THE PRACTICAL Sabbatarian: OR, SABBATH-Holiness CROWNED with SUPERLATIVE
Happiness.

By John Wells, Minister of the Gospel.

Isa. Lvi. 2. Blessed is the man that does this, and the Son of man, that
lays hold on it; that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeps his
hand from doing any evil, Nobis Christianis non congruunt ludi diebus festis;
ludi nostri esse debent sacrae cantiones, verbi divini lectiones, aegrotorum
visitationes, afflictorum consolationes, pauperum sustentationes, etc. Zanch.
in Colos. LONDON, Printed 1668.

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS ALSTON, With his Eminently PIOUS LADY, John
Wells wishes all Happiness here, and to ETERNITY.
Much Honored:
THat the sacred day of God should run the gantlet, and feel the stripes of
many malepert adversaries, is not miraculous; but that these enemies of Gods
blessed day should be reduced under no Head, and cast into no predicament, this
accents the wonder; that Ebion a primitive Heretic with his Accomplices should
rob the Lords day of a moity of its Honor, making two Sabhaths everyweek,
retaining both the Jewish and the Christian Sabbath: That Turrecremata, a
politic School-man, should rob the Lords day of its Authority, and fasten it
only upon a Canonical Law; that others of latter times should rob this blessed
day of its solemnity, giving way to Sports and Sensepleasing Recreations upon
this holy season; that another sort with their Confederates should rob the
Lords day of its site and position, rebounding it back again to the last day of
the week, and so put a Jewish brand upon the Lords day; nay, that some in these
dregs of time should oppose the very Being of the Lords day, and pluck up all
Sabbaths by the roots, and confidently, if not impudently affirm, that every
day is a Christian Sabbath; this is matter of amazement; we may truly admire
that all varieties should troup together to fight against the day of God; only
this consideration may a little break the force of the wonder; if holiness
which is the impression of Gods 2 Timothy 3. 12.
Spirit meet with a constant and violent persecution, it is not much marvel if
the Sabbath, the genuine promoter of holiness meet with the same dealing.
Indeed in the Primitive times of the Church, those Halcyon days of the Gospel,
The Lords day, like the beloved Disciple, lay in the bosom; we find Ignatius
calling it the Queen of days, Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. (...). Athan. ^pist.
119. c 13.
and s^ setting a Crown upon its Head; Athanasius making it the first of days,
the beginning of a new world; Justin Martyr giving us the several Branches and
methods of its sacred Solemnization, and shows us how exact the Primitive
Christians were in the several duties and services of it; the incomparable Aug
Sermon. de temp. 251.
Augustine lays us down the true and pregnant reason of its rise and
institution; and Ambrose tells us flatly, that Christ's Resurrection was a real
consecration of this Holy day for weekly and divine worship. I need not mention
what Tertullian speaks of the Holy Discourses the Primitive Christians used
upon this day; nor what Clemens Romanus says, of the devout prayers and
accurate attentions used by the Professors of the first times on this Holy
Festival; nor yet of the great preheminences given by Hierome to this blessed
season; that day alone, says Hierome, is the one proper Lords day, and better
Ambr. tom. 2. in 47. Psalm.
then all other common days, and then all the Festival days, New moons, and
Sabbaths of Moses his Law. And should Tertul Apol. cap 39.
we cast our eye upon what Chrysostom has written in his fifth Homily upon
Matthew; how unwearied the Christians of those times were in the holy duties of
Gods day; how their Devotion was a full and a constant stream; we should then
conclude, that the Lords day has had its Heralds to proclaim Clem. Romans l. 2.
c. 59.
its glory, as well as its Detractors to decry its solemnity. Thus the
Christian Sabbath has traveled in the Wilderness of this life under the pillar
of a cloud. and a pillar of fire; and as it has its enemies to oppose it, so
likewise its Seconds Hier. ad Eustoch.
to defend it. That which has cast a spot upon this blessed day in these
Chr^sost homil. 5 in Matthew.
latter days of the world, is not so much Error as Profaneness; Gods day
has not suffered so much (yet too much) by the blasts of Opinion, as by the
blackness of open profanation: Council. Prag. Synod. D^drect. Sess. 4^^.
Were we but sensible of the groans of the Council of Prague; how those
conveened there, bemoaned the profanation of Gods Holy day; or had we heard
the sighs of the Synod at Dort, Hosp. de Orig. Fest. l. 1. c. 3.
how they lamented this evil, and with what pathetical language they importuned
the petitioning of Magistrates for the redress of this great evil; nay, were we
sensible of the mournful expressions of many worthy and learned Divines of
Simler. comment in Exodus
the Reformed Churches, when their Pens seemed more to drop Tears, then Ink;
we could not but be much affected Aret. Prob. Theol. loc. 123.
and impressed: Nay, should we take a nearer Prospect, and take notice of the
prodigious vanities, and great impieties which are acted on Gods Holy day here
at home in our own Nation, Chemnit. exam. Council. Trident.
trembling may justly seize upon us. Now to put some stop to this sinful
Inundation, is the design of this Treatise, which (Much Honored) shelters it
self under the Protection of your Patronage: The promoting of Sabbath-holiness
has been the care of Courts, and the zeal of Councils, and the Vindication of
that Eminent Piece of Piety has been written not only with Pens, but with
Scepters. Sabbath-holiness is the glory of Princes; Constantines Edict Eusebius.
de vita Constantini.
for the strict observation of the Lords day, is recorded by Eusebius as a
Piece Nehem. 13. 15. 16, 17, 18, etc.
of Memorable Piety. Sabbath-holiness is the splendor of Nobles. Nehemiahs
zeal for Gods blessed Sabbath is recorded not by the Historian, but by the
Spirit, and made part of Gods sacred Word. Sabbath-holiness is the richest
field in the Gentleman's Escucheon. Mr. Bruens piety in an exemplary observation
of Gods Holy day Mr. Clark in the life of Mr. Bruen and Mr. Dod.
is transmitted by a faithful Pen to future times, as an Emblem of his
perpetual honor. Sabbath-holiness is not only the duty, but the dignity of a
Minister; the rare and strict observance of Gods Holy day, by the most pious
Mr. Dod is set down in the History of his Life, as a fair Copy for future
successions to write after. Nay, Sabbath-holiness is the honor of a people;
Chrysostom has left it upon record in one of Chrysostom. 19. Homil. in Genes.
his Homilies upon Genesis, as the Crown of his people, that with unwearied
patience, and unwonted alacrity they would wait upon his Ministry upon the
Lords day, and thought not the circuit of a Sabbath too great a compass, but
filled up the time of it in holy Devotion. Indeed the Sabbath Crowns them who
honor it. Now, (Most Worthily Honored) I shall make no Applications; what I
could say, is better seen in your practice, then in my Epistle: Suffer me only
to be your Remembrancer; those who are most spiritual, lie under the motions of
the Spirit; if you see your selves in the Glass of this Treatise, pardon me, if
I hold the Glass, and let not my service be my offense. Thus Ephesians. 1. 11.
commending your selves, your worthy Family, and this Tract (such as it is) to
the grace of him who works all Ephesians. 3. 20.
things for us, and in us, Iremain

Your faithful Servant in the Gospel of Christ, John Wells.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT may be the Subject here handled may not please thy Palate, because it is
not some Rarity. Common Dishes more quiet than please, and gratify Necessity
more than Desire. We are not fo fond of the Choritas ergo animas eadem feribit,
and inculcat; Amor spiritualis omne taedium absorbet, and omnem segnitiem. Alap.
Herbs as of the Flowers of the Garden; of those Plants which are to be put in
the Pot, as of those which are to lie in the bosom. Reader, at the first cast
of thy eye upon this Book, when thou see the Sabbath to be the Theme of it,
thou will happily be apt to conclude, Nihil dictum, quod non dictum prius,
Nothing can be more said, than what has been said before: And to what purpose
should I survey an old Work in a new Edition? An ancient person is little
mended in his beauty, by putting on a new Suit of Apparel. The Sabbath has
been often discussed by the Pens of Learned men: Nay, the Rest of God has had
little Rest from Men; there has been so many Tracts and Treatises about it.
Now to take away this pretended Surfeit, and so to bring the Reader to an
Appetite.

Polemical, they have Mr. War.
been the jars and digladiations of Divines; Mr. C. and*
some contending whether the last or the first day of the week be our Sabbath,
some striving Mr. P.
whether the whole day be to be given to God, Mr. L. Estr.
or only part, and the rest may be spent in corporal Mr. Bys.
Refreshments, or delightful Recreations? Other Controversies are started and
handled, Dr. Tw.
whether the Lords day be bottomed upon Ecclesiastical, Mr. Ab.
or Divine Authority? Whether the Sabbath was first founded in Paradise, or
upon Mount Sinai in the first delivery of the Decalogue? Whether we must begin
the Sabbath in the Evening on the Saturday, or early on the Morning on the
Lords day? etc. These and the like Polemicks have for the most part filled
those Pages which have been written upon the Sabbath: Now broken strings make
no music in the Ears of the people, Theological Debates are fitter for the
Schools than the Vulgar, Pro and con more disquiet than satisfy the ordinary
Reader.

occasionally; as that Subject has been brought in among others in their
Volumes, designed to some more comprehensive purpose: Many Mr. G.
have spent some leaves upon the Sabbath by Mr. Thom.
the bye: the Sabbath has been the Branch, Mr. S.
not the Tree, the Flower, not the Garden; It has only taken up some
inconsiderable part of the work which they have exposed to the Worlds view. Now
occasional Diversions can put no Nausea upon full Treatises, no more than the
putting of a Flag into a Cockboat can stop the building of a Ship.

doctrinally, without any application to Conscience: the principal design of
these Mr. Gr.
Writings has been to inform the Judgment, Dr. B.
and settle the Mind; Conduct has been more Mr. Walk.
aimed at, than Conversation, and Opinion Mr. B.
more consulted than manners. The end of Mr. G.
these Books has been rather to preserve us from Error, than profaneness,
from mistake than miscarriage.

Now Reader, the design of the ensuing Introduxit me Rex in cella^^ vinari^m,
inquit ponsa; hoc est, jussit introire ad Altar Dei and illi^ sumere calicem
salutarem Domini. Del. Rio.
Treatise is different from all these, it aims more at the Heart than the
Head, at our practice than at our judgment, it is more for reformation than
information. The design of this Tract is, to be a Munduction to lead us to a
right keeping of a Sabbath, how to converse with God, and banquet with Jesus
upon his own day, how to spend the Lords day exactly according to the Lords
will. This Tract shoots at Conscience, if possible to wound it for Sabbath-sin,
and to win it to Sabbath-holiness: It is an Alarm, rather than an Asterisk, to
call us to the sanctity of a Sabbath, than to point at the Criticisms of it, or
its bare knowledge. Other Treatises have vindicated the Sabbath from false
glosses; this presses the Sabbath upon Christian practices, and is put out to
bear testimony against the scandalous abuses of that sacred and heavenly Day.

some coincidency with former Tracts in this present Treatise, as oftentimes
there is a similitude in Pictures, when they are drawn for several persons; yet
Courteous Reader, let it not be impertinent, that I should be thy Remembrancer;
the Apostle Paul writes the same things to the Philippians Phil. 3 1.
which were before suggested to them, and Apostolus eadem repetit; ut ex cautis
fi^nt cautiores, et tutiores a periculis, et sic haec praxis nec inutilis est,
nec molesta. Zanch.
he says, It was not grievous to him, but safe for them. Philip of Macedon had
an Officer on purpose, to mind him every Noon at Dinner of his death and
mortality; the same Message did impress, not nauseate him: things of
concernment are never too much riveted upon us: Now Sabbath-holiness is not
only our obedience, but our interest, not only conforms to God, but concerns
our precious and immortal souls. And it is to be observed, the Nail is Eccles.
12. 11.
fastened by the Master of the Assemblies: a servant may bring it, but the
Master must fasten it; the same things, if spiritual, may please, but not
nauseate a gracious soul.

general profaneness which at this day casts a black veil upon the face of
Gods Facit indignatio versum.
blessed Sabbath, calls for some to pluck it off, and rend it: deep wounds must
have the more Balm to heal them, and the more Vinegar to wash them. Sometimes
the Times, as well as Theams, find work and employment for the Pen: what Pages
does devout Salvian spend Salv. de Provid.
in exclaming against the Impieties of those times he lived in? Nay, the very
Heathen Poets turned Satyrists when the times turned Aude aliquid. b^evibus
Gyaris et ^^rcere dignum, si vis esse aliqui^; Probitas laud^tur et alget.
Juven.
scandalous. Let it be no offense, that the Author deplores a profaned
Sabbath, and contributes his two mites to its reformation; Quis talia fando
temperet a lacrymis? When Gods Sabbath is covered with pollution, let it not
seem strange, if Gods Ministers are filled with lamentation, and put their
tears in Print. The profanation of Gods Day calls not only for Preaching, but
Writing to suppress it; and not only for the Magistrates sword (which may it
be weilded to that holy purpose) but the Ministers Pen.

Materials which may be met with in this ensuing Treatise, be found lying on
the ground in some other Volume, or Tracts; let not the Author be said to have
beaten the Air, if he have picked them up, and put them together for spiritual
edification: The Corpus eccles^^ debet esse (...) ^^^ctum, quia si membru^^
(...) sit (...), nil vi^^ris, aut sp^^^^us ^^ip^et ^ corpore. Hier.
building of a house of stone, requires not only the Qu^^ry, but the Mason;
the drawing of the Pictur stands in need not only of the Colors, but of the
Pencil and the Painter. It is the work of the spirit fi^ly to join together the
whole Body of Christ, as the Apostle notes, Ephesians. 4. 15. And if the Author
has only added method to matter, and has brought but some tacks and loops to
this Tabernacle work, and has put the scattered links into one Chain, let it
not be deemed a superfluity.

large Field of the Sabbath has been so enclosed by former labors, but some
part yet may remain to be hedged in; and if there be some gleanings left after
the Harvest, it is worth the Authors pains to gather them up, and make Bread of
them to feed invaluable souls, as he said, facile est, it is an easy thing; so
it may be said, utile est inventis addere, it is a very profitable thing to add
to what is already found out: It is not a despicable work to take notice of
others escapes, and to fill up the vacancies where they are discerned: Volumes
are as Ponds, not as Springs, they do not overflow, they are capable of a
supplement. If any more Ore be dug out of the Mine, which formerly was not
espied, let the Author in this be pardoned.

Books on the Sabbath are more in Scholars studies, than the peoples hands; he
does not take notice, that this subject is trite and worn by the perusals of
the Vulgar, he thinks no solemn subject in Divinity is more unknown to common
Capacities; his little experience cannot find the people to be much versed in
Volumes of this nature, nor can he observe their tract, that they have
traveled Exodus 20. 8.
this way: It may be, many have met with the Sabbath as it is laid down in the
fourth Commandment, Deuteronomy. 4 13.
one of Gods Ten words, but as it Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
is unfolded and applied in a practical Treatise: this seldom falls in the way
of the peoples travel. Therefore, Courteous Reader, accept of the tender of
this ensuing Tract, which is heartily levelled at thy souls good; And remember
the season when it is put into thy hands, v^z. When the Sabbath of the Lord
lies under much contempt, derision, and profanation. But as the Prophet was
pulled out of a dark and deep Dungeon by cast clouts and rotten rags that
only seem fit for the Dunghill, Jer. 38. 11, 12, 13. So if the Father 2 Cor. 1:
3.
of mercies shall graciously please, that this ensuing Tract shall be any means
to draw Sabbaths out of those Dungeons of scorn and abuse, into which they seem
now to be cast, let the Lord have the praise, my soul shall have the comfort,
the Reader shall enjoy the Benefit, Gods holy Day its just Vindication; which
that the Lord may mercifully vouchsafe, and that much success may crown this
weak Endeavor, shall be the incessant and earnest prayer of,

Reader, Thy real and true Servant for Soul-advantage, John Wells.

THE Practical SABBATARIAN.
ISAIAH 58. Chap. 13, 14. Verses. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath,
from doing thy pleasure on my Holy Day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the
holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words:

Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
Father: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.


CHAP. I. An Introduction to the Text.
IN this Chapter we have God unmasking and reproving the Jews Hyprocrisie in
their worship and holy Services; indeed in the former Chapter, the Lord had by
his Prophet foretold, that the penitent and the upright of the Jews should
return from the Captivity, their Chains should be knocked off, and their
Captivity should be turned as Rivers in the South, as the Psalmist speaks; but
as for the wicked, no peace should be Psalm. 126. 4.
to them, the 21 Verse of the former Chapter, tempest and tumult shall be their
Companions, and they shall be tossed continually from one calamity to another:
Now the wicked and hypocritic^^ Jews, supposing that the observation of Days,
their frequenting of Ordinances, their waiting on Solemnities, would reconcile
them to God again, and make up the breach their sins had caused; they set upon
this design, and multiply their duties, as fast as they did their sins, none so
often on their knees as themselves; they ply God with Ceremonials, to make
amends for their neglect of Morals; and because they were irreligious in their
practices, they will be over-religious in their Observations: But God in this
Chapter where the Text ly^^, unravels their folly, and discovers their vanity;
Alas, it is not the outward Worship, or the external attendance on an
Ordinance, can either pacify the anger, or procure the favor of God, no more
then a painted Cloud can dissolve into rain, or the sign of the Sun cast forth
refreshing beams. Duties which are the products of hypocrisy, only the
shining of that paint, they may provoke, but not put out wrath, may inflame,
but not quench that fire. So that in this Chapter we find God uttering his
complaints against these painted hypocrites, these earlier Pharisees, who
vainly dreamed to take off the edge of Gods fury by an overplus of Service,
when by these smooth pretenses they only brought Oil to make the fire of his
Wrath to burn with a greater flame: But yet this Chapter shall not be shut up
without the allay of two sweet promises, the first made to Charity, the best of
duties, 10, 11. Verses; the second made to a Holy Observation of the Sabbath,
the best of days, Verse 13, 14. And thus much may serve as a manuduction to
lead you to the Text.

CHAP. II. The Explication of the Text.
IN the Text we have two remarkable Parts:

Duties they are the Cords of a man, to use the Prophets Phrase, by which we
are Hos. 11. 4.
sweetly drawn nearer to God, they are our Travel toward Canaan: While we are
in a way of duty, we are in Bona opera sunt via ad Regnum.
our way to the Kingdom. Holy Duties are our spiritual intercourse, our
traffic with Heaven: and such a duty is enjoined in the Text.

Noah's Dove with the Genesis 8. 11. Genesis 44. 2.
branch in her mouth; like Benjamins sack with the silver Cup in the top of it.
God will not leave unrewarded the sweat of the soul. But of these in their
order.

For the Duty it self, in the whole of it, is a spiritual observation of the
Sabbath. The Sabbath day, as God ordained it for his own Rest, so it must be
observed for his own Honor. The Sabbath is Gods by his own Institution, and by
our sanctification: As we receive it from God, so we must keep it to God. But
in the Text there are many branches sprouting from this common stock; God
directs us many ways, and in many methods, how to observe his Sabbath: and we
will trace and open these Directions in an orderly progress and proceeding.
These Directions they are partly negative, and partly positive.

These Negative Directions call us from some practices which are prohibited,
and from some language which must be restrained.

Now there are four sorts of actions we must be abstemious from upon the
Sabbath, or, to speak in Gospel language, upon the Lords Day.

CHAP. III. Secular and servile works utterly unlawful on the Sabbath day.
ab actionibus civilibus, from Civil Actions, from the works of our Secular
actions to be forborne on the Sabbath day; we are in no wise to follow the works
of our Calling. Alap.
Callings, the Shop, and the Change-business must be laid aside on a Sabbath;
so the Text, If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath. Now Alapide gives us
the genuine interpretation of that phrase, Omne opus servile, quod pedibus fit,
aut manibus, hic erat prohibitum; All servile works which the feet or hands
accomplish, is here prohibited. Indeed the feet are quick and ready to
prosecute the gains of the World, and therefore here we are commanded to keep
our feet from being exercised in servile or secular employments on this Holy
Day; not any work must ^xod. 20. 10.
be done, says God in the fourth Commandment, a Commandment in which we may
truly-say, digitus Dei, the Exodus 31. 18.
Finger of God. We must not mingle the Week with the Sabbath. Oecolampadius
well descants on this phrase in Oecolamp. in hunc locum. Judas Macchab. We are
to abstain from all servile work, that having no work of our own, we may be
wholly taken up with Gods work, that he may speak with us, and reveal himself
fully and familiarly to us, as friends do when they get alone, Shep. p. 84.
the Text, Si quicquam rerum tuarum in Sabbatho, if thou have appointed to do
any of thy works upon the Sabbath, and shall draw thy foot away from the
Sabbath, intermiseris illud opus propter Sabbathum, that is, shall intermit and
lay aside that work for the Sabbath-sake, because of the Sabbath, in
remembrance of the Sabbath, then thou shall sanctify the Sabbath, for such a
Sabbath is acceptable to God. Whatsoever work we have purposed, we must break
it off, and turn our feet from it upon a Sabbath. One well observes, that Judas
Macchabaeus, whom God raised up for the defense of his People against the
Tyranny of Antiochus, that he having a great Victory against Nicanor and his
Host, and putting to the sword nine thousand, and chasing away the rest the day
before the Sabbath; after that they had gathered the spoil together, they did
rest upon the Sabbath, and praised God for the Victory; and after the Sabbath
was past, then they took order for the dividing of the spoil. Indeed should we
labor upon Prohibeturopus nostrum, scil. servile, mechanicum, laboriosum,
quaestuosum, and ordinarium, tum privatum, tum publicum, quae cum prohibita
fuerint in festis aliis solennioribus. Lev. 23. 7, 8, 25, 32, 35. Number. 28. 25.
Multo magis Sabbatho, Leid. Prof. Luke 23. 56. Psalm. 1. 2.
the Sabbath day, this would breed confusion, and confound Gods day with ours:
we labor six days, and should we labor on the seventh, where is the
distinction? this is to mingle light and darkness, and to abolish the Sabbath,
name and thing. The Sabbath is the Souls Monopoly; then we must not labor with
our hands, but with our hearts, and not seek the gains of the Earth, but the
Kingdom of Heaven; we must not then follow our Callings, but our Christ. Mary
Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of James, would not prepare odours to annoin^
Christ's body when he was dead on the Sabbath day, but rested that day, least
while they went about to Embalm his body, they might indeed eclipse his Glory.
On this day Physicians must not study Galen, nor Philosophers Aristotle, nor
Mathematicians Archimedes, but their delight must be in the Law of the Lord.
The Sabbath is sanctum otium, a holy leisure to pursue Eternity. We must so
give rest to our bodies and our souls upon this day, that nothing trouble us;
for here we must take up that of the Philosopher, Postulandum secessum, Toto
hoc die vacandum Domino.
ut melius intendamus, we must have our repose, that we may the better intend
the great work of our souls; and therefore not only worldly cares, but worldly
businesses are forbidden, that so our whole body may be at command to serve
God. It is most eminently remarkable, that we have in the Scriptures six
Commandments for the observation of this Rest.

Exodus 16. 22. The Israelites were to cease from gathering Manna on that day;
They were to gather a double measure on the day before, that they might not be
diverted to gather any on the Sabbath day. On this day, you have mercatur
animae, merchandise for your souls, wherein are better things then Manna to be
gathered; Manna not like Coriander Joh. 6. 53. 1 Pet. 2. 3.
seed, Exodus 16. 31. but Manna which is the seed of the Word, which is able to
save our souls.

Nehem. 13. 15, 16, 17. Where holy Nehemiah forbids all Traffic on the
Sabbath day; Indeed the Sabbath is the market day for the Soul, (as Mr. Rogers
used to call it) but other markets on this day, are not the supplies of
provision, but of profanation; in other merchandising we treasure up, not
wealth, but wrath.

Jer. 17. 22. There must be no carriage of burdens on this day, such servile
employments are black spots upon the feast of a Sabbath; It is most uncouth and
unseemly that I should be tiring out my body; on that day which is given Jer.
17. 27.
me for the strengthening of my soul. The Sabbath is not the bodies Term, but
the souls holy Vacation, it is consecrated leisure to look after its blessedness.

in harvest ^ime must we labor on a Sabbath, when Nature it self would go a
gleaning, and be busy with Joseph to bring the grain into the storehouse; and
although Genesis 41. 56. Deus nullam dispensationem admittit; etiam cum periculo
communis jacturae. Calv. in Loc.
the uncertainty of the season, the necessity of the Commodity, and the
sweetness of the grain, all plead for a toleration in this matter, yet it must
not be, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Exodus 34. 21. Nature, like
Naaman, might here say, only spare me in this thing, 2 King. 5. 18. but Gods
positive Law gives no dispensation.

no journeying on this day; all our travels must be the travels of the mind;
our journey must be to Canaan, with our faces toward Sion: thus God expressly,
Exodus 16. 29. Acts 1. 12.

Mount Olivet from Jerusalem, an inconsiderable distance: Learned men differ in
the interpretation, but all agree in this, that it was a very small distance.
Calvin says it was two miles, and of that judgment Calv. in hunc Locum.
Aliquantulam itineris facere, non erat contra traditiones Phorisaeorium,
Chemnit.
are the most of the Latin Interpreters. Tremellius in the Syriac Paraphrase
reads the Text thus, The Mount of Olives which is near unto Jerusalem, and is
distant from it about seven furlongs, that is not a mile; And that learned man
observes, that the Jews in their Talmud with one consent say, that the space
which it was lawful for a man to go upon the Sabbath was two thousand Cubits or
Spaces, which make but one mile, and not two. And Beza very well Beza.
notes, That all the Hebrews, whose testimony is most authentical in this case,
make a Sabbath days journey only one mile. Josephus, who was very well
acquainted with the Joseph. Antiq. Lib. 20.
place, counted Mount Olive but five furlongs from the City. But to dilate no
further, we may conclude with holy Mr. Greenham, That this journey was no
farther then one might conveniently travel for some holy purpose, without
hinderance of the ordinary exercises of this day, or without wearisomness
either to body or mind, whereby he should be unfitter for the Lords Worship, or
his own Duties.

to build Gods House, though of very great use, and great haste of it, Exodus
31. 14, 15. a most signal Text, compare it with the foregoing verses; not any
work is indulged, though Gods house should call for it. The Sabbath calls for
Worship, not Work, for the Service of the Sanctuary, not for the Building of it.

poor man shall bring his Plea, and urge the necessities of his Condition, and
that he cannot spare the time of a Sabbath, but must work upon that day to
satisfy the clamours and importunities of his family;

says in Deuteronomy. 5. 14. On the Sabbath thou shall not do any Shall the Worm
debate it with the Almighty? The Lord work. Deuteronomy. 5. 14.
as if all cases did not fall under his consideration? The Fourth Commandment
is a Commandment overflowing with mercy; God considers and compassionates
Children, Servants, and Strangers, nay, the very Beasts of the Field, the Ox
and the Ass; and the poor man's case should not have been left out, had divine
wisdom thought a dispensation necessary; he should have been left to his work,
as well as the stranger left to his rest.

the blessing of the Lord makes Rich, as the wise man speaks, Prove. 10. 22. And
what can entail this blessing on Lev. 25. 3, 4. comp. with Verse. 18, 19, 20, 21.
thee but obedience? Thy Duty shall more prosper thy Estate then thy Work:
Can thou possibly be endammag'd by keeping of the Commandments, which
Solomon makes the sum of all Religion and Happiness? Eccles. 12. 13. To which
the Psalmist fully accords, Psalm. 19. 11. The best way to sill thy Cruse, is to
fulfill Gods Commands. Godliness has the promise of the things of this life. 1 Timothy 4. 8.


cloth thee with rags: Profanation Prove. 23. 21.
of the Sabbath will be a certain moth in the little thou enjoyest.

This is to fill thy bag, not with Coin, but with Curses; And as the wise man,
There shall be no reward for the evil Prove. 24. 20.
man, Prove. 24. 20. To rob God of his time is such a piece of sacrilege, as
will assuredly fill thy bags with holes, which Hag. 1. 6.
will hold no wages.

poor man a soul to look after? and when shall he lay up provisions for this
piece of eternity, his precious soul, but only on a Sabbath? He cannot spare
time on the week, and shall his soul have no time at all? Shall the soul which
is more worth then a world, not be worth that little pittance he gets by
working on a Sabbath? The Mat. 16 26.
poor man pretends necessity, certainly he has the greatest necessity to look
after his immortal soul; to feed his family will he starve his soul?

lives by faith, whether he be rich or poor: and surely that faith runs dregs
which will not trust God Hab. 2. 4.
for the provisions of a day; and how irrational is it not to trust that God
who could send a Raven to feed Elijah! do 1 Kings 17. 4.
thou not know the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof? Psalm. 24. 1. And
cannot he furnish thy Table for a Sabbath thou have spent with him?

^he meat that perishes, thou might have gained that John 6. 27. Omne
studium, and omne, conatus eo conferamus, ut habeamus non externa and
corruptibil^^ hujus mundi bona, sed ut habeamus cibum, qui non ipse tantum
permanet, sed etiam affert vitam aeternam. Chemnit. Amos 2. 6.
meat which endures to everlasting life. Shall the gain of a penny, or some
inconsiderable profit, with draw thee from pursuing thy spiritual good on thy
souls market day; Thy gain on this day may be as the God of the Toulouse, which
was fatal to all who stole of it; or as the Coal brought to the nest, setting
the young and all on fire.

The Sabbath, as one says, is the School day, the Fair day, the Feasting day
of the soul, and the body is little interested in the affairs of it; this holy
day is the souls harvest, and not set apart for the gleanings of the world: and
thus while the poor man works on the Sabbath, he sells himself for a pair of
shoes; a little to invert the Prophet.

Calvin observes, This is only a wile of Satan, for says he, All of us
naturally are of that mind, that if we endeavor to mount on high to the
heavenly life, and bestow our studies therein, we think we shall dye for
hunger, and this shall be to turn us from our Profits and Commodities: And
indeed the Devil comes always to persuade us under this Calvin on Deuteronomy 5.
Sermon. 35.
shadow and wiliness, that if we employ our selves in the service of God, we
must needs dye of famine, and we shall live to be the objects of others pity,
for our meanness and misery. Thus far that holy man, who presently adds; Of a
truth we cannot serve God, unless we cast away from us these distrustful
cares, Lev. 25. 20, 21. Mat. 6. 33. 1 Timothy 4. 8. Pietas habet promissionem
vitae quae nunc est, ut scilicet hic vitam pacatam, and longaevam, and rebus
omnibus necessariis instructum agamus. Alap. Jer. 25. 20, 21. Exodus 16. 22.
Sex^a die deus pluit Manna ab^nde, ut toti populo suffi^eret ad biduum, Riv.
Haec sun^ ^^era tenebrarum, carnis, Buc de Regno Christi Lib. 2. Cap. 10.
which press us over much. And how does this unholy distrust, which often draws
the offender to a breach of the Sabbath, contradict those indulgent promises of
the Scripture, both under the Law, and in the times of the Gospel; where the
giving Religion and our Souls the precedence, is ensured not only of a better
portion in future Glory, but of a satisfying provision even in this Life. And
to wind up this particular; The Jews of old enjoyed a special promise, that no
lack should come to them by their resting on the Sabbath; and God gave them a
sure pledge in the Wilderness, when on the day before the Sabbath, a double
portion of Manna was given to all that gathered, Exodus 16. 22. Nor can the
promise be straightened to believers under the Gospel. And so we have at last done
with the poor man's Plea, leaving him for the future to act his Faith, and study
Obedience, rather then frame his Apologies.

Laboring on a Sabbath in the works of our Calling, or in any other
unnecessary toil, is a practice so manifestly sinful, that it is not only
prohibited by the Great Lawgiver in the Fourth Commandment, in the times of
the Law, but it is likewise forbidden by all Authority, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, in the times of the Gospel. Constantine the great Constant. Mag.
(who deserved that noble Title, more for his Religion, then his Victories)
sets out a pious Edict to this purpose, strictly forbidding all secular labor
on the Lords day. The very words of the Statute are these; He commands that
every one Statuit, ut curcti Romano Imperio subditi, diebus de Servatoris
nomine nuncupatis, ab opere feriarentur. Eusebius. Lib. 4. de vita Constantini. c.
18. 2 Pet. 2. 13. Jud. verse. 12. Car. Magn. Leges Ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap. 202.
Lud. Pius, ib. addition. c. 9. Leo Philos.
who lived in the Roman Empire should rest from labor that day weekly, which
was instituted to our Savior; and moreover, that all Judges, Citizens,
Artificers, should rest on the Sabbath. Thus this holy Emperor, who first
brought rest to the Churches, for a long time scorcht with persecution, and
discomposed by Pagan fury, takes care that the Sabbath be not profaned by
servile works, which are truly spots in that holy feast. Charles the Great,
Anno Dom. 789. not willing to blemish his Title, the same with Constantine's,
speaks Constantine's language, (Viz.) We do ordain, as it is commanded in the
Law of God, that no man do any servile work on the Lords day: And this he
explicates in several particulars, (Viz.) Husbandry, dressing Vines, Ploughing,
etc. and almost all kind of Manufactures. And the words of Leo Philosophus, the
noble Emperor of Constantinople, in his pious Edict for the better observation
the Lords day, are very memorable, (Viz.) We ordain, according to the true
meaning of the Holy Ghost, and of the Holy Apostles by him directed, That on
that sacred day, wherein we are restored to our intogrity, all do rest and
surcease from labor, that neither the Husbandman nor others, put their hands
to forbidden work, etc. I might mention Clothaire King of France, Gunthram, and
many other Princes, expressing the same zeal to the Sabbath, but it would be
altogether supervacaneous; only let me not denude our own English Princes of
their just and due Honor in this particular. King James of famous memory, 15
James.
at his first entrance into his Kingdom, he sent out his Declaration to this
effect, (Viz.) That for the better observation of the Sabbath day, he straightly
charges, That there be no Interludes, Pastimes, unlawful exercises on the
Sabbath day. And King Charles the First, he enacts a Law in his 15 Charles.
first Parliament, That there be no Pastimes, no Carrier, Waggoner, Drover,
travel on the Lords day, no Butcher kill or sell any Victual on the said day,
etc. Thus the English Throne has not been devoid of necessary Zeal, for the
suppression of unnecessary toil on the Lords day.

And laboring on the Lords day has not only been condemned by Civil, but by
Ecclesiastical Authority; both swords have been drawn against this practice.
And Ecclesiastical Authority has condemned it: Take it distributively for
eminent persons, Zerubbabels, who have been famous in building the Temple in
the primitive times. Origin thus expresses his holy fervor for the Sabbath,
and for the cessation from Die dominico nihil ex mundi actibus agendum, and ex
omnibus secularibus operibus feriandum est. Orig. Homil. 23 in numer. Augustine.
fervile or secular works on that day; On the Christian Sabbath day we ought
not to do any worldly business; If therefore thou do surcease from all
secular affairs, and do nothing but employ thy self in spiritual
negotiations, this is the right observation of the Christian Sabbath. Thus this
mirror of piety and learning. And Augustine, the miracle of the fifth Century,
in one of his Sermons thus declares himself; You must know Brethren that
therefore it was appointed and commanded Christians by our Holy Fathers, That
in the Solemnities of the Saints, and especially on the Lords days, they
should rest and be free from earthly businesses, that so they might be more
free and ready for the service of God, when they have nothing to hinder them,
and might leave earthly cares, that they might the more easily intend the will
of God. Chrysostom calls the abstinence from worldly affairs on the Sabbath,
(...), (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Matt. Greg. of Tours. Dies Sabbaths
indeterminate sumptus, est dies requiei. Alex. Hal.
an unmovable Law, such a Law as nothing but Sacrilege and Irreligion can
shake or suppress; we must on this day (...), abstain from all works, says
that golden mouthed Father. And if we come to the middle times of the Church,
the Sabbath still is fenced with the same cautions, that no work be done
thereon. Gregory of Tours has an excellent saying, Being the Sabbath was the
day whereon God made the Light, and after was the witness of our Saviors
Resurrection, therefore it ought diligently to be observed by every Christian,
no manner of public work to be done upon it. And the same Author tells us a
story of a fearful judgment of Lightning which befell the City of Limoges, ob
diei dominici injuriam, for profaning the Lords day. And another Gregory of a
far greater fame, Greg. Mag.
(viz.) Gregory the Great, speaks the same language, (Viz.) We ought to rest on
the Lords day from earthly labors, and altogether give our selves to prayer.
And if we slide down to our days, and the days of reformation, servile works
on the Sabbath incur the same censure. If we call in the Testimony of foreign
Divines: Doctor Ames, that pious Ames Mod. Theol. p. 364.
and learned Divine observes, That all servile works were to be abstained from
in other festivals among the Jews, Lev. 23. 7, 8. Numb. 28. 25. Multo magis
exclusa fuerunt a Sabbatho, Exodus 12. 16.
Much more on the sacred Sabbath. Other foreign Testimonies might be
subpaena'd in, to give witness in this Cause; but the Reader shall not be
cloyed with a multiplicity of Quotations. Only as forraigners, So our own
Divines give in their suffrage to the same truth. Famous Hooper, Bishop and
Martyr, thus declares himself; To that end Bish. Hooper.
did God sanctify the Sabbath day, that we being free from the travels of the
World, might consider his works and benefits with thanksgiving, hear the word
of God, honor him, and fear him, etc. And holy Babington most pathetically;
Even as Bish. Babington on the fourth Commandment.
you will answer it before the face of God and his Angels at the sound of the
last trumpet, weight whether Carding and Dicing, etc. and such exercises, be
commanded of God for the Sabbath: And thus this Godly Bishop restrains the
Sabbath to its own (viz.) spiritual work.

distributive, but the Church collective condemns laboring on the Lords day:
Many famous Councils have decried and prohibited this uncomly practice. The
famous Council of Mascon gives a severe prohibition to secular employments on
this holy day, in these words, Let no man meddle with litigious controversies
Council. Moscon. Council. Cartha. Council. Chalons
or works of Husbandry on the Lords day, but exercise himself in Hymns and
singing praises unto God, being intent thereon hoth in mind and body, and much
more to the same purpose. I could name the Council of Carthage, the Council of
Chalons, and others; but this truth shall stand no longer before humane
Tribunal.

Nay, the great taking argument of Reason, the Idol and Diana of most men,
joins in the Verdict, for the guiltiness and condemnation of labors and
working in our Callings on the Lords day.

Servile and secular labors are too pedantick and low for 2 Cor. 6. 14. (...).
Chrysostom.
the dignity of a Sabbath; as the Apostle speaks, What communion between light
and darkness? and what between the drudgeries of the world, and the affairs of
Heaven? The Sabbath must not be degraded by servilities and low employments; it
was appointed for more noble undertakings, it was set apart for Divine
contemplations, heavenly actions, spiritual ordinances, supernatural converses
between Christ and the Soul, and not for the culinary sweats of an empty, any
world. To work on the Sabbath, what is it but to plece a Silken garment with
Canvas? Greenham formerly complained, There are many who make the Lords day a
packing day for earth, and make it a custom to have their Servants follow
their Callings; but these men act as Heathens, who never Greenham's Treatise on
the Sabbath. p. 215.
knew any thing of the Creation of Heaven and Earth by God, nor never heard any
thing of the Redemption of man by Christ, nor ever tasted any thing of the
sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost.

Worldly labors they tend nothing at all to the worship of God, they are only
sinful and unseasonable divertisements. Can we be intent on the works of our
Calling, and yet at the same time our heads filled with divine meditations, our
hearts breaking with holy affections, our tongues employed in sacred devotions?
surely this would speak us more then men, and it is but a mear dream to fancy
such Veniendum est ad coenam a peccatis surgendum, and in vale dicendum,
Christus fide est amplectendus, and nova vita inchoanda Chemn.
nimbleness and agility: Worldly affairs will take the soul off from heavenly
employment, they are contraries in themselves. The Shop-board and the Church
cannot unite. Drossie avocasions will call us off from spiritual devotions. The
guests who were invited to the Supper, if they will mind their secular affairs
they cannot come to the Supper; they cannot mind their Oxen and their Farms
and the Supper too, and therefore they must be excused from the Luke 14. 16,
18, 19.
one. Such men who work on the Lords day (a holy man says) their hearts are
possessed with covetousness, their minds Doctor G.
are filled with the affairs of the world; and what shall God have if their
hearts and their minds are alienated to another Aug. de temp. Sermon. 251.
purpose? Augustine says, We are commanded to rest upon the Lords day from
earthly business, and he gives us this reason, That we might be the more fit
for Gods service. And so Calvin upon Deuteronomy. Cap. 5. Sermon. 34.
Calvin, We ought to cease from those works which hinder the works of God: Let
us not stay from calling upon his Name, or exercising our selves in his Holy
Word. Now secular affairs Council. Arelat. 4. Cap. 16. a (...) Est omnis
cessatio ab opere, and quies, scil. a motu and labor. Leid. Prof. 218. Joh. 3.
8. Exodus 34. 6. Exodus 35. 2. Sabbathum proprie quietem, et vacationem ab opere
servili significat, quod deus in ipsa mundi origin quieti sarctae consecravit.
Gualt. Sabbathum, Domini Sabbathum dicitur in scripturis, Exodus 16. 20 Lev. 19.
26. Eo quod deo consecratum est, et iis studiis quae ad dei honorem spectant,
Id. 1 Kings 6. 7. Exodus 13. 2.
would keep us, and chain us up from such seraphical and heavenly duties. And
the Council of Arles, which was celebrated under Charles the Great, speaks to
the same purpose, concluding, Let those things only be done on the Sabbath,
which appertain to the Service of God.

Nay, secular works, and the works of our Calling, upon the Sabbath, they
illegitimate and contradict the very name of a Sabbath, (...) which signifies
quietness, and rest, a cessation from labor; it is nothing more then a denial
of toil: so that when we labor on the Sabbath, we do but rough this calm and
quiet day, which is given us to hear Gods still voice, when the spirit, that
wind, blows gently, yet powerfully in the dispensation of the word. God will
have his own Name known, that he is a God of mercy and purity, and he will have
the name of his Sabbath known to be a day of quiet and cessation, and therefore
it is called a Sabbath of Rest, Exodus 35. 2. That if we at the first view did
not understand the meaning of the word Sabbath, Moses Comments on it, and gives
us an explanation, it is a Sabbath of Rest, a mere Hebraisme, when Sabbath and
Rest are the same thing, and in the Original the word is only repeated, for it
is (...) And as in the building of the Temple of the Lord, so in the keeping of
the Sabbath of the Lord, there must be no hammer heard, no axe, no noise of
working instruments, or secular employments.

4. Laboring in our callings on a Sabbath, does not only deny the name of the
Sabbath, but subverts the manner of its observation, which is by sanctifying
it: The Sabbath must be kept holy, so in the forementioned place, Exodus 35. 2.
so in the fourth Commandment, Exodus 20. 8. Now (...) Cadash, sanctify, a word
used in both these Texts, and many Exodus 40. 10. (...) Restaurari ad sanctum
usum, Buxtorf. Sanctificare, idem est, quod ad usus sanctos applicare, ceu
adhibere, Wall. diss. de quarto Praecepto. De modo sanctificationis duo
dicuntur; primum, opera propria cujusque sex diebus clauduntur; deinde opera
Divina, hoc die omnibus praescribuntur, Idem.
other places, it signifies the separation of any thing to a holy use. So the
first born among the Israelites were sanctified to God, the same word (...)
Cadash there, they were consecrated and set apart to God. So the vessels in the
Sanctuary were sanctified, (Viz.) they were set apart for the worship and
service of God. So the Temple was sanctified, 1 Kings 9. 3. in the same sense.
So that whatsoever is hallowed and sanctified, is set apart for holy use, by
the Will and Commandment of God. And that great School-man, Thomas Aquinas
speaks to the same purpose, Illa dicuntur lege sanctificari, quae divino cultui
applicantur, Those things are sanctified in the Law, which were dedicated to
Gods Worship. So then working on the Sabbath overthrows this (...) Cadash, this
sanctifying it, it diverts that day to our own use, which is sanctified,
separated only to a divine use. Secular works oppose the very purpose of the
word sanctifying, they rob God of his time dedicated to holy use, and give it
to the Labourer, to him who works, which is both impudence, and sacrilege;
Laboring casts (...) Cadash, sanctify, out of the fourth Commandment, and
alters the will of the great Legislator, it lays waste, and makes common the
holy day which God has limited and enclosed to an holy use.

Moses or the Prophets, but rest and Exodus 35. 2. Exodus 31 14. Deuteronomy. 5. 14.
Jer. 17. 27. Qui^quid aliquam speciem haberet operum servilium prohibebatur in
Sabbato. Rivet.
cessation is commanded too, Exodus 35. 2. It is called a Sabbath of rest, Exodus
31. 14. Thou shall do no manner of work. The same strictly enjoined, Deuteronomy. 5.
14. and so Jer. 17. 27. So that God has put rest and cessation from secular
employments into the very nature and essence of the Sabbath, he has engraven
rest upon the Sabbath in an indelible Character, that you cannot abstract it
from the Sabbath without an abolition of the Law it self. If you will keep a
Sabbath, keep it free from worldly labors, or never set upon the observation
of it.

necessary for us, as for former times, for the holy sanctification of the
Sabbath; our bodies are subject to Mat. 26. 41. Exodus 23. 12. Recreabitur
alie^^gena, mulio magis incola. Ne ^ontinu^s labor^b^^ s^^i^gent^r homines, sea
fessa memb a l^ventur die S^bb^thi. Leid. Prof. Exodus 31. 17. (...) respiravit
deus. Corpus nostrum mortale est, in quo brevi tempore, tanquam in tabernaculo
moramur. Alap. in Corinth.
tiredness, our spirits to faintness, our flesh to weariness, as well as those
who lived in former ages; and therefore are not we as much necessitated to a
quietation and rest from labors? Christ may say to us as well as to the
Apostles, The flesh is weak, though the spirit may be willing; we are clogged
with as many weaknesses, and disinabled by as many infirmities as former times,
and therefore Thou shall do no manner of work. That blessed indulgence and
dispensation, granted in the fourth Commandment, cannot but be as pleasing and
grateful to us, as others in the elder days of the world. Shall the Jews
observe an exact rest on the Sabbath, and not we Christians? Are our
Tabernacles of clay better fixed then theirs? Our tired bodies require a
cessation from labors to attend on the Divine Services of the Sabbath.

first institution of the Sabbath was rest from his works, (Viz.) the works of
Creation; and the main cause of the re-institution of the Sabbath, (if I may so
speak) in the change of the day from the Seventh to the First, was Christ's
resting from his work (Viz.) the great work of Redemption. The very reason of
the Law and Statute concerning the Sabbath, condemns secular labors and
business this day. A Quietus est first started the Law it self, and a Quietus
est must keep the Law now settled and Genesis 2. 3. Humano more, e^ quad
mattemperatione ad nestram institutionem loquitur scriptura Divina, etc Quievit
deu^, substitit, cessavit a procreandis producendisque rebus ex nihilo. ut
essent. Chrysostom.
established.

Rest from our labors is part of our inheritance above, whereof our Sabbath is
but a sign and pledge. When we come to glory, we shall cease from all sweat and
painfulness; and as there shall be no tears lying upon our cheeks, so there
shall be no sweat bedewing our brows; Our toil shall be turned into triumph,
our pains into pleasure, our industry into -rest, our hard labors into soft
loves, and glorious rewards; and therefore Lazarus lies in Abraham's hosome, a
place not of sweat but repose; and all this our present Sabbath is but a
harbinger of: So the working upon a Sabbath, does not only destroy the
Observation of it, which is to be Rev. 14. 13. The holy rest of the Sabbath is
the twilight, and dawning of heaven. Shep. Treatise of the Sabbath, p. 79. Luke
16. 23. Sabbathum nostrum, perpetuum illum caelestem Sabbatismum, consequentem,
et perfectum figurat, ubi fideles a propriis, malisque operibus sint in
aeternum feriantes. Leid. Prof.
with no manner of work, but the very significancy of it. Working on this day
eclipses the Sabbath, as it is our earnest of a better rest, and undervalues
this noble end of a Sabbath, finis sublimior, as some call it, to represent the
perpetual sabbatisme the Saints shall enjoy in a better place and state.

equitableness of man's resting from worldly labors on the Lords day. Shall
Man, that frail piece of dust, be like a Salamander, always in the fire of
toil and painfulness? Shall there be no time for him to interferiate and feast
with God, and consecrate himself to Exodus 31. 17.
holy observances? God was refreshed on the Sabbath (as was hinted before) and
shall trembling flesh have no leisure Omnis actio de^ nobis pietatis, et
virtutis regula est. Basil.
to pause, and walk with Christ in his ordinances? Does devout sequestration to
pious and holy exercises no way belong to him? Or shall God in the fourth
Commandment, that grand Charter of the Sabbath, take care for the repose Quia
durabile non est, quod requie earet; otium quoddam sanctum deus praecepit, ut
insatiabilem hominum cupiditatem frae naret, qui tam seipsos, quam servos suos,
nimiis laboribus exhauriunt, modo lucrum faciunt. Gualt.
of the Ox, and the Ass, the beasts that perish, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
49. 20. and no care of Man, that sublime piece in the Creation, which is little
lower then the Angels? Psalm. 8. 5. To conclude this large Argumentation: The
Labourer who defiles the Sabbath with his sweat, opposes divine command,
universal authority, and the dictates of sound Reason, which are the cords of a
man.

But now for works of absolute necessity, which could neither be done before
the Sabbath, nor deferred till after, the case is far otherwise; here to labor
is not our crime, but our duty. To breath a vein to one sick of a Plurifie, is
the duty of a Sabbath; so to quench our neighbors house on fire, is our proper
work on the Lords day; to stop inundations Psalm. 8. 5.
of waters, which else would break forth to the prejudice Hos. 11. 4.
of the adjacent parts, this is not to defile, but to honor Acts 20. 10.
a ^abbath. Paul on the Sabbath day uses means to recover Luke 13. 15.
Lutichus, who was dead for the present. The Jews Mat. 12. 5.
in their greatest strictness were not so bound up, as not to do works of
necessity: They might fight against their enemies on a Sabbath, take and
destroy the Cities of their adversaries. Jericho is encompassed seven days,
and taken the seventh, Josh 6. 20. Excipiantur illa opera, quae singulari
aliqua necessitate nobis imponantur, quo in numero, illa non sunt habend^, quae
homines sibimetipsis, quasi necessari: fingunt Ames.
probably the Sabbath, Josh. 6. 20. which was no blemish to Isreal's Victory,
but an inhancement to the praise of Isreal's God. Works of necessity they do
sweeten, they do not soil a Sabbath; they show the love of God, they do not
break the law of God. It no ways hinders my Soul from being put in joint upon
the Lords day, because my leg is put in joint, which was broken by a sad and
afflictive providence. And works of necessity are secured from
Sabbath-prophanation, by a fourfold warrant and dispensation.

Saviors holy example signs this dispensation, He wrought his cures on the
Sabbath for the most part, Mat. 12. Luke 6. 10. Mark 3. 5. Mat. 2. 28.
13. and many other places. The wound should not bleed to death, because our
Savior would not act the Physician on this holy day. Christ who was the Lord
of the Sabbath would oftentimes cause an Ordinance to wait on a Cure, and many
times the Preacher must yield to the Physician: Our dear Lord well knew, a
dying Patient was not fit to be a devout Worshipper.

necessities of the Disciples being gratified, were no blemish to the holiness
of the Sabbath; upon that day they Mat. 12. 1. Christus sumpta occasion, ex
discipulorum facto, viz. spicarum fricatione, et comessione factum illud
defendit. Lysit.
plucked the ears of Corn. They carried bodies of clay about them, which must
be shored up, or their souls would fly out at the cracks of them. If the glass
be broken, the cordial will be spilt. Our bodies must be indulged, or our souls
will be incapable of services, or ordinances. Faint bodies are listless to
lively duties.

plea's of Reason have warranted a dispensation. Our Savior urges three rare
Arguments to indulge cases of necessity.

a majori from the stronger and more forcible inference, which argument we
find, Luke 13. Luke 13. 15. Verbis exprimi non potest quantum homo, qui ad
imaginem dei conditus est, et pro quo unigenitus dei filius proprium suum
sanguinem fudit, quem denique spiritus sanctus per verbum Evangelii ad
communionem filiorum dei vocavit, et sanctificavit, irrationelibus animalibus
praestat. Chem.
15. where our Savior urges most sweetly and wisely, that if we can secure and
take care of the beast on the Sabbath, man should not in his necessity be
neglected on that holy day. Man is not only more worth then many Sparrows,
Mat. 10. 31. but then many Oxen or Asses, or more valuable Cattle. If the beast
must be plucked out of the ditch on a Sabbath, shall the plucking of a man from
the jaws of death on that day be a polution of it? This Argument the great
Master of the Assemblies is pleased to use, to indemnifie works of necessity.

a meliori, from the better, which we find, Mark 3. 4. where our Savior
sharply expostulates, Mark 3. 4. Finis est praestantior medie; salus hominis
est finis, propt^r quem Sabbathum est institutum. Par.
and queries whether it be lawful or no, to do good on a Sabbath, whether good
actions are not becoming a holy day; this must needs be undeniable. Now to cure
a sick person, quench a burning-house, resist an incroaching adversary, they
are actions immutably good, and therefore they must be so on a Sabbath. There
is no time, when to save a dying person, can in it self be unlawful; it is an
obedience to the law of Nature, a compliance with those (...), common
principles which are concreated with us. Therefore such actions cannot pollute
the holy Sabbath, or defloure the purity of it.

a potiori, from that which is more eligible, which is most fit to be done in
case of a Dilemma, and this Argument is urged, Mat. 12. Mat. 12. 3, 4.
Generalis est haec doctrina, non Davidem tantum ut sanctum Regem, et Prophetam
Domini licite edisse panes propositionis, quasi personale fuisset privilegium,
sed e^ famulos qui cum ipso erant, non peccasse manducando in casu
necessitatis. Lyser. Mal. 4. 2.
3, 4. Our Savior tells us, what David did in case of necessity: It was far
more eligible for David to make bold with the shewbread, then for the holy
Saint and King to die for hunger; his life was more considerable, then an
appointed observation. A substantial good is more to be valued then a shadow,
which only signifies something to come, and would fly away at the rising of
the Sun of Righteousness; and therefore as necessity entrenched on
extraordinary food without blan^e, so it may presume on an extraordinary day
without crime.

not guilty to works of necessity on the Sabbath. If my wound bleeds to death,
because it is not dressed on the Sabbath; or my disease send me to the dust,
because medicinal applications are not made on the Sabbath, this is my error,
not my duty. If I have no being, God can have no worship, and so acts of
necessity are dispensible. God will have us to worship him with all
cheerfulness and alacrity, which cannot be with an undrest wound, or a disease
not to be looked after, because it is the Sabbath. I cannot cheerfully join in
Divine Worship, and in the mean time the waters break into my house, and there
must be no stoppage of them, because the time of Gods holy day will not permit
it. Cases therefore of indispensible necessity neither pollute nor profane the
Sabbath.

But to wind up this particular of working on a Sabbath, (which has been the
more copiously handled, because of the greatness of its importance) we read
that the holy Apostle Paul sometimes labored with his hands, but yet his Acts
20. 34. Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2.
works on the Lords day were Sacred and Divine, nothing but preaching the Word,
administering the Sacraments, pouring out his Soul in Prayer, taking care of the
poor, and those duties which are the just companions of a Sabbath; He acts then
not as a Tent-maker, but as an Apostle; his Acts 18. 3.
heart works, not his hands. In a word, this particular shall be shut up with
the confession of learned Master Breerwood, Breerw. Tract of the Sabbath. p. 47.
who improved so much parts and pains in asserting an undue liberty on the
Sabbath, yet we may hear him thus acknowledge; It is meet that Christians
should on the Lords day abandon all worldly affairs, and dedicate it wholly to
the honor of God. And one of our Church Homilies has these words, Gods
obedient people should use the Sunday holily, and Hom. Of the time^ and place
of worship.
give themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion, and
Service; and this was the practice of all Gods people in all ages: And so much
for this large particular.

(viz.) Sensual actions, so the Sensual actions to be forborne on the Sabbath
day.
Text, [from doing thy pleasure on my holy day.] We are to forbear indulging
our appetites; we must not please a wanton eye, or a luxurious palate on the
Sabbath, which is a day not to feast the Body, but to feast the Soul. Feasts
and Banquets are not the Celebration, but the Profanation of a Sabbath; then
our fat things must be the fat things of Gods house. Psalm. 36. 8. Isa. 25. 6.
A full, luxuriant table, where no necessity requires it, is fitter for the day
of a Bacchus, then the day of Jehovah, who is all purity and perfection. A
moderate repast for Nature does best become the holy Sabbath.

The Disciples feed upon a few ears of Corn upon a Sabbath. Mat. 12. 1. De
caena nostra hoc dicendum est, nihil utilitatis, nihil immodestiae admittit,
non prius discumbitur, quam oration ad deum praegustetur, editur quantum
esurientes capiunt; bibitur quantum pudicis est utile, ita saturantur, ut qui
meminerint etiam per noctem adorandum etiam esse doum; ita fabulantur, ut qui
sciant dominum audire. Tertul. Exodus 16. 22, 23, 24, etc. Numb. 28. 10. Exodus
35. 3.
On this day a Table spread with dishes, is more spread with temptations: It is
dangerous then to study to please a palate, when we are more especially to look
after a soul. On this holy day the Word must be our food, tears must be our
wine, singing of Psalms our music, the Sanctuary our parlour and place of
repast, and our festivity must be joy in the Lord; our ear must be taken up in
holy attention, our heart in spiritual devotion, our eye in divine speculation.
The Sabbath is the Souls, not the Senses feastival; then to please the
curiosities of sense, is not to keep, but to lose the Sabbath. The Jews had
only the usual proportion of Manna for the Sabbath, they had no exceedings;
and though they were to offer double Sacrifices on the Sabbath, they were not
to eat double meals, to have an increase of outward provisions: They could not
lawfully kindle any fire on the Sabbath; and surely those preparations could
not be plenteous, where there was no fire to make them. We Christians make the
Sunday a day of spiritual rejoicing, says Bishop White, and he quotes it out
of Turtullian. Our pleasures on this day must not be in our Meats, but in our
Messiah; not in our varieties, unless it be of Ordinances. Chrysostom reports,
that the Love Feasts of the Christians in the Primitive times, consisted of
diverse Viands, provided by a common purse and collation, of which they took as
much as would suffice the Communicants, Diem solis laetitiae indulgemus.
Tertul, Chrysostom. On the 1 Cor. Cap. 11. Hom. 27.
and so celebrated the Lords Supper together, which done, they presently fell
to the spare and slender cheer, entertaining and solacing themselves with
spiritual and divine Colloquies. And indeed here we have our pattern, in the
purest times. The Golden Christians of the morning Sun of the Gospel were
contented with spare and slender diet. St. Augustine observed a vanity among
the Aug. in Prolog. 251. Sermon. de tempore.
Jews, in his time, that they feasted much on the Sabbath, and therefore
advises us To observe the Sabbath, not as the Jews did, carnally, and with
fleshly delicacies. And holy Ignatius, before him, much to the same purpose
cries out, Ignat. Epist. ad Magnesios. Procul abjicienda sunt impura carnis
opera, and insanum voluptuandi studium. Gualt. Phil. 3. 19. Amos 6. 4. and 6.
Qui Sabbatho vite utuntur, caetus sacros adeunt, Dei verbum audiunt, voluntatem
illius sedulo inqui^unt, in operum and beneficiorum ejus consideratione
versantur, precibus vacant, denique omissis omnibus, quae carni serviant se
totos ad aeterni illius Sabbathi considerationem componunt. Gualt.
We Christians must not keep our holy Sabbath after the manner of the profane
Jews, with excessive feastings, etc. But it is much to be feared, that Jews
excesses have got into Christian Assemblies; and many incur that censure of the
Apostle in making their belly their God on a Sabbath, they de indulgere gulae
and genio, flatter their imtemperate palate, and with the wanton Israelites,
Eat the Lambs out of the flock, and drink their wine in bowls upon Gods holy
day. It was the complaint of holy men in former times, that Wedding Dinners
were kept on the Sabbath, where too much intemperance swayed, to the great
profanation of it. This overplus of food and fare, gives the Soul a writ of
ease, and makes the body slothful and drowsy, and so renders the ordinances
and duties sapless and ineffectual; and if God reveals himself to them, it must
be in dreams, for the stretched and pampered body is fit for little else.

third sort of actions we must abstain from on the Sabbath, (viz.) sinful
actions; so the Text, [Not doing Sinful actions to be avoided on a Sabbath. Nec
relig osi hujus diei otia relaxantes, obscoenis quibuslibet patimur
voluptatibus teneri. Nihil die ^odem ve^dicet sibiscaena theatralis, aut
Circense certamen, aut ferarum lachrymosa spectacula. Anthem.
thy own wayes] Such actions which stain a week day, do blemish a Sabbath with
a blacker spot. Sin is a blot on any day, but a Monster on a Sabbath: On any
day it is a Cockatrice Egg, but a Serpent on a Sabbath. The Solemnity of a
Sabbath adds weight to every sin. How scandalous is it to be guilty of Pride,
excess, luxury, on Gods holy day? this is to turn the heaven of a Sabbath into
an bell. It is a remarkable Speech of Bishop Andrews; To keep the Sabbath in an
idle manner, is, Sabbatum Boum and Asinorum, the Sabbath of Beasts, Oxen and
Asses. To keep the Sabbath in a jocular manner, to see Plays and Sights, to
frequent the Theaters, or as Leo says, to be at Cards or Commessations, this
Augustine calls Sabbathum aurei vituli, the Sabbath of the golden calf: But to
keep the Sabbath in Sin, in Drunkenness, and surfeting, in Chambering and
Wantonness, this is the Sabbath of Satan, the Devils holy day. All Si quis
agrum colat die dominico, violator est sacriotii; verum si relicta agricultu^a
inebrietur, scortetur, ludat, etc. non censetur prophanasse di^i deminici
sanctimoniam? Aug. Dr. Andrews Patt. Chatechist. doct. p. 233. Leo Sermon. 3. de
Quadrag. Romans 13. 13. Exodus 20. 8. Exodus 35. 2. Neh. 9. 14. Monemus, vos
fratres, ut fugiatis sermonum vanitatem, and turpitudinem, facetias,
ebrietates, lascivias, fractos, et effoeminatos motus siquidem in diebus
dominicis, non permittimus vobis quicquid inhonestum. Clem. Romans Number. 15. 35.
the holies which God has added to his Sabbath in the Scriptures, not only in
the fourth Commandment, but in many other Scripture-texts, will be so many
Indictments against Practical miscarriages. And if it was a capital offense for
the poor man to gather a few sticks on the Sabbath, Ah what is it to draw
swords against Heaven in open scandal and profaneness?

CHAP. IV. That Needless Recreations are unlawful on the Sabbath.
(viz.) Recreative Actions; so the Recreative actions to be abstained from on
the Sabbath day. (...)
Text, [Not finding thy own pleasure] Recreations on a Sabbath, are blown up
into profaneness. Those delights which in the week are commendable, on the
Sabbath are intolerable. (...) Kephetz, the original word denotes, we must
have no blandishments on that day, nothing to be a snare or titillation to
sense, then the outward man must not be flattered or gratified. The
Commandments must be our walk, the Psalm. 119. 32.
Word our field, and Devotion our chiefest recreation. Our exercises on the
Sabbath are not Corporal but Spiritual, not for outward but inward delight, not
to please fancy, but to strengthen faith. The Sabbath is the souls holy day; It
Isid. Hispa. de Eccles. Offic. Lib. Cap. 19.
was a good saying of Isidore Hispalensis, The Apostles (says he) therefore
ordained the Lords day to be kept with Religious Non ed ludendum ordinatur
talis dies, sed ad laudandum, et orandum deum. Aquin. Opusc. de Praecept. 10. 2 Samuel 12. 3. Grande videlicet officium focos, et choros in puhlicum educere,
vicatim epulari, civitatem lat bernae halitu obolefacere, tatervatim cursitare
ad injurias ad impudicitias ad libidinis illecebras, siccine exprimitur
publicum gaudium per publicum dedecus? Tertul. Apol. Cap. 35.
Solemnity, because in it our Redeemer rose from the dead, which was therefore
called the Lords day, that resting on the same from all earthly acts, and the
temptations of the World, we might intend Gods holy worship, giving this day
due honor, for the hope of the Resurrection we have therein. We enjoy the
Sabbath ^ot to play in, but to pray in; for our souls, and not for our sports,
says Aquinas. It is true, Man is a poor frail piece of Clay, and therefore had
need to be recreated, created again by lawful delights and recreations; but
must the holy day of the Lord be this vacation? Is this the time for sports and
pleasurous satisfaction? Surely this speaks a grand abuse of the Sabbath. Must
the poor man's Ewe-Lamb be taken? that little spot of time God gives us more
immediately for our spiritual interest, must that be prostituted to gratify
the softness of the flesh? The Council of Carthage petitioned the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, that the shows of the Theater and other Plays, then
used on the Lords day might be removed, which accordingly was granted by his
Edict; and it was Enacted, Anno Dom. 415. That on the Lords day the Cirques and
Theaters in all places should be shut up, and people denied the pleasure
thereof, that so their whole minds might be taken up in the worship of God: And
thus at this time both Church and State united to suppress sensual Recreations
on Gods holy day; and indeed Dies festas Majestatialtissimae dedicatos, nullis
voluptatibus volumus occupari, C. Lib. 12. Tit. 12.
how irrational is this, that man's sense must be flattered in that juncture of
time when his soul is to be feasted? how comes it, that a Sabbath is so
tedious, that there is a need of pastime to wear it away, and so the burden
may be lightened? It is charged upon the carnal and covetous Israelites, that
they wished the Sabbath over; but this is censured as such a sin as God
threatens with the worst of judgments, a famine (...). Theod. ad Graec. Infid.
Sermon. 9. Amos 8. 5. compared with v. 8. 11. Ludi nostri esse debent sacrae
cantiones, verbi divini lectiones, aegretori visitationes, afflictorum
consolationes, pauperum sustentationes. Zanch. in Col.
of the Word, nay, such a sin as will shake a Land, and make it tremble.
Learned Zanchy has an excellent Speech; Our Plays on a Sabbath should be Holy
Singings, Scripture readings, visitation of the Sick, comforting of the
Afflicted, and supporting of the Poor: These are the delights of a savoury
spirit, and a gracious soul. I am sure that of the Apostle is seasonable on a
Sabbath, If any man will make merry, let him sing Psalms, James 5. 13. This is
a comfortable James 5. 13.
Ordinance, and a spiritual Recreation. Christ is an enclosed Garden, Cant. 4.
12. And can we complain of the Cant. 4. 12.
want of delight, who have such a Garden to walk in? Sensual pastimes, for the
most part, they are useless impertinencies, the Parenthesis of man's life; but
on the Lords day these are unjustifiable vanities, and let Reason bring in its
suffrage to condemn these unseasonable Sports and Recreations.

they are impediments to duty. The Bishop of Ely (our adversary in this point)
grants, that Sports and Recreations are prohibited on the Lords day, so Bishop
of Ely, p. 217.
far forth as they are impediments to Religious and Evangelical duties. Now how
they should be otherwise, is not easily discernible; for do not Recreations
possess the mind, divert the intention, withdraw from spiritual duties, hinder
the service of Christ, and fill the heart with froth and vanity? And are not
sports usually the very leekage of Corruption? When we bowl, what do we think
on but the bias, and the game? When we shoot, what are we intent upon but our
aim, and the mark? I instance in these two, because they are especially urged
as lawful on the Sabbath. Let us, says Greenham, Cease from Games, Sports,
Exercises and such like things of less necessity, but great impediments to the
Greenh. p. 825.
Sabbath. Is it to be supposed, that we frame our Spirits, or compose our
hearts for divine conve^se on a bowling green? What is this, but to fancy we
should meet with the gracious visitations of God at a Stage Play? An adversary
in C. D. p. 52.
this point has these words: Such is the reverence that is due to the public
duties of Devotion, that they require not only a surcease from other works and
thoughts for the time of the performance, but also a decent preparation
beforehand, that so our thoughts and affections, which are naturally bent upon
the world, and not easily withdrawn from it, may be raised to a disposition
befitting so sacred an employment: This is most piously and worthily concluded.
Let me reassume what is here granted: And must not our thoughts be as much
taken up in digesting of the word, as in preparing for it; in meditating on
Ordinances, when over, as in disposing our selves for them when to come? Meat
is not healthful, as Psalm. 1. 2.
only put into the mouth, but as chewed, swallowed and Non tantum lectio, sed
et meditatio.
digested. The sacred Ordinances of Christ must be followed with critical
inquiries, divine and serious meditations, servent prayers, or they will fall
short of the intended work and design of them. The seed when thrown into the
ground, Acts 17. 11.
must be covered with snow, warmed with sunshines, watered Aug. de temp. Sermon.
251.
with showers, or it will yield no expected crop and harvest: And if it be so,
I see not where Recreations can find any place, which are nothing else but
incumberances, as St. Augustine speaks.

they are the snares of the flesh, they are only pleasing temptations, with a
fair color, like the Apple which drew our first Parents to a breach of Gods
Genesis 3. 6.
will, it was pleasant to behold. The Jews first Feasted on Sane Sabbathum
festus dies cum fuerit, co hilaria agere judaeis consuetum suit, quae eo demum
abierunt, ut illa ad insanas saltationes, et plausus abuterentur Leid. Prof.
the Sabbath, then danced frantickly, and grew excessively profane, as the
Professors of Leiden observe. These pleasing sports, how often do they draw the
tongue to sinful slipperiness, inflame the eye with lust and wantonness, and
put the heart into a carnal frame, nay, too frequently, seduce to excess and
intemperance? And as Augustine in the forementioned place says, They press
down the Soul, from being lift up to a Heavenly Life. Our corrupt heart need
not the insinuation of sports and pastimes to broach it, that it may run with
levity and profaneness: Gods holy Sabbath needs not such engines of
corruption. Aug. Sermon. de tempore.


They are the very canker of Ordinances, they eat out the very heart and force
of them: Sports will easily and naturally rub off convictions, take off the
gust and sweetness we have tasted in the Word, and wear off the impressions of
Prayer, and of other solemn duties, all which with the sound of the Gospel we
have partaked of, evaporates and is lost. When we have conversed with God in
Ordinances, how many things lie at the catch to invalidate their power; Satan
is ready to steal Mat. 13. 19.
away the Word, our hearts to damp and quench the efficacy Sicut in seminando
ager praeparandus est, nisi operam et laborem cum semente perdere velimus; cor
ad audiendum verbun dei praeparandum est, et deus diligenter orandus, tum ex
part conciona toris, tum ex part auditoris, Lyser.
of it, the world to charm away the sweet music of it; and there is need of
meditation, prayer, and holy and sanctified means, to keep alive the fire of
the Word in the soul; and therefore unseasonably we flush our selves with
Recreations and Pastimes, to bury all in distaste or forgetfulness. The use of
sports will inevitably make our Righteousness like the morning dew, which the
heat of play and delights will suddenly dry up. Nay, if the Cares of the world,
as our Savior speaks, will choke the Word, much more the pleasures of the
world, when they are more soft and suitable to delicate flesh, and corrupt
nature. As in the Primitive Times, more Apostates were made by the flatteries
of Julian, then the fires of Dioclesian, and smiles more harmed the Church,
then smarts. Nothing more likely, then to shoot away, bowl away, whatever we
have been affected with, Hos. 6. 4.
in holy Ordinances and Administrations. Mat. 13. 22.


English Church, composed with so much exactness, and deliberation, (as is
often urged by the admirers of it) commands the fourth Commandment to be read,
as well as the other nine, and there pardon is begged for the breaches of this
Commandment for time past, Lord have mercy upon us; and then Grace is
importuned to observe it better for the time to come, where it is prayed, and
incline our hearts to keep this Law: Where these three things are considerable,

1. That by the Sabbath the Church understands the Lords day only.

2. That she takes the observation of the Lords day founded upon the fourth
Commandment.

3. That she intended that day to be kept as a Sabbath, and therefore begs
pardon and grace; which if so, there can be no room for unnecessary labors,
and needless Recreations, both which are but presumptuous encroachments on Gods
appropriated day. As holy Augustine forbad hunting, and all worldly pleasures.
And Leo the Emperor; Nullis Augustine. Leo the Emperor.
volumus voluptatibus occupari, Our will is, No pleasures to be used, as being
the great obstructions to the spirituality of a Sabbath; they discomposing the
soul for sublime and heavenly intercourses; to be spiritually raised, and to be
pleasurously (...). 1 Rev. 10.
addicted on the Lords day, being strange inconsistencies.

they are too much the evidence of a formal spirit. To the holy soul, the
Temple is his Triumph, Prayers his pleasure, Ordinances his delight, the
Sanctuary his satisfaction. David counts one day in Gods Courts, better then a
thousand. Flashy and frivolous Recreations Psalm. 84. 10.
on a Lords day, to a gracious spirit, they are his little-ease, and the
clipping of his wing, the Souls confinement and Psalm. 63. 2.
restraint, the Prison grate between him and Christ, no way his Pleasure but
his Purgatory; and where they are received Psalm. 43. 4.
with gratefulness and contentment, they loudly Proclaim too much froth and
vanity. David danced at the enjoyment of Cant. 2. 4.
the Ark, but these leave the Ark to sport and dance. 2 Samuel 6. 16.


They are the debasements of spiritual mercies, as if there were no captivating
power in Divine Ordinances, to hold the soul intent for a day; no Psalm. 19. 10.
Psalm. 42. 4.
honey comb in the Word to please the taste, no pleasing vent in prayer, to
ease and satisfy the Soul; as if singing of Psalms made no music, and reading
the Scriptures did yield no delight. Ah, with what patience and content did the
Jews hear the Law read in the time of Nehemiah? The people stood Nehem 8. 7.
in their place, says the Text quoted, as if they were staked and fastened,
without any desire of removal; Their serious attention chained them to their
present station. Paul preached Acts 20. 7.
till midnight: the sweet Oracles of God drowned all wearisomness and distaste.
Ordinances have a savor in them, Romans 3. 2.
which refresh and raise the Saint, and there is no need of carnal sports to
wear off any tedious abhorrency. To affect or use these pastimes on the
Sabbath, is to embase the value of Divine exercises, and to charge holy duties
with abortive Hos. 9. 14.
emptiness, as if they were barren wombs, and dry breasts. Let the Umpirage in
this case be referred to the holy Psalmist, in the Text quoted in the Margin.
Psalm. 1. 2.


spring of impertinent discourse, which is expressly forbidden in the Text; for
says the [Text, Nor speaking thy own words.] In our sports more especially,
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, as our Savior says.
Sports are the very Mat. 12. 34. Malitiae sermonis, sons est malitia cordis, ex
quo necessi est, ejusmodi maledicta per os ebullire, sicut ex faetido font non
possunt nisi fatidae aquae per f^stulas effundi. Par. Dr. B. Mark 6. 22. Mark
6. 27. James 3. 6. Peccatum, quod alter incurrit operando, tuum facis
obloquendo.
fuel of vain and frothy discourse. A holy man observes, That some men they
never make an end of their pleasures, nor an end of talking and hearing of
them; their Hawks are not only on their fists, but on their tongues. There are
two things which spring a mine of impertinent discourse, Feasts and Sports. We
may as well separate blackness from the cloud, as frothy language from frothy
pleasures; Nay, how often are pastimes stained with sinful protestations, the
fatal taking of Gods Name in vain, nay, with Execrations and Oaths, the scum of
Hell it self? Where did Herod make his wretched promise, which was died in the
blood of the Baptist, but at a dancing, when Herodias her Daughters feet, did
not trip so much as Herod's tongue; And if at any time the tongue is set on fire
of hell, as the Apostle James speaks, Games and Pastimes, presently become the
bellows to blow up the fire. Sports are usually the tongues Courtizan to draw
it to folly, and wanton intemperance, with frothy rejoycings, and carnal
triumphs; nay heats and passions are mixed with our recreations, and the tongue
is to proclaim them. The mirth which attends pastimes will not be cag'd up in
the breast, but will fly out inimpertinent and unsavory language. How often in
sports do we call our Brother fool, and yet our Savior Iracundiae, litis,
vanitatis, and censurae verba, a Satana procedunt, et ad Satanam tendunt, illic
incipiunt, et illic rapiunt. Mat. 6. 22. Psalm. 39. 1.
says, that very expression puts us in danger of hell fire? And therefore let
any serious Christian make his own conscience the Tribunal, to which I dare
appeal, whether this flatulent and unseemly discourse, the inseparable
companion of Games and Pastimes, be not a sinful undecency on Gods holy
Sabbath, and an opposition to the very Text; surely then, if ever, with David,
we should take heed we offend. not with our tongue.

They are an indignity offered to the noble and precious soul. Shall the body,
that mass and Isa. 2. 22.
pile of dust, cemented only with a little flying breath, that Corpus est
ergastulum animae. Plato.
bag of phlegm and cholar, that prison of the soul, as Plato used to call it,
enjoy the time of six whole days; and the soul, that piece of eternity in the
bosom, the breath of God, the saving of which was the grand and forcible
attractive of Corpus hoc vinculum, and carcer est animae, ex quo exire cupit
sanctus, and esse cum Christo. Hierom.
Christ's incarnation and death, this darling of Heaven, not enjoy one day, but
it must be retailed and cantoned into diverse divisions? Some parts of it must
be spent in the labors of our Callings, and some in solemn Duties in the
public Congregations, and some in sports and delightful Recreations, when the
public is over, and some in private Duties, (if there be any time;) and this
torn and rent Sabbath, something like Joseph's Coat of many colors, must be
the Genesis 37. 3.
only morsel for the immortal soul. But how irrational is it for the soul,
that better part of man, which shall live as long Mat. 16. 26.
as God himself, to be straightned and pinnion'd to a few Vita carnis tuae
anima est, vita animae tuae deus est, quomodo moritur caro amissa anima, quae
vita ejus est, sic moritur anima, amisso deo, qui vita est ejus. August.
hours? It must not enjoy one whole day, only the leavings of our work and
recreations, the crumbs which fall from the bodies table; Let the Christian who
is solicitous of his souls eternal interest, consider, whether this pittance of
time, only a few hours on a Sabbath, be suitable to the vast and unlimited
soul, especially if we observe, that the soul sways the body; the body follows
the condition of the soul, and not the soul the estate of the body.

much more Recreations. That labors are prohibited, the fourth Commandment is
the pregnant testimony of: now sports, toys, pastimes Melius est in Sabbato
araro, quam saltare. Aug. Enar. in Tit.
are of less avail then labors. It is a memorable speech of Augustine, Melius
est in Sabbatho arare, quam saltare: It is better to plow, then to dance upon a
Sabbath.

some Income, so not sports; there is a temporal profit, and emolument in the
one, none in the other. Concerning sports we may say, that the Gamesters labor
for that which is not bread, there can be no supplies Isa. 55. 1, 2.
from the breast of a recreation. Pastimes are clouds without water.

Recreations more tempt and flatter the flesh, then Labors do. Toil does not
pamper; dancing, hunting, shooting do; they are sun-shines which make the
dunghill of man's heart reak with noysomness. It was once the expostulation of a
holy man, worth the transcribing, his words are these; What shall I say of the
Zeal of worldlings, which may control Mr. Greenham.
the security of our sins; worldly men never seek for pleasure, Vita in
delitiis agens, and mors est, and umbra mortis, quantum enim umbra prope est
corpori, cujus est umbra, tantum pro certo, vita illa voluptuario inferno
appropinquat, Bern. Sermon. 48 in Cantic. 15 James. (...) p. 52.
whilst profit does drop, and so long as they may gain a penny, how diligent
are they, they will not sport or play: But the Sabbath is the market day of our
souls, where we should gather whilst the sun shines; Here is profit, and so
there ought to be diligence, and therefore we should lay aside pleasure, and we
should say, what have we to do with Recreations any more? yet how many neglect
their pleasure for the world, and we will not for heaven or our souls? But
after the public Ordinances are over, nay multitudes in the very time of
public Worship, follow their sensual Recreations, I was going to say,
Abominations. It was a saying of King James, Though without superstition,
Plays and lawful Games may be used in May, and good Cheer at Christmas, yet
always provided, that the Sabbath be kept holy, and no unlawful pastime be
then used. And as a worthy and holy man observes; No man can think Dr. B.
upon that day to be so disordered, as to follow his ordinary pleasures,
without great contempt of God and Man: Upon that holy day, all sorts of men
must utterly give over shooting, hunting, hawking, bowling, etc. and they must
no more deal with them, then the Artificer with his Trade, or the Husbandman
with his Plow. I shall shut up this particular with a pious Bp Hall of Exeter.
Contemp. Lib. 17.
Ejaculation of a Holy and Reverend Bishop, who thus vents himself: I wonder
what these kind of men, (viz.) (those who bathe themselves in pleasures upon
the Lords day) will do, when they come to Heaven, (if ever they come there)
where there is a continued Sabbatisme without intermission; surely they will
wish themselves on Earth again, unless they keep a Sabbath better here below.
Do we not pray, Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven? there the Angels
do nothing but praise God. Do we hope to be like them in Glory, and not
endeavor to be like them in duty? Our Heaven above is a continual Sabbath, our
Sabbath below should be a continued Heaven: The Sabbath, not the sports on the
Sabbath, should be our delight.

by all kind of Laws.

Divine Law, (viz.) the fourth Commandment, Requies requiritur in quarto
Praecepto, and co^mendatur, et ubique amatur, sed illa requies in solo deo,
certa, et sancta invenitur. Aug.
where Labors are expressly forbidden; and sports are an equal, if not a
greater impediment to the duties of the Sabbath, both public and private; the
sweets of Recreation influencing the mind, and withdrawing the heart, much more
then the sweats of Labor. Surely if we must not toil, we must not trifle on
Gods holy day.

Law of Nature; which requires a total abstinence from all works, both of
Labor and Pleasure, during the time allotted and consecrated to Gods service,
public Dies dominicus abipsis Apostolis sacris actionibus est consecratus.
Bucer.
and private. But the Lords day is that time allotted; we cannot work* and
worship both at once: and if when we should worship, we follow our pleasures,
or our profits, Is not this to subordinate the Divine Will to man's Fancy?

Law Political, which requires a total resting from all kind of labor or
diversion, and applying our souls Edw. the 6th.
wholly, and only to Religious Exercises, as the Statute of Act. Primo, Carol.
Primi.
King Edward the sixth of blessed memory, a Law yet unrepealed. That English
Josiah, the morning Sun of Reformation Ad Sabbathi rectam observationem, duo
requiruntur, quies et quietis illius sanctificatio. Ames. med. Theol.
in England, began early to confine the Sabbath to the two great designs of it,
Rest and Sanctity; and in this he showed himself to be Custos utriusque
Tabulae, a Keeper of both the Tables: And indeed the enjoining of the holy
observance of Gods blessed day, is a rare piece of Reformation, well becoming
the Care and Conscience of the best of Princes.

Law Ecclesiastical, especially that Homily of our Church, which is
established by a political Law, which Hom. Of the time and place of worship.
forbids all Labor, and requires us wholly to give our selves to Religious
Exercises, and so by consequence, strongly forbids, and prohibits all kind of
Recreations: and the same Homily forbids all toyish talking on the Lords day,
and so a majori ad minus, from the greater to the lesser sports and pastimes.
Now therefore what is thus prohibited by the Law of God, Nature, Church and
State, is certainly a sinful practice.

wastes of time, they alienate the time of a Sabbath from the intention of the
Lawgiver. God never sanctified a piece of a day, or ever set apart a few hours
only of his holy day for his service and worship, and left the remainder to
man's disposal, either to pursue his Games or Delights; Such sinful
encroachments, Mat. 9. 16.
to use our Saviors phrase, are only the putting a piece of new cloth to an
old Garment.

laboring person be brought in, who labors hard all the week, and therefore
lays claim to Recreations on the Sabbath, especially if it be considered, that
God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice: To this plea and apology Mat. 12. 7.
it may be replied,

Old Sabbath, as against the Lords day, and yet it is generally confessed,
Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.
that the Lord enjoined the Jews a whole day, and allowed them no bodily
recreations on the Sabbath; and therefore it is no violation of mercy to deny
the like on the Lords day. Ad minutula, et leviora quibus nec corpus fatigatur,
nec men's a cultu avocatur, ad illa non attendendum, quia illa anxietatem potius
servilem, quam libertatem filialem respicium: modo libertatem illam in
licentiam carnis non vertamus. Wall. James 4. 14.


Recreation is equivocal. Indeed there is a Recreation which is mercy, (viz.)
the necessary refreshment of the body, as eating, drinking, resting it self,
especially to those who have wearied themselves with labor; yea, to some
sickly bodies, some ordinary, moderate and inoffensive Recreations may be
allowed, as a learned man observes. But there is a Recreation which we call
sports and pastimes, when there is no necessity; and to allow this is no work
of mercy; and if it be a mercy to the body, it is severity to the soul: and in
this case, God will have sacrifice, and no such kind of mercy, which pleases
the fancy, and the corrupt heart of man, against the advantage of his better
part: This is to rob the soul that bears the Image of God, to pay the body,
which bears the Image of death and frailty.

greatest mercy which can be showed to such as labor hard all the week, is to
give them rest for their bodies, and divine refreshments and recreations for
their souls; and for Dr. Turners Sermon at White Hall. 1635.
this the Lord himself was careful: And if their bodies have rest and repose,
the greatest mercy, is mercy to their soul. to breath the soul in holy
meditation, to draw out the soul Sic agamus in Sabbatho, ut deum in nobis agere
patiamur, atque ita aeternum inchoemus Sabbathum. Wall. Cant. 1. 7. Cant. 2. 5.
in holy prayer, to refresh the soul with divine truth, to recreate the soul
with singing of psalms, to bring the soul to holy ordinances, where it may meet
with its Beloved; these are the very spirits of mercy, when Christ's stays his
beloved on a Sabbath, with Flaggons and Apples, in Gospel dispensations.

be merciful, the way is, not to steal it from God, but to allow it of his
own; Let the Labourer take his rest on his own day: And some well observe, If
the Mr. C. and Mr. P. Voluptatem vicisse est m^^ima volupt^s, neque est ^lla
major victoria, quamquae a upiditatibus refertur. Cypr.
Sabbath be Gods, it is no more true mercy to permit bodily recreations on that
day, then it is mercy to give men leave to steal other men's goods on the
Sabbath, because they have fared hard all the week before, the person offending
in the first b^ing far more guilty. Can it be rational, that Gods Commands
should wait on man's conveniences? and happily this convenience is created from
man's neglect, not necessity.

supposing it was mercy to permit some bodily recreation (which yet cannot be
granted) to such as have labored hard all the week long, yet what is that to
such who have labored very little, or nothing in the week, to such whose week
is nothing but a Sabbath, a rest, and time of leisure, and vacation? and yet
these are most ready to call and clamor for sports and recreations on the
Lords day. But as one wittily observes, Those who are not annihilated Dr. Paul
Micklethwait.
with hard labor, have no title or claim to be recreated, created again by
delight and liberty: If any can pretend to this plea, They are such whose
cheeks are moystened with sweat, and hands hardened with toil, and work all the
Epicuri disciplina multo ce^ebrior est non quia aliquid boni afferat, sed quia
multos ad populare nomen voluptatis invitat. Lactant. Lib. 3. Divin.
week; but such are most silent, and modest in their claim and pretentious: and
therefore it cannot be any mercy to such who spend their time in Courtships and
Dalliancings, who converse like a wanton Epicurus, or a plump Anacreon, whose
whole life is nothing else but a recreation, and a successive chain of
pleasures, and worldly satisfactions; and yet these (as I said) are they who
are most importunate for sports and pastimes on Gods holy day. And therefore to
reassume that Argument from which we have a little diverted; Recreations on the
blessed Sabbath are inexcusably the wastes of that time, which is wholly
dedicated to the service of God, and the soul, as now comes to be showed.

CHAP. V. The Whole Sabbath is to be spent with God.
THere are many persons both of Eminency and Learning, who have taken much
pains to prove the lawfulness of sports and pastimes on the Lords day; I shall
only reply, it was heartily to be wished, such great parts had been improved
on some other subject, and the stream of Nemo non in ^itia pro^^^ est, and ill^
vincere diffi^illi mum est. Lactant.
their sweat had run in some other channel. Alas, in this Argument, man's
corrupt Nature will be the b^st Or^tour, and produce the strongest ple^s; we
are naturally en^lined to fleshly ease, and the flatteries of sense, as other
things which hasten to the Center. Nature I say here can plead its own Q^i
h^^er^ vici^ f^rtior u^^ al^er^, sed qui libidi^^m repressi f^rtior ^at s^i^so.
Cypr. de bono Pudic.
cause, and needs not the supplement of another Advocate. But if the whole day
of a Sabbath must be spent with God in public, private or secret duties, and
in managing of the affairs of the soul, which comes now to be proved in this
Chapter; then the Argument for sports and pastim^s on the Lords day will lose
its force and significancy. And here I may begin the Argument, with that sharp
expostulation of Naamans Servant to Naaman himself; What if God (as he speaks
of the Prophet) had required some great thing of us, would we not have done it?
What if God had It is most equal, if man have 6 days, that God should have the
7th; and this is the reason, the soul, and life of the fourth Commandment. Mr.
Shep.
required of us six days, and given us only one for our selves, should we not
have observed them? Much more when he requires but one day, and gives us six,
shall not we observe that? Shall we abate God of the tale and measure of his
time? Shall the stream of time, wherein we are commanded to worship God be so
small, and yet shall it be turned into several channels and diversions? Reason
it self here seems to condemn the straightness of our spirits: but for the
clearing of the Argument, we will fetch our evidences from the treasuries of
Scripture, Reason and convenience.

Exodus 20. 8.
the sanctification of a day, not a part of a day, or a few hours of a day; for
the words of the Statute run thus, Deuteronomy. 5. 12.
Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy; and it is very observable, and not
to be passed over with silence, that Memento diei Sabbathi, ut cum sanctifices,
inquit Dominus in quarto Praecepto; Ad hoc recteintelligendum, notandum est ex
vi ipsius praecepti, non aliquam partem diei, sed totum diem esse Domino
sanctificandum. Wall. We are to account the sanctification of one day in a week,
a duty which Gods immutable Law, does Enact for ever. Hooks Eccles. Pol. Lib.
5. God would have at least one day in a week to be allowed him. Ferus. The
Divine Law required that one day in a week should be sequestered for holy
worship. Bellar. de Cult. Sanct. Lib. 3. Cap. II. 1 Kings, 3. 26. Mat. 25. 24.
God does not only command us to keep holy the Sabbath, which might be a time
indefinite and indeterminate, but the Sabbath day, which amply prescribes the
time of observance. A day, no less then the time of a day, it is (...) Jom Ha
Sabbath, the day of a Sabbath; Now the word (...) jom properly and usually
signifies a full day, unless it be figuratively, and by way of Synechdoche; it
signifies sometimes, time indefinite, as Critiques in the holy tongue observe;
and so Genesis 1. 5. where it is said, the Evening and the Morning was the first
day, there the word is (...) jom; and the day mentioned in this great
Commandment, must needs comprehend the space of twenty four hours; nor do the
Learned by their interpretations or glosses, abreviate or shorten the time, but
(...) jom is a whole day by the confession of all. Now shall God enjoyne the
observation of a day, and shall we mutilate it? Shall we maime or curtaile it,
and take part of this holy day for our labors or recreations? Surely this
savours of too great presumption. We must by Divine command keep holy a day,
not a part or piece of a day; and therefore for us to say, as the Harlot to
Solomon in another case, Let not God have the whole Sabbath, nor let us have
the whole Sabbath, but let it be divided between his service and our sports,
what is this, but with the unprofitable servant, to call God, hard Master, and
that his requiring a whole day, was an act of too much austerity.

the beginning of the fourth Commandment, wherein God shows his Sovereignty, so
we may discern an Argument in the body of the Commandment, wherein God shows
his indulgence; for in this fourth Commandment God allows us six days for
labor, Exodus 20. 8.
but the seventh is to be a day of holy rest and observation. Now the six days
for labor, are six full and whole days, Natural est, diem septimum quemque
deo sacrum esse, Jun. Com. in Genes
without any deduction or abatement. Man may without regret on these six days
pursue (...), those things which belong to this life, as Chrysostom calls
them; He may go forth to his labor till the Evening, as the Psalmist speaks;
nay; if his strength still fail not, he may draw the curtains Morale est, ut ex
septem diebus unus cultu^ divino consecretur. Armin. Disp. 77. Chrysostom. Psalm.
104. 23. No man doubts the meaning of these words, six days shall thou
labor, etc. to be this; That seeing God has permitted us six days to do our
works in, we ought in the seventh, wholly to serve him. VVhitguift Defense of
the Answ. to the Adm. p. 553. Jam hinc ab initio, doctrinam hanc insinuat Deus,
erudiens in circulo hebdomadae diem unum integrum, segregandum, et reponendum
in spiritualem operati^nem. Chrysostom. (...) Septimum diem, non utilem deus
putabat ad creandum, sed ad quietem accommodandum statu^t. Theod. quest. in
Genesin. Perpetuum est, ac aeternum quamdiu Ecclesia agit interris, quod unus
dies in hebdomade, cultui divino mancipetur, hoc stabile, and firmum est. Pet.
Mart. loc. Com. Aug Sermon. de Temp. Requirit Deus quietem hanc corporis, et
cess^tio^em ab operibus, non qualemeunque et dimidiatam, sed justam, plenam, et
exact^m, (i. e.) proposito accommodam. Musc. Totus ergo dies, ex toto ammo,
quantum fert humana necessitas, et imbecillitas, rite ac pie Deo servandus
erat. Leid. Prof.
of the night, and make a further progress into his toil and painfulness, and
all this without blame and violation of the fourth Commandment. Now shall not
the seventh day be of as long continuance and duration as any of the other six?
Shall the day for Heaven be more contracted, then the six days for Earth? The
day for spiritual rest, shall it not be of an equal length with the days for
secular labor? Whence arises the inequality, that the six days may be wholly
employed in our worldly affairs, but if part only of the Lords day be spent in
holy services, it shall be sufficient? I am sure the same word (...) jom a day,
is in both; both the six days, and in the seventh, and how comes the
signification to be altered? if jom a day, signifies a whole day in the one,
why not in the other? why not the whole seventh day engaged in divine service,
as well as the whole six days taken up in secular employments. Chrysostom and
Theodoret observe, that from the very beginning God taught man this lesson,
that one whole day in the circle of seven is to be employed in holy services.
And many famous lights of the Reformed Church conclude, that whatever is moral
in the fourth Commandment, this must needs be, that the seventh part of every
week be consecrated to the worship of God. So Zanchy, Bucer, Martyr, etc. That
famous person mentioned last speaks roundly when he says, That it is perpetual
and eternal while the Church remains upon Earth, that one day in the week be
designed for the service and worship of God; and this (says he) is firm and
unshaken. Augustine in one of his Sermons advises the people, That from the
Evening of the Saturday, till the Evening of the Lords day, they avoid all vain
sloth and idleness, and all secular toil and labor, and wholly set themselves
apart for the worship of God. This excellent man gives the full current of
twenty four hours to the holy observation of the Sabbath; And this, says he,
is rightly to keep the Sabbath: and truly if God gives us six natural days to
labor in, is it not fit that the seventh should bear an equal proportion with
every working day? And therefore it is a natural day consisting of twenty four
hours, which we must in conscience allow to God to be the Sabbath day. But
besides the force of Divine Command, which as clearly enjoins, the seventh day
for holy Rest, as indulges the other six days for toil and labor; the very
plea's of the soul may come in to affirm the sanctification of one whole day
in the week, to spiritual and divine services. Let us consider.

in the Nobleness of its Original, it is a Heaven-born soul, Gods breath in
man's bosom; Man's soul only bubbles from the fountain of spirits; our soul is
but a beam The Soul is (...).
from the glorious Sun, God beam*d into man a glittering soul; and shall not
this noble soul, so worthily descended, lay claim to one day, as well as the
body, that dusty case of the principle of life, the soul, that body, which is
only the sheath of the soul, the cabinet for this jewel to lie in, put in its
title and right to six? What is this but to degrade the soul from the honor of
its Excellent Original?

in the excellency of its capacity; what is not a reasonable soul capable of?
It is capable of Gods Anima est ex Deo, non ut ex materia, et ex traduce dei,
^eu ejus quadam particula, sed ut ^ causa efficiente, and accessu quodam
naturae propiore ad essentiam dei, divinarumque proprietatum assimilatione.
Leid. Prof. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Image. There is little of Gods Image to be seen in the body. God is a spirit,
and so stamps his Image on the spirits of men and shall not the soul, which
bears so noble a superscription, enjoy the privilege and latitude of one day,
as well as the body, that earthly tabernacle which is soon taken down, and
wrapped up in a silent grave, enjoy the immunity of six whole days? But must the
abatement fall on the souls portion?

the multiplicity, of a souls work; and therefore let not its day be shortened
by frothy pleasures or servile labors. John 9. 4. Praeclarae sunt arimae
dotes, eff^ctus, and divinae functiones: miranda solertia ingenii, cogitationis
celeritas, facilitas perceptionis, judicii acrim^nia, dis^ursus, et
ratiocinatio de rebus omnibus, memoria rerum praet^ritarum, contemplatio
praesentium, futurarum praevisio, et maxim inse ipsam conversio, et reflexio,
suaeque contemplatio, etc. Lied. Prof.
The work of the soul is very great and very various, there are many duties to
perform, many graces to act, many ordinances to wait upon, much knowledge to
acquire, many corruptions to subdue. Now he that is to ride far, let him not
want daylight, the souls task is great, let not its time be short, especially
shorter then God has made it. The body has only two things to get, (viz.)
food and raiment, it has but two rooms to go through, the Kitchen and the
Wardrobe: But the soul has more and nobler achievements to pursue; It has a
Pardon, Grace, Christ, God, Heaven to look after, and obtain; and shall its
own day, given it more especially for these great attempts, be subject to an
unhappy diminution?

in the eternity of its duration. The soul (says one) is a bud of eternity;
the business of the Anima^e (...) Domine aufer a me hanc tunicam grave^ (corpus
scil. terrestre, ponderosum, et aerumnosum) et d^ mihi levi^rem.
soul is of everlasting concernment: But the body is a shattered piece of dust,
a shaking fa brick which is soon unpinned; the paint of its beauty is soon
washed off, the vigor of its strength is soon weakened and enervated, a
thousand diseases can crack this piece of frailty; and yet this tottering piece
of flesh, must have its full six days, and the eternal soul not enjoy one
whole day, without allowance made for pleasure and secular employments.

in the importance of its welfare. The body follows the condition of the soul,
but the soul does not follow the condition of the body. If thy soul miscarry,
it had been better, as our Savior speaks, thou had never been born. Man
fares as his soul fares. It was Mat. 26. 24. Sic alloquitur anima sancta
suspirans, O civitas sancta, civitas speciosa, de longinquo te saluto, ad te
clamo, te requiro, desidero vere te videre, et in te requiescere; O civitas
desiderabilis, Muri tui Iapis unus, Custos tuus ipse deus, Cives tui semper
laeti semper enim gratulantur visione Dei. Hug. Victor.
the Redemption of the soul that drew Christ from Heaven to tabernacle amongst
us, and to offer up himself a sacrifice to Divine Justice; and therefore how
rational is it, that the precious soul should enjoy a full Sabbath without any
sensual vacancies, for pleasures and pastimes, seeing the whole man is
dependant upon its disposal, and is happy or miserable, according to its state
or condition. But to wind up this particular Argument, if we consider either
the force of the fourth Commandment, or the pregnant plea's of the immortal
soul, whose interest is much pursued on a Sabbath; nay, the Sabbath is the very
day God has appointed for the souls great affairs and negotiations; we must
conclude, that the time which God requires for himself, and for the souls
advantage, must be at least equal for continuance to that which he allows for
other employments: and surely no one day of the week is longer or shorter then
another; but if the Lords day has not twenty four hours, it must needs be
shorter then the rest.

The Primitive Church kept a night as well as a day on the Sabbath, as appeared
by their Vigils, and this not only in times of persecution, but in the times
when Emperors were Christians. The ancient Fathers are clear and copious in
commanding the Observation of a whole Sabbath for spiritual services as a duty.
So Augustine, Irenaeus, and the Council of Mascon, has these words; Let us
observe the Lords day, and sanctify Aug. Iren. Conc. Mascon.
it from the Evening of the Saturday, till the Evening of the Lords day,
sequestered from all business. Nay, let us hear Mr. Primrose, our Adversary in
this Controversy, It is necessary (says that learned man) that a day be
chosen and appointed, that in it, as often as it returns, men may apply
themselves extraordinarily Primrose. Praes. p. 1, 2.
to public and private devotion; men must stint some ordinary day for that
end, and in this stinting, must not show themselves inferior to the Jews,
appointing less then one day in seven to Gods service. And another concludes,
(who is likewise our adversary) That some day be destinated to the Lord, may
seem to be a dictate of the Law of Nature, which he proves from the practice of
the Heathens, who observed a whole day to the honor of their Gods: And
therefore C. DOW p. 74.
what spirit are they of, who on the week day could wish the Sun might stand
still, as in the time of Joshua, or Josh. 10. 13. 2 Kings 20. 11.
run back as on the dyal of Ahaz, that they might have greater leisure for
their worldly affairs? but desire that the Sun might pass on, on a Sabbath (if
it were possible, with a speedier flight) that that holy day might be the
sooner over, like those wanton Israelites, Amos 8. 5. who were Amos 8. 5.
weary of their Sabbath. In a word, it is very strange, that any man should
make the Sabbath like Nebuchadnezzars Image, the upper parts Gold and Silver,
but the lower Dan. 2. 32, 33.
parts Iron and Clay; the former part of a Sabbath to be spent in holy, in
golden duties, but the latter part of the Sabbath, in Iron labors, or Clay,
drossie pleasures and delights, in bowling and shooting, and such like sports,
so much contended for by many men to be lawful on the Sabbath day.

of a whole day in other Festivals, which are of an inferior nature, and which
were only Ceremonial shaddows of something to come, as we Lev. 23. 3^.
may observe in that signal and famous place, Lev. 23. 32. the words are these;
And it shall be unto you a Sabbath of rest, and you shall afflict your souls in
the ninth day of the month at Even, from Even unto Even shall ye celebrate your
Sabbath. Now this Feast here mentioned was called the Feast of Expiation, and
it was celebrated on the tenth day of the month Tisri, our September, and it
was called the feast of Post paschale sacrum, elapsis septem septimanis,
quadraginta novem diebus, quinquagessima, quam a numero, Asartha Hebraei
vocant, offerunt deo panem. Joseph Anti. Lib. 3 Cap. 10.
Expiation, because the High Priest did then confess unto God both his own
sins, and the sins of the people, by performance of some Rites and Ceremonies
expiate them, and make an atonement to God for them. Now to give you the
Reason why this Feast was called a Sabbath, in the forementioned Text, you must
conceive, that the other Festivals of the Jews were by a general notion called
Sabbaths, though they did not fall on the seventh day, as the New Moons, Ezekiel.
46. 3. the feast of unleavened bread, instituted in the twelfth of Exodus, upon
the sparing of the Jews in the slaughter of the Egyptians first born, and the
feast of Exodus 23. 14.
Pentecost, a feast instituted in memory of the Law given on Mount Sinai, fifty
days after Isreal's coming out of Egypt; Haec sesta so lennia, si in Sabbathum
inciderent, ob duplicem sestivitatem magnus dies Sabbathi vocabantur. Leid.
Prof.
and in these feasts which continued diverse days, the first and the last were
more properly termed Sabbaths. And so in the feast of Tabernacles, or Booths,
which was ordained to witness that the Israelites lived in Tents or Booths in
the Wilderness; the first and the last day of this feast was called a Sabbath;
but if these solemn feasts fell upon a weekly Sabbath, for the double
feastival, it was called the great day of the Sabbath, Joh. 19. 31. But to
reassume the Argument; If God will have a whole day for these Ceremonial Mel.
4. 2. Hos. 6. 4. Psalm. 92. 1, 2.
feasts, which were to set with the rising Sun, the coming of Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, surely God will abate nothing of his substantial Sabbath, which
is to endure till Sabbathi, apud Judaeos, fuerunt variae significationes, quae
tamen ab hac prima omnes dependent. qua septimus cujusque hebdomadae dies, in
quarto Praecepto Sabbathum appellatur. Wall.
the second coming of Christ; (I mean not the seventh day, the Jews Sabbath,
but the first day of the week, the Christian Sabbath) If the Lord was so
strict, that he would not lose a moments honor in a ceremonial day of rest,
what shall we think the Lord expects upon this day, this holy blessed Sabbath,
which is moral and perpetual? Surely on this day we must not serve him by fits
and flashes, and sudden pangs, which pass away as the early dew, but we must
constantly walk with him the whole day. A flying Ceremony must not command more
constant and strict observance, then a stated, steady festival, the holy and
weekly Sabbath; Wallaeus observes, all the other Sabbaths of the Jews had
their dependence on the great Sabbath, the weekly Sabbath, Luke 18. 12. Gal. 4.
9.
and the week was sometimes called Sabbath, and so the first day of the week
was called the first day of the Sabbath, Haec Sabbatha Ceremoniales fuerunt
umbrae verum futurarum. Ames.
and so the second of the week, the second of the Sabbath, for the Sabbath
sake, that glorious day, which shed a luster upon, and gave name to the whole
week. And indeed other Sabbaths, were but beggarly elements, as the Apostle
Sabbatil autem in decalogo praescriptum, et dies nostra Dominica, alius prorsus
sunt naturae. Id.
speaks, Gal. 4. 9. beggarly, having little in them to enrich the soul, and
elements, being the first and weak method of instruction, the shady Ceremonies,
which were to teach the Children of Israel. But our Sabbath is of a higher and
nobler nature, not covered with so much darkness, nor subject to so much decay;
and therefore if God be so punctual, Mark 2. 28.
and exact in his time, in these flitting solemnities, which were to cease at
the very first dawning of the Gospel, Ah how much more on his fixed Sabbath,
the souls weekly banqueting day with the Lord Jesus, the blessed Lord of the
Sabbath. Hi^ vero infertur, ut aeq^^^^s qu^rti praecepti pates^^t, nempe quod
deus benign nobiscum vilde agit, qui cum sex dies nobis relinquat, unum tantum
in septimana diem sibi postulat. Wall. Mic. 6. 3. (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Nos
illorum, (Apostolorum) sequentes traditionem dominicum diem divinis conventibus
sequestramus. Isich. in Levit. Cap. 9.


whole day with God, is but the wanton abuse of divine indulgence. The Sabbath
is a price God puts into our hands, and to play and sport upon it, is to
trample upon our pearls. And truly God has so smoothed and sweetened the fourth
Commandment with so much equity and kindness, in giving us six days, and
taking to himself but one, that to break this Commandment, is but the greater
evidence of obstinacy and stubbornness; and indeed, to those who encroach upon
his Sabbath by their toil, and their pastimes, God may frame the same
expostulation, which once he made to backsliding Israel, What iniquity have
you found in me, wherein have I wearied thee, come testify against me: Have I
roughed my Comm^ndmen^s with any grievous severity? have I not given you six
days, and reserved to my self only one? And must part of that one day be
prostituted to the flatteries of sin, to vain sports, and unprofitable
recreations, is not this to abuse my ^^ve, and sport with my indulgence? Nay,
to crumble the Sabbath into so many pieces and divisions, to spend part of it
in holy services, part of it in civil labors, and part of it in sensual
pleasures, it is nothing else but so to disfigure the Sabbath, that neither
Divine command, nor Apostolical institution will know it, so as to own it to be
their issue and production.

Text it self, which commands our delight in the holy Sabbath, We must Isa. 53.
13. Sabbatum est delicatum, i. e. delicate and tenere observandum; delicatum,
i. e. delitiae and tui, and domini: Deus enim capiet mognam delectationem ex
religioso sui cultu in Sabbato. Alap. in Isai.
call the Sabbath our delight, says the Text. Now can this be consistent with
that delight and complacency a Christian should take in the Sabbath, after a
few hours to break from holy services, and spiritual duties, to gad after the
pleasures or profits of the World? To refresh their wearied and tired selves
with a bowl or a football, and to leave Communion with God, to recreate their
selves with a fit of masking, dancing or shooting? Surely our delights in Gods
holy day are weak and faint, if they must be fetched again, and revived with
such loose and vain satisfactions. Indeed it argues a very vain and frothy
spirit, to have no more pleasure in Gods day, then to spend a good part of it
in vain talk and idleness, in rioting and wantonness, in sports and
foolishness. It cannot be imagined that any men who ever tasted any sweetness
in Christ, or his Sabbath, and felt the Sponsa Christum laudans, ab oculis crsa
est; sed cur? quontam cum amantes aspectu mutuo nequeant satiari, et semper
abaltero ad intuentis oculion imago gratior reflectatur, et fit, ut crescat
admiratio, et simul laudandi cupiditas, neque in hacre sit ullus modus: Et
oculi sunt amoris duces. Del. Rio.
unknown refreshings of his holy Rest, but that they will mourn for their cold
affections, and that they have not spent their Sabbath more accurately and
exactly. Certainly those who plead and inveigh much against the strict
observation of Gods holy day, never fully tasted what the Sabbath was, and what
the glory and excellency of it. Is the Majesty and Glory of God so vile in our
eyes, that we do not think him worthy of special attendance one day in a week?
does he call us now to rest in his bosom on his holy Sabbath, and do we kick
his bowels, and despise his bounty? Does he call upon us to spend this day in
holiness, and shall we spend it, or at the least, part of it, in mirth, sports
and pastimes, and in all manner of vanity? Where are our longings and
breathings after Christ upon a Sabbath? Were holy duties grateful to us, we
should not so soon shake them off, we should not make the time of a Sabbath,
like the vail of the Temple at Christ's death, to be rent in twain, (viz.)
between the Lord and the World; whereas one bone of Christ was not to be
broken, so not one hour of this day; Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
here we must say as Christ of the fragments, gather up the fragments, let
nothing be lost. It is perilous to clip the Mat. 27. 51.
Kings Coin, and very dangerous to clip the Lords day; Joh. 19. 36.
let us not with Annanias and Saphira, bring half the price. Mark 6. 43.
This holy time was never ours, nor ever, was there any part Acts 5. 2.
thereof in our power; therefore to keep back any hour of this holy day must
needs be sinful. If no part of this day be the Lords, why do we give him any?
And if the whole Communio nostra est cum Patre, et Filio, et in Patre cum Filio
sunt omnia vera, et coelestia bona. Zanch.
be the Lords, as certainly it it, why do we put him off with part? But there
would be no need of these questions, were our delight in Gods holy day, and
were our hearts captivated with Divine Communion. Delight sweetens duty, and
makes it easy and pleasurous. That Sabbath cannot be long which is
complacential. David did request to spend not only the Sabbath, but his life
in the Temple, and counted 1 John 1. 3.
one day in Gods house, better then a thousand. It is nothing but a carnal
frame of spirit disgusting the things of Psalm. 27. 4.
God, makes the Sabbath tedious and wearisome, and seeks to break open the Cage
door, that it may fly out to its sensual Psalm. 84. 10.
delights and recreations. Was the Sabbath our delight, we should not cast lots
upon it which should have most of it, God or the World, holy duties, or trashy
pastimes.

Convenience and advantage, calls for the whole day of a Sabbath to be spent in
holy and spiritual services; Sabbatha docent perseverantiam totius diet: Iren.
contr. Valent
for the gain we acquire in public Ordinances, will easily be lost, if not
followed with private duties; It is private meditation, private repetition, and
private devotion, must fasten truth on the soul, which we have heard in
public. The fruit we have enjoyed in public, will presently be blasted by
pastimes and sports, which withdraw and James 1. 23. In Sabbato occupari nos
debemus in la^dando dei nomine, usque ad vesperam. Council. Turon.
alienate the soul from the very duties it had newly been employed in. Happily
in the public Ordinances we saw the face of Christ in some measure; if
presently we fly to vain Recreations, we shall as the Apostle James speaks,
straightway forget what manner a beloved our Beloved was. What was delivered in
the Pulpit, is best impressed on the soul in the Closet; and secret approaches
can best set home public ordinances. Our tears we shed at home, must importune
a Nihil efficacius est ad verbi divini fructus, et spiritus sancti igniculos in
n^bis suffocardos, quam vel profana, vel nimis mundana oblectamentorum
consectatio Wall.
blessing upon truths we have heard abroad. It is the Observation of a Learned
man, Nothing more effectually quenches the sparks of the divine spirit kindled
in Ordinances, then the pursuance of earthly and worldly Delights; and
therefore he thinks, the safest manner of observing the Sabbath, is not only
to sanctify it in the public Congregations, but in our private Houses, not
only in solemn Ordinances, but in private Duties. And if we pursue public,
private and secret Duties, which yet are so necessary on a Sabbath, what time
will be left for labor or sportfull refreshments? So then the whole Sabbath
must be spent with God.

Jewish Sabbath was to consist of twenty four hours, much more the Christians:
But the first is most true, for the whole time of a Sabbath was required of
them to be Exodus 20. 8.
sanctified in holy duties, in opposition to their own works. As for the nights
we dispute it not, they were allowed to Mysteria Evangelii in aeternum adoranda
and contemplanda.
rest that night as well as we. Now then, if the Jews were bound to spend a
whole day, all their waking time, in divine and holy services, much more we
Christians, for we have received greater benefits, we have greater mysteries of
Godliness to contemplate, and greater means to help us in the 1 Timothy 3. 16.
contemplation, Our field is larger, our light is clearer, our service is
sweeter; we have our Sabbath to behold the face Cant. 5. 10.
of our Beloved, and what work more engaging and complacential?

very Heathens by the light of Nature, gave their Gods no less then a whole
day, and would not suffer any work to be done on those holy days; So Macrobius
tells us, Macrob. de diebus festis.
That the services of their Gods were partly diurnal, and partly nocturnal, and
that the Flamines were to see to it, that no works were to be done on their
holy days. Nay, one of our Adversaries in this particular confesses freely;
As the time in which such Religious Actions are done, so that some day C. Dow
p. 21.
or days should be destinated for the more solemn performance of those
actions, may seem to be a dictate of the Law of Nature, (...). Clem. Alex. Lib.
5. Stromat
inasmuch as the Heathens who had no other Guide, had their solemn Feasts and
set days in all Ages consecrated to the worship of their Gods. And therefore
for Christians to give less then a day, is to fall short of an Heathen. Nay,
Scaevola an High Priest among them, affirmed, That the wilful Offender, who
observed not strictly three days consecrated to their Gods, could have no
Expiation. And what a shame is it for Christians, that Jupiter should have more
solemn and constant worship then Jehovah? that an Idol God should have a whole
day, but the Almighty must only have a part, the rest to be drowned in sensual
pleasures, or worldly toil, Heu facinus! Is not this to let the light of a
glow worm outshine the light of the Sun, the light of Nature outvie the light
of the Gospel. Never let those Gods who have eyes and see not, have more
durable and continued worship, then our God who is Omniscient; those Gods who
have ears and Psalm. 115. 4, 5, 6.
hear not, have more solemn adorations then our God, who is a God hearing
prayer; those Gods who are Silver and Psalm. 65. 2.
Gold, be better served then the blessed and Holy One, the God of Jacob, who is
an infinite spirit.

very tyring and tedious to pass the whole current of a day in holy services,
and spiritual communion, and this might make us cry out with the holy (...). 2
Cor. 2. 16.
Apostle in another case, Who is sufficient for these things? To this it may be
briefly replied;

our infirmities, does afford what may refresh; and the better to bear up our
bodies, allows moderate sleep in the night, and temperate food in the day.
True, it was in Tertullians time a dispute, whether it be not a duty Tertul. de
Corona militis. Cap. 3.
to fast on the Lords day; but our Saviors Apology for his Disciples in
plucking and eating the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, may easily quiet that
Question; and blessed be the Mar. 2. 25.
Lord for his allowances of love: Nature even on the Sabbath has both its
Nurse, and its Caterer, its sleep and its provisions.

whole days for the world; they rise early and go to bed late, and eat the
bread of carefulness; Psalm. 127. 2.
they do not say all the week, when the morning is, would to God it was
evening; but rather in the evening, wish it were morning again, to go after the
world afresh. Nay, we find many in their sinful ways are unwearied, and when
Isa. 56. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Rev. 3. 21. Cant. 8. 14. Montes (...) sunt sedos
Angelorum, and Beatorum coeli, sunt mansiones civium Coelestium. Del. Rio.
one day is past, they fix upon the very next day with enlarged resolutions.
And shall Heaven with its Crown of Righteousness, its Throne of Glory, its
ravishing Felicities, and mountains of Spices, no more influence us, but that
one day spent in the pursuance of it, should seem tedious and burdensome, and
we should impatiently wish, would the Sabbath was over, that we might again
busy our selves in in the affairs of the world? It is strange, that neither
divine command, nor divine rewards should clip our wings, but that we will be
flying even on the Lords day, into the pleasing embraces of a sensual delight,
or secular emolument.

the Excellent of the earth, and the darlings of Heaven, and Princes in
disguise, those patterns Psalm. 16. 3.
of piety, have looked on the Sabbath as their Paradise, where they could
refresh their souls with variety of delights; Nor have they complained that the
wheels of time have been taken off, that it has moved slowly, and drove
heavily, but have thought the evening of that blessed Sabbath Psalm. 84. 10.
has surprised them, when they knew not how to give over their banqueting with
Jesus Christ; the Ordinances of Jesus Christ have not been their burden, but
their repast, nor have they thought holy duties the waste, but the improvement
of their Sabbath.

Anna the Prophetess, a widow of above fourscore and four Luke 2. 37.
years old, which departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings
and prayers day and night; for her Sex a woman, for her case a widow, not
having the company nor support of her husband, and for age eighty four years,
yet night and day with fasting and prayer, serving God in the Temple.

ever Sabbath, always singing, serving and setting up God. Bernard urges Rev.
4 10, 11.
the observation of the Sabbath, and holding out in holy exercises thereupon,
upon this account, That by present rest, Bern. Sermon. 4. Col. 1744.
men may learn to live in rest eternal; and by persevering in service, men may
be prompt to perpetuate the Lords everlasting praise. But how would men do to
endure Heaven, if here they cannot hold out the durance of a Sabbath day.

CHAP. VI. Impertinent and frothy Language unbecoming and defiling the Sabbath.
BUt God in the Text, commands us not only to abstain from unsuitable
practices, but unsuitable discourses on Gratia prudentiae caelitus datae
reprimit in colloquiis piorum sermonem otiosum et inutilem; funditus autem
removet, et tollit ab ii^, improbum, obscaenum et putridum sermonem. Daven.
the holy Sabbath; so the Text, [Not speaking thy own words.] The Sabbath may
be polluted by the slipperiness of the tongue, as well as by the sliding of the
feet; we may as well talk, as act irregularly. Holy Communication, Col. 4. 6.
becomes a holy Sabbath. Our Sabbath is a sign of heaven; and there, as there
shall be no irregular practice, so no unseemly discourse, and here we should
endeavor to begin heaven. Vain discourse on a Sabbath, is like Music at a
suneral, or sighs at a wedding, which are not only impertinent but unseemly.
It is a sign the World has crept into our hearts, if it creep out of our
tongues on the blessed Sabbath. The Sabbath has its Shibboleth. Is our frothy
and Abstinendum est a vanis confabulationibus, ridiculis, nugosis,
detractoriis, irrisoriis, obscenis, ri^^osis. Sept. Psalm. 45. 1.
loose language the fruit of those powerful Ordinances and holy
Administrations we enjoy on a Sabbath? What a gulf do we shoot, when we pass
from holy prayers to unseemly pratlings; from breathing out our souls in duty,
to breath out vanity in frothy Communications? Nor will it be any excuse for
us, to the God of the Sabbath, to spend part of it in discoursing of the flue^t
gifts, rare parts, elegant passages of the Minister, and to make himself, not
his Doctrine the subject to dilate upon. Gods holy truth, not the Ministers
person or parts, must take up our Sabbath discourses. The tongue indeed is only
the hearts interpreter; and what frame of heart we should be of on a Sabbath,
is most easily conjectured; surely then, if ever, our tongues should be as the
pen of a ready writer. The Emperor Leo would permit no talking of pleasures,
or worldly matters on a Lords day: And Clemens Romanus prohib^it, Sermonum
v^nitatem, et faceti^s.
so Clemens Romanus condemned all Jestings, and facetiousness, to tickle or
delight the vanity of men's spirits. Men by breaking jests should not break the
Sabbath. Dr. Ames observes, there is nothing more fits and tunes the heart for
Culius publicus quam maxim solenniter est celebrandus, et necessario postulat
exercitia colloquiorum sanct^rum, et contemplation is operum diei, quibus
paratiores fiamus ad publicum cultum. Ames. Luke 14. 1, 2. Secundum membrum
convivii Pharisaici est miraculosa sanatio hydropici. Ipsum hoc miraculum de
bonitate et potentia Christi, idem docet, quod reliqua omnia. Chemnit.
public service on a Sabbath, then holy discourses; we are more ready by them
for spiritual Administrations. Vain language sets the heart backward, that it
is not so intense in Sabbath performances. Our Savior (who is our Copy without
blot) making a meal with a Pharisee on the Sabbath, spent all his time, either
in healing or preaching, in working miracles, or speaking parable^, which are
those stars behind a cloud, not a vain word drops from him, Luke 14. 1, 2, 7.
and surely in this particular, our imitation is our holiness. A holy man
complained long since, That many had made such proceedings in sin, that when
they should reckon with their souls, they would reckon with their servants, and
when they should make even with their consciences, they would make even with
their Chapmen, and yet persuade themselves of the small breaches of the
Sabbath. The Leiden professors, make holy discourse, one of the private Duties
of a Sabbath; and to omit it, what is it, but to maime and mutilate a Sabbath,
to loose a duty, and to make a chasme and vacancy in the constant and continued
Religion of a Sabbath. And indeed, if holy language be salt at any time, it is
more especially at the feast of a Sabbath. The Psalmist, in Psalm. 16. 4.
Commands us not to take the Name of other Gods into our lips; we must not only
not worship them, but not name them: So that there is irreligion Eccles. 12. 10.
in the tongue, as well as in the knee; and if ever sinfulness Non modo
public, sed et privatim, Sabbathum sanctis pietatis exercitiis celebretur,
qualia sunt Scripturae lectio, et domestica meditatio, and colloquium de rebus
sanctis, Leid. Prof. Col. 4. 6. Sicut Sal non modo exsiccat superfluos and
noxios ciborum humores, sed focit illos insuper aptos ad digerendum, salubres
ad nutriendam. Sic Sal prudentiae efficit, non modo ut sermo Christianorum non
sit otiosus aut noxius, sed ut aptus fiat, ac utilis ad aedifi^andum. Daven.
Sermo noster opportunus esse debet, e^ com^i^^us, ut a^^itores nobis gratias
agan^, ^t per nos adjuti sint. Theoph.
cleaves to the tongue, it is in idl^ and foolish talking on a Sabbath; this
indeed is the Fly in the ointment. On that holy day we must not only abstain
from secular works, but secular words; for much talk upon the Sabbath about
worldly affairs; does as much hinder the sanctification of the day, as much
work; nay, we may work alone, but we cannot talk alone, and so we must hinder
others as well as our selves. Discourse, it either does cast a stench or a
perfume among others, according as it is good or bad. Now let us take these
five Glasses to see the sin of vain discourse on the Sabbath day.

in the clear Glass of a Command. Frothy language is only the foam of a carnal
heart at any time, much more on the Sabbath; it is always the breath of
vanity, Ephesians. 4. 29.
and therefore called corrupt communication by the Apostle, who here severely
forbids all such communication. And indeed Mar. 12. 36.
worldly discourse on the Sabbath is no less then corrupt discourse, putrid,
rotten and unsavory language, which is prohibited by a strict command, Ephesians. 4.
29. The same Apostle says, Evil communication corrupts good manners; I am 1
Cor. 15. 33.
sure it corrupts good Sabbaths; it is nothing but spittle cast Versus hic, est
senarius menandri; ait Hier. Mar. 16. 19.
upon the face of a Sabbath, its affront and shame; profane talkers dealing
with the day of a Sabbath, as the Jews with the Lord of the Sabbath, they spit
in its face.

In the Glass of Example. Should I reassume the divine example of our dear
Lord, Luke 14. 7. No pattern more pure and pregnant; his language on a Sabbath
was as the dropping Luke 14. 7.
of a honey comb, the langudge of Heaven, the triumph of Acts 20. 27.
words, the salvifical discoveries, that he brought from his Fathers bosom.
But let me lay down the wonted custom of a late Minister, now with God, Holy
Mr. Dod, briefly he thus Mr. Dod.
spent his Sabbath; He preached almost all day long on the Mr. Clark in the life
of Mr. Dod.
Lords day; first, in the morning he opened a Chapter, and prayed in his
Family, after preached twice in public, and in the interim discoursed all
dinner while to those who sat with him at his Table: he would say, this is not
a day Quam augusta erit ista Synodus, in qua convenient omnes sancti, cujus
(...) erit Christus; in qua non erit necessarium, solicit inquirere
veritate^^, sed omnia omnibus erunt nota, et manifesta.
to feast the body, but the soul; at the first sitting down he would bid them
help themselves, and one another, and see none want; let me said he, bid you
but once, for I would not speak a vain word to day. After the two Sermons in
public were ended, the house would be filled, and then he would fit in his
chair, and then he used to say, if any one have a good question, or a hard
place of Scripture to open, let them say on, and when he was faint, would call
for some refreshment, and so on again till night. And thus this man of God,
spoke nothing but the language of God on the blessed Sabbath of God.

unholy language on the Sabbath, may be seen in the Glass of Equity. If idle
discourse be not forbidden in the fourth Commandment, then that Commandment is
straighter, and not so comprehensive as the rest; for the sixth Commandment
does not only prohibit bloody 1 John 3. 15.
murder, but the very hating of our brother; the seventh Commandment does not
only forbid acts of Adultery, but Mat. 5. 28. Quod fecit Christus in casu
homicidii, hoc etiam facit in casu Adulterii, et non actum solummodo sed
impudicum quoque coercet aspectum, ut discos, ^bi consistat illu^, quod sepra
Scriburum et Pharisaeorum nostra precipitur obundare justitia. Chrysostom.
lascivious looks, wanton glances, nay, effeminate speculations; and shall not
the fourth Commandment be as large to condemn worldly discourses, as well as
secular labors? Or shall our obedience to the Commandments of the second
table, be more exact and strict, then our conformity to the Commandments of the
first? Shall our behavior be more precise to our neighbor, then to our God?
Surely he that has said, we must not work on the Sabbath, has likewise said,
we must not word it on a Sabbath about our secular affairs, our bargains, our
pleasures, our pleasing vanities.

Glass of Religion. We should converse as Saints on Gods holy day; our language
then more especially should Mat. 26. 73.
betray us to belong to Jesus Christ. Every thing should be Qnemad modum Moses
et Elias in transfigurations cum Christo colloquuntur sic in vita aeterna
vigebunt inter sanctes, perpetua et jucundissima colloquia. Gerard. Rev. 1. 10.
Psalm. 39. 1.
holy on a Sabbath, we should converse with God in holy duties, tread
accurately in holy practices, breath out nothing but holy affections, trade in
nothing but holy devotions, and edify one another with holy discourses. Vain
and idle talking becomes not those who would serve God* more seraphically then
others, and who are in the spirit upon the Lords day. Where are our hearts,
when our tongues range and licentiate in sinful liberties? Religion will cause
a Saint to make a Covenant with his tongue on this day, that the offend not
with his lips. At this time our tongues should be a mine of Gold, not a pile of
Dross.

foolish talking on a Sabin the Glass of future Glory. The glorified Saints
converse Neque enim beati erunt (...), sed suavissimos invicem sermones
conserent, de admirandis divinae sapientiae decretis, de stupendis divinae
potentiae operibus, de infinitis, divinae gratiae, et bonitatis argumentis. Ger.
one with another in a most holy manner: What the method, or the way is of
their Communications one with another, is not so easily discernable; but this
is clear, that it is most holy. We should study to spend our Sabbaths here, as
we shall spend them above, in all holy and divine communications; there shall
be no vain word, no senseless prate about the things of this life. Let us begin
Heaven betimes, and in observing a temporal, eye our Eternal Sabbath.

CHAP. VII. The Text further opened and explained.
ANd thus I have run through the negative directions in Isa. 58. 13.
the Text, I now come to the positive. There is something Commanded, as well as
some thing prohibited on a Sabbath; something for us to do, as well as
something for us to forbear: Now these practical and positive directions, they
are not very many, but very rare, and what they want in number, they make up in
weight, they are ponderous, though not numerous, and they are principally four,
like the four Elements, to constitute the holy observation of a Sabbath.

for delight; so the Text [and call the Sabbath a delight.] Our Sabbaths must
be our satisfaction; not our burden, but our blessing; the sinner must not
Psalm. 27. 4. Mat. 18. 20.
take that pleasure in the dalliances of the world, as we should do in the
duties of a Sabbath. This is the day of divine loves, and spiritual
complacencies between Christ and Cant. 2. 3. Delitias tum tuas, tum Domini.
Alap.
the soul, when Christ and the Soul meet together in the Garden of the
Ordinances, where they begin that communication, which shall last to Eternity;
then the believer sits under the shadow of Christ with great delight. As God
makes the Sabbath his rest, so he would have it to be ours. The Sabbath must
not be our toil, but our triumph; the Sanctuary must be our banqueting house,
Duty our delight; Psalm. 42. 3. 4.
It must be the joy of our souls to associate with Christ, to pour out our
requests in prayer, to entertain the discourses of divine will, and to enjoy
spiritual love, which is better then wine. The Sabbath in the primitive times
was called Cant. 1. 2. Nos in prima die, perfecti Sabbathi festivitate laetamur
Hilar. in Prol. in Psalm.
the feast of the Sabbath, and feasts are not usually times of tediousness but
pleasantness, such times pass away with grateful delight; and surely it must
needs soil the character of a Christian, to let those wheels drive heavily
which are in the Chariots of Aminadah. Does it not very much unbecome us to be
weary of that day, which God has appointed Cant. 6. 12.
for fellowship with himself, and for the transacting of the great affairs of
Eternity?

for Reverence. So the Text, [the holy of the Lord.] Si colueris Sabbathum,
quasi diem sanctum, gloriae, and glorificationi Domini consecratum. If Psalm. 2.
12.
thou observe the Sabbath as a holy day, consecrated, and set apart to the
glory and glorifying of God, as he well glosses upon it. There are two holy
passions adorn a Sabbath, Joy and Fear; the one for the benefits of God, the
Psalm. 2. 11. Discamus die Dominico, non quaerere gloriam nostram, pompose
incedendo, et splendide nos vestiend^, sed Dei gloriam quaeramus; and hoc nobis
erit gloriosum, quod gloria dei per ros and alios celebretur. Isa. 66. 2.
other for the presence of God, the one for his goodness, and the other for his
greatness. Upon a Sabbath we must, as the Psalmist speaks, rejoice with
trembling. It was the saying of a Learned man; Upon the day of a Sabbath, let
us not promote our own Glory, by stately walking, rich attire, and pompous
appearances, but let us exalt Gods Glory by holy duties, and this will be more
glorious and honorable to us. Upon the Sabbath let us tremble at Gods Word, as
the Lord speaks by the Prophet, Isa. 66, 2. Let us lie at Gods feet, let us be
awful of Gods presence, let us exalt Gods Name, and this is to sanctify a
Sabbath. Humble hearts, and not fine clothes, the bowing of the soul, not the
plaiting of the hair, or the ordering of the Dress, speaks the Sabbath Glorious.

high estimations of the Sabbath. So the Text, [Honourable.] The Word (...)
Machhid, in the (...)
Original, signifies that which is Glorious, and that which is Ponderous. Every
Sabbath is a price put into our hands, Luke 19. 42.
a good wind for Heaven, the souls term time, that a^tionius Psalm. 118. 24.
temporis, that juncture of time which the soul has to cla^ up for Eternity.
On this day more especially, the Scepter of Grace is held out to lay hold upon.
One observes, our Esth. 5. 2.
Sabbath is called the Lords day, not only because it is the Commemoration of
our Lords Resurrection, but because of the benefits we receive from the Lord
that day, and the duties we perform to the Lord that day; and therefore if we
will practice the Text, we must prize the Sabbath, we must call it honorable;
and indeed it is so, in a manifold respect.

look upward; This is the day in which more especially we sing the praises of
the Lord, we recount his hohour, wherein our hearts bubble forth in holy
thanksgivings; and therefore the Psalm, whose inscription calls it a Psalm for
the Sabbath, is wholly Laudatory, It is a song Psalm. 92. (...)
for the Sabbath day, so is the very title. And indeed what is the Lords day,
but primitiae Coeli, the dawning of Glory, the beginnings of Heaven, the tuning
of the music which shall last for ever, to every true believer. On the Lords
day the Saint makes it his grand affair to advance the Lords Honor.

look downward, the Sabbath still is honorable: Then the Lord crowns us with
his graces, honors us with his presence, meets us in his ordinances, puts all
marks and characters Mat. 18. 20.
of honor on his people; then the King sits at his Cant. 1. 12.
Table, and sends forth his Spicknard, with the sweet smell of it. The Holy
Sabbath is the blessed time when the Lord Sponsa contactu sponst sui, plane
divinam suavitatem acquisivit. Del. Rio. 1 John 1. 3. Mat. 18. 20.
bows the Heavens, and comes down, and vouchsafes his people fellowship with
himself, sweet and salvifical communion; in a word, then the Father drops his
grace, then the Son promises his presence, then the Spirit pursues his work in
the assemblies of his Saints.

look outward, if we cast our eyes upon other days, the other six days of
worldly toil and labor. The very gleanings of a Sabbath, are better then the
Vintage of the Judges 8. 2.
week. In other days we only reap the curse of the first Adam, to eat our
bread in the sweat of our brows; on the Genesis 3. 19.
holy Sabbath, we reap the blessing of the second Adam, we gather the fruits of
his glorious purchase, we enjoy the ordinances of his grace, lie under the
impressions of his spirit, and inherit the sweets of his presence; and
therefore compare the Sabbath with other days, and what is the dross of a
week, to the gold of a Sabbath? This day is nothing but the souls weekly
Jubilee.

look forward toward eternity, the Sabbath in this regard is honorable; it is
the special day for the soul to dress and trim it self in to meet* its
Bridegroom; this is our peculiar Fuit illud Sabbathum, Genesis 2. 3. Typus aeterni
illius Sabbathi in ^ae^is, in quo electi anima et corpore, a peccatis,
calomitatibus, et miseriis hujus vitae requiescent: Deus in illis, et ipsi in
Deo. Genesis 66. 23. Vltra hunc mundum est very Sabbathi observatio. Orig. Prove.
34. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 2 Cor. 4. 7. In Sabbatho totus Deo, deique voluntati
cognoscendae annuntiandae, et edimplendae vaces. Alap.
time to prepare for eternity. The Lords day is the day of Commemoration for
Christ's Resurrection, and the day of Preparation for ours. The Sabbaths are as
the rounds of a Ladder, by which we climb up to our Fathers house; our present
Sabbaths work being sanctified, becomes the way to our future Sabbaths rest. On
this holy day, the soul more especially waits at wisdoms gates, and brings its
corruptions to the slaughtering power of the Word, inricheth it self with
Gospel-treasures, feeds its graces upon Gospel provisions, and every way
accommodates its self for the embraces of eternity.

(viz.) of fruitfulness; so the Text, [and shall honor him.] Now there is
nothing more honors God then our holy fruitfulness, this gratisies his Will,
this magnifies his Grace, this adorns his Gospel, this glorifies his Name. Our
Savior says expressly, John 15. 8.
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. We exceedingly honor
God, when on a Sabbath day, we Sint submissi, tractabiles, et sequaces mores.
Cyr.
weep much in the Closet, pray much in the Family, hear much in the Sanctuary,
when we tremble at Gods Word, rejoice in Gods Ordinances, melt in Gods
presence, when Sabbaths soften us, ripen us, raise us, and bring us to a nearer
conformity to Christ; when this sun-shining day of a Sabbath melloweth us, and
makes us look fairer, and more beautiful: Thus we spread our branches, and
Gods Name together.

CHAP. VIII. The Promises in the Text, made over to Sabbath-Holiness,
explicated and unfolded.
ANd thus far we have assayed, to unfold the duty enjoined in the Text, which
is the holy and strict observation of the Sabbath; and the Sabbath may be
sanctified by forbearing what is criminal, and by pursuing what is commendable:
and what is both displeasing or satisfactory, we have amply laid down in the
Text, and hitherto has been discussed. Now we come to the glorious reward of a
due sanctification of the Sabbath, which is folded up in a Tria hic praemia
Sabbathum, deumque colentibus promittit Deus. Alap. Com. in Isaiam.
threefold promise, mentioned in the Text; for one promise is not thought
sufficient by divine bounty to be a spur to this holy observation. It must not
be a single Diamond, but a Casket of Jewels. Here is a constellation of
happiness promised, a Tree of Life with many branches, as if God would tell us
in the Text, how pleasing, how grateful, what a Prove. 11. 18.
sweet sinelling sacrifice the conscientious keeping of the Sabbath was to him;
such a Saint the Promises troop after him, they cluster together to refresh
him; God gives the Bond and the Counterpane too. But more particularly, these
promises they are not only rare, but comprehensive, they are both temporal and
spiritual, Gods bonds for left hand and right hand mercies.

And first God promises Vbertatem Voluptatis, abundance Prom. 1. Si in Sabbath^
te abstraxeris ^^ deli^ii^ carnis, deus dabit tibi suas delicias long majores;
scil. pro carneis dabit spiritusles, pro teciporalib^^ aeternas, pro humanis
divinas. Psalm 104. 34. Cant. 4. 9.
of Pleasure, so the Text, [then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord.] As
if God should say, if my Sabbath be thy delight, then my presence shall be thy
delight; if thou take pleasure in my day, thou shall sind pleasure in my self;
the same word (...) Gnanag, delight, which is used in the former verse for our
delight in the Sabbath, is here used for our delight in the Lord. Our duty
shall not exceed his bounty: if we on a Sabbath delight in him, we on a Sabbath
shall receive delights from him; God will meet the gracious soul, its
breathings after God shall be compensated with his blessings in God, thou shall
never lose by satiating thy self in God, thy understanding shall be delighted
with meditation, thy desires with satisfaction, thy heart with exhileration; he
that is an Ocean of delight in himself, shall be thy delight. If thou take
pleasure in Gods holy day, thy heart shall be more sweetened in the thoughts of
God, of his Faithfulness, of his Fullness, Incomprehensibleness, Goodness,
Tenderness, then in all sliding and secular delights; for our delights in God
are,

Most Pure, they are Christalline pleasures without spot or faeculency, they
are incapable of excess: The soul may rejoice Psalm. 94. 19.
in God, and fear no surfeit: There is no tang of sin, or mistake cleaves to
them; as holy David, In the multitude of my thoughts Passim Haeresiarehae et
Haeretici fuerunt voluptuarii, eaque de causa plurimos habuerunt assectus sicut
et Epicurus plures discipulos habuit, quam alit Philosophi. Epiph^n.
within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Now as for the pleasures of this
life, their object is sordid: what is a Field, or a Bag, or a Hawk, or a Hound?
The excess is easy, we mostly over-do in outward delights; their satisfaction
is sensual, only the smiles and laughter of dust: their time is short; the
frolicks of this life, are only for this life, as long as a vapor lasts, and
their end for the most part is heaviness; a smiling countenance, a wanton
palate, a catching eye, and a prancing fancy for the most part ending in a
heavy heart: But our pleasures in God are holy and undefiled, their rising is
their rarity, and their exceeding is their excellency.

are most abundant, they exceed the pleasures of this life, as far as the
receptive faculty of the Anima nostra delectatione carere nequit; unam si non
habet, quaerit, si non divinam, tum humanam.
soul exceeds that of the body. A whole world cannot fill the soul, it is too
vast in its desires and entertainments; but a little prospect can fill the
theater of the eye, a little wine the wanton vagaries of the palate, a little
game the galloping fancies of the hunter. Our pleasures in God, are a soul full
of delight, Thy Comforts delight my soul, says David; they are overflowing
waves of love, rising and ravishing Psalm. 94. 19.
waters, which cover the sea of man's heart.

satiating. Our pleasures in the Creature cloy us, Our pleasures in God
comforts us; outward delights surfeit, not Ecles. 1. 2. Voluptas est duplex, vel
Terrestris, vel Coelestis: Coelestes voluptates sariant, nonsatur^ne and ideo
diuturniores, terrestres s^turant, non satiant; and ideo breviores, quod etiam
jam dileximus, pieni quidem pr^rsus nauseamus. Baron.
satiate, they have something of the flesh, and that will not always go down.
Solomon, the great Chemist of pleasures, at last, after a thorough gust of
them, extracted nothing but wind from them, or the waters of Marah, either
vanity or vexation of spirit. But the pleasures we have in God, relate not to
the body, which is a tiresome piece of flesh, but to the soul which is full of
life and activity, and delighting in God, which is its center, finds no Nausea
or weariness, but its motions are quicker and sweeter, the nearer they come to
the center. As holy David who was much in Communion with God, all his enjoyment
of him, did but set him more on longing; nor did the Heart ever run so greedily
to the waters, as his soul panted after God, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. My soul longs,
says he; but longings are only Eccles. 1. 1. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Judges 15. 18.
in some cases, Well then, my soul thirsts, and thirst must be satisfied, or
else the thirsty person dies.

But secondly, God promises Vbertatem facultatis, abundance Prom. 2.
Altitudines terrae sunt luera rerum, blandiment^ populorum, sublimitas
dignitatum, abundantia opum. Greg. Moral. Mat. 6. 32. Sanchez. Musc. Marlorat.
Verum August^ haec dei verb^, and promissa altius et augu lius quid spectant
scil. altitudines Coelorum. Alap. Altitudines terrae, i. e. altitudines
coelorum, quae sunt terra and seeds non morientium, sed viventium. Alap.
of Revenue, so the Text; [I will cause thee to ride on the high places of the
Earth.] It is very observable here, how a temporal promise is clasped in the
arms of two spiritual promises; not as if the temporal promise was the
evidence of greater love, but because God will cast in temporal blessings, as
an overplus into the reward of obedience. Sanchez takes these high places of
the Earth, mentioned in the Text, for the abundance and plenty of earthly
increases, and says, the promise most properly belongs to the Jews; and to
this opinion agrees both Museulus, Marlorat, and so the Septuagint interpret
it, and they say, this speech alludes to the Mountanous Country of the Jews,
which was abundant, nay, even luxuriant with Vines and Fruits; so that the
meaning of the promise may be, That whosoever observes the Sabbath holily,
according to the prescribed directions, they shall enjoy a richer and larger
portion of outward things, then the common lot of the world: And this I suppose
may be the meaning of this rare promise, although others repine at the
straightness of the exposition, and will have some spiritual and more sublime
thing included; but leaving others to abound in their own sense, I understand
the promise of terrestrial enjoyments; and so it is consonant to another
Scripture of the like nature, mentioned in Deuteronomy. 32. 13. So that he who
observes the Sabbath, God Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
will not only provide the banquet, but fill the basket for him; he shall not
only enjoy spiritual comforts, but temporal good things, the very fruitfulness
of the Earth shall be his portion.

these promises mentioned in the Text, they are made only to the Jews, they
Fateor haec alludi ad illud, quod ait Moses ad Judaeos. Deuteronomy. 32. 13. Alap.
are Isreal's monopoly, and therefore they are no ground for Christians to build
upon, no promise for a Christian to act his faith upon, suppose he observes
Gods holy Sabbath with never so much severity and purity. To which it may thus
be replied.

temporal promises to encourage Godliness, a great part of which is the holy
observation of the Sabbath; Godliness has the promise of the life that now 1 Timothy 4 8.
is, says the Apostle. The Gospel has two breasts of Consolation, the promise
of things temporal, and of things spiritual; nay, fuller breasts then the Law
has: And though the high places, mentioned in the Text, may relate to the
Vitae quae nunc est, ut scil. hic vitam pacatam longaevam, et rebus omnibus
necessariis instructum agamus.
mountanes of Judaea, which were fruitful and feracious, yet Sabbath-holiness,
being as grateful in Gospel times, as formerly, it falls under the promise of
the things of this life, which will rise as high as the mountanes of Judaea,
The things of this life mentioned by the Apostle, in the forecited place,
taking in whatsoever may accomplish the happiness of this life, in its most
comprehensive circuit.

whatever promise may be made by way of encouragement, The 20th of Exodus and
the 12th verse. let it be compared with the 6th of the Ephesians and the 3 d
verse. Where what is promised in the Law, is likewise promised with enlargements
in the Gospel. Mat. 11. 30. Rev. 1. 10.
cannot be peculiar to the Jews. The Duty and the Promise always go together,
the Service and the Satisfaction. It is very strange that God should leave us
Christians the Duty, and give them, the Jews, the Promise; we only should act
the toil, and they enjoy the triumph; how inconsistent is this with the
easiness of Christ's Yoke? Christians, if they act high duties, they shall ride
upon high places. It must not be denied, if making the Sabbath our delight
belong not to us, neither do the high places of the Earth; but who can rise to
so great impudence, as to deny the former? And therefore if we must be in the
spirit on the Lords day, we must not be denied to be the inheritours of the
fatness of the Lords Earth.

temporal, and those made to Christians, for the most part spiritual, yet did
not Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Isa. 1. 9. 1 Timothy 6. 6. Magnum lucrum piet^s est; affert
secum quicquid homini satis est. Maldon.
the Jews temporal promises exclude spiritual, nor the Christians spiritual
promises exclude temporal, but our obedience keeps the Key, which opens to both
promises, to the Jew, and to the Gentile, and so in this particular case. A
holy deportment upon Gods blessed Sabbath must be the readiest way to make both
Jew and Gentile happy and prosperous; the one before, the other since the
coming of Jesus Christ: And we must leave this rich promise in the Text, to be
the Crown of Sabbath holiness, to the Saints under and after the Law.

But thirdly, God promises ubertatem sanctitatis, abundance Prom. 3. Tertium
est hoc Sabbati, deique cultus praemium; q. d. Dabo tibi insignia illa b^na,
quae promisi Abrahae, Isaaco et Jacobo scil. delicias, et divitias gratiae
coelestis, a^ deinde gloriae, et aeternae faelicitatis in ^^lo. Alap.
of spiritual grace, so runs the Text; [And feed thee with the Heritage of
Jacob thy Father.] Interpreters generally understand this promise of things
spiritual, and supernatural; that the holy keeping of the Sabbath shall be
crowned with the blessings of the upper springs, with rich gifts, heavenly
graces, with the riches of heaven, with the treasures from the mines above;
Alludit ad terram Judaeis promissam; quae praefigurabat sedem long altiorem;
Sic cibabo illos epulis coeli, says holy Hierome; He alludes to the promised
Land of the Jews, which only typisied and prefigured a better Country, a
Country to come, says that excellent Father. To the same purpose speaks Cyril
and Procopius. Those who conscienciously observe the Sabbath, they shall have
outward enjoyments, and they shall be only pledges of 1 Cor. 2. 9. Vides hic,
o Christian, quanta deus st^tuerit praemia, misericordiae, et pietati.
better enjoyments, the pawns and earnests of enjoyments more glorious. As if
the Lord should say, As I led Jacob from the temporal promise of an earthly
Canaan, to the promise of a heavenly; so will I do with thee, if thou observe
my Sabbaths, thou shall have a Jacobs reward; and what that is, our Savior
instructs us, Luke 13. 28. where he says, Luke 13. 28.
You shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of
God. Thus God he reduplicates his better promises on the heads of those who
carefully keep his Genesis 25. 33. Genesis 22. 36. Genesis 32. 28.
Sabbath; they shall have the Heritage of Jacob, who gained both the
Birthright and the Blessing; they shall enjoy the Primogeniture, the first
born of Mercies, nay Mercies with the Blessing, with the Fathers Benediction
too; they shall succeed in Jacobs Heritage, who was mighty, and prevailed with
God, who foiled the Angel in his spiritual Combat, and had the honor to have
his Name and Cum haec verba ex animo, simulque oculos circumfero, videoque quam
pauci sunt, qui delectentur in Domino sabbatique etc.
Escucheon changed, and into such a name as included the Name of God himself,
(...) El being the close of (...) Israel, and (...) El is one of Gods own
Titles. And truly here we may take up the contemplation of a learned man, who
examining and surveying these precious promises, was taken with a great
admiration, that so few should act the Duty in the Text, should be
conscientious in Sabbath Observances, Hoc lugendum est, et magnopere
plangendum, inquit Forerius.
persuading himself, that the diviness of these promises, might captivate the
most refractory and disingenious; and at last he concludes with moans, that so
few in the world should be taken with so rich a bait. To which I shall only
add, we may here see how much infidelity, influences the hearts of most; for
surely, did we not look upon these rare promises, as bonds without a seal, the
Revenue of them would bride us to the most accurate and spiritual observation
of Gods holy day; our reward would make the Sabbath our delight, and the
greatness of the gain would enforce Mat. 16. 8.
us to attempt this excellent piece of godliness. But the Quando doctrinam
Christi intra animum non perpendimus, nec ad praxinreducere nitimur, ex hoc
oritur occaecatio cordis, et (...). Chemnit. 1 Samuel 15. 29.
world is fallen under the same rebukes as once the Disciples did, O ye of
little faith, why reason you among your selves? says Christ, why question you
the public faith of Heaven, to the neglect of a duty so transcendently
beneficial? And in the conclusion of the whole Text, we have the seal and
confirmations of this Charter of blessings, [for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it] and let us be fully assured with the greatest certainty, that the
strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is not a man that he should
repent.

CHAP. IX. The Doctrinal observation comprised in the Text, propounded and
proved.
HAving thus taken in pieces the Text, by a large and copious explication, I
shall now set it together again in a solemn and serious observation, (viz.)

That God has locked up many rich blessings in sweet and sure promises, for
those who spiritually and conscientiously observe his holy day.

Thus the Inventory in the Text presents us with delights for the inward man,
with supplies for the outward, Isa. 56. 2.
with a reserve of happiness for them both. Such shall succeed in the Heritage
of Jacob, who keep holily the Sabbath; Now to Jacob, God was his protection
here, and his portion hereafter. There is no Duty wears a richer Crown in the
performance of it, then the serious observation of the Sabbath; for besides the
pleasures, riches, and grace promised in the Text, the Lord, Jer. 17. 24, 25,
26. gives Jer. 17. 24, 25, 26.
us additional promises; the words recorded in the Text quoted are these; And
it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken to me, says the Lord, to bring
in no burdens through the Gates of this City on the Sabbath day, but hallow the
Sabbath day to do no work therein; then shall there enter into the Nota hunc
locum pro cultu Sabbati apud Judaeos, et diei dominicae apud Christianos. Alap.
gates of this City Kings and Princes sitting upon the Throne of David, riding
in Chariots, and on Horses, they and their Princes, the men of Judah, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and this City shall remain for ever; and they shall
come from the Cities of Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from
the Land of Benjamin, and from the Plain, and from the Mountanes, and from the
South, bringing burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, and Meat Offerings, and
Incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise unto the house of the Lord. See in
this Scripture, in these two verses, a heap of rich promises, more valuable
then a pile of Diamonds, a mountane of Spices, or a rock set with Pearls. The
promises clustered and piled up in these verses, they are considerable in a
five-fold notion.

of pomp and splendor, Kings entering into the Gates of the City. Where the
Sabbath is duly observed, Prosperity shall guild that Nation; their Princes
shall be Pace, gloria, et vebus prosperis erunt affluentes: Currus et equi sunt
gloria regum. Genesis 25. 27. Mat. 6. 29.
resplendent, their Nobles flourish, their Potentates shine, in the dazzling
rays of glory; such a people shall not only succeed in the heritage of Jacob,
who dwelt in Tents, but in the flourish of Solomon, who dwelt in Palaces. The
holy keeping of the Sabbath sheds beams of honor and renown upon a Nation.

of largeness and amplitude; they are not personal, so much as national. A good
observation of the Sabbath, can diffuse mercies, scatter them up and Quum
nihil, aut parum esset praesidii^^ urbe tuenda et conservando regni statu,
Jeremias promisit tanquam singular dei benefi^ium, Reges fore stabiles cum
suis proceribus; et extendit Propheta fructum hujus promissionis ad totum
corpus, non tantum ad proceres sed ad plebem, tanquam sociam hujus
benedictionis, et gratiae dei: Regnum erectum erit, et totus populus cognoscet
se agere sub fide, et tutela Dei. Calvin.
down a Land: So the Text makes mention of Kings, and Magistrates of Public
Authority, Cities, places of public Receipt. The good keeping of the Sabbath
procures public benefits, opens the storehouses of blessings to Cities and
Nations, it is the rise and spring of Epidemical happiness. And our own Nation
formerly, in the strict observation of Gods holy day, did taste the sweetness of
these Cataracts of mercy; it lay under national happiness, and prosperous
abundance, to the wonder and astonishment of all the world: nor was our
felicity in the wain, till the Inhabitants of this Land grew loose and careless
on Gods holy day, and then it fell under the shadows of sore and dismal
afflictions; and our Sun was darkened, and made the world wonder, gazing at its
Eclipse.

full of stability; so the very words of the Text; And this City shall remain
for ever. Mercies they are more Heb. 7. 25. Christus in coelo, orat pro nobis
tanquam Pontifex. Hap.
sweet; by how much they are the more stable. Duration it felicitates and
enriches every possession. Christ is the chiefest good, because he ever lives
to make intercession for us. Those sweets are precious which are permanent; and
therefore the grace of the spirit is more valuable then the Gold 1 Pet. 1. 7.
of Ophir, for Gold is perishing Gold; Now these promises 1 Pet. 1. 18.
are of permanent good things, and so the more transcendent. The holy
observation of the Sabbath, it intails Vrbi erit salva sivere et pie colat
deum, idque testatur observatione Sabbathi. Calv.
mercy and blessings on a Person, upon a Family, or a City. Mercy shall not be
our physic, but our food: It lengthens our days of prosperity. If thou
would put thy own name, and the names of thy Family into a long lease of
Grace and Favor, be very strict in Sabbath Observation.

full of impartiality, Sabbath-holiness shall shed a blessing on City and
Country, so the Text; They shall come from the Cities of Judah, from the places
about Jerusalem, Jeremias hic plane signifi^at communem f^re hanc b^atitu^inem
tot^ populo
from the Plain, from the Mountanes, etc. This blessed performance of Sabbath
sanctity, it shall prosper the Citizen; and the Country man, the Shop, the
Farm, the Cottage, nay, the poor inhabitant of the mountanes, who has but a
shed or a Cave to shelter him, shall not be exempted the dewes of this
benediction. The holy observation of Sabbaths knows no distinction of persons.

full of spirituality. They shall bring burnt offerings and sacrifices, and
meat offerings, and incense; so the Text. The due observation of the Sabbath,
shall procure soul-mercies, affluences for our better part, the sweets of
Ordinances, divine Influences, rich Graces, celestial Communications, not
only the redundancies of outward prosperity, Jerusalem florebit, templu^que
mire frequentabitur.
but the participations of better prosperity; It shall fill our understandings
with light, our minds with refreshment, and our hearts with joy. They that have
delight in the Sabbath of God, shall find delight in the God of the Sabbath,
Christ shall be their Paradise. We have now seen what treasures of temporal and
spiritual riches are laid up in this blessed Scripture; and what need there any
other bait to catch our affections, to love, and keep Gods holy Sabbath? This
duty is an heir of the sweetest promises, such a duty as may seem to carry the
Key of Gods choysest treasures about it. God says to him who holily observes
his day, as once Ahasuerus said to Hester, What is thy request, Esther 5. 3.
and it shall be given thee? Indeed, not a holy sigh, not an affectionate
prayer, not a savoury discourse, not a heavenly duty, not a divine meditation,
which is shot up to Heaven on a Sabbath day, shall lose its reward: Holy
sacrifices are then more especially a sweet smelling savor in the nostrils of
Genesis 8. 21.
God. It was a rare promise God made to the Eunuch, who kept his Sabbath, Isa.
56. 4, 5. the words run thus; For thus says the Lord to the Eunuchs that keep
my Sabbath, and choose the things which please me, and take hold on my
Covenant, Isa. 56. 4, 5.
even to them will I give in my house, and within my walls, a place, and a
name, better then of sons and daughters; and I will give them an everlasting
name that shall not be cut Nomen (i. e.) memoria, fama, gloria; Hanc enim filii
parentibus conciliant.
off. Thus if Eunuchs keep Gods Sabbath, God will repair all their contempts in
the World, and they shall be had in everlasting remembrance; and though their
grave bury all the memory of them in silence, because they have no progeny to
bear up their name, yet their name shall be engraven in Gods house, which shall
outvie the duration of the most numerous offspring. Nay, the Lord, as if he
was unwearied in making bonds of love to the holy observation of his Sabbath,
makes a rich promise to the very strangers; so Isa. 56. 6, ^.
the Text, Isa. 56. 6, 7. the words are these; Also the sons of the strangers,
that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the Name of the
Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it,
and takes hold of my Covenant, even them will I bring to my holy Mountane, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt offerings, and their
sacrifices shall be accepted upon my Altar. Here God makes a threefold promise
of the best kind, (viz.) spiritual, to the very strangers who keep his Sabbaths
undefiled.

First, They shall enjoy the Ordinances, I will bring them to my Holy Mountane,
says God. Those who sanctify the Sabbath, they shall not want a Sabbath to
sanctify; they shall Isa. 25. 6. Per convivium medullatorum, ^en intelliguntur
carnales, sed s^irituales deliciae, et summae voluptates.
enjoy seasons of prayer, opportunities of love, means of grace, and feed upon
the fat things of Gods house. Gods Sabbaths are fastened by an holy improvement,
and fledged to be gone by a careless abuse. Nothing so ensures our Sabbaths, as
a conscientious observation.

Secondly, They shall be refreshed by Ordinances: I will make them joyful in
my house of Prayer: Prayer shall be their Paradise, hearing their Heaven,
meditation their Triumphant flight, Sacraments their savoury meat, which their
souls shall delight in: All the Ordinances shall be as the holy Alymbecks Genesis
27 4.
to drop sweetness into the soul of him, who undefiledly keeps the Sabbath.

Thirdly, They shall be accepted in Ordinances. God will fill the Temple where
they meet with smoke, they shall have sure signs of his presence, fire shall
fall down upon their 1 Kings 8 10
sacrifices, as a testimony of Gods acceptance. And all this the very
strangers shall enjoy, those who are not inoculated into 1 Kings 18 38.
a Jewish stock, but only transplanted from some other Nation, now joining
with the people of God; all which abundantly shows how grateful the holy
observation of the Exodus 20. 8.
Sabbath is to God. And indeed when

First, The Author of the Sabbath is holy, Secondly, The Duties holy, Thirdly,
The Command holy, Exodus 20. 8. Fourthly, The Day holy,
Fifthly, The Design holy, (viz.) to carry on the work of Grace and Holiness
on our souls; it must needs b^ very acceptable, we our selves should be holy,
our thoughts, Sicut in vitiis, qui ingratum ^ixerit, omnia dixerit; Ita in
divinis ^ffi^iis, qui Sabbatum dicit; omnia dicit. Acts 20. 7.
our desires, our services, our discourses, our actions on this blessed day.
One who prophanes the Sabbath, he is the scandal, the abuse, the spot, the
deflouring reproach of this holy day, the Antipodes of the Sabbath. In the
Primitive times, the Saints made a Collection of Duties, as well as of Charity,
as if no part of that day should run over to any impertinency.

First, And what a strange profaneness, nay, prodigality does it import, that
for the gratifying of our vanity, a wanton Prophaners of Gods Sabbaths, they
are prodigal of divine promises.
palate, a voluptuous inclination, a little fleshly ease, the covetous craving
after an unseasonable gain, the purchase of a little waste time upon a Sabbath,
we should disinherit our selves of all that superlative happiness, those many
promises folded up in Scripture have made over to a strict observation of that
holy day, this blessed Sabbath? What inhumane and frantic prodigality does
this imply?

their own good, but of Gods honor. This is one of his ten words, charged by
the Creator of Heaven and Earth upon man; Remember the They are prodigal of
Gods honor.
Sabbath day to keep it holy; and the engrossing of this charge, God does not
leave to any Amanuensis, but he will write it Exodus 20. 8.
with his own singer, and also to intimate that his intentions were to
perpetuate this (with other precepts of the decalogue) in the morality thereof.
The Lord himself imprinted Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
it not in paper, but upon tables of stone; yea, when the first tables of stone
were broken, his Majesty gives express order to Moses, to have other tables,
like to the former prepared, and he wrote thereon the same Law the second time.
Exodus 34. 1, 28. Praecide tibi, (i. e.) in tuam ^^ilitatem. Rab. Sol.
As the Lord delighted in the first institution of the Sabbath, so he accounts
himself honored in its sanctification; and his complaint, and charge is
against them, who are regardless of his Sabbath; I am profaned amongst them;
and what do those who profane his Sabbath, but break the tables of Ezekiel 22. 26.
stone the second time, and cast a dishonor upon him, who delights to be
called the Lord of the Sabbath? Mark 2. 28.


are highly prodigal of Gods favor, for they provoke him by the sin of
sacrilege; for it being the Sabbath, and the Lords day, that time is stolen
Such are prodigal of Gods favor.
from God himself which is spent otherwise then he allows; and how sad is
this robbery and theft? And that smart sentence which was misapplyed unto
Christ (for he strictly kept the Sabbath of the Lord his God) may be applied to
John 9. 16. Sabbathi prophanatio, contemptus est totius legis dei, et divini
cultus. Leid. Prof.
that person, who is an ordinary prophaner of this holy time, This man is not
of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day. And indeed according to a man's
regard, or disregard of the Sabbath, is his respect, or disrespect to all the
rest of Gods Commandments. The Sabbath observed, is the comp^ndium and Epitome
of the whole practice of Piety; and the transgression of the Sabbath, is the
violation of the whole Law of Sub observatione Sabbati, breviter
comprehenditur, s^mma t^tius Pre^atis. Calv. Exodus 16. 28.
God. When the people of Israel went to gather Manna on the Sabbath day,
observe Gods complaint to Moses, Exodus 16. 28. How long refuse ye to keep my
Commandments and my Laws, says the Lord. Observe Laws and Commandmentts, in
the plural number; in that they break the Commandment Totum divinum cultum, suo
ambitu complectitur Sabbathum. August. ad Casulanum. Council. Paris. Lib. 3.
Cap. 5.
of the Sabbath, God accounts it as the breach of all his Commandments; it is a
sin against all his concernments. It was a memorable saying of Augustine, Let
us show our selves Christians by keeping holy the Lords day. And the Council of
Paris, We do admonish all the faithful for the salvation and good of their
souls, that they would give due honor and reverence unto the Lords day;
because the dishonor of it, is both contrary to Christian Religion, and does
without all doubt bring destruction to the souls of all that continue in it.
And Bulling. Concio. 65.
holy Bullinger observes, He that despises the Sabbath, makes no great account
of the true Religion. The Prophets when they Ezekiel. 20. 16. Ezekiel. 22. 8. Ezekiel.
23 38.
would complain of the decay of Religion, they cry out, the Sabbaths polluted.
Indeed in the not observing Gods holy day, there is not only impiety, but
great disingenuity, for the Ezekiel. 20. 12. Ezekiel. 20. 20.
Sabbath is given us, not as a task, but as a privilege, to be a pledge of our
interest in God, and a confirmation of our hope Heb. 4. 4, 5, 8, 9.
of further sanctification, as also of our everlasting Sabbatisme, or rest,
after our wearisom wanderings in this world; it is given for the sweetning of
our wilderness-way unto the heavenly Canaan; it is our spiritual feasting every
week; it is our day of delight; in this day St. John was in his Sabbathum
delicatum, quia delicate, et tenere est observandum.
divine rapture, and no doubt but many of Gods dear servants, have abundant
experience of spiritual cordials, given in upon the conscientious keeping of
this day, and St. John's Garments of joy have fell in some measure upon 2 Kings
2. 13.
them.

CHAP. X. There must be serious preparation before the solemn day of the
Sabbath.
HAving thus in general discussed the Doctrine propounded, I come now to a more
particular handling and ventilation of it, and in so doing,

First, Lay down diverse duties, which are to fore-run the Sabbath.

Secondly, Lay down a platform, how we must spend every part of Gods holy day.

Thirdly, Give diverse rules for the more complete and strict observation of the
Sabbath.

Fourthly, Propose many cautions to prevent the pollution of this blessed day:
With many other things which will occur for the more manifest enucleation and
confirmation of the doctrinal truth propounded.

But to begin with the first thing proposed, (viz.) what we must do by way of
preparation for this holy day. Indeed the Sabbath is not to be rushed upon; Man
must not break in upon a Sabbath, as the horse rusheth into the battle, as
Jeremiah speaks, without premeditation and previous consideration. Jer. 8. 6.
Ignatius calls the Sabbath the Queen of days, and Queens have their trains
going before them; there must be Ignat ad Magnes.
a train of duties precedeing the holy Sabbath. On the Saturday Quomodo Maria
Virgo inter omnes mulieres principatum tenet; ita inter caeteros dies, haec
sole^nis dies. Hier.
let us prepare for the Lords day. We know tuned Instruments play the sweetest;
before they are tuned, they jar, and make a harth sound. Our hearts are these
Instruments which must beforehand be tuned by several duties, or or they will
jar and be discomposed upon the Sabbath. Physic is prepared before it is
taken; and our hearts must be prepared, before we take and enjoy the Ordinances
of a Sabbath. There is a preparing dress before we go to any feast; and must
not the soul be dressed before the festival of the Sabbath, that great banqueting
of the inward man? There is a dawning light before the rising Sun: some
glimering duties must be the harbingers of the approaching Sabbath. Indeed
matters should be so ordered every day, so as to prepare for this day. As our
whole life should be a preparing for death, so the whole week should be a
preparing for the Sabbath: But as this precious day does more approach, so
preparatory work must more increase. Holy Nehemiah shut the Gates of the Neh.
13. 19.
City (viz.) Jerusalem, when it began to be dark, the In veteri testamento, ut
impedimenta omnia celebrationis hujus diei i^ tempore auferrentur, Fideles
pridie Sabbati divino mandato om^ia sua, quantum poterant ad eum firem
componebant. Wall.
evening before the Sabbath, least the night time should be profaned by
bearing burdens in it; and he did this, least the men of Tire should occasion
the Jews to break the Sabbath day, by bringing in wares upon that night. This
holy man's care would not suffer any to cast dirt upon the portal, or entrance
of the Sabbath; he very well knew there must be some time spent in trimming the
soul to meet its Bridegroom on his own holy day. A due preparation for this
blessed Sabbath, lies more especially under a five-fold injunction.

Of necessity. It is necessary we should take some time to compose our spirits
for the duties of the following Sabbath. Our thoughts in the week how are they
loose, and carelessly dishevelled; some time there must be to bind them up
together, and put them into order. The Lord in the fourth Exodus 20. 8.
Commandment enjoynes us to remember the Sabbath; and to Id ipsum qu^que in hoc
praecepto certo r^spectu, m^rale est, scil. u^ diebus antecedentibus omnia
nostra, quantum fieri potest, ita i^stituamus, ut per eorum negligen tiam, a
sanctificatione hujus diei, non impediamur.
remember the Sabbath, it is before hand to mind and manage matters that
concern the Sabbath-sanctification, that when it comes, it may be holily kept;
for every duty on the Lords day, there must be a due preparation, for Prayer,
for Hearing, for Sacraments, etc. Now if we must prepare for single duties,
when they lie more asunder, sure we must prepare for the Sabbath, when such
duties are linked together; And this is more considerable, if we take notice,
we are not only to be in the duty, but in the spirit, in the prompt, powerful
and precise transaction of every service on the Lords day. And besides all
this, does not the Lord upon this day come in comfortable visits to the souls
of his people? and must not they prepare for his presence? It was the opinion
of some, Rev. 1. 10.
that Christ's personal coming to Judgment will be on the Sabbath day: This is
most sure, that Christ's spiritual coming Lactant. Lib. 7. Cap. 1. August. de
Temp. Sermon. 154.
in mercy, is for the most part on the day of the Sabbath; and shall there then
be no preparation? When a great man is to come to our houses, how are all our
Rooms dressed up: When a great God is to come to our hearts, shall not we
prepare Neh. 13. 22.
and dress our hearts for his entertainment?

Of Equity. The Ministers they prepare for the Sabbath-good of Gods people, and
shall not the people of the Lord prepare for their own? Faithful Ministers
before the Sabbath, do not only prepare matter to speak, but they prepare
their hearts to speak the matter. Bernard in a Sermon thus breaks out to his
people; To prepare you meat, my heart all Bern. in Fest. omn. Sanct. Sermon. 1.
this night has been seething within me, and in my meditations I have been
inflamed, as with fire. And is it not equal and most rational, that Christians
should meet their Ministers in holy preparation, and plow up their fallow
ground to receive Jer. 4. 3.
that immortal seed, which Gods holy Seeds-men are ready to cast into it?
Calvin complains of some Christians in his 1 Pet. 1. 23.
time, who no otherwise regarded the Sabbath then thereon to Calv in Deuteronomy. 8.
Sermon. 34.
attend their worldly affairs, the which they reserved to themselves that day,
as if they had no other day to deliberate for the whole week to come. Now shall
men on the Sabbath prepare for the week, and shall not we in the week, prepare
for the Sabbath? Is Mammon more to be minded then God?

Of advantage. 1. The duties of the Sabbath will the better and freer come off.
If we be sedulous in holy preparation, we shall then with more dexterity,
agility and facility, transact the several parts of Gods service. One cause why
we are often unactive in duty, and drive heavily, is, because we did not
beforehand oil our wheels, inure our selves, we did not the day before,
labor with God by Prayer, and with our own hearts by care and industry.
Oftentimes a Christian is straightned, stiff and bound up in the services of a
Sabbath, and knows not how to go on in holy duties, and all this arises from
neglect of holy preparation: The heart has not been dealt withal, to supple
it for more voluntary and cheerful performances. Preparatory work would wind
up the clock of the soul, that it would go, and strike, it would pray, hear,
contemplate, and act any Sabbath service, with far greater pleasantness and
consonancy.

2. If we prepare, the mercies of the Sabbath will the larger and fuller come
in; according to our preparations, will be our Genesis 44. 1.
participations. According to the number and measure of sacks, the sons of
Jacob prepared, and carried with them out Ex lege and mandato dei. 23 Luc. 54.
in omnibus Christianis conventibus requiritur, ne debito suo fructu haec
pietatis publicae exercitia priventur, ut inquam, animus ad eandem quoque
sanctificationem rite preparetur. Wall.
of Canaan, so were they filled with Corn, when they came to Joseph in Aeygpt:
And according as we prepare our hearts at home in the week time, so our
comfortable fillings shall be, when we come before the Lord on his own day. He
that expects from his field a large crop, and a plenteous harvest, must before
hand take pains in plowing, and well preparing the ground; we do not before
hand take preparatory pains, and that is the reason we reap so little in
Sabbath-time; man naturally is slow of heart, Luke 24. 25. Duty and Industry
must help Nature, that so our sluggish hearts may be fitted for the receiving
of those blessings which usually attend the Sabbath day. Emptied vessels take
in the liquor. Pruned Vines become fruitful and feracious: And dressed Gardens
cast the sweetest smells. And so the heart mollified with penitential tears,
pruned by resolute mortification, and turned up by frequent search, will be
accommodate for the magnificent plantations of Sabbath graces.

Of Zeal and Fervency. Can we observe the several Holy Days to have their
Eves, wherein some Service and Liturgy must be used for preparation? The
Chapels and Cathedrals (...). Hippo.
must be frequented, and prayers must be made, because some Saints day is
approaching; and the neglect of this duty is adjudged an indignity by many
great ones in the Church. Shall a day dedicated to a Saint, to an Apostle, to a
Martyr, be ushered in with preparatory services, and must the holy Sabbath, the
day dedicated to the Lord Jesus, God blessed Romans 9. 5. Christus est deus (...)
super omnes, aut super omnia eodem sensu. Par.
for ever, have no Eve, no preparatory duties, no services to proclaim its
coming? But the preceding day must be spent in a more eager pursuit of the
World; then we frequent the Markets, mind our shops, reckon with our workmen,
pierce further into the night for our worldly business, and we catch greedily
after the flying week now drawing toward an end; what is this but to give more
honor to the Saints day then the Sabbath day, to an ordination of the Church,
then an institution of Christ? Shall the blessed Sabbath have no evidence, no
sign of its coming, no preparatory Prayers, no precursory pains? Must the holy
days Eve have the Cathedral for service, and not the Sabbath Eve have the
Closet for preparation? Where is our zeal for Gods honor, and Gods day? It is
very strange, that the Saints Festivals should be introduced with greater
solemnity then Christ's holy day; Surely this does not become the Christian, who
is, or should be sick of love with his beloved. Cant. 2. 5.


Holy Ingenuity. Shall we be out-vied by the Jews, the vagabond Jews in our
preparations for the Sabbath? Shall they be so exact, and we so negligent? Let
not a blasphemous Jew rise up in judgment against us. And here I shall open
the care of the Jews in preparing for the Sabbath. Scalig. de Emend. temp.
Lib. 6 p. 261.
The Jews formerly gave, and for the present do give, very solemn and great
honor to their Sabbath. The week days they called (...) Cholim, Profane; as
the Greeks call them (...) working days: and in respect of the different
degrees of holiness of days, the Sabbath day is not unfitly Scalig. de Emend.
temp. Lib. 6. p. 269.
compared to a Queen, or to those who are termed primary Wives, other feast
days to Concubines or half-wives, working days to Handmaids. The Jews began
the Sabbath at six of the clock the night before; And this the Graecians called
(...). And the Hebrews (...) (...)
Biath Hasabbath, the entrance of the Sabbath. Their preparation Joseph. Anti.
lib. 16. cap 10.
to the Sabbath began at three of the clock in the afternoon, which the Hebrews
call (...) Gnereb ha-Sabbath, the Sabbath Eve, and this the Fathers called
Caenam (...)
puram, the pure Supper, the phrase being borrowed In vitibus Paganorum coen^
pura appellabatur illis apponi solita, qui in casto erant, quod Graeci dicunt
(...) Isa. Causab. Mark 15. 42. Luke 23. 54.
from the Pagans, whose Religion taught them in their sacrifices to certain of
their Gods and Goddesses, to prepare themselves by a strict kind of holiness
(observe the very Heathens prepared for their sacrifices to their Idol Gods and
Goddesses:) This preparation for the Sabbath is by the Evangelist called (...),
a preparation, Mark 15. 42. whose words are these, And now when Even was come
(because it was the preparation (i. e.) the day before the Sabbath.) To the
same purpose the Evangelist Luke, Luke 23. 54. And that day was the
preparation, and the Sabbath drew on. And among the Jews the whole day was a
kind of preparation; for on this preparation day they might not go more then
three Parsoth; now a Parsa contained so much ground, as an ordinary man might
go ten of them in a day; and Judges on this day might not sit in Judgment upon
life and death, etc. And so careful were the Jews of observing the time of
their preparation for the Sabbath, that the best Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. Cap.
10 (...) ^almud.
and wealthiest of them, even those who had many servants, did with their own
hands further the preparation; so that sometimes the Masters themselves they
would chop herbs, sweep the house, cleave*wood, kindle the fire, and such like.
In old time, they proclaimed the preparation with noise of Trumpets or Horns;
but now the modern Jews proclaim it by the Sexton, or some under Officer of
the Church, whom they call (...) Shihach Tsibbur, the (...) Hospin. de Fest.
Jud.
messenger of the Congregation; and this messenger advised them, that they
should prepare seasonably for the worthy Celebration of the Sabbath. Hospinian
tells us, (and his testimony is Authentical) that when the Sexton gives notice
of the approaching Sabbath, that then they prepared all those meats they were
to feed upon the succeeding Sabbath, and put them upon a table covered with a
clean cloth, then they washed their heads, pared their nails, and prepared
their Sabbath apparel. The Sun setting, the woman Occidente sole, mulieres
lumina Sabbataria accendunt, and mulier quaeque domi, ambas suas manus versus
lumen expandit, et precatiunculam quandam peculiarem demurmurat. Hosp. Cum
aliqui longiore spatio iti^eris ab hospitio aut aedib^^ suis abiit, die
Veneris, quam die Sabbatino conficere licet, in agris, vel media sylva
ubicunque ille sit, manner, et ibidem quiescere, et Sabbatum servare, neglecto
omni periculo, et injuria cibi et po^us debet. Hosp. The day before the
Sabbath, the Jews called Sabbatulum, the little Sabbath, on which they made
ready against the great day of the Sabbath.
of the house sets up lights, and a short prayer being made, then they go into
the Synagogue, and in their going, wish one another a joyful Sabbath; and when
they return, they spread the table with some provisions, and always set salt
on the table, to intimate an inward savouriness, and they put on two loaves of
bread, and then give thanks in these words, Blessed art thou O Lord our God,
the King of the World, who brings forth bread out of the ground; and then the
Master of the Family breaks some to those, who sit down with him, and in a
larger quantity then at other times, for the honor of the Sabbath, for then
sparingness is intolerable. And the same Author Hospinian observes, that when
any person is further from his home on the Friday, then he can reach to observe
the Sabbath strictly, he remains where he was, in the fields, or in the middle
of a wood, and willingly incounters any hazard, and the want of meat or drink,
rather then he will entrench upon the holy Sabbath. And thus exact the Jews
are in bodily and spiritual preparations; they would not profane the Sabbath
with an unpared nail; they wash their heads to betoken inward purgation; they
set up lights to denote spiritual illumination; they go into the Synagogue the
day before the Sabbath, to fit them for the sanctuary on the holy day of the
Sabbath; Joseph Jud. Antiq. Lib. 16. Cap. 10.
and these Jews were so conscientious in these preparations, that Josephus
reports, it was taken notice of all the World over, insomuch that Caesar
Augustus upon some complaint, wrote unto every Province where the Jews
resided, That it was his pleasure, that the Jews should enjoy their ancient Is
it not meet for Christians, whose Sabbath exceeds that of the Jews, to prepare
themseves thereunto? We have no sheep or oxen to prepare; we have the more time
to make ready our hearts and souls for spiritual service. Mr. G.
Privileges, and among the rest, that they should not be compelled to appear
before any Judge on their Sabbath days, or the day before their Sabbaths after
nine of the clock upon their preparation days. Their Conscientious Religion in
this particular, procured them favor with Heathen Princes, the Roman Emperor,
and obtained indulgence for them. And shall the Jew be so accurate and diligent
in his preparations, and the Christian so loose and careless? Does the
knowledge of Christ no more influence us? Let us even blush to be outdone by a
rejected and obstinate Jew, the Son of a Curse, which adheres to that
Generation from Age to Age. Shall those branches which are cut off, as the
Apostle speaks, spread in their careful and dutiful observances, and we who
are branches growing on the stock, be contracted, and fall short in a due and
necessary composing of our selves for the Lords day, the weekly memorial of our
Romans 11. 21.
Lords Resurrection? Surely it will be more tolerable for Romans 11. 17.
Jerusalem and Samaria in the day of judgment, then for Mat. 11. 21.
many Christians, who wreaking out of the world, rush upon Sabbaths without the
pauses and interpositions of a due preparation. But happily now some being
evinced, would set upon the work, did they fully understand it; they would keep
a Sabbath Eve, did they know how legitimately and suitably to spend it:
Therefore the next Chapter shall be the clew to lead us into this Labyrinth.

CHAP. XI. What those Preparatory Duties are, that must fore-run the Sabbath.
THus far we have traveled to assert the duty, that we must prepare for Gods
holy day; our next task is, to unfold and open the duty, how we should prepare
for a Sabbath. Every one who takes the pencil into his hand, cannot draw a
Picture, Preparation for the Sabbath is easier confessed then understood, and
many can sooner acknowledge then give an account of it; and that we may
therefore neither err in the omitting, nor yet in the doing of it, we must
understand, Sabbath preparation compriseth these several duties.

sequester our selves wholly from the world, and all the affairs of it; we must
for some time make off from worldly hindrances, as Mariners that intend a
voyage to Sea, they put off the ship from Land; so if we mean to serve God on
the Sabbath, our hearts and minds must be off from the world. Put off thy
shoes, says God to Moses, for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground.
We must put off earthly affections, Exodus 3. 5.
for the day we are approaching to, is a holy day. A Bird, says Musculus, That
she may fly, she fluttereth with her Musc. Loc. Com. Praecep. Quarto.
wings, and frees her self all she can, from what may hinder her flight: And
shall not we throw off beforehand what may hinder our flight upon a Sabbath,
or stop us in our careire to Jesus Christ? The Jews were angry with the man
who carried his bed upon a Sabbath day. How many carry their Joh. 5. 10.
beds before the Sabbath, lie sleeping on the down of carnal pleasures, and
temporal profits, and do not awaken to compose themselves for the Glorious
Sabbath of God; they lie snorting in carnal ease, and prepare not for spiritual
enjoyments. That Christ might make us a Sabbath to keep, in body he first rose
from the earth. In heart we must rise from the earth, before we can well keep
the Sabbath Christ has made. One well observes, That a total sequestring of
Mr. Walk.
our selves from all worldly business, and putting away all earthly thoughts,
cares and delights, will cleanse the affections from dross, and make room for
the entrances of holiness, for spiritual Praeparemur ad Sabbatum, ne spinis ac
curis hujus seculi, quibus cor hominis eo tempore obsidetur, incrementum, et
fructus verbi divini in^er^ipiatur, et evellatur ex animis nostris; ut Christus
in Parabola seminantis abundanter docet. Wall.
devotion, and the motions of the Holy Ghost; (and he gives this reason) For no
man can serve two Masters at once, God, and the World: Let us therefore by way
of preparation cast out earthly and carnal thoughts, and spiritual and heavenly
affections will the more easily enter, and be predominant. So then in the first
place, we must set apart some time for the trimming and rigging of the soul, to
be fit to launch into a Sabbath; we must come off from the stage of the World,
into the tyring room, quietly and spiritually to compose our selves for the
heavenly employment of the subsequent day; there must be a pause and cessation
from the entangling warfare of the world. And we must enter into our Closets,
and commune with our hearts, and be still, that so advisedly we may enter upon
the souls harvest day. Psalm. 4. 4


Duty preparatory to the Sabbath, is holy Meditation. We must meditate on those
things which may quicken grace in our hearts,

First, As chiefly upon the greatness, holiness, and infinite Majesty of the
Lord, before whom we are to appear Sit et nobis parasceue non tantum q^ae domos
sed quae animos ad sacra festa peragenda praeparet. Musc. Genesis 41. 14
the approaching Sabbath, and to present our selves when the light of the day
comes; this will certainly move, and stir up spiritual devotion and affection,
as we see by experience in worldly things, how careful we are to trim and
fit our selves, when we are to go to an earthly King, or some great Nobles.

let us meditate what holiness and purity, especially of heart and soul is
required in using the Lev. 20. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
holy Ordinanoes of God, and in approaching near to him. And that Holiness
which becomes the blessed Sabbath, and the Ordinances of it, is the putting on
humility, mercy, Humilitas primum, medium, and ultimum in Schola Christi. Alap.
meekness, and all other affections, and departing from all iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.
19. It is the Image of Christ in the New Creature, which is created after God
in Righteousness and Holiness; Ephesians. 4. 24. This is the embroydery we are to
Ephesians. 4. 24.
wear, when we meet with the King of Saints on his own day. Rev. 15. 3.


meditate on those Scriptures which require holy preparation, as Eccles. 5. 1.
which shows Gods anger against such who approach his presence in an unprepared
frame, Eccles. 5. 1.
Mat. 22. 12. The wise Virgins trimmed their lamps before they entered the
Bride-chamber; and we must trim our Mat. 22. 12.
selves before we enter the Presence Chamber upon the solemn day of his
appearance. God disgusts man's regardlesness; Mat. 25. 7.
and a curious plaiting of the soul pleases our Beloved: The harder our labor
is to fit our selves for Gods presence, the sweeter will our wages be, in the
influences of that presence.

us meditate on that whereof the Sabbath is a sign and a pledge, (viz.) Our
resurrection to Eternal Life, and to the Eternal Rest of Glory in Heaven, in
the fight and fruition of God, whom none can see without holiness. And Tertiam
requiem notat Atostolus. Heb. 4. 7. quae per duas praecedentes, (scil.) per
requiem Sabbati, et requiem in Canaan anagogice fuerit significata, quam nobis
praestat Jesus Christus. Heb. 12. 14. Heb. 12. 2.
this will be most powerful to stir up spiritual affection, and to quicken
Grace in our hearts. Our life should be a continual preparation for our Eternal
Sabbath; and some time should be granted for a temporary preparation for our
weekly Sabbath, we should be very active in this work, and despise the toil
and trouble, looking to the joy that is set before us, whereof the weekly
Sabbath is to every Saint a happy Harbinger.

Thirdly. Our third Duty which must precede the holy observation of the
Sabbath, is self examination, and this is two fold:

First, External. We must reflect back upon the past week, and review our
Erratas; sin before must be found out, least we come to Sabbath-work, with
weekday guilt. On the Saturday in the Evening, we must cast up our spiritual
accounts, and when we have found the Jonah, cast him overboard Jon. 1. 15.
by holy faith, and serious repentance. It is very unseemly to keep a Sabbath
with our filthy Garments, with Zach. 3. 4.
unwashen hearts, with untuned tongues, with untamenting eyes, with unrepented
sins. When Joseph was to come into Genesis 41. 14.
the presence of Pharaoh he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came
in to Pharaoh; And shall not we throw off our sinful incumberances, and put
off our prison clothes, our noisome irregularities by diligent search, and holy
repentance, when the day draws on, and we are to come into the Effunde cortuum,
sicut aqu^m coram facie Domini, extolle ad eum manus tuas pro remedio
peccatorum tuorum, accipe igitur lamentum. Hier.
presence of the great God? Our memories should be the surveyours to view, and
our consciences the secretaries to set down, our hearts the mourners to lament
the sins of the week; that Christ would bring his sponge to blot them out,
before Gods holy day comes upon us. It is observable, those herbs rise high in
the Summer time, that in the Winter shrink lowest in the ground; and those
hearts that in the week-time are laid lowest, they rise highest upon the
Sabbath day: There must be soul-humblings for the daily trespasses of the week,
else the day of Gods service comes, but we cannot comfortably and confidently
serve God on that day, especially if any fouler spot has deformed any day of
Josh. 24. 19.
the week.

Secondly, But there must be an inward examination, as well as an outward, a
search into our thoughts, our desires, our delights, our dispositions, what
they have been the foregoing week; we must examine the passages of our souls,
how it has fared with the inward man. The Psalmist commands heart communion, a
serious discourse concerning the Psalm. 4. 4.
behaviors of the heart. As the Shopkeeper casts up his Ex cord, vita et
actio procedit.
accounts, not only concerning his debts abroad, but his wares at home; He
turns every piece in the chest, to see how it goes with his estate. We must
dive into our souls, and see what growth of grace, what decays of corruption;
what ornaments and additional beauty we have gained all the week before;
whether Christ has given us new bracelets Ezekiel. 16. 11. Armillae significant,
nihil indecorum esse agendum, sed manus (i. e.) opera debere esse decora. Orig.
and Jewels, superadded grace, or whether we are more wrinckled in the
complexion of our souls, and look more like to the old man. Holy Master
Greenham sends us to civil and wordly wisdom, for the practice of this duty;
We see, says he, worldly thriving men, if not every day, yet at least once in
the week, they search their books, cast up their accounts, confer their
expenses with their gain, and make even their reckonings, whereby they may see
whether they have gained Ephesians. 4. 22.
or lost, whether they are beforehand or come short; and shall Mr. Greenh.
not we much more, once a week at least, call our selves to a reckning, by
examination what has gone from us, what has come toward us, how we have gone
forward or backward in godliness; that if we have holy increases, we may then
give thanks to God; and if we have come short, to travel with our selves the
more earnestly, to recover our former loss. In a word, the impartial survey of
our inward man, will necessarily lead us to a more profitable observation of
Gods holy day, seeing those wants will be scarecly supplied which lie
undiscovered: Let us therefore the evening or day before the Sabbath, withdraw
our selves from the noise of the world, and so quietly call our selves to an
account concerning our progress or regresse in Religion the foregoing week.

further prepare for the Sabbath, by stirring up in our selves holy affections.
It is fit the soul should be on the wing upon the Lords day?

First, we should long for the day of God, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 42. 1,
2. My soul thirsts for the living God; O when shall I come and appear before
God! And as she said, Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
Judges 5. 28. Why are thy Charriots so long in coming, and Judges 5. 28.
why tarry the wheels of thy Chariot? So, O when will the Sabbath come, that
we may sell all, and buy the pearl of price? O when will the day come, that we
may have communion with God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?

Secondly, And we should long for God on his holy day. Indeed there is nothing
in God but what may set us on longing; his Glory, his Bounty, his Purity, etc.
Christ is altogether Cant. 5. 16.
lovely; and loveliness inticeth affection; Beauty will attract love; rich
Pearls draw every eye; so let us entertain Quisquis diligit deum, s^gitta haec
in cord ejus haeret, et s^gittarius, tam fugit, tam sequitur, and ambo m^nent
cum amante. Del. Rio.
in our thoughts whatsoever may ingratiate God and his Ordinances; and let us
kindle the fire on the day before the Sabbath, that it may fl^me forth, and
burn bright on that holy day. A good man on Saturday evening going to bed,
leaped, and cried out, It is but one night more, and I shall be in the house of
God upon his holy day, and meet God himself in the use of holy things. Let us
before hand fall sick of Love, and then how grateful will the appearances of
Cant. 2. 5.
our Beloved be, upon his own blessed day?

Duty preparatory to the Sabbath, is earnest and fervent prayer. Indeed prayer
is the omniprevalent Engine, which can do wonderful things, things above
expectation, among others, it can admirably fit the soul for the Sabbath.

First, For the Prayer of Faith can prevail with God for the pardon and
forgiveness of sin, and pardoned sin will prepare ^randus est deus, ut nihi^
l^nguoris in nobis, et ruinae pristinae relinquat ne rurs^^ mali seminis
pullalent rediviva plantaria. Hierom.
the soul for Sabbath-mercy; those who are clogged with sin, will quickly be
tired in duty. Now the Sabbath is only the Mart, and spiritual Fair of duties:
The unpardoned sinner may spend, not keep a Sabbath, may pass away the time of
it, not enjoy the benefit of it. Prayer I say can prevail for pardon: The Lord
directs us to this very means to procure forgiveness, so Hos. 14. 2. Take unto
thee words, and turn unto the Lord, and say, take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously. God will give pardon, but prayer must Jam. 5. 15.
importune the gift. David he prays for forgiveness, and Dum oratur deus, ut
omnem auserat iniquitatem, ut non solum peccata, sed eti^m omnes peccatorum
sibras evellat. Hier.
he obtains it. On the Eve of a Sabbath, let us be earnest for the pardon of
the sins of our lives, of the sins of the past week; let the week be cleared
before we adventure upon a Sabbath. A sense of pardon will sweeten every
service of a Sabbath, make Duty delight, and Pains a paradise, Ordinances shall
be our incomes, not our incumberances. Be earnest for pardon, and the Sabbath
shall not only piously, but pleasingly be observed. Psalm. 51. 11.
Omnem aufer iniquitatem; est prima petitio, quae alias omnes merito praecedit
Riv.


Prayer can obtain the spirit. The donation of the spirit is promised to Holy
Prayer. Now our hearts are the spirit's Luke 11. 13.
workhouses. The spirit can chain up corruptions, draw out grace, blow away
the froth and vanity of the soul, open Spiritualia bona licet corporalia
longissimo intervallo post serelinquat, tamen sine condition petere audem^^,
certum est Christum ea nobis impetrasse, et patrem propter ipsum nobis d^turum
esse. Chemn. 2 Cor. 3. 17. Ephesians. 1. 13. Mal. 3. 2.
the heart for the entertainment of Gospel-messages, every way put us into a
sweet and Sabbath disposition. The spirit is a spirit of sanctity, to make the
heart gracious; the spirit is a spirit of liberty, to make the heart free and
enlarged; the spirit is a spirit of purity, it is fullers soap, and a refiners
fire, to purge and cleanse the soul; and so adaequately prepare the Christian,
for the divine duties of the Sabbath.

lays the foundation of Sabbath blessings; the prayer of faith keeps the Key
of Gods treasury door. Blessings indeed, which are really so, are the fruits of
prayer. Prayer it can open the womb; Hannah prays, and the obtains 1 Samuel 1.
27.
a Samuel: It can melt the Heavens, it can open the prison Jam. 5. 16. 18.
doors, it can avail very much; and prayer can turn a Sabbath into the souls
blessed harvest; it can open the heart, procure Acts 12. 7.
a blessing upon Ordinances, engage Christ's presence, Lutherus ait, utinam
eodem ardore orare possum; tum dabatur responsum, fi^t quod velis. Lutr. 2 Cor.
6. 2.
make duties fruitful, and spiritual Manna nourishing: Prayer can make the
Sabbath a time of grace, an opportunity of life, a day of salvation, a term of
love. It has been the manner of some Christians, the day before the Sabbath,
to meet and spend some time in seeking God by prayer, and quickening one
another; this fervently performed would lay a great ground of a good day indeed
to follow; and therefore let us Pray, pray, pray beforehand, that divine
Ordinances may be accompanied with divine benedictions; that sins may Mat. 24.
20.
be discharged, that our souls may be enlarged, and hearts may be upon the
wheel. Our Savior says, Pray that your flight be not on the Sabbath day; but
let us pray, that our flight may be upon the Sabbath, our flight toward
Heaven; when the soul is upon the wing, and the heart upon its speed toward
Jesus Christ. A believer on a Sabbath should make haste to enjoy the embraces
of his beloved, which are as the Faeminae Christum secutae, pridie Sabbati, id
circo ad futuram corporis Christi condituram omnia praeparabant ut Sabbatho
secundumlegem quiescerent. Wall.
Espousals, forerunning an Eternal wedding day.

The Eve before the Sabbath, we should spend more time then usually in family
duties. Our preparation must not only be the work of the Closet, but the work
of the Family; Then we should read the Scriptures, refresh one another with
holy discourses, be more solemn in our addresses to God; Shall we prepare no
more for a Sabbath, that bright spot of time God gives us for our souls, then
for another day? Will we approach the Princes presence, with the same
disregards we will converse with the Peasant? Esther purified Est. 2. 12.
and perfumed her self with Oil of Myrrh, and sweet Odours, before she came
into the prefence of Ahashuerus; and shall our Families have no holy anointing,
no divine quickening, before the day come we must enter the presence of the King
of Kings, nay the God of Kings? Shall there be nothing to put a Selah upon a
Sabbath Eve? Let us take some time the evening before the Sabbath to teach our
little ones the holiness and Solemnity of a Sabbath, let us tell them how
jealous God is of his Sabbaths, what severe punishments he has overtaken Deuteronomy.
6. 7.
those with, who have violated his holy day. Let us Numb. 15. 36.
bring up our servants in the Holy Trade of Sabbath observation; let us leave
it upon their Consciences the night before the Sabbath, how accurately, and
carefully God will be served on his own day; and inform them what it cost
Aarons Sons for offering strange fire. Governors Lev. 10 3.
of Families should take pains with those subordinate to them, in begetting an
awe upon their hearts, and so fit them for Sabbath duties. Surely we should
more solemnly prepare for the day of the Soul, then for the days of our
Calling; for the services of the Sanctuary, then for the gains of the Shop:
God's day gives us a more solemn summons, then man's day does. And now having
thus prepared our selves in the discharge of the forementioned duties, let us
retire our selves to our rest, and let the hand of faith draw the curtains
about us, and so quietly repose our bodies, till the approaching Psalm. 4. 8.
morning of Gods holy day, and how that must be passed and solemnly observed,
comes next under our most serious discussion.

CHAP. XII. It is most advised and necessary, to rise early ^n Gods Holy Day.
DIvine providence unclasping our eyes in the morning of the Sabbath, let us
lose no time; as we lie on our beds, let us think, now the Lord looks down from
Heaven, and bids us make haste, get you up, for this day I must Luke 19. 5.
abide in your hearts, and this day I must transact with you, about the great
importances of your souls. When Abraham was to offer his Son in sacrifice to
God, He rose early in the morning, and sadled his Ass, and took two of his
servants, and Genesis 22. 5* 6.
Isaac his Son, with wood cleav'd for a burnt offering, and went to the place
of which the Lord had told him: And shall not we on a Sabbath morning be early
up our selves, and our families, to go to the place where the Lord has
appointed, and offer up our bodies and souls in service to God? The Israelites
who lay in siege against Jericho upon the seventh Josh. 6. 15.
day, they being to compass the City seven times, the text says, And it came
to pass on the seventh day, that they rose up early, about the dawning of the
day, and they compassed the City after the same manner seven times. Upon the
Lords day we are today siege to Heaven, and to compass it many times, and to
plant our batteries by holy and invincible prayer, and therefore we should be
early up; And there are two things which would much advantage this duty, (viz.)
rising early on the morning of the Sabbath.

First, A timely going to rest the night before. It is too common a fault among
Christians and Professors too, for them to clog themselves the night before the
Sabbath with a multitude of worldly busin^sses, which causes them to sit up
late; hence in the morning when they should be up with God, they lie
sleep-bound in their beds.

Secondly, An entire love to the work of the day that follows. Alas, we have
too little love to the Lords day work, and so but little list to be at the work
of the day: Were there love to it, we should long to be at it. Our minds run
Pius se parite^ velle jugiter deum mente, and animo ge^ere, illum colere, illum
desiderare tum nocte, tum interdiu. Alap.
upon the things we love: We should think of the Sabbath, even in the night
time, and we should catch the very first hour of the day, with my soul have I
desired thee in the night, and with my spirit within me will I seek thee early,
says the Prophet to God. Were we for several months kept without a Sabbath,
how would our spirits spring at such a days appearance? Why should the
Commonness of the Sun-shining, Isa. 26. 9.
and the Sabbaths coming diminish the mercy? How should we every Lords day
morning have our minds mounting, and say, behold the Sabbath of the Lord, it is
come, it is come. Now there are many Alarums to awaken us betimes on the
morning of a Sabbath, and to throw off carnal sloth, and fleshly case.

eye Christ's pattern; he rose early from the Grave, even while it was yet dark,
before the Sun had gilded the World with its bright appearance. On the morning
of his Joh. 20. 1.
Resurrection the Sun of Righteousness prevented the Sun of Mal. 4. 2. Mar. 16.
9.
Nature. Can we indulge our sloth on the Sabbath morning, and think of Christ's
Resurrection? He was up early to save us, and shall not we be so to serve him?
shall not we take the wings of the morning, as the Psalmist speaks, and Psalm.
139. 9.
retaliate this kindness of our Redeemer? That Christ arose from the dead,
there was the truth of our redemption; that he arose early, there was the love
of our redemption. Christ's longing to arise, and finish our work, should
enforce us to rise betimes to set upon his. Job says, the morning stars sang
Job 38. 7.
together: Our meeting with Christ on a Sabbath morning, will make the sweetest
music: When carnal sloth surpriseth us, let us survey the History of Christ;
and as he left his tomb, let us leave our down betimes. Let not the Sun of
Ortos^le (i. e.) ad or^um appropinquante. Cyr.
Righteousness shine in our faces with our curtains drawn about us. May I not
here expostulate; Is the Disciple greater then his Master? Betimes he left his
lodging, and shall not we? The Master among us does not usually rise before the
Servants. In a word, Love to the Spouse, to the Church, made Christ betimes
draw the curtains of his grave; and let love to our Husband, to our Duty, to
our Souls, cause us betimes to draw the curtains of our beds, so shall we
seasonably Orientem solemn adorant Persae.
adore this morning Sun.

hear the clamours of the soul. The Lords day is the souls market day, the
souls fair day, its term time, its Mr. Rogers.
busy opportunity, for the securing to its self an everlasting Heb. 9. 15.
inheritance, and therefore no time can well be lost. The Client who has his
suit to follow, gets up early to wait at his Counselors door. The Husbandman
betimes waits on his business in harvest time. The Sabbath is the souls good
wind for heaven, and mariners must not lose their winds, they may so lose their
voyage. The Israelites were not to Exodus 16. 25.
gather Manna on the Sabbath, for then the shower ceased; but Christians are
then chiefly to gather their spiritual Manna, for then the shower is most
plenteous. If one day in Gods Psalm. 84 10.
Courts be better then a thousand, as the Psalmist speaks, it is so in relation
to the soul, and shall then any time of it be lost? Shall we clip that day,
when the very clippings are as good silver, as any that is left. The souls
interest widens the Sabbath, and would lose no time. The temptation of Satan
contracts the Sabbath, and would mind no time. Now whether we should hearken to
our better part, or our Mane, (i. e.) tempestive, solicit, vigilanter,
secundo, mane (i. e.) opportune. Alap.
worser enemy, is most easy to discern. Surely carnal sloth on Gods holy day
does only evidence the conquest Satan has gained over us. There are two
things he tempts us forcibly to, to lose our Sabbaths, and to lose our souls;
and it is no weak, no faint memento to us to rise early on Gods day to seek
him, when he professes so often he rises early himself, Jer. 7. 13. Jer. 26. 5.
Jer. 25. 4.
and sends his Prophets early to seek and enquire after us.

the examples of Gods Saints; they are early in their visits of God. The Church
resolves to get Cant. 7. 12.
up early and go into the Vineyards, she would betimes gather clusters,
spiritual food for her feeding and refreshing. The Church denotes her longing
after Christ's presence; E^ce sanctorum animae, ec ce sanctorum mentes quae ad
excellentissimos fructus gloriosissime perveniunt. Philo.
there will be nothing but fruitfulness and flourishing, where Christ draws
near. Christ comes not empty to his Spouse, but he brings abundance of grace
and sweetness with him. The bubbling and boiling hearts of Gods holy and hidden
ones are waiting for the first opportunities to enjoy communion with God; they
will file off the chains of sloth and sleep, to be free to converse with their
beloved. The holy Psalmist in this duty writes us the fairest copy; sometimes
he began his devotions in the night watches; before any appearance Psalm. 63. 6.
of day had made a rent in the mantle of the night, when others were rockt
asleep, and fast in the arms of natures nurse (for so sleep is) David was
waking and busily employed in holy meditation and devotion: But if the night
had been farther spent, yet he was so early in his addresses, Psalm. 88. 13.
that he professes that he prevented God himself, he was with him, before the
Lord could well expect him; If he delayed his devotions till toward morning,
yet then he Psalm. 130. 6.
grew so impatient, that he longed as much to be with God, as the poor tired
Sentinel waited for day peep, that he might be taken from his harsh and
dangerous employment; for thus he speaks, Psalm. 130. 6. My soul waits for the
Lord more then they who watch for the morning, I say more then they who watch
for the morning: And it is observable, least we should think he had spoken more
his affection then his practice, he repeats the word twice for our greater
assurance. Nor will his zeal, or divine affection suffer him to let the morning
steal upon him, that he should see the light of the sun, before he had pursued
the light of Gods Countenance; no, He will prevent the very first dawning of
the morning; so he says, Psalm. 119. 147. I prevented the dawning Psalm. 119 147.
of the morning, and cried, I hoped in thy Word. And in this passage it is most
remarkable, timely piety and devotion it was not a fit of love, but a holy
custom. And lastly, if his natural rest had kept him a prisoner from God
longer then usual, yet he resolves he will awake early, Psalm. 108. 2. Psalm.
108. 2. Psalm. 57. 8. Psalm. 110. 3. 1 John 1. 3.
Nay he will awake right early, Psalm. 57. 8. The rest of nature shall not long
withstand ^he force of grace and holy love; but he will break out of the womb
of the morning to cry, and wait for God, to enjoy salvifical fellowship with
him. Now if David was so early in his inquisitions after God, on any time, or
time indefinite, how much more should we on Gods own holy day, that peculiar
day which God has especially Psalm. 118. 24.
made for close converses between himself and the precious soul. Now if you ask
me what employments or affairs engaged David's early awakings, that he could not
fetch his sound sleeps as well as other men. I answer, I find four things that
took up David's earliest thoughts:

First, Prayer: so Psalm. 5. 3. and so Psalm. 88. 13. And in the morning shall my
prayer prevent thee. This holy man must break the silence of the night by the
approaches of his soul, before God break the darkness of the night, by the
approaches of the sun. He remembered that those who sought Prove. 8. 17.
God early should find him, Prove. 8. 17. A rich promise can draw out David's
heart in holy prayer.

Secondly, Meditation, Psalm. 63. 6. David could let out his earliest thoughts
upon God, as the most pleasing subject they could prey upon. Indeed most
sutably our thoughts should Rev. 1. 8.
begin with him, who is the beginning of all things, who is both the fountain
to bubble forth, and the pillar to support Porro a. and o. proverbialiter
dicitur de eo, qui primus est in re quapiam, seu qui in aliquo genere est
summus. Pau.
our beings. In the spiritual nature of God, is the reason of our spiritual
worship, his wisdom is the reason of our submission, his holiness is the
reason of our conformity, his justice is the reason of our fear, his goodness
is the reason of our love, his truth is the reason of our trust, his grace is
the reason of our prayers, and his glory is the reason of our praises. Now here
is the flowy field for the soul to meditate in, in the freshest morning.

Thirdly, Holy thanksgivings, Psalm. 92. 2. the words are these; To show forth
thy loving kindness in the morning, and Psalm. 59. 16.
this Psalm is the song for the Sabbath, as the title informs us; indeed every
morning, but much more on the morning of Gods holy day, there should be a dew
of holy thanksgiving upon the heart of every believer.

Fourthly, Acting of graces; so the Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 147. I prevented the
dawning of the morning, and cried, I hoped in thy word. Morning g^aces like
morning stars shine brightest: David used to cast anchor upon divine truth in
the morning; he did not only meditate on it, but act his hope and confidence
in it, and this was David's work in the earliest part of the day; and this is a
rare Copy for us: How should we prevent the dawning of a Sabbath in our flights
to God, in our longings after Christ, in beginning our Sabbath-work. Judge. 21 4.
Love to God and his Ordinances, should tear the curtains open, disdain the
softness of the pillow, and betimes 1 John 1. 3.
break open our closet doors to enjoy fellowship with Pers r^m Rex unum habebat
cubi u^arem, qui idoffi ii habebu, ut mane ingressus, regi diceret; Surge o
Rex, etque ea cura, quae te curare voluit. Mosoromisdes. Plutarch.
the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ. But to conclude this particular,
Plutarch reports, That the Persian King had one of the Servants of his Chamber
every morning to come to him, and to cry to him, Rise O King and follow those
cares, which thy good genius will have thee to pursue. Let us only invert the
phrase, and instead of thy good genius, say, Gods good spirit, and it will be
applicable to our selves; Let us especially early on Gods day resolve we will
follow the traces, in which the holy spirit shall lead us.

many miles, gets up early in the morning, and so sets upon Judge 19. 8.
his Journey. The soul has a great way to travel upon the Lords day, its task
is great, and therefore its time must not run wast.

There are many duties to perform.

First, Secret duties. On the Sabbath, there are some duties which must only
be acted between God and the devout soul. A gracious heart will have private
intercourse with God. Jesus Christ went into a Mountane apart to pray, Mat. 14.
23.
and he was there alone. The Saint some times turns the Closet into a
Sanctuary, and never more fitly then on a Lords day. Our dear Lord bids us go
some times into our Chambers, Mat. 6. 6.
and shut the doors upon us. The Saints are Gods hidden ones in point of
worship; they serve God in their recluses, (...) quem vis locum occulium notat.
Par.
and private retirements, and this is an evidence of their uprightness: The
Spouse sometimes meets her beloved, and none shall be spectators of their holy
fellowship; Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus.
and upon Gods holy day, let the gracious soul set upon these several duties;

First, The reading of Gods word. The Eunuch was reading the Prophet Isaiah in
his Chariot, not only because he would lose no time, but because he would be
more serious Acts 8. 28.
in this secret duty. David compares the Word to an honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10.
and honey combs are usually in the private gardens: The same Psalmist says,
The Law was Psalm. 1. 2.
his Meditation in the night, and then surely he had few witnesses to view his
devotion. The closet door may keep out not only other people, but other
thoughts; and then we are fittest to converse with Gods Word, when we are most
intent.

Secondly, Another secret duty for the Lords day, Is holy Prayer to God, and
praising of God. Indeed prayer is a duty 1 These. 5. 17.
accommodated for all places, for all times, and all cases; but closet prayer
on the morning of a Sabbath, is like a morning star, which portends a fair day:
We read of our Savior, Mark 1. 35. that in the morning, rising up a great
while Mark 1. 35.
before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, Acts 10. 9.
and there prayed; let us go and do so likewise: And holy Peter in this
confessed, that the Disciple was not greater then his Master, for he pursued
the same practice, Acts 10. 9. Peter went up upon the house to pray about the
sixth hour. And as we must pray to God, so we must sing the praises of God in
secret: sometimes our closets must not only be our Oratories to pour out our
prayers in, but our Mount Olivets to sing Hymns of praise to the Divine
Majesty. Mat. 26. 30.
We must begin the works of Heaven in secret, which we shall be doing to
eternity in blessed Society. Thus David praised God seven times a day, and
certainly he had not every time witnesses of his Divine Exaltation. Psalm. 119.
164.


Thirdly, A third secret duty is, Holy Meditation. When the mind, that
Spiritual Be, is working, and seeking honey out of every flower: and this
piece of service, is calculated Genesis 24. ^^.
only for privacy; Company untravelling whatsoever meditation works (but of
this more largely hereafter.)

Fourthly, The last duty to be acted in secret upon the holy Sabbath, is
Self-Examination; when Conscience is both Judge, Witness and Tribunal; And in
the acting of this duty, there needs no Sessions House, but a man's own breast.
David says, when we commune with our hearts, we must Psalm. 4. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 28.
be still. There wants no noise from the world, nor from the company of others.
These two last duties, (viz.) Meditation, and Self-Examination, are most proper
for the most secret and retired places, fitter for the Closet then the Church,
the secret Chamber then the open Sanctuary; they are, as one says, actions of
the mind, and so concern a Dr. Gouge.
man's own self in particular. And these secret duties of piety should
especially be performed in the morning of a Sabbath, that the Lords day may
begin with them, and then we shall be in a good preparation for other duties.
The beginning with God thus in the morning may influence the whole Sabbath,
like the tuning of an Instrument, which makes the whole Lesson's melody the
sweeter; and indeed pure Religion, and undefiled, which the Apostle speaks of,
Jam. 1. 27. never look's so comely as on a Sabbath day; the day Jam. 1. 27.
inhances the duty, as the lovely dress does outward beauty. Thus we see there
are secret duties to be acted on a Sabbath.

Secondly, Private Duties. On Gods holy day we must not lock up our selves and
our services above in the Chamber, but we must come down into the Family, and
there the morning stars must sing together, to allude to that of Job. Job 38. 7.
Consort makes the music. The stars shine brightest in a constellation. Jesus
Christ would not be transfigured alone, but he took some to be witnesses of his
Glory; when he would Mat. 17. 1, 2. Luke 9. 18. Mat. 13. 36.
pray, his Disciples were with him; and when he would open the blessed
mysteries of the Gospel, he takes his Disciples to him. In our closets there is
indeed a meeting of thoughts, but in our houses there must be a meeting of
Relations; there must be Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, those who
are born at home, and the stranger Exodus 20 10. Comm^ni s^nctifi^^ndi S^bbathi
lege ^onstringuntur omnes ex aequo; herus, serv^^, peter, liberi, mas and
f^^mina, s^per^^res, et infer^ores. Musc.
within our gates, and all these must jointly keep Gods Sabbath in holy duties;
and no less God commands in the fourth Commandment, the Son and Daughter must
remember to keep the Sabbath holy, as well as the Parents, the Manservant and
the Maidservant, as well as the Governors of the Family, nay, the stranger
within the Gates. On the Lords day, we must by a conscionable, and constant
performance of holy duties, turn even our private house into a little Church;
and thus we shall intail Gods presence to our houses, as he vouchsafed his
blessing on the house of Obed Ed^m; we must not only act secret duties on the
Sabbath, 2 Samuel 6. 12.
but likewise Family duties. What those duties are, shall be more copiously
handled hereafter.)

Thirdly, we must act public duties on Gods holy Sabbath: we must not only
open the doors of our closets, and of our chambers, to come down into our
houses, but Ex hac com^^^i^^e tum Regnum (...). Zanch.
we must open the doors of our houses too, to meet with Gods people to
celebrate the Lords day. The Sabbath is the day wherein the Saints visit God,
and one another; they then begin that society, which shall be perfected and
eternized in Glory. David rejoiced when he went with the multitude to the House
of God. The great Apostle taught every where, in Psalm. 42. 4.
every Church, (...): He taught when the people 1 Cor. 4 17.
were called together. The Corinthians came together in one place to eat the
Lords Supper. Nay, Christ himself will declare 1 Cor. 11. 20.
the name and praises of God to his Brethren in the midst Luke 8 19.
of the Church. We must therefore serve God on the Sabbath in the Assemblies of
Gods people; not in our houses only, but in the Church, (i. e.) in the
Congregation of the faithful. Moses speaks of a holy Convocation, Exodus 12.
16. Exodus 12. 16.
and the Psalmist makes mention of the Assembly of the Saints, Psalm. 89. 7.
nay, the promise is intailed* on the Congregation of Gods people, Isa. 4. 5.
The omission of this our assembling of our Isa. 4. 5.
selves, is by the Apostle sharply rebuked, Heb. 10. 25. One commenting on this
Text, has diverse things remarkable, Heb. 10. 25.
and worthy of our observation; As

First, By this assembling, the Apostle intends no other but the meeting of
Believers to hear the Word of God, and Per collectionem hanc Apost caetus
ecclesiae, et conventus fidelium, ad sacram synaxin; ad verb^m dei, p^e^esque
publicas intelligit. Secundo, Hos caetus vult Apost ut Ch^istiani fidem
profi^^^ntur, gratiarum actiones perso^ent, et se invi^em excitent ad veritatem
et bona opera. Ter^^ illi catus, et mutui congressus mire sovent fidem, quae in
secess^ et separatione diuturniori l^ngue scit. Quarto, Qui ecclesiae ^ae^^s
negligunt, et deserum, facile urgente perse^utione, ecclesiam ipsam, et fidem
Christi deserunt, et abnegant. Alap.
to pour out their prayers before God.

Secondly, The Apostle injoynes the Assemblies, that Christians might meet
publicly to profess their faith in Christ, and to sing the praises of God, to
stir up one another to love and good works.

Thirdly, The same Author observes, that these Companies and Assemblies do
exceedingly foment and cherish faith, which by a perpetual recluse and
separation, quickly would languish and be infeebled. Nay,

Fourthly, He observes, That those who forsake the Assemblies of Gods people,
will easily in the urgency and heat of persecution desert the Church of Christ;
thus far that learned man. And what a rare promise does the Apostle mention, 2
Cor. 6. 16. the words are these; For ye are the 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them, and I will be their God, and they shall Lev. 26. 12.
be my people. Christ when he was upon the Earth, he goes into the Synagogue on
the Sabbath day, Mar. 1. 21. and Mark 1. 21.
taught the people. Paul and his Company go into the Synagogue on the Sabbath,
and Paul preaches there: Nay, Acts 20. 7.
afterward Paul preaches to the Christian Assembly in a house on the Lords
day, Acts 20. 7. In a word, where does Christ walk but in the midst of his
candlesticks, which are the Churches? Rev. 1. 20. Cornelius Alapide observes,
that Rev. 1. 20. Alapide.
holy Ignatius, who was the Disciple, and follower of the Apostle Paul,
advises in his Epistles those of Smyrna and Ephesus, to frequent the meetings
of the Saints, and gives this reason, because they will wonderfully confirm us
in the faith: so then the whole duty of a Believer on the Lords day, lies not
in the Closet, or the Family, but likewise in the Societies of Gods people met
for divine worship. Coals put together make the warmer fire. When the
Christians were Assembled Acts 10. 44.
to hear Peter, then the Holy Ghost fell upon them. The Saints in Glory are the
Assembly and Church of the firstborn, Heb. 12. 23. and therefore we must act
public duties on Heb. 12. 23.
Gods holy day in the public Assemblies: (But now what these public duties
are, and how we must demean our selves in the performance of them, shall be
more largely discussed hereafter.)

rise early on the Sabbath; for as we have many Duties to perform, so we have
many Graces to act. The Sabbath is both the field to exercise Grace in, and the
treasury 2 Timothy 2. 1.
to supply grace with. Ordinances are both the breathing, Gr^^i^ non soli^ ^est
s^v^r ^^i, (...) q^od ex eo s^q^^t^r. Alap.
and the breasts of grace. In prayer we act, and we augment our graces; and so
in other Ordinances. The Sabbath is the Believers resting day, but Graces
working day; it is love which sweetens the work of a Sabbath; Faith makes
eff^ctual the Ordinances of a Sabbath; Repentance reconciles H^b. 11. 6. Jer
31. 19, 20. Romans 12. 11. Isa. 57. 15. H^b 4. 2. Jam. 5. 16.
the God of the Sabbath; Zeal makes acceptable the duties of a Sabbath;
Humility ingages Gods presence on a Sabbath. We cannot hear the Word profitably
on this holy day, without we mingle it with Faith, nor address our selves to
God in prayer, without we inflame the duty with fire, with the fire of zeal. In
our prayers, we must get our affections fired by the Holy Ghost, that they may
flame up toward God in Devout and Religious ascents. Brokenhearted, and
penitent Isa. 23. 16.
believers must meet with Christ at a Sacrament; A contrite heart is the
fittest company for a Crucified Savior. Ephesians. 5. 19.
In singing of Psalms, there must be holy joy, we must make August. in lib.
confess. Deplorat, and dolet, q^^d concentibus musi^is plus attentionis,
adhibuit, quam quae sub ill^s prof^reb^ntur. Zanch.
melody in our hearts; Holy affection must make the reading of the Word savoury
and saving to us; The Sabbath then, without we act our Graces on God, on
Christ, on the Word, and in the Ordinances, is only a day of theatrical shows,
and spiritual pegeantries, which when it is over, leaves the soul empty of any
purchase or satisfaction: And if so many graces must be drawn out into act, we
had need take the wings of the morning, and speed to our Sabbath employments,
which are so numerous and important.

faculties and parts to employ on the Sabbath; All that is within us, and all
that is without us, must serve and praise the Lord; every part of our bodies,
and Psalm. 109. 30.
every faculty of our souls, the whole man is but a reasonable Romans 12. 1.
sacrifice to be offered this holy festival.

First, Our outward man; the tongue must be employed in prayer, the ear in
attention, the heart in devotion, the eye in speculation, the knee in
submission. And

Secondly, Our inward man, the understanding must be improved to drink in
truth, the will to entertain truth, the Recta ratio dictat, deum mag^^ interna
fide, spe, pietate, amore, et puritate mentis, quam externis corporis
ceremoniis colendum esse. Alap.
memory to retain and record truth, and our affections have a threefold office:

First, To espouse the Word, by receiving it in the love thereof, 2 These. 2.
10. A careful attention opens the door to 2 These. 2. 10.
the word, but a lively affection opens the heart to the word. The preaching of
the Gospel lays a treble injunction upon us;

1. To receive it. 2. To love it. 3. To live in it: But the
Second office of our affections is to heat our prayers; it is love makes that
sacrifice to smoke and flame. And James 5. 16.


Thirdly, To scale Heaven in longing for a better Sabbath, more durable, more
sweet, more full and superlative. Psalm. 63. 1.


many persons to converse withal on the Lords day:

First, We must converse with God. The Sabbath is called the Lords day, not
only as it is the commemoration of Rev. 1. 10.
his glorious resurrection, and his appointment and institution, but likewise
because our business is with him on that day; then more especially our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Our praying on a
Sabbath, 1 John 1. 3.
is the pouring out of our souls into Gods bosom, our In Patrea, et in
Christo, sunt omnia verae ecclesiae bona. Zanch.
hearing is only receiving, and being acquainted with Gods mind; in Ordinances
we wait upon God; in the Sacrament we feed upon Christ; in our Services we do
homage to God; in our Praises we pay tribute to God. The Sabbath is the souls
meeting day with God, its spiritual Mart, in which it traficks, and drives its
trade with Heaven. Take away God from a Sabbath, and the Ordinances are dry and
parcht; duties are heartless and unprofitable, the Sanctuary is filled with
emptiness, the people and professors hunt after a Isa. 55. 2.
shadow, and at last shall catch that which is not bread. All our addresses on
this holy day are to God, our delights are in God, our expectations are from
God, our fellowship and sweet communion is with God; and therefore holy David
Psalm. 63. 2.
speaks of Gods Power and Glory in the Sanctu^ry, and makes its only request to
behold the beauty of the Lord in the Temple, Psalm. 27. 4.
and magnifies a days opportunity in Gods house. The Psalm. 84. 10.
Spouse enquires where Christ feeds, and where he makes his Can. 1. 7.
flock to rest at noon. Our great and principal business is with God on the
Sabbath.

Secondly, We must converse with the Ministers of God; they are on this day the
stars to guide us, Rev. 1. 10. they Rev. 1. 10.
are the Stewards to provide for us, and give us our meat in due season, Luke
12. 42. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 1 Pet. 4. 10. they Luke 12. 42.
are the salt to season us, Mat. 5. 13. they are the wise Duo docet Apostolus,
unum communionem, cum Apostolis, ideoq eorum Doctrinam eo spectare, ut omnes
unum fiamus cum Christo, and ejus Patre. Zanch. 1 Cor. 3. 10. Mal. 2. 7.
builders to edify us in the increases of God; their lips preserve knowledge;
their feet appear beautiful in bringing the glad-tidings of Peace; their voice
is sweet to the hungry soul. On the Sabbath we must wait on the Ministry of
Gods faithful Ambassadors.

Thirdly, We must converse with the Saints of God on his holy day; then Gods
people must gather together, and pursue Romans 10. 15.
a joint interest. Public Assemblies adorn the Sabbath. Cant. 2. 14.
Grapes are best in clusters. There are many strings to the 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Lute, which is the sweetest Instrument. Flocks are most pleasant when gathered
together in one company; and Armies most puissant, when kept in a body, their
dissipation is both their rout and ruin. Christ's sheep must flock together
Suggerit Apost. constantiae adm^nicula: Primo, Vtament, et diligenter
frequentent caetus Ecclesiasticos. Secundo, Vt se mutuo ad veritatem tuendam
cohortationibus excitent; maxim qui firmiores sunt infirmiores juvent,
confirment, et hortentur ad constantiam in fide. Deus enim publicis presentiam
suam et eruditionem promisit. In Ecclesiae congressi^us doctrina fidei
reperitur, et declaratur ad singulorum aedificationem et preces pro constantid
public funduntur ad deum, quas juxta promissionem exaudit. Par.
on Christ's holy day: Paraeus gives us four solid Reasons for it, which I shall
mention for their substantial worth.

First, The Congregating of Gods people (especially on the Lords day) is the
soder of unity; like many stones so artificially laid, that they appear all but
one stone. Every Congregation is a little body, whereof Christ is the head:
Unity is the strength and beauty of the Saints; nothing so preserves it, as
frequent and holy Assemblings.

Secondly, It is the preservative of love. Many sticks put together kindle a
flame, and make a ^laze. Frequent visits multiply friendships. In Heaven, where
all the glorified Saints meet together, how ardent is their love! Absence, and
seldom associations beget strangeness, as between God and us, so between one
another. To meet to worship the same God, is the best way to attain to the same
heart; like the Primitive Saints, who were all of one company, and all of one
mind, Acts 2. 46. Acts 2. 46.


Thirdly, God has made his promises to the Assemblies of his Saints, Mat. 18.
20. 2 Cor. 6. 16. He will not neglect a Mat. 18. 20.
weeping Hannah, who prays and sobs alone, 1 Samuel 1. 13. but will give her not
only a Child, but a Samuel: But yet God will create upon the Assemblies of his
people a cloud, which was the sign of his presence, Isa. 4. 5. And Isa. 4. 5.


Fourthly, The prayers of the faithful Congregation receive Deus quasi columna
ignis praefulget, et ostendit suis viam salutis; et quasi nubes calig^rosa
obumbrat, refrigerat, et proteg^t eos ab aellutentationis. Basil. Jon 2 7, 8,
9, 10
strength from their union. When all Niniveh entreated the Lord, and put on
sackcloth, God repents himself of that intended and threatened evil, and puts
his Sword into the scabbard, though drawn by an open denuntiation of Judgment,
Jon. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. Prayer is the souls battery of Heaven; and when these
petitions are the common breathings of the whole Assembly, the force must needs
be the stronger, and the answer must needs be the surer. Though a file of
Soldiers cannot take the City, an Army may. But

Fourthly, We must converse with our Families upon Gods holy day; then Parents
should draw out their softest bowels toward their Childrens souls, and
Masters discharge their most faithful duty toward their Servants eternity:
But of this more hereafter.

rise early on a Sabbath, for we have many good things to pursue, and usually
the richest lading requires the longest voyages; where we look for great gain,
we must spend much time. Now this holy day is Gods market day for the weeks
provision, wherein he will have us to come to him, and buy of him without
silver or money, the Bread of Angels, Rev. 22. 1. Isa. 25. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 2. Rev.
3. 18.
the Water of Life, the Wine of the Sacraments, and the Milk of the Word to
feed our souls, tried Gold to enrich our Faith, precious Eye Salve to heal our
spiritual blindness, and the white raiment of Christ's Righteousness to cover
our shameful nakedness. And now all things being laid together, that has been
suggested, how should both interest and duty awaken us right early on the Lords
day, for these holy pursutes, that no time be drowned and lost in unnecessary
sleep and sluggishness.

us betimes on a Sabbath, is seriously to consider the heats of worldly men.
With what wakeful diligence do they prosecute the meat that perishes; John 6.
27.
they rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of carefulness, and
all to grasp the shadow of a few flying and Psalm. 127. 2.
dying enjoyments, when, as one says, we should be careful to rise sooner on
this day then on other days, by how much the service of God is to be preferred
before earthly business: There is no Master so good as the Lord is, and in the
end no work shall be better rewarded then his service. Dr. Twisse Dr. Twisse
Moral. of the Sabbath. 147.
Reports, that at Geneva they have a Sermon at four of the clock in the morning
on the Lords day for the Servants; and Bishop Lake wished, That such a course
was general, as was in his Majesty's Court in his time, to have a Sermon in the
morning for the Servants on the Sabbath day. How did this holy man breath after
holy Services on the morning of a Sabbath? And let every one of us say, seek
the Lord, O my Soul, seek him early on his holy day: Let us do as Mary Mat. 28.
1. Mark 16. 2. John 20. 1.
Magdalen, she was early up to seek him whom her soul loved, she was last at
the Cross, and first at the Sepulcher, in the dawning, while it was yet dark
very early in the morning, say the Evangelists: O that our love to Christ could
keep pace with hers. Shall we love the World better then Christ? O that we were
as wise for our souls, as we are for our bodies! Let not sleep, that devourer
of time, beguile us of our golden hours in the morning of a Sabbath, when we
might have the softest and sweetest converse^ with God. Let the sinful
sluggard, who sleeps with the Sun beams in his face this day, remember the
saying of Augustine, If the August.
Sun could speak, how roundly might it salute thee with this reproof, I
labored more then thou did yesterday, and yet I am risen before thee to day:
But this is too low an Argument, behold the Sun of Righteousness is risen, let
us not sleep as do others, but say and sing with the Church, Isa. Isa. 26. 9.
Sanctus ad beatos aspirans, dicit, se velle jugiter deum, mente, et animo
gerere, ill^m desiderare, tam nocte, tam interdiu. Psalm. 139. 9.
26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, and with my spirit
within me will I seek thee early. In a word, it must needs enforce us to a
blush, to think that the Labourer who toils in his earthly employments, should
take the wings of the morning to muddle in the World, and we should let the
morning fly away by our sloth and carelessness, and not overtake it to meet
with God upon his own holy day.

the gracious soul will long to be with God. The Spouse sought Christ upon her
bed, and the Saint will leave his bed betimes on a Sabbath to Cant. 3. 1.
seek Jesus Christ; the Spouse would pursue her beloved in Sponsa interim
evigilans, speciebus illis non satis discussis, motu brachiis expansis, spon
sum complaecti conata fuit. Del rio.
the night, and the Saint will not omit to follow hard after the Lord Jesus in
the morning, as soon as she is awake she is with God, especially on his own
day, Psalm. 139. 18. Our heart is where our treasure is, as our Savior speaks,
Luke 12. 34. And if Christ be our treasure, our spiritual love will prevail
against our carnal sloth. Let us take notice of holy David, with what ecstasy
of love he was transplanted, Psalm. 63. 1. O God, thou art my God, early will I
seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry
Psalm. 139. 18. Luke 12. 34.
and thirsty land where no water is. Where there are thirsts after God, there
will be early enquiries for him. The gracious Psalm. 63. 1.
Soul pants after God, as the Heart pants after the water brooks: Now the
thirsty Heart will not be so taken with Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
the green and pleasant Grass where she is lodged, so as to forbear the brooks
which must quench her thirst; nor will the Saint be so toyled and fettered with
sleep, or sloth, so as Psalm. 122. 1.
to suspend his communion with God on his holy Sabbath, he will tear those
drowsy withs, his thirsts after Christ will admit of no delay.

Nature it self calls us up betimes on Gods blessed day, for then we are more
fit and fresh, more lively and vigorous for holy and spiritual duties. Grace
does not only command us, but Nature invites us; and surely we should serve
God on his own holy Sabbath, as David danced before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 14.
withal our might. Nature and experience teaches us, that our memory is
quickest, our senses are readiest, our natural powers ablest in the morning;
our mind then is free from evil, vain and worldly thoughts; our memory is
renewed, M^ne animus est apt^or ad audiendum et cogitandum rationalta, eaque
quae Dei sunt. Hier.
and has recovered far greater strength, our senses are not inveigled with
terrene and outward things, our natural powers being then revived, have their
greatest liberty; then our affections are disingaged, and divine things may
first attract and seize upon them; and these things being weighed in the
balance, how necessary is it, early in the morning of a Sabbath, that the
first thing presented to our minds, should be the beholding of God, the first
thing presented to our thoughts should be the Word of God, and the first thing
presented to our affections, should be the enjoyment of God. One well observes,
that in Scripture Language, to do a thing in the morning, and to do a thing
diligently, are the same thing, Psalm. 101. 8. and so Prove. 7. Psalm. 101. 8.
Prove. 7. 15.
15. illustrates this; where the Harlot tells the young man that she came forth
to meet him, and diligently to seek his (...)
face; the Original Word there, is, to seek thy face in the morning: So then to
get up early in the morning on the Sabbath, is the emblem, and the evidence of
our diligence. We have a saying amongst us, that the Morning is a friend to the
Muses, (i. e.) the morning is a good studying time; I am sure it is true, that
the Morning is a great friend to the Exodus 23. 19. Dicuntur primitiae, primi
fructus frugum, ubi non int^lligimus primos dignitate, pretio, vel bonitate,
sed origin, et tempore quod primo maturescit. Riv. in Exodus
Graces, the Morning is a good praying time, in Exodus 23. 19. The first of the
first fruits of the Land, was to be brought to the house of the Lord. God would
not only have the first fruits, but the first of the first fruits; if there
were any sooner ripe then others, God would have them: So God will have the
first of the first fruits of the Sabbath, the very earliest time of the
morning; the morning blushes are most beautiful in his sight. In the morning,
Nature renews its strength like the Eagle, Psalm. 103. 3. The eye is more fit to
contemplate, the tongue more fit to pray, the knee more supple Psalm. 103. 3.
to bend, the understanding more lively to speculate; we are freshest in the
first setting out of the race, and we run with the greatest liveliness. The
traveling beast foams, and is rampant when it first sets out in the morning.
Nature it self opens our curtains betimes in the morning, especially on Gods
holy day.

rise up early to pursue their pleasures. Young Men, as holy Mr. Greenham
observes, will rise up early to Marriages, to Feastings, to go a Maying, and
will not this be our shame, that for holy and heavenly exercises, to serve the
Lord in spirit and truth, we will redeem, no time, whereby Joh. 4. 24.
the glorious Sabbath may be better sanctified? Can carnal delights have a more
forcible influence upon us, then spiritual? Isa. 25. 6.
Shall the dregs be more lushious and sweet then Convi^ium Eucharisticum
corporis et sanguinis Christi, summae sanctorum sunt deliciae. Ruffin. et Leo
Castrius.
the Wine on the Lees? All divine complacencies the soul may find in Gospel
Ordinances: Shall delight in the Creature more enthrall our desires, then
delight in God, who is the sweetest Paradise to a gracious soul? Shall Young
Men rise early to gather May, and not we prevent the dawning of the Sabbath to
gather Manna? to feast with Christ? to let our thoughts wheel about toward
Heaven, and take Corpus in refectionis delectatione resolvitur, cor ad inane
gaudium relaxatur. Greg. Moral.
their flight within the veil? Let not a dalliance, nor a merry meeting more
engage the carnal part of the World, then the Lords feast of fat things, the
set banquets of his holy Sabbath, necessitates our most early flights after
that blessed prey.

How early will men rise to prosecute their sinful designs. The Persians
adore the rising Sun, are early up for their Idolatry. The Prophet observes,
that the Drunkards Isa. 5 11. Ebrietas certe est intempestiva, quae est
matutina contra Apostolum 1 These. 5, 6.
rise up early in the morning to follow strong drink, and continue till night,
till Wine inflame them; they are early up, and are unwearied in their sins, and
cursed profuseness. The Israelites rose early to evidence their madness and
their folly, to offer burnt offerings and peace offerings to a Golden Calf, and
to eat and drink and rise up to play; as usually Exodus 32. 6.
superstition ushers in profaneness. The Papists will break their sleep, that
more timely they may have their Masses, Superstitio, et omnu Idololatria, est
profus^, qui ea in^aleseunt, nulla p^rcunt sumptibus, veros dei cultores pudeat
tam ^arcos esse, cum agitur de regno dei promovendo. Rivet.
and Popish practices; and Heretics will attend on their vain Revelations, and
will recover some time by early rising; their Enthusiasmes and fantastic
dreams shall snatch them out of their beds betimes. God makes his complaint
against the Jews, that they rose early to corrupt their doings, to entangle
themselves in sin, and provocation. Saul sends messengers to slay David in the
morning, he will take the earliest time of the day, for murder and cruelty.
The Philistines rise early every morning to enter their Idolatrous Temple to
worship their Dagon; and shall not we infinitely more rise early on the Lords
day to worship Jehovah? Shall Dagon Zeph. 3. 7.
have more honor then the Ark? Surely the sinners vehemence 1 Samuel 19. 11. 1 Samuel 5. 3, 4.
might justly shame us into early piety.

CHAP. XIII. How we must spend the morning of a Sabbath.
ANd now when our zeal has made its way through the curtains, and raised us
from our beds and our down, let us set upon Sabbath work; let us betimes wait
for the visits of Christ in the performance of the duties of a Sabbath: Now
especially God waits to be gracious, but it must be in a way of duty. Holy
duties they are the paths to Isa. 30. 18.
meet Christ in, the road of Divine mercy, they are the Garden wherein the
Spouse meets her Beloved: Therefore in the morning let us set upon those sacred
services, which becomes Gods holy day. Indeed by private duties before the
public, our spirits are made more tuneable; and by private duties after the
public, Gods Ordinances are made more profitable: The morning of a Sabbath is
but the spring of a Sabbath, which is the sweetest and most pleasant season for
the soul to converse with God; then the soul seems to be most green and
freshest, then duties seem to be most melodious and musical, and then Grace
more delightfully buds forth, and is exerted with the greatest satisfaction and
beauty, Exodus 34. 4.
In the morning Moses went into the Mount to meet with God. In the morning the
Apostles went into the Temple Acts 5. 21.
to declare the Gospel. In the morning early, Joshuah Josh. 6. 12.
and the Priests take up the Ark of God, which was the testimony of the divine
presence. Job rose up early in the morning, Job 1. 5.
and offered burnt offerings. The poor multitude early Luke 21. 38.
in the morning wait upon the Ministry of Jesus Christ, they wait for the
morning dews of the Gospel, they are the sweetest, they are the freshest, they
are more natural, and most seasonable. Christ preaches his morning Lecture to
his flocking John 8. 2.
and numerous Auditors. In a word, the performance Commendat nobis, et domini
et populi diligentiam, hujus quam audiendi, illius quam docendi sedulitate
declaraverit; sed iterum diluculo venit in templum. Musc. in Joh. 8.
of holy duties, in the morning of Gods holy day, they work a threefold good.

prepare the heart. The sluggish heart must be rouzed and awakened in private
before it can see its beloved in the public: It must be breathed by some
divine duties, that it may be more fresh for the public administrations. Bells
must be raised before they be rung to make the pleasing music. The flowers
must be watered, either by the shower 1 Samuel 7. 3. 1 Chro. ^9. 18. Rev. 21. 2
or the watering pot, before they lift up their pleasant heads, and cast their
wonted perfume. The morning duties of a Sabbath, they put the heart into a
serious and heavenly Ante nuptias sponsa ornatur, et paratur sponso suo. Par.
frame, and make it fit company for Jesus Christ. When I have prayed in my
family, I am tuned and wound up the more, for that duty in the Assembly of the
Saints.

the discharge of conscience. A conscientious person cannot waste the morning
of a Sabbath, that is destinated to holy service. Among the Jews they had
their morning Number. 28. 4, 9, 10.
sacrifices on their Sabbaths. There is no part of a Sabbath must lie fallow,
especially in the morning. On the morning Mat. 28. 1, 6.
early Christ rose for our salvation, and on the morning of this holy day, we
must rise for his service. Christ calls himself the morning star, Rev. 22. 16.
And when is it fittest to Rev. 22. 16. Christus exoriens in cordibus nostris
caliginem mentibus nostris pellit: Sicut Lucifer claritate stellas alias
antecedens, et ante solemn oriens, instantis diei praenuncia tenebras nocturnas
dispellit.
behold this star, but on the morning of his holy day? The Christus est stella
matutina non mod^ praesentis, vitae noctem rad^s suis nun^ dis^^tit, sed etiam
in matutina communis resurrectionis luce, omnibus sanctis sese conspicuum
exhibebit. Andr.
morning of a Sabbath is the time for our first salutes of Heaven, for the
dressing of our souls, for the trimming of our Lamps, for the imitation of our
Savior in his early rising; for the seasoning of our Families. The morning is
as current coin as the rest of the day, it is more congruous to Nature, as
congruous to Grace, an^ whosoever shall by his sinful negligence let that part
of the Sabbath fly away, shall hardly overtake the blessing the subsequent day.
It is not without remark, that Christ is called the morning star, Rev. 22. 16.
and the Rising Sun, Mal. 4. 2, both to denote our early approaches to him.

Ensurers of spiritual gain. It is in spiritual, Rev. 22. 16. Mal. 4. 2.
as it is in secular affairs; The most thriving Husbands, get up early in the
morning, and do much business before the shop is open; and so the thriving
Christians get up early on the Sabbath, and so spend the morning as that they
have done much of their work before the Sanctuary door is open, or they meet
with the more public Assemblies: What views might thou have of God by Holy
Meditation? what smiles, and answers of Love from Christ by ardent and servent
Prayers? what heart warmings by holy Discourse on the morning of a Sabbath?
Then the first winds and brizes of Joh. 3. 8.
the spirit blow, and we may weigh Anchor, the more happily for the whole
ensuing day. Joseph's Brethren so minded Genesis 44. 3, 4.
their Journey, that they set forward as soon as the morning was light. The
Sabbath day is our traveling day toward Canaan, and therefore we must
dispatch much of our Journey in the morning, we should do, as it was prophesied
of Benjamin, devour the prey in the morning; that prey Genesis 49. 27. Hos. 6. 3.
which God has provided for those who right early sanctify his holy Sabbath;
and we should do this the rather, for it may be with us, as once it was with
the people of Israel, Nunb. 9. 21.
that the cloud was taken up in the morning: Now the cloud was the sign of Gods
presence, and if the cloud be taken up, how can we expect a shower of mercy?
David says, 2 Samuel 23. 4.
that the Lord is as the light of the morning when the Sun rises; when then is
it more suitable to meet these bright appearances, but on the morning,
especially on his own day. 1 Kings 18. 26, 29.
The very Priests of Baal called upon their Idols from morning until evening;
and afterward prophesied, until the time of the evening sacrifice; and shall
not we call upon our God, the living God, from morning until noon, and so to
the evening sacrifice, especially on that day which is a day of worship and
sacrifice? The wis^man observes, it is a principle agreeable to Nature, to ^^w
our seed in the morning; Eccles. 11. 6. Isa. 17. 11.
and what are our holy duties but this seed, which will spring up in Heavenly
rewards if piously sown? and the fittest Cant. 6. ^0.
time for them is the morning, especially the first day of the week, Our
Sabbath, which is the morning of the week: Sicut auroram, Christum inveniemus
paratum. Del rio.
Christ speaking of the Spouse, Cant. 6. 10. asks the question, who is she
that looks forth as the morning, not only denoting the Spouses freshness and
beauty, but the time and season for spiritual communications between Christ and
the Spouse. But now the main Query will be, what are those duties which are
incumbent upon us on the morning of a Sabbath? To Reply therefore to this
Query, I shall instance first in Meditation; Meditation is the souls flight
toward Heaven, and therefore it had need take the wings of Psalm. 139. 9.
the morning. When thou have broken thy sleep, begin the Sabbath with holy
Meditation, that is the morning sacrifices of the mind.

CHAP. XIV. The Benefits and Excellency of Holy Meditation.
MEditation is a most notable piece of Gods service, the very life and strength
of all other Duties, and without which, all duties are infeebled, full of
weakness and infirmity. Meditatio est nutrix orationis. Ger.
Meditation is the Nurse which feeds our prayers, it is the Nail which fastens
the Word, it is one hand that puts on the wedding Garment to fit us for the
supper of the Lord. Meditation it is the spiritual silkworm which works (...),
haec cura, haec satage, his juge studium, et corporis, et animae vires impende,
et intend.
rare and curious silk, rich goods out of its own bowels. It is the travel of
the understanding, the souls Hue and Cry after Divine things; it is the fixing
of the heart upon God, or some thing of God; it is the stop and pause of the
mind from the impertinent wanderings and rovings of it: In a word, Meditation is
the randezvous, and trooping together of the thoughts in some spiritual matter,
as Sunbeams are Psalm. 119. 15.
gathered together in a burning glass. If we meditate upon the Word, or any
truth therein, then our thoughts flock together, 1 Timothy 4. 15.
and center in the divine truth, in this spiritual object. Now for the
canvasing of this Excellent Duty, I shall briefly open what may conduce to the
fullest discovery of it:

First, Let us view Meditation in the nature of it, and it may be thus
described. It is the souls retiring of it self, that Quatuor tibi meditanda
reor, quae sub te, quae circate, quae supra te, et teipsum, a te meditatio,
inchoet, ne frustra extendaris in alia, te neglecto. Quid tibi prodest, si
universum mundum luereris, si teipsum perdas? Et si sapiens sis, etc. Bernard.
Consid. ad Eugenium. Mr. Greenham in his tract of meditation.
by a serious and solemn thinking upon God, or some thing divine, the heart may
be raised up to heavenly affections: Some refer this holy duty chiefly to the
understanding, but others draw it nearer to the memory; as one describes
Meditation thus; That it is the exercise of the mind, whereby we calling our
selves to remembrance, that which we know, we do further debate of it, with our
own souls, reasoning about it, and applying it to our selves, that we may make
use of it in our practice, and so it frames our affections accordingly. Holy
Greenham observes, in Meditation two parts of the soul are busied:

First, The Memory, remembering some thing heard or read;

Secondly, The understanding, gathering some thing upon that which is
remembered. Now

First, Meditation is a retired duty. A Christian when he Meditation a retired
duty.
goes to meditate, he must seclude himself from the World; the affairs of this
life make so much noise, that they drown the sweet, though secret music of
meditation. Holy Isaac Mat. 14. 23.
retires into the field to meditate: there must be a necessary sequestration
Genesis 24. 63.
of our selves from every impertinent and intruding object, if we will pursue
this holy service of Meditation; this duty is chamber, nay, closet practice:
The sweet Manna the soul feeds upon, when there is no spectator of its banquet.
When Zacheus would see Christ, he climbs Luke 19. 3, 4.
up into the Sycamore tree to see him; so when we would see God, we must get
out of the crowd of worldly business, Si sapiens sis, deest tibi ad sapientiam,
si tibi non fueris, Quantum vero; Noveris licet omnia mysteria, noveris lata
terrae, alta coeli et profunda maris, si temetipsum non noveris, eris similis
aedificanti, sine fundamento, ruinam, non structuram faciens. Bern.
we must climb up into the tree by retiredness of Meditation. St. Bernard when
he came to the Church door, he used to say, Stay here all my worldly thoughts,
that I may converse with God in the Temple; so say to thy self, I am now going
to meditate, O all ye vain thoughts stay behind, come not near. When thou
ascendest the mount of meditation, take heed that the world do not follow thee
at thy heels. Indeed meditation is an inward and secret duty, the soul retires
its self into the closet, and bids farewell to all impertinent extravagancies
which may discompose its privacy, and takes a view of those things which are
within its self. Meditation is an invisible duty to the eye of the world, and
therefore carnal men do relish it.

Serious Duty, and it is one of the noblest works a Christian can perform;
Reason then is in its exaltation. When the soul does meditate, it puts forth
the Meditation is a serious duty.
most judicious and rational acts; then is the soul most like to God, who
spends eternity in contemplating his own essence, Psalm. 77. 12.
and glorious attributes. When the Christian meditates he practices an
imitation of Divine Majesty. 1 Timothy 4. 15.


sublime Duty. It is an exercise of the understanding, it is not a duty in
which we converse with Qualis illic coelestium regnorum voluptas sine timore
moriendi cum aeternitate vivendi. Cypr.
drossie things; meditation properly sets upon spiritual things, upon spiritual
objects, spiritual truths, spiritual doctrines: David meditates on Gods Law.
Meditation pitches upon the joys of Heaven, the great account man must give,
the defiling nature of sin, the extremities of hell, and on objects of the like
nature. Psalm. 119. 97. Meditation a sublime duty.


Meditation is a fixed duty. It is not a cursory work. Man's thoughts naturally
labor with a great inconsistency; but meditation chains them, and fastens them
upon some spiritual object. The Soul when it meditates lays a command
Meditation a fixed duty. Josh. 1. 8.
mand on it self, that the thoughts which are otherwise flitting and feathery,
should fix upon its object; and so this duty is very advantageous. As we know a
Garden which is watered with sudden showers is more uncertain in its fruit,
then when it is refreshed with a constant stream; so when our thoughts are some
times on good things, and then run off, when they only take a glance of a holy
object, and then flit away, there is not so much fruit brought into the soul.
In meditation then, there must be a fixing of the heart upon the object, a
steeping the thoughts, as holy David, Psalm. 108. 1. O Lord, my heart is fixed.
We must view the Psalm. 108. 1.
holy object presented by meditation, as a Limner, who views some curious
piece, and carefully heeds every shade, every line and color; as the Virgin
Mary kept all these Luke 2. 19.
things, and pondered them in her heart. Indeed meditation (...), dicite de
aliquo secum dissertante. Grot. in locum.
is not only the busying the thoughts, but the centering of them, not only
the employing of them, but the staking them down upon some spiritual affair.
When the soul, meditating on some thing divine, says as the Disciples in the
transfiguration, Mat. 17. 4. It is good to be here. Mat. 17. 4.


defined, I now come to distinguish meditation from some things which looks
very like it: There are some duties which have a great resemblance, and yet
differ from meditation; those duties and meditation they are like similar
complexions, there is need of a familiarity to distinguish between them.

Solemn Meditation (the duty we treat of) differs from occasional; as if one
heard the clock strike, he presently may think with himself, what thought have
I had of God this hour, I am one hour nearer the Grave, and it lies in Gods
bosom whether I shall live another hour; such occasional meditations, are
things only in transitu, in a short Psalm. 31. 15.
and sweet passage; and as one observes, the subject of occasional meditation
arises very frequently from things artificial, civil or natural, indeed any
thing we see or hear: But the objects of solemn meditation, are only things
spiritual and divine. Occasional meditation is when the soul spiritualizes any
object, when the understanding is like an Alymbeck which distills some thing
from every thing; this is that spiritual Chemistry which turns any metal it
meets with into Gold. Our blessed Savior was an admirable example of this, He
drew spiritual matter from natural objects; from the peoples desirousness of
the Loaves, he sends them to seek the meat which endures to everlasting life;
and so the Gospel John 6. 27.
is full of Parables, and indeed a Christian should see some thing of God in
all things, and all things most eminently in God; every stream should lead us
to the fountane; all things below should be the pedestal to raise the soul
higher: A good Christian, I say, may from every emergence and occurrence,
extract matter of meditation. To instance in a few particulars, when we look up
to the Heavens, and see (...).
them resplendent with light, we may raise this meditation; if the footstool
be so glorious, what is the Throne, where God himself sits? Monica, Augustines
Mother, standing one day, and seeing the Sun shine, raised this meditation, Oh,
if the Sun be so bright, what is the Light of Gods presence? When you hear
music that delights the senses, presently raise this meditation, what is the
music of a good Conscience? Ignat. Epist. ad Philad.
Nay, rather what is the music of the Bride Chamber? When you are dressing
your selves in the morning, awaken your meditation, and think thus; Have I been
dressing 1 Pet. 3 5.
the hidden man of the heart? 1 Pet. 3. 5. Have I looked 2 Cor. 5. 1.
my face in the glass of Gods Word? I have put on my clothes, but have I put on
my Christ? When you sit down Luke 14. 15.
to dinner, let your meditation feed upon this first course, how blessed are
they that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of 2 Cor. 5. 1. Quid est vita, nisi
meditatio mortis,
God? What a Love-feast shall there be in Glory, when none but friends, and the
Bride-grooms guests shall be admitted? When you go to bed at night, meditate of
the putting off the Tabernacle of Clay, the earthly clothes of your body, and 2
Cor. 5. 10.
lying down in the bed of the Grave. When you see the Dic dormituro, non
expergisces amplius? Dic experrecto, non potes dormire amplius. ^en.
Judge go to the Assizes, meditate on the last Judgment, when we shall all
stand before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Indeed every thing
might feed the meditations of a Saint, who is the curious Alchymist, who can
spiritualize every presented object: But all these are occasional John 4. 7,
10, 13, 14.
meditations, and differ from that meditation which is solemn and deliberate;
(which is the subject discourse of this present Chapter.)

Meditation differs from study: Indeed the Students life looks like meditation,
but it varies from it:

First, Meditation and study differ in the subject; wicked men study, and it
may be more then Godly men, but wicked men study only, Godly men meditate; It
is one character of 1 Psalm. 2.
a Godly man, to meditate on Gods Law day and night.

Secondly, They differ in their nature. One well observes, Study is a work of
the brain, Meditation of the heart. Study sets the invention on work, but
meditation sets the desires and affections on work.

Thirdly, They differ in their Objects. Study is of all manner of things,
whether Natural, Civil or Mathematical; Study pursues Aristotle as well as
Moses: but Meditation is only of matters which concern our everlasting
welfare.

The matters we most study, are those truths which are Quae sunt necessaria ad
salutem, pleno intuitu felicitur inturemur.
most knotty and difficult, and afford least spiritual nourishment, as
Criticismes, Chronologies, Controversies, etc. But if matters of Meditation,
they are plain and of great spiritual advantage.

Fourthly, Meditation and Study differ in their design. The design of study is
Notion, the design of meditation is Piety; the design of study is the finding
out of truth, but the design of meditation, is the holy improvement of truth;
the one searches for the vein of Gold, and the other diggs it out. The end of
study is knowledge, the end of meditation is holiness. Study is like a winters
Sun, warms but little, and has an inconsiderable influence, but meditation
leaves one in a more holy frame; it melts the heart when it is frozen, Psalm.
119. 48, 78
and makes it drop into tears and love: In a word, if we see a learned man, we
presently conclude he has studied Psalm. 119. 148.
much; If we see a devout and holy man, we may conclude, that man has
meditated much.

Meditation differs from memory. Some have called memory the scribe of the
soul, it sets down, and pens those things which are done; what we hear or read,
the memory does register; and therefore memory seems to bear some resemblance
with Meditation; but they differ,

meditation on it, will but create matter of sorrow and trouble; A Sermon
remembered, but not ruminated on, will serve only Maxima est humanae memoriae
labili tas, versamur ^ic in terra oblivionis, inde saepius nobis accidit, ut
quae omnium optime addicisse videmur, quando ad rem ventum est, ignoremus. Ger.
Genesis 19. 3.
to aggravate our condemnation. Memory is only the registring of a truth, but
meditation is the learning of it by heart; memory opens the door to entertain
spiritual knowledge, but meditation it locks the door upon that discovery; It
will not let it fly out again: Meditation, like Lot, is importunate, that holy
truths, like welcomed Angels, lodge with us.

meditation of any thing has more sweetness in it, then bare remembrance. The
memory is the chest to lay up a truth, but meditation is the palate to feed
upon it. The memory is like the Ark in which the Manna was laid up; Meditation
is like Isreal's eating of the Manna. When David began to Psalm. 63. 5, 6.
meditate upon God, it was sweet to him as marrow. There is as much difference
between a truth remembered, and a truth meditated on, as between a cordial in
the glass, and a cordial drank down.

excellent duty of meditation, is the timing of it; how much, how often, how
long we must meditate. Indeed the Scripture does not positively Requiritur
animus memor, and vigilans, qui dies, and noctes de praeceptis servandis
cogitet. Ger.
determine any set time for this holy service. Our chief Pilots and Guides is
this main importance, must be spiritual prudence, and divine affection; Our
wisdom must select, and our love must limit the time for sweet meditation.
Indeed some of Gods holy people have taken long Journies in this holy duty.
David tells us, that he spent the whole day in it, Psalm. 119. 97. Nay, he
mentions a Godly man, Psalm. 119. 97.
who when the day was shut in, would not call off his soul from this blessed
service, as being tired and wearied, but would travel all night in the same
complacential performance. But leaving these extraordinary examples, we may
Psalm. 1. ^.
certainly and truly conclude, that we must consecrate some part of our time
every day to this duty of meditation. David though he had the business of a
Kingdom, and the pleasures of a Court to divert him, yet says of the Law, it
was his meditation all the day; and in this, evidences the excellent Psalm. 119
97.
disposition of his soul. Truly frequency in this duty, is not only
praiseworthy, but will bring in a harvest of spiritual gain.

frequency we shall make our thoughts more pliable for the discharge of this
secret and difficult duty, the soul will be made more apposite and accommodate
for it. Frequent and customary running makes a person long breathed, and more
able for exercise: when we use this duty of Meditation every day, our thoughts
will be more consistent, they Hos. 6. 3.
will be more improved and ripened for meditation. And on the contrary, when we
neglect the frequent use of it, we shall find meditation, first more
unpleasant, and then more unnecessary, and at last more distasteful and
burdensome. Disuse quickly brings holy duties into disgust.

infrequency of this duty, will hinder the fruits of it; when there are long
strides between the performances of this duty, we lose the benefit of former
meditations. As in the body, when a man makes a free and liberal meal, this
will not maintane and support him long, Panem petimus quotidianum, quo quotidie
indigemus, quique quotidie nobis frugaliter alendis sufficiat. Par.
but the next day a new and fresh hunger importunes another meal, and if
denied, the body faints and languisheth: So meditation, like food, it must be
our daily repast, else the refreshing of former meditations wear out, and leave
no fruit or benefit behind. When the Hen leaves her Eggs for a long time, and
does not sit upon them, they are unfit for production, and never are reared to
be Chickens; but when she daily broods upon them, they are living, and lively
productions: So when we leave our wonted course of meditation for some space of
time, our affections grow chill and cold, and are not fit to produce comfort
and holiness to our souls; when we are constant in this work, we shall find the
benefit and advantage of it.

But if it be demanded, how long we must continue in this duty of meditation?

meditation bring forth some considerable benefit, till it stir up our
affections, warm Domine, nunq^om a te absque te recedam. Bern.
our hearts, and tune our inward man, till we find some sensible change, and
transformation in our souls. Indeed nature disrelisheth this duty, and we are
very apt to be soon weary of it: Our thoughts are like a bird in a Cage, which
flutters the more when confined; and meditation fastens and confines them to
some spiritual object: But the distasts of nature to this duty, should make us
not more weary but much more vigorous. As when the wood is green or wet, we do
not throw down the bellows in a pet or anger, but we spend more time, and draw
out more strength in the blowing, and in so doing there first rises some
smoke, then some sparks, and by going forward, at last it breaks into a hot
and bright flame: And so it is with the duty of divine meditation; when we
first meditate on spiritual things, at first we raise a smoke of a few sighs
toward God, and by continuance sparks of holy affections fly up heavenward;
Genesis 8. 21.
but at last, there is a flame of seraphical loves, the soul is in an ecstasy
with Jesus Christ. Now we should not give over In phrasi hac, primo est (...),
tribuiturque deo, quod proprium est hominibus. Secundo, est metaphora, sicut
homines odoribus gratis* suaviter officiuntur; it a deus delectatur file, and
gratitudine Noah. Par. in Genes.
meditating till this flame break out and ascend up toward God, as Noah's
sacrifice, with a sweet smelling savor to the Divine Majesty. When a man goes
forth in a calm and serene evening, and views the face of the Heavens, he shall
at first see a star or two twinckle and peep forth, but if he continues his
prospect, both their luster, and their number is increased, and at last the
whole Heavens are bespangled with stars: So when we first meditate upon the
promises of the Gospel, at first it may be, one star begins to appear, a little
light conveighs it self to the heart; but let us go forward, and we shall find
when our thoughts are amplified and ripened, there will be a clear light, more
satisfaction will be conveyed to the Soul; and in continuance of these divine
meditations, the Covenant of Grace will be bespangled with promises, as the
Heavens with stars, to give us rich and full satisfaction.

But there are some signal and special seasons for the acting of this duty of
meditation: Sometimes our affections are more smart and vigorous, our thoughts
are more lively and unwearied, and so more disposed to this excellent service;
and such seasons are our harvest for the acting of this duty, and reaping the
great comfort of it.

morning is an accommodated time for meditation; then the body has been
refreshed with the sweetness of The first season for meditation.
rest, and so the impressions of toil being worn off, it is the more active
for the labors of meditation. David was with God before break of day. The
morning Sun smiles with the Psalm. 119. 147.
most pleasant aspect when first it begins it is laborious circuit, Our thoughts
are shot out of our minds with greatest strength in the morning, when our
bodies can yield their most lively assistance, and there are many pregnant
reasons for it.

most acceptable in that season. When we awake in the morning, many suitors
attend our thoughts, aad every suitor uses urgent importunity; Jer. 2. 3.
now if spiritual things obtain the first admittance, this is most grateful to
God. It cannot but be a sinful provocation, that our thoughts should be as the
Inn in Bethlehem, Luke 2. 7. where strangers took up all the rooms, and Luke
2. 7.
Christ was excluded, and was fain to lie in a manger. Indeed Charitas sponsae,
quae tot allecta beneficiis, sponso deo, in amore, obedientia, et obsequio
mutuo respondit, et eum deperiit. Lyran.
it cannot but be matter of deploration, that vain and worldly thoughts should
take up all the rooms of our souls in the morning, and Christ shut out: But for
the prevention of this, let Divine things first attach our meditations, and
this will be well-pleasing to the Lord. In the stilling of strong water, the
first water which is drawn from the still is more full of spirits, and the
second and the third they are weaker and smaller, and not of the same value: So
the first meditations which are stilled from the mind in the morning are the
best, and we shall find them more full Genesis 4. 4.
of life and spirits, and they come nearer to Abels sacrifice. Abel non
etemandato tantum, sed exside obtulit.
The morning is the golden hour of the day, like the first springing grass,
which is most pleasant to the eye, and most sweet to the taste. The morning is
the first budding of time; Let Christ have it in holy and divine speculations.

more influential. The Vessel which is first seasoned with that which is
precious and odoriferous, will retain the scent and tincture, nor will easily
lose it but with much toil and labor. That of the wise man is considerable,
When thou awakest, it will talk with Prove. 6. 22.
thee. As Servants come to their Masters in the morning, and receive Rules from
them, how they shall manage their business all the day following; So a gracious
heart, which meditates on Gods Word, and things divine, in the morning, those
savoury tinctures abide on him all the day, and Qu^ semel est imbu^a recers,
servabit odor^m, te^ta diu.
he walks with more circumspection and fruitfulness. Wind up thy heart toward
Heaven in the morning, and it will go the better all the day. The wool takes
the first dye best, and it is not easily worn out: The heart seasoned with holy
meditations in the beginning, will keep this color in grain. It would become
us to perfume our minds with divine thoughts betimes on the day, that the smell
may scatter it self to all we meet withal that day.

Equity requires our morning meditations to be sequestered, and set apart for
God: Some of his first thoughts were set upon us; If we are in Christ, we had a
being in his thoughts Ephesians. 1. 4.
of love, before we had a being in the world; His earliest 1 John ^ 19.
loves fastened upon us, when we were only in the possibility Spirituales
benedictiones in ipsa aeterna praedestiratione suerunt nobis in Christo
praeparatae. Zanch.
and futurition of a being: We had the morning of Gods thoughts, before ever
the Sun did rise or shine in the World: What thoughts of free and rich Grace,
what kind thoughts of mercy and peace had God of us from all everlasting? Let
us in some measure retaliate the first loves of God, let us fix our thoughts
upon God in holy meditation before the day breaks, and delivers the light, the
infallible Jer. 31. 3.
harbinger of it.

morning of a Sabbath is the most genuine and sweetest season for meditation,
and that upon this twofold account.

fasten the heart upon God, which is very necessary upon the morning of a
Sabbath. Meditation is properly the centring of the thoughts, (as was suggested
before) and fixing them upon some spiritual object. Genesis ^4. 1.
Our hearts they are naturally slippery, and will be gadding with Dinah, unless
they are kept at home, (viz.) with God, the proper home of the soul, by divine
contemplation. It was the boast of holy David, that his heart was fixed; the
Psalm. 57. 7.
fixing of the soul on God, is both the duty and the glory of a Psalm. 108. 1.
Christian. Now when once meditation has fastened our thoughts on something
divine, they will not be so easily called off, nor so subject to sinful
avocations, which will be a transcendent happiness on the Lords day.

raise our affections, not only six our hearts upon God, but draw them out to
God in ardent and holy desires, which likewise is most suitable to the morning
of a Sabbath. We light affection by the fire of meditation. On Gods holy day we
should be in an ecstasy Psalm. 42. 2.
of love to Jesus Christ; and meditation is that which can elevate and draw up
the desires to Christ; and when they are once raised, they do not so easily
sink and fall again. Psalm. 119. 97.
When Bells are raised then they are musical, and proclaim their loud harmony
to all who are within the hearing. The Psalm. 19. 6.
Sun when it is risen it ascends gradually, and runs its pleasing and swift
circuit, until it be stopped by full noon. So Psalm. 104 34.
likewise the soul being raised by sweet and divine meditation on the morning
of Gods holy day, it will be drawing out its holy fervencies and longings after
God the whole Sabbath ensuing.

next season for holy meditation, is the Evening: So we read of holy Isaac, He
went out to meditate in the field at Even tide, Genesis 24. 63. When business is
over, and every The second season for meditation.
thing is calm, it is then a convenient time to let out our thoughts loose to
fly up to God. God had his Evening as Exodus 29. 39.
well as his Morning sacrifice. As the cream at the top is sweet, so is the
sugar at the bottom. When the plummets Egressus Isaac in agrum ad m^ditandum,
accepit praemium pietatis, sponsam scil. gratissimam.
of our souls have been running down in worldly affairs and businesses in the
day time, then in the Evening to draw up that weight of the Clock in holy
meditation is most suitable and commendable; nor can any thing better become a
Christian, then in this duty to give God the Alpha and the Omega of every day.

third season for holy Meditation, is the night time, when nature has rockt
every thing asleep, and silenced the world from interrupting noyses. This David
leaves, as The third season for meditation.
the matter both of his command and example, Psalm. 63. 6. The night season is
sequestered from worldly affairs, and is Psalm. 63. 6.
not checked with their clamorous importunity, nor is it a time Psalm. 4. 4.
distracted with the incursions of sensible objects; it is likewise a time not
accosted or besieged with frivolous or dangerous temptations: There are two
things which do much fit and dispose the soul for Meditation, (viz.) Rest and
Silence, Sancti laetantur dei patefactionibus, sed timore et tremore.
both which are to be found in the night: And to this may be added, when the
curtains of darkness are drawn over the world, we are then filled with a
religious fear of God; our hearts are more composed, and we entertain more
solemn, and awful apprehensions of the Divine Majesty, Stulte, quid est somnus
gelidae nisi mortis imago?
there is then a holy terror struck upon the soul. And when we lie upon our
beds; the bed is an image, and representation of the Grave, and at such a time
a man may be more serious, and composed for the duty.

fittest time for meditation: On that day our Savior arose from the The fourth
season for meditation.
Earth, and our souls should ascend and raise themselves toward Heaven. And
meditation does not only become the morning, but the whole day of a Sabbath;
it must not only be our morning dress, but the attire we must wear all the
day. We should think with our selves, the Lords day it is a type of Heaven, and
contemplation is the work of Heaven. The Heb. 4. 9.
present Sabbath is only the abridgement of that eternal rest, which the
Saints shall enjoy with God; And they which disrelish this duty, how can they
expect that glorious reward, which principally consists in the view and
contemplation of God? A gracious soul upon the Lords day, by meditation may
converse with God, and with the inhabitants of another world, he may enjoy as
much of God, as this interposing vail of flesh will admit of. And thus much for
the proper seasons of meditation.

further illustrate this blessed duty of meditation is the evidencing of the
great advantages The great advantages of meditation.
of it, which are both rich and many: As several Diamonds are found in the same
Rock, and much Gold crowded into the same Mine. Let us therefore take these
manifold Emoluments in their Order.

vigorous antidote against sin, It is rare physic to purge away or prevent
that poison: Most sin for want of meditation: There are two great snares which
take most The first adtage of meditation.
men, and entangle them in sin, (viz.) Ignorance and Incogitancy; when we
either not know our danger, or not consider our duty. Men certainly would not
be so brutishly sensual as they are, if they did seriously weigh things in the
balance by solemn and holy meditation. If they did meditate on the strength of
Gods Arm, on the strictness of Gods Justice, Exodus 15. 16.
on the consuming power of his Wrath; if they seriously considered how
infinitely evil sin is, how much it Nehem. 9. 33.
affronted Divine Purity, and broke in pieces Divine Laws, Heb. 12. 29.
how exceedingly it endangered the soul, and how deeply it Psalm. 5. 3.
wounded the conscience; surely men would flee all appearances 1 John 3. 4.
of evil, and repulse a temptation in its first onset. It is sin which puts a
worm into Conscience, a sting into Death, 1 The^. 5. 22.
a curse into the Law, and fire into Hell. Men meditate not Romans 2. 15.
on these things, and so they are entangled in the snare. Holy meditation is a
golden shield against the darts of sinful temptations. In this case meditation
would be as the Angels Judge. 22. 23.
sword, to stop us in our sinful cariere, and to strike us into clammy sweats
and heavy damps, that we should not sport our selves in the ways and traverses
of sin and provocation. Joseph's meditation on Gods presence and omnipotency,
Genesis 39. 9. Josephus circumseptus fui^ pulcherrimarum virtutum choro, quarum
hortatu, victor evasit.
spoiled the design of his Mistress her dalliance, and kept him within the
limits of holiness and chastity. Meditation makes the heart like we^ tinder, it
will not take the Devils fire. In a word, it is strange rashness in men, that
they will be taken in the ambushes of sin, before they seriously meditate on
what they are going about.

Holy meditation keeps vain and foolish thoughts out of the heart, it
prepossesseth the soul, that frivolous imaginations The second advantage of
meditation.
tions are wholly shut out. God complains of the people of Israel, that they
were wholly taken up with vain thoughts, Jer. 4. 14.
Jer. 4. 14. And so it is with most men, their minds are filled with froth and
vanity, and varieties of foolish thoughts crowd in upon them, as flies swarm to
the place where the honey lies, and those incautelous persons consider not,
that (...) Chrysostom.
sin begins at the thoughts, which are the first plotters and contrivers of all
evil; the heart is the womb whereall sin is conceived and framed; and outward
acts only midwife the sinful birth into the world, and make it visible: The
mind and fancy is the stage where sin is first acted. The malicious O quam
vanae sunt hominum cogitationes; una cogitatio foelix est, cogitare de domino.
Hieron. in Psalm.
man acts over his sin in his thoughts, he plots his revenge; the impure person
acts over his concupiscence in his thoughts, he contrives his lust: And it is
much to be deplored, how much wickedness is committed in the chambers of our
thoughts. Now meditation on things Divine, the Purity of God, the Promises of
God, would be a Sovereign means to exite and banish such vain and flatulent
thoughts. Hierome 2 Cor. 7. 1.
cries out, How vain are the thoughts of men, there is but one thought
considerable, and that is, to think on God. If David had carried the Book of
the Law about him, and meditated 2 Samuel 11. 2.
on it, he had not looked on Bathsheba with such a wanton Psalm. 1. 2.
eye; Holy meditation would have quenched the fire of that lust. This heavenly
duty has this advantage in it, it presses the thoughts for the service of
Christ, nor will permit them to wander in a sinful liberty.

Meditation it puts life into Ordinances, and makes them sweet and savoury to
the soul. Ordinances they are like The third advantage of meditation.
clothes which have no warmth in themselves, but as they are heated by the body
which wears them; and so Ordinances have no energy or quickening power in
themselves, but as the divine spirit co-operates with them, and our serious
meditation makes them fruitful and effectual. If we canvas an Ordinance or
two, we shall find this more apparent and manifest. Shall we instance

Prayer. Meditation before prayer, is like the tuning of an Instrument, and the
fitting it for melody and harmony; This holy duty of meditation does mature our
conceptions, excite our desires, and screw up our affections: what is the
Preces non tam verbis, quam animo aestimantur. Chemnit.
reason, there is such a discurrency in our thoughts, such a running of them to
and fro when we are in Prayer, like dust blown up and down with the wind, but
only for want of meditation? And what is the reason, that our desires (...).
in prayer, are like an arrow shot out of a weak bow, that they do not reach
the mark, but only upon this account, we do not meditate before prayer? He who
would but consider before he comes to prayer, the pure Majesty of God, the
holiness of his Nature, the quickness of his Eye, the strength of his Hand, and
that he will be sanctified by all Acts 1. 14.
who draw near to him, as likewise those things he is to pray Ipsa majestas
dei, est origo et fundamentum gloriae; Gloria ex Majestate emanat sicut radius
a sole. Alap.
for, the pardon of Sin, the spirit of Grace, the assurance of Gods Love, an
inheritance with the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. How would this cause his
prayer to ascend, as incense before God? David expresses prayer by meditation;
Give ear to my words O Lord, consider my meditation, Psalm. 5. 1.

hearing the word, the benefit of it much depends upon meditation. Before we
hear the word, meditation is the plough Dum terra labori, et agriculturae
respondet, ipse deus novas pluvias et novas solis caelique influentias immutit.
which opens the ground to receive the seed; and after we have heard the word;
meditation is as the harrow which covers the new sown seed in the earth, that
the Fowls of the air may not pick it up. Meditation makes the Word full of sap
and juice, life and vigor to the attentive hearer: What is the reason; that
most men come to hear the word, as the beasts came into the Ark, they came in
unclean, and they went out unclean? it is, because they do not meditate on the
truths they hear; they put truth into shallow and neglective memories, and they
do not draw it out by serious meditation. It is said of the Virgin Mary, that
she pondered Luke 2. 19. (...) tanquam semen in agro.
those things in her heart. A steady and considerate meditation on divine truth
would produce warm affections, zealous resolutions, and holy actions. If we
will profit by the Word, let us conscionably meditate on the Word.

receiving the Sacrament: Meditation puts a taste upon that divine feast;
Examination is commanded before we approach this Supper; now this duty of
Examination is best managed by meditation. He who meditates aright concerning 1
Cor. 11. 28.
him who is the Author, the Object, the end of the Haec (...) in tribus
p^rtibus consistit 1 In agnitione miseriae, et peccatorum magnitudinis, and
reatus gravitatis. 2. In fide et fiducia mediatoris, ne desperatione
absorbeamur. 3 In serio resipiscentiae, et novae obedientiae proposito. Par.
Luke 22. 15.
Sacrament, and considers with himself, what rich testimonies of Grace there
are to the worthy receiver; how will this dispose the soul to that holy
Ordinance? And he who meditates of his infinite misery out of Christ, and of
his happiness in a dear Redeemer; how will this encourage and sharpen his
desires to come to the Lord Jesus, and meet him at his own table? And in
receiving we should meditate on the sufferings of Christ, for the Sacrament is
only the abridgement of Christ's agony: And we should likewise meditate on the
affections and loves of Christ, for the Sacrament is a Copy of his love. The
Sacrament is food, and so we must receive it with an appetite and strong
desires, but this food must be carefully concocted by meditation.

fourth advantage we receive by meditation, is the strengthening and recruit of
our Graces. Indeed grace The fourth advantage by meditation.
and meditation are reciprocal causes of each other; meditation maintanes
grace, and grace exercises meditation. A gracious heart with Moses, ascends the
mount of meditation Exodus 24. 15.
to meet with God, and then his face shines, his graces are more illustrious
and resplendent. Meditation feeds three royal Graces with supply and support.

First, Faith receives recruit from this heavenly duty. Fides est quasi
column^, et fundamentum in terra jactum, fides inter omnes res, est
solidissima, certissuna, et firmissima. Chrysostom. Heb. 11. 19.
When our faith languisheth, and our thoughts are ready to terminate in
despair, then meditation brings a cordial, it fixes upon the power of God,
which is faiths great supporter in all our temptations. When the soul shall
meditate thus; that God by his own Fiat, his own Word, gave being to the World,
and raised this glorious superstructure where man now inhabits, and that his
power is no less then infinite, reducing into act, and being whatsoever the
Divine Will shall command; how does this underprop our faith, and preserve it,
and secure it against the quicksands of unbelief? Haec suit invicta illa fidei
(...), et basis, in mandato et promissionibus dei radica^a.
Thus Abraham meditates on Gods power, and this meditation so steels and backs
his faith, that it breaks through the most rigorous and fierce onsets of trial
and temptation, and so becomes laureat and victorious.

grace which flourishes and thrives on the Mount of meditation, is Hope; Faith
is confirmed, and hope is enlarged 1 Tit. 1. 1. Tit. 2. 13. Col. 1. 5. Quaerat
aliquis quando per^eniam ad speratum gaudium, respo^dendum cum deus dederit,
nullae sunt l^ngae morae ejus, quod certo donabit. Tert. Psalm. 103 5.
by meditation; the hand of faith is strengthened, and the wing of hope is
plumed by this excellent duty. If a Christian should consider by holy and
serious meditation, those enamouring notions of Heaven and blessedness which
the Scriptures lay down, and contemplate on that spring of joy, that life of
glory, that rich inheritance, that future portion, which he lives in the
expectation of, this would put his hope upon the full speed to post toward his
desired possession. The grace of hope by holy meditation becomes more fledged
and vigorous, and renews its strength like the Eagle.

grace of Love is much meliorated and advanced by this duty of meditation.
There is an affectionate longing toward Christ in every gracious spirit, which
is fed and Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Joh. 3. 34. Col. 2. 3. Col. 1. 19.
succored by continual and due meditation upon its infinite want of Christ;
and a weighty consideration of those treasures of grace which are laid up in
Christ, and so the stream of holy love to this Mediator swells, and is ready to
overflow all Caeteri homines gratiam nacti sunt gradu inferiore, Christus omnem
gratiam possidet, et gradu summo. Daven.
banks of restraint. Our love of desire after Christ, arises much from the
meditation of his benefits; and our love of complacency in Christ flows much
from the meditation of his excellencies. But still it is meditation that blows
our love into a pure flame, and raises it to the highest degree; And therefore
as we desire to raise and refine our love, let meditation be our Mount Olivet,
to which we may frequently repair.

last advantage which meditation brings, is the amplification of our comforts.
The blessed promises recorded in The fifth advantage by meditation.
the Word, they do not conveigh comfort to us only as they are recorded, but as
they are applied by meditation. The Grapes while they hang upon the Vine, they
do not produce any Wine to exhilarate the gatherer or the possessor; but when
they are squeezed in the Wine Press, they yield forth that Liquor which is of
so chearing a nature. And Judge. 9. 13.
so promises, while only left upon record in sacred writ, they do not drop
their Sovereign Juice, which chears the heart of a poor believer, but when we
ponder and press them by stedy and serious meditation, then these promises
conveigh water of life to us, and drop cordials into our careful breasts. Thus
David in the 63 Psalm, through diverse Psalm. 63. 5, 6, 7, 8.
verses, tells us what marrow and fatness, what lushious and sweet delight he
found in Gods Ordinances, verse. 5th, and what cariers of love and pursuit he
had after the enjoyment of God, verse. 8th; but all this is the fruit of
meditation, verse. 6th. Indeed one morsel of meat chewed and digested, conveighs
more nourishment then a greater quantity swallowed down whole; so one Promise,
or one Ordinance ruminated upon, and digested by sweet meditation, conveighs
more comfort to the soul, then many Promises or Sermons in the head which are
not meditated on. And thus much for the advantages of meditation.

the next place cast an eye upon the excellency of meditation. Without
controversy great is the rarity of this The excellency of meditation.
blessed duty: Some of the Ancients have called it, The nursery of Piety; And
St. Hierom calls it his Paradise. Indeed meditation August. Chrysostom. Cypr.
is the Pisgah sight of the mind, when the soul takes a prospect, not of an
earthly, but of an Heavenly Canaan; we meditate on those things which are
within the vail, Dixit Hieronymus oppida, et urbes videri sibi tetros carceres,
et solitudinem ejus esse Paradisum. Epist. 72. (...). Theophyl.
Heb. 6. 19. The soul is upon the wing in this soaring duty, and the thoughts
march heavenward. Theophylact calls this duty the very gate and portal by
which we enter Glory; by this service we are ushered in to glance at God
himself. Meditation is the work of Heaven begun, the fight of God in the
twilight, the very view of him in a prospective; it does heighten us to a kind
of Angelical frame, and brings the Soul and God together. And yet how many
neglect this duty, and live almost in the nonperformance of it? They make
large strides and gaps between their meditations; 1 Cor. 13, 12. 1 John 3. 2.
now a little musing, and then after many days a return to that roseat path
again, for so indeed is holy meditation. How should this strike such with fear
and sorrow; have they nothing Heb. 6. 19.
above to contemplate on? No goods within the vail to Meditatio nihil est, nisi
visio dei e longinquo.
take an Inventory of by this blessed duty? Where is their God, their Christ,
their Crown of Glory? Are these Seraphical objects so above their thoughts; as
they are wholly strange to them? Meditation is our view of God at a distance, a
glance at Christ afar off. By this duty the soul listens Mat. 25. 10.
to the musicks of the Bride Chamber, which he in this life hears more
confusedly, and in glory he shall hear them more distinctly. And yet (I say)
how many account this sweet and heavenly duty, a melancholic interruption of
their peace and quiet? But as the Moon loses nothing of its light or
brightness, because the dog barks at it; and many rich Countries lose nothing
of their treasure, because they lie fallow, and are altogether unknown; Their
Mines are no way to be undervalued, because they want a discovery; So neither
can any Eclipse darken this Divine service of meditation, Josh. 1. 8. Genesis 24.
63. Psalm. 104. 34. Psalm. 119. 15. 1 Timothy 4. 15. Psalm. 1. 2.
notwithstanding many live in the total or partial neglect of it. Meditation
will be the command of a God, the Evening sacrifice of a Patriarch, the Divine
refreshment of a Psalmist, the Resolution of a Saint, the Work of an
Evangelist, and the Character of a Godly man, although it is a duty of a low
price among formal professors, or the profane scoffing miscreants of the
World. Meditation will be the Saints mountain of Spices, though unregenerate
persons smell not the fragrancy of them.

one Pearl in the Crown of this Duty, is its indispensable necessity. One
observes, That the end why God gave us his Word, is not only to know it, but
to meditate The necessity of meditation
on it, not to run it over with a transient glance, but to traverse it in our
meditations, and to ponder it in our Psalm. 119. 97.
thoughts. Now meditation will appear to be necessary upon a Luke 2. 19.
threefold account.

intellectual part of man upon service: The understanding is not more busied in
any duty, then in meditation; then like the Silkworm it spins out of its own
bowels; Intell^ctus, et men's, est seeds sapientiae, ^^ veteres putabant.
when we meditate, we rally up our thoughts to fall upon some divine object:
This holy duty is properly the task of the understanding. The Tongue works in
prayer; the Ear bends in hearing, the Hand is stretched out in Sacramental
receiving, the Eye toyls in reading, the Heart is, or ought Jam. 5. 16. Mat.
11. 15.
to be employed in every sacred service; but the Mind is taken up in meditating
on sublime and supernatural objects. The Eagles of the thoughts fly upon this
Carcass; to allude Mat. 24. 28.
to our Savior.

Meditation fructifies duty, without which the truths of God will not stay with
us. The heart is naturally hard, the memory slippery, and all lost without
meditation, every drop Mark 8. 17.
runs out again, and the whole web of divine service is unravelled. The Apostle
compares the word to rain, Heb. 6. 7. Heb. 6. 7.
Now it is meditation only which saves this rain water, that it sheds not, and
run in waste. This necessary duty of meditation it fastens truth upon the
heart, and is like the selvedge which keeps the cloth from ravelling; It is
the engraving of letters in Gold or Marble which will endure; without this
piece of holy duty, all the preaching of the Cor est sons sapientiae.
Word, is but writing in sand, or pouring water into a sieve. Reading and
hearing without meditation, is like weak physic which will not work. The Word
cannot be in the heart, Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
unless it be wrought in by holy meditation; this is the hammer which drives
the nail to the head. Ordinances without this duty are but spiritual
pageantries, a pleasant landscape, which when we have viewed, we presently
forget. Jam. 1. 23.
Knowledge without meditation is like the glaring of a Sunbeam upon a wave, it
rushoth into the thoughts and is gone. There is very much in this duty to fix
truth upon us. Carnal men's thoughts they are usually flight and trivial* they
know things, but they are loath to let their thoughts dwell upon them. Musing
makes the fire burn. Men musing and meditating Psalm. 39. ^.
on the Word are much affected, and then they are ready to say, now we taste
the sweets of our beloved, we lie Psalm. 119. 93.
under the force and power of the Word.

Meditation it sweetens our life here below. The contemplative Christian lives
in the Suburbs of Heaven. How did meditation cast a flavor upon David's soul,
and fill it with Psalm. 63. 5.
aromatic and perfuming impressions? Geographers are at a loss to find the
place where Paradise was; now to stop their curiosities, it may be replied, it
may be found in the fragrant tract of heavenly meditation. When we meditate
upon the sweetness of scriptural promises, upon workings of Christ's heart
toward believers, upon the watchfulness of Gods eye over his people, upon the
all sufficiency of our Saviors merit for 1 Cor. 2. 9.
life and salvation, upon the recompense of reward, so great that 2 Cor. 12. 1.
man's thoughts cannot grasp it; how do these, and such Rev. 1. 10.
like things raise us to St. Paul's rapture, or St John's ecstasy, which were
the initials of Glory to those heavenly Apostles? Quid est, quod futura
laetitia in cor non ascendit? qui^ sons est, et ascensum nes^it. Bern.
It may be averred for certain, that the neglect of this duty brings a searcity
of comfort upon our lives, which otherwise might meet with a plenteous harvest,
and a constant revenue of joy and satisfaction.

CHAP. XV. What we must meditate upon, on the morning of the Lords day.
HAving thus drawn the portraicture, and given a description of this duty of
meditation, with the blessed appendices which do attend it, as its seasons,
advantages, etc. I now come to present suitable objects, for this duty to prey
upon, and so to raise a little stock for meditation to trade with. And as to
the Queries, (viz.) What we must meditate on in the spring and morning of the
Sabbath? It is answered, Dies vitae nostrae est dies parasceves, in quo
laboramus, et cum Christo patimur, succedit dies quietis in sepulchro, quem
sequitur dies resurrectionis ad vitam. Ger.
whatsoever is spiritual, any thing of a spiritual nature; we may meditate on
the promises of God, the loves of Christ, the strictness of the Law, the
sweetness of the Gospel, on the filthiness of Sin, on the vanity of the
Creature, on the excellency of Grace; we may muse, and fix our thoughts upon
the estate of our souls, and of the fewness of them who shall be saved; so
likewise upon Death or Judgment. As holy David, sometimes he meditated on the
works of God, sometimes on the Word of God, and sometimes on God himself. But I
shall only open a double fountain to feed our meditations Psalm. 143. 5. Psalm.
119. 148. Psalm. 63. 6.
on the morning of the Sabbath, (Viz.)

1. Let us meditate on the God of the Sabbath. 2. On the Sabbath of God.
These two superlative objects, are like mount Hor, and mount Nebo, where Moses
and Aaron took their prospects, Numb. 33. 38. Deuteronomy. 32. 49.
before they were conveyed to the mountane of Spices: we Cant. 8. 14.
will handle them distinctly; And

1. Let us meditate on the God of the Sabbath. Indeed this Divine and admirable
object takes up the views and contemplations of holy Angels, and the
inhabitants of glory, Mat. 18. 10.
who spend eternity in beholding God face to face: But yet some glances we may
have of this sovereign being by holy Cor. 13. 12.
and spiritual meditation.

CHAP. XVI. God is most glorious in his essence and nature.
meditate on the essence of God. He is an infinite being, the fullness of
Heaven, the mirror of Angels, Exodus 15. 11. Creasti nos domine propter te, et
irrequietum est cor nostrum, donec perveniat ad te. August.
the delight of Saints; so glorious in himself, that he is only perfectly
known by himself. God is an Ocean of goodness, a fountain of life, a spring of
grace, a father of mercies, man's center to which he must come, before he find
quietation or rest for his soul. He is so infinitely glorious, that he must be
described by removing from him what he is not, rather then by asserting what he
is. The eyes of Angels are too weak to behold him, and must make use of a vail
alittle to remit De deo, dicisacilius potest, quid non sit, quam quid sit.
Rivet.
the beams of his glory. Our knowledge of him is only borrowed from his own
discoveries. Let us then meditate on,

everlastingness of his nature. He is the ancient of days, He was before time
was fledged, and had either wing Dan. 7. 9, 22. Psalm. 102. 28 Psalm. 29. 9. Rev.
4. 8. Romans 16. 26. Isa. 57. 15. Psalm. 90. 2,
or feather; His duration admits neither of beginning or ending; God is the
first and eternal being; He did shine in perfections before the foundations of
the world were laid; He is from everlasting to everlasting, His Name is
everlasting God, Genesis 21. 33. His Arms are everlasting arms; His Mercy is
everlasting mercy; He is the everlasting Father, Isa. 9. 6. His Strength is
everlasting strength, Isa. 26. 4. His Kindness Rex seculorum est proprium dei
attributum. significans quod deus est primum et aeternumens. Alap. Respondisse
fertur Thales Milesius interrogantibus quid sit divinitas? (...).
is everlasting kindness, Isa. 54. 8. His heart was full of love, before man
was created to be the object of it, nay, he had his delights in himself, before
he had his darling Man to let out his love upon. The Prophet calls God an
everlasting light, Isa. 60. 19, 20. which shows, there was no twilight before
this illustrious and bright Sun. His years fail not, there is no faintness can
seize upon his Nature, nay, his years cannot be numbered, Isa. 36. 26. There can
be no termination of his being. He inhabits Eternity, Isa. 57. 15. there he
always dwelt. The World is but a latter production, to which he was pleased to
give a being according to his good pleasure.

us meditate on the Independency of his being. He subsists of himself, and all
things lean on the arm of his power, and hang upon the good hand of his
providence; He sustains Acts 17. 28.
the Angels; He supplies man not only with bread, but Psalm. 147. 9.
with breath; He feeds the young Ravens, they seek their meat at his hand. God
is the universal purveyor of the World; and He supports this beautiful fabric,
which else Psalm 104 29.
would soon sink into its primitive nothing, and he does it by his own
manutenency. Should God withdraw his fustentation, the whole Creation would
faint and dye away; He is the great King which maintains the Universe; He
preserves Psalm. ^^6 9.
the stranger; He relieves the fatherless and the widow, as the Psalmist
speaks; nay, all things here below are constant stipendaries to this infinite
God.

meditate* on the variety of his Excellencies. He is excellent in Greatness, He
can wound the hairy scalp of the sinner, and break him in pieces as a potters
vessel; His Exodus 15. 7, Psalm. 63. 21.
Sword is called the sword of his Excellency, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. as that weapon
which can pierce the heart of his Enemies; His loving kindness is radiant with
Glory and Excellency; How glorious and excellent is his mercy to draw sinners
out of the dust, and seat them with Angels in eternal glory: And God is not
only excellent in loving, but he is so in Exodus 14. 22.
working; He can bring mighty things to pass, keep the water D^n. 3. 25.
from drowning, the fire from burning, the Lions from D^n. 6. 22.
devouring, the Sun from posting; His works are glorious in Jo^h. 10. 13.
excellency. In a word, whatsoever is excellent is originally Isa 28. 29.
seated in God, and the creatures excellency is but a drop from this Ocean, a
ray from this glorious Sun. If God put on Psalm. 93. 1.
his Attire, he clothes himself with Majesty, his inward Psalm. 104. 1.
garment is Strength, his outward wear is Honor; the Sun beams are shades,
compared to the glittering of his apparel.

meditate on the luster of his appearances. When God discovers himself, Angels
cannot look upon him, they are dazzled with that overcoming sight, and poor Man
is frighted Isa. 6. 5.
into despair, Isa. 6. 5. And so Manoah said to his Wife, Psalm. 68. 9.
We shall surely dye, because we have seen God. If God appears Judge. 13. 22.
in his Glory, Mount Sinai smoaks and flames, as if it was turned into an Aetna
or Vesuvius, those Mountains of Sicily Heu mihi! perii, occidi, defeci ex
consterra tione tantae visionis. Alap.
and Campania, which continually disgorge themselves in smoke and fire. If God
cast an eye upon the Earth, it trembles, if he but touch the mountains they
smoke, Psalm. 144. 32. Nay, if God wrap himself up in a Cloud, that dark
appearance Exodus 19. 18.
pearance is so full of Glory, that the people keep at a distance, Terra
dicitur siluisse conspectu Alexandri pavore concussa, nec resistere ausa est.
and the Priests dare not make any near approach, 2 Chronicles. 5. 13, 14. The most
refracted manifestation of God astonisheth, and strikes man into a
consternation. When God appears he must put on the mask of a cloud, or else
poor dust would unsoder, and fall before him. His appearance Exodus 3. 5. Exodus
19. 18. Isa. 2. 10, 19. Exodus 40. 34, 35. Exodus 16. 10. Isa. 2. 10.
in the bush sanctified the ground; His appearance on the Mount multiplied the
flame; His appearance to sinful Israel drives them into holes, and places of
retirement. Isa. 2. 10. How was Moses raised with the dazzling appearance of
Gods back parts on Mount Sinai? Exodus 34. 6. And the Apostles ravished with
Christ's splendid and seraphick Exodus 34 6, 35. Mat. 17. 2, 3, 4, 5.
appearance in the transfiguration? His glorious appearance in Heaven feeds the
songs of Angels; His gracious appearance on earth to his poor wasting people
fills their hearts with joy, and they are refreshed and refined by it; And his
powerful appearance in Hell fills the damned with horror and despair, Job 37.
2. When God appears in Ordinances, Job 37. 22. Mat. 18. 20 Acts 2. 37. Psalm.
63. 5.
those very Ordinances become the Cordials of Grace, the Instruments of
conversion, the Paradise of the soul, the fulfilling of a promise, the chariots
of Christ to convey him to the believer, and the banes of the most headstrong
corruptions.

meditate on the tender goodness of his mercies. His mercy is great in point of
quantity; His mercy is numerous Genesis 19 19. Number. 14 19. Psalm. 5. 7.
in point of multitude; God has a large offspring of love; His mercy is sweet
and soft in point of quality, Psalm. 103. 4. Sure mercy in point of perpetuity,
Acts 13. 34. Sheltring mercy, where the believer may retire himself, in point
of security, Vnus est dei filius, u^um verb^m ^ed miseria nostra est multiplex
non tantum magnam misericordiam, sed et miserationum quaerit multitudinem.
Psalm. 13. 5. His mercy fills earth, Psalm. 119. 64. reaches to the heavens,
Psalm. 57. 10. Nay, it presses into the Heavens, Psalm. 36. 5. Nay, it is so
great, it gets above the Heavens, Psalm. 108. 4. And Mercy is not only an
outward dispensation from God, but a sweet disposition in God, Nehem. 9. 17. It
is a pearl in his Crown, it is a letter in his Name, Exodus 34. 6. and a great
letter too; Nay, it is a beam of his glory; He delights to show mercy; His
mercy is not above all his attributes, that is impossible, for what is in God,
is God, but it is above all his works, Psalm. 145. 9. Qui^quid est in deo, est
deus. Psalm. 145. 9. Genesis 22. 17. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
How sweet was his mercy in multiplying Abraham's Seed; in knocking off Isreal's
bonds; in sanctifying Manassah's Fetters; in throwing Devils out of Mary
Magdalen, and introducing himself in the room; in stopping Paul in the carier
of his persecution of the Saints, and destruction to Exodus ^2 51. Luke 8. 2.
himself: It was Mercy p^nned the Covenant of Grace, sent an only Son into the
world; and it is the same mercy which Acts 9. 4, 5. Deus non pater judiciorum
aut ultionum dicitur, sed Pater misericordiarum non ^^do quia Pater filicrum
misere^^^ timentium so, sed quod miserendi causam et originem sumat ex proprio.
Bern.
scatters Gospel Light for man's direction to eternal life: Divine mercies are
the brightest rays to enlighten us, the sweetest drops to soften us, the
surest forts to safeguard us. The Hand of mercy gives us the bonds of the
promises; the Ear of mercy gives us an account of our prayers; the Tongue of
mercy speaks comfortably to us in our distresses; the Eye of mercy beholds and
pities us in our falls and lapses; the Heart of mercy yearns over us in our
sins and iniquities. A learned man observes, God in infinite mercy places our
justification upon faith, not upon works, upon the stretching out of a hand,
not the exact performance of a work; If God should lay the stress upon accurate
obedience, we should assuredly fall short of a Crown.

meditate on the glory of his wonders. He is a wonder-working God; He can fetch
water out of the Rock, Exodus 17. 6. Genesis 19. 24.
send fire out of heaven, he can rain down Manna, and so Exodus 16. 4.
furnish the table with a shower, and fetch provisions, not 2 Kings 20. 10.
from the Kitchen, but the Clouds; He can make the Sun Dan. 3. 25.
run in a retrograde motion, and turn a flaming furnace into an arboret, a walk
of safety and delight; He can fright Armies 2 Kings 7. 6.
with a noise, they shall be discomfited by the weak 2 Kings 19. 7.
sound of a rumor; He can raise an host of Caterpillars, Joel 2. 25.
and Palmer worms, and they shall do execution, and overthrow his Enemies
without Sword or Spear. Christ can Mark 6. ^2. John 2 9.
prepare bread without going to the meal in the Barrel, and provide wine
without going to the store in the wine Cellar, and his Command shall yield more
then the Vine: And the wonders of God

destructive; They strangled the firstborn of Egypt, and washed away the
Princeliness and Glory Exodus 12. 29.
of the Land of Ham, in the Red Sea. God miraculously stirred Exodus 14. 28. 2
Chro. 20. 2, 3.
up the Inhabitants of Seir, to help forward the destruction one of another.

preservative. The Mariners see Gods wonders in the deep; and the boisterous
Psalm. 104. 24.
waves by Gods wonderful power, are their Pillars, not their Dan. 6. 22.
Perdition, they support them, not swallow them up: Thus Deu^ solus est qui
^acit miracula, mult^ enim sunt stultis miracula, quae talia non sunt
sapientibus. Aug.
God wonderfully preserved Daniel in the Lions Den, and those beasts of prey
served for his Guard, and not his execution, Gods wonders are sometimes walls
of fire to scorch and burn, and sometimes walls of brass to secure and defend:
Sometimes God works wonderfully to show his love and faithfulness, and
sometimes to show his wrath and indignation.

wonders are sometimes declarative, they are the essay of his power before the
eyes of the world; the Heavens take notice of them, Psalm. 89. 5. The children
of men take notice Psalm. 89. 5. Job 9. 10. Psalm. 105. 5. Psalm. 77. 14, 15.
Nehem. 9. 10, Josh. 2 10. Psalm. 136. 4.
of them, Job. 9. 10. Holy Job was a notary to set them down, and the sweet
singer of Israel an instrument to set them out, Psalm. 105. 5. And not only the
children of Israel, Nehem. 9. 10. But the people of the Nations have taken
notice of the wonders of the Lord, Josh. 2. 10. and resented them with
astonishment and admiration.

CHAP. XVII. God is most Adorable in his blessed Attributes.
meditate on the Attributes of God. The Divine Attributes are those glorious
beams which give us the best discovery of the Divine Being; His Justice is a
scorching beam; His Mercy is a warming beam; His Faithfulness is a refreshing
beam; His Truth is an enlightening beam; His Infiniteness is a dazzling beam; His
Power is a piercing beam: But this prospect is so pleasant, we cannot so
suddenly take off our eye, and therefore we shall glance at the Divine
Attributes something more distinctly.

meditate on the Power of God: His Power, as his Glory, is transcendent: He can
bow the Heavens; he can Psalm. 144. 5. Judges 5. 20. Job 37. 16. Psalm. 104. 32.
Isa. 5. 26. Isa. 7. 18. Exodus 14, 24, 25.
marshal the Stars; he can balance the Clouds, he can destroy single persons;
he can subvert whole Cities, wash away the World with a Flood; he can make the
Mountains smoke with a touch; he can summon the Nations with a hiss: and he can
take off Pharaohs Chariot wheels with a look. If God frown, the Mountains
quake, the Hills melt, the Earth is burnt, the World is blasted, and the
Inhabitants of it tremble, Nah. 1. 5. He can scatter Nations, hurl Mountanes
Lev. 10. 1, 2.
to and fro as the dust, Hab. 3. 6. Such divine discoveries Genesis 19. 24.
of Gods infinite power we meet with in sacred writ. Genesis 7. 19.
He created the World by the Power of his Word, and bl^w Ad imperium, nutum,
etinstinctum dei volentis puni^e Judaeos, sta^im quasi li^lores accurrunt
Egyptii, et Assi^ii, sibilo tantum opus est, et advolant. Alap.
the Universe into a being by the breath of his mouth; His Fiat reared the
Heavens and the Earth into an existence; it filled the Sun with light,
bespangled the Firmament with stars, decked the fields with grass, laded the
trees with fruit, and made the valleys sing with Corn, Psalm. 65. 13. Paradise,
Man's first and delightful seat, was but the issue of Gods Commanding Power. He
planted every Flower, he sowed every Seed, he set up every Tree, not with his
Hand, but his Word. And as in Naturals, so is Gods Power seen in Spirituals: He
can subdue the strongest corruptions, break the hardest Ezekiel. 11. 19. Dan. 4.
33. Luke 7. 38. Jer. 5. 22,
hearts, relieve the most fainting graces; he can unhorse the proudest
Persecutors, and put the greatest Kings to 2 Samuel 17. 23.
grass, and throw the leudest Curtizans at his fect. And as Hest. 7. 10.
Gods Power is seen in perfective, so in destructive actions; he Acts 12. 23.
can unpin the wheels, and break the Axletree of the whole Luke 12. 5.
Creation with a word; he can infatuate the counsels of the Jer. 39. 9.
deepest Politians, tear in pieces the strongest adversaries, Psalm. Job. 26. 7.
59. 22. blast the designs of the loftiest Courtiers, speed the Job 9. 6.
death of the proudest Princes, and fire Nations out of their Heb. 10 31.
Cities, and tie them up with a tedious Captivity; he can throw sinners, soul
and body into hell, Mat. 10. 28. In a Mat. 10. 28.
word, Gods Power is commensurate to his will, and the Isa. 52. 10.
strength of his hand can effect whatsoever is in the purpose of his heart: If
he make bare his arm, Isa. 52. 10. his naked arm can execute wonders, nor
need he any weapons to accomplish his achievements.

meditate on the omnisciency of God. His eye is always upon us; he has a
window into our hearts; our very Psalm. 139. 1. Psalm. 44. 21. Jer. 17. 10. Rev.
2 23. Psalm. 139. 12.
thoughts are unvailed to him; he sees every sin, he searches every soul; he
trys every rein; Clouds do not darken his view, Curtains do not hinder his
sight, and doors do not shut out his prospect; Light and darkness are all one
to him; he sees the fine and curiously spun agitations of the mind before Dei
intellectus est vitae suae actus, quo Deus videt omnia, seipsum scil. et
extrase universa, quae esse possunt; quae esse vult, autipse facit, aut a
creaturis fieri vult, aut permittit, cognoscit eas res quae sunt et earum
causas, modos, et circumstantias, praesentia, praeterita, fatu^a, magna, et
parva, quibus scientia divina non vi escit, et animi recessus, dicta con^tus
facta Leid. Pr.
they are fledged, and fly out into action. It was an excellent speech of
Augustine, Deus totus oculus est, and minima videt, God is all eye, and sees
the most minute things, the very imaginations of our hearts, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
our thoughts in the first ^bullition, the very embryoes of our working minds.
God saw Achans wedge, although it was buried under ground, and can tell Joshuah
where it lay, Josh. 7. 11. Christ saw the Scribes reasonings, when they were
only agitated in the conclave of their hearts, Mark 2. 6, 8. He knows the
proud afar of, Psalm. 138. 6. before they draw near to lift up the heel against
him. Every motion of our minds, every sound of our tongue, every action of our
lives, lie plain before him. Omnia videt, etc. He sees all things from Eternity
to eternity, with one and the same view, as Schoolmen speak. David could not
fly from his presence, though he made the greatest speed to avoid it, and took
the wings of the morning to hasten his flight, Psalm. 139. 9. he weighs the dust
in the balance, Isa. 40. 14. takes notice of those things, which are as small
and contemptible as the dust.

meditate on the Holiness of God. This blessed Attribute is an orient pearl in
Gods Crown; Holiness is the very Glory of the Godhead: The Lord is glorious in
holiness, Ter sanctitatem deo acclamant animalia, sive Trinitatem in deo
innuentia, sive infinit^m (...) iterationem significantia: est enim deus ter
sanctus sanctissimus, sanctitas ips^, Beatos Angelos, et homines sanctificans
Par.
Exodus 15. 11. The Scriptures call the Father a holy God, Psalm. 22. 3. the Son
a spotless Lamb, 1 Pet. 1. 19. the Spirit the Holy Ghost, John 14. 26. The
Holiness of God is the triumphant song of heaven, both in the Vision of the
Prophet, Isa. 6. 3. and in the Revelation of the Apostle, Rev. 4. 8. The
Holiness of God is the wonder of Angels; those glorious spirits admire Gods
beauty, which is his holiness; the holiness of the Lord, is the pattern and
exemplar of Saints for them to imitate and write after, Lev. 20. 7. Holiness is
primarily and originally in God, as light in the Sun, derivatively only in the
Saints: As God is pleased to draw Man fair by the pencil of his spirit, to cast
and shed a beauty and sweetness upon him, Ezekiel. 16. 6. Christ issuing Sanctitas
tribuitur deo, non solum quia purus est ab omni inquinamento, sed maxim quia
nulla non solum, moralis, sed etiam et naturalis non potest in eo esse
imperfectio. Riv.
forth from his fullness some beautifying drops, cleansing from sin, and
watering with grace, and so poor man arises supernaturally lovely from amidst
his natural deformity and loathsomness. Holiness is so intrinsical and grateful
to God, that he will have Holiness to the Lord engraven on the plate of Gold
which Aaron the High Priest must wear upon his breast, Exodus 28. 36. God sits
in the Throne of his holiness, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 47. 8. He is praised
in the mountain of his holiness, says the Prophet, Psalm. 48. 1. Holiness
attends upon his Throne, and holiness besets his Mountain; Holiness is mixed
with his words, Psalm. 60. 6. Exodus 28. 36. Psalm. 47. 8. Psalm. 48. 1. Psalm. 60.
6. Psalm. 93. 5. Isa. 63. 15. Isa. 62. 9. Zach. 14. 20. Exodus 25. 31.
Holiness becomes his house, Psalm. 93. 5. Holiness fills his habitation, Isa.
63. 15. and replenisheth his Court, Isa. 62. 9. Nay, holiness is so much Gods
nature, that holiness to the Lord must be written on the very Bells of the
horses, and the pots of the Sanctuary, and they shall be like the bowls of the
Altar, which were of pure Gold, Exodus 25. 31. typifying weight and worth, the
Characters of true holiness.

meditate on the wisdom of God. He sits at the helm, and guides all things
regularly and harmoniously; he Tim. 1. 17.
brings light out of darkness, and can make use of the injustice Judi^ia d^i
sunt ^^^ventibilia. (...). 2. 3.
of men, to do that which is just; he is infinitely wise, in him all treasures
of wisdom dwell; he can break us by afflictions, and upon those broken pieces
of the ship, bring (...) omnia (...) seipsum, (...) per (...). (...).
us safe to shore. divine wisdom are so arduous and inextricable, that holy
Paul was struck with amazement in the observation of them, and is even
swallowed up with ecstasy and amazement, Romans 11. 33. There is a learned man
observes how many ways the wisdom and knowledge of God transcends and
surpasses the wisdom of man: 1 Cor. 13 12. Quanta est altitudo scientiae
divinae transrendit omnem


the object of it. God by his wisdom and knowledge understands all things past,
present, and to come, all things which have a possibility of being, and he
understands himself who is an Ocean of perfections; And this Man falls
infinitely short of.

God is most exact in his wisdom and knowledge; He understands humanam et
Angeli^^m scienti^m: Primo Ratione Objecti, Deus cog^oscit omnia prae^e^ta,
praesentia, et futura. Se^undo Ratione modi, deus omnia
every thing as it is an object of knowledge fully and perfectly; he is
comprehensive of every vein and artery of all things possibly to be known; he
fully knows the nature of Angels, every faculty of man's soul, every thought of
man's heart, every muscle and vein of man's body, etc. But poor man sees things
only in the twilight, his knowledge is both shart and superficial.

species and effects as man does, but by his own essence, which is the most
clear glass he sees all things in. Man knows things extrinsically, cognoscit
perfectissime. Tertio ratione medii, non per species out effectus sed per
essentiam suam
and a posterioni as they lie open to his senses, and by that portal make way
to his understanding.

all things presently, without any dilatory view, or long debate, but in an
instant, by the glance of his eye he sees all things before him; But man
attains his knowledge by study, care and painfulness, and usually great
clarissime omnia videt et cognoscit. Q^arto ratione celeritatis, etc.
knowledge accompanies gray hairs, and he usually beats out knowledge with
difficulty, with reasonings pro and con; and his conclusions suppose premises,
the method of his attainment being syllogistical.

certainly and assuredly, and those things too which in themselves are most
uncertain and contingent; he knew whether the inhabitants of Keilah would 1 Samuel 23. 12.
deliver up David or no a most contingent thing, 1 Samuel 23. 12. and of which
David was wholly ignorant, though one of Gods endeared ones: but Man's knowledge
is floating and wavering, and for the most part opinionative and conjectural.

from Eternity, when Man lay only in the womb of a decree, before he was born,
or produced in the world; the knowledge of God had its rise Psalm. 102. 24.
before time it self was fledged, or could spread its wing.

subject to no change or variation; it is always the same, and is never either
in the increase or the decrease: but Man's knowledge is both subject to flushes
and abatements, and may be impaired not only by ignorance, but forgetfulness.
Gods knowledge may be compared to the Sun, which always shines on us with the
same rays of brightness (Eclipses only excepted:) But the knowledge of Man is
like the Moon, which has both its increase and its wains, besides innate
spots, which are the emblems and hierogliphicks of darkness and deformity.

knowledge of God, is the cause of all things which have an existence. First,
God knows all creatures in his own incomprehensible wisdom, and then he gives
them a being by the creating power of his Word; He first sees them in the glass
of his essence, and then blows them into a being and existence by the breath of
his mouth, by his commanding Word. But man's knowledge speaks something of
observation, but nothing of production. God creates the object; Man only takes
the prospect.

knowledge is infinitely larger, and more copious then that of the creature: He
knows Angels, Men, Animals, etc. and whatever may be presented to knowledge,
and intelligence: But alas there is a darkness upon our deep; Our understanding
Genesis 1. 2.
is like some little beauty covered with a vail, like Hoc tantum scio, quod
nihil scio.
a twinkling star wrapped up in a cloud; something of knowledge we pretend to,
but the smoke of our ignorance dims the light of our small pretenses, and
makes it duskish, and only break of day.

But the great God, not only has, but is great wisdom; And he gives wisdom
to the wise, Dan. 2. 21. Solomon's Dan. 2. 21.
wisdom which made him the Non-such of mankind, 2 Chro. 1. 10.
was only some reflexive light which the Sun of Righteousness Mal. 4. 2.
cast upon him. In the works of Creation Gods infinite Jam. 1. 5.
wisdom was manifested, for so says the Psalmist, Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord, how
manifold are thy works? in wisdom 1 Kings 4. 29.
have thou made them all. In the great work of man's redemption Jam. 1. 17.
by Christ, the glorious wisdom of God was discovered; Psalm. 104. 24.
how many curious threads of inextricable wisdom run throw Rev. 5. 12.
that whole work? The Apostle calls the wise contrivance of Ephesians. 1. 8.
our redemption, manifold wisdom, Ephesians. 3. 10. Wisdom in (...). Ephesians. 3. 10.
all its varieties and embroyderies; indeed in that blessed work appeared
stupendous wisdom. But in a word,

wise originally, not by communication from another, but of himself. Our wisdom
is but a ray communicated Solus deus a seipso, et per essentiam sapiens est,
qui eam per fidem nobis manifestavit. Anselm.
from the father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. The knowledge of Angels is only a beam
or a spark of the divine light. God teaches Princes wisdom, 1 Kings 3. 28. he
teaches Senators wisdom, Psalm. 105. 22. The judgment of the Court, and the
prudence of the Council are both from him; he gives that wisdom which gives
life, to continue our being, Eccles. 7. 12. He gives that wisdom which gives
Eccles. 2. 19.
strength, to carry out our being, Eccles. 7. 19. He gives that Eccles. 2. 12.
wisdom which gives wealth to sweeten our being, Prove. 16. Prove. 16. 16.
16. He gives that understanding which secures the soul, Prove. 19. 8.
which is the being of our being, Prove. 19. 8. and the wisdom Prove. 21. 30.
of God bears down all other wisdom, Prove. 21. 30. As the Sun out-shines the
Glowworm, or the light of it puts out the fire-light.

wise essentially. We must not understand God to be wise, as if wisdom made him
wise, as it happens among the creatures, in them wisdom is a separable quality;
but Non ex sapientia sapiens deus, sed ex sapiente deo sapientia procedit. Orig.
Gods wisdom is himself, and himself is his wisdom. As Origin well observes,
Wisdom does not give a Name to God, but God gives a Being to wisdom. The
perfections of the Creature are like the gilding which may be laid upon vessels
of Romans 16. 27
wood or stone, the matter is one thing, and the varnish and ornament is
another; but the perfections of God are like a vessel made of pure beaten Gold,
where the matter and the splendor or adorning is the same.

infinitely wise; His wisdom is unlimited, and incomprehensible; God manageth
the affairs of the whole world, visible and invisible; he takes care for all
things, from the Ant Job 6. 5.
to the Angel. Nothing so small as to escape his knowledge; Psalm. 104. 24.
he sees every dust on the looking-glass nothing so great as Mat. 13. 54.
to burden his mind; The Sun with the same ease shines Luke 11. 49.
upon the whole world, as upon one single field; so God does 1 Cor. 1. 24.
manage the Government of the whole world with the same facility, as he rules
one single creature; he bridles all mankind with the same ease and dexterity as
he can muzle an Ox, and rein in, and guide one of the beasts of the field. Man
attends upon one care at once; various thoughts scatter the mind, and weaken
it, but Gods wisdom does not deliberate with hesitancy, or consult with doubt;
his thoughts are clear all at once, not successively, and in a way of
discourse.

meditate on the truth of God. This glorious attribute, Quid nam homines di^^
s^^^les faciat? raspondet Pyth^goras, cum vera loquuntur. Deuteronomy 32 4. Deus
merito oppellatur, non t^m verax quam veritas ipsa. Zanch.
is the pillar of a believers dependence, the firm ground upon which he casts
anchor, we therefore trust in God, because he is faithful and true, Psalm. 49.
7. This attribute sheds a glory upon all Gods other attributes; for God is
truly Wise, truly Omnipotent, truly Holy, truly Gracious, and this is the glory
of God. And God is not only Deus verus, a true God; but Deus veritatis, a God
of truth: He is not only true in the concrete, but truth in the abstract: And
God is truth in all acceptations, and all the latitudes of it.

truth is opposed to falsehood. The strength of Israel cannot lie, 1 Samuel 15.
29. And this the Apostle says is impossible, Deus est verax non ob aliquam
virtutem a natura sua diversam, sed verax est sua essentia et natura.
Heb. 6. 18. The Sun may sooner turn it self into a cloud, then God can be
charged or blemished with a blot of untruth. A learned man observes, That truth
is no virtue different or distinguished from the essence of God, but is the
very nature and essence of God.

truth, as it is opposed to hypocrisy and dissimulation; God can put on a mask
to conceal himself, but not to counterfeit: His faithfulness reaches to the
clouds, Psalm. Numb. 23. 19.
36. 5. If God be angry, he does not feign himself so; He Tit. 1. 2.
truly whets his sword, and draws his arrow, Psalm. 7. 12. Viscera sunt Symbolum
aeque ac seeds miserationum. Alap.
Deuteronomy. 32. 42. And the soundings of his bowels are real music, they are not
artificial, Isa. 63. 15. God truly yearns over the penitential soul; his
compassions are kindled with real heat.

truth, as it is opposed to injustice and unequalness, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. The ways
of God are equal, without Deus ita purus, et syncerus est, ut nihil in eo
possit esse fuci, aut simulationis quicquid nobis praestat deus, et in nobis
efficit sine ulla hyporisi efficit, cum justificat, vere efficit justum. Zanch.
any crookedness and incurvation, Ezekiel. 18. 25. Man's ways indeed are full of
error and deviation; mankind is a crooked generation traversing their ways
like a wild Asses Colt, Job 11. 12. But all Gods proceedings are just and holy,
laid to the line of truth and righteousness; if they are laid in the balance,
there will be no lightness or failure in them. God he is most just, Job 34. 17,
19.

1. God is just in his Commandments, Romans 7. 12. no speck of injuriousness, or
over-severity sticks upon any of his commands.

2. God is just in his Sovereignty, 2 Samuel 23. 3. His Scepter Isa. 3. 8. 1 Pet.
1. 6. Isa. 45. 21. Zeph. 3. 5. Zach. 9. 9.
is a scepter of righteousness; he rules over all with an equal distribution of
right and judgment.

3. God is just in his punishments, Nehem. 9. 33. Deuteronomy. 16. 18. He strikes not
the sinner without provocation, Isa. 3. 8. Viae dei sunt consilia, et judicia
dei circa ecclesiam, et hosts ejus, quod illam affligi et premi sinit, illos
grassari, et florere patitur, injustum hoc carni videtur, sed justae sunt viae
dei. Par.
nor corrects the Saint without a necessity, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

4. God is just in all his ways and walkings among the children of men, Rev.
15. 3. There may be abstruces, but no iniquity in all his providential
proceedings; there may be a wheel within a wheel, Ezekiel. 1. 16. but no broken
wheel.

5. God is just in all his pardons and forgivenesses, 1 Job. 1. 9. Christ has
purchased our pardon, and God is just to issue it out.

But a little further to draw the curtain from before this illustrious
attribute of Gods truth, we must seriously consider and understand that,

essentially true. Truth is not his quality, but his nature; God is most truly
that Being which he sees, and knows himself to be, (viz.) an Eternal and most
perfect being. Augustine observes, That is false which seems to be Deus est
essentia vera, et veritas essentialis
one thing, but is another; but now God is truth it self, because he is of
himself, and in himself what he beholds himself to be. He is (...) Jehovah, a
true essence, and essential truth. Other Gods they are nominally so, not really
so; They have eyes, but there is no sight in their eyes, no visive faculty;
They have ears, but they hear not; noses have they, but they smell not; mouths
have they, but they speak not, Psalm. 115. 5, 6. Psalm. 115 5, 6.
And because God is truth, whatsoever he says and averrs of himself is most
true.

originally true. All created beings are really and Deus Idea est e^ scientia
(...) rerum omnium, quae extra ipsum sunt, ad qu^m Ideam omnia quae sunt,
conformata sunt, et ideo verae res sunt. Zan.
truly what they appear to be, because God was the Author of them, and they
were made according to the perfect Idea, which was in the mind of God; their
correspondence to the platform in Gods breast speaks them to be true things,
and true beings. God makes all things truly and substantially good, and they
are all fashioned according to the pattern of his purpose.

most perfectly true; In him there is no shade of deception; he is light
without darkness, the supreme good, without any blending of evil; he can
neither Tametsi res lucida omnino aliquid in se tenebrarum habere potest, sed
deus est veritas, quae secum non patitur aliquid salu^.
deceive, nor be deceived; he is all knowledge, without any black tincture of
ignorance; he is all truth, without any interruption of mistake.

supreamly true; He is the highest truth. The Law of God is the true measure
and rule of all Laws; and Laws are so far just, good and equal, as they accord
with the Divine A prima veritate quae est deus dependent omnes veritates.
Law: So every thing is true, as it is consentaneous and conformable to the
Counsels and Will of God, to that truth which is in the mind of God. As Ambrose
observes, No man can call Jesus, Lord, but in and by the Holy Ghost, because
whatsoever is true, by whomsoever it is spoken, it is from the holy spirit. All
truth flows from the spirit, as all lies are from Satan, he is the Father of
them.

unchangeably true. Man runs often from truth to error, deceiving and being
deceived; we often leave the plain way of truth, and go into the bywayes
Pulcherrima est veritas, per quam immutata, quae sunt, quae fuerunt, et quae
futura sunt dicuntur. Cic.
of error and mistake. The Church in all ages has had its Pests, as well as
its Pillars, and has been plagued with an Arrius, as well as blessed with an
Athanasius. Simon Magus has crept in among the fold of Christ, as well as
Simon Peter has had the charge of the flock of Christ: And besides, truth in
us is sometimes more clear, sometimes more clouded. Our understanding is
different and graduate in Amos 3. 6. Jer. 10. 10. Joh. 17. 3.
the apprehensions of it. But the Lord is always unchangeable in his truth,
because he is so in his being, in his will, in his wisdom, and other
attributes. God is not subject either to misapprehensions or recollections.

is true in all his works: Whither we consider his spiritual operations; whom
he justifies, he not only freely, but truly justifies; not only reprieves,
but pardons; suspends Isa. 46. 10. Romans 11. 29.
his execution, but makes him heir of life and salvation; If God call us, he
does it truly and effectually, not by Romans 8. 30.
a pretended invitation, but by a powerful and successful vocation. The
Apostle links predestination and vocation together in the same chain. Whom God
regenerates, he does truly convert to himself, gives them true faith, and the
blessed graces of his holy spirit. And so in the works of his hands. Angels are
glorious and real spirits; Man is a noble and a true creature, resembling the
God of truth, and bearing his image, he is no fantasm, no spectrum, as some
Genesis 1. 26.
heretics in the primitive times asserted of the body of Christ. God made all
things very good, Genesis 1. 31. and so (...)
no mixture of false semblance embased their worth. The Creatures are real
according to their appearances: The world is no dream, or fantastic landscape.

true in his words. He is true in the incarnate word. Christ is the true Son of
God, not suppositious; not the Son of Joseph, but the Son of God. He was truly
1 John 1. Joh. 7. 40. Heb. 5. 10. Joh. 12. 15. Col. 2. 9. Psalm. 19. 8.
God, and truly Man; a true Prophet, a true Priest, a true King, 1 John 5. 20.
And Christ calls himself the truth, Joh. 14. 6. God is likewise true in every
word which the Prophets or Apostles have pronounced, or laid down for Joh. 18.
31. Joh 18 37. Mat. 5. 18. Romans 3. 4.
our advice and instruction; truth is an indelible character of the Scriptures.
In his Word God is true, in every particle of it, in every tittle of it, Mat.
5. 18. And therefore as the Apostle says, Let God be true, and every man a
liar, Romans 3. 4. Christ asserts, he spoke nothing but the words of truth, and
he left heaven to converse with the Sons of men to bear testimony to the truth,
Joh. 8. 40. Joh. 8. 40.


true in his donations. He gives us true happiness, true grace, puts in us a
principle of truth; God writes us true Ephesians. 4. 30. Mundi bona sunt fugacia et
falsa, sed Christus robis confert spiritualia et aeterna, spiritum sanctum, et
vitam aeternam. Ger.
pardons, seals us by a spirit of truth to the day of redemption, give us true
knowledge, fills us with true joy, and sweetens our souls with real and true
consolations; He enriches us with true riches, Luke 16. 11. The profers of the
world are false, and evanid, false shows, and counterfeit satisfaction: But all
true complacencies and delights are to be found in Christ, and are treasured up
in God.

true in his promises, Those breasts which yield better liquor then wine, those
flowers which smell sweeter then Promissiones habent ubera vere vino meliora,
et magis fragrantia unguentis optimis. Bern.
the choycest ointments, (as Bernard says) sweeter then the flowers of
Paradise. All the promises in Christ are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. They are
all established in him, as a str^^^ure built upon a sure founda^ion. Indeed the
Lord is abundant in truth, Exodus 34. 6. He is encompassed with truth, as with a
girdle, Isa. 11. 5, 6. He is plenteous in 2 Cor. 1. 20. Exodus 34. 6. Isa. 11.
5, 6. Psalm. 86. 15. Psalm. 100. 5. Psalm. 91. 4. Psalm. 117. 2. Psalm. 146. 6.
truth, Psalm. 86. 15. Ready to write truth in our inward parts; He is eternal
in truth; he is holy and true in this generation, and so he will be in the
next, Psalm. 100. 5. He is preservative in his truth, his truth is both shield
and buckler, Psalm. 91. 4. So that truth is not only Gods glorious attribute,
but man's sure defense.

meditate on the Love of God. This is that influential attribute which sets God
on work; His love sets his eye on pitying, his head on contriving, his hand on
acting, his heart on melting: God out of love sent his Son Joh. 3. 16. Joh. 3.
19.
out of his bosom, scatters his Gospel in the world, that light which is more
glorious then the Sun. In love, God says Ezekiel. 16. 6.
to the sinner, live, Ezekiel. 16. 6. seeks after enemies for reconciliation, 2
Cor. 5. 19. and makes clods of earth, and 2 Cor. 5. 19.
poor worms heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. But for the further Heb. 1. 14.
discovery of this sweet attribute, we must search for it in its properties; it
may be discerned in its characters, though not in its cause. Now there are
diverse explanatory characters of divine love.

love of God is eternal love. Gods love to poor man had no beginning, there
never was any time when the heart 2 Timothy 1. 9. Jer 31. 3. Hos. 11. 9. Apostolus
tempora secularia vult, quae simul cum seculo, et mundo fluere, et volui
caeperunt, sed ante tempora secularia, quod ante mundi constitutionem, ante
temporis et mundi origine^ est. Ansel.
of God was not set upon a Saint: He loved him in his futurition, when the
believer was to be; a child of God had a being in his love, before he had a
being in the world. The Saint first lay in the womb of the decree of love,
before he lay in the womb of his natural parent. God saw Saul when he was hid
among the stuff, 1 Samuel 10. 22. and God saw and loved the Saint when he was hid
in an eternal purpose of grace. Chrysostom observes, That this is a discovery
of the immensity of Gods love, that he loved us before the world was made; He
had us near his heart before all time, and had careful and solicitous thoughts
for us particularly, and predestined us through Christ to eternal salvation.
In Gods love to man, this is stupendous and admirable, that he who is clothed
with Majesty, and encompassed with infinite happiness, Deuteronomy. 7. 7.
who enjoys all good in himself, and is indige^^^ nothing complacential, should
set his heart upon poor dust from all everlasting.

love of God is free, and drawn out by no incentive. Cyril observes, There is
no utility or profit in man to lay any Deus nos amat sine sua utilitate, et
commodo: superflua est deo creaturarum productio quantum ad dei perfectionem
attinet, hoc enim erat deus ante quam nos creati essemus, quod nunc etiam est,
nihil ei attulimus. Cyr.
engagement upon God. The production of the creatures belongs nothing to the
perfection of God; he was infinitely and absolutely perfect before; when we
were created, we brought nothing to him, and if we were annihilated, we should
detract nothing from him. God made us to love us, but he loved us before he
made us. Indeed naturally man has no beauty, no attractive quality to endear
or engage the heart of God to him. One says well, We are made, not born
beautiful; God plants his grace in us, and then loves his grace in us; gives us
his Christ, and then loves us for the sake of his Christ.

love of God is infinite and unmeasurable, and admits of no comparison: The
love of Relations, the passionate love Isa. 49. 15. 2 Samuel 1. 26.
of women, nay, the love of a Jonathan, which surpassed the love of women, are
but painted fire, compared to the sweet Amor dei gratuitus est, quia nulla re
per^otus suit ad nos amandos. Zan.
and sacred heats of divine love. The love of an indulgent Father, of a tender
Mother, of the dearest Husband, of the most affectionate wife, are no more to
divine affection, nay, infinitely less then the light of a glowworm compared
to the light of the Sun. Read a line or two of Gods love in humane Dilatat amor
terminos suos, extendit funes, expandit sinus, disponens omnia suavitur. Bern.
instances, in the meltings of a David over his Son Absolon, in the
heartbreaking loves of a Mary Magdalen to Jesus Christ, Luke 2. 38. How did
the hearts of these Saints faint away in an ecstasy of unspeakable affection?
But Christ in a greater and more of unspeakable affection takes our nature 2 Samuel 18. 33.
upon him, that we might wade to Canaan through the Red Sea of his blood. In
the mystery of our Redemptiot, says Romans 5. 10.
Bernard, Gods love was dilated, and passed all bounds, outstretched all cords,
opens the whole bosom, and disposes all things sweetly, for the
accomplishment of that great design.

love is unchangeable, and withdrawn by no diversion. Whom God loves he loves
to the end, Joh. 13. 1. There is Joh. 13. 1.
no unstayedness in the love of God; whom he loves, he loves freely, fully, and
finally; whom God loves, though he do not find them lovely, he makes them so;
and although their beauty does not allure his love, yet his love does confer
their Psalm. 45. 2. Col. 1. 27.
beauty, he puts grace into their lips, and draws Christ upon their hearts,
that there may be no cause of change or repenting. Further to evidence this
truth, we must consider, there is nothing in the Saints can make a change in
the love of Psalm. 34. 19.
God.

afflictions; God pities, he does not throw off his afflicted ones; he delivers
them, but he does not disown them, he lays his rod upon them, but he sets his
heart upon Isa. 43 2. Isa. 63. 9.
them; he is present with them in all their troubles, Isa. 43. 2. He
sympathizeth with them in all their troubles, Isa. 63. Isa. 48. 10.
9. Nay, oftentimes he takes the opportunity to show greater favor to them in
their troubles, Isa. 48. 10. Then he selects them for himself: The afflictions
of the Saint they draw out, but they do not draw off the heart of God.

temptations. How many promises has God made to his tempted Saints? 1 Cor. 10.
13. He will sweeten 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and proportionate their temptations, 1 Cor. 10. 13. He will deliver them out
of temptations, 2 Pet. 2. 9. he would not 2 Pet. 2. 9.
have them grieved for, but rejoice in temptations, Jam. 1. 2. Jam. 1. 2.
He will bring Satan under their feet, Romans 16. 20. He will Romans 16. 20.
tread the Tempter under them: All these expressions evidence the care of God
over his tempted ones. The temptations of the Saint may discover Gods
watchfulness, but no way divert his loving kindness.

Transgressions. If any thing would sponge our names out of the Book and heart
of God, it is sin; for sin Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 John 3 4. Deuteronomy. 9. 8. 2 ^am. 24. 15. 2 Samuel 24 25. Psalm. 89. 32, 33. Omnia cooperantur in sanctorum bonum, etiam et
peccata. August.
grieves the spirit of God, breaks the commands of God, provokes the
displeasure of God; yet God can show his wrath against the sin, and his love to
the sinner; God punished David for his foul sins, yet he pitied him after his
foul sins; Sin grieves, not alienates the heart of God from offending Saints:
But let not this encourage any in sin, David's tears and bitter sufferings are a
forcible argument against all such presumption; though God will not take off
his heart, yet he will hide his face from offending believers. But to close up
my discourse on this blessed attribute; the love of God participates something
of all his attributes.

wise love; He chooses according to the purposes Ephesians. 1. 4. Amor dei non est
ex ignorantia, nec ex passione, sed omnis dei amor cum summa aequitate et
sapientia conjunctus est.
of his grace, and then makes his Elected ones fit for his love; then he makes
them spiritual, believing, holy, fruitful, that he may take delight in them. He
determines mercy to a poor sinner, out of the wisdom of his choice, not out of
the goodliness of the sinner. In infinite wisdom he selects his little flock
out of the mass and generations of mankind.

powerful love. The softness of Gods bowels can break the hardness of man's
heart; the love of God can heal Romans 12. 2. Formam vitae spiritualis induantus;
Forma enim constantior est, et interior, et ad substantiam pertine^. Chrysostom
natures, kill lusts, plant graces, change hearts, convert stubborn sinners,
and accomplish whatsoever is strange and glorious. If God love thee, he will
conform thee to his will, and carry thee through all the hazzards and
difficulties of this life, and never leave thee, till he has lodged thee in
his own bosom.

omniscient love. God sees from eternity the waywardness and obstinacy of those
whom he chooses to salvation; Ephesians. 1. 4.
and yet the force of his love is not overcome by that foreseen petulancy, but
he in time removes it, and man's unworthiness puts grace upon a greater attempt,
but no way Dilexit deu^, quos praescivit fore ingratos, immo hostos suos.
drives God to a sentence of neglect or rejection. Indeed here is the wonder of
Gods love; he from eternity sees us a mass of corruption and sin, and yet no
discouragement withstands or weakens his love, but in due time he beautifies
his chosen ones, and loves them everlastingly for their comeliness and beauty;
he foresees all disengagements, but decrees to remove them.

just love. God loves not, but where he sees something lovely. Indeed the
duties of sinners are distasteful to Isa. 1. 13. Prove. 28. 9. Job 1. 1. Psalm.
7. 10. Psalm. 112. 2. Prove. 15. 8.
God: But God loves the Saints because of their uprightness. The wise man
says, The upright in their way are the delight of the Lord, Prove. 11. 20. The
curious work of grace in the heart of a Saint, pourtrayed with so much wonder,
and drawn with so much exactness by the pencil of the divine spirit, is a
beauty God is pleased with, and fixes his love upon, and does evidentially
declare, that though he is free, yet he is most just in his favor and
affection.

CHAP. XVIII. God is much to be admired in his Works of Creation.
meditate in the morning of the Lords day on the works of the Lord. David was
much busied in this contemplation, Psalm. 77. 12. He usually took his views and
Psalm. 77. 12. Psalm. 143. 9.
prospects of the beautiful issues of creating power, which are the evidences
of the wisdom, goodness, and almightiness of the Great Creator. How does the
Psalmist in the beginning of the nineteenth Psalm fall into the admiration
Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
of the heavens, that bespangled Court, where God took up his eternal abode and
residence? How is David's prospect checkerd and delighted with beholding the
firmament which is embroydered with stars; that large branch which holds those
twinkling tapers which enlighten the world in the Psalm. 8. 4. Est autem (...)
ob ornatu appellatus, tota haec pulchra machina, quod ea nihil sit Ornatius et
pulchrius, non tam propter pulchras rerum formas, formosamque coeli faciem, et
splendidissimam lucem, quam etiam propter pulcherrimam totius mundi, rerumque
omnium inter se (...), quatenus a deo creantur et reguntur. Zanch. (...) Plato.
Job 28. 4, 5, 6. Si quis varia motuum genera, circularem, rectum, obliquum, et
alias temporum vicissitudines, et distinctiones in momenta, horas, menses,
annos, si quis attento animo omnia haec contemplatur, et perpendet, poterit
facilius sentire, nihil h^c mundi machina pulchrius.
night-season. And in the eighth Psalm, especially in the fourth verse, David
goes down stairs into the lower room of the Earth, and there he contemplates on
man, that Microcosme, the world bound up in a lesser volumn; and how does he
enlarge his wondering thoughts on this Viceroy of God, Man, who is the Universe
contracted. And in these meditations, let the Psalmist be our pattern; for
meditation on Gods works becomes the blessed Sabbath. In that Psalm, whose
title is a Psalm for the Sabbath, (viz.) the ninety second, David begins it
with holy admiration of Gods works in the world, Psalm. 92. 5. And truly it is a
dishonor to a workman to manifest abundance of skill and ingenuity, and none
to take notice of his workmanship; for a Limner to draw a rare piece, and no
eye to admire his Artifice, to draw the curtain from before the Picture, and to
observe its Curiosities. God has his mighty works to be remembered and wondered
at. It is said of Pythagoras, that he lived sequestered from men in a Cave for a
whole Year together, that he might meditate on the abstruse points of
Philosophy. On the Lords day, let us take some time to ponder the infinite
perfections which appear in the operations of Gods hand. Alas! the choicest
works of man, compared to the smallest works of God, are but as the childrens
houses of cards or dirt, compared to the loftiest Courts, or the stateliest
Palaces of the world. The Lilly has more magnificence and beauty in it, then
Solomon in all his glory, Mat. 6. 29. Solomon was not so gorgeous in his
richest Attire, as the Lilly in its beautiful color and blush. The meanest of
Gods works* has more rarity and wonder in it, then Archites his wooden Dove,
which was soequally poysed with its own weight, that it hung firm in the Air
without falling; or Archimedes his Horology, wherein the motions of the Sun,
Moon and Stars were so lively depainted. There is so much of God appearing in
the Heavens, that many have taken them for a God, and gave them divine worship.
The Persians adore the rising Sun, and admire the daily visit of that glorious
body, which they think little less then a Deity. When we meditate on the works
of God, we have a large field; here our souls may wander from Sea to Land, from
Earth to Heaven, from Time to Eternity; yea, we may walk upon the Sun, Moon and
Stars, and enter into Heaven it self, the Paradise of God. Every Creature we
cast our eye upon on the blessed Sabbath should be a flower to refresh our
Meditations; we should now feed our Graces by our Senses, and the meditation on
created beings should conduct us to Christ. When we look upon the Sun, we
should look up to Christ the Sun Mal. 4. 2. Numb. 24. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 19. Joh.
10. 7. Ephesians. 1. 22. Isa. 61. 10. Rev. 15. 3. Joh. 14. 6. Joh. 1. 1. Joh. 6. 51.
Gal. 2. 20.
of Righteousness; every star may mind us of the star of Jacob, that bright
morning star; when we look on our houses Christ is the door; when we look on
our bodies, Christ is our head; when we look upon our clothes, Christ is the
garment of Salvation; when we look upon our friends and relations, Jesus Christ
is our husband, Cant. 2. 16. our Friend, Joh. 15. 10. our Beloved, Cant. 4. 16.
our King, Rev. 15. 3. If we walk, he is our way; if we read, Christ is the
word; if we eat or drink, Christ is our food; if we live, Christ is our life:
Thus a gracious heart may make a spiritual use of all earthly objects, and
every Creature which presents it self, may supply our contemplations on Christ;
And so we may happily begin our Sabbath.

But more particularly:

most noble works of the Creation. And here the Angels heighten and sublimate
our meditations, the Sun and the stars enlighten them, the several pieces of
the Universe enlarge them, and the sweet fields and flowers refresh them, the
thunder and lightning awaken them, the musical notes of the birds delight them.
Our Psalm. 18. 13.
meditations are raised in beholding the Creatures. The Creationis mundi
efficiens causa non sola est Dei bonitas, sed bonitas cum summa sapientia
conjuncta.
contemplation of created beings turned the Prophet into a Philosopher; he
observed the Wisdom and Power of God in the worlds Creation, Jer. 10. 12. there
says the Prophet, He has made the Earth by his power, he has established the
world by his wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his discretion. How
sweetly does the Prophet Philosophize upon the raising and settling the Fabric
of the world. The Jer. 10. 12.
contemplation of created beings turned the Psalmist into an Job 35. 5.
Orator: How eloquently does David paraphrase upon the Psalm. 104. 2.
wonders and works of the Creation? Psalm. 104. 2. there says the Psalmist, He
stretches out the Heavens like a curtain, lays the beams of his Chambers in
the waters, who makes the clouds his Chariot, who walks upon the wings of the
wind. The Psalmist spends largely upon the treasury of his Rhetoric, to set
out the excellency of the worlds Architect. Nay, the contemplation of created
beings turns Nomen, gloria, decus creatoris, quia Coelum est nominatissima pars
mundi. Martin
holy Job into an Astronomer; he views with admiration Arcturus, Orion; the
Pleiades, and casts his eye upon the Chambers of the South, Job 9. 8, 9. And
then he is folded up with amazement at the glory and power of the Creator.
There are some who derive the word (...) the Job 26. 13.
Heavens, from (...) to be amazed. Indeed a prospect of that glorious body, the
Heavens, the roof of the great house of the world, that bespangled and enameled
Canopy over our heads, can drive the most considerate person into amazement.
The vastness and beauty of the body of the Heavens, the swiftness and
regularity of their motions and agitations, which is above all reason, can
easily raise men into wonder and trasportation. In Scripture we sometimes meet
with the Heavens of Heavens, 1 Kings 8. 27. and with the Nehem. 9. 6. Psalm.
148. 4. Isa. 63. 15. Obstupuit propter insignem vastitatem istius corporis,
quod ipsi nos aspicientes in stuporem rapimur. iscat.
third heavens, 2 Cor. 12. 2. There are likewise the highest heavens, and yet
God made them, Genesis 1. 4. and he can bow them as he lists, Psalm. 18. 9. He
can stretch them to what latitude he pleases, Isa. 45. 12. He can span them,
Isa. 48. 13. And if he be angry and inflamed, he can throw a black cloth over
them, and shade their glory, Isa. 50. 3. Jer. 4. 23. 28. and melt them, Psalm.
68. 8. and cause them to vanish like a smoke, Isa. 51. 6. Amos 9. 6. Nay, how
does Holy Paul like an exact Logician, draw the conclusion of the glory of
things invisible, by the splendor and excellency of things visible, Romans 1. 20.

But further to d^late on this subject; God created the body Acts 4. 15.
of this world, Genesis 1. 1. The inhabitants of this World, Angels and Men, Isa.
42. 5. Mat. 2. 11. The light and Psalm. 89. 12.
Luminaries of this world, to distinguish it from a great and Amos 4* 13.
darker prison, Genesis 1. 14. He created the garnishes and delights Psalm. 74. 17.
of this world, the soft waves, the sweet fields, the Si interrogas quota hora
creabantur Angeli? Resp, prima cum coelum creabatur. Si interrogas quo loco?
Resp. in loco beatorum. Zanch.
shady clouds, the piercing winds, to fan and cool the world, and the different
seasons to beautify the year with successive alternations. Pontanus
Chancellor of Saxony propounds to be viewed, the most beautiful arch work of
heaven, resting on no post but Gods power, and yet standing fast for ever, the
clouds as thin as the liquor contained in them, yet they hang, and move, salute
us* only, and threaten us, and pass we know not whither. Now all these things
may feed our meditations on the morning of the Lords day; (though divine
medidation may become any part of that sacred day.) Augustine August.
finds no reason, why God should be six days in making the world, seeing he
could have made it with a word, but that we should be in a muse when we think
of it, and should think on his works in that order he made them. Our
meditations should take leisure in the survey of them, and not pass them over
in a short and momentany flight. And besides the reason urged by St. Augustine,
we may take notice of a second, (viz.) what a beautiful and sweet prospect
meditation shall have in the survey of the works of the Creation, which may
entertain our view for some considerable Genesis 19. 3.
time, and may stop and stay our meditation, as Lot did the Angels, and force
it to a retirement.

meditate on the Sun, that glorious, though inanimate creature: What is the
Sun, but the eye of the world? Quid potest esse tam apertum tamque perspicuum,
cum coelum aspe^cimus et coelestia contemplati sumus, quam aliquid esse Numen
praestantissimae mentis, quo haec reguntur. Tull. de Not. deorum. lib. 2.
If we take notice of its situation and motion, the contemplation will be
rare; It is fixed in the midst of the Planets, that it may dispense its light
and heat for the greater advantage of the lower world. By its course from East
to West, it causes the agreeable vicissitude of day and night, and maintains
the amiable war between light and darkness; And this distinction of time is
necessary for the pleasure and profit of the world. The Sun by its rising
chases away the shades of the night, to delight us with the beauties of the
stupendous Creation; It is Gods Herald to call us forth to discharge our work.
The Sun governs our labors, conducts our industry, and when it retires from
us, a curtain of darkness is drawn over the world; And this very darkness in
some sense enlightens us, for it makes visible the Ornaments Hunc diem conf^cit
Sol non motusuo proprio, qui est per Zodiacum, sed motuquo a primo mobili
movetur. Zanch.
of Heaven, (viz.) the Stars, and shows us their Aspects, Dispositions and
Motions which were hid in the day. This darkness unbends the world, and gives a
short and necessary truce to man's labors, and recreates their wasted spirits.
The Sun finisheth its compass about the world in twenty four hours, a very
short space for so long and tedious a circuit. The diversities of seasons
proceed from the motion of Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3.
the Sun; and as the motion of the Sun from East to West makes day and night,
so its motion from North to South causes Summer and Winter, and by both these
the world is preserved; Summer crowns the Earth with flowers and fruits; and
Winter, which seems to be the death of nature, robbing the earth of its heat
and life, contributes very much to the universal good; it prepares the Earth by
its cold and moisture for the returning Sun, and seasons. Indeed the motion of
the Sun is admirable, running ten or twelve millions of leagues every day,
without failing one minute of its appointed stage, and inviolably observes its
due and constant order.

meditate on the Air, whose extent fills the space between Heaven and Earth; it
is of a pure and reviving nature, and easily transmits the influences of the
Heavens; And as One observes, It is the Arsenal for Thunders, Lightnings,
whereby God summons the world to dread and reverence; Pedro d' Mexia Imper.
Histor. Diaphanus est Aer, nisi vero talis esset, species rerum coloratarum, et
figurarum, adeoque omnium rerum visibilium recipi non possit, nec ad oculos
nostros deferri, ac proinde nihil a nobis videri; qu^^e igitur est hoc
beneficium, quodnam speculum hoc pulchrius? etc.
insomuch that Caligula, Rome's Emperor, was wont to fly under his Bed at the
noise of the Thunder. The Air it is the treasury of the clouds, which
dissolving in gentle showers, refreshes the earth, and calls forth its seeds
into flourish and fruitfulness; it fans the earth with the wings of the wind,
allaying those intemperate heats which otherwise would be injurious to the
worlds inhabitants. The Air is the region for the birds, wherein they pass, us
so many m^ving Engines praising the Creator, the Air being only their larger
musick-room. The Air serves for the breath and life of man, and is divided into
several Regions; there are three Regions of the Air, all useful and admirable
in their kind. And as Zanchy observes; By the Air things become visible, and
colors are seen in their proper comeliness and beauty.

meditate on the Sea, that vast body of waters which fill the hollow and
excavated places of the Earth, as the Oceanus totam per circuitum terram,
eamque ex^avatam instar magni, et latissimi circuli ambiens, efficit ut terra
supra et infra sit ^quis detenta idque ex dei mandato, tum ad perfectionem,
ornatumque universi, tum ad plantarum, et animantium salutem.
blood does the veins of man. Here the Leviathan plays and sports it self in
its liquid traces and windings, the high and proud waves serving to racket and
bandy this Sea Monster from one place to another, Job 41. 1. Psalm. 104. 26. And
in these great waters Gods admirable power is seen; that they should be reined
in by so weak a bridle, as the sand, and its rage should be snaffled by it:
when the ways beat upon the shore in their insultation, you would fear they
would swallow up all, but they no sooner touch the sand, but all is turned into
froth, and its watrish insolence evaporates. How does the Lord descant upon
these mountanous billows, and this swelling Ocean? Job 38. 8, 9, 10, 11. Who
shut up the Sea with doors when it brake forth, as if it had issued out of the
womb? When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkness a
swadling-band for it, and Job 38* 8, 9, 10, 11.
brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors, and said, Hitherto
shall thou come, and no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. The
extent of the Sea is likewise to be considered; it washes the four parts of the
world, and becomes the Bond of the Universe; by it the most distant Nations are
united; it is the medium of Trade and Commerce, (in which Divine goodness is
much to be observed and adored) and Commodities peculiar to several Countries
are made Common to all. Thus great advantage and delight accru^s to man, who
sails upon this kind Element to the Port of his desire.

meditate on the Earth; Consider its position, it hangs in the midst of the Air
to be a convenient habitation (...). Plato in Cratylo.
for us. Its stability is rare; the Air it self is not able to bear a feather,
and yet the whole Earth remains in it fixed and unshaken, notwithstanding all
the storms and tempests which beat upon it; surely the invincible and powerful
hand of God must needs support and sustain it. We may likewise contemplate on
the various dispositions of the parts of the Isa. 44. 24. Job 38. 4, 6. Terra
corpus est simplex, grave, solidum, et densum in medio mundi, tanqu^m
fundamentum ipsius collocatum eoque proprio in loco immobile, et rotundum. Zanc.
earth, the Mountanes, Valleys, Rivers, which are as the veins to carry
nourishment to this great body. Nor are Plants to be pretermitted, their roots
whereby they draw their nourishment, and the firmness of their stalk, by which
they are defended against the violence of the winds, the expansion of their
leaves by which they receive the dew of Heaven. So now all the parts of the
world may afford fuel for holy meditation. The Heavens give light, the Air
breath, the Sea Commerce, the Earth habitation; all these things being pondered
and medita^ed on, in them we may read the Name of God indelibly printed: Our
meditation may flutter its wings over these considerables, and fly into
admiration of the Infiniteness, Power, Excellencies and Perfections of the
Great Creator.

meditate on Man; the abridgement and recapitulation of the whole Creation. Let
us consider and observe Psalm. 139. 15. 16. (...).
the composure of his body; He was fearfully and wonderfully made, as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 139. 15, 16. Let us take notice of the powers of his
soul; and who but an infinite Agent could unite this soul and body, and clasp
them together, an immaterial soul, with an earthly body? Who but God, the great
Jehovah, could assign them both their form, situation, temperature and fitness
for those uses to which they serve? Acts 17. 27, 28. We may indeed see God in
the activity of our hands, in the beauty of our eyes, in the vivacity of our
senses; and if we look inward, what distinct and admirable faculties is the
soul endowed and enriched with? The understanding exercises the Empire over all
other (...). Arist.
faculties; the will pursues with eagerness, either that which is good, or that
which appears to be so; the memory preserves fresh and lively, the pictures of
those things which Galerus antiquissimus, and peritissimus medi^us parts
hominis corporales delineans in admirationem raptus, (...), ex clamat.
are committed to its charge: Surely this consideration would make our
meditations on the Lords day most sweet and delectable; and what a golden
thread of divine wisdom runs through the whole Universe! The Order of the world
shows the wisdom of God, Prove. 3. 19, 20. The Earth is set lowermost, as the
foundation of the rest, the Sea is pent within its Channels, the Air is above
them both, and the Heavens are the highest loft of the Crea^ion. And so
admirable order may be seen in making the world; God proceeding from things
imperfect to things more perfect. First there is the rude mass, then the Heaven
and the Earth, glorious Psalm. 104. 24.
creatures, but without life; then Herbs and Plants which 1 Cor. 1. 21.
have a vegetative life, but without sense or motion; then the brute Creatures,
which have sense and motion, but want reason; and last of all, Man, whom God
endows with a reasonable soul, and makes him after his own image; And Genesis 1.
1, 2, 11, 20, 26.
in this order we may perceive, first, the dwelling place is appointed, then
the food, then the creature which is to feed 1 Kings 10. 7.
upon it; the beast upon the herbs, and man upon the beasts. The Queen of Sheba
was astonished at Solomon's wisdom, when she perceived the well ordering of his
family: Certainly Abraham cum suis, civis erat non Canaan, sed Coeli, in Canaan
domum haber^ noluit, se^ in mobili semper habitavit tabernaculo, qui oculos
jugiter conjiciebat in coelestem civitatem. Ansel.
did we observe the order of nature, we should more wonder at the infinite
wisdom of God, Heb. 11. 10. Amos 9. 6. The several parts of the world are
sometimes compared to a building; and in this great house every part conspires
to the beauty, service and decency of the whole. The roof of this building is
Heaven; the Spears are Chambers and stories in the Heavens; the foundation of
this building is the Earth, Job 38. 5, 6. The Stars and glorious Luminaries are
windows in this house, and the Sea is the watercourse which serves this
magnificent Structure. And it is observable, that every thing in the world is
fitted for use and service. The workmans skill is as much commended in the use
of an instrument, as in the making of it. Now the upper Isa. 40. 28.
Heavens are made for the habitation of the Saints; the middle Isa. 43. 15.
Heavens to give light, heat and influence; the Air or lower Isa. 42. 5.
heavens to give breath to sustain both man and beast, the Isa. 45. 12.
fruits are for food, the plants and herbs for medicine. Galen Mal. 2. 10.
says, there are six hundred muscles in the body of man, and Ephesians. 3. 9.
every one fitted for ten uses; and so for bones, nerves, arteries and veins,
whoever shall observe them, their situation, use, correspondence, cannot choose
but fall into admiration of the wise Creator. The wisdom of Men and Angels
cannot mend the least thing in a Fly, the figure, color, quantity or quality
of a worm, or of a flower, all which are made with so much exactness. And it
was no less then blasphemy in Alphonso the Spanish King, to aver, That had he
been the Maker of the World, he would have cast it into a better form. No, All
the works of Creation are stupendous and admirable, and are as so many
asterisks to point out the glory and fame of that incomprehensible being, who
was the author and founder of them.

CHAP. XIX. God is most wonderful in the works of his providence.
meditate on the works of Providence. God is seen and manifested, not only in
the making, but Duplex est in deo potentia, una qua novit omnia; altera per
quom (...). Amm.
in the governing of the world, not only in the power of his hand, but in the
wisdom of his head; he has not only made the ship, but he sits at the stern,
and is the pilot to guide it. Divine providence will be more fitted and suited
to holy meditation, if we trace providence

conservation of all things in their beings. By Gods immutable and powerful
providence all things are sustained Quomodo aut Sapiens esset deus mundi
conditor, sine sciret, aut omnipotens si non posset aut bonus si nollet mundum
quem condidit cur are and gubernare.
and supported, Acts 17. 28. It is a good saying of a learned man, How could
God be unspeakably wise, if he knew not, be infinitely powerful if he could
not, be admirably good if he would not govern, and take care of the world he
has created? A Master of a Family will take care for, and support the Children
of his loins, the servants of his house; and the place of his habitation where
he himself has taken up his abode.

sustains all things by his good Providence, is easily to be demonstrated, if
we look upon the world in general: He hangs the Earth upon no king, Job (...).
26. 7. And what then should sustain that great, vast, and massy body, but the
supporting hand of the Almighty? He not only sustains a Body of Earth, but
gives life, and breath unto all things, Acts 17. 25. The World does not only
rest steady, as leaning upon the Pil^ar of Gods Power, but all creatures in the
world have their life and motion from him; He puts a principle of life into
them to travel, and flit Damascen. 1 Ephesians. 11.
up and down the world; their steps are guided and given Acts 17. 24, 25, etc
Prove. 15. 13. John 5. 17. Annon Dei manu omnia sustentantur and reguntur? certe
durare non possunt, presertim tam diu, cum omnia sint ex nihilo. Z^nch.
by the Lord; Their locomotive power is from him. And God does not only give
breath, but bread to his creatures, Psalm. 33. 19. He spreads the Table for Man,
his Viceroy in the world; And the young Ravens cry to him, (all the fealty
they can show) they cry, and they have their supplies from him, Psalm. 147. 9.
Luke 12. 24. And God does not only make provision f^r man, but afford
protection to him. His food shall sustain him; and man's Sword shall not d^stroy
him; God will not only exhibit supply, but keep off danger. This likewise is
verified in inanimate things. He numbers the Stars, that one of those glistring
tapers shall not be missing, nay, he calls them by their Names, Psalm. 147. 4.
to show his exact providence for the conservation of Job 5. 15.
them; not one can be wanting, but the defect will soon appear, he has an
exact muster roll of them: He calls them Job 5. 10.
over continually, and every Star must answer to its Name. He convocates the
Clouds, he summons them, and then m^lts them into showers, and every drop of
Rain alarms the Psalm. 147. 8.
grass to rise, and spring, not only in the Fields, Job 5. 10. Toll animam e
corpore, quid fiet de corpore? Peribit, dissolvetur: Quan^o magis si
gubernationem de mundo tollas?
but upon the lofty mountains, Psalm. 147. 8. So God preserves the Earth; not
only in its poyse and Being, but in its feracity and plenty. And its
observable, if God contract our time in the world, there is no warding off the
stroke of death, Luke 12. 20. And if God lengthen out our days beyond what
nature promises, then death has no stroke to give, Isa. 38. 5. In a word, he
that made us in the womb, Job 31. 15. keeps us in the world, fixes our time
both for our Job 31. 15. Psalm. 31. 15.
abode and departure, Psalm. 81. 15. All things depend upon A deo mundum regi
fateri oportet, etiamsi nulla haberemus sacrarum literarum testimonia; Deus est
quasi anima illum sustentans.
Gods b^ck, hang upon his hand, live upon his bounty; If he hide his face they
are troubled, and if he take away their breath, they die, Psalm. 104. 28, 29. It
is Jehovah, who is the pillar to support the world, who is the first being to
give life to the world, who is the Sovereign to rule and govern the world, and
who can not only untile, but cast down this beautiful fabric, when he pleases.
Upon the Basis of Divine All Sufficiency the Universe rests.

general, but his care and preservation is most illustrious and conspicuous in
the keeping and defending of Haec est illa ecclesia, cujus causa reliqua omnia
condita sunt, and gubernantur.
his Church. Let us observe this,

First, In single persons: Daniel is preserved in the Den, Dan. 6. 22. Jeremy
in the Dungeon, Jer. 40. 4. Paul and Silas in the Prison, Acts 16. 39. Lot
among the Sodomitical Rout, Genesis 19. 11.

Secondly, In lesser numbers, the three Children are preserved in the fire,
Dan. 3. 25. O the admirable providence 1 Cor. 12. 6. Romans 11. 35.
of God! The Furnace shall be a field to walk in, and the flames shall suspend
their unkind heat, and not disturb their recreation: Gods providence can shadow
and shelter his precious ones, when designed for fuel and destruction.

Thirdly, In particular Churches, Rev. 3. 10. Temptations Rev. 3. 10.
troop together and besiege the Saints, but God in that hour breaks their
ranks, and routs them, and rescues his people from those destructive Onsets.

Fourthly, In the Church in general. The Church of God was upon the brink of
ruin in the time of Haman, the Bill for their execution was signed and sealed,
Esth. 3. 12, 13. But then God tore the Bill, and brought the promoter of it
Est. 3. 12, 13. Esse in Deo Providentiam, (...) su^ (...)gare (...) qui^ Ratio
ejus ita cum Divinitate conju^cta est ut nullo pacto possu separari. Leid. Prof.
to shameful ruin and destruction, Esth. 7. 10. God wounded the hairy scalpe
of the Churches enemies. Let us further trace the providence of God toward his
people, and it will appear nothing but a stock and treasury of wonders.

First, His earliest thoughts of love to his people, how are they a Morning
star to cast light on the excellency of Divine providence? He loved his own
f^^m Eternity, Ephesians. 1. 4. Every Saint lay in the womb of Eternal love, before
he lay in the womb of his Mother; God from all everlasting laid his people near
his heart. Josh 21. 45. 2 Kings 9. 36. 2 Kings 10. 10 Jer 31. 3.


Secondly, In time God gives his precious ones a Being, to capacitate them for
future good things. Non-entiti^s are incapable of good or evil. God creates his
people, and so brings them upon the stage of the world to act those parts (...).
of honor he has designed them unto: He who has reserved love for his Saints,
must give them a Being to be receptive of it.

Thirdly, In process of time God calls and converts his people, and brings them
home to himself by a work of Regeneration: They are not only born by Gods
power, but Psalm. 113. 7. Luke 1. 52. ^ob 5 12, 13. John 3. 5.
new born by Gods grace; and so God qualifies them for glorious things which
shall be revealed, 1 Pet. 5. 1. He gives them faith, John 1. 12, 13. And faith
gives them power to be called the Sons of God. Now he adopts them In toto mundo
nihil est ^ divinae providentiae legibus exemptum, fatendum tamen est, Major
cura est de hominibus, maxim^ de Sanctis.
into his own Family. God does not only bring them into the outward Court of
the world, but into the inward Court of his own peculiar Household, Gal. 6. 10.
Ephesians. 2. 19. They are now his friends, John 15. 15. His Jewels, Mal. 8. 17. His
Spouse, Cant. 4. 9. The beloved of his Soul, Jer. 12. 7. His chosen ones, Isa.
41. 8. Kings and Priests, Romans 1. 6. Thus glori^us is Gods providence toward
his people.

Fourthly, Further to trace Divine providence in reference to the Saints; God
preserves them in the world as a spark in an Ocean. When the whole world was
drowned, God prepared an Ark for Noah and his F^mily; and when the Genesis 7 1,
Inhabitants of the world had no peni-house to secure them, God provided a
shelter for this holy Family: When all perished in the storm, they had a Haven
to put into. The Church of God in Egypt they were in bondage, but they were in
Being. The Taskmasters had a hard hand over them, Annon hae mirabiles
ecclesiae conservationes aperte declarant Deum singulari Providentia illam
tueri?
but God spread a large wing over them, and brought them in time out of their
servitude, in glory and triumph; and made their way through the waves, when the
waters were their walls, their security, not their ruin. When God sent his
people into Babylon, it was to chastise them, not to confound them, to humble
them under their sin, not to sink them under their burden; these Captives at
last were Conquerors, Exodus 14. 29.
and erected their Trophies in Jerusalem: For he had thoughts of peace, and not
of evil, to give his people an Jer. 29. 11.
expected end says the Prophet Jeremy: And God seems to have tears in his
eyes, when he has a rod in his hand. And indeed how would Christ's little flock
survive, if God by a Luke 12.
wonderful act of providence did not rein in the Wolves, and put bounds to
their brutish severity?

Fifthly, God gives daily testimonies of his love to, and care over his people.
He commands the Earth to nourish and sustain their outward man; God provides
flocks for Abraham, Corn for Jacob and his Family, and the Son Joseph Psalm. 24.
1. Genesis 42. 25. Exodus 16. 13. Exodus 17. 6. 1 Kings 17. 4, 6.
shall help to support the Father. Nay rather than want shall befall his
people, he will fetch water out of the Rock, shower down Manna, send Quails
from Heaven, prepare a Table in the Wilderness: The Empty cruse shall 1 King^
17 14
be filled to support the Prophet, and the Ravens shall dish in provisions for
Elijah. And God does not only feed his people with bread that perishes, John
6. 27. but with that Neque corpori neque animae ulla in part deest Deu^ e
terra nutrit corpora, e coelis animas verbo, spiritu, and donis innumerabil bus.
which endures to Eternal life. The Saint lives not by bread only, but by
every word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat. 4. 4. God feeds the
weak Saint with milk, the sincere milk of his word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and those who
are grown to a higher stature in Religion, he gives stronger meat to. O blessed
care of the great Jehovah toward his dear and precious people! Are they
sluggish, he excites them to work; Are they insolent, he presently humbles
them; If Jesurun wax fat, and kick, he turns them out of Canaan, which was both
their Granary and Dairy. Do they indulge sinful desires, God mortifies them,
and as the Gardener prunes the Vines, weeds the Banks, and waters the Cant. 4.
16.
flowers of the Garden to cause it to flourish; so God visits his people with
the North Wind of affliction, and with the South Wind of grace and favor, that
its spices may flow out, that his Church may bud and blossom with happiness and
prosperity. But to wind up this particular: so tender and passionate is God in
his providence toward his people; that he fixes his Church upon a rock, Mat.
16. 18. that it may be unmoved and unshaken: He leaves heaven to come down to
visit it, and to lay down his life for it, John 10. 11. And after John 10 11.
a little time he returns to glory again, but he will not leave them
comfortless, John 14. 18. but sends the Infinitae s^nt promissiones, innumera
exempla, quibus apertissime demonstratur, quanta si^ providentia qua suo^ regit
elect^s Deus, nihil ut sit certius quam ecclesiam imprimis maximae curae esse
Deo!
Comforter in his room, John 14. 16. as his Delegate to refresh and sanctify
his people. Now he is in glory he commissionates his Angels to be the guard of
his believing ones, Heb. 1. 14. and to Minister to their necessities. He leaves
his promises to be his bond and security to his Saints, that their trembling
faith may have something to stay upon, 1 Cor. 1. 20. He vouchsafes his
Ordinances to be marrow and fatness to them, Psalm. 63. 5. for their comfort and
revival; And least those Ordinances should be dry breasts, and barren wombs, he
promises his presence to enliven and fructify them, Mat. 18. 20. And if his
people fall into persecution, he will give them interest for their sufferings;
They Mat. 19. 29.
shall have a hundred fold for the present, Mat. 19. 29. And if the pension be
so large, what will the portion be? And his Angels shall not only watch over
them, but God will take care of them himself, he will not suffer their foot to
be moved, Psalm. 121. 3. Not a foot, the lowest member of the body, and not
moved; it is not said, not broken, but not moved. Zach 2. 8.
He will keep his people as charily, as the apple of his eye, Isa. 63 9.
Zach. 2. 8. If they be over-taken with afflictions, he will be in the fire,
and the water with them, Isa. 43. 2. Nay so tender is Christ to his people,
they must not disturb themselves Mat. 6 28.
with any care, (that hair in the eye of the soul which makes it water, and is
so troublesome) 1 Pet. 5. 7. and it is Phil. 1. 29.
not to be over-passed; God pours his spirit on his people, John 14. 26.
and his people must cast their care upon God: a rare Joel 2. 28.
change! God sheds his blessings on them, and they cast Psalm. 55. 22.
their burdens upon him, Psalm. 55. 22. And to conclude, if any attempt their
hurt, They kick against the pricks, Acts 9. 5. And every wound is struck at
Jesus Christ. Acts 9. 4. All their injuries are reflections upon himself.

providence is not only extended to precious Saints, but even to the vilest
sinners. He keeps their breath in their nostrils, Isa. 2. 22. God sustains and
supports them; those Vipers fasten upon the hands of providence, and it is
often a Acts 28. 3.
long time before he shakes them off into the fire. Psalm. 64. 8.


First, He fills their belly with his hid treasure, Psalm. 17. Acts 4. 27, 28.
14. He sends the Prophet to anoint Jehu, 2 Chronicles. 22. 7. Genesis 6. 7.
and Hazael, 1 Kings 19. 15. God kept cursed Cham in the Prove. 8. 15.
Ark. He set the Crown on Nebuchadnezzars head. Bad as well as good Kings reign
by God, by his permission and constitution, Romans 13. 1, 2.

Secondly, As God gives wicked men temporal blessings, as he is the Author of
their possessions; so he is the Over-ruler Lam. 2. 16, 10.
of their actions. God bid Shimei curse for the humbling of David. He calls
Nebuchadnezzar out of Babylon to lead his Jer. 4. 6.
people into Captivity, Jer. 4. 6. He checked Laban, that he could not vent his
rage and enmity against Jacob: he curbed him in, and restrained him, Genesis 31.
24. he must hush, Gen 31. 24.
and not speak a distastful word to him. It was of God that Judas did act so
treacherously, the Pharisees so blasphemously, the Jews so inconstantly, and
the Soldiers so cruelly against Jesus Christ, Acts 2. 23. Herod murders the
innocents, and in it fulfills a Prophecy, Mat. 2. 28. The Romans destroy and
burn Jerusalem, and so fulfill what was foretold by holy Daniel, Mat. 24. 15.

Thirdly, God does not only overruled the actions, but the words of wicked men.
Balaam that cursed Miscreant, shall pronounce a glorious prophecy concerning
Jesus Christ, Numb. 24 17.
Numb. 24. 17. And Caiphas unawares shall foretell Christ's death, the
meritorious cause of Man's felicity, John 11. 50, 51. He spoke not as biased by
his own judgment, but as overruled by Divine Providence. Though Princes wear
their Crowns on their heads, yet their hearts are in Gods Prove. 21. 1.
hand.

Fourthly, And God does not only overruled the actions Impii sunt vasa irae
^daptata ad interitum and ruinam.
and words, but he appoints the ends of wicked men: What ever glory bespangles
their passage, yet shame and confusion shall be their end, Prove. 16. 4. They
are fitted for destruction both by their own sin, and Divine Justice, which
will not be always dallied with. The wicked who here rise up in Mat. 25. 41.
Pride and opposition, shall at last go down into Hell and Exodus 14. 27, 28.
damnation, Psalm. 9. 17. What fatal and tragical ends have over-taken insolent
and unbounded sinners? Pharaoh drowned Hest 7. 10.
by a wave, Haman strangled by a cord, Jezabel dashed in 2 Kings 9. 33.
pieces by a fall, and proud persecuting Herod eaten up by a worm, and Gods
v^^se and wonderful providence shines forth Acts 12. 23.
in all their ^x^cutions; the finger of God not only hastened, Rom 9 ^2.
but specified their dispatch.

Gods providence are seen in the most minute and inconsiderable things of the
world. He numbers Ab ipsis soltis arborum, ^tque flosculi^ providentia su^ ad
ima^s^^p^rti^g ^ Deus. Plotin. (...) omnia disponuntur, omnia ad suos
d^ducuntur sines and tandem ^d ultimum qui est gloria Dei. Probrum non est, ea
fecisse, mult^ minus facta dirigere, nec sic humilis est, qui ad humilia
attendit, nec altissime habitare cessat, qui d^mississime pr^sp cit. Leid.
Prof. Quis disposuit membra culicis, aut pulicis, ut habeant ordinem suum, and
vitam suam? Aug.
our hairs, Mat. 10. 30. and not one of them shall shed without a providence:
he keeps the Sparrows, those little worthless birds, which feed man's ear, not
his belly; and not one of them falls to the ground without a providence, Mat.
10. 29. He guided the bow which slew the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22. 24. He
caused the Iron to swim, to evidence both his power and his providence, 2 Kings
6. 6. He takes care of Oxen, 1 Cor. 9. 9. and provides meat for the young
Lions, Psalm. 104. 21. those Beasts of prey, whose Dens are their
slaughterhouse, and the Forest serves only for their destructive range. The
eyes of all wait upon God, Psalm. 145. 15. And he lays in their provision. God
prepared the goard to r^fr^sh Jonah, and God prepared the worm to destroy the
goard, Ion. 4. 6, 7. To such minute things the providence of God stoopeth. God
sees to the bringing forth of the wild Goats, and to the calving of the hinds,
Job 39. 3. and when they are brought forth, God sees to their growth and good
liking, Job 39. 4. God takes notice of humane contracts, who borrows, who
lends, Deuteronomy. 28. 12. and his precious ones shall lend and not borrow. God by
his providence quiets the Beasts of the field, disciplines and keeps under the
fowls of the Heaven, and stills the creeping things of the earth from rising,
Hos. 2. 18. That as the greatest things cannot disannual, so the least things
cannot escape the providence of God.

Gods providence is seen in the conservation of all things in their beings, so
in the direction of all things in their actions; Deus singularem rorum quarum
cunque providentiam habet. Chrysostom. Nihil plane in mundo est, quod ante mundi
constitutionem, non suerit a dei praescientia praevisum, a dei voluntate
praeordinatum.
The enmity of Joseph's Brethren, is directed by God to the promotion of
Joseph's person; and therefore Joseph says, Genesis 50. 20. That providence was
ordered by God; He was sent into Egypt by a barbarous sale, but God brought
him into Egypt by a gracious hand. The Jews in their rage bring Christ unto
the Cross, but God in his love, makes that the way to bring us to the Crown;
they shed, and we are washed in the same blood, Rev. 1. 5. Nebuchadnezzar in
his fury marches against Jerusalem, to revenge himself against a perfidious and
fedifragous people, but he only executes Gods design to captivate a rebellious
Nation, Jer. 6. 22. Ier. 10. 22. And therefore God calls that proud Prince his
Servant, Jer. 25. 9. Jer. 27. 6. He only did the drudgeries of Divine
displeasure. Man may bring the Instrument, but God plays what tune he
pleases.

inconsiderable and smallest things to bring about the most material and
important effects. The Genesis 39. 18, 19, 20.
unridling of a dream promotes Joseph to be the second man in Egypt. A lie
throws Joseph into prison, and a dream Genesis 41. 14.
brings him out.

contingent and casual things to bring about the most certain and infallible
events, 1 Kings 1 Kings 22. 24
22. 24. It was Gods hand guided the arrow, to make good the prophecy of holy
and faithful Micah.

sins of wicked men, for gracious and excellent events; so the persecution of
the Church Sanguis martyrum est semen ecclesiae.
of Christ, is for the increase of the Kingdom of Christ. As black lines
beautify the Picture, and set it off the more: Wicked men bring Martyrs to the
stake, and the stake becomes a pulpit wherein the Gospel is propagated. It is
very observable what the wise man takes notice of; Man in his own heart is full
of contrivances, Prove. 16. 9. several Prove. 16. 9. Rerum omnium exitus in manu
dei est; Lingua non ex^licar^ potest sine providentia dei lingu^m dirigentis.
Zanch.
things roll up and down in his mind, but at last all his ways are directed
by God, they hit the mark at which God levels; so that the heart cannot devise,
nor the tongue speak any thing which is not guided by God to fulfill his
purpose. The Prophet Jeremy asserts, Jer. 10. 23. That the way of man is not in
himself, it is not in man who walks to direct his steps. Every way of man is
biased by the guidance of 2 Kings 6. 19.
the Almighty, to arrive at that end which God has determined. Prove. 21. 1.
Nothing is in our power, as Zanchy well observes, but Deus flectit omnium
hominum voluntates, quocurque vult. August. Omnia ducuntur ad finem a deo
determinatum s^^ientissime, et justiss^re ad ipsius gloriam. Leid. Prof.
all our ways, works and words depend wholly upon the providence of God.
Kings, of all persons are the most Arbitrary, yet their heart, which is the
most arbitrary part of Kings, is in Gods hand, and is turned and disposed as
the rivers of w^ters, and run into what channel the Lord pleases. Princes
themselves are not so swayed by their volatile fancies, or imperious lusts, but
that all their counsels tend to, and all their proceedings end in, what God
has designed; the very traces and windings of all their roving progresses
center and are fixed in Gods determinate purpose.

providence is seen in the deduction of all things to their appointed ends. Man
when he breaks Gods Commands, Omnia deus quidem nectit, and ad suos trahit
effectus. Boeth.
he fullfills Gods Decrees, and when he runs counter to what God imposes, he
keeps pace with what God determines. That always comes to pass, which God, who
exercises an universal providence over the world, has appointed to fall out
and come to pass. Those who crucified Christ acted a Acts 2. 23.
great sin, yet they fulfill a certain decree, for the Lamb was slain before
the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. 8. The divine purpose and determination,
is the center to which the lines of occurrences and affairs are drawn. There
was a medley and miscellanious contrivance to bring Christ to the Cross; There
was Judas his treachery, the Pharisees enmity, the peoples inconstancy, Pilates
desire to make himself popular, and the Soldiers cruelty; but all these
different interests meet in the execution of Gods designed purpose, as Peter
most excellently, Acts 2. 23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel
and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, Acts 2. 23. Exodus 2. 24. Exodus 7 22.
and by wicked hands have crucified and slain. And thus Pharaoh, not only
burdens Gods people, but hardens his own heart, both which carry on Gods end
which he had 1 Samuel 6. 6.
determined, (viz.) The delivery of the poor Jews, and the drowning of Pharaoh
and his wretched Egyptians. So Mat. 2. 15.
Gods end and purpose is achieved in every undertaking. Herod in his rage
enforces Joseph to carry Christ in his infancy Hos. 11. 1.
into Egypt, but Christ's going into Egypt did not so Verba haec ad Christum
referenda sunt, quamvis judaeorum interpretationes ab hoc scopo l^nge abeant.
Riv.
much decline Herod's fury, as accomplish a divine prophecy, Hos. 11. 1. Herod
unwillingly fulfils what God wisely had foretold. The Gospel is the sweetest
means of salvation, yet it is a savor of death unto death to the reprobate
world. They suck poison out of these flowers, because they shall dash upon
their designed ruin: The Gospel of life shall be a means to accomplish their
determined death. All things arrive at Sicut fragrantia unguenti columbam
vegetat, scarabaeum necat, et sicut lumen solis oculos sanos recreat, debiles
offend^t, sic Christus malis in ruinam est, bonis in resurrectionem gloriosam.
Theoph. 2 Cor. 2. 16. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
that end which God has set them. Christ himself is for the ruin of sinners
which are appointed to misery, for the joyous salvation of Saints, who are
determined to glory: So the same fire purges the Gold* and consumes the
stubble. In a word; the works of providence,

First, Sometimes how strange are they, and misteriously intricate, as in the
case of Joseph, through how many mazes and maeanders did that holy man pass to
his appointed principality.

Secondly, Sometimes how terrible are they, and tremendous, as in the case of
Pharaoh; his fatal and final destruction being ushered in by ten preceding
Judgments.

Thirdly, Sometimes how worthy and glorious are they, as in the case of Hester,
who was advanced by unexpected Est. 7. 3, 4.
means to her sovereignty, for the preservation of the Isa. 44. 28.
Church from ruin. Isa. 45. 1.


Fourthly, And sometimes how good and gracious, as in the case of Cyrus, who
was raised by God for the return of Israel to their beloved Country and Home.

CHAP. XX. God is most gracious in the transcendent work of man's Redemption.
meditate likewise upon the great work of our Redemption: This glorious work is
the Masterpiece of divine Christus est dei sapientia, tum (...), quia est
(...) aeterm patris; tum revelata, quia in Christi cognitione salutaris
sapientia sita est. Par.
wisdom; The Angels desire to look into it, 1 Pet. 1. 12. but though they
excel in wisdom, yet they cannot see to the bottom of it; there are so many
small threads of curious contrivance in it, that no eye of the creature can
possibly discern them. It is worth our notice, that Christ who carties on this
work, is not only called the power of God, but the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.
24. to evidence the traces of infinite contrivance which are in this blessed
undertaking: And therefore how should we on the morning of a Sabbath
contemplate on this rare design of man's redemption by our dear Jesus, the holy
Son of God? How should we ponder 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20. Genesis 3. 15.
it deeply, get lively and strong apprehensions of it, that it might leave deep
and lasting impressions upon our souls? Let Ephesians. 1. 4.
us view over the several passages and transactions of this Non-such of Gods
works.

First, Let us view it in the platform, how gloriously was this laid in the
eternal purposes of Gods love, Ephesians. 1. 4. Yea, in the eternal promise past
between the Father and the Son, Ephesians. 3. 8. Christus est agnus macta^us ab
origin mundi. 1. Aeterna dei praeordinatione 2. Promissione de semine mulicris
contrituro caput serpentis. 3. Fide Patrum quae sui (...) rerum sperandarum 4.
In vict^m^^ patrum quae erant ipse agnus sacramentaliter. 5. In membris suis
quibus patientibus ipse patiebatur. Par.
Tit. 1. 2. O the everlastingness, infiniteness and unsearchableness of this
love of God! That the everlasting God, the Majesty of Heaven and Earth should
take care of us, before the world was, that he should buisie himself, and his
Son about poor, worthless and wretched worms; O let us adore this first love,
admire this free love of God and Christ.

Secondly, Let us see in the next place the early discovery, and shining forth
of this mystery in the very morning of the world; No sooner man was fallen, but
a promise of Christ our Redeemer is reached forth unto him, Genesis 3. 15. And
after many ages God sends his blessed Son out of his bosom to fulfill this
promise, Gal. 4. 4. We could not come up to Heaven to Christ, and therefore he
comes down upon Earth to us: O let us see the King of glory stooping, bowing
the Heavens to come down, and dwell in a dungeon, and lodge among prisoners,
and pitch his tent in the Rebels camp. Let us think how the holy Angels
wondered to see the King of Heaven stepping down from his throne to sit on his
footstool, Occisio Abelis innocentis suit figura occisionis agni. Lyra.
yea, putting off the robes of a Prince, to put on the livery of a Servant,
Phil. 2. 7, 8. and that after treason had been stamped upon it; nay, taking our
nature after it had been in arms against God: not that Christ took the sin of
our nature upon him, Heb. 4. 15. but he took the shame of it, after it had been
under a cloud, under a blot before God and Angels; nay, God did so love the
very nature of his Elect, that though for the present, he had them not all with
him in heaven, yet he must have their picture in his Son to see them in, and to
love them in. O let us meditate much on this admirable strain of love, till it
melt our hearts, Luke 24. 32. Zach. 12. 10. Isa. 53. 2, 3.
and make them burn within us.

Thirdly, From the incarnation of our Savior, we may trace him through the
several passages of his life to his death, (...)
and passion, and here with an eye of faith look upon him whom we have pierced,
and view that man of sorrows, suffering, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
bleeding, dying on that tree of shame and ignominy; there we may dwell upon
the death of Christ, till it put life into our dead hearts, and then let us
follow Christ in our meditations from the Cross to the Sepulcher, and by the
way, ponder deeply of the severity of Divine Justice, of the sinfulness of sin,
of the inexpressible love of Christ, and the rare worth of souls, which are not
redeemed with corruptible 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
things as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as a
lamb without blemish and spot, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Acts 20. 7.
And why did the primitive Saints sacramentally show forth the Lords death on
the Lords day, Acts 20. 7. but to signify to us, that to contemplate and
commemorate the death of Christ, is a special duty of that day? But a little
more distinctly to supply our meditations on this glorious subject.

meditate on the Author of our Redemption, he that carried it on from the first
to the last; Let us contemplate Mat. 3. 17. Hag. 2. 7. Isa. 29. 19.
Promissiones in Christo constantes et verac^s sunt, in eoque impletae sunt.
Alap.
on our dear Redeemer: He is the Son of God, the wonder of Angels, the desire
of Nations, the joy of Saints: All the prophesies of old were fulfilled in him,
Luke 24. 27. All the favors of God are conveyed to us by him, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6,
7. All the types of the Law were the shadow of him, Col. 2. 17. Heb. 10. 1.
Nay, all the promises of the Gospel are yea and Amen in him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Let
us meditate on his person, it is altogether lovely, Cant. 5. 16. Let us
meditate on his natures. The Creator and the Creature never met in any but in
him; such a person, (...), God-Man, Joh. 4. 19. Rev. 15. 3. Heb. 9. 28. Heb. 4.
15. 1 Timothy 1. 15.
never was, nor never will be in the world besides him. Let us meditate on his
offices; they are necessary and glorious. Let us meditate on his behaviors;
they are spotless and fructiferous. Let us meditate on his designs; they are
affectionate stupendous.

meditate on the objects of redemption, (viz.) Gods Elect; a company of poor,
helpless, succourless sinners, Isa. 29. 22.
whom God out of eternal pity has designed for himself to be ransomed by the
blood of his dearly beloved. These redeemed ones are sometimes called his
people, Luke 1. 68. Peculium hebraice (...) peculium selectum, thesauros
pretiosiores, et charos significat. Hieron. Chaldaeus vertit (...) Syrus (...)
novum populum. Exodus 28. 29.
sometimes his Israel, Luke 24. 21. sometimes his peculiar people, Tit. 2. 14.
sometimes his treasure, as Hierom observes, his New people, as the Syriack
translation renders it: There are a few scattered up and down in the world, in
all places, in all times, and in all ages, whom God set his heart upon from
everlasting, and Christ leaves heaven and is incarnate to purchase and redeem
these scattered ones. Aaron was to have the twelve Tribes engraven on his
breast plate, and to bear them before God, when he was to go into the holy
place, Exodus 28. 29. Our dear Redeemer, whom Aaron was only to typifie, did
bear the names of his Israel upon his heart, when he did sacrifice himself to
divine justice, upon his shameful, but fruitful Cross.

meditate on the price of our Redemption; And here (as the Apostle speaks) we
must conceive, We are not Redeemed 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.
with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with 1 Cor. 6 20.
the precious blood of Jesus Christ; Tears, not treasure; Col. 1. 14.
not silver, but sighs; not full coffers, but emptied veins were Agnosce o homo
quam gravia sunt vulnera, pro quibus necesse est filium dei vulnerari. Bern.
the price of our redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7. All the mines in the world could not
have purchased the life of one soul; for as the Psalmist speaks, Ps. 49. 8.
The redemption of the soul is precious: Nothing but precious blood could redeem
the precious soul; our sinful wounds are only healed by Christ's sacred
wound, we are cured by stripes. Christ's chastisements are our peace. Our Olive
leaf is dipped in blood. Christ trod Isa. 53. 5.
the wine press alone, and his garments were sprinkled with blood, Isa. 63. 3.
There are four ways by which the Isa. 63. 9. Isa. 63. 3. Rev. 5. 9.
redeemed person attains his freedom:

Captive is freely manumitted, and let go without price or ransom: But this is
not our case; for neither would Satan have ever dismissed us from his thraldom
of his own accord, and freely, nor yet our sin would leave us freely and
spontaneously, it stuck so close to us.

Captive is freed by way of exchange: Nor is this our condition; what bartery
could we make with God to Quorundum permutatione fieri potest omnium electorum
redemptio? Gravius est peccatum quam ut ulla permutatione puraealicujus
creaturae tolli, et ita captivum redimi potest. Zanch.
purchase our freedom? Could the Elect be redeemed by their own sweat or
services, or by the sacrificing of the purest Creatures? This is no way
proportionable to divine justice which we have provoked; these means are too
weak to file off our chains: Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams,
says the Prophet, or with ten thousand rivers of Oil, (which yet is
impossible) or shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, or the fruit of
my body, for the sin of my soul? Mic. 6. 7. Observe in this Text of Scripture,
here is offered all varieties of creature-contributions for man's redemption;
Here are inanimate creatures offered, ten thousand rivers of oil; here are
irrational creatures made proffer of, thousands Mic. 6. 7.
of Rams; nay, here rational creatures are tendered, the fruit of our bodies;
nay further, here are the most beloved creatures frankly and pathetically
presented for an oblation, our firstborn, the heirs both of our love and
revenue, and yet all this to no purpose: All these great offers can contribute
nothing to our release or redemption. Sin is not expiated but by blood, and not
by the blood of a Ram, a Bullock, or a Goat, but by the blood of him who was
God as well as Man; Acts 20. 28.
and therefore our Savior expostulates the case: What shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Suppose he should pick Mat. 16. 26.
up the excellencies of the whole Universe, and sacrifice them for the souls
redemption, will they be accepted? Surely no.

Captive is rescued by force from his thraldom, as Israel was from their
Egyptian Taskmasters, as by a Pro^^e vere Christus vocatur redemptor noster,
quia ut frater noster primogenitus dato pretio redemit fratres suos. Zanch.
mighty hand, and a stretched-out arm, as Lot was by the prowess and valor of
Abraham and his company, Genesis 14. 16. But this is not the way of our
Redemption; we are rescued not by killing, but by dying, not by giving wounds,
but by receiving them.

Captive is bought with a price: And this is our case, Empti, redempti sumus,
We are bought, we are rebought, or redeemed, as the primitive Christians sung
it out 1 Cor. 6. 20. Quanto sibi pretio deus nos sibi comparavit, scil.
sanguine suo Alap.
usually and triumphantly; but by what price are we bought? Not by furnished
mines, which are the rich linings of the earth, but by the large effusions of
spotless and chrystalline blood.

meditate on the slaveries from which we are redeemed: There are four Cardinal
Miseries from which our blessed Redeemer has rescued us;

slavery of Satan. Christ in managing the work of our Redemption has trod
Satan, not only under his own D^o in cruce affixi intelliguntur, Christus
visibiliter sponte sua ad tempus, Di^bolus invisibiliter, invitus, in
perpetuum; Fidei ergooculus conspicit Christum in summitate crucis, quasi in
curru triumphali sedentem, Diabolum in ima part cruci allig^tum et Christi
pedibus conculc^tum. Orig.
feet, but under our feet, Rev. 16. 20. By death he has conquered him who had
the power of death, which is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. It is true, even still
Satan tempts, but not triumphs over the Saints; his conflicts are for the trial
of our grace, but not for the trampling upon our souls; he may raise a dust,
but not give a mortal wound to the poor believer, Luke 22. 32. he may sift us,
but not sink us, he may winnow us, but not win us; Christ has redeemed us from
his destructive power: It is a rare speech of Origin; There were two fastened to
Christ's Cross, Christ visibly, of his own accord, for a time; the Devil
invisibly, unwilling, and for ever; therefore the eye of faith may behold
Christ at the top of the Cross, as sitting in a triumphant Chariot; the Devil
at the bottom of it, bound, and trampled upon by the feet of Christ. Look upon
Satan as a Serpent, Genesis 3. 1. Christ's death took away his sting, (as far as
concerns believers.) Look upon Satan as a Dragon, Rev. 20. 2. Christ's death cut
off his tail; Genesis 3. 1.
and look upon Satan as a roaring Lion, Christ's death dashed Rev. 20. 2.
out his teeth, and made his paw unserviceable. 1 Pet. 5. 8.


redeemed us from the curse of the Law; so the Apostle fully and elegantly,
Col. 2. 14. Blotting out the Subnectit Apostolus ipsum ch^^ographum esse
delet^m, sed fort^sse non tam deletum, quin p^ss^t^lis nova suboriri; Addit
igitur Apossolus in super sublatum esse; sed fort^sse aliquid l^tet
absconditum, et in posterum proferri possit; immo, inquit Apostolus, est cruci
affixum, dilaceratum, et in frusta abs^^ssum. Daven. Gal. 3. 13. Gal. 4. 5
Christus emendo nos exemit dato pretio, et in christianam vindicavit
libertatem. Eras.
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. And Bishop Davenant descants
most sweetly upon that Text: The Apostle (says he) proceeds here in a most
pleasing gradation, and consults the case of trembling consciences; for says
the Apostle, the handwriting was blotted out; but, answers the doubting
Christian, but new controversies may arise; the Apostle adds, but it is taken
away; but, replies the doubting Christian, but some other may lie hid, and be
brought to light hereafter; therefore says the Apostle, The handwriting is
nailed to Christ's Cross, it is rent and torn to pieces by the same nails by
which Christ was pierced and fastened to the Cross. Indeed the Law is now
Directory, but not Damnatory to the believer; his rule, but not his ruin; his
glass to see himself in, but not his rock to dash himself upon. The Apostle
avers, Gal. 3. 13. that we are redeemed from the curse of it. The Law is our
Copy, but it cannot be our curse; we may steer by its purity, but believers
cannot fall by its power, Gal. 4. 5. The Law is our Teacher, but not our
Task-master; we are delivered from the tyrannical domination, though not from
the guidance and sacred instruction of it; we may be advised, but we, (viz.)
believers, shall never be endangered by it.

redeemed us from the power and destructiveness of sin: A believer may mourn
over the spot, but he shall not Romans 6. 2. 12. Christus merito fuit percussus,
non suo, sed alieno pe^cato, nos illum attrivimus, nos illum ^ulneravimus, qui
illi nostra peccata, tanti dol^ris causam, and tanti cruciatus materiam
attulimus. Riv.
fall under the weight of sin. Sin may abide in, but not reign over a Saint, it
may be his grief, but not his condemnation, Romans 8. 1. Christ has redeemed us
from the destroying, though not from the disturbing power of sin. He has
redeemed us from all iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. He has purchased our forgiveness,
Ephesians. 1. 7. so in the Col. 1. 14. In whom we have redemption through his blood,
even the forgiveness of sins. And it is observable, there are two Texts of
Scripture, viz. Ephesians. 1. 7. and Col. 1. 14. which speak the same thing, in the
same words, which is unusual; that by the mouth of two witnesses this great
truth may be confirmed. Our pardons are written in Christ's blood, 1 John 1. 7.
And so most 1 John 1. 7.
excellently the Apostle Peter speaking of Christ, says, Who 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Christus spirituales n^stros mo^bos s^n^vit, ^t in^^ recepit, ^^ ^^llerit, et
a^^leret, ne^pe per imputationem, et paenae persolutionem. Riv.
his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree. Now, if Christ has
born our sins, then they are taken from us, our souls must not die for them,
they are his charge, and not our condemnation: So then, the In^itement of sin
cannot reach the believer, the guilt of sin cannot cast him, the power of sin
cannot overruled; the spot of sin cannot so unbeautifie him, as to render him
repudiate in the sight of his beloved; sin may bring the Saint to the bar of
conscience to be arraigned their, but never to the bar of God to be condemned 1 John 29. Jer. 31. 34. Heb. 9. 14. Isa. 43. 25. Isa. 44. 22. 1 John 1. 9.
there: Christ has satisfied for the sins of his people, and divine justice
will not require a double satisfaction. The Apostle says, 1 John 1. 9. If we
confess our sins, much more if Christ die for them, God is just to forgive our
sins.

redeemed us from the killing power of death; The Saints death is his
alteration, not his execution; his Job 14. 14. Phil. 1. 23. Mors non est
interitus, sed introitus.
change, but not his curse: His privilege, and not his penalty. Our death by
the death of Christ, is become a desirable thing, the bitterness of Christ's
death has put a sweetness and loveliness upon ours. When the Saints die, they
only go to their Fathers house; Death sees them safe home, it Joh. 14 2*
unites the body to the Earth their Mother, and the soul to Tempus diversionis
est te^^ reversionis et regressionis ad Deu^. Tertul.
the Lord their Father; who in the Resurrection will conjoyn these dissever'd
pieces of Man, and glorify them both for ever. Tertullian calls the time of
dying, the time of return to God, after the years of absence here below.
Cyprian calls death the time of a Saints assumption and conveyance to his
Augustinus in 1 Timothy 4 7. Exultantis magis sunt verba ad mort^^ praesentiam, et
ad cor^^^m ^^ helantis, quam timentis, et seipsum cruciantis. Aug.
Kingdom. And it is recorded, when the same holy Martyr heard of a sentence of
death passed upon him by the Emperor Valerian, he answered, I thank God who is
pleased to loosen the chains of my body, that at last I may truly be at
liberty. Christ's death indeed has sweetened and perfumed ours; the spices which
were thrown into Christ's grave, are now taken up and thrown into ours. Life to
a believer is but an unkind Wall, which parts the Saint from his Beloved;
death throws down this Wall, and brings him into Luc. 24. 1. Joh. 19. 40.
the same Heaven with Jesus Christ. Death conveyed Lazarus from the comfortless
gate of the rich man, to the refreshing Luc. 16. 23. Heb. 9. 27.
bosom of blessed, because believing Abraham: Christ has redeemed us from the
sting, though not from the stroke of death; from its hurt, though not from its
hold. A Saint Rev. 14 13. 1 These. 4. 14, 16.
now dies in Christ; and though he die in his bed, yet he sleeps in Jesus;
Death is only his ceasing to be any longer in a valley of tears, and a
wilderness of snares.

But a little farther to dilate on this point. The Attributes resplendent in
the work of Redemption.


In the great work of our Redemption, all the Divine Attributes manifest
themselves in their greatest luster and splendour; in this beautiful Orb they
shine the brightest.

Justice of God; that if the sinner did not die, the Son must: One must die: if
the sinner be not cast into hell, the Savior must go out of his Fathers bosom.
Here was infinite (...) delectatus est. Deus voluit et ejus beneplacito
profectus est, quod infirmitatibus subjecerit filium su^m eumque afflictionibus
contuderit; Alioquin nihil actum esset, si existimaremus illud accidisse, vel
nolente deo, vel otiose spectante. Riv.
justice, here justice had a Selah put upon it. That Text of Scripture is most
remarkable, in Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the Father to bruise him, he has put
him to grief, etc. God took a delight in bruising his own Son, because in those
bruises justice rid triumphant. Innocence must bleed, that the sinner may
escape, and that justice may be displayed. Lycurgus once made a Law, that
Adultery should be punished with the loss of both the eyes; his own Son being
found guilty, that justice might not be waved, he puts out one of his Sons
eyes, and one of his own; So the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. That Law is
unalterable; now sin is committed, there is an accursed thing in the Camp,
Josh. 7. 11. Either the sinner or the Savior must die, If the Principal cannot
pay the Debt, the surety must. Divine Justice is so inexorable, that the sinner
escaping, the Cup of Divine Romans 6. 23. Heb. 7. 22.
wrath must be put into the hand of an only Son. Thus justice is eminent in the
work of Man's Redemption.

faithfulness of God. God from eternity made a compact with his Son, the Copy
of which is laid up in that Ad successum mortis de quod attinet; Recte
exprimitur, videndi, et saturandi verbis, quibus omni moda fruitio rei
conquisitae laboribus significatur, et accipitur pro foelici et ubere sanctarum
animarum mess, Christus ad mortis suae tempus esuriebat, grandi charitatis
aestu, etc. Joh. 17. 4, 5, 6.
Text, Isa. 53. 10, 11. And one iota of this agreement must not pass away. The
substance of this compact is comprised in this main Article, If Christ will
make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see the travel of his soul, and be
satisfied: If Christ will die, his Spouse, his Church shall live, his Cross
shall make way for their Crown. Now in the fullness of time, Gal. 4. 4. Christ
attempts and accomplisheth this stupendous undertaking, he becomes incarnate,
and dies for his people, and so his people live by his death; the Father
altogether comporting with this glorious agreement, and not only gives his Son
to redeem sinners, Ioh. 3. 16. but likewises gives redeemed sinners to his Son,
Ioh. 17. 4, 5, 6. And thus Divine faithfulness gloriously breaks forth in the
blessed work of our Redemption. Every Article is made good, and Christ meets
with no disappointment; not a soul miscarries, for which he laid down a price
and a ransom.

Love of God did most transcendently appear in the work of M^ns Redemp^ion.
There was rich love on the Fathers part, Ioh. 3. 16. Unspeakable bowels did the
Father express to part with a Son, a holy Son, the Son of the bosom, the Son
from Eternity, the very Character of his Father, Heb. 1. 3. An only Son, a
begotten Son, Psalm. 2. 7. to die Genesis 22. 12.
for sinners. Though Isaac was on the Altar, yet he was rescued, but our dear
Jesus was on the Cross, and he must die; Christ begs his life of the Father,
Mat. 26. 39. But Non solum confi^mat Christus, se discipulos suos dilexisse,
sed dilectionis suae magnitudinem exaggerat quod summo amorisgradu eos
dilexerit. Ger.
the Father will not hear. Great love was manifested in the Son too: He takes
upon him the rags of our flesh, and they are farther torn by sorrows and
afflictions, and at last dipped in blood. How Christ glosses upon his own love,
Joh. 15. 13. and shows us that death was the most sincere testimony, and the
most superlative Character of entire love; his wounds dropped more love than
blood, his arms spread upon the Cross were stretched out for amicable and Cum
inimici essemus, reconcil^ati sumus deo per sanguinem filii sui, et Christus
mortuus es^ pro ^^^cis, et si nondum q^i^^m amantibu^, sed tam^n jam amatis.
Bern.
amiable embraces: There was a threefold Inscription upon the Cross of Christ,
I will only a little invert it, let it be this; The wisdom of the Father, the
love of the Son, and the Salvation of sinners. Christ's heart was full of love,
Joh. 10. 15. He lays down his life, it is not forced from him, Ioh. 10. 18. he
deposits it, as the pawn of his affection: Christ dies for his friends, says
Bernard, happily not yet loving him, yet already beloved by him.

mercy of God did most illustriously shine in the glorious work of Man's
Redemption. The Apostle Romans 5. 10. Romans 5. 8.
assures us that Christ died to reconcile enemies to his Father; and what would
have been the issue of enemies? how bitter Coristus ex charitate sua, et
Patris, pro ^ohn injustis, et malefactoribus peccatoribusque mori voluit;
Christus ergo long omnem omnium hominum charitatem superat et transcendit.
Alap. in Romans Ezekiel. 16. 6.
their portion? how full of wrath their Cup? how sure their slaughter? Luke 19.
27. But Christ comes to die for us in this low and lost condition, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
when we were ready to receive the reward of enemies, when we were falling by
the hand of Justice as so many enemies: How sweet and seasonable was this pity
and compassion? we had all the Characters of misery upon us, which are fastened
upon the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 17. we were blind, miserable, poor and
naked, both helpless and hopeless; then Christ redeemed this dying Captive crew
by the ransom of his blood, and as the price of his death. Our Messiah must die
for us, when nothing else can help us; and his wounds must bleed to stanch
ours; his blood must be our balsam, his Corrosives our Cordials, his fresh
wounds must cure our festred ones. Heartbreaking pity and mercy brings our
beloved to the slaughter, when mankind was ready to drop into the flames.
Alapide observes, There was more charity Genesis 42. 25. ^en. 44. 1.
and pity in one Christ dying for sinners, then there can be bowels in all
mankind. Joseph in pity preserves his Family from famine, Christ in softer
bowels preserves his people from rain.

wisdom of God was greatly seen in the work of man's Redemption; in this work
there was apparent (...), Ephesians. 3. 9, 10.
the manifold wisdom of God, as the Apostle speaks; all the embroydery and
artifices of rare contrivance and wisdom. Omnes illae ^ultae variae,
e^p^gnantes inter s^r^tiones, quibus us^s ^^t deus in redimendis elect^s and
Christo conjungendis, omnes haerationes ab aeterno definitae fuerunt in divino
consilio, and admirabilem, and vere (...) fuisse aeternam Dei sapientiam.
Zanch. in Ephesians.
Zanchy observes, that many seeming contrarieti^s and contradictions were
reconciled in the Redemption of mankind: Jew and Gentile dissevered in Name,
Nature, and Privilege are copulated in the same Gospel, with the joyful news
of our Redemption by Christ, God and Man at an infinite distance united in the
same person of Christ, who is our blessed Redeemer; Justice and Mercy in a
mutual antipathy one to the other, meet and kiss each other in the same work of
our Redemption. What an efflux of wisdom was this, that the Son of God should
die to free the Sons of men, that so the Sons of men should become the Sons of
God; what rare contrivance of divine wisdom! That justice should be executed,
and yet mercy no way impaired, that justice should over-take the surety, but
mercy should be displayed to the sinner; that our pardons should be written in
another blood, our favors should lie in another smiles, our persons clothed
with another robe of spotless righteousness, Rom 13. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20 Heb.
7. 25. Rev. 1. 5. Christus jam vivit non sibi, sed nobis nostram causam agens
in conspectu dei.
that our Prayers should be heard upon the account of another intercession,
Heb. 7. 25. That our souls should be cleansed in the bath of another bleeding,
Rev. 1. 5. All these methods of interwoven wisdom may be both our wonder and
meditation. Christ is the wisdom of his Father, 1 Cor. 1. 24. not only as he
was his Son and his Character, but as he was our All-sufficient Redeemer.

power of God did eminently appear in the work of our Redemption. Love brought
Christ to the grave, but power Heb 9. 14.
brought him out of the grave, Justice laid the weight of sin upon Christ, but
power sustained him under that burden, Simplicius est, and res postulat, de
ipsa Christi divinitate intelligere hunc phrasm, (aeternum scil. spiritum) quae
nisi aeternam fragantiam humanae Christi victimae ospirasset, utique
satisfactoria pro mundi peccatis, aeternaeque justitiae meritoria esse non
po^^isset. Par.
which would have crushed men and Angels into nothing. It was nothing but
Almighty power which supported Christ, and carried him effectually and
gloriously through the work of man's Redemption, which must necessarily be
exerted to sustain Christ under those effusions and chataracts of divine wrath
which were poured out upon him, and to raise him from that grave where he lay
breathless for an appointed time. What but omnipotency could break the bonds of
death, and petarre the Sepulcher to make way for the Resurrection of a glorious
Redeemer?

CHAP. XXI. God exceedingly to be praised in his works of Grace and Glory.
meditate on the morning of Gods holy day, upon the works of grace: Now divine
grace may be taken in a Romans 8. 28. Romans 9. 11. Ephesians. 1. 11. Ephesians. 3. 11.
double sense:

First, Either for grace the cause, which is nothing but the favor and
good will of the Lord, his rich grace and mercy folded up in purposes of
eternal love, and therefore the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 9. joins Gods purpose and
his grace together, Gratia ab aeterno data in decreto, scil. Dei, and
praedestinatione, et haec donandi voluntas absoluta est et irrevocabilis. Alap
to evidence his gracious purposes of favor which he had from eternity toward
his dear Saints. These methods of grace are various and admirable: The
rejection of the Jews, and the calling in of the Gentiles; the different
dispensations used in the Church before the Law, under the Law, and in the time
of the Gospel; these are the products of Gods eternal grace and favor. That
God should subdue sinners to himself, hedge up their way with thorns, lay Hos
2. 6. Jer. 2. 24
stumbling blocks before them in their sinful carier, that he Tiadam eos in
miseriam, unde se nequeant explicare. Riv.
should take sinners in their month, and dispose of unthought of circumstances
and passages of providence, for the turning of transgressors into the way which
leads to everlasting life; all these things speak the eternal grace and favor
of Ephesians. 1. 7.
God.

But Secondly, Divine grace may be taken for grace the effect, for the graces
of Gods spirit, which in eternal love, and grace, and favor, he plants in the
soul; and this work of grace merits our sweetest meditation. And here we must
meditate

powerfulness of the work of grace. Grace is an irresistible principle, a
torrent which bears down all before it. Manassah was prejudiced against the
impressions of grace by Gratiae Vocabulum tria denotat. 1. Gratuitum actum
divinae volun^atis accepton. it is hominem in Christo, and peccata misericorditer
condonantis, 2 Ephesians. 9. 3. Romans 24. Hic amor gratuitus est primum d^num, in quo
omnia alia dona dautur. H^nc gratia acceptationis Aquin. vocat. Secundo sub
gratiae vocabulo complectitur Apost. omnia hubitualia dona, quae deus infundit
ad animam sanctificandam. s^il. Fides, charitas, etc. atque omnes virtutes, et
omni^ dona salutarta sunt gratiae, Ephesians. 4. 7. Hanc gratiam inhaerentem pae^e
solum agnoscunt Pontificii, et illam interim acceptantem, quae est hujus sons
and s^aturigo nimis negligunt. Tertio Gratia denotat actuale auxilium dei, quo
renati post acceptam habitualem gratiam corroborantur, ad exercenda bona opera,
et ad perseverandum in fide, et pietate, nam homini per gratiam renovato, et
sanctificato; necessarium est quotidianum dei adjutorium ad singulos octus, et
necessaria est horum omnium connexio. Daven.
scandalous and prodigious sins, he was a pattern of impiety, 2 Chronicles. 33. 5,
6, 7. Mary Magdalen was fortifyed against those sacred impressions by seven
Devils, Luke 8. 2. Paul was garrisoned against those divine illapses of grace
by an obstinate antipathy to the Gospel, and the profession of it; he
barbarously persecuted the Church of Christ, Acts 9. 2. And Peter turns his
back upon grace by denying Christ the fountain of it. But yet neither
Profaneness, Impurity, Rage, Apostasy, or the Devils themselves can withstand
the powerful influences of grace: But God by his grace humbles Manassah, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. brings him upon his knees to importune forgiveness: Melts Mary
Magdalen into tears, Luke 7. 44. and she bedews those checks with her moans,
which she had so much prostituted to her lusts; the evil spirit must give way
to the good spirit, to carry on his good work on her soul. Nay grace softens
Paul into submission and indisputable compliance, Acts 9. 4, 5. And Peter by a
look of grace, Luke 22. 61, 62. turns to Christ by lamentation, whom he had
dishonored by desertion. By grace God breaks the hard heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
supplies the stubborn will, Ezekiel. 36. 27. brings down the lofty spirit, 2 Chronicles. 32. 26. writes his Law in the inward man, Jer. 31. 33. and raises a
stately fabric of holiness out of the very rubbish of nature, Ezekiel. 11. 19.
Ezekiel 18. 31. and so the Convert becomes a new and lovely creature, 2 Cor. 5.
17. Indeed a work of grace may be reproached, but it cannot be resisted; we may
pursue holiness with scorn, but we cannot withstand its work and operation by
force, or the most resolved might. The spirit which works grace in the soul;
plucks down Satan's strong holds, plucks up rooted corruptions which have been
long settled and riveted in the heart; plants holy qualifications and habits in
the Saint, creates holy tendencies and inclinations; and the Regenerate person
becomes passive, and sweetly yields to the force and power of this blessed
work; Christ throws his chain over him, and he smiles himself into a voluntary
and pleasing Captivity, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The work of grace is often compared to
a new birth, Joh. 3. 5. Now when the throws and pangs come upon the woman with
child, she cannot withold her Issue, but freely and with joy she brings forth
the Man-child into the world, Joh. 16. 21. And so when the spirit of grace
carries on the new birth, the loins of the Convert cannot withold, but with
joy a Saint is born into the world. Grace like a sunbeam pierces powerfully,
though sweetly, and is always prosperous, though sometimes strange in its
design.

meditate on the Arbitrariness of the work of grace. Indeed grace like Christ,
is a most free gift, it knows no entail, Spiritus sanctus non secundum
dignitatem et merita, sed quos et quando vult, ar^anis suis afflatibus aspirat,
dividens dona sua singulis, sicut vult. Ger.
nor admits of any claim; It is not in the power of a Holy Father to transmit
his spiritual worth, though he may conveigh his temporal wealth to his beloved
Child. The wind blows where it lists, Joh. 3. 8. And this wind is the
spirit of grace, as Augustine well observes, and the words of the Text make it
plain. The freeness of this glorious work of grace, which God works upon the
hearts of his people, may be fully and amply discerned

nature of Election, which is a voluntary choosing of some out of many; now
vocation and sanctification are 1 Cor. 12. 4. 1 Pet. 1 2. 1 Pet. 5. 13. Jer. 3.
14. 1 Pet. 2 4. Rev. 17. 14. Romans 11. 5. Romans 9 11. Jer. 3. 14.
only the fruits of Election, as most evidently the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 4. He
has chosen us to be holy. We are holy, because we are chosen. And so, Acts 13.
48. As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. We believe, because we
are ordained to eternal life. Nothing is more arbitrary then election, free
choice, God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, as the Apostle speaks.
Here it is true, one is taken and another left, as our Savior speaks in
another case; There is two of a Tribe, and one of a Family, as the Prophet
speaks; It may be one in a P^w is converted by a Sermon, others in the same
Seat not in the least wrought upon; as the same Fides electorum non fides
eligendorum, ut clamitant Arminiani.
Sun ripens some fruits, and rots others. Nothing then is more free then
election, which is the spring and fountain of grace and sanctification. Faith
is called the faith of the elect, Tit. 1. 1. Paul was converted after an
unusual and Tit. 1. 1.
strange manner, because he was a chosen vessel, Acts 9. 15. There are but few
chosen, as our Savior says, Mat. 20. 16. and therefore but few Saints in the
world.

work of grace arbitrary, is the free-agency of God, in sanctification of the
means of grace. The Gospel of Christ is a savor of life unto some, unto others
a 2 Cor. 2. 16. Joh. 6. 67, 68. Acts 13. 48, 50
savor of death; The Word, it melts and mollifies some, others it leaves to
hardness and incrustation. When Christ preached, some leave him, but his
Disciples adhered the closer to him. When the Apostles preached, some believed,
others persecute both the Doctrine and the Preacher. The Ordinances of Christ
are marrow and fatness to David, Psalm. Praedicatio crucis, et mortis Christi,
est odor mortis incredulis, et cedit in eorum exitium, qui mortem Christi, ut
mortem tantummodo considerant, sed credentibus est odor ex vita, quia ipsi
vitam ex ha^ morte amplectuntur.
63. 5. more then necessary food to Job, Job 23. 12. But to others they have no
taste, no sweetness, no power, no reach to affect the heart. When Paul and
Barnabas preached at Iconium, their Doctrine only stirs up rage and passion,
Acts 14. 2. Like a high wind which turns the waves of the Sea into froth. The
preaching of the word is a cure to some, and a curse to others; to some it
strengthens their grace, to others it amplifies their guilt; some fall before
it, as the word of salvation, Acts 16. 29. others reject it, and so dash upon
eternal perdition. The word indeed is a light to some, and to others only a
stumbling block, as God is pleased to pass by, or work by his holy spirit.
Ordinances they are attended by man, but sanctified by God. The Word works
unnaturally Ephesians. 4. 16. Joh. 3. 19. Prove. 16. 1. Ephesians. 3. 7.
upon the Jews, Acts 7. 54. pleasingly upon Herod, Mark 6. 20. most powerfully
upon Lydia, Acts 16. 14. fully and effectually upon Paul, Acts 9. 5. And thus
the Gospel, which is only an instrument in Gods hand, works variously and
differently, according to the pleasure and free agency of his will.

arbitrary, is evidenced in the impossibility of humane merit. We cannot
prepare our selves Natura corrupta est, et lex morbum ostendit, non sanat vos
autem meritum nescio quod excogitastis, quod mul(...) ^^lutem (...)endam
^^^eat. Whit. Q^i dignitate ^i^tationis hereditariae nituntur, multo sunt verae
pietatis studiosiores, quam qui ^ servorum merito ria virtute dependent. Mort.
Epis. Dunelm. contra Merita.
for the entertainment of this work of the holy spirit; there is no meritum ex
condigno, or meritum ex congruo, as the Papists fondly imagine, and our
Protestant Divines have fully evinced. When God first begins his work of grace
upon the soul, he finds nothing but ruins and rubbish, no remains of beauty.
The spirit of God meets with a great deal of enmity, Romans 8. 7. and boisterous
opposition, much wrigling and reluctance of the flesh; All the powers of man
are up in arms against this blessed work: It is therefore only Gods free and
eternal love which prompts him to carry on this powerful work. One observing
that of the Apostle, Our carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. By
carnal mind, says he, is not to be understood sensuality, the dregs, the lees,
and the whites of nature, but our natural wisdom, our most refined part, nature
in its best condition, even Lady reason it self unsanctified; and therefore the
work of grace must needs be arbitrary; there is nothing to allure it, nothing
to engage God to effect it: wrinkles will not stir up love. The wise man says,
Prove. 16. 1. The preparations of the heart are of the Lord; Observe,
preparations in the plural number, to show us, that every little wheel in the
work of grace is moved, Prove. 16. 1.
and turns by power from God; every good tendency, Vita nostrae animae maxim
beata a deo pendet, et donatur dei amicis
every regular propension, every breathing and anhelation after good, is
implanted in us by God, who is liberrimum agens, as the schoolmen speak, most
free and arbitrary in all his works and dispensations.

the ineffectualness of all man's attempts, to arrive at a state of grace and
holiness. There are many things bid fair for this holy work, but they all
Tollitur cooperatio liberi arbitrii, interior volentis, exterior currentis, et
totum opus bonum est dei miserentis, et gratiae operantis. Calv.
bring only to the birth, they cannot bring forth the least semblance of it,
all turn into a timpany at last: Good Education, holy Patterns, sweet
Ordinances, precious Sabbaths, these may contribute something to an outward
restraint from evil; but they beget not the Saint, without the admirable work
of divine grace. The holy spirit must overshadow the soul, and so beget Christ
in it. That holy thing, the new birth, is the product of the Eternal and
Almighty spirit; we cannot ascribe the New creature to any thing in Romans 9. 16.
man, for creature implies a work of creation, which only is to be attributed
to an infinite power: Thus most evidently the Apostle, Romans 9. 16. It is not of
him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who shows mercy. Man's fairest
colors are but paint; they may counterfeit, but are not true beauty.

meditate on the morning of a Sabbath, on the secrefie of the work of grace. It
is a sweet, but a spiritual work; indeed Vita sanctorum obscondita est, quia
sancti a mundi cupiditat^bus et mundara conversatione se abstrahunt et
abscondunt. Anselm.
it is admirable, but most frequently indisecruable, this blessed work is like
a river under ground, like a star behind a cloud, the world cannot see it; they
look upon the Saints, as the only troublers of Israel. Holy Paul was called a
seditious fellow, Acts 24. 5. The Apostles were called intemperate, men filled
with new wine, Acts 2. 13. Nay, Christ himself was called Beelzebub, and a
friend of publicans and sinners, though he had the spirit above measure, John
3. 34. (...) Epic.
The world understands not the Saints Shibboleth. Nay, often the Saint himself
is at a loss, whether this work be Mundus non agnoscit aliquid spirituale in
fil^is dei. Dav.
wrought in him or no: He often wants the lively and vivid sense of the spirit
of God, he many times is so clouded with afflictions, battered with
temptations, disturbed Heb. 11. 37, 38.
with the hurries of the world, dazzled with sensual flatteries, Col. 3. 3.
and benighted with desertion, that he can scarce see any day light of grace,
by the least cranny of observation, or experience. How does David cry out, that
the spirit had taken Cum sentiant sancti insehanc vitam spiritualem, tamenillam
agnoscunt valde infirmam, lanquidam, et obscuratam propter perpetuam illam
pugnam, rebellionem carnis. Daven.
wing, and was upon the flight from him, Psalm. 51. 11. The Apostle says, Col.
3. 3. Our life is hid with Christ, both in point of security, and in point of
secrecy; with Christ, as in the spring; with Christ, as in the root and
principle, and the root we know is under ground, and no eye of the passenger
observes it, with the several threads of it. Let one thing more come within our
view; This work of grace is often under a mask, and faces are not discovered
under a mask; there is a continual combat between the flesh and the spirit, and
the poor Saint stands as a spectatour, he waits, and cannot tell which of the
two combatants will go away with Gal. 5. 17.
flying colors.

meditate on the beautifullness of the work of Grace. The Scripture best
depaints this lovely work. Sometimes it Nova creat^ra spiritualis effecta,
novam gratiae vit^m fortua est, ut de^^^ceps in novitate vitae ambulet.
is called Regeneration, Joh. 3. 5. Sometimes it is called a new Creation, Gal.
6. 15. With what flourish and glory did the world look when God did first
create it, and it first put on its comely dress and attire; how pleasant was the
Earth in its first spring? Sometimes the work of grace is called Gods
workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10. and this work must be good, Genesis 1. 31. (...)
because it is his. All things he made were very good, Genesis 1. 31. Nay,
sometimes this work is called our coming to our selves, Luke 15. 17. And when
lunatic persons are reduced to their wits, what a comely and a lovely sight is
it? Indeed holiness is an attribute of God, it is the loveliness of Angels, it
is the beauty of Saints; this makes them excellent, Psalm. 16. Psalm. 16. 3.
Prove. 12. 26. Prove. 17. 27. Ezekiel. 16. 7. Phil. 1. 10.
3. nay, more excellent then their neighbors, Prove. 12. 26. The habits of
grace are excellent ornaments, Ezekiel. 16. 7. The ways of grace are excellent
ways, Phil. 1. 10. The work of grace it sheds light into the understanding,
makes it day there; the beginnings of grace are day break in the soul. Grace it
shapes the will, and brings it into form, it sublimates Col. 3. 1, 2.
the affections, and raises them from the dunghill, and makes them, as it was
said of the Bereans, Acts 17. 11. more noble; it softens the heart, and makes
it pliable to the tenders of the Gospel; it cleanses the conscience from its
filth and nastiness, Acts 15. 9. it composes the conversation; 1 Cor. 15, 58, 59
it adorns the life, and bespangles it with good works, those beautiful issues
of a work of grace.

meditate on the beneficialness of the work of grace. Grace is glory initiated,
the dawning of future glory, and glory is the noontide of grace. There is a
connection between grace and glory, Psalm. 84. 11. They are clasped together by
an eternal decree. Gods everlasting purpose of love has espoused grace to
glory. The work of grace foreruns Deus dedit nobis pignus futurae haereditatis
gratiam, qua nos unxit, ^t signavit in filios dei, discrevitque a filiis
diaboli.
the wages of glory. Grace is only glory in its infancy, and glory is grace in
its full growth. Grace and glory differ in degree, not in kind. The spirits
work is only the first Scene of heaven; here the spirit is a refining, above
it will be a ravishing spirit. Death blows the bud of grace into the flower of
glory, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 14. Grace only ushers in glory, it is only the
greener fruit of heaven, and in Oecum.
future blessedness it comes to its full maturation. In a word, 2 Cor. 1. 22.
the work of grace is the beginning of heaven in the soul; and Ephesians. 1. 14.
Christ in the heart does fully assure us; we shall see Christ Ephesians. 3. 17.
in the Throne.

meditate in the morning of a Sabbath, on the works of glory; How should we
contemplate on heavenly things, Psalm. 36. 8. Heb 4. 9. Rev. 3. 21. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
1 Cor. 2. 9. O ineffabile gaudium in sanctis glorificatis, qui ad dextram
Christi sistent, ut subditi serenissimo suo principi, ut filii benignissimo suo
patri, ut regale sacerdotium gratiosissimo suo pontifici. Glass.
on Gods heavenly day; what those chambers of rest, what those rivers of
pleasure, what those crowns of righteousness, what those thrones of glory are,
which God has prepared for his believing, and beloved ones, who have rejoiced
in his holy day here, and made it their seraphical delight. From the mount of
meditation, as from mount Nebo, we may take a prospect of the land of Promise,
which Christ has taken the possession of, in the name of all believers, Heb.
6. 20. Heaven must needs be a glorious City, which has God both for its
builder and inhabitant; it must needs be the extract and quintessence of all
blessedness. On Gods day in the morning, let meditation listen to the musicks
of the Bride-chamber, take a taste of our Masters joy, peep within the vail, and
take a glance of the face of God, and make an essay, how well a crown of
righteousness becomes the believers head; And surely we cannot meditate on
these things, but we Quanta erit illa felicitas, ubi nullum erit malum, nullum
latebit bonum, vacabitur dei laudibus, qui erit omnia in omnibus. Aug.
must rejoice in hope. What prisoner shackled with the chains of temptation,
and fettered with the irons of his own corruption, being in the dark prison of
the world, can meditate on the time when all these restraints shall be filed
off, and he enjoy the pleasant light, and glorious liberty of the Sons of God,
Romans 8. 21. but he will be transported with joy and exultation? Meditation
brings down heaven to us, and we travel in the view of things superlative and
ineffable. In Glory we shall see the King in his beauty, Isa. 33. 17. There
John 14. 2. Psalm. 16. 11.
God shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28. There shall be beauty Rev. 3. 21.
to the eye, music to the ear, joy to the heart, light to the mind, perfection
to the soul, plenary and absolute satisfaction to the Saint. Glory is
meditations upper-loft, it is its highest gallery to walk in, it is its
pleasing nest among the stars. Meditation may take a view of the pompous
Theater 2 Cor. 1. 3. Mat. 1. 21. Heb. 7. 25.
of glory, where there are the three persons in the Godhead; The Father of our
mercies, Jesus Christ the Savior of our souls, the Holy Ghost the Healer of
our natures; the Father who hears our prayers, the Son who is our intercessour
above us, and the spirit who is our intercessour within us: And in
correspondence to this blessed Trinity, there Romans 8. 26, 27.
are three species of beings who enjoy glory; the glorious God, the holy
Angels, the glorified Saints; and thus meditation may tune the morning of a
Sabbath, and the music may sound all the ensuing day.

CHAP. XXII. God is most illustrious in his Bounty and Presence.
meditate on the morning of a Sabbath, not only on the nature of God, on the
attributes of God, and on the works of God, but likewise on the bounty of God,
and his indulgence in giving us his Sabbath. Our very work on this day is our
reward, our spiritual duties are our greatest dignities; O what an honor, what
a favor, what a happiness does God vouchsafe us in giving us this golden
season. David though a King, and the Head of the Psalm. 84. 10. Psalm. 42. 2.
best people in the world, esteemed it an honor to be the lowest Officer in
Gods house, Psalm. 84. 10. The ordinances Psalm. 63. 2.
of God, are called our appearing before God, Psalm. 42. 2. The fruition of them
is as the seeing of his face: Capernaum Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
because of them was lifted up to heaven, Mat. 11. 23. Who can tell what honor
it is, to appear in the presence of this King? Or what happiness to see his
lovely countenance? In the ordinances of God, the Christian has sweet
communion with, ravishing delight in, and enflamed affection to the blessed
God, if in them he tastes God to be gracious, and has the first fruits of his
glorious and eternal harvest. Well might the Protestants of France call the
place of their public meeting on Gods holy day, Paradise. Ordinances are
heaven in a Glass, and the Londs day is heaven in a Map. O the bounty of God in
giving us this blessed day! This day is to be valued at a high rate, therein we
enjoy fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, we have tastes
of the Spirit, and feel the influential impressions of his grace, we are going
up the stairs, till we come to the highest loft of 1 John 1. 3. Psalm. 34. 8.
glory. The Jews call the week days, profane days, (...)
but the Sabbath a holy and precious day; The Greeks call week days working
days; but the Sabbath is a day of sweet rest: Other days are common and
ordinary days, but this holy Sabbath is the chief of days: Many daughters
have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all. Many days, as Lecture Prove.
31. 25.
days, Fast days, Thanksgiving days have done virtuously, but thou O Sabbath
excellest them all. Well might the good soul run to meet thee in the morning,
and salute thee, with a, Come my sweet spouse, thee have I loved, for thee have
I longed, and thou art my dearest delight. How far then Honos ne sit onus, nec
verba spiritus verbera carnis.
should we be from accounting the Sabbath our burden, and our attendance on
Ordinances upon that blessed day, our task or bondage? O let us not esteem
spiritual opportunities our fetters, but our freedom. Think what the Phaenix is
among the birds, the Lion among the beasts, the Fire among the elements, the
Prince among the Subjects; that is the Lords day among other days. Wax in the
shop is worth something, but wax put to some Deeds is worth thousands. Ordinary
days are wax in the shop, but the Lords day is wax put to the deeds. Upon this
day Christ carries the soul into his wine-Cellar, and his banner over him Cant.
2. 4.
is love, Can. 2. 4, 5. Upon other days Christ feeds his members, but on this
day he feasts them; on other days they have their ordinary diet, but on the
Sabbath, they have their exceedings; on this day Christ brings forth his living
waters, Genesis 43. 34.
his best wine, Joh. 2. 10. His finest bread, his Benjamins Haec visio non est
personalis, et Jacobi solummodo consolatio, sed commune piorum solamen, ut de
praesentia, et divino auxilio dubitemus. Par
mess. On the Lords day Christ pitches his Tabernacle among us, we are as it
were taken up into the mount with God, there to be transfigured before him,
Mat. 17. 2. When the Lord appeared unto Jacob in a vision by night, he saw a
Ladder erected between Heaven and Earth, and the Lord on the top of it, the
Angels ascending and descending by it, and when he awoke, How dreadful (says
he) is this place, the Lord was here, and I was not aware; surely it is no
other Genesis 28. 16, 17.
then the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. Are not Hos. 11. 9.
our places of assembling the very gates of heaven? In our Deuteronomy. 33. 3.
solemn assemblies is there not a ladder erected between earth and heaven, and
is not the Lord at the top of it? The gracious Sicut deus sanctus est, sic
etiam populum sonctificat, et servat, et in medio eorum est, et apparet. Riv.
instructions which we receive, are they not so many Angels descending? The
gracious motions which arise in our hearts upon meditation on Gods word, upon
thanksgiving to God, or rejoicing in him, or else sorrowing for our sins, are
they not as so many Angels ascending? And have we not then great cause to be
filled with admiration, and holy gratulations to God for Sabbath indulgence,
for his rich bounty in the donation of his blessed day?

morning of the Sabbath, let us meditate on the presence of God. Many
miscarriages are acted by man, and many miseries do seize upon man, for the
neglect of this ever Deus totus oculus est, et minima videt. August.
seasonable meditation. A solemn consideration of Gods presence would restrain
us from sin, would quicken us in duty, would draw out our graces, would compose
our spirits, and cast a holy awe upon us, which things would be inductive of
much fruitfulness and piety. When we sin, we forget Gods eye is upon us; when
we flag in duty, we do not think God is nigh to us; when we trifle away
Sabbath, we do not remember Gods hand will certainly be against us. Now there
is a twofold presence of God.

general presence; and God is present every where, Deus presens est. 1. Per
Essentiam Psalm. 139. 12. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.


First, By his Essence, and so he fills all things, 1 Kings 8. 27. and thus he
fills heaven with his glory, Earth with his goodness, and Hell it self with his
power and justice.

Secondly, God is present every where by his knowledge, so he beholds all
things, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Light and darkness, 2 Per Cognitionem.
night and day are all one to him, Psalm. 139. 12. He sees the very
imaginations of our hearts; His eyes behold, and his eye lids try the children
of men, Psalm. 11. 4. And though his Throne is as high as heaven, he sees what
is done below.

Thirdly, God is present every where by his supporting 3. Per Suflentationem.
power; he upholds all things, the whole Axle-tree of the Greation would soon
yield, and sink under its weight, was it not sustained by the power of the
Almighty.

Fourthly, God is present every where by his Government; 4. Per Dominium.
He rules all things, Angels and Men are his subordinate officers; the Sun and
Moon are those lamps he sets up to rule both day and night.

Secondly, There is a special presence of God, his gracious presence, whereby
he manifests himself to his people; which likewise is threefold:

First, This presence is evidenced in some visible and standing Exodus 13. 21.
tokens; as in those extraordinary, the pillars of the cloud Exodus 25. 10.
and of the fire; and in those ordinary, the Ark, and the Temple 1 Kings 8. 11.
of old, and the Ordinances of the Gospel now.

Secondly, In some inward influences and irradiations upon the hearts of his
hidden and holy ones.

Thirdly, In some signal effects, in conducting, leading, and covering his
people in times of danger and peril, Exodus 33. 14. (...) my face, faith the
Original, my self, says the Exodus 33 4
Septuagint, shall go before you. Now we should meditate on the presence of God
in every distinction, and this would not only supply our thoughts, but direct
our words, for God has many eyes upon us.

First, God has an eye of observation and inspection. God sees with what
uprightness and sincerity we run through Jer. 16. 17.
our duties, Jer. 16. 17. God eyes and takes notice of all our Mal. 1. 14.
services, and all our sacrifices, whether we offer up to him the Male of our
flock, or no; whether we are singing, or hearing, or praying, or reading, the
eye of the Lord is upon us; Preces non tam verbis, quam animo aestimantur.
Lyser.
He takes exact notice with what frame of heart our performances are managed,
whether slothfully or spiritually, whether heavily, or of a willing mind.

Secondly, God has an eye of favor and benediction; Gods eye can convey a
blessing, as well as his band, and his eye can speak his good will as well as
his heart, 2 Chronicles. 7. Jer. 24. 6. 1 Kings 9. 3. 2 Chronicles. 7. 16. Psalm. 101. 6.
Psalm. 30. 7.
16. Psalm. 101. 6. Gods eye is in his house of prayer, to approve, and bless
us, if we sanctify his Name in holy Ordinances; we should then be accurate and
exact in Sabbath observation, for Gods eye is fixed upon us, and he will not
turn it aside, nor lies it within the verge of humane artifice to cast a mist
before it.

Thirdly, God has an eye of anger and indignation. Gods looks Isa. 66. 4.
sometimes speak his Anger, as well as his Blows, Job 16. 9. Isa. 1. 26.
His fury is visible by his frowas; Gods sight can wound Christus iratus
hosts, ut ignis paleas consumit.
as deeply as his sword, Amos 9. 4. God seems sometimes to stab to the heart by
the glance of his eye. And if we wait on God irreverently, worship him
carelessly, and profane his day, Ezekiel. 22. 26, and 31.
either by corporal labor, or by spiritual idleness, we may justly expect to
be blasted by an eye of divine fury and displeasure. Dan. 10. 6.
pleasure. Christ whose eyes are as a flame of fire, Rev. 1. Psalm. 13. 2.
14. walks in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks throughout the world; He
observes how holy duties are performed, and how his holy day is sanctified; he
is in the midst of our Assemblies, to behold our inward and outward carriage in
his Courts; he goes down into his Garden of nuts, to see Hortus nucum sunt
corda sanctorum, et quideum valde diligunt coelestem dulcedinem in intimis
gerunt. Del Rio.
the fruits of the valley, Cant. 6. 11. He sees the rotten bough of
hypocrisy, the bare leaves of an empty profession, without the answerable
fruits of a holy conversation, and looks on these disappointments with fury and
indignation; In a word, this presence, this eye of God must be thought of, and
meditated on, upon the morning of a Sabbath, and it will be a good preparatory
to the subsequent duties of the whole day.

CHAP. XXIII. We must not only meditate on the God of the Sabbath, but on the
Sabbath of God, in the morning of his holy day.
HAving thus far treated on the first glorious object of our Sabbath
meditations, (viz.) Tbe God of the Sabbath, Genesis 24. 63. Paradisus est locus
beatorum, locus nobilior et eminentior. Alap.
I now come to the second head of meditation, (viz.) The Sabbath of God, and
here is fair Champian for meditation to travel over. Indeed the Sabbath is a
garden for meditation to walk in, it is like Isaac's field into which he went
to meditate; it cannot but be an inferior Paradise for meditation to delight
it self in, and to open our way into this Paradise, where there is no flaming
sword to keep us out, Genesis 3. 24. We will first cast our tie on the several
ends of the Sabbath. God has many rare and sacred ends in giving us this
seventh part of every week for converse with his divine self, and for
transacting the affairs, and concernments of Eternity.

universal end of the Sabbath, Creatio estopus mirandum, et stupendum. Dr. Jun.
which refers to all mankind, and relates not particularly either to the
Jewish, or to the Christian Church, (viz.) To preserve the memory of the
glorious work of the Creation; And indeed this work was most illustrious, and
in it many things were discovered: Psalm. 90. 2. (...) Philos.


First, Gods Eternity, who was before all things, Psalm. 90. 2. Yea, before time
it self, in which all things were created.

Secondly, In the work of Creation, we may take notice of the Self-being of
God, who being before all things, gives being to all things, and must
necessarily be of himself.

Thirdly, In this great work, we may discern the overflowing Isa. 37. 16. Isa.
40. 28. Isa. 45. 12, 18. Isa. 51. 13. Jer. 14. 22. Jer. 27. 5. Jer. ^2. 17.
Jon. 1. 9. Rev. 4. 11. Psalm. 33. 6, 9.
bounty of God; for nothing could move him to create a world, but his own
goodness; that there might be a Cistern to receive the sheddings of an
overflowing fountain: besides how has God furnished and stored the world with
all variety of furniture for the use of his Viceroy, Man?

Fourthly, In this stupendous work of the Creation, we cannot but acknowledge
Gods infinite power, who by his word alone created the vast bodies of the
Heavens and the Earth, and all the numerous host of them.

Fifthly, In this miraculous work, we may admire his Inter omnia beneficia dei
memoranda, primum et praeci^^^um est benefi^ium creationis, quod commemoratur
in sanctificatione Sabbati. Aquin. Prima Secundae, Quest. 100. Artic. 5.
transcendent Majesty, in that magnificent Palace of the Heavens, which he
has prepared and furnished for himself, where he sends forth his light, and
makes it his covering, and the clouds are his triumphal Chariots, Psalm. 104. 2,
3.

Sixthly, In this great work is manifest Gods absolute perfection in imparting
to the creatures all their several perfections, which must needs be in a far
more eminent degree in him who gave them. And indeed this illustrious work, is
the strong motive to all Gods Creatures, to Adore, Worship, Love, Fear, Serve,
Reverence and Obey this great Jehovah; and to Depend, Rest, Trust, and submit
themselves to him alone.

But the glory of this work of Creation will yield a more amazing splendour if
we look on it,

Antiquity: It is the most ancient of all Gods visible works, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. Mat.
13. 19. Rev. 3. 14. and that In principio de^^^reavit, etc. In hac voce, non
Authorem tantum, sed exordinum mundi judicat Moses. Par. Genesis 1. 1.
which is most ancient is most honorable, Jer. 18. 15. Dan. 7. 9. This great
and stupendous work is now some six thousand years standing; it is the
primitive essay of his power who is the ancient of days; Time seems to shed a
Veneration upon it. The first Creation was the Cradle of the world, its
infancy, which nothing did precede but the Being of a God who is from all
eternity.

universality: The work of Creation is the most general and extensive of all
Gods works, extending to Angels, Men, Sun, Moon, Stars, nay, to the Sparrow on
the 1 Kings 4. 33.
house top, to the fly in the air, and to the hysop on the Wall; it transcends
the bounds of Solomon's Philosophy, to give us a Tract of all the Vegetables,
the Bruits, and Rationals Bonum eo melius quo communius.
which God created when he set upon this glorious work. And here that politic
axiom is most true, That which is good, the more general, the more grateful;
And therefore Philo the Jew in his Tract of the Workmanship of the World,
styles the Sabbath which is the Festival in Memory Phil. suo de Opisicio Mundi.
of the Creation, a Feast not of one people, or of one Region, but the
universal festivity of all Nations, which Festival alone deserves the name of
popular.

goodness and untainted purity. God at the first created all things very good,
perfect, pure, and excellent; Genesis 1. 31.
Nay, man himself after his own image, in holiness, true righteousness, Genesis 1,
25, 26.
integrity, and perfection without sin, corruption, Eccl. 7. 27.
or obliquity. The work of Creation at first was wholly unblemished, Ephesians. 4. 24.
there was no wrinckle upon the face of the Universe, every creature was fair
in its kind. Man's sin put poison into the Toad, put rage into the Wolf, put
Briers and Genesis 3. 17.
Thorns into the Earth, put spots into the Moon, nay withering into the flowers
of the field, and decays into the Omnes creaturae vehementem aversionem habent,
it^ ut si haberent sensum gemerent ut parturientes, i^lque ab exordio mundi,
and lapsus hominis usque nunc.
trees of the forest, and veiled the face of nature with the black veil of
uncomeliness: And that the whole Creation groans, as the Apostle affirms, Romans
8. 22. it is from those sick fits and distempers which man's sin has cast it
into: When the air infects us, the heat and the cold does annoy us, the earth
disappoints us and yields no increase, from whence is this vanity? Even from
our selves, from ours and our first parents sin. Man in sinning commits two
evils, as the Prophet speaks in another case; he presses God, Amos 2. 13. Jer 2
13.
And he burdens the creature, nay alters the world from its primitive
loveliness, when beauty was the taking blush of every Being.

rarity and eminency of some creatures more especially: How glorious are the
Angels, those Courtiers of Heaven, 1 Kings 13. 18. 1 Kings 19. 5. Dan. 6. 22. 2
Chr. 32. 21.
those friends of the Bridegoom, man's elder Brethren, Psalm. 5. 8. Those
Chariots of God, Psalm. 68. 17. Those Guardians of believers, Psalm. 91. 11. who
are decked and adorned Quid murmuras caro misera? quid recalcitras quid omnino
invides? si fueris corpus humilitatis, reformabit idem Artif^x, qui formavit.
Bern.
with excellency, who excel in strength, Psalm. 103. 20. who excel in holiness,
Mark 8. 38. who excel in all the fruitions of joy and happiness, Mat. 18. 10.
Rev. 5. 11. Rev. 7. 12. who excel in splendour and glory, Luke 24. 23. And how
glorious was the humane nature of Christ, how spotless, precious, pure,
chrystaline, yet a creature; His soul how undefiled, Heb. 4. 15. His body how
glorious, Phil. 3. 21. How did the divine Nature glorify the humane in its
stupendous and grateful acceptance of it? I might add, how glorious is the
glistering Sun, the amiable Moon, the twinkling Stars which put the night out
of its blackest melancholy? Let only this be subjoyned, that without the work
of Creation, there could be no work of Redempti^n^ the chief end of which is,
to restore us to that felicity, happiness, and enjoyment, which man in his
first Creation both did, and (had he persevered in that estate) should have
enjoyed and possessed. Now one principal end of the Sabbath, Genesis 2 ^.
is to commemorate this glorious work, that as God when he had finished it,
took up his rest, Genesis 2. 3. So man, when he beholds it, should take up his
rest, and keep a weekly Sabbath to the Lord.

political end of the Sabbath, viz. The refreshment and recreative breathing of
the outward man, a relaxation ^um deus sex d^^r^m spacio (...) absoluisset,
septi^um diem quiet sua sanctum reddere voluit. Riv.
of the body from the pains and toil of the week; and therefore the Sabbath is
called a rest. It is said of God himself, that on the seventh day he rested and
was refreshed, Exodus 31. 17. And how much more does poor man stand in need of
rest and refreshment? Death indeed fairly unpins our tabernacle of clay, folds
it up and lays it in the grave, but too much labor tears it down; man's body is
taken down Psalm. 116. 7.
by death, is thrown down by too much toil, therefore the Deus non tantum
Creator, sed and conservator est Creaturarum. Leid. Prof.
wearisom labors of the week must be allayed by the rest of the Sabbath. The
very name of a Sabbath signifies nothing but rest, strongly to argue, that that
holy day was appointed for man's relaxation from the hurries of the world, and
the sweats of the week. The Sabbath is a rest to the body and Requiesc^mus in
Sabbato, ne continuis laboribus fatigemur et eorum remissione fess^ membra
leventur and vires reficiantur.
a revival to the soul, the bodies ease, and the souls enjoyment; the outward
man on the Sabbath recovers st^ength, and the inward man receives Christ: Our
exhausted spirits on Gods holy day are sweetly recruited, and our importunate
souls are rarely answered, they then prey upon a Christ offered in the Gospel.
Pla^o observes, That the Go^s willing to recrui^ mankind over-toiled with
labor, in pity have appointed festival days for their ease and relaxation.
Thus that Heathen Philosopher gives in his verdict to this particular; Dii
genus hominum laboribus pressum miserati propter remissionem laborum ipsis
statu^runt solennia F^st^. Plat. lib. 2. de legib.
Indeed Gods blessed Sabbath shores up a piece of clay, and it builds up a
pie^e of eternity, the precious and the immortal soul. The Sabbath is the
bodies friend, and the souls fosterer; the bodies rest-time, and the souls
term-time. Those words of God, Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15. That thy man servant, and thy
maid servant may rest as well as thou, and remember that thou wast a servant in
the Land of Egypt, are very emphatical, and intimate to us, that one necessary
end of the Sabbath Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15.
is rest; and that not only for governors of Families, who happily need it not
so much, but also for servants; and they which have tasted of toil and bondage
will easily allow, rest to others.

aeconomical end of the Sabbath, viz. That the whole family be taken off from
their customary toil (as Exodus 20. 10. Nec Pater familias nec ejus familia nec
animalia domestica nimiis laboribus perdenda sunt, sed uno die intra septiman^m
quiet fruantur a laboribus. Zan
was suggested somewhat before) and labor, and enjoy a sweet vacation for
their communion with God. On this holy day the governor is to cease from his
secular oversight and usual labor, the children are to suspend their daily
employments, and the servants are to lay aside their accustomed sweat; and the
Posterity of Adam is now neither to dig, nor delve, and to get his living by
the sweat of his brows. This day the Ox must ot toil at the plow, nor the Ass
groan under his burden, nor must the stranger be disturbed in his pleasing
repose. Thomas Aquinas observes, In observantia Sabba^^ s^nctifi^atio est
finis, prae^^^^^m est c^ss^re ab ^^ere s^rvili. quin. secunda se^undae quaest.
122.
The level of the fourth Commandment aims at holy, rest and a full cessation
from servile and secular labors. And Musculus takes notice, That in case of
Religion there is no difference between the Master and the Servant, between the
Parents and Children; but all distinctions of Sexes, and Degrees, and Relations
is quite taken away, and the same Law for the Sanctification of that holy day
indifferently involves and includes Communi s^nctificandi Sabbati lege
constring^ntur omnes ex aequo, Herus, Servus, Pater, Laberi, Mas et Faemina;
superiores and inferiores. Musc. Deuteronomy 5 14. Vt familia quief^eret. haec habes
ad Charitatem.
all. The observation of the Sabbath reaches him who grinds at the Mill, as
well as him who sits on the Throne. Then the whole family must be built up
in their most holy faith, as the Temple was in its Magnificent structure
without noise of ax or hammer, 1 Kings 6. 7. without interruption or noise of
worldly and secular labor. A learned man thinks it is agreeable to the Law of
charity, that Children and Servants should be call*d off from their servile
employments upon the Lords day, their souls requiring as much care and
attendance as the souls of those who move in a higher sphere, and take the
upper seat in the household and family.

Ecclesiastical end of the Sabbath: we are then to be conversant about those
things which belong to the Finis secundus Sabbati, est Ecclesiasticus, eo quod
cirea dei cultum, et meditationem divinorum operum versatur; Omnia enim ea quae
ad veram pietatem, et verum dei cultum pertinent in hoc sacro otio peragi
debent. Hospin. Ostendit Deus discrimen inter labores externos, et inter illos
pietatis, et cultus Divini in quarto praecepto. Ger.
Church of Christ; we are to attend upon the worship of God, to meet with the
people of God, and to refresh our souls with the Ordinances of God. This day is
a time for the Church, not the Change; it is not the fair of the body, but the
Market Day of the soul. The things to be agitated this day are of another
nature than the affairs of the week: Now we must not mind our coffer, but our
Christ; not the meat which perishes, John 6. 27. but that which endures to
everlasting life. God gives us the seventh part of the week to trade for
Heaven, to dig for grace, to sue out our pardon, to strike high, and look after
an interest in a Mediator, to lay up for eternity, and to mind our part in
Canaan above, in the Country to come. Now must we dress the Garden of our
souls, Genesis 2. 15. Now we must drive furiously, 2 Kings 9. 20. for a Crown of
glory: Now we must pursue the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. The
affairs of the Sabbath are not civil, but Ecclesiastical.

Christian end of the Sabbath, viz. That it may be a note and badge of our
profession. In the Primitive times the Pagans used to question the Christians
upon this interrogatory; Have thou kept the Lords day, and the answer Beati
martyrs in judicium vocati, et a procons^le interrag^ti, number Collectam
fecissent, aut Dominicum egissent? Voce saepius repetita respondont, se
Christianos esse, Collectam Dominicam, et Dominicum congrua religionis
devotione celebrasse, quia intermitti non potest. Baron.
commonly was, I am a Christian, I dare not intermit it, for the Law
admonishes me of it; namely, the Law of God, of Christ, of Christianity, which
answer cost many Christians their lives, the last drop of their dearest blood.
Never were two truths more deeply dyed in the blood of Martyrs, than the Lords
Day, and the Lords Supper have been; the one under Popish, the other under
Pagan persecution. The keeping of the Lords day in those Golden days of the
Church, was the Christians Motto, the Saints Shibboleth, the Martyrs boast; and
persecutors frowns could not cause them to suspend it, nor the greatest fury
enforce them to renounce it. And the holy observation of the Lords day did not
only then discriminate the Christian from the Heathen, the Church from the
world, but it still differences the Saint from the sinner, the believer from
the formalist, the carnal Gospeller from the real professor. The Lords day is
the Crown of the Lords people, and their delights in it betray them to be the
true Disciples of Jesus Exodus 31. 13, 17. Ezekiel. 20. 12.
Christ, and wearing this Livery they travel to Canaan, leaving the miscreant
and mistaken world to read their own doom in Sabbath-prophanation. Not many
years since the strict keeping of the Lords day was the note of a Puritan, but
always in the Church of Christ it was the good note of a good Christian.

prudential end of the Sabbath, viz. To preserve unity in the Church. There is
nothing more adorns Non habet dei charitatem, qui non diligit ecclesi^
unitatem. Aug.
and beautifies the Church, then its sweet consent and harmonious unity. Rents
are the deformities of a Garment, and Schisms the wounds of the Church, which
both weaken it and make it despicable. Augustine used to say, He has nothing
Quantum facinus est ecclesiae corpus dilaniare, et dilacerare, contentionibus,
et vixis ecclesiae unitas turbatur. Zanch.
of the love of God, who loves not the unity of the Church. The people of God
are but one flock, Luke. 12. 32. One body, Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. One building, Ephesians.
2. 11. And Divisions are the untiling and shaking of this house, the scattering
of this flock, the wounding and piercing of this body. But nothing more
conduces to the cementing and uniting of the Church of Christ, then the
Identical observation of a day for Divine worship; that on the same day all the
Habemus unum Dominum, unam fidem; quid restat ut tot vinculis alligati, immo
uniti, antemus, colamus, et servemus hanc spiritus unitatem.
prayers of the whole Church should meet at the same Port, and all their sighs
should blow to the same harbor, nay, all their singing of Psalms should make
up the same Quire, that the universal flock and people of God should at the
same time be bending their knees to the Almighty, lifting up their hands to
heaven, and be unanimously engaged in the same acts of holy worship. All this
speaks the strength and excellency of the Christian Church. As the death of
Christ is the same price and ransom, so his Resurrection authorizeth Deus
pluris* facit preces in ecclesia quam domi factas; non ob locum sed ob
considerationem multitudinia fidelium, Deum communi consensi^ invocantium. Riv.
the same day for worship to all his Saints, and to all Christian professors in
the world; that all who own the Gospel, may, with one accord at the same time
meet in their addresses to the Throne of grace. Should one part of Gods Church
observe one day for Divine worship, and a second part another day, another part
a third season, this double inconveniency would arise.

First, This would be a perpetual fountain of Controversies and feuds in the
Church of Christ, and his seamless Coat should be rent and torn, jars more then
Corinthian, 1 Cor. 1. Psalm. 87. 2. Exodus 14. 7. Jude 5. 28.
21. would disturb the peace of Sion, each party struggling to put the fairest
character upon its own observation: There would be more than twins striving in
the womb of the Church, and in such digladiations and contests the Spouse of
Christ should not escape woundings and scars of hurt and disgrace. How did that
needless Controversy about the observation of Easter tear the Eastern from the
Western Church, and made the gap so wide, that the Chariots of the most
malicious enemies might have drove in at the breach; much more controversies
about the weekly day of divine worship would beget implacable factions; and
Armies divided, are as good as routed.

Secondly, Should several days be weekly observed by several parts of the
Church; some of these would fall in, and be co-incident with the Jewish or the
Turkish Sabbath, or else with the solemn days of the Paynims and Heathens,
Ephesians. 4. 3.
which would be an unhappy blending; that Satan's proselytes, and Idolatrous
worshippers, and Christ's Disciples Corporibus licet divisi, et disparati s^mus,
mente t^m^n et anim^^, conjuncti, uniti, et quasi unum simus. Alap.
should all keep the same day for a festival, and send up their different notes
at the same time, which would be a very distasteful miscellany and confusion.
For the prevention of these inconveniences, the Lords day is the Churches
weekly jubilee, that the followers of the Lamb might serve their dear Jehovah
in the unity of the spirit, and in the bond of peace, all observing the same
day, in the same worship, to the same God.

spiritual end of the Sabbath: And this, as Hospinian observes, is the most
sublime and seraphical end. On Finis tertius Sabbati, ejus otii est sublimior,
est vere spiritualis atque adaeternam hominis salutem propior ac^edit. Hospin.
(...). Ignat. ad Magn.
the Sabbath, the soul takes its flight toward heaven, pursues life and
salvation, and is upon the wing toward its center above. The Sabbath day is
our transfiguration day; then more especially we are upon Olivet with Jesus,
Mat. 17. 1, 2, 3, etc. It was a worthy saying of Reverend Bishop Joseph Hall,
not long since deceased; Gods day, says he, calls for an extraordinary
respect. The Sun arises on this day and enlightens it, yet because the Sun of
Righteousness arose upon it, and gave a new life to the world on it, and drew
the strength of Gods moral precept unto it; therefore justly do we sing with
the Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord has made, etc. Now let me forget
the world, and in a sort, my self, and deal with my wonted thoughts, as great
men use; who sometimes in their privacy forbid the accesses of all Visitants:
Prayer, Hearing, Meditation, Reading, Preaching, Singing, are the proper
businesses of this day, and we dare not bestow the time of this day on any
work, or pleasure, but what is heavenly. Let Superstition be hated on the one
hand, and Profaneness on the other; but we shall find it more hard to Est
Sabb^tum spirituale, quo a corruptae cornis n^strae operibus feriamur, ac deum
in nobis operari sinimus. Gerar.
offend in too much Devotion, but most easy to offend in Profaneness. Indeed
the whole week is sanctified by this day, and according to our care of this
day, will be the blessing on the rest; thus far this Holy and Learned man. The
Jews call the Sabbath, the secret of the living Lord, and some give the
reason, because God keeps a perpetual rest in himself; and we observing an
holy rest, we become most like to him: (...)
may not another reason be annexed? Because the pious soul is then in secret
with God, transacting the affairs of another Psalm. 25. 14.
world, and enjoying that secret delight which the world knows not of, and
feeding on that hidden manna, which Job 23. 12.
is the dainties of the Saints only. God verily gives us this day for s^ul
work; then we hear the word which is the food of the soul, Job 23. 12. then we
pursue greater measures of grace, which is the beauty of the Soul; then we look
after the Mat. 13. 47, 48.
pearl of price, the Lord Jesus Christ, which is the riches of the soul; then
we pour out our prayers, which Mic. 6. 3. 2 Pet. 1. 19.
are the ^ent of the soul; and then we follow after spiritual knowledge, which
is the ^ayst^r arising in the soul. The School men wel^ obs^^ve, that the
injunction of the fourth Commandment is abstin^nce from servile works, but the
end of the command is spiritual duty and holiness. The design of the Sabbath
was never principally the case of the flesh, but the labor of the heart; the
hearts of serious Christians then working, like Bees in the Garden, drawing
honey from the flowers of every Ordinance.

significative end of the Sabbath; it signifies a threefold rest. Sabbatum
praecipitur Judaeis ob triplicem rationem. 1. Propter avaritiam, ut vacentur
divinis. 2. Ne errent circa creationem. 3 Vt significet triplicem quiet^m. 1.
Christi in sepulchro. 2. M^ntis a pec^atis 3. Beatorum in patria. Aquin.


First, The Sabbath in the time of the Law signified Christ's rest in the grave.
When our Savior having run through the toils and sorrows of the world, lay
down in his dormitory of dust for three days, and there both Christ and the
Jewish Sabbath lay asleep together, only with this difference; the legal
Sabbath took its last sleep, and awoke no more; but our dearest Lord, after a
short repose, awaked in his blessed and glorious resurrection, and went to
sleep no more. But the expiration of the Old Sabbath being fully accomplished
at Christ's burial,

Secondly, The Gospel Sabbath arises, as a Phoenix out of the ashes of the
other, nor is it defective in its signification, but implies and signifies our
rest from sinful, as well as sec^lar works. Indeed sin is a default on other
days, but it is Vtrisque vero gravias peccant, qui otio Sabbati ^b^tuntur ad
suas cupiditates. Aug.
a prodigy on the Lords day; then our bodies must not only rest from toil, but
our hearts from trespass, and from its sinful traverses. Augustine observes,
That they sin at the greatest rate of offense, who abuse the leisure of the
Sabbath to pursue their lusts, and unlawful desires. And the Schoolmen note,
That they who are only idle upon the Sabbath break only the fourth Commandment,
but those who are profane Qui solum ab opere servili cessant, omnino peccant;
sed qui sequuntur suas cupiditates, et libidines, non solum violant quartum,
sed and alia transgrediuntur mandata. Altissiod.
upon that day, sin with greater obstinacy and violate other Commands; their
excesses and intemperance swell into the highest guiltiness. What Moses in his
passion did in breaking the two Tables in pieces, Exodus 32. 19. Profane
persons upon a Sabbath seem to imitate, and out-vy. We enjoy leisure on Gods
holy day, but it is for divine worship; we must rest, but it must be in God,
and not lean on our couch in ease and slothfulness, but we must lean on our
beloved in holy and fiducial services.

Thirdly, Our blessed Christian Sabbath further signifies Cant. 8. 5.
the Saints rest in glory. The present Sabbath is only the pawn, and the first
fruits of a better rest to come; Here the Josh. 18. 7.
Saints, like the Tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half Necessum est dicere,
quod David aliam and tertiam quandam requiem intellexerit, puta in coelo
aeternam, quae nobis Christianis quavis aetate, proponitur, tertiam, inquam,
requiem, quae per duas praecedentes scil. per requiem Sabbati, et requiem in
terra Canaan anagogice fuit significata. Alap. Vltra hunc mundum est very
Sabbati observatio. Orig.
Tribe of Manassah, are on this side Jordan, they are not yet come to Canaan:
Believers indeed enjoy Communion with Christ here, but they are not arrived at
their perfect rest, in the heavenly Canaan, where they shall enjoy Christ in a
full fruition. The present Sabbath is the twilight, the dawning of that which
is to come, it is the morning dew of love, which being melted away, we shall
come into the warm bosom of Christ to keep an everlasting Sabbath. We are by
our weekly rest lead by the hand, to take notice of our perfectly complacential
and undisturbed rest, that which Origin calls, The true Sabbath, and
Chrysostom calls, the true Rest; not that our Sabbath here is counterfeit; but
truth and v^rity is ascribed to our Sabbath above, as it is attributed to the
God of the Sabbath by way of greater glory, and more unlimited eminency. There
is a light in the Candle, but the light of the Sun is more transcendent and
illustrious. Flaviacensis observes, that our future Sabbath, is the Sabbath of
Sabbaths, because the Saints rest is begun only here, but consummated in every
lineament in the Kingdom of glory; the Elect shall rest in every part, in soul,
in body, from disturbance, from all afflictions, labors, miseries,
temptations; Tertia est requies quae est vere quies scil. regnum caelorum, quod
assecuti vere quiescunt a laboribus, and afflictionibus. Chrysostom.
no evil One to tempt, no evil heart to seduce. Hesychius calls our future
Sabbath, our rest in Heaven, an intelligible rest, as if the soul did never
fully understand its rest and quietation, till it took up its abode in the
bosom of Christ.

CHAP. XXIV. A Collation and Comparison of the Jewish with the Christian
Sabbath.
OUr Meditation on the morning of Gods holy day, having Exodus 16. 23. Exodus 35.
2. Rev. 1. 10.
passed through the several ends of the Sabbath, it may a little look back, and
compare the Jews seventh day, and the Christians first day together, their
Sabbath, and our Lords day, and much delight will flow from both to refresh our
meditations: And here we may compare the legal and the Evangelical Sabbath,
both in their agreements, and in their differences; for when they do not sound
the same tune, yet they yield the same and sweet harmony.

Jewish and the Christian Sabbath agree in this, they are both the seventh part
of the week; though the duties Dies septimus non propter numerum septenarium,
aut utiquam propter ipsius qualitatem, sed quoniam sa^^tae erat quieti
consecratus a domino, ideoque pro sancto habendus est, and sanctis actibus, and
meditationibus sanctisicondus. Musc.
of our Sabbath be of a sweeter taste, yet they are not of a longer duration.
The (...) Jom of the Hebrews, is as long as the (...), Hemera of the Christians
the Lords day is a day and no more, and so was the Jews Seventh day; both
contain the space of twenty four hours. Indeed the quarrel is not concerning
the tale, but concerning the trading of the hours of our Sabbath; the time is
the same both under the Law, and in Gospel times; but as God complained of the
Jews for their Sabbath pollution, Exodus 20. 13. so may he complain of
Christians too for their Sabbath-prophanation. The controversy did never rise
from the length of the day, but the feud arises from the abuse of the day, when
that time which is destinated to holy service, is prostituted to secular toil,
or sinful practice. How many among us Christians have curtailed Gods holy day,
have impt it, and shortened that golden season by an untimely throwing off holy
days, and setting to sports and pastimes those panders of Mal. 4. 2.
lust and vanity? They have chased away the Sun of Righteousness from our
Horizon too soon, and have made a difference between the Jewish Sabbath and
ours, which God never made, (viz.) they have made our Sabbath shorter then
theirs. The Lord by his Apostles in the New Testament Exodus 31. 13. Lev. 19. 30.
has altered the day from the seventh to the first, but never the time from a
longer to a shorter duration. Surely much guilt and blame-worthiness must fall
upon them, who Nehem. 9. 18.
shut up the Church doors, and the Sabbath together, and Sanciri denuo et
commendari observationem Sabbati, omnes vident. Riv.
when the public is over, then all is over, as if the service of Christ was so
cheap, and so inconsiderable, as it could not run parallel with the sacrifices
of the Law, which were both morning and evening on the Sabbath, the intervals
Numb. 28. 9, 10.
being likewise spent in holy and divine worship; for so expressly runs the
Command. The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. not some few
houts, but the whole day. The Lord in Lev. 19. 3. espouseth the fourth and the
fifth Commandments together, as if they were both one flesh: Ye shall fear
every man his Mother and his Father, and keep my Sabbaths; I am the Lord your
God. God unites these precepts, as if they were equally natural; and it was as
great a crime to pollute Gods Sabbath, as to offer affronts to our natural
parents; the greater then is their crime who mangle Gods Sabbath, and tear away
a great part of it, to fling it to their lusts or their laziness.

Jewish Sabbath and the Christian agree in this; both commemorate some renowned
benefit. The Jews in Sabbatum Mosaicum institutum fuit; ut perpetuum memoriale
articuli de Creatione extaret, et ut monumentum esset liberationis ex servitute
Aegypti, et gratiarum actionis deo debitae pro quiet a laboribus quos in
Aegypto sustinuerat gravissimos
their Sabbath observation preserve the memory of two illustrious benefits; the
one recorded in the promulgation of the fourth Commandment, Exodus 20. 11. the
other mentioned in the repetition of the same Command, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. The first
the benefit of the Creation, being of a greater extent concerned all mankind;
but the Jews were more especially entrusted with the memorial of that glorious
work; and therefore the Lord did engrave it in the body of the fourth
Commandment, alleging his progress in the work of Creation, as the reason of
that precept; that as he did work six days in making the world, and rested the
seventh, so man should work six days, and rest the seventh, consecrating that
weekly sequestration to the honor and service of the Creator. The second
benefit which the Jews commemorate in the observation of their Sabbath, is
their miraculous deliverance Ger. de leg. Dei.
from Egyptian bondage; that seasonable rescue was embroydered with a pile of
miracles, and therefore the Lord Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
brings it in with an ergo, in Deuteronomy. 5. 15. as an authentical ground and
reason for the Jews weekly observation of the seventh day, to the glory, and in
the worship of their Omnipotent Deliverer. It is very observable, how
frequently the Tot^ Aegyptum comparat pistrino aut simili loco, in quo mancipia
constringeb intur, et ad difficilia and dura servitia cogebantur. Riv.
Scriptures mention this great Deliverance; in Exodus 13. 3. it is ushered in
with a memento; and the day of its performance has a Selah put upon it. Egypt
is called a house of bondage, Deuteronomy. 5. 6. where there was no furniture to
garnish it, but strokes and slavery. In another place of Scripture, Mic. 6. 4.
It is called a house of servants, where toil and sweat was the badge of every
Inhabitant. Rivet compares Egypt (when the Israelites were enslaved there) to
Joseph's Prison, Genesis 39. 20. To Jeremiah's Dungeon, Jer. 37. 16. To Samson's
Hold, Judge. 16. 21. where he ground Inculcanda erant liberis dei beneficia, et
dandam esse operam ut ea memoria retinerent.
at the Mill. Now the sharpness of the servitude set off the sweetness of the
delivery, a delivery so great, that it must be part of the Catechism, which
the Jews must teach their Children, Exodus 13. 14. one of the Principles of
their Religion; this providential mercy must become doctrinal instruction. No
wonder then if the Jews must therefore observe their Sabbath, to preserve fresh
the memory of so great salvation; and which is observable, The Lord mentions
this stupendous deliverance, Mic. 6. 4. almost eight hundred years after the
accomplishment, as of a story to be wrote in Marble; nor is it to be
overpassed, that this freedom from Egyptian bondage, is both the usher to, and
part of the Decalogue, the Preface to the Ten Commandments, and a peculiar
reason in the fourth. And we Christians in the observation In honorem illius
diei, quo Christus amortuis resurrexit; Apostoli in locum Sabbati Judaici, diem
Sabbato proximam cultui divino deputarunt. Ger.
of our Sabbath, eye a great, nay, the greatest benefit, (viz.) the most
inestimable, the most inexplicable, the most inconceivable resurrection of
Christ; that triumphant work, that first step of Christ's exaltation, did first
breath into our Sabbath the breath of life. When the Sun of Righteousness did
rise, it made our Sabbath, Day, nay, a day of life and salvation, or as the
Psalmist, Psalm. 118. 23, 24. a mavelous day, a day not more beset with mercy,
then wonder. By rising Christ freed us from more then Egyptian bondage, and
therefore sheds a greater glory on our Sabbath, Surrexit Christus mane prima
Sabbati, manifest docens, sc. nos a morte animae resuscitatos, in lucem
perpetuae selicitatis perducturum. Bid.
then either the light of the Creation, or the glory of a temporal deliverance
could cast upon the Sabbath of the Jews. Venerable Bede observes, Christ rose
in the morning of the first day of the week, to raise us from the death of the
soul, and to bring us to the light of perpetual happiness. Our souls benighted
by darkness, by the appearing of the true morning star, Rev. 22. 16. are lead
out of this darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and being fettered
before, are loosned, and enfranchised into the glorious liberty of the Sons 1
Pet. 2. 9. Romans 8. 21.
of God, Romans 8. 21. The rich and rare benefit which we commemorate on our
Sabbath, is Christ's rising from the grave, when he conquered death, pinnion'd
Satan, locked Necte natus est Christus, nocte captus, et sole obtenebrato
mortuus est; sed illucescent die resurrexit, ut ostenderet, quod gloriosa sua
resurrectione, etc.
up the gates of Hell, perfumed the grave, and became the powerful cause, and
great exemplar of our resurrection. I cannot let slip the Elegance of a learned
man, who takes notice, That Christ was born in the night, apprehended in the
night, died when the Sun was darkened, and wrapped up in Cypress and Sables, but
rose at day break, when the light began to appear, to intimate, that the dark
shadows of our sins were put to flight by his glorious resurrection, and
eternal light of righteousness did compass us as with a garment.

Jewish Sabbath, and the Christian agree in this; That holiness to the Lord is
written upon the breast plate of Exodus 28. 36.
both; both must be inviolably and spiritually observed to God. Purity and
sanctification, is the beauty and comeliness, the end and answer of b^^h. There
was a time when the Jews were so exact in the observation of the Sabbath, Ex
Rabbinis refertur, quod in die Sabbati, non licet pomum admovere carboni, aut
vinum super sinapi pulverem mittere, aut allium quod edere velit, decorticare,
etc. Munster.
that they screwed up the page ^oo high, and the string broke into superstition;
their own Ra^bins aver, that to put an Apple to the fire, to take a Flea which
was skipping from one part of the body to another, to peele Garlic to eat, to
climb a tree to break down a bough, etc. was reputed amongst them altogether
unlawful; nay, such minute trifles which the learned man gravely asserts, are
more foolish then the toys and jests of Sicily. Indeed these over-zealous
Rabbis thinking to make the Sabbath more specious, made it more ridiculous,
and put black spots upon it, instead of making it more beautiful; yet thus
much we may learn, that the overplus of Ceremonies implied their exact
observation; and their niceness and superstition did strongly imply, there was
much religious devotion, as the guilding of the frame, speaks the choiceness of
the picture: However we may confidently conclude, that the Jewish Sabbath was
encompassed with a hedge of thorns, that neither secular labor, nor sensual
pleasure, nor sinful practice was to break in to profane Ter paenam capitalem
infligendam violatoribus Sabbatum exprimit deus per Mosen. Riv.
it; And God was very zealous of his Sabbath, that it might not be polluted,
when the transgressour was to be punished with no less penalty then death,
Exodus 31. 14, 15. And which is observable, not riot, but work on the Sabbath,
not lust, but sweat was punishable with the loss of life. Nay, God did see the
least wrinkles in the face of the Sabbath, Nec est quod quis de supplici^
gravitate conqueri debuerit, quia contemptus dei nunquam potest nimis gravi
supplicio vindicari. Riv.
and took notice of the least defilements if it was but the gathering of a few
sticks, Number. 15. 32. And this example was in terrorem, for greater dread and
terror to others: And Rivet animadverts, That eternal death in the Scripture
mentioned is threatened to obstinate sinners. But to slide down to Gospel times,
Holiness does not less become the Christian Sabbath; we may hear by the
thunder, and see by the lightning of Gods judgments upon Sabbath breakers, how
jealous God is still of his own day; the change of the day from the seventh to
the first opens no gap to looseness, gives no dispensation to sin or
sensuality: The day is changed, but the bonds are not broken; our tie is as
strong as that of the Jews, to the strict and holy observation of Gods blessed
Sabbath. If the Sabbath was to be kept holy in the times of the Law, much more
in Gospel Times. The fourth Commandment binds us as forcibly as them, and it is
our Obstinatis autem, ut in omnibus peccatis eternam mortem fuisse denunciatam,
non inficias imus. Riv.
glass as well as their directory, our chain as well as their bond, it is
still Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, Exodus 20. 8. whether it be the
seventh day, or the first. Gospel light may make sin more shameful, not more
venial, more hateful, and not more excusable. And if Sabbath-pollution was
matter of complaint heretofore in legal times, Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 20. 13.
20. 13. To act the same sin under Gospel Grace is a more prodigious crime.
Purity certainly is the decency of the Lords day. The love of Christ in rising
for our justification, Romans 8. 34. should in no wise make us more wanton, but
Romans 8. 34.
more obedient.

And as the Jewish Sabbath agrees with the Christian in many particulars, so in
several things we may discern a difference.

differ in this: There was a multitude of appendices and impositions which did
clog the Jewish Sabbath, Exodus 16. 22, 27. Exodus 35. 3. Numb. 15. 32. Exodus 16.
29. Acts 1. 12.
all which are taken off from the Christian, to make the yoke more easy and
lightsome to the bearer. The Jews on their Sabbath were not to gather Manna,
nor to pick a few sticks, or to kindle a fire; nay, they were not to stir out
of their places; And in after times they were only indulged to travel a Sabbath
days journey, which some learned Expositors Buxtorf. lib. 3. p. 100.
confine to a mile, and others stretch it out only to two. Thus God was pleased
to pinnion and streighten the Jews Sabbath with a multitude of burdensome
circumstances, and Communio nostra est cum Patre, and Filie ejus; In Patre, and
in Christo, sunt omnia vera and Caelestia bona, Zanch.
a failure in any one of them was very prejudicial to the offender. But Christ
rising from the dead, did not only loosen the bonds of the grave, but of the
Sabbath too: Those circumstances which did load the Sabbath of the Jews, are
now like knots plained off, like darker shades which are now blown away: And
the Lords day is freed from those fruitless ceremonies, and is wholly to be
spent in sweet communion with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, John 1. John
1. 1, 3.
1. 3. Our Christian Sabbath has not its fetters on, but holy liberty is its
character and Shibboleth; Our stages are not laid how far we shall go on the
Sabbath, if pure Ordinances are our errand. Holy Christians went many miles to
hear heavenly Mr. Hildersham, and it was not reputed their crime, but their
zeal. We may on the Sabbath Numb. 15. 36.
alleviate winters cold with seasonable fires, and God will not judicially turn
our sticks which were to warm us into stones, to bruise and destory us: we may
gather up Manna, even spiritual Manna, and it will not be our fault, but John
6. 32.
our happy frugality; our Sabbath is the Souls feasting day, Excessus in epulis
cum natura pugnat. Convivium enim ^ vita, non a morte nomen habet. Chemnit.
and our provisions are no less then true bread from heaven. We Christians are
not denied on our Sabbath the moderate furniture of our Tables; Christ himself
feasted with the Pharisees on the Sabbath day, Luke 14. 1, 7. Our greatest care
in this case is, that our tables be our support, and not our snare. To wind up
then this particular; Our Christian Sabbath, though it has less ceremony, it
has more substance; Psalm. 69. 22.
though it has fewer leaves, it has more fruit, and though it is unhinged
from legal observances, it is more enriched with spiritual Ordinances. It is a
good observation of Learned Andrews, That God imposed upon the Jews Bishop
Andrews.
not to kindle a fire, or to dress meat on the Sabbath, this was merely
ceremonial, and only belonged to them. Therefore our Savior sweetens our
Sabbath in removing those burdens which were the servile badge of the Jewish
pedagogy.

Jewish and the Christian Sabbath differ in this; upon the Jewish Sabbath there
were carnal sacrifices offered Clarius imperfectionem eorum, describit, cum
dicit, Dona, and victimas illas, non posse perfi^ere conscientias: Dona vocat
Oblationes rerum inanimatarum, (...) victimas mactatas oblationes rerum
animatarum. Par.
as well as spiritual services performed: On the morning of their Sabbath,
there was offered two Lambs of the first year without spot, two tenth deals of
flower for a meat offering, mingled with Oil, and the drink offering thereof;
and this is the burnt offering of every Sabbath, besides the continual burnt
offering, Numb. 28. 9, 10. There was likewise on the same morning burning of
Incense, Exodus 30. 7. So in the Afternoon both sacrifices and burning of
Incense, Exodus 29. 38. And to this alludes the Psalmist, Psalm. 141. 2. So that
much of the Jews Sabbath was spent in the offering of these legal sacrifices,
which the Apostle calls carnal Ordinances, Heb. 9. 10. And which Alapide
mentions as fleshly rites, fit only for abolition, to make way for more sweet
Christus correcturus erat ritus illos legales, et carnales, iisque bolitis,
eorum loco spiritualem Dei cultum erat inducturus, ut adoraremus deum, et
spiritu, et veritate. Alap. Muscul. in quartum praeceptum.
and spiritual Institutions. Pareus superadds, and calls them imperfect
oblations, the grosser victims of a people kept in the dark. These shadowy
offerings were only the Jewish Alphabet, to teach them how to spell the meaning
of better oblations to come; And therefore Musculus calls the Jews Sabbath, A
legal, a corporal, an elementary, a shadowy, a pedagogical Sabbath.

But the Christian Sabbath knows no stone Altar, no fleshly sacrifice, no
spilling of the blood of Lambs, no making a smoke with Incense and Perfumes:
These exterior varnishes and Types are a broken cloud to us which wholly
disappears. We on our Sabbath have no Altar but Christ, no Incense but his
merit, no slaying of Lambs, but of that Heb 13. 10. Rev. 8. 3, 4. Rev. 13. 8.
Jam. 5. 16. Heb. 9. 14.
Lamb without spot, which was slain from the foundation of the world; we offer
no burnt sacrifice on a Sabbath, but a heart flaming with zeal; nor do we bring
any tenth deals of flower, but those mean services of our souls, which if we
Altar nostrum Christus est, qui pro nobis immolatu^ fuit, qui est and
sacrificium, sacerdos, et etiam Altar.
had better, we should offer them to our dear Jehovah; nor do we mingle any Oil
with our offerings, but only the acting of our graces in our holy performances.
The sacrifices of a Christian upon the Lord day are of a more refined nature,
then the carnal sacrifices of the Jews upon their Sabbath: The bending of the
knee, the lifting up of the hands, the composing of the countenance, the
weeping of the eye, are the offering up of his body as a reasonable sacrifice,
Romans 12. 1. The acting of faith upon the word, the dispensing Phil. 2. 17.
charity to the poor, the pouring out of prayers in Ephesians. 5. 2.
holy addresses, the rendering of thanksgiving for receiving Heb. 13. 15.
mercies, are the sacrifices of his soul, they are his spiritual 1 Pet. 2. 5.
oblations which he offers to God on his own day. The Christians services on
the Sabbath are so far sweet, as they are soul-services, and they have so much
acceptance as they have of the heart.

The Jewish, and the Christian Sabbath differ in the duration: The Jewish
Sabbath ended in the times of the Gospel, but the Christian endures till the
day of judgment, when time shall be no more. The Sabbath of the Jews was buried
in the grave of Christ, and their its honor was laid in the Mat. 17. 2, 3, 4,
5.
dust: But the Lords day shall stay till the Lords second coming, and then it
shall not be buried, but transfigured into an Eternal Sabbatism, when all the
Saints shall say, It is Heb 4 9.
good to be here, and Moses and Elijah shall be our eternal Companions. Our
Sabbath is not so short-lived as that of the Jews, but at the great day of
account with the living Mar. 2. 28.
Saints, it shall be caught up to meet the Lords of it in the 1 These. 4. 17.
air, and so shall it be ever with the Lord: as a little to allude to that of
the Apostle, 1 These. 4. 17. And in this regard, the Christian Sabbath much
outvies the Jews seventh day. Duration and continuance sets a higher price on
every thing which is valuable; The Temple exceeds the Tabernacle, John 14. 2.
not only for the costliness, but for the continuance of it. Our possessions
above Christ calls Mansions, not only for their excellency, but likewise for
their permanency. The Omnis homo est advena noscendo, incola vivendo, quia
compellitur migrare moriendo. Sed in domo caelesti non solum erimus, sed
manebimus, unde coelum vocatur civitas manens. Aug.
Body of a man which is his inferior part is called a Taberbernacle of clay, 2
Cor. 5. 1. which is soon taken down: But the soul which is man's better part is
a piece of eternity, and when disunited from the body, it takes its flight unto
an eternal condition and estate. The prospect of a fair Landscape pleases us not
so well, because it is transient; but it is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun,
Eccl. 11. 7. because it will not meet with its last setting till the
consummation of the world. Gold it self is despicable, because corruptible, 1
Pet. 1. 18. Duration is the excellency of every good thing, that which makes
grace it self look so lovely and beautiful, it is because it cannot faint away,
it is as immortal as the (...). Isid. Pelus.
soul it enricheth; this sets off its comeliness, it cannot lose its beauty,
Cant. 8. 7. But to return to our Christian Sabbath: It therefore differs from,
and has the pre-eminence over the Sabbath of the Jews, because it walks over
its grave, and will survive till all Gospel Institutions shall cease, and our
weekly Jubilees shall be turned into eternal triumph.

CHAP. XXV. The Comparison of the Christians Sabbath here, with his Eternal
Sabbatism or Rest above.
AND that the joy of meditation may be full, and may be wholly indefective in
suitable objects, to prey upon on Gods holy day, especially in the morning, so
far as time and convenience will permit, Let meditation look forward, Dies
Dominica, est imago venturi seculi, et assidua commotione vitae illius nunquam
desiturae, non negligimus ad eam demigrationem viaticum parore. Bas.
or rather upward, and observe what proportion our Sabbath here bears with our
Sabbath above. This pleasing task will cause meditation to renew its strength
like an Eagle, Psalm. 103. 5. and to take its flight with greater vigor and
liveliness. And to make the comparison more considerable, we will observe
wherein our earthly and our heavenly Sabbath do perfectly agree, and then take
notice wherein our heavenly does transcendently outvy and surpass our earthly.

earthly Sabbath does resemble our heavenly in the holy nature of it. They are
both holy, our Sabbath here is called (...), Exodus 35. 2. A holy day, a day set
apart Exodus 35. 2. Exodus 28 36. (...)
by a holy God, to be spent in holy services, destinated to sacred and holy
purposes, vouchsafed for holy Communion with Jesus Christ, and appointed as a
blessed means to make us holy. The Lords day as our Sabbath is called, Rev. 1.
10. carries holiness in its very title. Its name is written in the golden
Letters of sanctity, and so our heavenly Hoc Sabbatum aeternum inchoatur in
renatis per spirituale Sa^batum hujus vitae, et consummabitur tandem in futura
vita, in qua Deus erit omnia in omnibus. Ger. In die judicii plene et perfect
sub pedibus conteretur Satan. In ha^ vita reportant Pii victoriam ex pugna, in
futura plen^rie liberabuntur ^ pugna
Sabbath is an undefiled rest. Heaven admits of no impure thing, no unclean
person, Ephesians. 5. 5. There are no weeds in our Paradise above. Our future Sabbath
shall be an everlasting holy day: we have there a holy God to behold, a holy
Redeemer to enjoy, holy Angels to join issue with, spotless and glorified
Saints to delight in: nay, the rivers of pleasure which run at Gods right hand,
Psalm. 36. 8. Psalm. 16. 11. have Chrystalline streams, and are excellent not
only for their sweetness, but their purity. Every thing in glory is
unblemished, and without spot, else heaven could not be the seat and residence
of the great King. A learned man observes, Our eternal Sabbath is only the
consummation of our spiritual, which consists in a full cessation from sin. And
indeed in heaven all causes of sin shall utterly and everlastingly cease.

First, The Corruption of the Flesh.

Secondly, The Temptations of Satan.

Thirdly, The Seductions of the World.

Fourthly, A Propensness to Evil.

Fifthly, A Faculty and capacity of offending. In glory the Saints shall be
endowed with such perfect purity, that suppose Temptation could get within the
Veil, and intrude among the glorified Saints, that Siren should no way impress
or allure them: So then our Sabbath here and hereafter both look fair because
of holiness.

here resembles our rest above, in the duties and employments of it: In our
Sabbath below our whole business is with God; we run it out in hearing
something drop from the heart of God, when we attend upon his word, in making
our humble addresses to God by secret and more public prayer, in fixing our
fledged meditations on God, in singing Psalms, and making melody in our hearts
to Ephesians. 5. 19.
God. The Saints task is wholly to serve God, his privilege Intra in gaudium
Domini, (i. e.) gaude de eo, quo gaudet and in qua gaudet Dominus, sc. de
fruitione sui ipsius. Tunc gaudet homo ut Dominus, cum fruitur ut Domi^us.
Aquin.
is to enjoy communion with God, his ambition is to Sun himself in the presence
of God, on Gods holy day: And all our employment in our celestial Sabbath will
be to rejoice in God, and to glorify God; we shall spend eternity in venting
our joys for the blessed fruition of God, I say in venting those joys;

First, Which will be rare for the subject of them; they are the joys of the
Saints, John 16. 22.

Secondly, Rare for the fountain and spring of them; they are the joy of the
Lord, Mat. 25. 23.

Thirdly, Rare for the plenty of them; it shall be the fullness 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Exultabunt Sancti in gloria, videbunt Deum et gaudebunt, laetabuntur, et
delectabuntur, fruentur gloria et in faelicitate jocundabuntur aeterna. Cypr.
Beata Deitatis visio est gaudium Domini tui. O gaudium super gaudium, vincens
omne gaudium extra quod non est gaudium. Aug.
of joy, Psalm. 16. 11.

Fourthly, Rare for the adjunct of them; joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

Fifthly, Rare for the efficient cause of them, they are joys from the Holy
Spirit, Isa. 35. 10.

Sixthly, Rare for the characters of them, our joy in our eternal Sabbath shall
be,

First, True in eternal cordial joy, all the faculties of the soul shall
tripudiate and leap for joy, they shall be as a dancing Sun, or as David danced
before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6. 14. and their several measures shall be the elevation
of the exstacy. The understanding shall joy in the Lord for its divine light;
the will shall joy in the Lord, for its perfect consonancy to the divine will:
The memory shall joy in the Lord for its full strength, and so the affections
for their heavenly purity.

Secondly, Our joy in our Sabbath above shall be sincere, without mixture of
grief or disgust. Our worldly joys are (...), bitter-sweets, sweet brier, which
can tear as Prove. 14. 13.
well as sent; but in our celestial Sabbath, there shall be no Gall or Vinegar
in our Cup.

Thirdly, Our joy in our Sabbath above shall be stable and sempiternal, neither
to be interrupted nor concluded, because the fountain of it will be eternal,
viz. The sight of God, who is the highest and chiefest good, the most
transcendent Si tanta vis solis creati est, ut suo calore rebus nascentibus
vitam non modo impertiat, sed etiam animos hominum, immo omnes creaturas
diffusione radiorum lucis suae suaviter recreat, et mirifice dilectet; Quantum
in infinitum majori gaudio credendum est, completum in pectora piorum, quando
creatorem solis, solemn justitiae ac salutis, non modo oculis suis intuebuntur,
sed etiam intima ejus communicatione, discussis* penitus peccatorum tenebris
plenissime persoventur?
loveliness and superlative sweetness. The Sun of nature, how does it refresh
us in our view of it; how infinitely more the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2.
when shining in its full glory above in the heavens! And as in our heavenly
Sabbath we shall be ever venting our joys in God, so our work shall be always
to be praising of God, the glorifying and lauding of God will be the Saints
great employment in heaven: God who is the chiefest good cannot be seen but he
must be loved, and what we love, we necessarily praise; Commendation is the
natural fruit of affection. All creatures who arrive at the sight of God, are
filled with his praise; they have words to advance God, if they have eyes to
behold him; the four beasts, Rev. 4. 8, 9. If they have wings to fly to God,
they have language to honor him; if they have eyes to behold him, they have
tongues to admire him. The four and twenty Elders, Rev. 4. 10, 11. They are not
only prostrate before God, but they speak admirably of God, their praises are
as high as their persons are low; they indeed cast down their Crowns, but they
lift up their voices, as in the forementioned Text. The Seraphims above the
Throne of God, though they cover their faces, they do not hold their tongues,
and though they hide their feet, they still lift up their voice, Isa. 6. 2, 3.
The Angels about the Throne of God, magnify the Name of God, Rev. 5. 11. Those
pure spirits are praising spirits: And assuredly, whosoever comes near the
Throne of the Lord, will exalt the Majesty of God. The beatifical vision will
be the attractive and incentive of eternal praise, and adoration. Praise in
heaven is the Angels song, the Creatures Ipsam veritatem purae mentis oculo
intuens; cantabo cremeo sonum festivum. Aug. Mat. 22. 30. Luke 20. 36. Heb. 12.
23.
tribute, the Saints hallelujah, the efflux of unspeakable joy, which arises
from the possession of God; and this is the work of the firstborn, now they
keep their Sabbath in another world.

here resembles our Sabbath above in the enjoyments of it. Our Sabbath in this
life, is a day of fellowship with God; Ordinances are the Garden for the soul
to walk in together with his beloved, Psalm. 63. 2. They are the souls
banqueting house, and the Sabbath is the souls banqueting Cant. 2. 4. John 5.
4. John 2. 10. Mat. 5. 1. Luke 22. 12. Luke 1^. 42. John 9. 4.
day. This holy day is as the poole of Bethesda, to cure our spiritual
diseases, as the wedding in Cana of Galilee, where we meet with our better
wine, as that Mountain where Christ preaches to us by his Ministers, as that
upper room where Christ sits down with his Disciples; the Sabbath is that day
in which we have unravelled to us, the things which belong to our peace; Now
the Christian enjoys converse with his elder brother, the Lord Jesus Christ;
now he transacts the great affairs of eternity, lays in stores of spiritual
grace for future spending, and busies himself to carry Mill gehenna: ponas,
nihil tale est, quale est excludi a gloria, Chry.
on the suit of his immortal soul: And as for our enjoyments in our heavenly
Sabbath, they may be all summed up in the beatifical vision: This is the Saints
essential and principal beatitude when they are arrived at their Country above,
(...). Basil.
1 Cor. 13. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 7. Rev. 22. 4. Chrysostom observes, It is more then
a thousand hells to be excluded from this glorious sight. Basil says, The want
of light is no such prejudice to the eye, as the banishment from the sight and
presence In vita aeterna, dei essentia non quidem sensibus verum animo ceu
mente cognos^etur a beatis, si^ut 1 John 3. 2. Pet. Martyr.
of God, is to the poor desolate, caitiff soul. The sight of God is like a knot
of Diamonds, it sparkles with all varieties of glory; it is the glorified
Saints heaven, the Angels happiness: in this transporting vision is contained
whatsoever man can well desire, whatever man can well bear; it is the Paradise
of pleasure, the fountain of joy, the field of knowledge, the fuel of praise,
the height of triumph; this shall be done to all, whom God delights to honor.
Biel takes notice, there Videbimus deum spiritu, videbimus et oculis, sed
spiritualiter; corpora enim nostra erunt spiritulia non substantiae sed
qualitatis, and actionis ratione. Alsted.
is a fourfold way of knowing God:

1. By Faith. 2. By Contemplation. 3. By Apparition. 4. By open Vision.
The first way is of common grace; the second of excellent grace; the third of
special grace; and the fourth of consummating glory. The sight of God then is
our chief enjoyment in our heavenly Sabbath, the top of all, the highest round
in the Angels ladder. There was a bright essay of this glorious sight in the
Lords familiar discourse with Moses, Rev. 22, 4, 5. Exodus 33. 11. Mat. 17. 2,
3. Rev. 1. 13, 14, 15. Job 19. 26. Psalm. 42. 2. Psalm. 16. 11. Psalm. 36. 10.
Exodus 33. 11. Numb. 12. 8. A brighter discovery of it, in Christ's
transfiguration before his Disciples, Mat. 17. 2, 3. but the most bright
representation of this Celestial prospect, was in the Patmos Vision of John
the Apostle, when he saw his Redeemer in his glorious and heavenly robes, Rev.
1. 13, 14, 15, etc. The beatifical vision has blown up sparks of triumph in
the hearts of Gods people, even in this life. This caused Job's o^asion and
exultation on his dunghill, John 14. 2, 3.
Job 19. 26. David's triumph on his Throne, Psalm. 16. 11. This blessed sight is
that good which the Saints promise themselves in another world, Psalm. 36. 10.
For this sight believers long, Psalm. 42. 2. To this sight the promise looks,
Psalm. 66. 18. Mat. 5. 8. To make way for this sight, our Savior is gone
before, John 14. 2, 3. And to secure this glorious sight, Christ has begged it
of the Father, Visuri sunt beati deum, in ipso corpore, sed utrum per ipsum non
est parva quaestio. Aug. de Civ. Dei.
John 17. 24. And the enjoyment of this happy sight will be our Crown in our
Sabbath above. Great Divines contest much about the manner of our seeing God,
whether with the eyes of our body, or only with the eyes of our minds, or
whether (as some) with our bodily eyes spiritualized; I shall not intricate my
self in these mazes of dispute, but only conclude, our sight of God will be
glorious, full, perfect, ravishing, everlasting, and will run parallel with our
eternal Sabbath.

here resembles our Sabbath above in the rest of it. To work upon our Christian
Sabbath is to defile it; our sweat is our sin; the pains we must take on this
holy day, is not with our hands, but with our hearts: The brain indeed must
work, but in holy meditation; the tongue must work, but in prayer and
supplication; the heart must work, but in ardent and holy affection; our faith
must work, but in seasonable application, in apprehending Christ, and
entertaining Truth: But as for secular works they must be Operum humanorum duo
sunt genera; unum est licitorum in se, alterum est illicitorum; licita sunt
necessaria honesta and utilia in rebus humanis: Illicita sunt, noxia,
inhonesta, et superflua. Quae in Sabbat^ prohibentur, non sunt in se idicita,
sed quae aliter sunt omnino licita; ut appareat prohiberi operas domesti eas,
necessaria^ et honestas, (...) utilos quide^* in se, verum ad sanctificationem
Sabbati omnino incommodas. Muscul.
wholly suspended, and laid aside on the Lords day. To work upon the Sabbath,

1. It is a sacrilegious act, it robs God of his time, that season which God
has principally set apart to converse with men. The Sabbath is the Lords day,
it is none of ours, it is his enclosure, none of our Common; and therefore to
spend his day, or any part of it, about our works, it is both sin and
sacrilege.

Secondly, It is a confusing Act: Six days we must work; if we likewise work
on the Sabbath, where is the distinction? Then there will be no wall of
separation, all will be working days, and there is no day of rest, and so the
fourth Commandment is a mere parenthesis, and God wrote with his own finger a
mere impertinency. To what a height of frenzy will these consequencies rise?
There is no gold of a Sabbath to be found in the rubbish of the week; why
should any rubbish of the week be found among the gold of a Sabbath?

Thirdly, It is a destructive act; It robs the soul of its sweetest
opportunity. Christ is most principally to be spoken with by the soul on his
own day; this day is set apart for intercourse with heaven, it is the term time
of the soul, a busy time for his affairs; and therefore to spend any of this
time in secular works, what is it but to pluck the bread out of the mouth of
the soul, and to throw firebrarnds into the believers harvest?

Fourthly, It is an Irreligious Act, below the devotion of the very Heathens,
who have kept a Sabbath, as a rest. It is recorded in Heathen Stories, That
their Boys go not to School on the Sabbath day, neither are humane Arts and
Sciences then taught or disputed. And Philo Judaeus observes, Quae operasabbato
facienda deus prohibuerit, illud non solum ex aliis scripurae locis sed ex
praecepti hujus verbis colligitur (non facies ullum opus) scil. servile, quod
publici ministerii parts, et cultum divinum impediat. Morale enim et perpetuum
est opera illa prohiberi, quae publici ministerii exercitium impediant. Interim
tamen opera illa quae ad culium dei, and dilectionem proximi, et vitae
necessitatem pertinent, non sunt prohibito. ^^r. de leg. (...).
That diverse poor people, that never had Scripture or Prophet among them, but
followed only the conduct of the light of Nature, and what they had learned
from their Ancestors, did keep the Sabbath day. And Clemens Alexandrinus tells
us, that the very Heathens did account the seventh day, a holy day; And that
Alexander Severus Emperor of Rome, though a Pagan and an Infidel, yet every
Sabbath day, he retired from his warlike affairs, and went up into the Capitol
to worship the Gods. Musculus calls, All secular and servile works the
impediments of Sabbath-holiness: And indeed they are that dirt which stops up
the watercourse of grace, that it cannot run out upon the soul. It is very
observable in the time of the Law, how severely God prohibits working upon the
Sabbath:

First, He puts a prohibition in the fourth Commandment, that Standard of our
obedience in the observation of the Sabbath; Thou shall do no manner of work,
Exodus 20. 10. and these words are repeated, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. That by the mouth of
two Witnesses this truth may be established.

And Secondly, From the root of this great Command sprouts many additional
injunctions, not to work upon the Sabbath, Exodus 31. 14, 15. Exodus 35. 2. Lev.
23. 3.

Thirdly, Nay, Servile work is so inconsistent with the solemn feast of the
Sabbath, that God forbids all servile works on other festivals, those
solemnities of an inferior nature; On the days of the Passover, Lev. 23. 7.
On the days of Expiation, Lev. 29. 23. Lev. 23. 28, 29, 30. On the feast of
Tabernacles, Lev. 23. 34, 35. And surely, if inferior days of observation
were defiled by secular works, much more the blessed Sabbath, in which the
people of God must keep their meetings in the Suburbs of Heaven.

Fourthly, How often does God espouse Sabbath and Rest together as indivisible?
Exodus 16. 23. Exodus 31. 15. Exodus Sabbatum est sanctum otium.
35. 2. And indeed holy Rest is the life of a Sabbath; and if the Sabbath rest
be disturbed, it faints away, and becomes Leid Prof.
an unprofitable miscellany of rest and labor, and an expiring dying
privilege.

Fifthly, How severely does God threaten the disturbers of the Sabbath rest?
God threatens them, to throw them out of the Church, Exodus 31. 14. Nay, to
throw them out of the world, Exodus 31. 15. And brands such as are violatours of
his Covenant, Exodus 31. 16. And shall Rest be so necessary for the legal, and
not as convenient for the Evangelical Sabbath? Surely much more, the Lords day
must not be disturbed by man's work; but as Christ on the first day of the week
rose from his toil to his triumph, so must Christians on that sanctified day
lay aside all their worldly toil and labors, and take up their triumph and
rejoicing in God, spending those golden hours of the Sabbath in heavenly
Communion, sweetly delighting themselves in the visits of their beloved, to
which all labor is a disturbance; and so our Sabbath above, it is a perfect,
an undisturbed rest, Cessat homo ab omni opere die Sabbati, futuram sanctorum
requiem significans, qu^ndo laboribus hujus vitae liberati, et sudore carporis
de terso, beatam cum Christo, et jucundissimam vitam agemus. Ambr.
in which the mind shall not be rackt with cares, the body shall not be wasted
with toil, nor the spirits spent with labor, or the heart torn with griefs,
but soul and body shall be calmed into an eternal quietation. The Apostle
says, Heb. 4. 9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God. The
Greeks call it a Sabbatism, our future Sabbath and Rest being all one. When the
Apostle wrote his Epistle to the Hebrews, the rest of the legal Sabbath was
over, and the rest of Canaan was first disturbed by Nebuchadnezzar, and upon
overthrowing, and quite taking away by Titus the Roman; so now then there
remains only a rest in Heaven, a heavenly Sabbath for the people of God. In
this life our Laudabile Sabbati otium, sanctorum vitam, requie, et
sanctificatione exprimit, tum futuram ostendit, cum omni hujus vitae cura de
posita bonis aeternis fruimur. Cyril. Alex.
Sabbath it self is disturbed, sometimes with vain thoughts, with deadness, and
coldness in duties, it is disquieted with the iniquity of our holy things, we
cannot pray as we would, and we do not hear as we should, we often displease
Christ at his own table, when we come with polluted hands, and unprepared
hearts; and when duties are over, we either dash upon sins of omission, or rush
upon language or practices unbecoming the Lords day; there is still something
to discompose our spirits, our hearts are sad, and our moans are great; but
however, the week treads upon the heels of Sabbat^m Coeleste, est requies illa
Coelestis patriae. (...)
our Sabbath, and then like the Sons of Adam, we get our livelihood in the
sweat of our brows; then we toil our brains, harden our hands, and weary our
bodies, and all for that which is not bread, Isa. 55. 2. And besides, as Master
Herbert, that sweet and excellent Poet observes, our Sabbath does but leap from
seven to seven, it flies away, and then recurs in a constant revolution; One
Sabbath passes over, and we must press through the crowd of weekly and worldly
Rabbin.
affairs which will make us sweat and faint, before we attain Isa 55. 2.
to another.

But our Sabbath above is,

rest from sin. In it we shall enjoy absolute purity, and spotless perfection;
we shall there be a Glorious Church, Excitat sibi Christus ecclesiam (...)
multo decore, et gloria illustrem non habentem maculam peccati, aut rugam
vetustatis. Alap
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. Sin cannot dwell in
Heaven with God, it is impossible; if Achans wedge, one sin, disturbed the
whole Camp of Israel, John 7. 11. How would one sin disturb the Court of
Heaven? It would put a damp upon all the triumphs of it; there cannot be
perfect joy where there is the least relic of sin.

rest from troubles and afflictions. In our heavenly Sabbath there shall be no
groans but musicks, no sighs but songs, no tears but triumphs; not a drop of
the waters of Marah in a whole ocean of joy and satisfaction: if any grief
remained, our joy would not be full.

natural afflictions; They shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more, Rev. 7.
to 16. Rev. 7. 16.
to which accords that of the Prophet, Isa. 49. 10. The Isa. 49. 10.
Saints cannot hunger in their eternal Sabbath, for the good Shepherd of our
souls does not only f^ed us to eternal life, Psalm. 16. 11.
but likewise in eternal life, and there he shall feed us with fullness of joy,
with the smiles of his face, with the fruits of his love, and with the
overcoming influences of his grace and favor. And moreover, the Saints cannot
thirst in glory; The Lamb shall bring them to living fountains Rev. 22. 1.
of waters, Rev. 22. 1. They shall have waters for their necessity, Rev. 7. 17.
Rivers of water for their plenty, nay pure rivers of water for their greater
ecstasy; and these rivers of water shall proceed out of the Throne of God and
the Lamb, for their superlative complacency.

Eternal rest be disturbed with pressing afflictions; All tears shall be wiped
from their eyes, a Isa. 25. 8.
sentence mentioned three times in Scripture, Isa. 25. 8. John 7. 17.
Rev. 7. 17. Rev. 21. 4. As if every person in the Trinity, Rev. 21. 4.
would severally assure the Saints of future undisturbed felicity. A learned
man observes, this phrase of wiping tears from our eyes, is a metaphor taken
from tender mothers, Lacrymae malorum sensu exprimuntur.
who give their breasts to their infants when they cry for want, and then wipe
off their tears from their pretty cheeks which were bedewed with that emblem of
sorrow: Tears Altera foelicitatis pars est, quod nullis miseriis, aerumnis,
molestiis, hujus praesentis vitae obnoxii erimus. Malorum immunem esse, maximum
est bonum, cujus Author deus est. Par.
are those drops which fall, when the fire of affliction is put under; the
sense of some evil, the feeling of some corroding sorrow squeizeth them out, as
the extremity of pain makes the patient sweat. But such oppressive calamities
shall not seize upon the Saints in their Sabbath, and Rest above: here indeed
they are in a valley of tears; but one tear shall not interrupt the joys of
the glorified Saints: The Psalmist says, Psalm. 30. 6. Weeping endures for a
night, but joy comes in the morning; and when the Saints are arrived at their
rest above, all night is past to return no more; the morning is begun to pass
away no more.

Eternal Rest shall not be disturbed with privative afflictions; There shall be
no more death, Rev. 21. 4. Rev. 21. 4. Isa. 25. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 57. John 3. 16.
Then death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15. 57. and it shall rally
no more to do any execution upon the Saints in glory. Our Sabbath in heaven is
eternal, and therefore our life is eternal. Indeed here below death is always
Sabbatum hoc coeleste est sempiternum, sicut omnia alia bona quae ad
perfectionem pervenerunt. Musc.
to be expected, Job 14. 14. But above death is never to be dreaded; there that
King of terrors, as Job calls it, Job 18. 14. has lost both his Scepter and
hs Sith, both his force and his prevalency. There is neither fear nor
expectation of death in glory; were it not so, it would turn those rivers of
pleasure memorized by the Psalmist, Psalm. 36. 8. into Psalm. 55. 4.
salt and unpleasant waters; and upon the very possessions of heaven would be
written, bitterness in the latter end: But faith in Christ gives us eternal
life, John 3. 16. A full assurance and security against the approaches and
seizures of death or conclusion. Perfection, which is the character of the
Saints future condition, excludes and denies all end or conclusion, as Musculus
well observes.

Eternal Rest shall not be disturbed with accidental afflictions. Neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall Luctus oritur ex morte amicorum et pri^atione
eorum, quos charos habuimus, non erit dolor, quia mors non erit; erepti nobis
amici restituentur videndi, salutandi, etc.
there be any more pain, Rev. 21. 4. In our heavenly rest, we shall neither
grieve for the loss of friends, nor cry for the smart of troubles, nor roar for
anguish or pain, but eternal ease and tranquillity shall sweeten our glorious
Sabbath, and we shall for ever be singing our requiems. There shall be no spot,
and therefore no sorrow, no guilt, and therefore no grief, affliction being the
inseparable companion of sin and deviation.

Eternal Rest shall not be disturbed by persecuting afflictions, Neither shall
the Sun light upon them, nor any heat, Rev. 7. 16. By this heat we may truly
understand Rev. 7. 16.
the heat of persecution, Mat. 13. 21. Satan's rage, and wicked men's fury may
reach gracious, but not glorified Saints; The Church Militant, but not the
Church Triumphant. Ephesians. 6. 16. Heb. 12. 22.
Satan cannot throw his fiery darts into the New Jerusalem, the City of the
first born. Here the Sun of persecution may arise and scorch the Saints; but in
glory, there shall be no need of Sun for light, Rev. 22. 5. much less for beams
to burn; but the Lord shall give them light, which will be only the shining
forth of eternal grace and favor, the light of his own blessed countenance.

Eternal Rest shall not be disturbed by toil or labor. In the Earthly
Paradise, man was to dress the Garden, Genesis 2. 15. and this he was to do in his
state of innocence; Luke 23. 43. 2 Cor. 12. 4.
so that there was labor, though no pain; there was some kind of care, though
no corrosive. But in Paradise above, Rev. 2. 7.
there shall be no minding of the fruits of the Earth, but the Saints shall be
always tasting the joys of Heaven: What should we toil with in our heavenly
Sabbath, with our hearts? There is no corruption; with our hands? there is no
want, or capacity of addition; with our enemies? there is no temptation,
neither of fury from Satan, or flattery from the world; and what should we
labor for? To gain more? there is no defect; to be better? there is a full and
absolute perfection: And therefore the rest of our present, does sweetly shadow
forth the perfect rest of our future Sabbath.

here resembles our Sabbath hereafter in its splendor and external beauty. On
our Christian Sabbath, In Sabbato vestes mundiores induimus and mutamus
priores; sic in Sabbato aeterno veterem hominem exuem^^ and induemus novum,
dabitur sanctis ut se cooperiant bissino splendenti. Chemnit.
we put on our best attire, we array our outward man with our choycest and best
apparel, as well as adorn our inward man with holy and gracious dispositions.
The Sabbaths festival calls for our ornaments, the deckings of our body; we
come to the assemblies of the Saints with the neatness and elegancy of our
wear, that both body and soul should be dressed to meet with their beloved;
nasty hearts, and sordid clothes (if it may be prevented) are both undecent on
the Lords day. When Joseph was to go into the presence of Pharaoh, he changed
his clothes, Genesis 41. 14. How much less does neglect and despicableness become
the presence of the Divine Majesty? That which is civil and comely, does adorn
holy worship and religion: Man's body is Gods workmanship, and is a piece of
rare curiosity, Psalm. 139. 16. The texture indeed and artifice of divine
wisdom and power; Non decuit sordidum prodire in regis conspectam civilitas,
and decor pietatem, et prudentiam ornat.
and therefore we must not eclipse the honor of this body, by attiring it
sordidly, and more meanly then there is necessity, when we come to worship God
on his own day. The best of our Garments suit the best of our days. On the
Subbath we meet our Bridegroom, Mat. 18. 20. And Brides usually are dressed
with the greatest care and exactness. Fatui sunt Monachi, aliique
superstisi^s^, qui in sorditie vestimentorum sanctimoniam ponunt. Par.
Indeed Pride of Apparel is a stain, but decency is an Ornament to Gods blessed
day; nor must we put on our choicest attire to waste the time, but to honor
the day of a Sabbath. Paraeus observes only foolish Monks place holiness in
tattered and nasty garments; but such rags are adequate and fit for such a
mimical superstitious rout.

And so in our heavenly Sabbath, we shall be clothed Haec accipienda sunt de
Beatorum munditie puritate, and laetitia, and perpet^a festivitate. Ger.
with brightness, splendour and glory, as with a garment: Indeed it is a great
question among Divines, whether properly we shall be clothed with raiment in
our Eternal rest, and it is by the most concluded the contrary. Indeed there i^
mention made of white raiment, Rev. 4. 4. But this only signifies purity, as
likewise of exact attire, Rev. 19. 7. Scholastice statuunt Beatos habituros
vestes, non quidem ex auro, vel seri^o, sed luce.
But this only signifies perfection; nay, of fine linen, Rev. 19. 8. But this
only signifies glory; that kind of wear which becomes Kings Houses, Mat. 11.
8. The Schoolmen observe, that the blessed shall have garments, but not of
gold, or silk, but of light: And indeed garments though never so rich, would
speak something of imperfection; Garments Beati nudi erunt sed omni decore
sulgebunt, and non plus de illis membris, quam nunc de gratiosis oculis
erubescent. Ansel.
are for adorning, and that speaks want of Ornament; they are for the repelling
of the injuries of the weather, which speaks an inferior condition; not to
speak of their primitive use, which was to cover nakedness: I might add,
garments are the* veiles of modesty; but glory is incapable of shame: And
therefore clothing properly is not requisite in our heavenly Sabbath. Adam in
his innocence before the fall needed not raiment, much less the Saints shall
want it in a state of glory. Indeed we shall put on our best apparel in our
Sabbath above, but they shall be garments of innocence, Rev. 7. 13. Sweet
smelling odoriferous garments, Psalm. 45. Cant. 4. 11. Rev. 19. 8. Exodus 28. 2.
8. Bright shining and illustrious garments, Dan. 12. 3. Beautiful, rare, and
comely garments, Isa. 52. 1. Garments of praise and glorious thanksgiving, Isa.
61. 3. Such garments the Saints shall wear in their future rest, embroydered
with all varieties of joy and happiness. And indeed if there be so much
ornament in a spirit of quietness and meekness 1. Chr. 16. 27.
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 3. 4. how ornamental must a spirit of glory be
in its full brightness and perfection?

But as our Sabbath below does something resemble, so it does infinitely fall
short of our Sabbath above.

The two Sabbaths differ in their duration: Our Christian Sabbath is a golden,
but a little spot of time; like a draught of rich wine, it is lushious, but it
is quickly drank off; Our sweetest Sabbath here is but the passage of a day, it
endures no longer then the Sun can make its flight for a few Psalm, 39. 5.
hours. Our life is but a span; our Sabbath how little a Nemo tam Divos habuit
faventes, Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri. Sen.
part of this span? It is the Lords day, but yet a day of bright gleam, the
souls market which is presently over; like a great Feast wherein we have fed
plentifully, but the next day the meal must be renewed, or the body faints and
languisheth. Nay, our Sabbath is only the seventh part of the week, and all our
Sabbaths are but the seventh part of our Vita nostra tam brevis est, ut nescio
an dicenda sit vita mortalis, aut vitalis mors. August.
life, which the Apostle calls a vapor, Jam. 4. 14. both for its
contemptibleness and speedy disappearing. Gods blessed day here is sweet, but
short, it is a banquet indeed, but the cloth is soon taken away; it is like the
star in Bethlehem which was useful to bring to Christ, but it soon disappeares.
Mat. 2. 10.


But our Sabbath above shall be stretched out to all eternity, Vbi
appropinquassent magi^ Hierosolymae disappar^it stella. Hoc Sabbatum est
sempiternum, neque alio quodam Sabbato terminabitur, excipietur aut
perficietur. Musc.
it will be always spending, but never wasting, no week day shall follow it, no
night shall close it, no death shall bury it. The Jewish Sabbath was entombed
in Christ's grave; the Christian Sabbath shall end with the world: The beautiful
fabric of the world shall be taken down, and the Sabbath of Christians shall
be rolled up together; but our Sabbath above shall never be shut in with any
period or termination. This blessed Sabbath in glory is spotless, and why
should it die if it have not offended? It is perfect, and perfection admits of
no end or conclusion, whatsoever is undefiled, is eternal; so God is
everlasting, the good Angels John 3. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 1. Heb. 13. 14. Luke 16. 9.
2 Pet. 1. 11. Heb. 9. 15. Heb. 4. 9.
and glorified Saints. The Sabbath above is a full rest, and it could not be
perfect ease if it met with a certain end; a conclusion must needs be a
disturbance, and that rest must needs be imperfect which is interrupted. The
Saints would not pray so ardently for this rest, Psalm. 55. 6. if they were to
Heb. 4. 9. 1 Pet. 5. 10 2 Cor. 4. 17. Spirituale Sabbatum licet N. T. sit,
tamen ipsum est imperfectum and tum demum perficietur, quando veniet quod
perfectum est.
suffer another remove, and still be liable to change and mutation. The Jews
rest in Canaan, which was sweetened with the overflowing of milk and honey, did
only prefigure this Eternal rest, as the shadows in the time of the Law did
typifie Christ. But the rest of Canaan is at an end, and all the legal shadows
are passed away, but Christ and our Sabbath above shall remain for ever. In
this then our Sabbath to come surpasses the present, viz. in continuance and
duration.

The two Sabbaths differ in their purity: Our Sabbath here may be and is
spotted, it is black as well as comely, fair indeed, but yet not without its
wrinkles, the emblems of Cant. 1. 5.
frailty and imperfection; This holy One will see corruption. The most acurate
Saint defiles his best Sabbath, and when Psalm. 16. 10.
he is most circumspect he is offensive, he either pollutes it with the lesser
stain of vain and frivolous thoughts, or with the larger stain of unsuitable
and impertinent language, or with the blacker stain of unjustifiable and sinful
practice, or with the deeper stain of deadness and unbecomingness in holy
duties, or with the more usual stain of mispending time, letting that golden
oil run in wast: The Saints themselves fall seven times on this day as well as
others. The Prove. 24. 16.
way is so narrow on a Sabbath, that we easily miss it; either we are not
prepared for the duties of a Sabbath, or we are defective in those duties, or
we are weary of those blessed Peccatum ita omnes homines invaserit, ut nemo in
hac vita, quamvis vir sanctus, sine peccato esse queat, et peccata sanctorum
sunt lapsus, qui eis inter ambulandum in luce contra animi sententiam
contingunt. Zanch. Joh. 1. 1, 8. 10.
services: There will be still something amiss; either our tongues slip, or our
hearts wander, Isa. 29. 13. Our feet slide, or our graces flag; either we
neglect holy Ordinances that day, or we are careless in Ordinances, or we are
incautelous after Ordinances; we have not been so vigorous in closet duties, or
not so savory in family services, or we have not behaved our selves so
composedly in the public Assemblies, as did become the purity of a Sabbath:
The Sabbath here may complain that it sojourns in Mesech, and dwells in the
tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120. 5. It is like the Ark among the Philistims, 1 Samuel
5. 1. It is unattainable by the Saints of the highest form, to keep a Sabbath
upon earth without blot or blemish: Here the learest sky has a cloud.

But now our Sabbath above shall not be defiled or freckled with the least
defect or imperfection. We are perfect in our eternal Sabbath, and therefore we
can breath no damp upon it. The Apostle avers there we shall be like Christ, 1
John 3. 2. which is security enough against all fear of 1 John 3. 2.
Quemadmodum pu^itas, and mundities speculi requiritur, ut imago in eo
conspiciatur; sic animae, and corporis perfecta mundities in beatis erit, ut
Deum videro, ejus demque imaginem in semet ipsis perfect exprimere possint.
Ger.
taint or pollution. Hereafter we shall fully recover the image of Christ, our
souls and bodies shall be perfectly pure; And indeed that glass had need be
clean, in which God must see his image and representation, the least speck or
tincture of imperfection would wholly spoil the resemblance. The Psalmist by an
eye of faith sees the day of Resurrection, and rejoices in this, he shall
fully recover the image of Christ, Psalm. 17. 15. Both the Prophet and Apostle
agree in this triumphall truth, we shall be fully restored to Gods image in
glory. And if we are perfect, from whence should our Eternal Sabbath receive a
stain? From the Author of it? He is a holy God; from the nature of it? It is a
perfect rest; from the possessors of it? They are unspotted Saints, and
therefore it must remain in eternal purity.

The two Sabbaths differ in the fullness of their enjoyments: Mat. 5. 8. 2 Pet
3. 13.
Our Sabbath here is only the tuning of our Music; we shall enjoy in the
Bride-chamber; and in the tuning of the rarest instrument there will be some
jarring, some harshness. Our present Sabbath is a pleasing twilight, in it we
taste how good and gracious God is, we see through a glass darkly, we Psalm. 34.
8.
drink drops of divine delight, we have refreshing gleams, sweet visits of
Christ's presence, but we know visits are soon 1 Cor. 13. 12.
over. There is a threefold imperfection which clouds the enjoyments of the
present Sabbath.

but little of God, we only see him through a cranny or a lattice on our
Sabbath here: It may be one truth in a Sermon may warm the heart, and many
savory Cant. 2. 9. Nonne fidelis anima Deum talem experitur quando celeri
omnium commutatione in spiritualibus exercitiis illum modo presentem devotionis
fervore, modo ut absentem, ariditate quidem sentit; modo suprae coelos
contemplatione elevatur, modo transilit humilium cogitationum colles? Del. Rio.
truths pass by and make no impression; we are sometimes affected in a prayer,
other times the heart is dead and flat, and the chariot wheels are taken off,
and we drive heavily, we rise with grief and guilt from our knees. Sometimes at
a Sacrament we make a good meal, but at another season we are little better
than spectators at that heavenly banquet. Nay, the very efficacy of Ordinances
is sharp and painful; when the word does work it breaks hearts, it slaughters
lusts, it meets with the torrent of corruptions, it is the corrosive which eats
out dead flesh; and all those things are unknown in our better Sabbath. And how
many Ordinances do we enjoy, and how few do we profit by? Sermons oftentimes
are more our music then our medicine; they court more then they cure; we
seldom meet with the blessed appearances of God: Our spiritual benefit by
Gospel-dispensations is like the grapes after the Vintage. In our Sabbath here
we see God more remotely, at such an infinite distance we can scarce discern
him; as we look upon stars as so many twinkling tapers, they are at such a
distance, we see little or Ezekiel. 33. 32. Mic. 7. 1. Psalm. 63. 2.
nothing of their vast magnitude.

little enjoyment of God on our Sabbath here meets with great interruptions, it
is like a shallow stream which runs a little way, and then is dried up; we
happily meet with Christ on a Sabbath, and many Sabbaths pass over before we
meet again with our beloved; there are many pauses and chasms in our sensible
communion with God. The visits of Christ are sweet, but they are not constant;
we often come to the assemblies of the Saints, but we do not meet with our
beloved: Showers of divine mercy they are refreshing, but they are rare; the
Spouse cannot find Christ, Cant. 3 1.
no not on his own day; how often does the Saint say even Cant. 5. 1.
concerning the Sabbath, as once Titus did, They have lost a day: as some
flowers sometimes they lift up the head and open, but of a sudden they hang the
head and fade away; so the poor soul, it sometimes cries out in an Ordinance,
He is Cant. 3. 4.
come, he is come, he has given me the kisses of his lips, but presently all
is dark again, and the distressed Saint is ready Cant. 3. 3.
to enquire, did you see my beloved, did ye meet with him whom my soul loves.

Our little enjoyment of God upon our present Sabbath is much darkened by our
own neglects: On Gods holy day we do not prepare to meet with God, and so we
miss of that little of his presence we might enjoy. Our own follies draw the
curtain, raise the cloud, set up the screen which hinder Isa 59* 2. Sicut
firmamentum est interstitium dividens aquas supera^ ab inferis, ita peccata
nostra sunt interstitium firmiter dividens et separans nos a deo, abscondunt
ejus faciam, and oculos ejus benevolos, ne nos benign et gratiose respiciat.
Alap.
our pleasing views we might have of God; We sometimes come to hear from God,
and we will not take pains with our hearts; and then though we hear the word of
God, we miss of the God of the word: And so in Prayer, we do not pullice up our
hearts, exert our graces, and stir up our strength to lay hold on God, and so
we loose the sweet appearances we might otherwise be ravished with, we loose
the lifting up of Gods countenance, Psalm. 4. 7. the sweet smiles of Gods face,
the powerful workings of his Spirit, and the practical visits of his grace,
that power and glory which God shows in his sanctuary, and revives his people
with, on his own day: So that many imperfections beset our present Sabbath.

But our enjoyments in our Sabbath above are superlative and glorious; we shall
have a three fold vision to delight us:

First, A corporal vision, by which we shall see the humane nature of Christ,
which will be most transcendent; his incarnation Robes being embroydered with
all variety of perfections. Man's nature was crowned with all glory in Christ's
assumption of it.

Secondly, A spiritual vision; By which we shall see the Psalm. 103. 20. Psalm.
148. 20. In vita aeterna primo penitus remoto velo ignorantiae, et
densissimarum tenebrarum quibus in hac vita circum septi sumus, gloriosissimam
faciem Domini dei Zebaoth, Patris, F^ii, et Spiritus sancti, lucem, essent^am,
and bonitatem, sapientiam, etc. Chytr. Lib. de vit. and Mort.
blessed Angels, those beauteous spirits, the illustrious masterpiece of the
whole Creation: and this view will be most complacential, the Angels beauty
being never stained, their strength never impaired, their wisdom never foiled,
their music never jarred, but these morning stars sing together, Job 38. 7.
and it shall be ever morning with them, and their Hosts were never discomfited.

Thirdly, An intellectual vision; by which we shall see the ever blessed
Trinity, and not as we do here, with clouds and shades, but clearly, and face
to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Job 19. 26. which sight will be the spring of ineffable
joys. Chytreus observes, In our heavenly Sabbath we shall see God, and all
masks shall be removed, all vails rent, we shall be filled with light without
all darkness, with wisdom without all error, with righteousness without all
sin, with joy without all grief, with life without all decease or death. One
well observes, That our sight of God in glory, shall not be like the sight of
one man beholding another, for from that sight Rev. 20. 14. Ex visione dei
^mnia beotorum bona unice oriuntur, et dependent. Ger.
there may be some pleasure, but nothing of advantage; But our sight of God
shall be close and intimate, and not only the conveyance of delight, but an
affluence of all good things, and desirable satisfactions. God being the
chiefest good, our beholding him must needs return to us all unspeakable
happiness, all joy and sweetness in the highest degree. Mat. 18. 10.
Our Savior avers, hereafter the Elect shall be like the Angels, Mat. 12. 25.
Luke 20. 36. And how glorious Dei visio summum erit beatorum praemium. Aug.
is their sight of God! Those excellent spirits, how do they fill their joys
from that ocean of pleasure which flows from (...). Greg. Nyssen. de Virgin.
the beatifical vision. Augustine says, our sight of God is our chief reward
in heaven. Gregory Nyssen takes notice, That so far to be honored as to see
God, is the consummation of our hope, the full of our desires, the top of all
unspeakable good things; I may add, to see God is the issue and stage of our
faith, the sea of enjoyment, into which the River of faith runs and is lost.
How infinitely greater then will our enjoyments in our Sabbath above be, then
those we attain to here in our Sabbath below! In our Sabbath above, there shall
be fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. A torrent of pleasures which will be ever
running, and overflowing; but here our delights Imago dei sita est in hominis
mente, sive in eo quod homo sit in summo rerum gradu, in quo est d^us et
Angelus, scil. quod sit naturae spiritualis, secundum animam, et naturae
intelligentis. Alap.
in the Lord are faint and few, like the Sun shining in a shower, mixed with
successive tears: In our Sabbath above, we shall be satisfied with the likeness
of God, Psalm. 17. 15. But here in our Sabbath below, we must bemoan the
iniquity of our holy things; not only the iniquity of our slips, but of our
services; there are black spots upon the face of our fairest duties, those
which look with the most taking countenance; our very tears had need of
washing; our prayers interceding for pardon, and our sighs, which are the
hearts incense, had need perfuming, and when we are in our best dress, we may
be censured for uncomliness. In our Sabbath above, there shall be everlasting
triumph and exultation, Psalm. 68. 4. The Saints shall be always glorying upon
their beds of spices, and on their Mountanes of prey, everlasting Cant. 5. 13.
joy shall be upon their heads, as a triumphall Crown, Isa. 35, Isa. 35. 10.
10. But here in our Sabbath below, our rejoicing is soon Isa. 61. 3.
over-cast; either God hides his face in displeasure, or we let Isa. 65. 14.
fall our hands in duty, and then our triumph is turned into Mat. 25. 21.
trouble, and we are ready to say, Woe to us that we sojourn in a valley of
Baca, a wilderness of tears and inconstancy.

The two Sabbatht differ in their suavity and delight. Indeed our Sabbath below
is not wholly destitute of its sweets Exodus 16. 14.
and consolations; dews of delights fall upon it, like Manna about the
Israelites Camp; there is marrow and fatness in the Ordinances of it, Psalm. 63.
5. There are refreshings and The sweetness of holy duties. Psalm. 104. 34. Job
23. 12. Acts 10. 10. Dan. 9. 21.
perfumed gusts in holy duties. David's meditations were sweet and lushious,
Psalm. 104. 34. Job perfers Gods word above his necessary food, Job 23. 12. John
was in the spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. in an excess of joy, and in the
height of intellectual rapture. Peter in his prayers was in a trance, Acts 10.
10. he was carried above himself, and saw heaven opened to present him with
unwonted views. Daniel in the midst of his supplications had the prospect and
company of an Angel, Dan. 9. 21. An inhabitant of glory descends to
congratulate and accost him; nay, oftentimes the word is sweeter then honey to
the taste of the hearer, Psalm. 19. 10. And while we attend upon it, we feed upon
dropping honey-combs. Peter preaching to his Auditory, there falls a shower of
the spirit, and heaven came Compositio thymiamitis offerri debuit coram domino:
Altar enim incens^ ob eam causam fuerat constructum. Riv.
down to visit the Congregation. Holy duties how often are they spiced with
unspeakable delight and complacency. Among the Oblations of the Jews, there
were perfumes to be offered upon the Altar of Incense, Exodus 30. 1, 7. And our
Gospel Sacrifices are often sweetened with inward joy and consolation. If Christ
meet us in a duty or an ordinance, he drops sweetness from his voice, Cant. 2.
14. sweetness from his lips, Cant. 5. 13. sweetness from his fingers, Exodus 30
34. Psalm. 119. 103. Psalm. 141. 6. Lev. 16. 14.
Cant. 5. 5. sweetness from his cheeks, Cant. 5. 13. sweetness from his mouth,
Cant. 5. 16. If we taste any thing of his fruit, it is very sweet, Cant. 2. 3.
when Christ gives a visit he is every way sweet to the soul.

The Sabbath receives an additional delight from the Fructus Christi^ dulcis
est, accipi potest de praedicatione Evangelii, aut de contemplatione dei, aut
deconsolatione Sacramenti. Del Rio.
Communion of Saints; we do not only meet with God, but with his people on his
sacred Sabbath, we flock as Doves to the windows, and as stars meet in a
constellation, as morning stars we sing together. David remembers with some
kind of complacency, the joy he had in going to the Sanctuary with the
multitude, Psalm. 42. 4. The Primitive Christians prayed, and brake bread
together, Acts 2. 42. Their harmony was their happiness, and their society was
their satisfaction: But yet all these sweets have their allayes, their damps,
and their ecclipses, they are as the shining moon behind Isa. 60. 8.
a cloud, they yield only a duskish light. Isa. 38. 7.


First, The sweets of our present Sabbath are only partial; they may delight
the soul, they do not delight the body; a diseased body is not cured at a
Sermon; a tormented body is not eased at an Ordinance; if we read, the dim eye
is not made more vivacious; if we receive the Sacrament, the paralitical hand
is not made more steady: the hand of faith may be strengthened, but not the hand
of flesh; moreover the Ordinances they may delight the mind with information,
when they do not affect the heart with gracious impressions; Hos. 6. 3.
they may be our Counselors, when they are not Psalm. 119. 24.
our Comforters; they may convey gladness, when they do not transmit grace to
us, Mark 6. 20. Nay, they may cherish one grace, when they do not recruit
another. The word Maledicere rebus irrationalibus in se consideratis est
otiosum and vanum. Aquin.
may be a pillar to our faith, when it is not a prop to our patience; as Job,
he flings in his troubles, Job 3. 3. when nothing could daunt his faith; If the
Lord kill him, yet he will trust in him, Job 13. 15. The preaching of Christ
melts Mary Magdalen into tears, Luke 7. 38. and we read of little joy mingled
with her weeping.

Secondly, The sweets of our present Sabbath they are gradual: First,
Ordinances work conviction, Acts 2. 37. They work upon the Reason, and then
they work conversion, Parvulus est in Christo, et in Christianismo. Alap.
Acts 16. 14. They work upon the Conscience; and when we are regenerate, they
are first milk to us, 1 Pet. 2. 2. They strengthen the first beginnings of
grace, they are breasts of consolation, at which the Newborn Saint lies and
draws; and afterward they are stronger meat, Heb. 5. 12, 14. to nourish the
believer to a greater adolescence and growth in holiness.

Thirdly, The sweets of our present Sabbath, they are uncertain; sometimes the
Saint meets with a hive of honey at an Ordinance, the truths of Christ are
sweet and precious to him, and he is ready to cry out with Archimedes, (...), I
have found, I have found him whom my soul loves: at an other time, Ordinances
are dry breasts to the same Saint, all the Bees are burnt; Opportunities of
grace are a 1 Kings 3. 21.
dead child to him, like Gideons fleece with no drops upon it, Judge. 6. 40.
he can squeeze nothing of comfort or satisfaction to his soul; so that these
spiritual riches, are, as the Apostle calls worldly 1 Timothy 6. 17.
treasures, uncertain demains.

Fourthly, The sweets of our present Sabbath are faint and imperfect. Here our
spiritual delights are only begun, they are perfected in our better Sabbath,
here they are interrupted by our weekly labors, there succeeds a hurry of Hab.
2. 6.
worldly cares, a week laden with the thick clay of business Quicquid Judaei ex
nationis privilegio, and signo faederis; Quicquid Graeci ex Philosophia;
quicquid magnates ex dignitate sua frustra sperant; eaomnia excellentiora
quivis renatus habet in Christo. Daven.
and affairs; but in our heavenly Sabbath, our pleasures and sweets run in a
full torrent, and in a constant stream; Here we are lead to our delights by
means and ordinances, but above we shall be possessed of our full delights
without the help of them, and our God, who is our joy, shall become immediately
to us all in all, Col. 3. 11. Indeed much intermission and remisness may be
found in our very devotions here, in our services of the highest elevation;
David himself, when his heart was most strung with divine affections, and in
the best tune, yet then he had his cadencies; his Hallelujahs, and highest
strains of praise, came off with a Selah, a prostration of voice; our delights
in our earthly Sabbath are only (...)
a table in a wilderness, they are only flagons, Cant. 2. 5. Prostravit. Buxt.
which hold a little quantity of wine, and they are compared to Apples, which
are only an ordinary fruit. Psalm. 78. 19.


But the delights of our Sabbath above, are superlative and ineffable: When we
are put into possession of glory, we shall feel the sweetness of Gods electing
love, we shall taste the Psalm. 63. 3.
sweets of Christ's redeeming love, we shall drink joys eternally from the
spirit of love, whose loving kindness is infinitely Gaudium erit de veritate.
Aug.
better then life; then we shall need no threatenings to drive us, no promises
to lead us, but divine goodness will perfectly and complacentially attract us,
that we shall be naturalized to God, and goodness, and be no more able to turn
off from that ineffable sweetness, then the lodestone is to convert it self to
the West. Augustine says, That heaven is nothing but the joy of truth. It is
remarkable, That the joys of heaven are oftener compared in Scripture to drink,
then meat, because there is no labor in chewing them, nor any diminution of
them, but they slide down smoothly and fully, and replenish the dilated soul.
The whole quire of our powers and faculties shall be fixed in everlasting
fruition of unspeakable delight. Now the Saints Suavis hora, brevis mora. Bern.
have some fits of joy, but then they shall have their fill. Now they have many
a sweet hour; but joy shall then be a standing dish, and we shall be
everlastingly satisfied with the fullness of Gods house. Now our memories are
slippery in the most captivating Ordinances; but then shall be an actual
sensation of divine joys continually; then shall there be joy upon Gaudium
erit super gaudium, vincens omne gaudium, gaudium extra quod non est gaudium.
Aug.
joy, joy above all joy, joy, without which there is no joy, as Augustine
excellently. We shall then be perfectly at leisure for God, and see him, we
shall see him, and love him, we shall love him, and praise him in the end, and
without all end. And in our heavenly Sabbath transcendent delight will arise
from our company, (viz.) The Prophets and Apostles, and all the Glorious
Martyrs with their marks of honor, Concupiscibile replebitur sonte justitiae;
Irascibile perpetua tranquistitate. Bern.
Angels, Cherubims and Seraphims, and all that blessed Quire of Spirits, who
here have done us many an invisible courtesy, which we never thanked them for,
Heb. 1. 14. Those Seraphick spirits shall contribute dews of joy for our
refreshing, but the full shower of delight will arise from the sight of God. If
Diagoras when he saw his Three Sons crowned in one day at the Olympic games,
as Victors, di^^ away, when he was embracing them for joy; And good old Simeon,
when he saw Christ, but in a body subject to the infirmities of our Natures,
having him in his arms, cried out, Now Lord let thou thy Servant depart in
peace, for Luke 2. 29.
my eyes have seen thy salvation. What unspeakable joy and delight will it be
to see our Christian Friends and Relations all crowned in one day, with an
everlasting Diadem of blessedness which shall never decay. And when the
glorious (...).
Angels begin their Hallelujahs, the Saints shall also join in the same
harmony. O how the Arches of Heaven will echo! Jam. 1. 12. Psalm. 149. 5. Psalm.
150. 2.
such a blend and sympathy of praises shall be in the heavenly chorus, as shall
fill the inhabitants of glory with ravishing admiration; and there we shall
love one another as our selves, O quot, et quanta gaudia obtinebit, qui de tot,
et tantis beatitudinibus sanctorum jubilabit. Ansel. Judaeorum Doctores
observant, Sabbatum (i. e.) diem quietis, repraesentare mundum verae quietis,
and gaudii, quem vocant (...) ubi consummatu miseriis hujus mundi aeterna
faelicitate g^udebimus. Rabbi Isai c. and Rab. Arama. Quando Pii in hac vita
quandam (...) coelestium bonorum, et gaudiorum percipiu^t; corda eorum vix
possunt capere divinam illam dulcedinem, quid ergo de futura coeli dulcedine
censeamus quando non primitias tan^um etc.
we shall love God and our blessed Savior better then our selves; and Christ
shall love us better then we can love our selves, or one another. O how many
joys shall he possess, who shall keep an eternal Jubilee, in the enjoyment of
so many and so great beatitudes and felicities of others, as truly as of his
own. The Jewish Doctors call the pleasures of our heavenly Sabbath, (...)
everlasting breathings; our delight stirring up our desires, and our desires
feeding upon our delight. The joys above shall not only be transcendent, but
universal, filling all the faculties of our souls, refreshing and ravishing all
the parts of our bodies; they shall be continued, not interrupted, most sweet,
most sincere, elevated to the highest degree of pleasure, extensively reaching
to all eternity, intensively wound up to the highest peg of satisfaction and
delight, Psalm. 36. 9. And the fountane of divine sweetness shall not distill or
drop upon the glorified Saints, as Gums from the Tree, or Rose Water from the
Still, or Chemical drops from the Alymbeck, but streams of delight shall gently
dash upon them, to fill them with joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, Rev. 22.
1. We may conjecture at the body of the Sun by the brightness of the beam; so
may we guess what those ecstasies of joy shall be, which shall sweeten our
eternal Sabbath, by those fore-tasts and prelibations of joy which the Saints
here sometimes feel, 1 Pet. 1. 8. The first fruits of this joy, how do they
transport the believer, and carry him even above the world? Insomuch that he
scarce knows whether he be in the body, or out of the body, 2 Cor. 12. 2. His
senses and faculties are wrapped up to drench in unusual pleasures. Now if the
present clusters yield such generous wine, what will the over-flowings of the
Vintage yield? What fruits shall we gather from an everlasting harvest? This
made Augustine Aug. de Civit dei. lib. 22. Cap. 30. Quest. Supr. Exodus Quest.
173.
call our Sabbath above, Sabbatum maximum, our greatest Sabbath; Plenitudinem
Sabbati, The fullness of a Sabbath; Nay, Sabbatum Sabbatorum, The Sabbath of
Sabbaths. Indeed the sweets of our future Sabbath, here they may be admired,
but they cannot be comprehended; hereafter we may be filled with them, but we
shall not dive to the bottom of them.

two Sabbaths differ in this, the one is the representation of the other. Our
Sabbath upon Earth does only adumbrate, Fuit illud Sabbatum typus aeterni
illius sabbati in coelis; in quo electi an^ma, et corpore, a peccatis,
calamitatibus, et miseriis hujus vitae requiescent. Ger.
and shadow out our Sabbath in Heaven. On our Sabbath below, the body rests
from labor; in our heavenly Sabbath, both body and soul shall rest from sin,
calamity and misery, and God shall rest in us, and we shall rest in him. In the
legal Sabbath, there was no Manna fell on that day, Exodus 16. 27. In the
Sabbath above there shall be no ministry, that useful and necessary ordinance
shall wholly and for ever cease. In our Sabbath below, we leave the world, and
the affairs of it, while we go up into the Mount, and converse with Jesus
Christ: In our Sabbath above, we shall Dies dominica est imago futuri seculi.
Bas.
get above the world, and with Elijah, let fall our mantle, our loose garment
of mortality, and put it on no more, but converse with God eternally on the
Mount of joy and delight. There are indeed many rare types and representations
2 Kings 2. 13.
of our heavenly Sabbath.

Paradise; which was a promptuary of beauty, pleasure, delight, especially when
man's innocence did accent the Paradisus univers^ sensibilis venustati^
inte^ligentiam excedit. Damasc. lib. 2. de Orthod. fid. cap. 11.
sweetness of it. How fresh the trees, how sweet the flowers, how musical the
birds, how lushious the fruits of this transcendent place, till Adams fall
folded up this land-skip, and turned himself out of this Garden of God, that he
might dress it no more; and since it is overgrown, insomuch that the remains
of it are not known to the most curious searchers after them: But before this
breach, the pleasures of Paradise were so transcendent, that the delights of
our supernal Sabbath are called Paradise, Rev. 2. 7. 2 Cor. 12. 4. Only the
Paradise of the Second Adam, where he met with August. Epist. 112. Cap. 13.
the saved Thief, Luke 23. 43. transcendently surpasses the Paradise of the
First Adam; In that, the presence of God is Clem. 5 Stromat. Ansel. Thom.
Aquin. secunda, secundae, quest. 175. Art. 5.
immediately in the Paradise above, which inhanceth all enjoyments to the
supreamest height. And therefore Augustine, Clemens Alexandrinus, Anselme, and
Aquin as affirm, that Paul, when he was rapt up into the heavenly Paradise, he
saw the Divine Being, entering the place of the blessed, who eternally see God
face to face: So that when we 1 Cor. 13 12.
mention, or contemplate on the Celestial Paradise, we must cast a shade on
Adams Paradise, his pleasant Seat, as falling short below all degrees of
comparison.

Secondly, It might be added, that the fruits and delights of Adams Paradise
were more calculated to please the sense, and refresh the outward man; But the
delights of the upper Paradise are more refined, and principally influence the
soul, man's better part.

Tabernacle does sweetly resemble our Sabbath above, Psalm. 84. 1. Luke 16. 9.
Psalm. 15. 1. Rev. 21. 3. especially Tabernaculum Mosaicum propter pelles
hyacynthinas ipsam co^perientes; coelum e long inquo aspicientibus
representabat. Joseph. lib. 3. Antiq. Cap. 7.
if we look upon the furniture of it.

First, There was the Ark of the Testimony, Exodus 40. 21. which, as a learned
man concludes, denotes the blessed Trinity, whose sight is our happiness above.
In the Ark there were the two Tables of the Law, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. The golden Pot
of Manna, and Aarons blossoming Rod, Heb. 9. 4. In our heavenly Sabbath the
Father will govern us with most holy Laws, which answers to the two Tables; The
Son shall be bread of life to us to feed upon, John 6. 33. which answers to the
pot of Manna. The Holy Ghost shall Numb. 10 33*
eternally fill us with fresh and flourishing graces, which answers Charitas
ibi erit lex; Filius dei erit rex; et modus erit aeternitas.
to Aarons blossoming Rod.

Secondly, Over the Ark was the Mercy-Seat, Exodus 25. 21, 22. which expresses
our dear Redeemer, who has promerited not only grace, but glory for us. And
from the Romans 3. 25. Numb. 7 89.
Mercy-Seat answers were given, which signifies that blessed familiarity which
the Saints shall enjoy with the Lord in Glory. Exodus 35. 18. Hac figura
Cherubinorum repraesentati fuerunt Angeli dei. Riv.


Thirdly, By the Cherubims which were at the two ends of the Mercy-Seat, we may
understand the blessed society of Angels, Mat. 22. 30. who shall join with us
in a pleasing, and complacential harmony. The praises of the most high being
eternally celebrated by the confederate praises of Saints and Angels.

Fourthly, In the Tabernacle there was an Altar, Exodus Post Christum, justi et
sancti omnes, consummati, et perfecti erunt in gloria. Alap.
27. 1. to denote the sanctity, and the unspotted holiness of our devotion
above. Our worship before the Throne, shall resemble the Lamb who sits upon the
Throne, in unspotted purity. We shall be always eating of the tree of Life;
there shall be no tree of Good and Evil to hazard our disobedience. We shall
have no need then to complain of the iniquity of our holy things; then the
services of just men shall Heb. 12. 23.
be as their spirits made perfect. It is not possible, that all tears should be
wiped away from the eyes of the Saints, Rev. 21. 4. before all blemishes are
fetched out of their persons, and all stains washed away from their services.

Fifthly, In the Tabernacle there was a Candlestick, Exodus Tobernaculo suit
candelabrum speciei planae, et extensae, placentae instar. Riv.
25. 31. to inform us of the clear vision we shall have of God in our heavenly
Sabbath, 1 Cor. 13. 12. There shall be no partition wall to debar our sight, no
intervenient pillar of a cloud to abate our light, no curtain drawn to cast a
shade on our sight, but all shall lie open to make way for our Deum cerneraus
non quod deus faciem habeat, sed phrasi hebraica cognitio nostra erit clara, et
intuitiva. Par.
fullest and everlasting views. Then we shall see God intuitively, as the
Schoolmen speak; and Moses his request, Exodus 33. 13. shall be answered in
every particular. Our knowledge of God shall be intimate and familiar. Our
minds shall be a clear sky, without the covering or veil of any darkness;
nothing shall remain to interpose or hinder our freest vision of the sacred
Trinity. Exodus 33. 11.


Sixthly, In the Tabernacle there was a Table on which Deus omnem caliginem
mentibus et cordibus nostris absterget, et tam sensus, quam animos nostros
coelesti luce perfectissime perfundet.
stood the Shewbread, Exodus 25. 23, 30. to signify to us, the rare satiety of
our blessed fruitions above: In our heavenly Sabbath we shall be satisfied, but
never surfeited. Our Masters joy cannot cloy us; the musicks of the
Bride-chamber will ravish, but not weary us, they will be our triumph, not our
trouble; the songs about the Throne of the Lamb will never put a distaste upon
us. Here lies the difference between Earthly and Heavenly delights, the first
Mat. 25. 10.
drown, the other draw out our appetite; the pleasures of Mat. 25. 21.
this life blunt, of the other life, blow up our desires. Vo luptates terrenae
saturant, non satiant; voluptates caelestes satiant, non saturant.


Seventhly, The Table in the Tabernacle was to be made of Shittim-wood, which
will not decay or putrify, to deuote the indefective eternity of all our good
things above. Christ purchases are like himself, a holy one which will not see
corruption. It is observable, that glory which in one place is called a crown
of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. in another, is called a crown of Immortality, 1
Pet. 5. 4. only to show, that Eternity is the richest pearl in the Saints
crown.

land of Canaan.

First, This plentiful land was freely promised, and as Deuteronomy. 9. 6.
freely given to the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 9. 6. so the gift of God is
eternal life, Romans 6. 23. our heavenly inheritance is the gratuitous bounty of
our heavenly father; free grace is our best, and only tenor.

Secondly, The land of Canaan was gained by Conquest; Joshuahs sword paved
Isreal's way to that fruitful soil; their heads were to be crowned with Laurel,
the emblem of Acts 14. 17.
victory, before their hearts were to be filled with food and Rev. 2 7.
gladness, and the lushious plenties of Canaan, which was Rev. 3. 5.
the larger Paradise of the world. And the delicacies of heaven Rev. 3. 12.
are given to the Conqueror. This truth is so frequently Rev. 3. 21.
inculcated in Scripture, and so often pressed by Christ, as Rev. 21. 7.
if our beloved intended our meditations should dwell there.

Thirdly, The land of Canaan flowed with milk and honey, 2 Samuel 24. 19.
Josh. 5. 6. It was rich and plenteous to a miracle; holy 1 Chro. 21. 6.
writ affirms, One Million, three hundred thousand men were maintaned in it,
besides women, children and impotent persons, and yet this land was of a small
and inconsiderable compass. These outward plenties did only set forth, Psalm.
36. 8. Phrasi ista, Intra in gaudium domini tui universa denotatur beatitudo,
cum non poss^t esse major gloria servi. Chrysos^.
the copious delights of glory. In our heavenly Sabbath, there are rivers of
pleasure, Psalm. 36. 8. Legions of Angels, Mat. 26. 53. One hundred forty four
thousand of glorified Saints, Rev. 7. 4. Fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. and
pleasures in the plural number to show their plenty, and pleasures for evermore
to denote their eternity.

Fourthly, The Land of Canaan was entered by armed Israelites; but when they had
taken possession, the Arms were laid aside, and every one safe under his own
Vine, and his own fig tree, Mic. 4. 4. And so the Saints in this life put In
vita Aeterna perfecta erit tranquillitas, and aeterna securitas. Ger.
on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 12. and in that Coat of Male out-vy
Caesar, who fought and was victorious in fifty battles; but death at last puts
an end to these sharp encounters, and the Saints weapons, though not their
honor, is laid in the dust, and so entering a better Canaan, they sit under the
true Vine, John 15. 1. with complacency and 1 Cor. 2. 9.
inconceiveable joy to all everlasting.

Temple of Solomon was an illustrious type of our heavenly Sabbath.

First, When that glorious structure was built, there was no noise of ax or
hammer; no tool of Iron gave the least disturbance, 1 Kings 6. 7. Every thing
was fitted before it was brought, to prevent the clamorous confusions of
workmen and their instruments. So our supernall Sabbath in Rev. 21. 4. Isa. 38.
14. Psalm. 38. 8. Psalm. 6. 6.
glory shall admit of no noise, no harsh, or displicent sound, no heavy groans
or uncomfortable sighs, no roaring out for the disquietness of our heart, or
chattering like a Crane in doleful prayer and complaint, there shall be no
silent voice Heb. 11. 10.
of weeping, or soft murmur of a gliding fear; but all these In coelis ibi
civiles erimus, ibi erit nostra mansio, ibi non solum erimus, sed et ibi
manebimus.
things shall be done away, all capacities of trouble being swallowed up in
perfect joy; as the flaming firebrand is quenched in an Ocean.

Secondly, The Temple was a fixed structure and not portable, to be carried up
and down as the Tabernacle was, its station was at Jerusalem, nor was it
capable of removal, (...). Isid. Pelus.
and for some hundreds of years it remained in its usual place, shining in its
gold and glory. And so our future Sabbath shall be immutable, not subject to
change or alteration, not ambulatory or in a passage. Our dwellings above are
Mansions, John 14. 2. Our enjoyments are stable and inalterable: There we meet
fully with God who is our fixed Center. The Apostle says, our building in
heaven is eternal, 2 Cor. 5. 1. It is a building of God not made with hands,
and so not subject ^o decay or reparations; Art John 18. 36.
did not frame it, and time cannot loosen or dissolve it. But Rev. 21. 2.
to revert to that from which there has been some digression; Our Sabbath
below as in a morning blush, does something Dies dominicus Resurrectione
Christi sacratus, Aeternam non solum spiritus, sed and corporis requiem
praefigurat. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
resemble our Sabbath above as the Infant in the Cradle does a man in his full
stature or the dim candle, the Sun in its greatest splendour: And let us admire
divine indulgence in giving us this faint resemblance, before we come to the
Archetype of an everlasting rest. But in the general, thus meditation like the
Sun, may run through all the signs of the zodiac, and fly from one spiritual
object to another, from the God of the Sabbath to the Sabbath of God, (which
subjects have been thus enlarged for its larger circuit) and freely dilate it
self as far as our time shall either restrain us, or give us greater leisure;
and when, as the Sun, meditation has fetched its compass, it may begin again.

CHAP. XXVI. Not only Meditation, but Prayer, with other services must fill up
the Morning of a Sabbath.
BUT meditation must not enclose the morning of Gods holy day as its own proper
demeans, nor so grasp that Oration sine meditatione tepida, meditatio sine
oratione est infrugisera. Bern.
precious time, as to exclude the succession of other divine performances: But
as meditation does well become the first approach of a Sabbath, so prayer in
the next place properly takes its course and order. Let us shut up our
meditations with prayer, and pray over our meditations; prayer sanctifies every
thing, and so it makes meditation effectual to 1 Timothy 4. 5.
the soul, that the pleasing ascents of that holy duty may bring down a
blessing with them; Bernard couples prayer 1 These. 5. 17.
and meditation, prayer being lukewarm without meditation, and meditation
being unfruitful without prayer. Both duties together being like the Diamond
Ring, or beauty and sweetness in the same rose, light and heat in the same Ephesians.
6. 18.
Sun. These two duties add reciprocal luster one to another. Now for the
better mannagement of this duty on the morning of a Sabbath, we will enquire
into these three things.

First, What are the opportunities when we must pray.

Secondly, What are the qualifications how we must pray.

Thirdly, What are the objects for what or whom we must pray.

Our prayer on the morning of the Lords day,

First, Must be closet prayer, we must as our Savior says, Mat. 6. 6. Enter
into our closet, and shut the door upon Deus vult nos precari, non ut videamur,
sed ut exaudiamur. Par.
us, and so pray to the Father, etc. solitary prayers usually do not want the
company of a reward; Jacob wrestled with the Angel alone, there were no
spectators of the combat, and he was not only a Jacob for wrestling, but an
Israel Genesis 32. 24, 28
for prevailing. Let us begin the Sabbath with secret prayer, and so we may the
more freely vent our thoughts, pour out Vtile est fide^^bus in conclavi
precari, quo liberius vota sua ad deum ess^ndant; and sic ab omnibus
avocamentis liberae sint mentes nostrae.
our complaints, make our requests, and send up our desires, not being checked
or confined by the audience or observation of others. Patients discover not
their distemper before the multitude, but privately to the Physician. A secret
prayer in the morning of the Sabbath may ease and fit the heart for the
subscquent duties of the whole day; we may kindly bemoan the sins of the past
week, humbly acknowledge our indispositions for the present Sabbath; we may
open to Prece utamur occulia sed manifesta fide.
God the uneven beatings of the pulse of our souls, and sadly bewail the
mutinous disorders which are in our bosoms; many things we may unravell to God,
we would not proclaim Solus Jesus si^ut alias orationes fecit in secessu, et
secreto ut liberius s^ne impedimentis orare possit, nocturnum tempus sumit ad
orationem. Tunc enim quies officiorum corporis, et aliorum negotiorum mentem
distrahentium tenebrae, et s^enti^ animum aptiorem faciunt ad orationem.
Chemnit.
in the ears of an associate assembly. It is observable, that our dear Jesus
who had many things upon his heart, he would take the privacy of place to pray
in, and would lay hold on the most retired seasons for that duty, Luke 6. 12.
He would pray all night, that not so much as the Sun might be a witness of his
withdrawn devotions; the world must not hear what he had on his heart to speak
to his Father. Surely the closet is a good porch to the Sanctuary, and we are
made the fitter for the public by chamber-devotion: First, the Evening star
rises alone, and then it joins with the stars of the night. When we have
opened our case to God in secret, then we are more prepared to converse with
God in Societies. Showers in the night refresh the Garden, and fructify the
ground though no eye behold those sweet and seasonable drops. If we with
Cornelius make our flight to God in solitary prayer, Acts 10. 2. we may receive
his answer: your prayers are come up to God, ver. 4. And so the following
Sabbath may be a prosperous gale to blow us nearer Mark 1. 35. Psalm. 63. 1.
Dan. 6. 10. Job 1. 5.
to our Eternal rest.

closets we must come down into our families, and join with them in the same
holy duty of prayer. Family prayer lies under a command to be used on every
day, Jer. 10. 25.
and bitter imprecations are poured out on those families which neglect it,
Jer. 10. 25. The Prophet calls for full vials to be poured out upon them. But
prayer never better becomes a family, then on the morning of the Lords day. Our
closet devotions and family prayers common to other Numb. 28. 9.
days, must not be omitted on this blessed day, but rathet augmented. It is
worth our notice, that the first service of Exodus 30. 7.
the Jews on their Sabbath was burning incense before the Lord, Exodus 30. 7.
Now family prayer is the burning of incense in our family; every branch of the
family joining in prayer, does as it were fill his hand with incense, and so
offer it up in Christ's merit, which is the sweetness of our 2 Cor. 1. 3.
incense to the father of mercies; and how perfumed must Sicut suffitus sursum
ascendunt, et odorem suavem praebent, sic preces sanctorum coelestia petunt, et
deo gr^^ae sunt.
that house and family be where so much incense is offered, Let our whole
family in the morning of the Sabbath cry out, seek the Lord, O our souls. As
Mary Magdilen, she was early up to seek him whom her soul loved, Mat. 20. 1.
John 20. 1. Mark 16. 2. She was last at the Cross, and first at the Sepulcher:
And O that our love could keep pace with hers. The whole family shall be as
morning stars to sing together, Job 18. 7. and pour out their souls in the
bosom of God; this is worship like that of heaven, where the multitude, the
whole host of heaven sing forth the praises Job 38. 7.
of God together. And in this we follow the clew of Reason.

First, Families have their wants as well as single persons, they may want
prepared hearts, composed spirits, exerted graces to meet with God on his holy
day; that which is the complaint of one, may be the moan of the whole family;
as if some one string in an instrument be struck, another string trembles:
heart may answer heart throughout the whole family.

Secondly, Spiritual grace is as necessary to the whole family, as it is to any
particular person, and so ardent prayer is as indispensible. The whole land of
Egypt came to Joseph for Corn because of their want: Every foul in the family
Genesis 41. 57.
had need to beg for the beauties of Christ, that he may meet pleasingly with
his beloved on his own day. Grace is the comeliness of the Servant as well as
the Master, of the Child as well as of the Parent. In the fourth Commandment,
the injunction is laid upon all within our gates to keep holy the Sabbath. Exodus
20. 10.


Thirdly, Moreover the whole family is to attend upon Quamvis nullus advena ad
hoc cogebatur, ut circumcideretur, tamen ad auditum divinae legis adhibebatur,
et die Sabbati ad sacrum otium constringebatur. Muscul.
public worship; and prayer is both the plow and the harrow to prepare the
ground of our hearts to meet with God, and to receive the immortal seed which
is able to save our souls, Jam. 1. 21. Indeed the Apostle advises us to pray
continually, 1 These. 5. 17. but then more especially, when we are going to the
public assembly, to prepare us for those solemn Ordinances wherein we join
issue with the Saints in holy worship, and for this God will be entreated.
Families must not rush upon Ordinances as the Horse into the battle, but prayer
must prepare the way, and so let us feed Ezra 8. 23.
upon the Manna of the word, and drink of the truths of the Jer. 8. 6.
Gospel.

Fourthly, Family prayer makes a musical harmony: Consort Vna communis oration,
quam una mente, et fidem Jesum inculpata protulerunt. Ignat. ad Magn.
is the life of melody, a heavenly host celebrated Christ's Nativity, Luke 2.
13. Not a single Seraphim, but a quire of Angels. In the primitive times there
was (...). One common consent and harmony of prayers. And Clemens Alexandrinus
tells us, That in the golden days of the Church, there used to be on the Lords
day a pile and heap of suppliants, having one voice and one mind in their
prayers and addresses to God. It was the wish of Athanasius, in his (...).
Athanas,
Apology to the Emperor Constantius, That all might lift up the same voice to
God without any dissonancy or disorder. United prayers are the stronger voice,
united sighs are the thicker cloud, united tears are the fuller stream, and so
make the deeper impression upon the divine breast. The devotions of a family
must needs make a greater noise then one single cry, to awaken the Lord to give
answers of love and grace. A single instrument may make music, but no harmony.

opportunities of prayer in the closet and in the family on the morning of a
Sabbath, so we must look to the qualifications of our prayers. Every prayer is
not an engine to batter heaven; we must so pray, that we may obtain, we must
therefore look to the character, as well 1 Cor 9. 24
as to the custom of praying.

closet, in the family, and likewise in the public assembly, must be fetched
from the heart, Christiani usi sunt precibus, prout illis suggerit Sp. s. sine
monitore, qui de pectore orabant. Tertul.
not lip labor only, then they are lost labor. Tertullian tells us, The
Christians in the primitive times needed not a monitor in their prayers to
dictate to them, they prayed from their own hearts, which suggested to them
seasonable and suitable petitions. And the Apostle tells us, That the effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, Jam. 5. 16. The original word
is, (...). A working prayer, when the heart works in holy affections and
yearnings, as the Be in the midst of its wax and honey. Success may be much
known by the heat and warmth of our spirits, Luke 11. 8. We translate the word
importunity, but it is (...), impudency. In the times of the Law, the sweet
perfumes in the censers were burnt before they asscended. When we go to our
closets or our families, we must look to our affections in our addresses to
God; get Cant. 4. 6.
them fixed by the Holy Ghost, that they flame up toward Vtinam eodem semper
ardore orari possim, tunc erit responsum, fiat ut velis Luth.
God in devout and religious ascents. There is language in groans, a voice
there is in weeping, Psalm. 6. 6. Sighs have their speech and are articulate
before God. Indeed it is no easy thing to work a lazy dead heart to a
necessary height of affection, the weights always running down-ward; but they
must be wound up by force as the weight of a clock must be tugged up by the
strings: And when our affections are pulliced up, it is hard to keep them so;
like Moses his Exodus 17. 10.
hands, they are apt to faint and fall down, but a continued violence and force
must keep our affections in their highest sphere: The Bird cannot stay in the
Air without continual flight and motion of the wings, nor can we persist in
affectionate prayer without constant toil with our own hearts; (...). Justin.
Mart. Apol 2
affections faint, and thoughts scatter, weariness makes way for wandering, so
that we must take pains to keep our affections sailing toward heaven, we must
keep the wind of the spirit and row at the Oar, that we be not sinfully
becalmed, and so miss of the end of our voyage. Justin Martyr observes, That
the prefect of the assembly in his time used to pray with his utmost strength.
So then our prayers on the morning of the Sabbath must be cordial and
affectionate.

clothed with humility, we must pray in a sense of divine purity and of our
own unworthiness, Luke 18. 23. Not only the bended knee, but the submissive
Isa. 66. 3.
spirit becomes prayer. Christ himself kneeled down and prayed, Luke 22. 41. On
the morning of a Sabbath we Quatuor sunt gradus humilitatis Primus est
contemptibilem se esse cognoscere Secundu^ de hoc dolere. Tertius hoc
confiteri. Quartus Aequo animo far se contemptibiliter tractar^. Ansel.
have great things to beg, and we our selves usually give our charity not to
the sturdy, but to the stooping beggar: If we look for blessings from Gods
hand, it is fit we should lie at Gods feet. Christ himself melted, Heb. 5. 7.
and shall not we stoop and be humble in prayer? Hezekiah turned his face to the
wall and prayed, Isa. 38. 2. as being conscious of his own unworthiness,
covering his face with blushes which the world must not see, and so confounded
in himself, he pours out his soul before God. In this holy duty we lie at the
allowance of Gods mercy, and most rational it is we should lie at the
footstool of Gods Throne: The Publicans stroke on his breast, which was an
evidence of his humility and self-abhorrency, made his way to that acceptance,
the Luke 18. 13.
proud Pharisee could not attain unto.

sharpened, and spirited wirh the sense of want, and with hungrings and desires
after supplies. The Mat. 5. 6. Neh. 1. 11. Luke 11. 13. Non frigide a deo
petere debemus beneficia, sed affici nos oportet, sensu et vehementi desiderio
illarum rerum quas a deo petimus. Daven.
beggar cries loudest, his rags make him roar; we are cloyed in our
apprehensions, and we are cool in our Petitions. Necessity inflames
importunity. Were we but sensible on the morning of a Sabbath (to come to our
case in hand) what need we have of sins pardon, of an understanding heart, of a
hearing ear, of a holy and suitable frame of spirit for divine Ordinances, and
to run profitably through the duties of the whole Sabbath; surely our hearts
would be like coals of Juniper, Psalm. 120. 4. we should burn with ardency and
importunity. We pray most fervently, when we pray most feelingly; want is the
bellows of desire. Let In petendo panem nostrum quotidiunum egestatem, and
mendicitatem nostram agnoscimus.
us therefore study a sense of our spiritual wants, and that will set the wheel
of prayer on going with the greatest speed and eagerness.

introductory prayers on a Sabbath be animated with faith, That grace makes
every duty weight: and every service without it, if it be put into the
balance, will be found too light. In our prayers we must be persuaded of the
Heb. 11. 6. 1 John 5. 14. Psalm. 10. 17.
mercifulness of Gods nature, to incline and bow his ear to them, of the riches
of his promises to encourage them, of the infiniteness of his power to fulfill
and accomplish them, Olea Arbor, pinguedine sua fertur nunquam deficere, sed
folia sub aquis manner possunt virentia. Par.
or else all our requests are like the bird with clipped wings, they may flutter
up and down the ground, but they can rise no higher. We must believe that God
can fill every chink of our desires, and that he will send home the Dove with
the Olive branch in his mouth. These annexed Scriptures will further evince
this truth, 1 John 5. 14. Mat. 21. 22. Psalm. 141. 2.
Jam. 1. 6. Psalm. 55. 17. Where David says, He shall hear my voice. O rare act
of vigorous faith! In a word, Then Jude v. 20.
we pray aright, when we pray in the Holy Ghost. His concurrence is necessary:
God will own nothing in prayer but Romans 8. 26, 27
what comes from his spirit, any other voice is strange and barbarous to him:
God delights not in the flaunting of parts, and in the unsavory belches of a
carnal heart, nor in the tunable cadency of words, which is only an empty ring
in Gods ear. But the method of the Lord is, to prepare the 1 Kings 18. 38.
heart, and then to grant the request, Psalm. 10. 17. Our heart is opened first,
and then God opens his ear. Fire from Potentia ad precandum, non est ex nobis
metipsis, sed ex spiritu sancto. Psalm. 147. 9. Vt adjuetis me in Orationibus,
(i. e.) ut concertetis in agone mecum: grae^e est (...).
heaven to consume the sacrific was the solemn token of acceptance heretofore,
1 Kings 18. 38. Fire from heaven is the token still, even an holy ardour
wrought in us by the Holy Ghost. Indeed prayer is a work too hard for us: we
can babble of our selves, but we cannot pray without the Holy Ghost; we can put
words into prayer, but the spirit must put affections, without which, prayer is
but cold prattle, and spiritless talk. Our necessities may sharpen, but they
cannot enliven our prayers. The carnal man may cry unto God, as young Ravens,
and as the rude Mariners did in Jonahs ship; but now gracious affection is
quite another thing. There may be cold and raw wishes after grace in an
unbeliever, but Jonah 1. 6.
serious and spiritual desires after the same blessed gift, these Hos. 12. 4.
we must have from the Holy Ghost.

necessity of the spirits assistance. Prayer is a Qui precatur debet esse (...)
certans, et luctans etiam cum ipso deo. Daven.
work which will cost us travel of heart, Acts 1. 14. a working spirit, Jam. 5.
16. an earnest striving, Romans 15. 30. and contending with God himself, Col. 4.
12. It is very observable, that the party Jacob wrestled with, Genesis 32. 25. is
called a Man, an Angel, nay, he is called God; a man for his shape, and the
form he assumed; an Angel to denote the second person in the Trinity, who is
the messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. and this party is called God, Genesis
32. 30. It was such an Angel as blessed Jacob, which was a work proper to God.
But now if it be demanded what it is, to pray in the holy Ghost?

First, The spirit helps us in prayer in a way of gifts, Alludit Paulus ad
illud. Psalm. Psalm. 46. 8. Psallite sapienter pro quo hebraice est (...) ut
intelligentio, quod septuaginta vertunt (...) ut nimirum intelligatur quod
canitur, et quod precatur.
that the heart may not be bound up, and that we may have necessary words to
give vent for our affections; It is the spirit which bestows the gift of
prayer, that we may enlarge our selves to God on all occasions, 1 Cor. 14, 15.
But this gift is much bettered by Industry, Hearing, Meditation, Reading,
Conference, nay, by prayer it self, such holy exercises may be auxiliary to
this excellent gift, for the spirit works by means, as the Sun shines in the
air, in which it makes its glittering ascents.

Secondly, There is the gracious assistance of the spirit, which is either
habitual or actual.

First, Habitual grace is necessary to prayer, Zach. 12. 10. where there is
grace, there will be supplications; as soon as the Child is born it falls on
crying, Acts 9. 11. Prayer is the Zach. 12. 10. (...) Gratia, et supplicatio in
uno comprehenduntur.
kindly duty of the New Creature; the regenerate person is easily drawn into
Gods presence: when once we are renewed by the Holy Ghost, we shall certainly,
and sweetly pray in the Holy Ghost, we shall offer up spiritual devotions
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, There is the actual assistance which we have from the spirit; when a
man is regenerate, yet he cannot pray as he ought, unless he be still moved and
assisted by the blessed spirit. Now these actual motions do either concern;

First, The matter of prayer, which is suggested by the spirit Jam. 1. 17.
of promise; for let a man alone, and he will soon run into Ephesians. 1. 13.
a temptation, and cry for that which is inconvenient, and it would be severity
in God to grant it, and therefore the direction of the Holy Ghost is necessary,
that we may not ask Romans 8. 27.
a Scorpion instead of a Fish, a stone instead of bread: We take counsel of
lusts and interests when we are left to our private spirit; now the Holy Ghost
teaches us to ask, not only what is lawful, but what is expedient for us, so
that the will of God may take place before our own inclinations. Or

Secondly, These actual motions of the spirit concern, the manner of our
prayers; now in prayer we have immediately Quid resert gemere? Suspiria confusa
ad deum mittere, forte evanes^unt in aere; sed interpel^atio spiritus certo
exauditur ^ de^, Par.
to do with God, and therefore we should take great heed in what manner we come
to him. The right manner is, when we come with affection, with confidence, with
reverence:

First, With affection, Romans 8. 26. It is the holy Ghost sets us on groaning;
words are but the outside of prayer, sighs and groans are the language which
God will understand; we learn to mourn from the Turtle, from him who descended
in the form of a Dove, Mat. 3. 16. He draws sighs from the heart, tears from
the eyes, and moans from the soul. Parts may furnish us with eloquence, but the
spirit inflames us with love, that earnest reaching forth of the soul after
God, and the things of God: That holy importunity, that spiritual violence
which is often used in holy prayer, comes only from the spirit. Many a prayer
is neatly ordered, musically delivered, and gravely pronounced, but all these
artifices, they are the curiosities of man, and savor nothing of the holy
spirit; then it speaks the spirit to be in a prayer, when there is life and
power, and the poor suppliant sets himself to wrestle with God, as if he would
overcome him in his own strength.

Secondly, With confidence. In Prayer we must come as Children, and cry, Abba
Father, Romans 8. 16. usually we do Suprema essentia spiritus dei, qui orare
facit, orantibus promittit, promissum largitur, testimonium nobis intus
perhibet, quisnam dubitationi locus. Chrysostom.
not mind this part of the spirits help in prayer; we look to gifts and
enlargements, but not to this Child-like confidence, that we may be able to
call God Father, without reproach or hypocrisy; not seriously considering it
is the language of a Child, which will only prevail upon the affections of a
Father.

Thirdly, With Reverence. That we may be serious and awful. God is best seen
in the light of his spirit; the Heathens could say, We need light from God,
when we speak of, or to God. That sense of the Lords greatness, and those fresh
Non loquendum d^ deo sine lumine.
and awful thoughts that we have of his Majesty in prayer, are stirred up by
the Holy Ghost. He uniteth, and gathers our hearts together, that they may
not be unravelled, and Devotio, et pius in deum affectus, debet semper viam
aperire ad particulares nostras petitiones, sive pro alii^ petimus necessaria,
sive pro nobis. Daven.
scattered abroad in vain and impertinent thoughts, Ephesians. 6. 18. And therefore
to wind up this particular, (which has been more copiously handled, then
usual) when we go to pray at any time, and so consequently in our Closets, or
Families on the morning of the Sabbath, let us cast our selves upon the Holy
Ghost, as appointed by the Father, and purchased by the Son, to help us in this
sweet and serviceable duty, Romans 8. 26. We are often tugging and laboring at
it, and can make no work of it; but the spirit comes and contributes his
assistance, and then we launch forth, and our sails are filled, and we go on
prosperously in that omniprevalent duty. A good Expositour gives this gloss on,
Rev. 1. 10. John was Arch. in lo^.
in the spirit on the Lords day, (i. e.) he was in prayer upon the Lords day;
the spirit mightily assisting us in prayer, makes strange and glorious
impressions upon us: As it is reported Greg. Orat. de Laud. Basil.
of Basil, That when the Emperor Valens came in upon him, while he was in
Prayer, he saw such luster in his face, as struck the Emperor with terror,
and he fell backwards. Prayer can make a great change in us, and work Luke 9.
29.
great things for us; and therefore the management of this duty must be
dispatched with the greatest care and exactness.

opportunities for prayer on the morning of a Sabbath, and see to the
qualifications of Psalm. 5. 3.
of that duty, to direct our requests, that they may not miss Sicut in perperam
dictis parum, aut nihil momenti est, sed ad irritandum deum contigit, sic
commode, et opportune dictis nihil fere bonitatis abesse creditur. Cartwr.
the mark of a blessing: But we must see to the matter of our prayers, that our
devotions be not only sweet, but seasonable, not only fervent but pertinent:
there may be petitions which are lawful, which are not so expedient for the
season of a Sabbath; and therefore to secure us against such mistakes, we must
be informed what seasonably to beg of God, as the boon of the instant
opportunity.

Minister, who is to be Gods mouth to us, in the public worship of the
Sabbath; we must pray that God would give him a door of Acts 16. 14. Ephesians, 6.
18, 19. Col. 4. 3. 2 Cor. 1. 11. 1 These. 5. 25.
utterance. He that must open the hearts of the people to receive the word
savingly, must open the lips of the Minister to preach the word effectually.
How often does Paul entreat the prayers of the people; that Seraphick Apostle
would not set sail without fresh gales of the peoples prayers. Indeed Preces
sunt arma sacerdotis. Ambr.
the preaching of the Word is an arduous affair, and cannot be success fully
managed without divine help and supplement, which must be begged by prayer and
importunity. Ambrose says, That prayers are the weapons of a Minister. Romans
15. 15.
It may be truly added, that prayer must put weapons into the hands of a
Minister, for the killing and slaughtering of Ephesians. 6. 20.
the lusts and sins of the people. We must therefore pray on Audacitas, et
animositas Ministros decent, et in Evangelio praedicando, et in praedicatione
defendenda. Theophil.
the morning of a Sabbath, that the Minister may open his mouth boldly, and
publish freely the mysteries of the Gospel; that he may speak the Word truly,
sincerely, powerfully and profitably, delivering what is suitable to our
present condition; For he that guided the arrow to kill a wicked Ahab, 1 Kings
22. 34. must guide the truth to hit and destroy a cursed lust and corruption. A
learned man tells us, we must pray for three things for the Minister:

the Faculty, the Liberty and the Efficacy of preaching, That God would open
the door, that he may come out in the fullness of the Gospel of Christ to our
souls.

dexterity and wisdom to improve Petendum est pro Ministris. 1. Vt facultas
si^ illis, libertas, et efficacia predicandi. 2. Vt sit praxis hujus
facultatis. 3. Vt sit modus debitus in eadem exercenda. Daven.
his gift and faculty. Every one which takes a Lute in his hand cannot make
sweet music on it. There is a holy Art in the Ministry, and this we must beg
for, that God would give it to the Minister who plies at our souls. The Word is
a Sword, Ephesians. 6. 17. We must pray that the Minister may weild it to the highest
advantage, and that he may do the greatest executions upon our carnal hearts.

Minister may speak, as becomes him, with that gravity, affection, zeal, and
soul-awakening power, which may render him a faithful Ambassador of Jesus
Christ. And we should consider the weightiness of a Ministers work, Heb. 13.
18. Est ^fficium omnium piorum assidue, et enixe deum orare pro pastoribus et
Evangelii ministris. Dav.
how tremendous and formidable it is. The larger the Ship is, the more strength
is required for the lanching of it. Prayers are more then needful that the
Minister may do the work of God, in the strength of God. One says, A faithful
Minister is the treasure of the Church; our prayers should be, that this
treasure may be spent in the enriching of our souls. Surely preachers are much
carried out upon the peoples prayers. It is prayer fetches the coal from the
Altar to touch their tongues, and causes these fishers of men to cast the Net
on the right side of the Ship.

Congregation which associates with us. Our Savior says, Luke 22. 32. When we
are converted, Luke 22. 32.
we must strengthen the Brethren. The Apostle avers, we must prefer others
before our selves, Romans 12. 10. And surely Romans 12. 10.
then we must strive to advantage others as well as our selves. Totus populus
Christianus unum sunt.
Cyprian says, All Christian people are one thing; but there must needs be a
greater unity in the same society and congregation, which is as a large family.
In our heavenly Sabbath, Cypr. de Orat. Domin.
it will be our joy to see one another; there the assembly of the first born
shall congratulate the happiness of one another: and then surely on our Sabbath
here below, it must be a grateful service to pray for one another. Thy Acts
16. 14.
prayers may prevail with the Lord, who always has the In nostis orationibus,
oportet nos esse memores, non nostrae conditionis solummodo, sed and fratrum,
et aliorum a nobis.
key in his hand to open another heart, as well as thy own. Some sympathy
thou should have with the members of Christ who join with thee, and prayer
is the best evidence of this fellow-feeling. Christ prayed on the Cross for his
adversaries, Luke 23. 34. and wilt not thou pray in the Closet for the flock
with whom thou art to mingle? Let the miraculous workings of Christ's heart be
attractive to the meltings of thine, that a shower of the spirit may fall upon
all that hear the word with thee, Acts 10. 44. God can 1 Cor. 13. 1.
give a shower, as well as a drop of his spirit; and let me add, this will be
charity which may speak thee to be more then sounding brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal.

for persons, so we must pray for things too on the morning of Gods holy day.

glorious, and that that sacred leaven may leaven the whole lump. Let 2 These.
3. 1.
us consider, Romans 10. 17.


First, The work of the Gospel is glorious, it begets grace which is the seed
of glory, it is instrumental to bring to glory. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
The glorified Saints which are now in their triumphs, Pauli arm^ fuere preces
suae, et suorum, quibus omnes hosts devicit. Haec nobis imitanda sunt; hisce
Armis Hezechias vicit Assyrium, Moses Amalekitas, Samuel Askalonitas, et Israel
32 Reges. Chrysostom.
are eternally praising God for the blessed and glorious Gospel.

Secondly, The work of the Gospel is necessary; where there is no vision, the
people perish, Prove. 29. 18. It is by the Call of the powerful and divine
Gospel, souls are brought home to Christ, who is the great Shepherd of our
souls; the music of the Gospel allures us; the truths of the Gospel enlighten
us; the power of the Gospel saves us, Romans 1. 16. Take the Gospel out of the
world, and it is only a larger Dungeon, a wast howling wilderness, the broad
rode which leads to eternal destruction. If the people of Constantinople so
honored the Ministry of Chrysostom, as they could rather want the Sun, then
want it, of how much more value is the light of the salvifical Gospel?

Thirdly, This glorious and necessary work of the Gospel is much furthered by
prayer. The Minister preaches not, without annexing prayer to the word; and
sometimes the Saints prayers obtain that for the Minister which his own does
not. However a multitude of prayers must carry the greater force, and be the
most likely battery against Heaven; The wise man says, Eccl. 4. 9. Two are
better then one; and as in other things, so in devotion. Single prayers may be
like the single hairs of Samson, but united devotions are like the locks of
Samson, which were full of extraordinary strength. The prayers of many are an
united troop, which promises more probably victory and success; and Rev. 6. 2.
therefore let us earnestly beg in our Closets and in our Families Hic est
effectus ministerii Evangelici, ut Satan instar fulguris ex toto suo regno
verbi ministerio ejiciatur, et vana est sine viribus ira; et hoc facit
mirc^iliter ad piorum consolationem. Ger. John 6. 20.
on the morning of the Sabbath, that the Gospel may ride on triumphantly in
conquering, and to conquer, and that many may fall captive before the power and
force of it. The conquests of the Gospel are most amiable, when the engine of
our captivity becomes the object of our love; and we who are taken are not
prisoners but proselytes. The Sword of the word saves, not slayes, and it is
only sharp when it is ineffectual. This was the glory of the primitive times,
that the Gospel increased, Acts 6. 7. That the Gospel was spread, Acts 13. 49.
That the Gospel grew and multiplied, Acts 12. 24. This was the gold of those
golden times; the Gospel made a multitude of converts, and with its Doctrine
leavened the world: And so we should be earnest in prayer for Gospel
propagation, that the heaven of the Church might Regnum Christi ponitur, pro
promulgatione et cognitione Evangelii, et deus dicitur transfer illos in
regnum filii sui, quos eruit ex tenebris ignorantiae, et illuminat cognitione
Evangelii Daven.
be full of stars. And to spirit this argument now before us.

Let us take notice, that by the propagation of the Gospel, the Kingdom of
Christ is much enlarged; It must speak a pleasant day, when the Sun of
Righteousness scatters more plenteously his enlightening and refreshing beams.
Christ's Glory in the World is the Saints both wish and happiness; as the
Members are honored, when the Crown is set upon the head; and nothing more
advances Christ on the Earth, then the stupendous success of the Gospel.

Satan his power is enfeebled in the world, which is most complacential to the
friends of the Bridegroom. This blessed spread causes Satan to fall Josh. 6.
20.
like lightning, Luke 10. 18. His cursed walls fall down at the sounding of the
Trumpet of the Gospel; it is deplorable to consider what power Satan has had
in those Nations Diabolus instar fulguris e toto suo regno, Ministerio verbi
ejicitur. Chemnit.
which have wanted the Preaching of the Gospel: How did he bring the Philistims
to worship a Dagon, the Sidonians Ashtaroth, the Graecians to worship Apollo,
the Latins Jupiter and other Gods and Goddesses, wanton and lascivious Deities;
nay, others their God Remphan, Figures which they made, Acts 7. 43. Such
abominations have clouded the Land, 2 Kings 23. 13. where the light of the
Gospel Praedicatio Evangelii, ceu potius res praedicata in Evangelio, and per
Evangelium, viz. Christ^ mors, merita, etc. Dei virtus est, per quam potenter
in credentibus oper^tur salutem, fidem, and justitiam, immo vitam aeternam.
Alap.
has not broken forth; nay, where the Gospel makes no progress, there
Salvation is wholly exiled, Romans 1. 16. And how lushious soever the enjoyments
of such a place may be, their souls must pay the reckoning. Though such a
Nation had the milk and honey of Canaan, the spices of Arabia, the gums of
Egypt, the gold of India, yet wanting a glori-Gospel, Eternal death is mingled
with all these dainties, this Jubilee only reaches to the grave: And the
Inhabitants of such a place only tread on Carpets and Roses to hell; life is
not within their walls, nor Salvation within their Palaces. When the Apostle
would dispute the privileges of the Jews, he brings in this as their greatest;
To them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. Christ is the Sun, the
Ministers are the stars, and the Gospel is the Amos 8. 11.
light of a Nation. The famine of the word is the plague of a place. To enjoy
Pastors after Gods own heart is the sweetness Jer. 3. 15.
of a promise, Jer. 3. 15. Golden Mines which are the rich linings of the
Earth, may make a place or a Nation Mat. 13. 16.
gaudy, but it is the Gospel only can make a Nation glorious; And Satan has
least footing there where the Gospel is most scattered and disseminated: where
the Gospel is either wholly Luke 10. 18.
wanting or penned up, what prodigious evils overrun that place, and how does
Satan reign and rage! The Scriptures tell us of the unnatural lusts of Sodom,
the pride and wantonness of Tire, Ezekiel. 27. 3. The cruelty and ambition of Genesis
18. 20.
Babylon, nor may we omit the Turkish Polygamy, the Heathens Jer. 4. 13.
Idolatry, the Indians brutish nakedness at this day, Jer. 8. 16.
where the Gospel takes no place. It is no wonder to hear of bloody Nero's,
lascivious Caracalla's, and frantic Domitians, Nero dictus fuit Pestis humani
generis.
those monsters of men who were strangers to the sweets, the power and light of
the Gospel. It is the Gospel lays the ax to the root of Satan's power, and where
this Mat. 3. 10.
blessed light shines not, or very faintly, the Prince of darkness Ephesians. 6. 12.
exercises a cursed sway, and a destructive Sovereignty.

progress of the Gospel our consummate blessedness is hastened and secured; for
the more efficacious the Gospel is, the more maturated and mellowed we are for
heaven and eternity. The Gospel is like the Sun to the 1 Pet. 2. 2.
fruits, or the shower to the flowers, which ripens the one, and blows and
draws out the scent and sweetness of the other; we grow in strength and
spiritual stature by the 2 Pet. 3. 18.
power and efficacy of the Ordinances and Preaching of the Gospel. We might
likewise fall into the thoughts

many opposites to the Gospel, as Jannes and Jambres resisted Moses, 2 Timothy 3.
8. And thus Stephen in preaching Christ was opposed by the Sanedrim of the
Jannes and Jambres duo suerunt magi, qui Mosi restiterunt, and cum eo
miraculis, et portentis edendis concertarunt.
Jews, and truth was buffeted by Cries, Storms, and Stoning of the Preacher,
Acts 7. 57, 58. The building up of souls, like the building of Jerusalem, will
meet with Sanballats and Tohias to race the very foundation, Neh. 4. 3. Satan's
instruments will hinder Christ's work.

persecutions are ready to obstruct the progress of the Gospel. Threats and
flames like the Angel which stood with a flaming sword, Genesis 3. 24. are ready
to keep the soul from entering Paradise. And when persecution Josh. 6. 20.
arises for the Gospel sake, men's fear often shuts out men's faith, and few will
close with a persecuted Gospel.

Sun of the Gospel is often clouded with reproaches. Paul was called a Babbler,
a setter forth of strange Gods, Acts 17. 18. The Gospel is often Acts 17. 18.
reviled where it cannot be rooted out, and it must wear the habit where it
does not endure the execution of a Malefactor; it is often wounded by the sword
of the tongue, where it escapes the sword of the hand.

evil lives of those who preach and profess the Gospel, put no small stop to
the enlargement and progress of Sicut Foetor apes, ita peccatum bona abigit.
Hier.
it; and therefore what need of strong and numerous prayers to God, That he
would give the Gospel a free and uninterrupted passage into the hearts of all
that hear it, seeing it is encompassed with so many impediments and
obstructions?

Ordinances of Christ may accomplish their designed events, that God would
cloth them with his own power, and that they may be mighty in operation for
the bringing in and building up of many souls; Psalm. 63. 2.
and that the Saints may see the power, and the glory of God in the Sanctuary.
There is no greater reproach to a Congregation or a people then barren
Ordinances, that they Hos. 9. 11, 14.
should be clouds without water, and breasts without milk, and that God should
give them a miscarrying womb; pray Durum fuit maxim apud Hebraeos vulvam esse
sterilem, apud quos simulier esset infaecunda, apud omnes infamioe stigmate
notabatur. Riv.
therefore earnestly before thou come to the public Assembly, that God would
take away this reproach. Indeed it is a mournful consideration, that the
blossoms of holy Ordinances, which promise hopefully to bring forth fruit,
should on a sudden be blasted either with divine withdrawings, or our own
neglect. Prayer is necessary for the success of Ordinances, as a right wind is
for the Ship which sets forth, and a fresh wind to fill the sails to carry it
to its desired Port. And we are the more comfortably induced to pray for that
Hos. 9. 16.
which is most consonant and agreeable to the Divine Will: Now nothing can be
more pleasing to the Lord, then that Isa. 45. 19.
our prayers should not be in vain, but return fraught with Mat. 13. 8.
success and advantage, and that the seed of the Word Luke 22. 19.
should fall into good ground, and so we should not hear in vain. Let us
therefore lie at Gods feet, for that which is so according to Gods heart.

other persons and other things on the morning of a Sabbath, so more especially
must we pray In (...) est metaphara a rebellica, translata ad cogitationes
ordine mi^itari animo digestas, and instructas. Cartw.
for our selves. The wise man says, Prove. 16. 1. The preparations of the heart
of man are from the Lord: And he that makes provisions of grace must prepare
the heart for grace; we must make our approach to the God of Ordinances, before
we come to the gate of Ordinances; he that gives us the privilege, must teach
us how to use it. Let us then earnestly beg. Ephesians. 6. 17.


First, That God would enlighten our minds, (let us begin Quanta fuerit
caecitas gentilium in gentilismo, etiam quoad illa, quae ratio naturalis, and
lex naturae dictat. Persae sorores, matres, and filias suas nefandis sibi
matrimoniis jungebant. Humanis carnibus vescebantur Scythae, and filios suos
immolabant. Mossagetae cognatos senes comedebant. Hirc^ni senes avibus, Caspii
canibus devorandos objiciebant. Lacedaemones furtum laudabant tanquam rem
solertem, and ingeniosam; Alii conjuges suis hospitibus tanquam symbolum
hospitii adulterio polluendas concedebant. Eusebius. lib. 6. de prepar. Evan.
at the head.) The Apostle says, Ephesians. 5. 8. That in our selves we are
darkness. Not dark in the concrete, but darkness in the abstract, which shows
our own incapacity to understand Gospel-mysteries; of our selves we are as Paul
when he was first unhorsed by Christ, Acts 9. 8, 9. blind, and had need to be
led by the hand: Nature's eye has a mist before it, and cannot of it self see
the glorious things of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But it is the blessed spirit
must scatter this mist, must take away the scales from the eye of our
understanding, and make way for an apprehension of the glad tidings of
Salvation; which spirit, says our Savior, is obtained by prayer, Luke 11. 13.
And if we have any feeling of our own blindness, and not, as Prisoners in a
dungeon, laugh at the Sun; or if we have any high esteem of the great things of
the Law, Hos. 8. 12. if we see the word with the eye of the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.
7, 8, 9, 10.

First, To be perfect in its nature.

Secondly, Predominant in its effects, converting sinful, making wise simple,
and rejoicing sadned souls.

Thirdly, Various in its operations, rellishing the soul, rejoicing the heart,
opening the eyes, pleasing the taste, enriching the believer; all which are
attributed to it; nay, if the word be everlasting in its duration, which the
Psalmist strongly avers, Psalm. 19. 91. and is likewise attested, Rev. 14. 6. we
should then be importunate for that directive spirit, which can lead us into
the right understanding of this most glorious word. This manuduction of the
spirit was the sum of that precious promise which Christ when about leaving
the world made to his drooping Disciples, Joh. 16. 13. And how earnestly does
the Psalmist importune this very mercy, That God would open his eyes, that he
might behold wondrous things out of his Law, Psalm. 119. 18. Psalm. 119. 34.
God must give us the prospect of the glories of Divine truth. Psalm. 119. 73.
This eye salve we must beg of the Father before we go to the Psalm. 119. 27.
public Ordinances on the blessed Sabbath. Rev. 3. 18.


Secondly, As we must pray that God would take away the scales from our eyes,
so likewise that he would remove the caul from our hearts, that he would open
our hearts to receive the word: Judgment discerns truth, but affection
embraces it. Indeed the understanding takes a view of Gods word, and finds it
to be holy, just and good: Romans 7. 12.
But the heart entertains it, and lays it up as its choicest Luke 2. 19.
treasure. A poor man goes by a Goldsmiths shop and sees Mandata dei sancta
sunt, quia praescribunt, quomodo deus sancte col^ debet; justa, quia
praescribunt ut proximum non laedas, sed ei quo^ suum est tribuns; bona, quia
praescribunt e^, quibus quisque in se bonus est. Alap. Nisi Sp. s. cordi sit
audientis, otiosus est Sermo Doctoris. Greg.
Money, Jewels, and Plate, but he is not enriched by this wealth; and a
traveller in his journey takes a view of pleasant Lands, delicate Mountains,
and amiable Prospects, but his own Tenure is not amplified by all that he
sees. So our judgment views truth, and is convinced of its beauty and
excellency, but the heart only espouses the blessed truths of God, and makes
them his own to all intents and purposes. Gospel discoveries are no riches till
they are locked up in the heart; and therefore God must be entreated for this
thing; for he that opens the eye must open the heart, or else when the Sermon
is done, all the Prospect is over, and we are not at all the better. Lydia's
attending was unavailable until God opened her heart, Arts 16. 14. The Apostle
speaks of receiving truth in the love thereof, 2 These. 2. 10. Truth is pleasant
to the Understanding, but profitable to the Will. Then the Gospel advantageth
us, when the Doctrine of it is not only the guide of our eye, but the good of
our heart. It is love and affection which squeezes the Grapes of truth, and
makes it generous wine: to the soul. Where Acts 2. 37.
the word Preached by Peter wrought upon the Jews, it Christimors, morita,
sacramenta, praecepta, promissa, licet incredulis pudorism^, et risui, tamen
nobis virtus dei, et potentia.
pricked them to the heart, Acts. 2. 37. If we buy the truth as Solomon
advises us, Prove. 23. 23. the heart must be the Chapman: If we taste the word,
1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. the heart must be the Palate; we then relish truth when we
affect it. If we delight in truth, Psalm. 119. 47. It is the joy and the
rejoicing of the heart, as Jeremy speaks, Jer. 15. 16. A learned man observes,
It is the love of truth which is one of those graces which accompany Salvation:
Therefore on the morning of a Sabbath, let us importune the Lord to engage our
hearts in the service of truth, and for the entertainment of it; he who
searches must draw the heart. Romans 1. 16.


Thirdly, Let us wrestle with God for the strengthening of our memories, that he
would make them pillars of Marble to write divine truth on. It is very sad,
when heavenly Doctrines are written in sand or dust, and after our hearing of
them, they run out again as the sands in the hour glass; sad it is, that truth
which cost so dear should be lost so soon. If God is so gracious to keep a book
of remembrance for our discourses, Mal. 3. 16. how serious should we be to keep
a book of remembrance for Gospel discoveries. It is most reasonable that those
truths which were bought with Christ's blood, should be wrought on our hearts:
Indeed in this case Jonah 2. 8.
to forget our mercies, is to forsake them. How earnest was the Apostle Peter,
that the Saints might not forget those Doctrines which he ^ad preached; how
does he reduplicate his care and their duty, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. Wherefore I will
not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 15.
these things, yea, I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir
you up, by putting you in remembrance: And so in the fifth verse, Moreover I
will endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to have these things
always in remembrance. Thus this blessed Apostle again and again stirs up and
urges their mindfulness and remembrance of those Gospel truths he had
discovered to them, and presses that the Gospel might not die with them when he
was dead and gone. Our memories are naturally sieves of vanity, and therefore
need divine assistance to close up the chinks and stop the holes, that the
waters of life run not out in waste. Indeed man's memory is never so useful as
in the time of Ordinances; it is then a sacred Register, and a holy repository,
like 1 Cor. 4. 17.
the Ark where the two Tables in which the Decalogue was written, were put and
lodged: After a good heart and 2 Timothy 2. 14.
a good life, nothing more conduces to man's happiness then a good memory.
Forgetfulness is the grave of Gods truth, 1 Timothy 4. 6.
and man's treasure; what I forget, I can neither dwell upon by meditation, nor
feed upon by love and affection, nor live upon in a holy and fruitful
conversation. Forgotten promises cannot support my faith, forgotten commands
cannot regulate my life, forgotten truths cannot enrich my mind. Forgetfulness
is never happy but when injury is the object, when we bury our injuries in that
silent sepulcher. One glorious office of the spirit is to bring things divine
to our remembrance, John 16. 26. and to fasten truth upon the Spiritus sanctus
non solum ut sciamus Author est, sed ut vere sapiamus Doctor est, and ut beati
simus intimae suavitatis largitor est. Aug.
soul; we should therefore be earnest with God on the morning of a Sabbath, to
cause his spirit to execute this blessed office. For though in preaching of the
word, the Mysteries of the Gospel are propounded to us, yet it is the spirit
must open our minds to understand the word, else it will be a book sealed as
the Prophet speaks, Isa. 29. 11. It is the spirit must give us wisdom to apply
the word, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. It is the spirit must support our memory to retain
the word. A learned man observes, The Holy Ghost performs his office, Isa. 29.
11.
not only by revealing truth to us, but by imprinting it upon us: Else the
sounding of the Gospel will be like the sounding of Ephesians. 1. 18.
a Clock after it has struck, a little noise there is for the present, but it
ceases by degrees, and at last no sound at all is heard. In a word, forgetful
hearers go from Ordinances Spiritus Sanctus apud nos officium suum peragit, non
solum docendo, sed et suggerendo.
just as they came to them, like the Beasts in Noah's Ark, they went in unclean,
and they came out unclean: how necessary then is it, that we should pray for a
firm memory to record sacred truth, as well as a free heart to entertain it.

Fourthly, Let us on the morning of a Sabbath pray for a tender conscience to
fall down before the power and force of the word. Conscience is the strongest
Fort for the word to take, it is the most unruly patient for the word to cure:
Oftentimes the word takes the ear; nothing is more musical, Ezekiel. 33. 32. The
word takes the tongue; nothing more commended then the Preacher and the Sermon,
Ezekiel. 33. 31. (...), sua viter.
Nay, the work takes the affections, Mark 6. 20. Herod that miscreant Prince
heard John the Baptist gladly. Nay, often the word takes the judgment; nothing
is accounted more rational. The fickle Jews were convinced, never man spoke as
Jesus Christ, John 7. 46. But all this while conscience lies asleep, and is not
awakened from its dream: Conscience all this while is as fast asleep in the
bosom as Jonah in the ship, Jon. 1. 6. and nothing minds the storm. Conscience
may be seared, 1 Timothy 4. 2. and so feel nothing of the sharpness of the word;
conscience may be defiled, 1 Tit. 15. and so mind nothing of the m^ssage of the
word; conscience may be evil, Heb. 10. 22. and so fling away from the warnings
of the word; and therefore how should we beg of God that conscience may be
impartial in waiting upon holy Ordinances. A yielding conscience is the best
auditor at a Sermon. This was Josiahs praise, he wept, and Sacrae Scripturae
sic exaratae sunt, ut scire volentes sciant, et litis studiosi ansam litigandi
facillime arripiant. Camer.
was tender at the hearing of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. The soul lies in a fair
way to life and Salvation, when conscience blushes at the reproof of sin, when
conscience startles at the hearing of judgment, when conscience is convinced of
the necessity of Christ, and of the beauty of holiness; and that only a holy
life leads to a holy God. Indeed the principal work of the Gospel is to deal
with conscience; and it is the great work of God himself in the Gospel to rowse
Non periclitor docere ipsas Scripturas ita dispositas esse, ut moteriam
subministrant etiam haereticis. Tertul.
conscience from its sleepiness, to quiet its rage, to take away its
prejudices, and to bring it into a calm temper, that with meekness it may
receive the engraffed word, which is able to save the soul, Jam. 1. 21. Men of
polluted consciences can arm themselves against the assaults of the word; now,
that we should lay down the weapons, and submit to the force and power of
truth, this is to be begged by sollicitous and importunate prayer.

Fifthly, We must entreat the Lord that the fruit of all Cingulo veritatis
ornantur, qui veritatem in moribus assequuntur, Qui omnes res amandas, et
amplectendas per veritatem per virtutem and virtutis verum dictamen metiuntur:
Quid enim humilitas? Quid charitas? quid patientio? quid ^aeterae virtutes nisi
lumina veritatis. Ansel.
his holy Ordinances, may appear in our lives. The life of Ordinances lies in
living Ordinances; our sanctity only commends the Sanctuary; to hear the word
speaks some profession, but to live the word only speaks Religion: It is very
observable, that all those Israelites who heard God speaking from Mount Sinai
the ten Commandments, not living up to the tenor of those ten words, as Moses
calls them, Deuteronomy. 10. 2. they all fell in the Wilderness; none but Joshua and
Caleb came safe to Canaan. The sight of Physic does not cure the patient, but
the application. The word does not advantage us as it is musical, but as it is
medicinal, as it is taken inwardly and heats the corrupt heart, and the cure
will easily be seen in a fruitful conversation. We then become the Gospel when
holiness is our dress: Those Sermons are most fairly printed, which are most
conscientiously practiced. A Sermon of charity is best seen in our alms, a
Sermon of self-denial is best seen in our carrying the Cross. A Sermon of
Repentance is best seen in our tears and reformation. To be only hearers of the
word, is to put a cheat upon our souls, Jam. 1. 22. and make the Minister not
the Physician, but the Mountebank. Practice is the shining lamp of the
Sanctuary, Exodus 27. 20. It was observed among the Jews, that they were exact
in turning Romans 3. 2.
over the leaves of the Bible, and none more incurious to understand John 5. 39.
the mind of the Holy Ghost in those sacred pages, or to conform themselves to
the commands of those divine Oracles, they were like some heedless persons who
gaze upon a tree, but never turn up the leaves to see what fruit is underneath,
that they might feed upon it for support and satisfaction: Such Jewish spirits
too too many we have among us, who like oscitant and negligent workmen, who
have their tools about them, and set upon no piece for the exercise of their
Art. But it is rare and worthy when we hear things to be done, and do things to
be heard. That knowledge is best which is practical, when the understanding
Psalm. 119. 105.
impresses the will, as the seal does the wax, and Mat. 7 17.
so leaves characters of worth and holiness. Our Savior calls them blessed who
hear the word and keep it, Luke 11. 28. The hearers life is the Preachers best
commendation. The true use of Ordinances is not only to increase our knowledge,
but to regulate our practice. The Law is a rule as well as a lamp. A sinful
life will unravell all our profession, and expose that puppet dressed up to
scorn and derision. Seneca observed of the Philosophers, That when Boni esse
desierum simulac docti ^vaserint. Senec.
they grew more learned, they grew less moral. This is more venial in a
Heathen Philosopher, then in a professing Christian. We must desire the sincere
milk of the word, that we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Indeed the word must
not only be the light of our minds, but the treasure of our Psalm. 119. 111.
hearts, which treasure must be spent upon works of piety and holiness. The
Lord Jesus makes it an infallible Character of our love to him, if we keep his
Commandments, John 14. 15.

First, Christ does not say, if ye hear, but if ye do my Jam. 2. 22. Romans 2. 13.
Commandments; hearing is only a step toward Religion, a good wish for
heaven; the Scribes and Pharisees heard Qui servat legem dei, vere
testificatur, se non simulate, sed vere et sincere amare deum. Zanch.
Christ, who afterward brought him to the Cross. It is a sharp speech of the
holy Apostle, 1 John 2. 4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

Secondly, Christ does not say, if you love me, dispute subtly of my
Commandments. Deeds, not disputes, evidence 2 Cor. 3. 1, 2.
our love to Christ; the regular acts of our lives, not Prove. 2. 10.
the ingenious canvasings of the Schools, it is not reasoning out of Gods word,
but walking after that holy word, speaks us the Disciples of the Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, Nor does Christ say, If ye love me, prescribe Est observatio
praeceptorum Christi omnibus Christi fidelibus eo loco ha benda, ut si illa
desit in ipsam Christi dilectionem peccare convin^am^r. Musc.
my Commandments to others, read them lectures of sanctity, no, but live them
your selves. Personal holiness is of absolute necessity to every Christian. It
is not our prescription, but our obedience; not what we dictate to others, but
what we act our selves, shows our interest in, and our union to Christ.

Fourthly, Nor does Christ say, keep the Statutes and the Commandments of your
predecessors, no, but keep my Commandments; it is not a plausihle custom, but
an undefiled conscience speaks the Christian. This the Lord pleads Acts 24. 16.
with Israel of old, Ezekiel. 20. 18, 19. But I said unto their Children in the
wilderness, walk ye not in the statutes of your Ezekiel. 20. 18.
Fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile your selves Mat. 15. 3,
6.
with their Idols; I am the Lord your God, walk in my statutes, Mat. 7. 9. 13.
and keep my judgments, and do them. The Pharisees darling, Gal. 1. 14.
was the tradition of their Fathers, and they were the Masterpieces of
Hypocrisy. Col. 2. 8.


Fifthly, Nor does Christ say, if ye love me, keep and observe Numb. 15. 39, 40.
what seems right to you, no, but keep my Commandments, though severity be
written upon their very forehead, Deuteronomy. 12. 8.
though it be to the carrying of my Cross, to the denial of your selves, to the
laying down of your lives for my sake; Non spectatores, sed luctatores, non qui
vident, sed qui vincunt in agone, et certamine coronabuntur. Alap.
and keep all my Commandments, not what are pleasing to your flesh, but what
are enjoined by my word. So then, if we have any love to Christ, holy practice
must be the testimonial of it. Indeed many Christians are like Children in the
Rickets, they have big heads, but weak joints, they are all for notions, and
head-light, curious knowledge, and airy speculations, but they wave practical
truths, and that wisdom Prove. 2. 10.
which enters upon the heart, Prove. 2. 10. This undigested knowledge puts out
the fire of zeal; as if the waters of the Cum sapientia hominis animum
penetrat, quam suavis illi est, supra mel, et favum. Cartw.
Sanctuary should put out the fire of the Sanctuary, and men could not at the
same time be knowing and holy. How ardently then should we pray to the Father,
that Ordinances may so influence our lives, that our conversation may bear
witness how much we love the Lord Jesus. And thus much for the second duty to
be performed on the morning of the Sabbath, before we join with the assembly of
Gods people, (viz.) Prayer.

third duty incumbent upon us, before we join with the Congregation, is, taking
pains with our own hearts, and this properly is Closet work, which we may
manage to very good purpose in these four particulars.

empty our hearts:

First, To throw out all the trash, to cast out all vain Jer. 4. 14. (...).
nos reddimus cogitationes noxias, pro nox iae, Aquila vertit (...), (i. e.)
damni, Symmachus (...) septuagint (...) Haec omniasuns fructus vanarum
cogitationum.
thoughts, and worldly desires. Ponds and Moates are cleansed to keep them
wholesome: Foolish and vain imaginations will fly-blow all our duties; and
therefore we must let down the Portcullis of our hearts to keep in straglers,
and wanderers, that they may not interrupt us in our holy worship. These
Caterpillars will blast and spoil the fruit of holy Ordinances; and for the
atchieving of this necessary work,

First, Let us beg of Christ, that he would whip these buyers and sellers out
of the Temple of our souls. The spirit of God can sweep away these Locusts, and
supply us with more noble and heavenly cogitations, he can drop divine
meditations into our hearts, and turn the dross of flatulent thoughts, into the
gold of spiritual and seraphicall; He is called a holy spirit, not only from
those gracious impressions he stamps upon the heart, but likewise from those
divine infusions he instills into the head; and so the whole man is his
workman-ship in Jesus Christ.

Secondly, We may likewise lash and correct these vain Ephesians. 2, 10. Vnden^m sit
facultas bona opera saciendi, (immo et bona cogitandi, ab eo a quo fimus novae
creaturae, nempe a deo; A quo enim Arbor habetut, sit bona, ab eodem habet, ut
bonos proferat fructus. Zanch.
thoughts; which flit up and down in our minds, by setting before our hearts
the future judgment, when thoughts shall be canvased, as well as words and
actions; sinful thoughts at any time are accountable, but those which defile
the Sabbath are of a double dye, and are written in red Letters. The
consideration of a judgment day, will turn Hagars and Ishmaels out of door,
carnal and foolish imaginations. Indeed we are apt with Lots Wife to look
backward toward the worldly pleasures of Sodom, toward the vanities of the
world, which has too much of our heart even on the holy Sabbath of God; but
pondering on our future account, we shall keep our faces steady toward Sion.

Thirdly, We must consider how much this trash of the heart, foolish and vain
thoughts will distract us in duty; Heb. 4. 14.
they are like the ringing of Bells in Sermon time, which drown the voice of
the preacher, and stop the ear of the Mat. 13. 22.
hearer; These vain thoughts choke the Word, that it dies away untimely, and
works not lively upon the soul. This is Isa. 29. 13.
that setting the heart far from God, when we seem to approach to him in
Ordinances, which the Lord so much complains of, Isa. 29. 13. Distracted
persons are fit for nothing, nor hearts distracted and torn with the varieties
of flashy conceptions.

Fourthly, Let us take up strong and fixed resolutions, that we Haec suit causa
excaecationis judaeorum, quia scil. deum nominabant, et honorabant ore tenus,
cord vero erant ab eo elongati, et aversi.
will wash our hearts in innocence, and so we will compass Gods Altar. Holy
resolution is a good guard to the heart, it will examine every passenger, it
will keep out sin and the world, which are very unsuitable to the work and
worship of the Sabbath. It was observed of our Henry the fifth, that when he
came to the Crown, he threw of all his old companions; and when God Crowns our
pilgrimage with the Psalm. 94. 12.
honor and happiness of a Sabbath, we should throw off Psalm. 139. 23.
all our worldly and frothy desires, which have been too much our companions in
the week past: Let us resolve then in the strength of God against these
unbecoming workings Psalm. 45. 13. Aristoteles asserit suo tempore in urbibus
creatum fuisse praefectum, qui mulieribus intenderet ne vagarentur, sed domi se
continerent. Arist. Po^it.
of our hearts. On the Lords day, let us be like the Kings Daughter, all
glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. Cobwebs are not to be suffered in Palaces, nor
vain thoughts in those hearts which are to meet with Jesus Christ. Now let us
say with David, I hate vain thoughts, Psalm. 119. 113. and firmly resolve, that
on the Sabbath, the world and our souls shall be wholly strangers, they shall
take no acquaintance one with another, and this will be a successful method to
purge our hearts. Resolution if sincere is invincible.

to over-aw our hearts. The heart is never more fitted for holy duties, then
when it is fixed, then Psalm. 57. 7.
when a sense of divine presence stays it from roving, and Psalm. 108. 1.
breaking out into paths of sin and vanity. Bring thy heart 1 Samuel 1. 28.
before God, as Hannah did the Child Samuel before the Lord in Shiloh, and that
will keep the heart serious and demure. Dinah gadded when she was out of her
Fathers eye. Say to thy soul on the morning of a Sabbath, Soul, there is an
infinite Heb. 10. 31.
God which is irresistible in power, incomprehensible in Heb. 12. 29.
majesty, tremendous in justice, into whose hands it is a fearful Non solum
apud Judaeos, Deus fuit ignis puniens, et consumens idololatras, aliosque
violatores.
thing to fall, Heb. 10. 31. and who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. He will
fasten his eye upon thee, this holy day; He will see every turning and winding
of the heart, and therefore O my soul, close to the work of the day, do not
scatter from the work in hand, least God take thee up as a stray, and carry
thee to the whipping-post of some judgment and tribulation. The Scholar
writes his Copy, and Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
does not glance up and down with his eye, when his Master Sed apud nos
Christianos, Deus pariter est ignis vindicans, et consumens peccatores. Alap.
is over him, but the absence of the Master leaves the Scholar to his wanton
vagaries. That eye is upon us on the Lords day, which is ten thousand times
brighter then the Sun. To stake down thy heart then to things spiritual and
divine,

First, Let it know, that it is under the piercing eye of God.

Secondly, Make it sensible that heart sins, are heavy sins.

Thirdly, That the heart is principal in holy worship, and if that be tainted
with frivolous and foolish thoughts, it sowres all holy services.

Fourthly, Commune with your hearts of loose and carnal thoughts when Christ on
the Sabbath is the proper and sweetest Psalm. 4. 4.
object of them; And why should he solicit the embraces of a lewd Curtizan,
who himself is indulged with a beautiful wife. Let the heart only be set on
him who is altogether lovely, Cant. 5. 16. Machiavel says, The great design of
Religion is to keep the people in awe. Surely it is a Michiavel del. princip.
great piece of Religion to keep the heart in awe, especially on the morning of
Gods blessed Sabbath. Let this be only annexed; that the Fear and Reverence of
God are the best means to confine a quick-silvered heart from its sinful
ranges, Heb. 12. 28. Man's heart naturally is slippery, and we by 2 Samuel 22. 11.
our own power can no more confine it, then we can clip the wings of the wind,
or button up the rays of the Sun. We must endeavor to spiritualize our hearts
on the morning of the Sabbath; and this work will not only fit the heart for
the grace, but likewise widen it, that it may receive much of the spirit of
God. Joseph's Brethrens Corn, was more, or less, according to the proportion of
the Sacks, for they were all filled, and when we spiritualize our hearts for
God, Genesis 42. 25.
we shall have our money too in the mouth of the Sack; we Genesis 44. 1.
shall have redundancies of grace and comfort. Now to spiritualize our hearts:

First, Let us stir up holy longings after Christ, let us blow off the ashes
from those sacred fires, let our hearts glow in (...) Appetitio et vehemens
desiderium gratiae, nobis dabit meliorem, et gratiorem bencdictionis proventum.
Ger.
holy ardencies after their beloved. The Spouse was sick of love, Cant. 2. 5.
The real consideration of Christ's love and loveliness would bring us into these
blessed fits; Ordinances will be sweet m^rsells to these hungring and
affectionate souls.

Secondly, Rally up holy contemptations; be thinking what a sun-shiny day the
Sabbath is, and how well it imitates the rest of eternity; contemplate on the
riches of Ordinances, and what glorious spoils the prepared soul shall fall
upon Josh. 7. 21.
there, more then Achans golden wedge, or goodly Babylonish garment. Ordinances
are the souls golden Chariots which drive toward heaven.

Thirdly, Let us blow up our hearts into great expectations. The Sabbath is the
souls spiritual harvest, the season of unlading Anima gratia Christi
regenerata, et renata, immo recreato, et nova creatura spiritualis facta, novam
gratiae vitam sortita; deinceps in novitate vitae ambulet. Alap. Psalm. 81. 10.
spiritual treasure, and the prepared Saint comes to carry it away. In the
Paradise of Ordinances grows the Tree of life. For the most part, the Sabbath
is the souls New Birth day, the blessed nativity of the new man. It is not,
Anno Domini, but die Dominico, not such a year of the Lord, but such a Lords
day, most believers were born to an inheritance with the Saints in light. Let
us therefore possess our hearts with high expectations, for if we open our
mouths God will fill them; Indeed much of our work on the Sabbath, lies not
only in the closet of our houses, but in the closet of our hearts.

to tune our hearts to spiritual joy and delight. Joy suites no person so much
as the Saint, and no day so well as the Sabbath; Joy at other times is like the
birds chirping in the winter, which is pleasing; but joy in the Lord upon the
Lords day is like their warbling notes, and musical noise in the spring, when
all other things look with a delightful aspect. Thus the Psalmist tripudiates
and exults with joy, Psalm. 118. 24. He was in a high degree of joy. And indeed
if the feast be made for laughter, as the wise man Vmbra fit ex corpore, et
luce, et est itinerantium refrigerium ab aestu, et pratectio a tem. pestate,
Christus umbra et tutela est, et refrigerium humani generis, quod gravi
peccatorum onere premebatur. Honor.
speaks, Eccles. 10. 19. That day wherein Christ feasteth his Saints with the
choysest mercies, may well command the greatest spiritual mirth. The Lords day
is the highest thanksgiving day, and deserves much more then the Jewish Purim
to be a day of gladness, and a good day, Esth. 9. 17, 18, 19. On this day we
enjoy communion with Saints, and shall we not rejoice in those excellent ones,
Psalm. 16. 3. On this day we have fellowship with Christ, and shall not we sit
under his shadow with great delight? Cant. 2. 3. On this day we are partakers
of the Ordinances, and shall we not be joyful in the house of prayer? Isa. 56.
7. On this day we have special converse with the God of Ordinances, and who
would not draw water with joy out of the wells of salvation? Isa. 12. Zach. 2.
10. Phil. 4. 10. Isa. 58. 13.
3. Surely when we are in the midst of so much musk, we must needs be perfumed;
it is Gods command, as well as our privilege to make the Sabbath a delight;
And whether we are dilating on Gods works, or attending on Gods word, which are
two principal duties of this day, they both call for joy and delight. David
says, Thy testimonies are my delight, Psalm. 119. 24. 77. And Solomon tells us,
Prove. 25. 25. As cold water to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
Country. Now the word of God contains the best news that ever was discovered
to the Sons of men, Peace on Earth, good will toward men, Luke 2. 14. and the
glad tidings of Gaudete semper, si non actu, tamen habttu. Cajet.
the Gospel came from Heaven a far Country. Indeed the Apostle commands us to
rejoice evermore, 1 These. 5. 16. A Christian may rejoice with all kinds of joy;
Phil. 4. 4.


First, With natural joy, in those things which are good Semper subest materia
laetandi sanctis, et exhibitis, et promissis. Bern.
to nature, in health, strength, beauty, riches, etc.

Secondly, With spiritual joy, with joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. The
Saints must rejoice in the favor of God, and in the fruits and pledges
thereof, (viz.) In the pardon of sin, in sanctification, in hopes of glory.

Thirdly, The Saint as he may rejoice in all kinds of joy, so in all states and
conditions, both in an adverse, and in a 2 Timothy 2. 19.
prosperous estate.

Fourthly, In all ages, in his Youth, and in his declining years. Luke 10. 20.


Fifthly, In all days, both in our day, and in Gods day. Gaudete de
exhibitione, gaudete de promissione, quoniam et res plena gaudio, et spes plena
gaudio gaudete quia expectatis praemia dextrae. Heb. 12. 23. 1 Kings 8. 56.
However it is, Gods Children always have or may have cause of rejoicing: The
Promise is, Their joy shall no man take from them, John 16. 22. To this end,
the Comforter is given, to abide with them for ever, John 14. 16. And one of
the fruits of the holy Spirit is joy, Gal. 5. 22. And Bernard observes, there
will be a continual supply of joy.

First, In things exhibited, and already given, as the writing of the Saints
names in Heaven, Luke 10. 20. by an unchangeably decree; so that it is as
possible for God to cease to be God, as to alter his decree of election: To
which may be added other blessings depending, as sins pardoned, the person
justified, the nature healed, the soul sanctified, all which are matter of
unspeakable joy and delight, Romans 8. 37, 38. But

Secondly, If the things exhibited should fail us, yet we might rejoice in
things promised, and these promises are fresh springs of continual joy. For
Gods promises to his Promissimes divinae non excidant, neque irritae reddantur.
people, are Cabinets filled with the richest Jewels, Exchequors filled with
the greatest Treasures.

First, They are infallible for their certainty, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

Secondly, They are before the world for their Antiquity, Tit. 1. 2.

Thirdly, They are precious promises, for their rarity, In dei promissis nulla
est falsitas, quia in faciendis nulla est omnipotentis difficultas. Fulgent.
2 Pet. 1. 4. The promises are a firm inheritance to the Saints, Heb. 6. 12.
They are unshaken pledges of better things, Romans 4. 21. The Saint has a double
pledge to assure him of future happiness.

1. One within him, in his own breast, Gods holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13,
14.

2. One without him in Gods word, those glorious promises recorded in sacred
writ; I say, glorious; for the promises are vessels laden with the richest
fraught. Promissiones sunt bona in coelis nobis promissa, et haec possidebunt
fides, et patientia. Alap.


1. The Saints have promises for all seasons.

1. For times of affliction, Isa. 43. 2. Isa. 63. 9.

2. For times of temptation; Satan shall not buffet them, but they shall have
the shield of a promise to defend themselves, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

3. For times of decay and declination, when the stock of grace runs low, and
the poor believer languisheth in his inward man, Phil. 1. 6.

4. For times of necessity, Mat. 6. 33. Heb. 13. 5. He that Haec celebris est
promissio; non te deseram, neque derelinquam; hebraice (...) deus erit scutum
et clypeus suis.
has the fruit, shall have the paper and the packthread to bind it up in. The
Earth is the Lords, Psalm. 24. 1. as well as the Heavens, Isa. 58. 14.

5. For times of prosperity, Deuteronomy. 28. 8. Their good things shall be sweetened
with his goodness, and he will shed a perfume upon all their increase.

Secondly, As the promises which God has made to his people, are calculated
for all times, so are they repleat, and enriched with all varieties of good
things. Numb. 14. 10 1 Timothy 4. 8. Deuteronomy. 19. 8.


First, Of good things temporal. Canaan a land flowing with milk and honey, was
the land of promise, Deuteronomy. 19. 8. The good things of this life, which smooth
and sweeten our way to eternity, are only waters which gush out from the rock
of a promise; Isaac's store of Servants, Genesis 26. 14. and Genesis 18. 18.
Jacob's store of Cattle, Genesis 30. 43. they were the fruit of a Genesis 22. 18.
promise made to Abraham, that God would bless his Seed, Acts 3. 25.
Genesis 12. 3. And

Secondly, So of spiritual good things; of pardoning grace, Isa. 55. 1. of
converting grace, Jer. 31. 33. of growth in Promissio facta est Christianis,
amicitiae dei, remissionis peccatorum, et regni coelestis.
grace, Hos. 14. 5. the gift of a Christ lay under a promise, Genesis 3. 15. Luke
1. 71. the gift of the spirit was bound up in a promise, Acts 2. 33. Gal. 3.
14. If a new heart be put into our bosoms, it is the issue of a promise, Ezekiel.
36. 26. And God in a pursuance of a promise, breaths a new spirit Ezekiel. 36. 26.
into our souls. Shall we rise higher?

Thirdly, God has made promises to his people of things eternal; Of a future
Crown, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Of a glorious Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Of a heavenly Throne,
Rev. 3. 21. Of eternal Inrer pocula Germaniae, clamatum est; spiritus
calriviamus est spiritus melancholicus Sclat.
Life, John 3. 16. Of everlasting Habitations, Luke 16. 9. Of everlasting
Salvation, Heb. 5. 9. And therefore how much are they to be censured, who
accuse Religion of sadness, and sorrow, and upon the force of that argument,
draw back to courses of sin and profaneness; What do they less then blaspheme,
both the God, and the privileges of the Saints? Joy is a constant dish with
the people of God, but Cujusmodi est gaudium, quod est in domino? In his quae
secundum domini mandatum fiunt gaudere debemus. Basil.
their joy is hidden Manna, it lodges in their bosoms, not in their looks;
their musick-room is a little more retired, the world does not hear their
melody. Look upon the Saints in their lowest condition, when grace it self is
at an ebb, at very low water; Yet then

First, The Lord assures us, that little is a pledge of more, 2 Cor. 1. 22. And
even

Secondly, That little he will enable to get a final victory, Rev. 3. 8, 9. And
in Rev. 2. 7. the promise is made to him, (...).
who is overcoming, not to him who has already overcome.

And Thirdly, That little shall be kept perfect to the day of the Lord Jesus, 1
These. 3. 10. Phil. 1. 6. So many causes of constant joy are there to all Gods
Children; what roses do they walk upon here, even while they are in a valley of
tears? In their bosoms lies a pardon, like Aarons Rod blossoming in the Ark,
their consciences are serene and calm with holy peace, nay, they can laugh in
a storm, they can joy in tribulations, Romans 5. 3. Jam. 1. 2. And they can
Gaudium Christiano utile est, immo necessarium ut jucunde vivat, et alacriter
in virtutibus pergat.
glory in a shipwreck, they can triumph in death it self, 1 Cor. 15. 55. And
therefore the Apostle inculcates, and reduplicates the command for holy joy.
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. But though the
joy of the Saints, open to the wide Common, they can, and may rejoice in all
things, and in all times, yet in the enclosure of Gods blessed Sabbath, the
freshest and sweetest springs of joy are to be found. And thus much for the
third duty, Jam. 1. 2.
to be performed on the morning of a Sabbath, before we go to the public
congregation, (Viz.) Laboring with our own hearts.

fourth duty to be discharged before the public on Gods holy day, is private
reading of the Scriptures: What a charge does God lay upon the Jews to be
acquainted with Deuteronomy. 11. 18.
the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 8, 9. And these words which I command thee this
day, they shall be in thy heart, and thou Verbum dei in nos totos admittamus,
in mentem, in memoriam, in affectus, in vitam, ut nulla sit pars nostri in qua
verbum dei non inhabitet.
shall teach them diligently to thy Children, and thou shall talk of them when
thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk in the way, when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up, and thou shall bind them as a sign upon thy
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thy eyes, and thou shall write
them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. Let us sum up this charge.

First, Gods word it must possess every part, it must be between our eyes for
direction, it must be a sign on our hands to regulate our works and operations;
it must be lodged in Evangelica historia debet esse perpetua lectio cujuslibet
hominis Christiani. Mirandul.
our hearts to sanctify and spiritualize our love and affections, that the
heart may be warm, but not feavourish.

Secondly, Gods word must possess every room, it must be our discourse in our
Parlors where we use to sit, it must be our meditation in our chambers where we
use to lie; and if we take the air abroad, this holy word must be our
companion, this must be testis conversationis, the witness of our conversation.

Thirdly, Gods word must possess every season: It must go to bed with us to
sanctify the farewell thoughts of the day, that we shut up the day and our
eyes with God; if we rise in the morning it must be our morning star to guide
us, our morning dew to soften us, our morning Sun to warm us, Ne patiamini
verbum dei, esse quasi peregrinum, et foris s^are, sed intromittatur in
domicilium cordis nostri, and versetur assidue in animis nostris, non secus ac
domestici versantur in domo sua; immo sit nobis non minus no^um, ac familiare,
quam illi esse solent qui apud nos habitant. Daven.
it must be our first company, and our best Breakfast in the morning.

And Fourthly, Gods word must not only possess the inside of the house, but the
outside too; it must be written on the posts and the gates to show its own
excellency, that we must hold it out, and own it in the view of all the world.
This is the sum of the charge, and indeed it is not unnecessary, if we
consider the Scriptures are the guide of our youth, 2 Timothy 3. 15. They are the
cure of our minds, Mat. 22. 29. Ignorance of Gods word breeds error and
spiritual distempers in us. They are the comfort of our souls, Romans 15. 4. They
are both a Cordial and a Julip to warm us in cold affliction, and to cool us in
careless prosperity. They are the treasure of our hearts, Col. 3. 16. He is the
potent and mighty man who is an Apollos in the Scriptures Acts 18. 24. Nay,
they are the breathings of the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 20. They are not only men's
advantage, but the divine issue of the third person in the Trinity. The result
of the whole is this, if God lay so much weight on reading of the Scriptures,
and man receives so much advantage by acquaintance with them, no season fitter
for this duty then the morning of a Sabbath.

First, The reading of the word prepares for the hearing of it, that we may
arrive at the Nobility of those Bereans, who searched the Scriptures, whether
what the Apostles delivered were consonant and agreeing to them or no, Acts 17.
Acts 17. 11. Ignorantia, and negloctus dei, o quantum malum est, et in quot, et
quanta mala Gentil^^ per hanci ignorantiam inciderint. Alap.
11. By constant reading on the Sabbath morning we come acquainted with the
body of the Scriptures, and so are fitted to entertain particular truths which
may be delivered in public by the Minister. Well read Lawyers easily
understand particular cases. Ignorant persons like Children, take in what ever
is in the spoon, whether Sugar or Poison. An ignorant Auditory wholly depends
upon the conscience of the Minister, and blindfold grasp all with an implieit
faith, they drink in all which is delivered, and so most probably the dregs at
the bottom. But our preparatory reading in private, will enable us the more to
judge and discern of public Gospel discoveries.

Secondly, Nor is it a small advantage, that Gods word should take livery and
scizin of our hearts in the beginning Quo semel est imbuta recens serv^bit
odorem, testa diu.
of the Sabbath, and so accommodate our hearts for future Ordinances. Vessels
retain the sent of the first liquor. The Summer much follows the quality of the
Spring. Conversing in our closets and families with Gods word, will much
conduce to a spiritual frame of heart; The tracing of a Chapter or two in the
morning at home, will mould the heart to a sweeter compliance with Christ in
his Ordinances. The reading of the Law made Josiah weep, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. and
then he was flexible for every good purpose.

Thirdly, Theophylact has an excellent argument to this purpose; One great end
of the Sabbath, says he, is to give Lex homines praecipit in Sabbatum
quiescere, ut lectioni vacent homines. Theoph.
us respit for the reading of the Scriptures, which is meant, not only of the
public reading in the Church, but also of private reading at home, the Gospel
being nothing else but Christ opened and expanded; to study Christ is the
purport not only of our public but private devotion. To read the Scriptures
then is one duty, which must take up our private leisure on the morning of a
Sabbath.

Fourthly, The Lord Christ, and his Apostles in alleging Mat. 21. 13.
the places of the Old Testament, do generally say, That it is written, or as
it is written in the Book of the Psalms; or Luke 20. 42.
this was spoken by the Prophet Isaiah: Now how much Acts 1. 20.
shame will befall us, if when the Minister alleges Scripture Acts 2. 16.
quotations, we may say of the word, as they did of the Holy Ghost, they had
not so much as heard, whether there be an Holy Ghost or no, Acts 19. 2. So we
never read of such a Text, we never met with such a Scripture, we never were
acquainted with such an example, as is cited by the Preacher, This might
discolor our faces with blushes of shame and regret. It was a sharp
redargution of our Savior which he gave to the Jews, when he remitted them to
search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. they making their Scriptural knowledge the
greatest of their boast and ostentation. And indeed to be a stranger to the
Oracles of God, neither becomes our interest, nor our profession.

And Fifthly, In this the Disciple must not be greater Cultus ipse publicus,
quam maxim solenniter est celeb^andus, et postulat necessario ill^ exercitia,
Scripturum lectionis meditationis, precum, etc. Quibus paratiores simus ad
publicum cultum ut ille etiam in nobis vere efficax reddatur. Ames.
then the Master. On the morning of the week day, He preached the word, John 8.
2. And in the morning of the Lords day we should read it; which as he did
dictate, we must survey; if he was early in the dispensation of it, it well
becomes us to take the dawnings of the Sabbath for its perusal and lection; let
us take the dropings of this honeycomb at the first effusion. And thus much
for those Duties which are incumbent upon us in the morning of a Sabbath,
before we associate with the Assembly of Gods people. We must dress our inward,
as well as our outward man, before we come to the Congregation.

CHAP. XXVII. How we must demean our selves in the Public Assembly, on the
Holy Sabbath.
HAving thus performed our Morning Exercises in private, Psalm. 84. 1, 2, Psalm.
122 1. Psalm. 87. 2.
how cheerfully should we repair to the Public Assemblies, and draw nigh to
the public Ordinances on this acceptable day of grace and salvation, when
Christ Isa. 2. 2, 3. Psalm. 42. 4.
sits in state, scattering treasures of grace among hungry and thirsty souls,
who are poor in spirit, and wait for spiritual Alms? David admired the
amiableness of Gods Tabernacles, Deus pluris facit preces in Ecclesia quam domi
factas, non ob locum, sed ob considerationem multitudinis fidelium, deum
communi consensu invocantium. Riv.
Psalm. 84. 1. and he longed for the Courts of God, rejoicing, when they said to
him, Let us go to the house of the Lord, Psalm. 42. 4. And the Prophet Isaiah
speaking of Gospel times, seems to foretell the disposition of Gospel Saints,
Many people shall go, and say, Come let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord,
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths, Isa. 2. 2, 3. And the Apostle advises us, by no means to
forsake the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, Heb.
10. 25. whom he brands with reproof and reproach. Public Ordinances they are
our spiritual Exchange, our holy Mart, our heavenly Fairs, where we buy up, and
fit our selves with all heavenly Commodities; In these seasons we store our
selves with grace, knowledge and comforts, which may abundantly serve us till
the revolution of another Sabbath. It was once the sad complaint of the Church,
That the ways of Sion did mourn, because none came to her Assemblies, Lam. 1.
4. The want of public Ordinances might put a Nation in sackcloth, they being
the badge of the Church, and the glory of the Kingdom. Indeed holy duties in
private they are of great use, and have their blessing: But public Ordinances
are the chief work of the Sabbath. It is worthy our observation, that the
Sabbath and public service are by God himself both joined together: Ye shall
keep my Sabbaths, says God, and reverence Ezra 10. 1.
my Sanctuary, Luke 19. 30. The Sabbath and the Psalm. 68. 26.
Sanctuary are coupled, as being twins of happiness. Every thing is beautiful
in its Season. Private duties are beautiful, Numb. 10. 3.
and are in season every day: But public Ordinances are never so lovely and
beautiful, never so much in their full sea, as upon Gods holy day; Then they
are in season, as the harvest in the year, as Courts of Judicature in the Term,
as a Psalm. 111. 1.
shining constellation in a dark night. David's resolution was to praise God in
the great Congregation, Psalm. 29. 9. The Psalm. 89. 7.
Lord esteems it his glory, to have many beggars thronging at the beautiful
gate of his Temple for spiritual gifts and charity; Psalm. 87. 2.
how loud, nay, how lovely is the noise of many golden Trumpets, what an echo
do they make? How pleasant is it, when the holy Convocation meet for holy
worship, like the pleasant flocks upon the mountain of holiness. Many Quia
potentiam illam, quam infans in stabulo occultat, eodem tempore in agro et in
orient, immo in coelo exerit hoc testimentum est, non aliqua indigentia, sed
voluntaria humiliatione exinanitionem illam factam esse. Lyser.
skillful musicians playing together, elevate and sweeten the harmony. The
Congregation meeting together, do much resemble the Celestial Quire above, and
seem to imitate that Troop and Host of Angels which proclaimed Christ's Nativity
to the world, Luke 2. 13. In public, God receives the highest praises, and
there he bestows the greatest blessings, Psalm. 65. 4. The promise runs, God
will create upon her Assemblies a cloud, Isa. 4. 5. which Cloud was the assured
testimony of the Divine presence, which presence includes and involves all
varieties of good. Wine flows more plentifully from a Vintage then a Vessel; in
public Ordinances God gives us the plenty of a Vintage. In Gods Courts we
shall taste of his goodness, not only of his good will and favor, Psalm. 65. 4.
Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm. 50. 2. Cant. 4. 6. Cant 5. 5. Acts 3. 1. Acts 13. 23.
but of his good things; we shall be refreshed with pardoning grace, the joys
of peace, the smiles of love, and be captivated with the beauty of holiness,
Psalm. 96. 6. If you will know where believers see their best sights, where ^hey
hear the most ravishing sounds, where they make the most delightful meals,
they will tell you, in the Assemblies of Gods people, Psalm. 68. 24. There they
have been satisfied with marrow and fatness. Indeed when God denies public
Ordinances, he himself will be a little sanctuary to his Chosen, Mat 12. 9.
Ezekiel. 11. 16. But where he affords them, he expects they Mat 13. 54.
should be attended on. Christ himself went into the places Mark 3. 1.
of public resort. It is signally to be observed, that in every Festival of
the Jews, there was to be an holy Convocation, a joint meeting of Gods people,
to evidence how pleasing Isa. 60. 8.
it is to God, for his Doves to flock to the windows; the Per fenestras
intelligamus columbaria. Haec enim plena sunt fenestris, instar oculorum, per
quas prospicere gaudent Columbae, in eoque delectantur. Hieron.
companies of his dear ones being the workhouses of his grace, the
storehouses of his blessings, and the true Goshens where light and plenty
dwells. So in the Feast of the Passover, Exodus 12. 16. a Convocation was to
begin and shut up that feast, it was both to open and to end it, to be the
Alpha and the Omega of that solemnity. So in the feast of the Sabbath, Lev. 23.
3. it was to be a day of rest; but this rest was given for holy meetings, for
holy addresses, for holy worship. the Tabernacle and the Temple in the times of
the Law, and the Synagogues in latter times were open, and frequented on the
Sabbath, Mat. 1. 21. Mark 6. 2. when private affairs were laid aside, and
public worship was to be in ure. And so in the feast of Pentecost, or first
fruits, Lev. 23. 21. The Israelites were not to offer up these first fruits,
the tribute their praise and thanksgiving, without burnt offerings, Lev. 23.
18. without sin offerings and peace offerings, verse. 19. nor without holy
worship, verse. 20. nor yet without a holy meeting and convocation, verse. 21.
Every solemn feast must be accompanied with a solemn meeting* the worship it
self not being grateful without the worshipers. And thus it was in the feast
of Trumpets, Lev. 23. 24. In the day of Atonement, Lev. 23. 27. And so in the
feast of Tabernacles Levit. 23 37. Levit. 23 40. Numb 28. 26. Numb. 29. 1, 7. 12
or Booths, Lev. 23. 34, 35, 36. There was a holy convocation at the beginning
and close of that solemnity. And it is remarkable, that what is called a holy
convocation, Lev. 23. 35. 36. is called a Sabbath, Lev. 23. 39. to intimate to
us, that a Sabbath is not a Sabbath without the Assemblies of Gods people. Thus
pleasing are congregated Saints in holy worship, where God makes all his
festivals of grace and love.

Now for our grateful and acceptable deportment in public Observatio subbati
est caput veligionis, et totum dei cultunt continet. Willet.
Ordinances, we must study;

1. To be strict in our behaviors.

2. Spiritual in our duties.

3. Active in our graces. We will take them, and canvas them all in their
order; for indeed the duties of this holy day require extraordinary diligence,
they have a double die of holiness upon them, they are double gilt; Gods eye is
Non putes te in domo dei male posse conversari, et occultari. Oleast. 1 Kings
9. 3.
very much upon our behavior in his house. Therefore in the Tabernacle, the
place of public worship it was commanded, Exodus 25. 37. Thou shall make seven
Lamps, and they shall light the Lamps that they may give light, to teach us,
that nothing there escapes his fight, for in his house it is always light. In
the Sanctuary thou can not sin in secret, there are seven Lamps to discover
thy miscarriages.

beseeming behavior in the public Ordinances, and this is twofold; Corpus
est hostia vivens, quiase vivum per viva opera novae vitae spiritualis deo
offert. 2. Et hostia est per actus mortificationis. Alap.


1. External of the body. We must compose our outward man to a suitable
behavior, when we approach to God in public Ordinances: Considering

1. God is the Lord of our bodies, as well as our souls, and therefore the
deportment of the body must be as critical.

2. The Apostle advises us, Romans 12. 1. To offer up 1 Cor. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 13.
our bodies a reasonable sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. Especially,
this oblation must be made in public worship; the Temple we know, was the
usual place for sacrifice. Let Josh 5. 14. Exodus 4. 32. John 17. 1.
it be added:

3. The body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. as well as the
heart is the lodging of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. David speaks much of the
comportment of the body in holy services. The eye must look up, Psalm. 123. 4.
The hands must be lift up, Psalm. 63. 4. The mouth must be filled with praises,
Psalm. 63. 5. The ear must bow, and the knee Luke 21. 2.
must bend, Psalm. 95. 6. The body is one of the two mites we indigent
worshipers can offer to God.

But for the better unfolding of this particular, (viz.) How we must comport
our bodies in public worship; there is something to be acted, and something to
be avoided:

First, Something the outward man must Act.

lift up our hands in prayer; this the Psalmist enjoin us, a a duty, Psalm. 134.
2. and proposes his own example, Psalm. 119. 48. What speaks more humility in
prayer, then to lift up the hands to receive the Alms? Nor does it show less
then our dependence upon God, when by the lifting up of our hands, we seem to
point at our benefactor; The Prophet Jeremiah, 2 Lam. 19. joins the pouring
out of the heart, and the lifting up of the hands together. Moreover it
pretends to a holy violence, when we lift up our hands to wrestle with God, and
to storm heaven. Christ Luke 24. 50.
lifted up his hands in benediction, and we must do the same Numb. 16. 22.
in supplication.

Secondly, We must compose our countenances to holy Reverence. Dicit Maria,
respexit humilitatem ancillae suae, non virginitatem. Bern.
The Pharisees indeed disfigured their faces, Mat. 6. 16. But their hypocrisy
must not discourage our piety: nothing does more beautify a serious worshipper
then a becoming gravity: Did we consider the infiniteness of that Majesty we
are to deal withal, the brightness of his eye, the purity of his nature, the
strength of his hand, the severity of his judgments, and likewise weigh the
account we must give for Gospel opportunities, this would put a holy
astonishment upon our faces, and cover them with a reverential dread; Lev. 10.
3.
we know the offering up of strange fire but once, cost two Priests their
lives. God loves a trembling at his word, Isa. 66. 2.
Isa. 66. 2. Slight carriages in worship more become a wanton Jupiter, then an
awful Jehovah, who is a consuming fire. Heb. 12. 29.


Thirdly, We must bend the ear to the severest attention. How often does our
Savior call for a hearing ear; this was Mat. 13. 43.
the Epiphonema, and conclusion of every Sermon to his Auditors, Mat. 11. 15.
Mark 4. 9. Luke 8. 8. Luke 14. 35. And Mark 7. 16.
this was the winding up of every Epistle to the Churches, Rev. 2. 7, 11, 17,
29. Rev. 3. 6. 13, 22. It is said of Christ's Auditors (...).
that they did hang upon his mouth in hearing him, Luke 19. 48. They did sit
upon his lips, that no word might escape them, but they might arrest it for
soul advantage. The ear is the proper door to the heart; this is the postern to
let in truth; study then to make it a door to salvation by a serious and
diligent attention. Divine truths, like those Angels who Genesis 19. 3.
came to Lot, must not be shut out, but entertained, and the ear is the portal
by which they must enter. Attention, Fides est donum dei, Ephesians. 2. 8. sed non
omnium, 2 These 3. 2. electis solum datur, Tit. 1. 11. sed hoc donum deus non
instillat cordibus immediate, sed per auditum verbi sui, auditum, sc. externum
operante intus sp. sancto: Praecones verbi sonant auribus, aures ad mentem
deserunt.
though it be not an only, yet it is a necessary duty; the ear lies in the way
to the soul, as the light shines not into the house, but by the window. Faith,
says the Apostle, Romans 10. 17. comes by hearing, and justification comes by
faith, Romans 5. 1. So that attention in holy Ordinances lays the first stone in
the structure of glory. He who is an attentive and serious hearer lays a good
foundation, a foundation of Jasper to found the New Jerusalem upon. The ear is
the fort which the Minister is to assault, but the heart is the strong hold
which the spirit is to take, but if we are not attentive, and resist the first
onset, that of the Minister, we shall lay discouragements before the second,
that of the spirit, we shall grieve the spirit of the Lord, Ephesians. 4. 30. But let
not our careless attention obstruct and hinder the spirits saving operation:
And let us not loose those blessed truths by neglectfull hearing, which Christ
has bought by his painful bleeding. Are the glad tidings of the Gospel so
Adest sp. dei per doctrinam auribus haustam, mentem illuminans, etc.
slight a message? Are divine truths so mean a Doctrine? Are Sermons of faith
and godliness such low discourses, that we will not be attentive in the hearing
of them? Surely Luke 19. 47.
this is below the Religion of the Jews, who diligently heard Luke 20. 1.
Christ in the Temple, though afterward they brought him to the Cross. It was
the great complaint of God, that the John 8. 20.
people would not hear him, Isa. 28. 12. L^^ us then be exact and very diligent
in our outward attention, when we come to the public Ordinances, always
remembering, that the outward Court brings to the inner Court, and that leads to
the Holy of Holies.

But as we must watch our outward behavior in public worship to know what we
are to act, so likewise to understand what we are to avoid.

CHAP. XXVIII. Sleeping in Ordinances, is a great and daring provocation.
avoid all sleep and slothfulness; this surely is a great and general distemper
broken in upon us, much to be lamented, and now more fully to be discovered.
This was the brand of the foolish Virgins, they were asleep as the Bridegroom
came, and so their happiness Mat. 25. 5.
was a dream. We dare not sleep when a King speaks to us, and yet we will
adventure it when a God speaks to us. It is very uncouth and inconsistent, that
we should be shutting our eyes, when we should be opening our hearts; Josh. 24.
27.
that our bodies should sleep, when our souls should awake, Jer. 7. 13.
that the street door should be shut, when the closet door should be open,
(viz.) in public Ordinances, and in the Acts 1. 16.
holy worship of the Almighty. Surely those who commit this sin, did never
really examine it; they adventure upon 2 Pet. 1. 21.
the practice of it, because they never dived into the bottom of it: But let
such know, that sleeping in Ordinances, is every way offensive.

the eye of God. When we are in Ordinances we are more especially under the eye
of God; though Psalm. 63. 2.
he is excluded no where, yet his presence is more peculiarly Mat. 18. 20.
in the assemblies of his Saints. He more particularly walks Isa. 4. 5.
in the midst of his Candlesticks. Now there are several attributes in God
which bespeak our greatest attention and Rev. 1. 13.
devotion in holy Ordinances.

First, His excellent and incomprehensible greatness. If we Christus praesens
est medio suorum came convenerint nomine suo, gratiosa sut praesentia.
had any dread or awe of an infinite Majesty upon us, we should throw away all
sleep and drowsiness when we come before him in holy worship: Let us
contemplate on the royalty of his Throne, of the brightness of his Majesty, and
this would awaken us to fear and astonishment. Shall a besotted worm stupifie
himself by sleep, when he is under the full view and immediate eye of the
Almighty? Surely not only his senses but his reason is asleep, and his whole
man is Psalm. 11. 4.
in a benumbed Lethargy. Cannot infiniteness startle us? And the dread of the
Almighty pull us out of our dream? One sparkling of his eye could confound us;
if he should command a ray of the Sun, it would fire us out of our sloth and
scorch us into nothing, or that which is worse then nothing.

Secondly, His omnisciency. We sleep, but God does not Psalm 121. 4.
slumber, he fully sees our desperate carelessness and wilful drowsiness in
holy Ordinances. There is no dropping asleep in a crowd, or taking a nap in
some obscure place can Genesis 28. 17.
evade the full view of Gods eye. He takes notice of the frame of our hearts,
much more of the posture of our bodies. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9
When thou sleep in the time of worship there is no curtain before thee,
nothing to abate the view of God, or darken his eye. God sees all thy snoring
indulgence, which is excessively Psalm. 139. 12.
offensive to him.

Thirdly, His holiness. God is exceedingly displeased with our unbecoming
behaviors in holy worship, his purity is much provoked by our sinful Lethargy.
Sleeping in Ordinances, it is a sin, nay a dangerous sin, nay, it is a crying
sin, Psalm. ^. 5.
and therefore highly provoking to divine holiness. Our Savior, Rev. 3. 1.
speaks of some who seemed to be alive, and yet were dead. And such are sleepy
hearers, their Pew is their grave, their clothes their winding sheet, and their
present sleep their temporary death. Indeed sleeping in Ordinances is a sin
against nature it self. The Sun will not stop in its course in attending on the
world, but the foolish sleeper stops in his attendance on the word; and yet the
Sun receives no reward, but the Christian looks for one, and though he has
snorted away a Sermon, he presumes he has discharged a duty, and so is in his
road to life eternal.

Fourthly, His justice, which is easily awakened by his holiness, a just God
will not endure a drowsy hearer. The young man who slept at Paul's Sermon fell
down from the Acts 20. 9.
third loft, and was taken up dead: In mercy God presents the Gospel to our
attention, and in justice he will punish our want of attention; God indeed took
away a rib from Genesis 2. 21.
Adam when he was asleep, Genesis 2. 21. But he will not take Edormiente potius
quam vigilante formavit deus mulierem, quia deus se ei in somnis revelari
voluit, sicut se revelare solebat prophetis. Par.
away a lust from any of the Sons of Adam while they are asleep in the Paradise
of Ordinances. A Lamb will not sleep in the paw of a Lion, in the reach of an
enraged Panther; how much less should fond and formal sinners sleep in the
presence, in the most peculiar presence of him who is the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, Rev. 5. 5. who can tear our souls like a Lion, Psalm. 7. 2. nay, tear us
in pieces, and there is none to deliver, Psalm. 50. 22. and break us in pieces
as a potters vessel, Jer. 19. 11. to be made whole no more. Jer. 48. 38.


Sleeping in Ordinances is distastful to the view of Angels; Those holy spirits
frequent the assemblies of the Saints, 1 Cor. 11. 10. And they are witnesses of
our carriage and Nos Angelos habemus obedientiae, and inobedientiae no strae.
etc. Chrysostom. Theo. Theoph. Ans.
deportment, of our obedience and disobedience, as Theophylact, Anselm,
Chysostom, and others aver; and how much disgust must it cast on those holy and
most Seraphick beings, those blessed Courtiers of heaven, whose concerns are so
much wrapped up in the honor of God, to see a stupefied formalist with his
senses chained up in unseasonable Angeli templum percurrunt, and singulorum
habitus, gesta, and vota explorent. Nil.
sleep, when the Eye, Heart, Mind, and all should be attentive to grasp after
divine truth in the public dispensations of it, and when the inward and the
outward man like wind and tide both should meet, to carry away and treasure up
the discoveries of Gods word and counsel to him? The Angels see our foolish
glances, wanton looks, undecent postures, they have a strict eye upon us in
Ordinances; O then let us not damp these glorious spirits by our uncomely and
unworthy drowsiness.

sinful sleepiness is disquieting to the assembly of the Saints with whom we
do associate: Do we know what hearts are saddened, what spirits are grieved,
what passions are raised by our sleepy carriage, and our drowsy behavior? Our
Savior charges us not to offend one single Saint, much 1 Cor. 10. 32
less an assembly of Gods people when we are met together in divine worship.
When we see one sleeping, and Mat. 18. 6.
hear another talking, and observe another rolling his eyes from one object to
another, is not this to turn the Temple Sed etiam Christi monitu, quanto magis
necessaria tanto magis cavenda sunt scandala ne a nobis vel concitentur, vel
capiantur.
into a Babell, and the order of the Church into confusion, and to attempt to
build Gods house a new with axes and hammers? A sleepy hearer is a spot in our
Feasts, like a seared bough in a green tree, a disturbance and grief to the
assembly, like a broken string in a lute which jars the Music.

This stupid drowsiness is very prejudicial to the work we are about, when we
come to Ordinances we are employed in the work of heaven.

opus dei, Gods work, a holy and sacred work. In Ordinances we deal with God,
we pay our tribute to God, we have communion with God, we drive a great trade
with 1. Vt in ear quam agimus sit tota animi intentio. 2. Vt sit
inexplicabilis cupiditas been operandi. 3. Vt accedat assiduitas, and
continuatio. Basil.
God, and shall we sleep in Gods work? Basil observes, there are three things
requisite for the carrying on Gods work.

First, That the mind be wholly set upon it, and taken up in it.

Secondly, That there be a restless desire of doing well.

Thirdly, That there be diligence and unweariedness in the work. Now then a
sacred work is no sleepy work. Our enjoyment of God in Ordinances is a day of
salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. It is no night to sleep in. It is against reason to 2
Cor. 6. 2.
sleep with the Sun shining in our faces. In Gospel Ordinances the Sun of
righteousness shines in the face of the soul, it does shed its warming and its
winning beams upon us. The Gospel is called bright, John 3. 19. which is to
rouse us, not to rock us asleep. It was once a sharp expostulation of our
Savior. What could ye not watch with me Mat. 26. 40.
one hour? The same query may be put to every sleepy hearer.

2. In Ordinances, the work we are employed in, is, opus animae, the souls
work. Will the prisoner fall asleep when he is begging his pardon? What are we
doing in prayer, but suing out our pardons, and making up our peace with our
offended God? The Heir will not fall asleep, while he is Evangelium est
sublustre quidcam, et praegustus clarae lucis, sive (...) (i. e.) gloriae
divinae. Quae revelabitur in coelis. Chrysostom.
hearing the Will read, in which he is highly concerned; the discoveries of the
Gospel are the Fathers will concerning his Children, and when we meet in
Ordinances, we are hearing this will, and is that a time of sleep and
drowsiness? In Ordinances, the case of our souls is agitated, heaven and
eternity are proposed, life and death are set before us, the silver trumpet of
the Gospel sounds, and is that a time of sloth and oscitancy? Ordinances are
the way to life, the means of grace, not only the radical moisture to
preserve spiritual life, but the very first means to beget it, and shall we
sleep in Ordinances? When the wind blows right, shall the mariner betake
himself to his bed, or to his tackle, to drown himself in sloth, or to hoise
sail, and trace the floating Idem sermo aliis est propi^iatio ad vitam, aliis
condemnatio ad mortem, quae diversitas, non verbo, sed nostrae incredulitati
debetur, fic admonitiones, exhortationes, doctrinae castigationes quib^^
delinquentes ad recipiscentiam vocantur, contemptores, et impaenitentes
judicantur in die ultimo, Muse.
waves? Every opportunity of grace is a good wind for heaven; and shall we
sleep away that seasonable and precious gale? How then shall we finish our
voyage to eternity? We hear Proclamations with great attention: Every Sermon is
Christ's Proclamation, to proclaim pardon to all penitent sinners, who will come
in, and lay down the weapons of sin and lust, and submit themselves to the
Scepter and Obedience of Jesus Christ; and shall we sleep in hearing this royal
Proclamation? It is very observable, what awakening, and heart-penetrating
expressions the Prisoner uses at the bar, and there is nothing unobserved by
him, but with much greediness and attention he hearkens to the Evidence of the
Witnesses, to the Verdict of the Jury, to the Sentence of the Judge, and no
wonder, it is for his life. Now the word we hear, it is that which shall judge
us at the great day, John 12. 48. By it, our eternal estate shall be disposed,
either to life or death; that blessed word shall cast or crown us; and shall we
sleep away this word? Shall it not then condemn us for mutes, and so to be
pressed to eternal death? Our life, our peace, our souls are all concerned in
the entertainment of this word, and we sleep and dream it away; surely greater
frenzy cannot befall the Children of men.

Sleeping in Ordinances is a great affront to the richest privilege we enjoy
on this side heaven. The time of worship is the souls Term time, a few choice
minutes to gain glory in; and shall we sleep away these golden filings of time,
these sweet Veniente Christo mors vigebat, et regr^bat, sed Christus ejus
vigorem, et regn^m. sustulit et destruxit. Alap.
opportunities of the soul, when Christ is wooing us, to court us to a Crown?
Did we ever understand the true value of Ordinances?

1. Ordinances, they are the purchases, and price of Christ's blood; that we
have a Gospel to hear, divine truth to entertain, this is the Revenue of
Christ's death. The Apostle tells us, Christ brought life and immortality to
light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Christ by dying brought this life,
Christ by descending into the dark grave brought this immortality to light: And
the Gospel is the full declaration of these glorious achievements. And Christ
by his Heb. 10. 20.
blood has opened a new and living way for prayer, to the throne of grace,
Heb. 10. 20. And shall a privilege purchased with blood be slept away? We will
not throw away Diamonds fetched from far with care and hazard, nor cast away
Rings left us as tokens of love by endeared friends; why should we sleep away
opportunities, not purchased with treasure, but tears, not with wealth but
blood, nay, the best blood which ever ran in the veins of humane nature?

2. Ordinances are the Benjamins mess which are given to few in the world; some
corners only of the earth are gilded, and guided by this light: Has God
indulged us with these distinguishing opportunities, and must they pass away
from us in a dream? This very ingratitude is not so much a trespass, as a
prodigy. Shall Christ select us out to feast with Cant. 2. 4. Esth. 7. 1.
him in his hanqueting house, as once the King selected Haman to feast with him
with the Queen; and shall we sleep at the table, when we should feast upon
Gospel dainties, shall we drowsily throw away those seasons of love, nay, the
best love, which few in the world are honored with?

3. In Ordinances we have the offers of the sweetest grace. Quia filius dei est
vivus cum Patre, et sp. sancto deus, et quia secundum humanam naturam ad patrem
abiit, et ad dextram patris est evectus, et omnem in coelo, et in terra
potestatem accepit, indeut verus deus, and verus homo, preces credentium
exaudit ac (...) orationem ex fide in Christum prosectam non exaudiri. Ger.
Prayer has the key of the treasury door, John 14. 14. where our comforts are
banked up. In hearing we have the gracious offers of Christ, and in him of life
and happiness; and shall all these offers, these paramount tenders of love be
slept away? Shall we shut our eyes, shut our hands, shut our souls against all
these rich revenues freely proffered in Gospel dispensations? Beasts by natures
instinct will not sleep at the provender, nor at their manger.

4. Ordinances they are precious, but transcient privileges. As we sometimes
pass upon the water, and view a stately structure, but we quickly lose the
sight of it, our prospect is upon the speed; so yet a little while, and we
shall pray no more, hear no more, enjoy communion with God no more, and shall
we sleep away these golden, yet gliding seasons? Shall we drousilie pass away
those streams of Gospel love, which are always running, and being passed
return no more? Shall we be as rocks before the music of the word, when the
instruments will soon be laid aside? Shall we be as persons in a swoun, before
the calls of the word, when those invitations will not last, but our refusal
proves our ruin? Luke 19. 41, 42.
The sleepy hearer might have heard that Sermon, which happily might have
brought him home to the arms of Christ; but now happily the offers of peace
and reconciliation may be hid from his eyes. Before his eyes were shut, he was
asleep, But now the day is shut in, and he may, as our Savior speaks, Mark 14.
41. sleep on now, the day will shine no Mat. 22, 13.
more, but he shall be involved in utter darkness. There are three things very
much provoke the Lord:

1. When we do not bring faith to an Ordinance. Faith is Genesis 43. 5.
the Benjamin, which we must bring with us, or never expect to see the face of
God in Ordinances. Isa. 29. 13.


2. When we bring not the heart to an Ordinance, but our thoughts are
wandering, and eccentrical.

3. When we bring not our senses to an Ordinance, but sleep has chained them
up, and restrained them from their use and exercise; Surely God will be much
inflamed, he cannot have the outward man at an Ordinance, a supple knee, a
weeping eye, an attentive ear; now as unbelief seizes upon the faculties of
the soul, and pinnions them up, that they will not embrace the word, so sleep
surprises the senses, and fetters them, that they have no liberty to entertain
the offers of the word; And it is an equal provocation, to shut the eye at, or
turn the back upon the blessed Gospel.

Sleeping in Ordinances is not only the imprisoning of the senses, but the
present suspension of our graces. Sleep shackles body and soul too. The drowsy
hearer does not only stop his ear, but stifle his grace too. We are to bring
diverse graces to the Ordinances with us. S^cut olla quae fervet, non quiescit,
sed semper bullit, in altum se erigit, atque ignitas bullas, et vapores sursum
ejaculatur; ita charitas continuo ad majora semper proficit, et exilit, atque
persinceram institutionem, orationem, desideria et gemitas quasi vapores ad
deum ascendit.


1. Faith. The word is to be mixed with faith, Heb. 4. 2. Prayer must be the
prayer of faith, Jam. 5. 15. The Sacrament is only the pageant of an Ordinance,
if faith be absent.

2. We must come with knowledge. These blessed institutions, they are the way
to salvation, but we must have an eye to see the way.

3. We must come with self-denial, we must deny sinful self, and moral self,
to hear what God speaks in an Ordinance, we must take down self to entertain
Jesus Christ.

4. We must come with zeal. Every sacrifice in the Law was offered up with
fire; The Sun has its heat, as well as its light. We must be fervent in spirit
serving the Lord, Romans 12. 11. As the boiling pot is always sending up its
bubles, and its fumes, as the learned man most elegantly. There must be an
activity and liveliness in all holy worship; we must be spiritual, and
spirited, when we serve that God John 4. 24.
who is a spirit. Now sleep and drowsiness puts out the fire of our graces, and
suspends their actings, so that there is neither Verbum dei, and matter, and
nutrix fidei, and gratiarum.
smoke, heat or glowing. Sleeping in Ordinances it is a multiplied sin, it robs
God of his time, it keeps grace from the breast, it is the Pent-house that
keeps the shower from the heart, that Doctrine cannot distill as the dew, nor
Mors brevis est somnus.
speech drop as the rain, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. It shuts the eye of the understanding,
that for the present it cannot discern the glorious things of God.

Sleeping in Ordinances, it pours contempt on the holy name of God. We do not
use to sleep, if we are upon our own work, if it be but the hearing of a tale,
or the giving of a visit, or the getting of a penny; In our sales, bargains,
merchandizings we are wakefull and vigilant enough; then the eye is open, the
mind is intent, and the tongue talkative, all the faculties of the soul are
summoned to attendance; we will not sleep in the Change, if it be only to hear
a piece of news; in our fruitless discoursing, worldly bargaining, courtly
visiting, luxurious banqueting, though we sit on the softest Couch, and talk of
nothing but novelties and vanities, pride and fashions, and our language is
nothing Imperuestigabiles divitiae Christi, sunt copia gratiarum et bonorum
quae Christus nobis attulit. Alap.
but a vain parenthesis, yet all this while no sleep seizes upon our employed
senses; but when we come to transact our soul affairs, when the unsearchable
riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. are telling out, those Sums which will enrich the
soul to eternity, when we have opportunities for spiritual gain, to advantage
our inward man, to grow Incomprehensibiles divitiae, sunt Christi divitiae.
Ambr.
rich in the jewels of grace and holiness; then Nature lets down her
Port-cullis, as if it was a midnight vacation, and we fall asleep, as if we
were wholly unconcerned in those spiritual transactions. What a dunghill of
vanity is the corrupt Divitiae Christi speciales sunt remissio peccatorum,
justificatio, regeneratio, resurrectio, et vita aeterna. Zanch.
nature of man? The Husbandman will not sleep with the plow in his hand, nor
the Pilot in the steerage of his ship; the Shopkeeper falls not asleep in the
vending of his wares, nay, the Guest will not sleep in the eating of his
Viands, but the careless Christian will sleep when Christ comes to give him a
visit in holy Ordinances, and he is in the divine presence, hearing something
which concerns his eternity. But as the Apostle angrily expostulates with the
Corinthians, Have ye not houses to drink in? 1 Cor. 11. 22. So may I say, 1
Cor. 11. ^2.
have ye not houses to sleep in, and beds to rest on? Must Gods Ordinances be
undervalued and disesteemed by your shameful sloth and drowsiness? And when
the Minister is opening the transcripts of Gods heart in Gospel dispensations,
must all be buried in silence, and rejected by a dronish and sloathfull
contempt? Ah! how prodigal is stupefied man of his soul, which shall live as
long as God himself?

Sleeping in Ordinances is a most dangerous and desperate adventure: Whilst
thou sleep away a Sermon, happily that very truth was delivered which might
have converted thy soul, thou know not when that plaster will be spread
which shall cure the wound of sin. The means of Grace are called a day of
Salvation; and there is a particular hour in that day for thy Conversion, it
may be thou sleep away Luke 19. 42.
that very hour. Ambergris is not cast on the shore every day, though
sometimes that precious thing is cast on the land. Mariners have a wind, which
if they neglect, they may hazard, if not lose their Voyage. Indeed conversion
is a kind of wonder, as blazing stars, which are seen once in an age; and will thou sleep in Ordinances, when happily this wonder is to be wrought? Will thou
for the sloth of an hour venture the pains of eternity? If Zacheus had not Luke
19. 5.
climbed up into the Sicamore-tree, in that very season, to see Res mira,
legimus sane in Evangelio dominum fuisse invitatum, and ad eos accessisse, sed
quod ultro ad convivium se ingesserit, nunquam legimus solummodo ad hunc
principem Publicanorum. Ger.
Christ, possibly salvation had never come to his house; If thou belongest to
the election of Grace, thou have thy hour, thy Sermon, this opportunity for thy
turning to God. The Man-child lies long in the womb, but it is brought forth in
a moment: How should we take heed that we do not sleep away that moment, when
our salvation should be brought to the birth! Happily there is some way of
wickedness thou walk securely in, some necessary duty thou live in the
neglect of, some sore temptation thou groanest under and grapplest with; Now if
thou art asleep, when these things are pathetically and powerfully spoken to,
thou may live and dye in the practice of that sin, thou may fall and sink
under the power of that temptation; and so eternity may be spent in bewailing
one hours folly.

Now for the avoidance of this God-provoking sin.

1. The most plausible excuse, which gives the fairest color to it, to varnish
it over, shall be examined.

2. Some ponderous considerations shall be laid down to be weighed in the
balance.

3. Some seasonable Directions shall be suggested to be followed and pursued.

The great excuse which seems to cloak and disguise this sin, is this; some
guilty of this sin usually plead, It is true, we sometimes forget our selves or
an Ordinance, and fall asleep, but this is our natural weakness, not our moral
wickedness; our grief it is, but not our guilt; we combat with it, but we
cannot conquer it; it is our infelicity, and our bemoaned misery; our piece of
clay is heavy and will be seeking rest, and sometimes in Ordinances, and we
must cast our selves upon our Saviors indulgent Interpretation, The spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. Matthew. 26. 41.


To this specious pretense and usual plea, it is answered; Possibly natural
weakness may be the true cause of sloth and Haec infirmitas carnis in renatis
adhuc reliqua, perpetuo ob oculos nobis versatur, ne fiducia propriarum virium
inflati animo efferamur. Corpus est ergastulum animae. Plato.
sleepiness in Ordinances, not so much the remissness of our minds, as the
indisposition of our bodies: the pile of dust our souls are cloystred in, drops
into our eyes, and we are rockt asleep. And it may likewise be remembered, that
the senses are attendants on the body, and Lacquies to the commands of it; and
no wonder if the eyes be locked up when the body will be indulged, or the
indisposition of it demands a truce or cessation.

But yet there are many things which conscience can only answer in this Case.

customary, or casual, accidental, or habitual? It is very true, the Saints
themselves are obnoxious to accidental falls and follies: the Sun is subject to
ecclipses, but very rarely; the best and most stately Ship may run a ground:
and in this particular a Believer may fail; he may shut his eyes when he should
act his grace at an Ordinance. The Disciples slept when Christ was praying at a
little distance. The wise Virgins slept as well Luke 22. 46.
as the foolish, Math. 25. 5. A real Saint may drop asleep Matthew. 25. 5.
in a Pew, or in a Seat, as well as Jonah in the Ship, or Christ John 1. 5.
in a Bark. A believers eyes may be arrested with sloth, Matthew. 8. 24.
when his ear should be attending its office; But this is casual.

unseasonable drowsiness, an inevitable pressure, or is it caused by our own
miscarriage, by indulging our sensual appetite, by overmuch vigilance in
worldly affairs, or by the intemperate use of Creature Comforts? If so, never
impute it to natural weakness. This is all one, as if by intemperance Qui
spiritum habet promptam carnem mortificat, qui segnis est eandem saginat.
Origin. Luke 21. 36.
one should contract the Palsy, and say, the Disease is the consequence of his
Constitution. As Grace is the Mother, so abstinence is the Nurse of
watchfulness; but if we drown our sense in an undue overplus, it is no wonder
if we be in a dead sleep at Ordinances. Let us impartially examine the cause of
our drowsiness.

proper remedies against this sinful and unseasonable drowsiness? Have we
prayed, wept, mourned and struggled against it? Have we kneeled in the Closet,
Non nobis blandiamur, sed caro serviat spiritui, infirmior fortiori, ut ab eo
etiam fortitudinem ipsa assumat. Tertul,
cried in the Chamber beforehand, that this destructive sloth might not seize
upon us? No wonder if Sampson sleep if he lie in a Dalilahs lap. It is a good
saying of Tertullian, Let us not flatter our selves, says he, but let the
flesh serve the spirit, the weaker serve the stronger, the more contemptible
obey the more honorable, that the weaker may receive strength from the
stronger. The wound is not cured without a Plaster: Have we used methods of
Grace for the cure of this sleepy Lethargy? If not, our sleep in Ordinances is
our sin, our provocation, and no way our infirmity, and let us not charge
constitution, but conscience. No wonder if the Disease grow upon us, if we
neither use Physic, nor Physician.

secular affairs? and shall we be more vigilant for earth than Heaven? for a
poor piece of clay, than for a piece of eternity? our immortal, our never dying
souls? Shall the meanest parenthesis of our lives keep us waking, and not the
great importances of our better part? This in the close will be Heb. 2. 3.
found to be our folly, and no way our excuse.

value and worth of an Ordinance? Is it not a golden opportunity, a fresh tide
of mercy? and shall we lose our tide for a little unseasonable sloth? In
Ordinances Christ treats with us about our everlasting concernments; and is
that a time for the folding of our hands to sleep? Must we be consulting our
ease when we should be Prove. 24. 33.
prosecuting our salvation? It was David's resolution, He (...) sunt homines
electi, studio and zelo divinae gloriae servidi, ardore salutis eorum
flagrantes, metaphora esthaec a bellatoribus. Par.
would follow hard after God, Psalm 63. 8. What a contradiction to this holy
man is a sleepy Hearer, one who buries himself alive at an Ordinance. The
Scriptures assure us, we must storm heaven and take it by force, Math. 11. 12.
And we must enter in at the straight gate by striving, Matthew. 13. 24. Nay, we
must make our way to Heaven by fighting the good fight of Faitb, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
And all these are actions most inconsistent with sleep and slothfulness. Matthew.
11. 12.


little sweetness in holy Matthew. 13 24. 1 Timothy 2. 12.
Ordinances, and that Gospel-dispensations never shed their perfumes upon our
souls, when we can wish them away with a nod or a dream. Rich Banquets will
scarce meet with sleepy guests. Sweet Musiques will court and captivate Verbum
Dei satiat, non saturat, creat amantes, non fastidientes.
our attention: And had we the taste, either of a Job, Job 23. 12. Or of a
David, Psalm 19. 10. we should keep both eye and heart open in divine
Ordinances. Were Ordinances so pleasant or parturient to us, as either to
delight our souls, or awaken our consciences, we should not throw Siulte, quid
est somnus, gelidae nisi mortis imago?
them away at so cheap a rate, as the gratifying of the flesh with a little
stupifying sleep. Surely the design of sleep was to be the Nurse of Nature, and
not the enemy of Grace, to Somnus aliquando vo^atur consanguineus leti.
support the body, and not to hazard the soul. Some learned men have called
sleep the kinsman of Death; O let it not be the Parent of our eternal Death; It
is a fatal change, when sleep is metamorphosed into sin.

And thus much for the washing away of the paint of that excuse which pretends
weakness and indisposition of body; It is much to be feared the hand of Joab is
in all this, that neglect and carelessness close our eyes, when we sleep away
the precious Ordinances and opportunities of Grace.

But now succeed some ponderous considerations to be weighed in the balance,
and seriously to be digested, before we give our selves the sinful latitude to
sleep in Ordinances. Indeed many there are who sin away their souls, and how
many are there who sleep away their souls? Before they come to Ordinances they
sleep in sin, and when they come to Ordinances they sin in sleep. Sleep truly
in the bed is the nurse of Nature, but sleep in the Sanctuary is the nurse of
vanity, and breeds the soul up in Ignorance and Atheism. It is very strange,
that when our grace should be full of activity, our senses should be chained
with stupidity. When Jonah slept, the storm came. Thou sleep at a blessed
soulawakening 1 John 5. Psalm 11. 6. 2 Chr. 26. 20.
Ordinance, a storm of wrath may speedily fall upon thee, as the Leprosy on a
sudden rose in Vzziahs forehead. But let us deliberatively weigh in our
thoughts,

Satan's work, and while they are undoing their own souls. If Judas have a plot
in hand, out of doors he will, though in the night to bring his cursed design
to pass, John 13. 30. Nay, the proud, wanton, envious eye in the Congregation,
will not fall asleep, but will pry into every corner, observe every fashion,
take notice of every beauty, Satan's work shall not be done sleepily; and shall
the work of God, of Christ, of Heaven, of the Soul, be done with drowsinesse
and stupidity? Here Ministers may make their appeal, Hear O Heavens, and give
ear O Earth, Isa. 1. 2. It is strange the work of a Tormentor should be more
faithfully done, than the work of a Play Master; that the service of Apollyon
Isa. 1. 2. Vtitur Isaias prosopopei^, ut Oration sit gravior, et plenior
indignationis. Cyril.
should be done with liveliness and activity, and the work of a Savior should
be done with dross and drowsiness. It is much Ahab should be so restless for a
Vineyard, 1 Kings 21. 4. and we so drowsy for a Kingdom, nay, the Kingdom of
Heaven, Luke 12. 32. How will Ruffins, Roysters, and roaring Companions spend
whole days and nights, in quaffing, carowsing, and gaming? and we cannot spend
one hour watchfully and actively for the pleasures of Eternity.

some Ordinances we will not sleep at, when we come to the Lords Table; it is
no less then prodigious to fall into a sleep: why then in Prayer or hearing of
the Nemo potest fide credere, nisi prius id quod credendum est, sibi proponi,
et predicari audiat. 2 Cor. 5 21.
Word? It is the preaching of the Word is the converting Ordinance: Faith comes
by hearing, Romans 10. 17. which faith espouseth us to Christ, justifies our
persons, Romans 5. 1. Seasons our Duties, Heb. 11. 6. Purifies our hearts, Heb.
15. 9. Unlades our guilt, and lays it upon him who is mighty to bear. It is
faith by which we put on Christ, Romans 13. 14. and so being clothed with the
spotless robes of his righteousness we may stand with confidence before Gods
tribunal. Preaching is the Mother, the Sacrament only is the Nurse of Grace;
preaching the Word of Christ fits us for feeding upon the body of Christ. Paul
gives preaching the pre-eminence, 1 Cor. 1. 17. And so prayer it carries the
conquest of omnipotency it self, Isa. 45. 11. Yet we are often Praecipuum
Episcoporum munus est Evangelium praedicare. Alap.
guilty of drowsy prayers, and sleepy hearing, when we tremble to think of
sleeping with a Sacramental Cup in our hand. Alapide observes, The predominant
duty of Bishops is to preach the word. And yet this Ordinance principally must
be a witness of our shame.

Satan mightily promotes; he knows of what fatal consequence it is for the soul
to hear attentively, to heed diligently the word of 1 Pet. 5. 8. Satanas suas
infernales volucres (quae sunt malae suggestiones, hostium veritatis
sophismata, prava hominum prophanorum colloquia, illusorum dicteria, numquid
omnia, quae dicuntur credis. quid vult tibi iste sermologus?) immittit quae
sermonem auditum ex cordibus hominum ita eximant, ut ne memoria quidem ejus
maneat, ne dum ut per illam ad fidem, et pietatem et illius exercitia, et
fructus excitemur. Lyser.
life, and reconciliation; this will batter his Kingdom, and pluck Proselytes
out of the paw of this roaring Lion: And therefore when we come to a Sermon, he
either attempts to disturb and distract us, and to throw in his cursed
injections to procure a hurry in the soul; he will then either suggest unto us
vain impertinencies, which may be as Sodoms pleasures to Lots wife, to cause us
to look back, or so many golden balls to stop us in our journey toward the
Heavenly Canaan; or else, this evil one will assail to rock us asleep, and so
sit heavy upon our eye lids; he will bring down and pillow for us to lean
upon. This is the stratagem of Satan, if he cannot steal us from the Word, to
keep us back from Ordinances, he will steal the Word from us, to make
Ordinances useless and unprofitable, Mat. 13. 19. The souls term time, is
Satan's tempting time: When we are most busy about our souls, he is most active
against them; he will make any music to rock us asleep, when we are
discoursing with Jesus Christ. The Siren sings sweetest, when we are upon the
waters sailing to our Port; and Satan never sweetens his temptations more, then
when we are sailing heaven-wards; and therefore when we sleep in Ordinances,
let us remember, the Charmer has swayed with us more then the Preacher.

sleepy eye in holy Ordinances is a sad sign of a sleepy conscience; if the eye
be drowsy without, it is much to be feared the heart is dead within. It is
very observable, A fat Ephesians. 5. 14.
heart, a deaf ear, and a closed eye, are all coupled together, Isa. 6. 10.
Grace is an awakening principle; the power of grace will fix the eye in
heavenly contemplation, will bend the knee in humble supplication, will lift up
the hand in holy devotion, will wind up the tongue in savoury communication,
Col. 4. 6.
and will bow the ear in holy and careful attention. A gracious heart will
even Quicksilver the body in Josh. 9 21.
holy duties, and make the flesh serve the spirit, and the Didicisse fideliter
arts, emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
senses be as Gibeonites to the soul. As the Arts soften us to ingenuity, and
will not suffer us to be brutish, so a conscience awakened by a work of grace,
will keep the eye awake in Ordinances, seriously considering,

1. That every Ordinance concerns the soul. 2. That every Ordinance may be the
last. 3. That every Ordinance is the purchase of Christ. 4. That every
Ordinance is a good wind for Heaven.
In a word, The work of grace may very well be suspected, where the means of
grace are so much slighted, as to be passed away in a sleep, and a dream.

no sleeping in hell. Here we sleep when we might awake; there we shall awake,
when Si magnificum quid vides, cogito regnum dei; si terribil^, cogita
gehennam. Christ.
we cannot sleep; we shall take no naps upon our bed of flames: Scorching
wrath, screetching cries, gnawing conscience will keep the reprobate waking;
Here we sleep unseasonably, and let us take heed least we awake eternally, and
carefully beware least for want of watching one hour, we lose our rest for ever.

sleeping in heaven, Rev. 4. 8. Now Ordinances they are the glimpses of heaven;
And it should be our endeavor to serve God here; as the Saints and Angels do
in glory; there is no weariness, no drowsiness, no deadness, there hallelujahs
are pleasant and perpetual. When we come to the Sanctuary, we are about
heavenly employment, and let us study a heavenly deportment; and let us ask our
souls the question, Would an Angel (was he capable of it) fall asleep when he
converses with God?

And further to discourage us from the practice of this customary and crimson
abomination, let us observe a few quickening and awakening prescriptions.

a suitable frame of spirit. Was the heart tuned by preparatory prayer, Preces
preparatoriae, sunt administratoriae.
the strings would not so soon crack in sleep and drowsiness; a warm heart
would cause a wakefull eye. Neglect of preparation exposes us to wanton
glances, wandering thoughts, and a sleepy eye in holy administrations. Gardens
if not dug and dressed, bring forth weeds, not flowers.

Bibles, or our Note Books; we shall hardly sleep with a Book or a Pen in our
hands. If our eye was employed in Scripture search, it would not suffer the eye
lids, those curtains to be drawn for sleep and sluggishness. But oftentimes the
shutting of the Book brings the shutting of the eye; and if we stand idle in
the market of Ordinances, who will Mat. 20. 3. 6.
hire us but Satan?

steady eye of faith upon God and the glorious Angels, when we come to
Ordinances. We will not sleep in the (...), sic exemplaria graeca (...); sic
Arias Mont. (...)* Sic. Vet. Lotin.
presence chamber, especially if the Prince and Nobles be there. The blessed
Ordinances are Christ's Presence Chamber, his Court, his Garden, his
Banqueting House, and shall we sleep in the presence of the King of Saints,
Nay, the King of Nations? as the Prophet calls him, Jer. 10. 7. Nay, the King
of Ages, as the vulgar Latin terms him; this is not only incivility, but
impiety.

pampering Nature. An over-free use of the Creatures on Gods holy day will lay
us open to sinful drowsiness, when we make Kitchins of our bellies, the smoke
will soon fly in our eyes, and incline us to wretched and careless sleepiness.
When Lot was overcharged with Wine, he soon sleeps himself into incest and
wantonness. Genesis 19. 34.


expecting great things from God. They are vigilant who are in a waiting
posture. Beggars Psalm. 123. 7.
are not dormant, if they are so in the Barn, they are Psalm. 4. 7.
not so at the door. Let us come to Ordinances, as to a Golden Mine; the Miners
do not sleep with the iron instruments in their hands. Let us approach to the
Sanctuary looking for grace, loves, smiles, the kisses of Christ's lips, the
light of Gods countenance, and this will keep us wakefull. Cold desires, and
mean expectations make us careless and oscitant in Ordinances. We sleep not
telling Pearls, or picking Diamonds: there are better riches to be found in
Psalm. 63. ^.
Communion with God.

CHAP. XXIX. Other Evils to be avoided in our outward behavior, when we come
to the Public Assembly.
not rove in Ordinances. As the eye must not sleep, so it must not wander, when
the eternal Gospel is preaching, or we are pouring out our souls in holy
prayer, to an infinite God. It is recorded of Christ's Auditors, that they did
fasten their eyes upon him, Luke 4. 20. Luke 4. 20.
We must bring a double eye to every Sermon: Triplex est aspectus Christi. 1.
Vnus corporalis qui sit oculis carnis, et hic per se non bea^. 2. Spiritualis,
qui sit oculis fidei, et hic solus beat. 3. Visio, et corporalis, et
spiritualis, qui beatitudinem in homine auget, et quasi conduplicat. Chemnit.


1. The eye of our body, and this must be fastened on the person of the
Minister.

2. The eye of our understanding, and this must be fastened on the Doctrine of
the Minister. And as Solomon says, Eccles. 2. 14. The wise man's eyes are in
his head, especially when he approaches to holy Ordinances; then as he is to
look to his feet, Eccles. 5. 1. so likewise to his eye. Our Savior tells his
hearers, Luke 10. 23. Blessed are the eyes, which see the things which ye see;
as if properly the Gospel did belong to the eye, rather then to the ear; and
the wandering eye in Gospel Ordinances, was the greater crime. Indeed when the
eye is fixed, the heart will be composed; and the more we view the Preacher, the
more we shall mind the preaching. We must take heed to the eye in Ordinances; a
captivated eye will easily affect, and seduce the heart; and when all is
withdrawn, what shall the Word work upon? The eye is the window of the soul;
let us see that this window open toward Jerusalem, that it sparkle in zeal, be
Dan. 6. 10.
fixed in love to Christ, that it be composed to reverence, when we come to
spiritual opportunities. It is the just reproach of the Papists, that they
bring wanton and lustful eyes to their Orisons and devotions, and more look
after a Genesis 34. 2.
curtizan then a Christ. But when we meet in the assemblies Luke 11. 34. Psalm.
123. ^. Isa. 51. 6.
of the Saints, let our eye be lift up to God in holy admiration, let it be
fixed on his Ambassador to behold his zeal and devotion, let it be viewing and
turning over the Scriptures in a Berean noble examination, Acts 17. 11.
searching what is quoted and delivered, and let our eye melt in tears, and
tenderness in humble and broken compunction, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. The eye has its
work and offices in Gospel opportunities. In which we must see Isa. 66. 2.


First, That our eye be fixed. Heb. 11. 6.
Secondly, That our ear be attentive. Thirdly, That our grace be active. Acts
16. 14.
Fourthly, That our heart be receptive, to entertain the word of life and
salvation.
Eccles. 5. 2. In praying our words must be few, but in our hearing all words
must be forborne, (...), a little to invert the Philosopher. The Apostle says,
1 Cor. 14. 33. God is the Author, not of Confusion, but of Peace. Now private
whisperings and vain chat in holy Ordinances, they are the confusion and
disorder of holy assemblies; have we not tables to talk at, or houses to
discourse in? Must the Sanctuary of God be our Change to tell of news, our Shop
to talk of Commodities, our Parlour to prate of family affairs, or whatever our
slight hearts will froth out? When Proclamations are made, all keep Isa 61. 1,
2.
silent; and surely silence does not less become us when the Ambassador of
Christ proclaims liberty to the Captives, and the acceptable year of the Lord.
We read of a silence Silentium caeli quietem, and tranquillitatem notat. Ribe^.
in heaven, Rev. 8. 1. When something important was preparing for the world,
and much more must this heavenly order be kept in the assemblies of Gods
people, when the importances of our souls are in their discovery; in this case,
men as well as women must be silent in the Church, that God may come in the
still voice to speak peace unto us; and Psalm. 85. 8.
that we may return no more unto folly, Psalm. 85. 8. Paul would not preach his
Sermon before silence was made, Acts 21. 40. Confused noise becomes Babell
better then the Temple, the workmen of that prodigious structure, rather then
Gods people when orderly congregated together, and yet how many are guilty of
this offense, they will be full of their salutes and complements, telling their
tales, producing their intelligence, venting their vanities, even when the
heart of God is opening in sweet and sacred dispensations; Ezekiel. 19. 14.
this is a Lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. When we come to holy
Ordinances, we should take up David's resolution to keep our tongue; that we
offend not with our lips, Psalm. 39. 1. And follow the injunction of the Apostle
James, James 1. 18. to bridle our tongues: For Jam. 3. 6.
surely if ever an unbridled tongue was the character and sign of irreligion,
it is then when it breaks out in the time of holy Ordinances.

outward behavior must not be vain and loose, but grave and serious in the
public assemblies. The Turkish Heyl. Geograph.
Bashaws sit silent, and are very composed in the presence of their Sultan, and
shall a pedantique worm more overawe those pieces of gravity, then the
presence of an infinite God stake us down to a reverential behavior? Gods
presence makes every place a Sanctuary, as the presence of the King Domus dei
dicitur, ubi deus se viatoribus patefacit, ubi locus est opportunus precibus,
and deus singulari praesentia adest, et invocantes exaudit. Par.
makes the Court, and therefore where ever we come to give him a meeting, let
his eye reine us in, and draw us to a becoming veneration: When we read of a
Jacob full of awe and dread in the apprehensions of the presence of God, and
hear of a Solomon lifting up his trembling hands to seek the face of God, and
observe holy Josiah weeping and melting at the hearing of the Law of God, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. we must conclude these things were written for our instructions,
1 Cor. 10. 11. to show us how we must behave our Genesis 28. 17.
selves in Gospel solemnities. The Bride dresseth her self in her choicest
attire to meet with her Bridegroom. In every 1 Kings 8. 22.
ry ordinance the believing soul meets with her beloved; shall there be no
dress, no composing the behavior to love and reverence, that Christ may not
suspend his salvifical 2 Chr. 34 27.
embraces? As God showed infinite wisdom in forming a beautiful body out of a
little scattered dust; so man shows great wisdom in composing this heavy piece
of clay to reverence, when he comes to God in Ordinances.

CHAP. XXX. How to compose our inward man in our approaches to God in
Ordinances.
HAving thus copiously shown how we must order our Cor cum manibus levat, qui
orationem suam cum operibus roborat; nam quisquis orat, sed operari dissimulat,
cor levat sed manus non levat, et qui oper^tur et non orat, manus levat, sed
cor non levat. Greg. Moral.
outward behavior in public Ordinances: In the next place we must glance at
out inward deportment, viz. That of the mind. The Prophet Jeremy advises us,
Lam. 3. 41. Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.
The soul is principally interested in all holy duties.

First, Not only because in all holy services God principally eyes the heart,
Prove. 23. 26.

Or Secondly, Because Gospel Ordinances chiefly influence and aim at the heart.

But Thirdly, Likewise because the welfare of the soul is the only Port we sail
to in all our attendance upon Gospel opportunities: It is the souls conviction,
the souls conversion, the souls edification and building up in its most holy
faith, which is the grand design in every Evangelical administration. Now for
the composure of our inward man in Ephesians. 3. 16.
holy Ordinances,

our understandings to the word and the work we are about. The wise man says,
Prove. 20. 27. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord; and when we Haec
lux in intellectu in*tenebris micans sovenda est, studio et diligenti operum
dei commentatione, et experimentis, et otio, veluti rubigine corrumpitur. Cartw.
come to holy Ordinances, it is both our duty and our wisdom to snuff this
candle that it may burn the brighter, to see the mysteries of the Gospel; and
this is suitable to the Apostolical Counsel, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Gird up the lo^ns of
your mind. A metaphor taken from travelers, who gird their garments close that
they may not be impeded and hindered in their journey. When we draw nigh to God
in Ordinances, we must bend our minds and be intent on the word, and drink in
truth, as the parched ground does the rain; we must screw up our minds to an
acurate observation of what ever is revealed unto us from divine Writ. If the
Gospel John 3 19.
be light, it is the eye of the understanding must behold this light; If the
Gospel be a day, it is the eye of the mind must Romans 13. 12.
discern this day. Some hear the word and understand it Isa. 6. 10.
not, and this is Gods judgment. But some hear the precious truths of God and
entertain them not, and this is man's sin. Men shut the eye of their
understanding by carelessness and neglect. We should hear the word as condemned
men their pardons, as Legatees the Wills wherein their Legacies are set down,
with that intenseness of mind. Preaching, if we spur not up the mind to
pursue it, is a noise, Pater nobis de^ illuminatos oculos cordis nostr^ ut ejus
lumine illust^ati, Christum plene agnoscamus. Ambr.
not the word, an inarticulate sound, not soul-saving Doctrine. And that our
understanding may discharge its office, prayer must precede: That God would
open the eyes of our mind, that we may see the wonderful things of the Law,
Psalm. 119. 34. and we must beg eye salve, Rev. 3. 18. and that God would give
us the spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1. 18. to shed a light upon our
understandings, Luke 24. 45. that we may dive deep into the profound Mysteries
of the Gospel. We know not what ardent prayer and a diligent mind may Christus
solus operit intelle^tum Scripturarum. Chemn^ Mel in Ore, melos in Aure. Bern.
accomplish toward Scripture knowledge. Indeed the Gospel is proportionate to
every thing in man, it is honey to the taste, and Gold to the interest of man,
Psalm. 19. 10. It is music to his ear, Ezekiel. 33. 32. light to his eye, John 19.
and comfort to his heart, Romans 15. 3. And pity it is, the shutting of an eye, a
little rareless remisness and not bending the mind, should rob the soul of
such unsearchable treasure.

our hearts to embrace the word in the dispensations of it. The Gospel is not
only to be let in by Prove. 23. 23. Verbem dei s^t domesticus, non peregrinus,
non for^ stare, sed in domo cordis continuo versari. Daven.
our apprehensions, but to be locked in by our affections, and we are to
entertain it not only in the light of it, but in the love of it. The Apostle
complains, 2. These. 2. 10. That many did not entertain the truth in the love
thereof, that they might be saved. The truths of God must have the heart, and
we buy them not by our audience, but our espousals. The word must dwell in us,
Col. 3. 16. and not as a transient guest, but as an inmate. Scholars may
understand the word, but Christians embrace it. It is a rare speech of the holy
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 20. My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy
judgments at all times. The word is the Mat. 13. 23.
seed, the heart the ground, where this seed must be thrown. John 5. 40.
David calls the Law not his light, but his love, Psalm. 119. 97. and his
delight, Psalm. 119. 35. When we come to Ordinances, we must resolve to treasure
up truth, and entertain it as Lot the Angels, Genesis 19. 3. Or the Virgin Mary
the wonders of her time, Luke 2. 19. A refractory will renders all
opportunities of grace abortive. The two Disciples Luke 24. 32.
which came from Emmaus question one with another, Whether their hearts did not
burn within them, when Christ had opened the Scriptures to them? intimating to
us, that the heart is properly the Altar upon which the fire of the word is to
be laid to the sacrificing of our lusts, and the inflaming of our graces. And
it is the glorious promise of God to write his Law upon our hearts, Jer. 31.
33. Let us meet this blessed promise in bringing our hearts to every Gospel
dispensation.

our memories upon employment when we come to holy Ordinances. The memory it is
the Secretary of the soul, and as at Council boards the Secretary cannot be
absent, so at Ordinances, which are the Council table, Acts 20. 27.
where soul-concernments are agitated and transacted, the memory must not be
absent. We must not write the word when preached to us in dust, but in marble,
not in a heedless neglect, but in a faithful remembrance. We do not throw
Pearls into sieves to drop out. The paradox is greater Memo^ia ignis gehennae,
est ^emedium ap^rime utile contra omnes tentationes. Chrysostom. Rev. 14. 6.
when we put the eternal Gospel into a treacherous and faithless memory. Surely
we shall never practice that truth we cannot remember, if we do not mind the
word, we shall never live it. We cannot read blotted lines, or understand torn
papers; and if the word lie only upon the surface of the memory it will never
get within the bark of the life. That Sun-dyall will never give us the time of
the day, which wants the gnomon to cast the shadow: charge thy memory to retain
every truth thou hear; Let it pick up the filings John. 6. 12.
of divine Truth, that nothing may be lost. The richest Fringes are so many
several threads wrought together: We do not Agnoscamus, et deploremus communem
honc humanae naturae corruptionem, quod in mundanis quidem, sive quis nobis
benefaciat, sive nos offendat, satis acrem habemus memoriam; Ac in Divinis,
Benefaciat deus nobis, sive nos puniat, facillime obliviscimur. Lys.
address our selves to Ordinances to see our faces in a glass, as the Apostle
speaks, Jam. 1. 23. and presently forget both our featute and complexion.
Whatever truth thou forgetest, so much is lost to thy soul. We put not our
Treasure in broken baggs. The forgetful hearer is guilty of the same
unthriftiness. Let us beforehand beg of God a firm and tenacius memory: He who
gives wisdom, Jam. 1. 5. to understand his word, can give us a memory to
retain it: All the faculties of the soul are created and enriched by him.
Remembered Truths are probably riveted in the heart and revealed in the life. It
is a most gracious providence of God that he commits his Word to writing: And
shall that Word which has been preserved by God for many Ages, even to a
Miracle (the fury of Man, the rage of Persecutors, the malice of Satan, the
subtilty of Heretics being considered) shall that blessed Word, I say, be lost
by thee in a moment? where God has brought a Pen to set down, will thou bring
a sponge to blot out? Let us be serious, and consider God remembers those
truths we forget, and if they are not the guide of the life, they will prove
the guilt of the soul.

conscience to appear at every Ordinance. Satan will give us many dispensations
in holy duties and divine worship; He will permit us an ear to hear, a tongue
to pray; nay, he will not disquiet us in our transient heats of zeal, and sweet
passions of joy, as Herod heard the Word (...), Mark 6. 20.
sweetly; Our affections for a little time shall be dallianced and delighted
with some sweet Truths, especially if they be set off by the musical voice of
the Preacher; but this evil one will never suffer (if he can obstruct it) that
conscience shall come into the Assemblies of the Saints, within the hearing of
Gods sacred and saving Word. Indeed, the purpose and design of the Word is to
deal with conscience, Cant. 5. 16. Romans 7. 24.
to work upon conscience to convince conscience of the sinfulness Eccles. 1. 1.
Mat. 16. 26. Ephesians. 2. 10. Mat. 11. 29, 30 Luke 7. 45. Acts 2. 37. Mat. 10. 30.
31. John 8. 8. Romans 2. 15. In Basilica cordis humani Deus tribunal constituit,
legesque in ejus tabulis incidit digito suo, rationem creavit judicem,
conscientiam actorem, Testes cogitationes, quae vel accusant, vel defendunt
hominem. 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7, 8.
of sin, of the loveliness of Christ, of the vanity of the creature, of the
preciousness of the Soul, of the beauty of Holiness, of the easiness of Christ's
Yoke, etc. Christ he Preaches, and convinces Mary Magdalen in her conscience,
and she melts in tears at his feet. Peter convinces the conscience of the
stubborn Jews, and they are pricked at the heart. Paul and Silas convince the
conscience of the Jaylour, and he is in a fit and an agony of trembling and
despair, and presently falls upon enquiry after life and salvation. When thou
approachest to Ordinances, if a sin be reproved, let conscience speak, is not
this my default? If a duty be pressed, let conscience speak, is not this my tie
and obligation? If a corruption be unmasked and detected, let conscience speak,
is not this my Dalilah, my right eye, which with Antigonus in his Picture, I
put my finger upon? If self-denial be urged, let conscience answer, is it not
the Cross I have so wriggled under, and have been so impatient of? Conscience
is the chief Guest which is invited to the feast of an Ordinance. To leave
conscience at home, is to let all the sons of Jesse to pass by, and to keep
back David too, and so Samuel may go back again with his anointing Oil.

live them over, to practice every Prayer we put up, to act every truth we
hear, and to adorn every Ordinance we enjoy. Our mingling with the people of
God in holy worship, is only the bare canvass: It is Conversion brings the
Pencil and the colors to draw a fair and beautiful piece. Moses when he came
down from conversing with God, his face shone. Our light must shine before men
Exodus 34. 30.
after our communion with God in Ordinances. The light Mat. 5. 16. Conciones
sunt verba vivenda, and non tantum audienda.
of the Gospel must enlighten our lives, as one taper lights another: It is
rare, when our heart is suitable to Gods nature, as it is said of David, 1 Samuel
13. 34. and our life is suitable to Gods Law. And indeed, though the spiritual
life, as the natural, begins at the heart, yet it does not end there, but
proceeds to the hands and the feet, etc. The same water which was in the Well,
is in the Bucket. The holy heart is like a box of Musk which perfumes and
scents the tongue, the eyes, the ears, the hands, and whatever is near it, with
sanctity and holiness. The Ordinances should impress our hearts and influence
our lives, and therefore a holy conversation is called a conversation becoming
the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. If we are resolved upon sin, let us lay aside holy
Sabbaths, holy Duties, holy Ordinances. When the Preacher has shut up all in
the Pulpit, the hearer is to begin in his practice: the strokes in Music must
answer the notes and A morte Christi omnis piorum ministrorum sufficientia, and
aptitudo dimanat, qui aures verbo percipiendo, et pollices actionibus sacris
praeparat. Riv.
rules set down in the Lesson: Our actions are these musical strokes which must
answer the rules set down in the Sermon. It is observable, that the blood was
to be sprinkled on Aarons right ear, on his right thumb, and on his right toe,
Exodus 29. 20. The first did note the right hearing of the Word; the second and
third, his working according to the tenor of it; His working by it, and his
walking in it. Our Savior couples hearing and keeping the Word together, Luke
11. 28. The Porter is not so rich who carries the baggs of Silver, as the
Merchant who ownes them: He is not so happy who hears the Sermon, as he who
lives it. As one well observes, The Virgin Mary was more honored that she was
the member of Christ, than Romans 6. 13.
that she was the mother of Christ. Life and holiness set off the luster and
beauty of Ordinances. A savoury Christian is an Ornament to holy institutions.
Prayer is music when holiness sets the tune; The Gospel is glorious when
holiness 2 Cor 4. 4.
gives the shine, and reverberates bright beams upon it. Let Jer. 5. 14.
us then fully, in the strength of Christ, Phil. 4. 13. resolve, Psalm. 119. 105.
when we come to Ordinances, the Word shall be a Fire to our dross, a Curb to
our passions, Music to our ear, A Purge to our corruptions, a Light to our
feet, a Card and Acts 17. 18.
Compass to our conversations. Some hear and deride the Acts 7. 54.
Word; Some hear and storm at the Word; Some hear and Mark 6. 20.
only admire at the Word: But let us hear, and both admire and reform, so hear
as to set our dyall according to the Sun of the word: And as many as walk
according to this Rule, Gal. 6. 16.
the peace of God shall be upon them, and the whole Israel of God.

Let us take heed of wandering thoughts in holy Ordinances. It is storied of
Bernard; that when he came to the Church Luke 10. 37.
door, he would say, Stay there all my earthly thoughts. Let us go and do so
likewise; When we approach to holy Ornances, let us say, stay behind me all my
secular imaginations, all my worldly cares, all my vain and impertinent
thoughts, we are now going to meet with God on the Genesis 22, 5.
Mount. Vain thoughts in holy Worship, they are as weeds in the Garden, or
those painted plants in the Corn, which hinder the springing up of the blessed
seed of the Word; Indeed they are like Thieves who dog us to do us a mischief,
either to steal away the comforts of the Word, or to wound and burden
Conscience, or to keep the heart in an hurry till Christ's message be delivered,
and the blessed opportunity be over. These vain thoughts in Ordinances are the
flies in the ointment, the motes in the eye of the soul, and the spots in the
feast of an Ordinance. But here, we will first find out the disease, and then
apply the Remedy.

They are open and offensive to Gods eye: They cannot creep so sliely Deus
totus oculus est, et minima videt. Aug. Heb. 4. 12. Jer. 4. 14. Oculus Dei
simul universa cernentis, non abdita locorum non parietum septa secludunt. Non
so^um ei acta, et cogitata, sed agenda, et cogitanda sunt cognita. Aug.
and closely through the mind, but God fully observes them, certainly takes
notice of them, and as surely is angry at them, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Gods eye is
more peculiarly upon us in holy Worship. Beggars crowd not into the
Presence Chamber. Vain thoughts what are they but the rags of the mind, the
emblems of our nakedness and poverty, and shall these thrust in when we are in
the Presence Chamber of the infinite Majesty? God sees all these Vagrants, and
shall we converse with him with Concubines in our bosoms? How often is it
repeated, Christ knowing their thoughts, Mat. 12. 25. Luke 5. 22. Luke 11. 17.
Luke 6. 8. which does alarm us to keep our thoughts pure, especially in the
Divine Presence, when God meets us in holy Worship. And let us seriously
consider, Christ who is now the Spectatour shall be the Judge of our thoughts
and imaginations.

Impertinent and vain thoughts they very much discompose and distract Duty;
they are like a broken string in an Instrument, which makes the Music harsh
and unpleasant: They are the inward noise of the mind which so much disturbs
Isa. 29. 13.
us, that we cannot heed with that attention, nor pray with that devotion as
does become us. As if Music should be brought into the Room, and play while
we are hearing a Will read, we cannot apprehend one clause in it distinctly and
to any purpose: such swarms of inconvenient thoughts hinder the ear from
listening to, and the heart from fastening upon God in holy Worship, they are
like Tobiah and Sanballat who hindered the building of Jerusalem. What
confusion must there be, if the Minister speak, Nehem. 4. 2.
and the Spirit speak, and our worldly hearts speak all at the same time? whom
shall we hear? God usually comes in the still Voice when the ear bends, and the
heart waits 1 King. 19. 12.
silently at the door of Salvation.

Vain thoughts in holy Ordinances, they are sinful irregularities, the spawn of
the Serpent, they do not only disturb, but stain our duties: They are breaches
of Divine Command, Prove. 4. 23. When we are in Ordinances we Nocturnas et
diurnas excubias collocemus, invigilando cordi. Cartw.
are not only to thrust out enemies, but to keep out wanderers. If we watch
our hearts, we must not only resist Satan from his attempts, but reject
foolish thoughts from their intrusion, their company being our crime. Indeed a
careless hearer flings all open, and lets in light, vain, worldly, wanton, all
ranks and degrees of sinful thoughts and imaginations. (...), Captivum ducentes
omnem intellectum. Sir.
Surely it must be a great sin, that when in holy duties our hearts should be
Gods enclosure, we should make them a Common for all beasts of prey to graze
upon. And how can we bring every thought in obedience to Christ, according to
Command, 2 Cor. 10. 5. When our hearts in a duty are like open Cages for every
thoughts to fly out, and perch upon any vanity it meets with. Our thoughts in
duty must not sport, and like the Bees run from one flower of pleasure, to
another of worldly affairs, and so skip over to another of ordinary
occurrences, and think to suck sweetness from them. In Gospel opportunities our
1 Cor. 6. 20. Quod non caput, non pedem, non manum, petit Deus; illud e^us
sapientiae est consentaneum, quippe cordis possessione omnia corporis mem bra,
sibi addicta et devota habebit. Cartw.
thoughts are not our own, but they are under Authority, and must be staked to
the spiritual business they are now about, they must be confined to Truth, to
Christ, to sacred Counsels, and holy instructions which are now in handling.
and the suggestions of Gods Word, which are now laid before them. And how can
we be said to give God our hearts, according to that Command, Prove. 23. 26. if
our thoughts are tossed too and fro in a loose vagary, when we are in Communion
with God? To give God our hearts, is a gift never so rational, so necessary, so
seasonable, as when we are in holy duties, then this donative is like ripe
fruits, blown Roses, like those Commodites which bear the greatest price: So
much of the thoughts as wanders from God, so much of the heart is estranged,
and it must be so, for Isa. 29. 13.
thoughts are only the hearts emissaries. And it is very remarkable, Mal. 3. 8.
that those thoughts which are good in themselves, yet if impertinent to the
duty in hand, viz. prayer, hearing, receiving, etc. they are sinful and
irregular. As a Limner who eyes the hangings in the Room, the fret-work in the
Ceiling, the largeness of the windows, which observation is not blameworthy in
it self; yet not eying the person, whose picture he is drawing, he is guilty of
folly and carelessness. Our thoughts in holy duties are sinful, if not suitable.

they are the ebullitions and breakings forth of a corrupt heart. Man's heart
has Jer. 2. 24.
no month to be taken in, it is as the troubled sea, which always casts up mire
and dirt as a Furnace, which is ever sparkling forth its vanity and folly, nay,
the special presence of Christ in ordinances cannot shackle it, or compose it
to a due consistency, Maligni spiritus in menstruis animum inveniunt, quando in
pollutis cogitationibus positum, facile ad perversam operationem trabunt. Greg.
it will steal away under the eye of the judge; impertment thoughts in holy
duties are the pimples which evidence the heat of Corruption within: And here
we may expostulate with Job, Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? And surely the scum of a putrified heart must needs be offensive to
the pure eyes of an holy God; this is wickedness which God has no pleasure in,
Psalm. 5. 6. Vain thoughts in duty are only the breaking of the impostumation
which lies covertly in the heart, where no eye sees it.

But now the Disease being discovered, let us apply the Remedies. And for the
preventing of wandering thoughts in holy Ordinances,

Let us heartily bemoan these sinful impertinencies. Let us speak to God in
the language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 120. 5. Woe is me that I dwell in the Tents
of Kedar! Woe is me that I cannot keep my heart close to Christ in holy
Ordinances, nor watch with my Lord one hour, no not one hour, but that I dwell
among sinful, vain, foolish and flatulent thoughts. God surely will take away
the cumbersome burden of a troubled soul, if it be a real burden, he will
chase away these frothy thoughts from our minds; and this is one of those
burdens we must cast upon God, Psalm. 55. 22. Christ will not break the bruised
Reed: It breaks the very heart of a Saint, that when he should enjoy close
Communion with Jesus Christ, a cloud of vain thoughts should interpose, to
eclipse his happiness, and darken his comforts. Let us spread therefore this
affliction before the Lord with a weeping eye, and a bleeding heart: God knows
how to stop up every passage, that a vain thought shall not slip out of any
cranny of thy heart.

Let us overawe our hearts with a sense of the divine presence. Say with the
Centurion, Acts 10. 33. We are all here present before God. The Creature dares
not trifle, if thunderstruck Acts 17. 28.
with the presence of the Lord; he cannot but know something of Gods power, his
own dependence. I can speak it Loquor per experientiam quantillum boni per
sacras scripturas obtinendum, etc. Eras.
by experience, says Erasmus, That there is little good gained by the
Scriptures, if a man hear or read them cursorily and carelessly; but if a man do
it out of Conscience, and heedily, as in Gods presence, he shall find such
efficacy in it, as is not to be found in any other Book. Gods eye will make us
serious, and Pedro Mexia, Histor. Imper.
fetter our flitting thoughts. The Servant will not sport in the Masters
presence. The Historian observes, That Domitian the Emperor played with flies
when he was in the Chamber alone. Indeed we give the reins to our hearts in
holy duties, because we think there are none see them; but were we sensible of
the divine presence, and that Gods piercing eye 1 These. 2. 13*
saw all the hurly burly in the soul, when our thoughts took their ranges, we
should fetter our hearts straighter, then the Jailer did the feet of the
Apostles, Acts 16. 24. and put a pad-lock upon our imaginations. We suppose
there is none in the congregation but the Minister, and the people, and they
are strangers to our thoughts, whether they are fixed or flying; but let us not
deceive our selves, Psalm. 139. 12.
our thoughts are as fair Champian to Gods eye and prospect, as our actions.

Let us take some pains with our own hearts. Children will be wanton, if not
disciplined; our hearts will be flying, if not deplumed by care and industry.
Charge thy heart in holy Ordinances, not to stir up to awake thy beloved until
he Cant. 2. 7.
please, which will be after the Ordinance to bless thy care Cant. 3. 5.
and watchfulness. Cant. 8. 4.


We must pray against these wandering thoughts, that God would fix our
Quick-silvered hearts, and keep Dinah at home.

We must strive against them, and set before our hearts,

for lesser evils. great evil of lesser sins; nay, let us threaten our hearts,
if they will not commune with God in Ordinances, and be still, Psalm. 4. 4. that
we will fill them with smarting grief and sorrow.
We must fight against these vain and wandering thoughts, with the sword of the
spirit, which is the Word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. We must convince our hearts, how
many Scriptural Commands, wandering thoughts are the breach of, and Ephesians. 6. 17.
therefore in themselves they are weapons drawn against heaven. Our hearts,
like Gardens, are best when dressed, but being neglected, they are easily
overgrown with sin and vanity.

If vain and impertinent thoughts arise in our minds, when we are in holy
Ordinances, let us not dwell upon them. Ah let Agrippina cu^ filio suo Nerone
concubitum ambire ausa est, ut imperium petulanter et superbe exerceat. Hist.
Imp.
us not take pleasure in speculative Wickedness. Evil thoughts, like Curtezans,
if they are smiled upon, they grow impudent, and will crowd in upon the soul;
therefore when such thoughts arise, send them away with a sigh. Let us drown
our sinful thoughts, as Pharaoh did the Israelites Children, in their first
birth, Exodus 1. 16. When our hearts are ready to cherish them, let our graces
be ready to crush them. Vain thoughts even in holy duties, will be ready to
break out, if the love of Christ, and holy resolution keep Acts 15. 9.
not the door. That heart-purifying-grace of faith will give these sinful
intruders their speedy dismission.

Let us preserve and keep holy affections in the heart; for such affections as
we have, such necessarily will be our Sibimutuo causae sunt.
thoughts, Psalm. 119. 97. Mal. 3. 16. The fear of God will make us think much
of God. Indeed thoughts and affections are mutual causes one of another;
thoughts are the bellows which inflame affections, and when they are enflamed,
they cause thoughts to boil over; and therefore men newly converted to God,
have new and strong affections, and they think more of God, then any other.
Superlative love to Jesus Christ will scatter vain and wandering thoughts Cant.
3. 1, 2.
in holy duties; the soul will then say, I come to seek my Beloved.

Let us get strong apprehensions of the holiness and purity of God: And let us
consider how unsuitable vain and slight thoughts are, to his holy and
unblemished thoughts, how Attributa dei sunt invisibilia, et spiritualia, et
ideo deus est colendus, latria precib^, votis, et gratiarum action. Alap.
unsuitable our mud is to his Crystal. What is the reason, that the Saints and
Angels in Heaven have not a vain thought, they strike not a wry stroke, the
sight of the holy God does fix them. Nothing would more spiritualize our
thoughts in holy duties, then the consideration of Gods Attributes, the
transcendent brightness of those most glorious beams. The Masters eye keeps the
Servant demure and observant; and nothing more consolidates man's heart, then
the serious apprehensions of a glorious and infinite God.

Let us be earnest with God for the spirit: He can sanctify our thoughts in
holy Ordinances, and keep them close to the 1 These. 5. 23.
work in hand. The spirit of God can turn the heart, which naturally is a bed
of lust, to become a bed of spices, and 1 Cor. 2. 10.
so fill it with divine cogitations; this blessed spirit can present the soul
with Heavenly objects, in Heavenly duties. The spirit is not only a discerner
of thoughts, but the refiner of them, to purge away their dross and
impertinency; and therefore called a Refiners fire, Mal. 3. 2. Our Savior
faith, John 16. 13. The Spirit of truth shall lead us into all truth; and our
hearts being guided, the thoughts will not be subject to wander into by paths,
when we are interessed in holy and sacred opportunities.

CHAP. XXXI. As we must be strict in our behavior, so we must be spiritual in
our duties, when we approach the Public Ordinances.
HAving thus largely discovered how we must be strict in our behaviors in
public ordinances, We come next to show, that we must be spiritual in our
duties. The heart is the chief ghuest at every ordinance. The Egyptians of all
the fruits, chose the Peach to consecrate to the Goddess, and they gave this
reason for it, because the fruit thereof resembles the heart. The Saints
Character is from his inward carriage to God. The Kings Daughter is all
glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. If we will worship God indeed, we must worship
him in heart. Hypocrisy is but practical blasphemy. The heart is the King in
the little world, Man. Our Savior (...).
says, John 4. 24. God is a spirit, and he will be worshipped in spirit and in
truth. In truth (i. e.) Scripturally, opposite to the inventions of men's heads;
In spirit (i. e.) sincerely, John 4. 24.
opposite to the dissimulation of men's hearts. The deeper the belly of the Lute
is, the pleasanter the sound is; the deeper our worship comes from the heart,
the more delightful it is in Gods eye: But now that our holy duties may be
spiritually performed, that we may hear spiritually, and pray spiritually, and
receive spiritually.

The inward man must be employed in holy ordinances; not so much the ear, as
the understanding; not so much the knee, as the memory; not so much the tongue,
as the heart; though as our Savior says, Mat. 23. 23. This must be done, but
the other must not be left undone. In legal sacrifices God would have the fat
and the inwards, Lev. 7. 3. Is it Bis adeps nominatur, et halocaustum non
tantum suit res sancta sanctarum, sed et locus in quo comesta fuit a
sacerdotibus, sanctur fuit.
not to inform us, that our services must not be specious, but spiritual, God
must have the fat; and they must be cordial not extrinsical, God must have the
inwards. It is not the Pharisees disfigured face, but Mary Magdalens melting
tears, God eyes and respects. God is not delighted with the Pageant of a duty.
The Service does not please God, which has Absolons face, but which has
David's heart. Jehu's fained zeal, Herod's seeming joy, no way comport with Gods
will. The melting frame of a weeping Peter, and the spiritual 2 Kings 10. 16.
agony of a praying Hannah are in Christ a sweet smelling Mark 6. 20.
sacrifice to the Lord. The chief wheels, in prayer, in Luke 22. 62.
hearing, in meditating, and other holy duties, are the faculties 1 Samuel 1. 13.
of the soul; a supple will, a working mind, a faithful memory, embracing
affections, these are the music of the Spears in holy ordinances.

The care of our souls must be the signal design in all holy Ordinances. It is
not so grateful to perform service, as to advantage the soul in service, 1 Pet.
2. 2. When we come to 1 Pet. 2. 2.
ordinances, we must not study a secular interest, or to quiet the clamours of
natural conscience, or to keep up a port in Religion, but we must study the
interest and the emolument of our souls.

1. To raise them. Every Duty, every Sermon, every Prayer should be a wing to
the soul, that it might fly higher toward God. Duties are not only to
satisfy, but to sublimate the soul, to make it more heavenly, and more
ambitious after a crown in glory; as those primitive Saints who looked upon the
things of this life with disdain, soaring after a better Country, which was to
come, Heb. 11. 13, 16.

2. We must study our souls in ordinances, so as so quiet them, to give them
more peace and tranquillity. Gospel seasons are not only for the elevation,
but the calming of the 1 Pet. 5. 8.
soul. Satan disturbs, sin defiles, and lusts war against the Mark 7. 20.
soul, and the soul never finds rest, till it comes to God in 1 Pet. 2. 11.
ordinances, and there quietly it lies at Christ's feet, as Mary Magdalen, to
receive the honey combs dropping from his lips. After Hannah had prayed, then
she was no more sad, or discomposed, 1 Samuel 1. 18. When we acquaint our selves
with God in holy ordinances, we shall be at peace, Job 22. 21. and thereby good
shall come unto us.

3. To spiritualize them. We sow in duty, we reap in grace, that we may be more
humble, more holy, more savoury, and more serious in the things of God and
Eternity. We enjoy the glorious Gospel, that we may pass from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3. 18. Means of grace are for the getting of 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 3. 16.
greater measures of grace; we feed upon the feast of Ordinances, Co^roborari
in interiori homine est corroborari in mente, in intellectu, in voluntate,
caeterisque animae potentiis.
that we may be strengthened in the inward man. The Apostle says, faith comes
by hearing, Romans 10. 17. And the same Gospel is both the Mother and the Nurse
of that heavenly grace. Study therefore thy soul in ordinances; for what will
it profit thee to gain a whole world of Gospel opportunities, and at last to
lose thy own soul?

Let us study a broken frame of spirit in Ordinances. A eleven foot is a sign
of Satan's appearance: A cloven tongue was a sign of the spirits appearance; but
a cloven, broken Psalm. 51. 17.
heart is the sign of a Saints appearance. Our best composed Acts 2. 3.
services flow from a broken heart; Hezekiahs chattering (...) Plural. numeri
denetare amplitudinem and magnitudinem sacrificii cordis contriti.
like a Crane, Isa. 38. 14. And David's weeping oratory were forcible engines to
batter heaven. Our hearts, like clouds, they are best when melted. It is well,
when our services, like Paul's companions, come to the shore upon broken planks.
A melting spirit will melt God into compassion. Moaning Ephraim is a pleasant
Child, Jer. 31. 20. The softer the Luke 4. 18.
heart is, the sweeter is the duty. Squeezed Grapes only Psalm. 34. 18.
yield the Wine. The Psalmist avers, That the Lord is nigh to them, who are of
a broken heart; he loves to dwell near Isa. 57. 15.
them; nay, the Prophet says, he loves to dwell with them. Unquestionably God
is never more seen in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 63. 1, 2.
then when it is a Bochim, a place of tears, and spiritual dissolvedness.
Foramina Petrae sunt vulnera sanciantia. Alap.
Broken clouds forerun a fair day; broken hearts foretell a fair acceptance:
Thus Christ comes in at the clefts of the Rock, Cant. 2. 14. And when we faint
most, we sink least: When the Spouse is sick of love, Cant. 5. 8. then is Cant.
2. 5.
her beloved well pleased.

When we are most spiritual in ordinances, let us h^ve ardent desires to be
better in those sacred administrations. The gracious soul is good at desires;
he would offer better, if there was better in the flock; his love shall piece
up what is wanting in his duty; though he cannot be excellent, yet he Duplicem
Cain culpam impingit; unam quod post multos dies obtulit, sero obtulit, cum
celeritate sacrificium commendatur, alteram, quo^d ex fructibu^, non ex primis
fructibus obtulit. Phil. Jud.
would be obedient, if he cannot offer an entire service, yet he would
sacrifice a broken heart to God; and though his services are wanting in weight,
yet they are not deficient in wish; his desires are plumed, though his
performances flag and hang the wing. Abel will give the best, though he has no
better; and though the Saint can only offer a little Goats hair, or a pair of
turtle Doves, yet he would offer a young Bullock, or the fat of Rams; he could
wish his tongue was more fluent in prayer, his ear more attentive in hearing,
his spirit more melting in service, his heart more open in ordinances; his
desires are fledged, though often his duties are in the shell. And this would
become us in holy ordinances; when we are best, to think we are short, and when
we fly fastest, to complain of our clipped wing; and Psalm. 63. 8.
when we follow hardest after God, to suppose we might mend our pace. And
surely, holy desires after better things are most pleasing to God. The Child
who offers to serve his Father is very acceptable, though his desire be more
then Phil. 3. 14.
the Act. Paul pressed forward toward the Mark; in this, our exsample.

We are most acceptable, and more truly spiritual in Ordinances, when we bring
the whole man to them, when the knee does bend, and the eye does weep, and the
heart does yield, and the soul does stoop, and the ear incline in holy duties.
Gods great work was to make the whole world for man; and man's good work in
spiritual approaches, is to give the whole man to God. We must come to
Ordinances as the Israelites went out of Egypt, with their whole train, we
must come with all the faculties of our souls, and all the Psalm. 103. 1.
parts of our bodies. If there be one wheel missing in a In divinis officiis
non tantum sit totus homo, sed and totum homini^.
watch, it cannot go at all to be an Index of time. And so in holy duties, if
the ear be missing, or the memory wanting, or the heart lacking, all our design
falls to the ground. Those who will serve God in ordinances must give him their
hottest love, their highest joy, their strongest faith, their greatest fear;
they must act every grace, extend every faculty, improve Psalm. 9. 1.
every part; all the worshipper must be employed in that sacred work. The Ship
which sails well must have all Psalm. 119. 34.
its tackle, the Mast must be up, the sails must be spread, it must have both
its pump and its lanthorn, the want of any furniture may endanger the whole.
There must be head Jer. 3. 10.
work, and hand work, and heart work in ordinances. It was the resolution of
the Psalmist to keep the Commandments Jer. 24. 7.
with his whole heart, Psalm. 119. 69. It is the whole man which is grateful to
God in holy duties: we must as the poor widow, give all we have, cast in all
our capacities into the treasury of holy worship. Mark 12. 44.


CHAP. XXXII. Active graces do well become Holy Ordinances.
AND we must not only be strict in our behaviors, and spiritual in our duties
in the time of public Ordinances; but we must likewise be very active in our
graces in those sacred solemnities. There are three seasons when our graces
must be active and vigorous. Ephesians. 6. 13, 16.


1. In a time of temptation: Then faith is a shield, as the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 6. 13, 16. Taking the whole armor of God, we shall be able ^o withstand
in that evil day. Luke 21. 19.


2. In the day of affliction: Then patience keeps possession, and self-denial
breaks the stroke. Wind up the watch, and it goes as stedily in the night as in
the day.

3. In Gospel opportunities. The breast is full of Isa. 12. 3.
milk, but the Child must draw and strive to get it out. A quae salutis sunt
sacrae scripturae, and doctrina Evangelica quam h^^^imus a Christo. Hier. Orig.
There is a life and sweetness in Ordinances, but grace and desire must draw it
out, there must be a hand of faith to let down the bucket to bring up the water
from the wells of Salvation. If any ask what spices must flow out, what graces
must be acted in holy ordinances, it is answered

our knowledge in holy duties; We must know it is God the infinite Jehovah with
whom we have to do* All worship without the knowledge of the true God is a
notion and empty speculation. God alone is the object of a godly man's worship,
Exodus 20. 2. His hope is in God, Psalm. 39. 7. His dependence is on God, Psalm.
62. 8. His dread is of God, Psalm. 119. 122. His love is to God, Psalm. 18. 1. in
every Ordinance he approaches to. God is the only object of his prayers, Psalm.
5. 3. If he come to Sermons, it is to Paulo quinto Vice-deo.
hear something of God and Christ, John 10. 3. In Ordinances we must not
worship men, as the Samaritans worshipped Antiochus Epiphanes, stiling him the
mighty God; or as the Venetians petitioned Paul the fifth, Pope of Rome, giving
him the title of Vice-god; nor must we worship the host of heaven as the
Ammonites, nor the Devil as the Indians, nor Ezr. 9. 1. Zeph. 1. 5. Phil. 3.
19. Col. 3. 5. Jer. 50 2. Judge 2. 13. Acts 19. 28. 2 Kings 5. 18. Jer. 51. 44.
Chemosh non potest defendere Moabitas a Babyloniis; Nec aurei vituli Israelitas
ab Assyriis. Alap.
the belly as the Glutton, nor interest as the Covetous, nor the Cross as the
Papists; nor must we worship false gods, not Belas as the Assyrians, nor Baal
as the Tyrians, nor Diana as the Ephesians, nor Juno as the Samians, nor Rimmon
as the Syrians, but we must worship the great God, the incomprehensible
Jehovah, God in Christ, and him only must we serve. In a word, we must be
cautionated against a threefold worship.

First, We must not worship deos mortuos, dead Gods, images, and relics, etc.
Nec deos mortales, nor dying gods, Men or Princes; Nec deos mortificos, deadly
goods, our swaying lusts and corruptions. How necessary is it then for us to
come with knowledge to holy worship, that we may seririously apprehend that
infinite Majesty, that most glorious Being, Psalm 82. 7. Nahum. 1. 5.
at whose presence the mountains quake, and the hills melt; and this is the
God, the Jehovah Elohim, with whom we converse in holy Ordinances.

We must act sincerely in holy Ordinances. We must be hearty in our hearing;
we must not only bring the ear, but Col. 3. 16.
the heart to the truth of the word. Truth must dwell in us, Col. 3. 16. and
must be not only our information, but Luke 2. 19.
our inhabitant; it must be treasured up as well as attended to. The truths of
the Gospel are as so many Jewels and rare Pearls, which must be locked up. The
ear is only as the Verbum dei intromittatur in domicilium cordis nostri, ac
versetur assid^e in animis nostris. Daven. Psalm. 17. 1. Heb. 10. 22. Lam. 3.
41. Notandum est, quod quae offeruntur in holocaustum interiora sunt; quod
exterius est, non deo offertur, ut pell^. Orig.
stall, the heart is the Cabinet. And indeed Satan can quickly pick truth out
of the ear, he can easily open that window; but he cannot penetrate the heart,
that lock is only broke open by Omnipotency. Truth is under lock and key,
safely secured when laid up in the heart; and indeed it is never well housed
till it is folded up in the soul. And so we must be sincere and hearty in our
prayers. Tongue and heart must keep time and tune. The Jews have this sentence
written in their Synagogues where they meet for holy Ordinances, A prayer
without the heart, is like a body without the soul. God looks not so much to
the Elegancy of our prayers, how neat they are; nor to the Geometry of our
prayers, how long they are; but to the sincerity of our prayers, how cordial
they are. Thy prayers without thy heart will be a sacrilege, not a sacrifice.
When the heart is Rector chori, the chief leader of the quire, then the voice
is pleasant in Gods ear. The heart though it be one of the least parts of man,
yet it is the best. And as we must be sincere in our management of holy duties,
so in the ends we propose. Acts 17 18.
Some go to Ordinances as Athenians, to understand some Mat. 22. 15.
new thing; some as Herodians, to carp and to catch; some to be gratified with
ingenuity and wit, as those who go to hear a noise of Musicians: All these are
as Children, who Ezekiel. 33. 32.
go to Fairs to buy toys and trifles. But let us go to Ordinances, to gather
those flowers which grow in Eden, to advantage our better part, and to lay up
treasure for our immortal souls.

We must act faith in holy Ordinances. The Apostle avers it positively, That
without faith it is impossible to please God. This grace is the incense in our
sacrifices, the rising Heb. 11. 6.
perfume in all our offerings: The hand of faith sprinkles the blood of
sprinkling upon all our oblations. Faith is the Heb. 12. 24.
eye of the soul to see the light of the Gospel: faith is the hand of the soul
to receive Christ offered in the Gospel. Though faith be not the One thing
necessary, yet it is the chief thing necessary in all our duties and services.
This Si non unicum necessarium, tamen primo necessarium est fides, sacro and
sole^ni cultu efficox.
grace does not only justify our persons, Romans 5. 1. Purge our hearts, Acts
15. 9. Nay espouse us to Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. But it does sanctify our
duties, and make them authentical and effectual. It is the believing soul
alone enjoys an Ordinance profitably, and performs a service acceptably; he
only feeds upon the tree of life in the Paradise of Ordinances.

We must act holy and ardent desire in holy Ordinances. We must come to the
Ordinances, as the Heart to the brooks, Luke 17. 37. Psalm. 42. 1. Fides, qua
sola apprehenditur Christus, cujus justitia induimur, verbi praedicatione, and
procreatur, and conservatur. Cartw.
or as the Eagle which flies upon the prey, or as the poor stooping Israelites
who lapt at the water, Judge. 7. 6. Indeed there are many desirable things in
ordinances; there is a desirable Christ, desirable Grace, desirable Life, a
desirable Soul to save, a desirable heaven to ensure. It may be added, the
Scriptures resemble this blessed work to whatever may inflame desire; It is
light for its pleasantness, John 3. 19. It is honey for its sweetness, Psalm.
19. 10. It is food for its necessity, Job 23. 12. It is gold for its value,
Psalm. 19. 10. We live by it, Mat. 4. 4. And we perish without it, Prove. 29. 18.
And let our desires answer all these allurements. Indeed we should come to
Christ in ordinances, as the Bride to the bridegroom, with joy and delight; as
the Husbandman to the Vine for a Vintage of satisfaction. David rejoiced and
triumphed in his own soul when the multitude called him to go to the house of
God; and indeed the Sanctuary is the Saints Bride-chamber on this side heaven.
And thus we see how we may every way deport our selves in public ordinances
and opportunities.

CHAP. XXXIII. How we must improve the interval between the Morning and the
Evening worship in the public Assembly.
THE public worship being over, and the assembly of Romans 16. 5.
Gods people being scattered, as fruitful clouds which Col. 4. 15.
are melted into their several drops, let us repair to the lesser Church, our
family, and follow Christ home, and entertain Privata familia quae ob
religiosam sanctitatem illustris est, ecclesiae nomen promeruit. Daven.
him there with holy communion. Christ has his lesser as well as his greater
banqueting house, Cant. 2. 4. And will meet us in our houses as well as in his
own, Mal. 21. 13. the place of more solemn assemblies. He who will come to the
house of a Pharisee, Luke 14. 1. will come to the house of a believer.
Therefore after the public ordinances are done and finished, let us haste to
our habitations as fast as Zacheus to his, Luke 19. 6. to the same end with
Familiam suam privata fecit ecclesia, eam pietate, and religione exornans.
Theod.
him, to entertain our dear Jesus, and pursue those family duties which are
incumbent upon us, which now shall be opened and discoursed upon. There are
several duties which must take up this interval, that it may not be an empty
and unbeautiful chasm.

temperance, and made lushious and sweet with holy and savory discourse.
Heavenly communication is salt at the table, is sauce in the dish, Non prius
discumbunt, quam Oration ad deum praegustetur; editur, quantum esurientes
capiunt, bibitur quantum pudicis est utile, ita saturantur ut qui meminerint
etiam per noctem sibi adorandum deum esse. Tertul.
is a flavor in our drink. Full meals are those which are spiritualized, and
they have most of rarity which have most of heaven. Our tables are spread with
variety, not from our dishes, but from our discourse. Tertull. speaking of the
carriage of private Christians at their meals, tells us, That they do not sit
down before they have prayed, they eat as much as may satisfy hunger, they
drink so much as is sufficient for temperate men, and are so filled, as they
that remember that God must be worshipped even in the night season. O the
golden temper of these golden times! Temperance must be the Caterer, and holy
discourse must be the music of our tables. Our tongues are instruments, but
the good spirit must tune them. Holy discourses are perfumes which are not only
pleasant to our selves, but delightful to others, they are the trumpets of our
piety, the sparks which fly from our zeal, the disburdening of a gracious soul,
they are a celestial harmony which makes a meal on a Sabbath pleasant and
seraphical. Vivunt impii ut bibant et edant; sed bibu^^ et edunt been, ut
vivant. Socr^t.
And therefore let us discourse at our Sabbath meals on some things delivered
by the Minister, or some spiritual matter which may administer grace to the
hearers, and let us avoid the common rock of vain and worldly talk. Xenocrates
the Philosopher being in company with some who used evil language, he was very
mute, and being asked the reason, he replied, It has often repented me, that I
have spoken, but never that I have held my peace. Oh that our hearts and lips
were heavenly on the Lords day! that there might be more sprinkling of grace in
our discourses: Sermo noster sit ad aedificationem necessitatis. Theoph.
This would turn our food into Manna, and drop dissolved Pearls into our Cup,
and turn our board into a Communion table. Holy discourse, it Et ad
aedificationem utilitatis. Erasm.


First, Warms the heart. Secondly, It gives vent for grace. Thirdly, It is the
bellows of zeal. Et ad aedificatione^ opportunitatis; Sermo aedificet, quoties
opus vel opportunitas est alios docere. Theoph.
Fourthly, It often awakens conscience. Fifthly, It is the Gangrene of sin, as
silence and flattery are the promoters of it.
Sixthly, Nay it countermines Satan, and turns him out of the room where our
table stands.

Seventhly, Holy discourses are the freedom of imprisoned piety, and the
Midwife of that holiness which lies in the womb of the heart, the turning up of
that truly golden Ore; they are the Saints Shibboleth, which distinguishes him
from the foolish world, which travels with froth and vanity. In a word, holy
discourse is the ease of Conscience, the sacrifice of Religion, the Saints
refreshment, the sinners chain and astonishment, heavens echo, the delight of
Christian Society, It is a twofold Charity:

First, To our selves; it enfranchises our affections to Christ; our heart is
full of love to him, and holy discourse gives vent to our full hearts; it is
the discharge of our duty, Cant. 5. 10, 11,
and so frees us from the guilt of disobedience; and Col. 4. 6.
moreover it gives fire to our dedolent hearts. Our hearts Luke 24. 31.
must be awakened and raised, sometimes by ordinances, Mal. 3. 16.
sometimes by prayer, sometimes by holy discourses, Sequi debet in una^uaque
familia mutua communicatio, et mutua familiae institutio. Rivet. in Decal.


Secondly, Which likewise are charity to others: They may be their
satisfaction, an answer to their scruples, a corrosive to their lusts, a check
to their sin; thou know not but thy good discourse may be as an Angel in the
way, to stop some sinful progress, or a flame to another zeal, and a salve to
another sore. Such discourse becomes our table on the Lords day, and becomes
the Sabbath, as rich attire the Luke 14. 1, 7.
beautiful person, the garment sets off the person; and the person adorns the
garment. It is reported of the hearers of holy Mr. Heldersham, that they would
go home from Church discoursing of he powerful and precious truths which were
delivered, and so they did strew the way home with Roses, and made their miles
short by heart-sweetning discourse. Christ when he was with his little family,
his twelve Apostles, he would always be speaking of the things Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.
of heaven, Mark 4. 10. Gracious words would flow from Job 32. 18, 19, 20.
him, as drops from the fountain, or the morning dew from above. It was a
charge laid upon the Israelites to discourse Deuteronomy. 11. 19.
of the statutes of God, when they were in their Mat. 12. 34.
houses sitting with their Children and Servants about them, Deuteronomy. 6, 6, 7. The
two Disciples going from Emaus, Christus suo exemplo declaravit, quomedo tempus
inter matutinos et vespertinos caetus Sabbati insumendum est; Ipse enim suos
discipulos dissipata turba de rebus regni examinavit. Chemn.
were talking of the sufferings and the affairs of Christ, and then their dear
Mediator joins in with them, Luke 24. 15. Dr. Bound observes, That when we
have heard the word upon a Sabbath, we must discourse of it, unless we will
lose a great part of the fruit of it. A talking of worldly affairs, will chase
away that truth we have been made partakers of. And indeed none but a corrupt
heart would chain up holy discourse upon the Lords day; that heavenly season
when gracious words should be our dialect. If the word of God dwell richly in
us, Col. 3. 16. Inhabitants will not always keep within doors, we shall bring
forth our treasure for the enriching and edifying of others. And let us not
excuse our selves with a pretense of shamefastness. The shame of the world will
not keep us from vain, why then from godly discourse? Sweet and spiritual
communication Christiani in primaeva ecclesiae aetaie, non tam caenam
caenabant, quam diciplinam. Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
is none of those fruits whereof we may be ashamed, Romans 6. 21. Nor let
ignorance be alleged for an excuse; ignorance it self might induce thee to
propound things profitable, which will feed good discourse; the Question will
beget an answer, and the Answer will bring forth a progeny of heavenly
communion. But in a word, what do our tables (especially on the Lords day)
without savory and Christian discourse differ from a manger.

our meal our dinner is over, then follows not only the digestion of our food,
but of the word that better food John 6. 27. Verum non public modo, sed and
privatim hunc ipsum diem sanct^ pietatis officii^ qualia sunt sacrae Scripturae
lectio, et meditatio domestica, and colloquium de rebus sacris, atque
charitatis officiis transigendum censemus. Leid. Prof.
which nourishes unto eternal life; and this will be the best wine at the end
of our meal, John 2. 10. We must repeat over, discourse over, pray over that
word we hear in the Morning. in the public Congregation. Indeed Truth is most
pleasing when most tasted. David calls the word Honey, Psalm 19. 10. and honey
pleases not the eye; but the palate; it is better food then prospect: Then the
word does its work, not when it is only heard, but when it is ruminated on,
and is not only discovered but digested; it then does most good to us when it
is riveted in us: fastened nails help forward the building, not those which lie
loose up and down; when we work Gods word upon our hearts, this is like inlaid
Gold which makes the richest embroydery. Hearing may bring a truth to the head,
but meditation and a careful pondering works it into the heart. It is the
seething of Milk makes the Cream. The Be sucks the flowr, and then works it in
his Hive, and makes honey of it. Satan himself is called an Angel of light, 2
Cor. 11. 14. He knows very much: It is not truth in the head, but riveted,
fastened and settled in the heart, which speaks us to be translated from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18. Chrysostom in one
of his excellent Homilies upon Matthew, lays it as a charge upon Christians,
That when we depart from the Ecclesiastical Assembly, we should not in any case
entangle our selves in businesses of a contrary nature, but as soon as we come
home, turn over the holy Scriptures, and call our wives and children to confer
about those things which were delivered in public; and after they have been
deeply rooted in our minds, then to proceed to provide for those things which
are necessary for this life. And the same worthy Father makes the Similitude:
(...) Chrysostom. Sciendum est quod non sufficit, ut concionibus dei sabbati
attenda^us, et doctrinam bonam recipiamus, et ut nomen dei invocemus; sed ut
haec omnia digeramus, et ad hanc rem ipsi quoque transformemur. Calv. Acts 17.
11. Si detis operam verbo, ut inde pietatem, et omnem salutiseram sapientiam
discatis; Haec est meta studii nostri, et sic instruamur expen^^ scripturarum.
Daven. Psalm. 119. 15, 23, 48, 78, 148, 97, 99.
When, says he, we retire from Fields in their beauty and flourish, we bring
some Rose or Violet home with us; And when we come from a goodly Supper, we
bring some remains of those dainties and give them to our friends: And when we
have been in public Ordinances, shall we not bring some doctrine and heavenly
admonition to our wives, friends ad children, when this doctrine is more
profitable then the flowers of the field, or the dainties of the Table.
Heavenly Truths are Roses which will not shed, fruits which will not perish,
and delicacies which will not corrupt, etc. So then, the word which we hear in
the public Assemblies, that heavenly food must be concocted, it must be walked
down by holy Meditation, staked down by good and seasonable Communication,
fastened upon the soul by holy musing and ardent Prayer. The seed in the ground
brings forth grain, not the seed upon the top of the clods: The digested word
will bring forth twins, delight and obedience. Women when they dress
themselves, they do not walk by the Looking-glass: but set themselves before it
and spend some time in fastening every pin: only to hear the Word is but to
walk by the Glass; but repetition, discourse, prayer, and contemplation must
fasten every truth upon the soul, and so it will look amiable and beautiful.
The clean beasts chew the cud, Levit. 11. 3. The careful Christian will whet
the word upon his own, and as much as may ^e upon another heart. The Bereans
obtained the title of Noble, not from hearing, but examination of the Word,
not for any thing they did in the public Assembly, but from what they did at
home. The winnowed Corn is fit for use when it has passed the Flail and the
Fan. The Word digested is fit for practice when it has passed the meditation
of the head, the discussion and discourse of the tongue, the pondering and the
laying up of the heart. The hearing of the Word only is but a beautiful
Prospect, which is delectable, but not durable; but the weighing of the Word
in the scales of judgment, the beating of it out by the labors of the mind,
makes it a rich treasure and a stock of divine counsel for the life to spend
upon. The Psalmist no less then seven times in one Psalm professes, that the
Law was his meditation: he did not run over the beauty of it with a glance of
his eye, or pass over the music of it as the playing of a tune, and so lay
aside the Instrument; but his thoughts did dwell upon it as the Scholar upon
his books: Let us, as our Savior says, go and do so likewise; and let us
remember, that on Gods blessed Day, and on Gods blessed Word, our Luke 10. 37.
work is much at home, in our Families, and with our hearts.

the interval between the Morning and Evening worship in public, in holy
prayer. Prayer is suitable to every division of a Sabbath: It does not only
prepare Homines sunt instar terrae, cursemen verbi dei committitur, quaeque
cultura ministerii praeparata, pluvia coelestis gratiae ad
fructificandumirrigatur. Par.
us for public duties, but succeeds those public ordinances to us; It is like
a good wind which does not only carry us off from the shore, but goes along
with us the whole Voyage; it is a sweet duty, which must be interwoven in every
part of a Sabbath. Prayer plows the heart for the seed of the Word, it
commands rain to prosper that seed, it secundates and ripens the Corn when it
appears above-ground, and it keeps the weeds from choking the Corn; It does
the whole work. When we have been in public with Psalm 109. 4.
God, Private prayer in Christ is the Altar which sanctifies the gift: and
Prayer in this interval of holy worship looks with a double aspect, backward to
what we have heard, and forward to what we may hear; indeed in this being like
Heb. 4. 12.
the Word, a two-edged Sword, it has a double edge for our spiritual
advantage. Now our Prayer is like the sword at the east of the Garden of Eden,
which turned every way. Acts 2. 27.
Prayer in the Closet often saves us the labors of the Pulpit, Jer. 23. 29.
and directs the speech of the Minister to prick the Jer. 20. 9. 1 Cor. 3. 2.
heart of the hearer. Ananias came to Paul when he was praying, Acts 9. 11. If
the Word be an hammer, it is prayer causes the stroke; if the Word be fire, it
is prayer lays this fire on our hearths: if the Word be a sword, it is prayer
weilds this Sword to wound our lusts and corruptions. In a word, private prayer
is the best means to prosper public preaching, and to guide the arrow of
truth to hit the mark of Conscience.

the space between the public Ordinances is, reading the^ Scriptures. When we
come home from the public, we must not be confined to the Scripturae sunt
spiritualis aniae mensa, in qua vivae representantur deliciae et maxima bona.
Anselm.
enclosure of the Ministers Sermon, but we must open to the wide though
pleasant Common of the whole book of God, we must read some Chapters for
spiritual edification. Anselme used to call the Scriptures the spiritual Table
of the soul furnished with all heavenly delicacies, and with the choicest good
things. And on Gods holy day, when our own table is taken away; Let this
spread-table be set before us for soul-feeding and repose. Every Chapter which
may be read, is an Epitome of divine Truth, which may Si quando procacior suit
inimicus, Psaltorium decantabat. In tentationibus Deutero ^ii verba voluebat:
In tribulationibus, Isaiae replicabat eloquia, et scripturae testimonium in
consolationem suam edisserebat. Hierom.
train up our children and influence our servants, and which may build up our
own souls, and water every branch of the Family for spiritual growth in the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil. 3. 8. Hierome
reports of Paula, that he used the Scriptures as a Medicine against every
disease; If her enemies were violent, she would turn over the Psalms; If her
temptations were strong, she would fix upon some part of Deuteronomy; If her
afflictions were forcible, then she consulted some part of the Prophecy of
Isaiah; and so she drew the Scriptures into an universal comfort to her. The
Word of God is our light to guide us, Psalm 119. 105. And that family where
the Scriptures are much read, is a Goshen of light and pleasantness, where
Israel resides and inhabits, when other habitations are covered with Egyptian
darkness, with the darkness of sin and ignorance. Governors of Families are
the best stewards, not only when they lay in provisions from the Market, Luke
12. 42.
but when they bring forth spiritual food from the Scriptures, by reading
conscionably and constantly those Oracles of Romans 3. 2.
God to those under their roof: for holy Job confidently asserts, that the word
is more necessary than the appointed food, Acts 20 27.
Job. 23. 12. Let therefore the interval between the public worship be filled
up with holy travel in the counsels of God Scripturas non obiter inspicia nus
et legamus, ut externum corticem tantum accipiamus, sed adhibenda est diligens
perscrutatio. Chemnit.
recorded in Scripture. Our Savior imputed all the sottish mistakes of the
Jews to their ignorance of the Scripture, Mat. 22. 29. and lays it as a charge
upon them, to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. But it must not be, as
Chemnitius observes, a transient glance, but a serious search, as Miners for
Gold, with pains and delight. So then it is a great part of wisdom in Families
to converse much with Gods word, but especially on Gods day, and most
peculiarly when the most solemn and public worship does not call them off.

CHAP. XXXIV. How we must spend the Evening of the Sabbath, when the Public
Assemblies are dismissed.
THere are many who will give an easy answer to the question Nos ab omni opere
externo vacantes, deo uni, et soli hoc die vacemus; Ideireo et hunc diem
benedixit, et sanctificavit, (i. e.) in usum suum separavit, et elegit. Aret.
Ephesians. 4. 20.
proposed, and will tell us, that when the public service is ended, we have
our free liberty for all pleasing Recreations; we may exercise our skill in a
pair of Bowls, we may exercise our valor in a pair of Cudgels, we may
exercise our fancy in a Dance, or a Barly-break: But all the reply I shall
make, (this being spoken to before) is, I hope we have not so learned Christ.
Now therefore my next task is, to lay down those duties, with which we may
close Gods holy and blessed day.

We must carefully survey, what we have been acquainted withal in the public.
The Repetition of Sermons is a heartpenetrating, and soul-edifying duty, the
very manuduction, Quod toties Paulus eadem scribit, hoc est, ad corroborandum;
ut Christiani sint tutiores, cautiores, et vigilantiores. Alap. John 6. 12.
and leading of families into the fear of the Lord: Holy truths are those
divine fragments, which must not be lost, but gathered up by a faithful
repetition. When the Minister has ended to preach, we must begin to rehearse;
such repetitions being the musical echoes from that sweet voice we heard
before. If Paul thought it not grievous to write the same things, which he had
taught before, Phil. 3. 1. We must not think it painful or impertinent to
rehearse the same things which we have learned before. The repedting of 1 Samuel
3. 10. Quaevis cogitationes, et rations naturales intellectus quantumvis
artificiosae, quantum vis sublime subjiciantur doctrinae Evangelicae, et de
facto subjectae sunt omnibus eadem doctrina conversis. Mal. 13. 19.
truth preached, casts a new light upon it, it clincheth Gospel counsel the
faster upon the heart; and so corruption receives a double, and by consequence
a deeper wound. Samuel answered not God till the third time; it may be
conscience will answer that word in the repetition, to which it did not listen
in the delivery. Repetition of Sermons is like the Sun beams in the
repercussion and reflection, which shine in a more fervent heat, and a more
considerable warmth. The second shoot often kills the bird, when the first
misseth: We know not what the second hearing of Gods Word may act upon the
soul. And we repeat Sermons in our families, not only barely to pass away the
time of a Sabbath, but by this fruitful exercise our memories are recruited,
the Sermon is more distinctly apprehended; the heart is a second time assaulted
and stormed, that it may be taken and brought captive to the obedience of
Christ; Besides in the repetition of the Word, we have a more private tender of
life and salvation, misappehensions are this way removed, and the Original is
cleared by the Copy: We often mistake the Minister, when the Word is delivered;
when we repeat the word, the mistake is easily corrected and amended, to all
which may be added by this heavenly course and practice. Families are trained
up in Gospel discipline, and the more we hear of Christ in public and in
private, the more our love to him is courted and conquered; and thus Servants
better understand their duty, and Children better learn obedience. If we leave
those Sermons we hear, at the Church door, and there take our farewell of them,
Satan quickly takes up our lost treasure, Diabolus est inster avis famelicae,
semen verbi rapiens, et sat habet, si homo verbi alimento non pascitur. Par.
and then our attempt in the public ordinances was in vain, it being not
probable, that we should give those holy Sermons room in our hearts, which we
were careless to lodge in our houses by a conscientious repetition. The
strongest hold we lodge divine truth in, is slack enough. Satan is ready to
untie the knot, let man's care tie it as fast as it may; and therefore we must
tie truth upon the soul with a threefold cord:

1. With a diligent attention in the public Assembly.

2. With a heedfull repetition in the private Family. Chem. Exam. de dieb.
Fest.


3. In ardent supplication running over the heads of the same Sermon in our
more retired and severer Closets. It was the custom of our sweet and dear
Jesus, after he had preached a Sermon to the multitude, to examine his
Disciples privately about it, and to rivet what had before been revealed. Mar.
4.
Truths, like stars, are best when fixed; and when Luc. 14.
our hearts, not our understandings, are their Orbs to move in. Vain
controversies, as the wise man speaks, may not be repeated, for that will
separate friends, Prove. 17. 9. But divine Counsels must, for that will unite
truths to the soul. And moreover our slippery memory may be made more
consistent by repetition, and so retentive of that word, which is apt to slide
away. Surely great are the advantages of repeating Sermons in our families; it
is like Lots holy violence to the Angels to force them into his house. The
rehearsal of holy Genesis 19. 3.
truth, is a sweet attractive to draw Christ into the family, and it sents the
house with sacred fumes, which the fire of the Word sends up: This worthy
practice makes our Si medico non est oppro^r^um de aegroto s^^scitar^, neque
crimen est de auditorum semper inquirere salute. Sic enim moniti quid expeditum
sit, etc. Chrysostom.
houses Chapels of devotion, and is nothing but Religion drawn in a smaller
frame. In a word, when the Ministers blessing has opened the door of the
Sanctuary for our departure, let us apply our selves to this experienced medium
for soul advantage; our souls which were tuning in the public may be musical
in private, and the Sermon may be more sweet in the second gust and taste of it;
like the works of some learned men, which are more refined and enlarged in the
second Edition.

the Evening of a Sabbath, is holy Prayer: This powerful service is a golden
thread which must run through every space of a Sabbath; it is the sacrifice of
the Closet, it is the service of the Family, it is the ordinance of the
Sanctuary; it does seasonably break Quartum praeceptum ponitur in gremio
decalogi, tan^uam testis amoris divini, et nostrae obedientiae.
the morning of a Sabbath, and usher in the following duties; it does sweetly
concur with the midday of the Sabbath, when our devotion, like the Sun, should
be at the highest, remembering that the Commandment for the Sabbath is in the
middle of the Decalogue. And there is more work for prayer, it must shut up both
the Morning and the Evening Worship; there must be prayer to beg a blessing on
truths already discovered, that in their light we may see light, Psalm. 36. 9.
And indeed prayer does most becomingly close the Mat. 13. 23.
Evening of a Sabbath; then the lifting up of our hands are Psalm. 141. 2.
instead of an Evening sacrifice. Prayer is like a setting Sun, which is most
glorious; like a well fraught Ship after its Voyage, which lands at the Port,
which is pleasing and joyous. In the Evening Noah's Dove brings the Olive
branch. Prayer Genesis 8. 11.
often is this Dove, when after the travels of the Sabbath, it sums up all, and
importunes success and acceptance, then the soul is calmed with peace and
rejoicing. In the Evening Mat 14. 23. Dan. 9. 21.
Christ wrestles with his Father alone in prayer, as if the Sun should not see
the triumphs of his Victory. Daniel was praying in the Evening, and then the
Angel came unto him, the messenger of glad tidings to this humble Supplicant. 1
Kings 18. 37, 38.
Fire comes upon Elijahs Evening sacrifice, when Prayer presented the oblation,
as a sign of pleasing acceptance. We must then shut up Gods day, at Gods feet,
that he may bid Luke 2. 29. Ephesians. 1. 6.
us depart in peace, for he has accepted us in his beloved; otherwise we may
go to bed, but not to rest: And our conclusive prayers in the Sabbaths evening
must be,

1. Confessory. Our best Sabbaths have not escaped the stains of sin, there
will be iniquity in our holy things; our Condonet mihi deus, etiam sacrorum
meorum delicta. Aug.
best services are like the spotted moon, or a jewel with flaws. Augustine
would beg pardon for the sins of his holy duties: And we, when our Sabbath is
setting, have more need of tears then triumphs, and say, as the Romans did of
one of their Victories, such another would undo them. Prayer Jam. 3. 2. Psalm.
119. 59.
therefore in the close of the Sabbath, must look up to God with a weeping eye,
and we must pray, that God would Jer. 3. 13.
forgive the sins of our prayers, that our dull ear, flat heart, ranging mind,
floating thoughts, treacherous memory may be pardoned to us, and that the sins
of our Sabbath, may not sour the sweets of our Sabbath; and so our precious
privileges, become as Vriahs letters whose contents were the destruction of
the bearer: We let fall an Evening dew of Aliud Sabbat^m, et alia requies,
relinquitur, et restat populo dei, popu-lo fideli, et Christiano, puta, requies
gaudium, et solennitas coelestis, figurata per Sabbatum Judaicum.
tears upon our very services on Gods holy day.

2. Petitory. But our sighs must not so stop our language, but we must be
begging, as well as moaning; and there are many things we must importune the
Lord for the winding up of his Sabbath; we must beseech him, that his smiles
would speak his acceptance of what we have performed that holy day; that his
spinit would feal upon us those instructions, which we have heard that day;
that our lives might conform to those blessed ordinances which we have enjoyed
that day; that a full fruition of himself may succeed the sweet communion we
have had with himself that day; and that the present Sabbath may be the
harbinger of an Eternal Rest, which is the glorious reserve God has made for
his Saints, Heb. 4. 9. We must likewise pray, that every lust complained of
that day may receive its deaths wound; that every sin confessed and
acknowledged that day, may receive its full pardon; that every opportunity of
life possessed that Ecclesia ^^ domus or^tionis, quia in ea a deo petimus,
peccatorum veniam, vitiorum victoriam, virtutum robur et incrementum, in
tentationibus constantiam, in gratia et virtutibus progressum, felicem mortem,
et sa lutiferam beatitudinem. Alap. in Is.
day, may receive its designed end. Wrestling with God is never more
seasonable, then on the day of God; then it is both seasonable and sweet;
therefore let it put its last hand to our Sabbath. Of all graces, faith wears
the Crown, Ephesians. 6. 16. Of all duties, Prayer wears the Garland, Isa. 45. 11.
This is the favorite in the Court of heaven, to whom the King of Kings can
deny nothing. Gods house must be called a house of Prayer, Isa. 56. 7. not of
hearing, not of singing, not of receiving, but of praying. One letter in Gods
name is, he is a God hearing prayer, Psalm. 65. 1, 2. It is prayer can sanctify
afflictions, it is prayer can bless provisions, it is prayer can sweeten
Ordinances, and make them marrow and fatness to the soul, Psalm. 63. 5. Prayer
is the Porter to keep the door of our lips; Prayer is the strong hilt which
defends the strength of our hands; Prayer is the Chemist which turns all into
Gold; and it is prayer can turn a Sabbath into that which is better then gold.
Let Prayer then bring up the rear of our services on a Sabbath.

3. Gratulatory. In the close of a Sabbath, let us triumph 1 These. 5. 16.
and ^^joyce in the Lord, and in the cool of the evening let us Semper gaudete,
si non actu, tamen habitu. Cajet.
not lose the heat of the day; Let not our Sabbath be as Nebuchadnezzars Image,
whose head was of Gold, breast and arms of silver, but the feet and lower
parts iron and clay. Let not our hearts in the morning of a Sabbath, have
heavenly Dan. 2. 32, 33.
heat, and be in a golden temper, and in the evening, as dead and cold as the
iron and the clay. It is very sad, when our affections on a Sabbath, are like
the grass the Prophet speaks of, Psalm. 90. 6. In the morning it flourishes,
Zach. 14. 6, 7.
and in the evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered. Some experienced
Christians can say, that upon the continued 1 Chr. 23. 30.
care throughout the Sabbath, in the evening thereof; they have received large
enlivenings of soul. Plutarch reports of a River, which runs sweet in the
morning, but bitter at night. Let not this be the emblem of our condition; but
rather as Rivers have their Evening Tides, as well as their morning; so let it
be full water with us in the evening of the Sabbath, and then we have many
things to praise Jehovah for:

1. We must magnify the Name of God, for the time of a Psalm. 92. 2.
day, that the candle of our life burned one day longer, when Divine Justice
might have snuffed it out. Acts 17. 28.


2. For the sweetness of an Ordinance. Ordinances are the souls Jubilee, the
walks where we meet with our beloved, the Golden Scepter of Grace which God
holds out to Esth. 4. 11.
us, now to come in and receive favor, the white flag of heaven, to bespeak us
to yield to Christ, and we shall be received into grace and favor; And how
many of these Jewels does God set a Sabbath with?

3. For farther tenders of life and salvation: Let God be praised, that still
the bargain is driving for eternity; every offer of pardon in the Gospel is
renewed love; the fresh soundings of Gods bowels, his heart once more yearning
toward the poor soul; And is not this worthy our highest thanksgivings? The
Persians adore every new rising of the Sun, and shall not we adore the Lord for
repeated tenders of salvation?

4. For the liberty of Gods Sanctuary, which is his Royal Illust^^t deus faciem
suam, (i. e.) lucida, serena, benigna, et amica facie respiciat ad templum
suum, et illud instauret.
Palace to entertain his Saints in, where he gives his sweetest and most
satisfactory discoveries, Psalm. 73. 17. There are the goings of God, Psalm. 68.
24. There God shows his power, and shines in his Glory, Psalm. 63. 2. There
Gods strength is evidenced, and his beauty unmasked, Psalm. 96. 6. And there he
causes his face to shine, Dan. 9. 17. which is the most beautiful sight on
this side the beatifical vision.

5. Let us praise God for the Riches of a Sabbath. In this Psalm. 14. 20.
blessed season we enjoy the treasure of his Word, without Romans 3. 2.
which we should have been both unholy and unhappy; and by its powerful
operations, we are made both gracious and glorious; and the giver of such a
gift deserves the elevations of our praise, and we should commemorate it with
an Higgaion Selah. The light of the Sun, Moon and Stars, are Genesis 1. 18.
of great concernments to men, they are the Governors of Joel 3. 15.
day and night: But the light of Gods Word is of infinite more value. The Sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, Joel 2. 31. but not an
Iota of Gods Word shall pass away or perish. By the Word, the glory and beauty
Cur non potest Iota perire; quia tunc periret vox, et sententia legis, ex Gr.
(...), si Iota periret, tuno esset (...) nullo sensu. Par.
of the New Creation, the curious piece of man's redemption, is seen and known;
considering then we have our Fathers will in our Mother tongue, we have and
hear the Gospel, which brings suitable remedies for every malady, suitable
sucour for every misery, which brings the costliest Cordials, and the choysest
Comforts; let the enjoyment of this Word spring our Hallelujahs in the close of
a Sabbath.

6. For the frequency of a Sabbath. This might have been an annual, and not a
weekly feast; were we kept for several months without a Sabbath, how would our
spirits spring at such a days appearance? Why should the commonness of the
Suns shining; and the Sabbaths coming, put a blast upon the mercy? A market day
once in the week does not tire or weary us; a Feast and Banquet once in the
week does not Mat. 12. 42.
nauseate or surfeit us; when we mention the Sabbath, a greater then these
inconsiderables is here. A learned Author observes, That near the Pole, where
the nights endure diverse months, the Inhabitants in the end of such a night,
when the Sun begins to be seen, they deck themselves in their best apparel, and
get up to the Mountains with joy and singing, and cry out, the Sun appears, the
Sun appears. And shall not our Sabbath, when the Sun of Righteousness appears;
lay as Hoc vocabulum (...) traditur proprie de equis subsaltantibus, et
transfertur ad motum qui sit (...). Van.
great a foundation of joy and exultation in our souls? Indeed our Sabbath does
not only necessitate our praise for the sweet provision of it, but for the
speedy revelation of it. The Circle turns about quickly, and then the Sabbath
comes again, and meets us with his heavenly salutes. The monthly light of the
Moon, how does it cheer the world? Much more the weekly splendor of the
Sabbath, when the gracious person scaps in the womb of it, as foretelling the
coming of a Jesus, Luke 1. 44. This weekly rest how sweet is it to Gods holy
ones, and what a softning argument to praise and thanksgiving.

Nor must we omit Catechizing of Children and Servants in the close of a
Sabbath. The learned observe, That the Greek word (...), to catechize,
signifies to resound as by (...)
an echo. When we draw answers from our catechists, our children or servants,
their answers are but the echoes of divine truth rebounding from the tongue of
the answerer, which needs must be pleasing and musical to the examiner. This
work of catechizing is like the watering of flowers, Gutta cavat lapidem, non
vi, sed saepe cadendo.
which makes them smell and grow: This is truly distilling doctrine like the
rain, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. drop by drop, which probably will make its way into the
heart at last. This practice of catechizing is the first liquoring of the soul,
Fundamentum animae fidelis, est Jesus Christus.
which will not easily wear of; This is the laying of the foundation Christ in
youth, and foundations are not easily shaken: winds may annoy the roof of the
house, but not touch the foundation. Governors of families build their houses
not with brick, but instruction; and the hewing of 1 Cor. 3. 11.
hearts by inculcating the word of life upon them, is the hewing of stone which
will last and continue. Indeed chatechizing Luke 2. 52.
is the feeding of the understanding, the exercise of the memory, the seasoning
of the heart, the teaching of the tongue to pronounce Shibboleth; and fidelity
in this duty will leave marks in the lives of Children and Servants. Radix
vitae aeternae est fides, origo, and pronuba omnium bonorum etiam and
caelestium. Cyril.
Let us then in the evening of Gods day make a scrutiny into the knowledge of
our families, that they may learn to know God and him whom he has sent, and to
obtain eternal life, John 17. 3. Masters are not only to teach their servants
their trade, but their Christ: And Parents are not only to see their Children
trained up in secular, but in spiritual learning.

First, Catechizing is a duty most gratefully accepted with God. God says of
Abraham, Genesis 18. 18. For I know him Sancitur officium aeconomicum parentum
erga liberos, et domesticos: Jubet deus Abrahamum, non sepelire revelationes,
sed ad domesticos et posteros propagare. Par.
that he will command his Children and his Household after him, that they shall
keep the way of the Lord. And for this God makes him a great and mighty Nation.
God will assuredly bless and reward our religious care over our families, which
is much evidenced in a careful catechizing of them. And as we study to diffuse
knowledge to them, so will God shower down his blessings on us. Abraham's crown
was not his flocks, but his care, not his wealth, but his diligence to train
his family in the fear and knowledge of the Lord.

Secondly, Catechizing is a duty strictly charged upon us. God commands the
people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. That his words may dwell in their hearts, and
that they diligently teach them their children. Parents in families must be as
lighted tapers, to give light to all who are in the house; first they must
rivet Gods word on their own hearts, and then drop it into the hearts of their
families. Joshuah's Josh. 24. 15.
resolve was, That he and his house would serve the Lord. Governors of families
should be as Gardiners, which water the young plants at the root.

Thirdly, Catechizing is a duty most successefully pursued upon young ones.
This is throwing seed into a fruitful ground, which will not want an harvest.
Timothy was trained up betimes in holy Doctrine, and afterward he was a most
excellent Evangelist. When a house is strongly built at first, after-years will
proclaim the care and fidelity 2 Timothy 3. 15.
of the workman. As Sir Walter Mildmay said of his College which he built,
Emanuell College in Cambridge, He had planted an Acorn which might be an Oak
in time; and this worthy College has been the seminary of many learned and
excellent men. Every serious catechizing of our family is the planting of an
Acorn, and aftertimes may see the fruits of that holy plantation. We have all
varieties of Arguments to press this necessary and excellent duty.

Scripture. In the Old Testament the Jews were to teach their Children the
Original use of the Passover, Exodus 12. 26, 27. and other points of the divine
Law. The Lord speaks Exodus 12. 26
thus, Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19. Therefore shall ye lay up these my words Ezod. 13. 8.
in your hearts, and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand,
that they may be as frontlets between your eyes, and ye shall teach them your
Children, etc. In those times Deuteronomy. 4. 10.
children were taught the chief points of the doctrine of the Prophets,
touching God, or the Law, or the Promise of the Gospel, or the use of the
Sacraments, and Sacrifices, which were the types of Messiah to come, and of his
benefits; these and other Principles children were taught at home by their
Parents. In the New Testament, Christ commands little children to be brought
unto him, Mat. 10. 14. This evinceth the necessity of a Christ for our
Children: And how shall these young ones believe on Christ, of whom they have
not heard? and how shall they hear without a Chatechizer, without one to open
and discover Christ to Romans 10. 14.
them in the plain and familiar way of Chatechisme? Quando parvuli post
baptismum adolescunt, Christo adducondi sunt per sedulam; sollicitam, et piam
institutionem; cum annis crescat cura nostra de pueris. Par.
which plain method of instruction adapts and fits youth for hearing the Word
from the Minister, and is the first round of the Ladder of Knowledge. The
careful institution of children in Gospel-knowledge, was no stranger to the
first times of the Church: and therefore the Apostle Peter calls the Word Milk,
1 Pet. 2. 2. as being fit and proportionate sustenance for young ones in
Religion: And the Promises are called the Breasts of Consolation, Isa. 66. 11.
for young Children to lie at, and draw comfort from them.

Antiquity. A learned man says, That Paul the Apostle was a Chatechist,
grounding his assertion from 1 Cor. 14. 19. where that word we translate teach,
is in the Conciones Apostolorum fere tantum erant Chatecheses. Alap. in 1
Epist. ad Cor.
Original, (...) Catechize. The Sermons of the Apostle, often opened the very
principles of Religion, which are calculated for the information of youth. And
the same blessed Apostle lays down a short Compendium of Christian principles
in a chatechistical Summary, Heb. 6. 1, 2. And we are told, that Cyril of
Jerusalem composed a Catechism De rudibus chatechizandis. Aug.
for the benefit of Christian youth; That Gregory Nyssene made a chatechistical
Oration; And Augustine wrote a Treatise concerning chatechizing the ignorant, as
being the most proper way of diffusing and disseminating Gospel Light. A De
pueris ad Christum trahendis. Gers. in part. 2.
learned man tells us, that Genson, Chancellor of Paris, in later times, did
usually instruct Children, and did it to the great benefit of the Church of
God: The Church did gather O ^issime Jesu, quis ultra post te verecundabitur
humilis ad parvulos, etc Ger.
the fruit of such watered Nurseries. The same Author tells us, that Gerson
wrote a Treatise concerning drawing children to Jesus Christ: And in this
Tract, falls into this holy Rapture: O most holy Jesus, who after thee shall be
ashamed to condescend to children, when thou have invited little ones to thy
self? O gracious Christ, will thou intwine children in thy sacred Arms, and
fold them in thy divine Embraces? And shall any who is spiritual, and seeks not
his own things, but the things of Christ, whom charity, humility Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist lib. 6. c. 3. Ab ecclesia domi redeuntes, Amici inter se, cum filiis
Parents, cum servis domini, meditarentur, and contenderent, quomodo quae
imperata sunt exequenda sint. Chrysos.
and piety guides, refuse the introduction of younger ones, to prepare them for
the Embraces of the dear Jesus? Eusebius writes of Origin, that he restored the
pious custom of Chatechizing in Alexandria, when in times of persecution it
was very much decayed. Chrysostom was wont pathetically to persuade his
Auditors; that when they came from Church on the Lords day, That they should
discourse among themselves, and Parents with their children, Masters with their
servants, how they might act and do what they were commanded. And Origin, in
his 9th. Homily on Leviticus, makes it his serious Option, That we would be
exercised, not only in the Church, but in our houses in meditating and
canvasing Gods Word; For, says he, Christ will be with them, who seek after
him. Thus we see the Golden times of the Church much favored and followed this
successful practice.

reason. 1. Catechizing is necessary, that Novices and young ones be not
entangled and seduced into erroneous Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit
odorem, Testa diu.
opinions, Chatechizing is the hammer to beat down heresies: Cloth which is
died in grain before, will not easily take another color. Youth having drunk
in the saving and fundamental Truths of Religion, will hardly be led aside to
another doctrine. The first sent remains in the Vessel. The Janissaries are the
fiercest Turks, and they are taken from Christian Parents in their childh^od,
and so trained up in the Mohammedan Religion. The same fruits the Tree bears
when it is young, it bears ever after. Chatechizing lays the foundation which
Seducers cannot easily shake and pluck up. Ignorance is the mother of weakness,
and lays us open to destructive changes.

2. Those who learn thoroughly the Chatechisme, will better understand Sermons,
and they will be able easily to reduce Facile est inventis addere.
whatever they hear from the Word, to the several heads of their Chatechism.
Mariners have their several side-winds, but they can bring every wind to verge
toward one of their four chief winds. Principles of Religion take in the whole
of Religion reductively, and Principles are dropped into youth by Chatechism. One
gravely observes, That Sermons without Conciones sine chatechizatione
praeparatoriae sine fructu, et emolumento usitatissime ce^ditae sunt. Ursin.
out preparatory Chatechism and instruction are heard to little profit or
advantage. Ignorant persons more usually hear a sound than a Sermon; like Paul's
Companions in their journey to Damascus, who heard a voice, but no language,
Acts 9. 6. Ignorant persons travel in the dark, and the light of a Sermon does
rather confound then convince them, they are still more in the dark, and the
learning of Principles must bring them in their way.

3. Chatechism is most accommodate to young and in judicious persons: A copious
and vagrant form of instruction is not suitable to youth and Christians of the
lower form: The Scholar learns not the Greek language at the first; it is the
Accidens, not Homer, is fit for his first setting forth in the travels of
literature: Every thing is good according to proportion: We eat not loaves but
morsels; The Nurse chews the meat, and then puts it into the child's mouth:
Inculcated principles must first be prepared for children and servants, and
doctrines must run parallel with their capacities. The Sun rises by degrees,
nor does it get up to its full height till its just time.

interest: If we will have obedient children and faithful servants, let us pave
their minds with Scripture-principles, and this will chase away that ignorance
which is the spring of all irreligion. Every flowr the beast feeds upon, we
have the sweetness of it in the milk; and so all those truths we insinuate into
the hearts of our Families in a chatechistical way, we shall find in their
behaviors and carriages. The cost we bestow on our Gardens, we find in the
spring, and then the sweetness of the Rose, and the beauty of the Tulip will
court both our eye and our smell; so in this case, our pains in chatechizing
will be found in the towardliness of the youth of our Families; and if we would
turn our houses into little Churches, chatechism must be Col. 4. 15.
the chiefest consecration; But if we lay aside this successful duty, Ignorance
will overgrow the Family, and then a cloud of ignorance will easily melt into a
shower of profaneness; The darkness in the head will turn into darkness 1 C^r 2
8.
in the deed; and our Family may not love Christ, probably because they do not
know him. Well instructed are usually well governed Families: Let something
then of the Sabbath Evening be spent and employed in this influentiall Duty.

CHAP. XXXV. Singing of Psalms, is the Music of a Sabbath.
THe Feast of a Sabbath is not to want the music of a Ephesians. 5 19.
Psalm: The Lords day, says the Psalmist, Psalm 118. Revel. 5. 11.
24. is a day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it: And
Psalms are the echoes of joy, the hearts Revel. 4. 11.
melody, the Saints tuning his Hallelujahs. When we sing Revel. 5. 13.
Psalms, we seem to join issue with the 24 Elders mentioned in the Revelation,
and with the Quire of Angels, the Psalm 100. 2.
subject of whose Song is the Lord, and the Lamb who sit 2 Samuel 23. 1.
upon the Throne. David was not only the great King of Judah, but the sweet
Singer of Israel; and he did not only 1 Chronicles. 13. 8*
compile his psalms for the Church, but himself did sing Nehem. 12. 27.
forth his Songs to the Lord; nay, the whole body of the Judge. 5. 3.
people of Israel, though they cannot be Psalmists, they Psalm 30. 4.
will be joyous in the praises of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 13. 8. The wall of the
City was not dedicated without singing, Psalm 147. 1.
much more the worship of the Temple was not celebrated without the same method
of praise and thanksgiving. Singing is the commanded mirth of Mountains, Isa.
44. 23. It is the Exultation of the Earth, Isa. 49. 13. It is the pleasant
triumph of Saints, Isa. 51. 11. It is the Trophie of Victories, Exodus 15. 21.
It is the Music of Isreal's Quire, 1 Chronicles. 16. 9. And then surely, it is the
joyful melody of Gods holy day. Gods praise is much set forth by singing; and
all varieties join in consort. The trees of the Wood, 1 Chronicles. 16. 33. The
spears of the Heavens, Isa. 44. 23. The Kingdoms of the Earth, Psalm 68. 32.
The Saints in their greatest numbers, Psalm 149. 3. The Saints in their
greatest straights, Isa. 26. 19. The Saints in their greatest flight, Isa. 42.
10, 11. The Saints in their greatest deliverances, Zeph. 3. 14, 15. The Saints
in their greatest necessities, Isa. 52. 9. Isa. 54. 1. The Saints in their
greatest plenties, Isa. 65. 14. Jer. 31. 12. How comely then does singing
divine praise to the divine Majesty befit the holy day of God? And we are to
take notice, that Psalms are not only calculated 1 Cor. 14. 26.
for the public Congregation, but likewise for private Col. 3. 16.
families. There must be a Quire in our houses; Our Loquitur Aposto^us non
tantum de publicis in ecclesia cantatis hymnis, sed etiam de privatis. Dr Jun.
children like the lesser birds must sing the praises of the Creator; Our
servants must understand the chief service in singing forth thanksgivings to
the Lord, and Governors of Families must be guides of the Chore, they must be
Presidents in this complacential service. Tertullian tells us, That the
Christians in the Primitive times had their meetings before day to sing to
Jesus Christ; so sweet was this Duty to Christiani habuere caetus antelucanos
ad canendum Christo et Deo. Tertul. Lib. ^0. Epist. 97. Hymnipro sympanis
sumantur Psalmodia pro fl^gitiosis cantibus. Naz. Niceph. lib. 13 cap. 8.
Ruffin. Histor. lib. 10. cap. 9.
them, and reputed so necessary. Eusebius mentions some Hymns, which the
Christians in the early times of the Gospel used to recite and sing forth: And
Nepos compiled many of these divine Songs for the service of Dyonisius and his
Brethren. Plinius secundus, though an Heathen, makes mention of Christians
singing of Psalms to their great praise, in his Epistles to the Emperor
Trajan. Gregory Nazianzen much presses the singing of Psalms and Hymns upon
Christians in their solemn days, for the avoidance of fidling Instruments, and
of light and jocular songs. And as if psalms were not only the discharge of
our duty, but the confutation of the errors of others, Chrysostom commanded
Psalms to be sung in the night for the suppression of the Arrian Heresy.
Basil, as Ruffin attests, commanded the people to meet for the pouring out of
their prayers, and singing of Psalms. The Eastern Church, from the time that
the Mos cantandi in Orient^li ecclesia jam inde ab Apostolis est observatus.
Dr. Jun.
Sun of Righteousness arose in the East, did propagate the use of singing of
Psalms and Hymns to successive Generations: Nor was the Western Church
defective, in praising and practicing of this sweet and reviving Duty. Holy
Ambrose so zealously pressed this duty of singing of Psalms, that he would not
allow times of persecution, a sufficient reason to intercept it; But the
Empress Justina raging against Plebs in ecclesia excub^bat, et tum psalmi, et
hymni cantabantur secundum morem in Orientalium partium, ut populus
reficeretur, etc.
him, He commanded the common people to lie in the Church, and there sing
Psalms and Hymns, according to the practice of the Oriental Christians, that
they might not be sensible of any sorrow or tediousness: and this custom
prevailed in aftertimes, and was scattered into other places: the Churches in
other parts imitating this worthy practice. And Paulinus testifies, that the
same excellent Ambrose brought Hymns and Psalms to be sung in public in the
Churches of Millain, and this practice overspread almost the whole Western Per
omnes pene Occidentis provincias manasse resert. Paulin.
Church. Paulin. in Vit. Ambros. And if you ask what Psalms were sung in those
Early days of the Church, Augustine informs us, The Psalms of David. Aug.
confess. lib. 10. cap. 33. And Theodoret joins in the same assertion, Theodor.
Hist. lib. 2. cap. 24. And these Oracles were warbled forth with a lively and
sweet voice, that the truths which were sung did seem to get a new life by the
tune, as the same Augustine averres. Chrysostom assures us, That the words of
Ipse de cantatorum psalmorum Davidicorum verba inter canendum prolata recenset.
Chrysostom. Homil. de verbis Isai. 1. lib. 5.
David's Psalms were the constant matter which was sung, that which did feed the
voice, and the rejoicing of Christians in his time. Thus singing of Psalms was
the usual and commendable practice of the golden times of the Church. And sing
to the Lord, Psalm 47. 6. must be the command which must lead us up and down a
Sabbath, and especially put an Higgaion Selah upon the close of it. Now for our
more comfortable management of this heavenly service and spiritual recreation,
we must consider,

Singing of Psalms has excellent Presidents. That service is much sweetened,
which is exemplified by the best Patterns: We have the best of Persons going
before us in this Job 38. 7.
way of holy delight. The Morning stars of the Church have sung together; Heb.
2. 10.


1. Christ himself, the Captain of our sanctification as well as our salvation,
has gone before us in this holy practice; he sang a Hymn with his Apostles,
Mat. 26. 30. He sang with the Apostles, to show us, that Psalms are calculated
not only for the public Congregations, but private Families: He sang not with
the multitude, but with the Disciples: And Christ sang in the Evening, to
evidence, that the Evening of his own day is the most fit season for this
heavenly duty. And he sang immediately before he suffered, Hymni sunt lauds dei
cum cantico. Et si sit laus, and non dei, non est hymnus, and si sit laus dei,
et non cantetur, non est hymnus: Oportet ergo ut sit hymnus habeat haec tria;
et laudem, et dei, et canticum. August. Psalmi Davidici sunt sacri hymni.
Philo. (...) Archimusico, vincenti, praecentori cui cura est de re musica,
instatque ut ad debitum finem perducatur. Prefecto cantorum, Occurrit in
Psalmis 35 vicibus. Bithn.
to seal this Ordinance with his blood. And if it be Queried what Hymn Christ
sang? Learned Expositors are various in their opinions, and shoot so much at
Rovers, that I shall not stay to take up their arrows. But it is not without
remark, that Augustine gives us the full and rare description of an Hymn, which
may help us in this case: Hymns, says he, are the praises of God set forth in
singing: If it be praise, and not of God, it is no hymn; And if it be praise of
God, and these praises are not sung, it is not an Hymn; And therefore if it be
an Hymn, it must have these three things; It must be praise, the praise of God,
and that with a song. Christ then was versed in this holy practice: and so the
Holy Ghost pens a Psalm for the Sabbath, viz. the 92 Psalm: that as there is
the Lords Prayer to guide us in that holy duty, so there i^ the Lords Psalm
too, to excite and stir us up in this feraphical Service.

2. Godly Princes have glorified God in this duty, 2 Chro. 29. 30. David
composes Psalms; and Hezekiah commands them to be sung; The chief Magistrate
joins with the chief Musician: And he that takes the Scepter in his hand to
govern the people, he likewise takes the Harp in his hand to sing the praises
of the Lord, Psalm 98. 5. David, and Asaph, Hezekiah and the Levites, all join
to sing forth the praises of God. There was among the Jews a Prefect of songs,
as well as a Governor of the People.

3. The Holy Apostles, those bright luminaries of the Church, they have made
this music in their Spears, Acts 16. 25. Paul and Silas sang praises to God
in their Exodus 15. 1.
darkest Dungeon; though their feet were, their tongues were not in the stocks.

4. Eminent Fathers: Some have been cited already to give (...). Just. Mart.
Quest. 117. ad Orthodoxos.
in their testimony to the praise and practice of this duty; I will only
superadd one more, One most worthy among the worthiest, famous Basil, who thus
discants upon singing of Psalms; Look whatever is profitably dispersed
throughout the whole Scriptures, the same is gathered together Est Psalmus
animarum tranquillitas, Pacis Arbiter, optimarum disciplinarum promptuarium;
Psalmus turbas et fluctus cogitationum compescit, iracundiam mollit, est
elementum incipientibus, incrementum proficientibus, etc. Basil.
in the Book of the Psalms, and therefore this Book of Psalms was preserved,
that those who are Children in years, or altogether young in manners, might in
show sing in meeter, but in truth might instruct their own souls; the
instructions of the Psalms being sung both at home and abroad. A Psalm brings
quietness to the mind, is a peacemaker, repressing the perturbations and
passions of the mind; it does mollify anger, and procure love and friendship
among men, suggesting unto the mind a certain concord, and a common bond to
unite men together, and compelling men to the harmony of one Quire. A Psalm is
instruction to the ignorant, an increase to them that profit, and one voice of
the whole Church: This does beautify solemnities, and causes Godly sorrow, for
Psalms do pull tears out of the most stony hearts. Thus far the Renowned Father
launches forth in the praise of Psalms, Ho^ institutum in hodierum diem
retentum. Aug. Confess.
that spiritual incense, as he is pleased to call them. And from the Primitive
Church, this heavenly service has been propagated down to our very times. This
duty, like the Sun which runs through the several signs of the Zodiac, has
passed the tempers and dispositions of every Age.

Singing of Psalms has not only excellent presidents, but enforcing reasons.
The Psalmist says, It is a good thing to sing unto our God, Psalm. 47. 1. This
duty being like a fruitful Cloud in the Summer season, which is not only our
screen against the heat, but melts into a shower for the earths refreshing. It
does not only make a Canopy for us, to keep of the scorching Sun, but makes a
draught for the ground to satisfy its parching thirst: So we do not only
magnify God in singing of Psalms, but we solace our selves, and put our Josh.
6. 20.
own hearts into a spiritual delight. This duty is much to Edification. Our
souls are built up as the walls of Jericho were pulled down, by loud sounding
forth the praises of the Lord; while we praise God, we engage him, and as holy
musicians, after we have drawn our tongues and hearts into the Quire, we shall
have our reward. The Apostle advises Cum hilaritati inservimus, aedificationis
et utilitatis mutuae memores esse debemus. Daven.
the Ephesians to speak to one another in Psalms, Ephesians. 5. 19. The Christian at
the same time carrying on a threefold design.

1. He praises God.

2. He works divine truth upon his own heart.

3. He instructs those who join with him. And the tune sweetens, it does not
lose the Scripture Counsel we sing to God.

Singing of Psalms does very much advantage us; it can sweeten a Prison, Acts
16. 25. Paul and Silas by singing chase Ne sit horagratiae coelestis immunis
gaudio; conventus sobrius sonet Psalmos. Cyp.
away the terror of the night, lighten the heaviness of the chain, enlighten
the darkness of the dungeon. This divine Service can turn a Prison into a
Paradise, a place of restraint into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.
Cyprian well advices us; Let not, says he, an hour of grace want its joy; let
serious conventions of Gods people sound forth Psalms before the Lord.

prepares us for sufferings. When Christ was ready to be offered up, then he
sings an Hymn with his Disciples; Christ sups and sings, and then he sets
forward Mat. 26. 30.
toward the Cross. Joy in the Lord, whereof singing is Hoc genus delectationis
est animae nostrae valde cognatum; Deus Psalmos constituit ut ex iis simul
caperetur utilitas et voluptas. Chrysostom.
only the rebound, arms us against the dint of suffering: He will scarce be
sensible of approaching strokes, whose heart is taken up with God and Christ,
and is in the midst of his Hallelujahs; no more then the three Childrens feet
were parched when they trod upon flames. Chrysostom informs us, That God
appointed Psalms both for our gain and recreation: Thus being wrapped we shall
scarce feel the thorn in the flesh.

chases away fears. When the Church of Christ was much threatened by Tyrants,
and those Wolves of the Evenings, whose Den was at Rome; Among Psalmus 4^
Lutheri Psalmus dicitur.
others, Luther was the white, those Archers shot at; but in the midst of the
greatest fears, Luther would call to sing the 46th Psalm, which since is called
Luthers Psalm; Thus did that incomparable man, as if singing of Psalms was the
holy spell, to charm away all griefs and fears, the threats of persecutors
might raise and procure. As perfect love, so inward joy casts out fear; the
triumphing and the trembling of the heart at the same time, being inconsistent.
Whilst we are beginning heaven in this work of Angels, as Basil calls Basil de
laudibu^, et virt. Psalm.
singing of Psalms, we are got above the frowns and fears of the world.

heart rejoicing duty can make travels sweet and pleasant; it can shorten
miles, and hasten stages, Number. 21. 17. Sive in templum convenimus ad orandum,
sive ad Agapen, sive in domum, ad mensam, aut cibum nobis metipsis in Psalm^^
loquamur. Number. 21. 17.
A learned man observes, That singing holy songs; it is the music of the
Temple, the pleasure of the feast, the delight of the Table; and it may be
added, it is the recreation of the journey. The Children of Israel had a
wilderness to travel through, but they had a God to converse with, and sweet
ordinances to refresh themselves by, they made their journies pleasurous; and
the change of their stages, was only the variety of their delight; singing to
the Lord strewed their way with roses.

soul-raising duty has facilitated victories, 2 Chronicles. 20. 22. When the people
of Israel began to sing, and to praise God, the Lord set ambushments against
the Children of Ammon, 2 Chr. 20. 22.
etc. Thus singing of Gods praises has not only a melody in the Church, but a
force and a power in the Camp. Swords sometimes are no sense against songs,
when God and Christ are the matter of them.

heavenly ends.

Singing, it blazons Gods Righteousness, Psalm. 145. 7. By it we bless Gods
Name, Psalm. 92. Psalm. 66. 2.
1. By it we evidence Gods love, Psalm. 47. 6. By it we declare Gods Majesty,
Isa. 24. 14. By it we testify Gods mercy, Isa. 12. 2.
Psalm. 89. 1. By it we publish Gods Judgments, Psalm. 101. 1. By it we proclaim
Gods power, Psalm. 59. 16. Psalm. 47. 6.
This sacred duty David urges with more then ordinary fervency. And in this
service we join confort with the whole Psalm. 95. 1.
Creation: The brute and inanimate Creatures praise the Creator by singing to
him. The Mountains cannot pray, Psalm. 98. 4.
but they can sing, Isa. 44. 23. The Valleys do not meditate, but they sing,
Psalm. 65. 13. Singing is the harmony of the Forest, 1 Chronicles. 16. 33. Singing
is the music of the Grove, Psalm. 104. 12. Nay, the Heavens sing, Isa. 49. 13.
And the Earth sings, Psalm. 96. 1. Thus the Quire of all the Creatures bear a
part in singing the praises of the Almighty.

to draw out our Graces; and they indeed are the music which make the Cant. 4.
16.
harmony, they are the spices which flow out with a pleasant, and an aromatical
sent.

1. Singing draws out, and exercises our joy, Isa. 12. 2. The joy of the heart
is only midwiv'd into the World by the songs of the lips.

2. Singing draws out our faith. The Heathens sing to the Psalm. 47. 7.
vain Idols, and we to our Jehovah. Sing praise, says the Psalmist, to our
God. Our spiritual songs keep time by the hand of faith. And so Tertullian
observed; (as was suggested before) The Primitive Christians met before day to
sing Hymns to Jesus Christ, their dear Redeemer.

3. Singing draws out our love, Isa. 5. 1. We sing most Mat. 26. 30.
sweetly in the arms of our beloved. Christ sang with his Apostles, the
Disciples of his bosom. Moses sings with the Psalm. 33. 1.
Children of Israel, the Brethren of his love. When we sing to Christ, we sing
to him, who lies as a bundle of Myrrh between our breasts, Cant. 1. 13. It is
love dilates the heart, it is love sweetens the voice, it is love makes the
tongue an Semper Mobile. Arist,
instrument of perpetual motion.

4. Singing draws out our thanksgiving, Isa. 38. 20. Singing is only gratitude
put in meeter, and set in tune. The grateful person comes with his harp in his
hand, as Jephtah's Daughter did, to congratulate her returning and victorious
Prove. 29. 6.
Father, Judges 11. 34. Singing Psalms only becomes the righteous, who shall
eternally praise God for the Psalm. 30. 4.
blessings of their salvation by Christ. We may sing musically, but not
joyfully, not heartily, with unpardoned guilt upon our souls. A wicked man is a
Parot in this duty, he is Prove. 13. 14.
only Satan's Nightingale. The Prophet says, Isa. 65. 14. The Servants of God
shall sing for joy of heart. Wicked men can have no peace, Isa. 57. 21. and
therefore no joy. A grave Divine well observes, That praise and psalms well
become the Saints, who sing with affection, reverence and understanding;
otherwise this duty is as a costly garment, which is rich and beautiful in it
self, but it fits not the person who is to wear it.

Singing of Psalms does admirably cheer and exhilerate the soul. The Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. 5. 19. Of singing Psalms and Hymns, and making melody in our
hearts: this duty is the Hortatur Christianos Apostolus ad laetitiam, et
exultationem spiritualem, ut laeti et exultantes in Christianismo jubilent.
Alap.
sweet shout of the soul, the jubilie of the inward man, a spiritual
exultation, the triumphal gladness of a gracious heart, a softer rapture. We
may say of this Service, as Tremelius does of David's harp; That by the music
of it, the storms of Saul's spirit were laid, and he was composed and serene.
This Service can calm a perturbed and discomposed spirit. Augustine confesses,
That oftentimes for joy he wept in the Aug. lib. 3. Confess cap. 6.
Church to hear the melody of the peoples singing. And Beza acknowledges, That
at his first entrance into the Congregation, Bez. Paraph. in Psalm. 91.
hearing them sing the 91st Psalm, by the singing thereof he felt himself
exceedingly comforted, and he did ever since bear the sense of it dearly
engraven on his heart. Dr. Bound observes, Psalms are most convenient for the
Sabbath, for that is a time of joy, and there is no joy comparable to that we
have in Christ Jesus, who fills our hearts with joy unspeakable and 1 Pet. 1. 8.
full of glory. Indeed singing of Psalms it reveals and confines our joy, it is
the smile, and the gracious smile of the soul. The Apostle James advises us to
turn our mirth into the right channel, If we be merry let us sing Psalms, Jam.
Psalmis nos oblectemus, et ex hisce hilaritatem nostram promanare annitendum
est. Daven.
5. 13. Our mirth should be as the music of the Spears, pure and celestial;
As the waters of a spring, and not as the waters of a pond, which easily
putrifieth. Our joy then flows, and breaks out in this blessed duty of singing
Psalms, which is the only vent of inward complacency, the heart being the chief
musick-room of a Saint.

In the singing of Psalms we begin the service of heaven, singing is the
triumph of glory. In heaven we read of the song of the Lamb, the song of Moses,
Rev. 15. 3. All varieties in the Palace of the great King sing songs to the
Lord, and to the Lamb who sits on the throne, Rev. 5. 9, 12, 13. The twenty
four Elders sing a new song, as if they would out-vy and double the tribes of
Israel, as in their Psalmi sunt (...) quaecunque cantiones vari^s argumentis
scriptae; Hymni sunt (...) quae solummodo dei lauds continent. Cantica, seu
Odae sunt (...) peculiares, and magis artificiosae, angustiore quadam forma.
Daven.
number, so in their praises to the God of Israel, Rev. 5. 9. The Angels lift
up their voice to sing the Psalms of heaven, Rev. 5. 11. Those glorious spirits
though they have no tongues, yet they have voices to celebrate the praises of
the Divine Majesty. The Harpers likewise have a new song, Rev. 14. 3. and join
issue in the same harmony, to evidence that heaven is a place of joy and
triumph. Now as no Ordinance better resembles the company of heaven, then that
of the Lords Supper, where the Saints meet to feast with, and on Christ: So no
Ordinance better resembles the harmony of heaven, then the singing of Psalms,
when the Saints join in the praise of their Redeemer. It is not without a
Selah, a note of observation, that the Apostle is so copious in setting down,
the several ways of the Saints praising God, viz. In Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, Col. 3. 16. Is it not to prefigure that plenty and joy which
is reserved for them, when they shall always join in consort with the music of
the Bride-chamber? David singing with his harp Psalm. 71. 22.
here looks not so like the King of the Old, as a Citizen of the New Jerusalem.
Rev. 14. 2.


prudential cautions.

the heart must be president of the Quire. He plays the hypocrite who bids his
harp awake when his heart is asleep. Affection must be loudest Non vox sed
votum, non musica chordul^, sed cor; non clamans, sed amans caniat in aure dei.
Aug.
in every Psalm. The Apostle says, That he will sing with the spirit, 1 Cor.
14. 15. David tells us, His heart was ready, his heart was ready to sing and
give praise, Psalm. 57. 7, 8. Psalm. 108. 1. The Virgin Mary sings her magnificat
with her heart, Luke 1. 46, 47. Bernard in a Tract of his tells us, When we
sing Psalms, let us take heed that we have the same De modo been vivendi Bern.
thing in our mind which we warble forth with our tongue; and that our song and
our tongue run not several ways. Audiant illi quibus psallendi in ecclesia
officium est, deo non voce tantum, sed cord cantandum, non in Tragaedorum
modum. Hieron.
Spiritual songs must not be as ic^^les which drop from the eves of our mouths,
but as sparks which fly from the hearths of our souls. If there be only the
calves of our lips, it so much resembles a carnal and Jewish sacrifice.
Hierome tells us, We must not act as players, who stretch their throats and
accomodate their tongues to the matter in hand; but when we sing Psalms, we
must act as Saints, praising God, not only with our voice, but with our hearts.
A sweet voice pleases men most, but a melting heart pleases God most. Non
franges vocem, sed frange voluntatem, non servas tantum, consonanti^m vocum,
sed concordiam morum. Bern.
Thou studiest cadencies and to run divisions, says Bernard, Study to break
thy will, and to keep under thy corrupt affections, and do not so much affect a
consonancy of voice, as conformity of manners. It is not a quavering voice, but
a trembling spirit, Isa. 66. 2. Augustine complains sadly of some in his time,
who minded more the tune, then the truth which was sung, more the manner how,
then the matter Aug.
what, and this was a great offense to him.

We must sing with grace in our hearts, Col. 3. 16. Viz. Either as some expound
it with gratitude and thankfulness, N^n incommode cum cantionibus conjungitur
gratitudo. Daven. Laetis and prosperis rebus ad canendum monemur quo in statu
affectus gratitudinis debitus est, and plane necessarius. Dav.
for the word (...) grace, is sometimes so taken, 1 Cor. 15. 57. And indeed
thankfulness is the Selah of this duty, that which puts an accent upon the
music and sweetness of the voice; we sing the thanksgivings of the Lord. In
times of prosperity, when God crowns us with his loving kindnesses, Psalm. 103.
4. We are then stirred up to sing forth the praises of God, and every part of
man makes up the Consort; the eye looks up with joy, the tongue sets the tune,
the hand claps with triumph, Psalm. 47. 1. The heart is the Organist which sets
all the rest on going; that bosom instrument begins the songs of praise.

Secondly, Bishop Davenant expounds with grace, viz. with gracefulness, with a
graceful dexterity, which brings Et prodesse volunt, and delectare.
both profit and pleasure to the hearers. When we sing Psalms, we must sing
seriously and solemnly, not lightly or sensually to gratify a curious ear, or
a wanton spirit. Psalms they are not the Comedies of Venus, or the jocular
celebrations of a wanton Adonis, but they are the spiritual ebullitions and
breakings forth of a composed soul to the holy and incomprehensible Jehovah.
Therefore David Psalm. 96. 1.
will sing a new song to the Lord, Psalm. 96. 1. (i. e.) in the Hebrew dialect,
a most excellent song, a song tuned with suavity, composed with piety, and
warbled forth Psalm. 137. 4.
with real sincerity.

Thirdly, This phrase with grace may most properly signify, the acting of
grace in that heavenly duty. Not only our heart, but Gods spirit must breath in
this service, in it we Cum in conspectu dei Cantus sit, hoc considera in mente.
Bern.
must act our joy, our confidence, our delight in the Lord. Singing is the
triumph of a gracious soul, his unconstrained exultation, which is not penned
up in the mind by meditation, nor confined to the ear in attention, nor yet
chained to the tongue in prayer and supplication, but flies abroad in a more
solemn Ovation, praising him who causes him to triumph in Christ, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 2. 14. In singing 2 Cor. 2. 14.
of Psalms the gracious heart takes wing, and mounts up to God to join with the
celestial Quire.

We must sing with understanding: We must not be guided by the tune, but the
words of the Psalm; and must not so much mind the melody, as the matter: we
must consider what we sing, as well as how we sing. The tune may affect Psalm.
47. 7.
the fancy, but it is the matter affects the heart. David in 1 Cor. 14. 15.
the Old Testament, Psalm. 47. 7. And the Apostle in the Spiritum and
intelligentiam opponit Apostolus, ut causam and effectum; docens psallendum
esse spiritu, ut non modo a psallentibus sed and ab audientibus intelligatur:
Quia secus fructu illud totum carebit. Par. in Cor.
New, 1 Cor. 14. 15. call for understanding in singing, otherwise we make a
noise, but we do not sing a spiritual song; and so this duty would be more the
work of the Chorister, then the Christian; and we should be more delighted with
an Anthem of the Musicians making, then with a Psalm of the spirits enditing.
We must therefore sing wisely, that not only our own hearts may be affected,
but those who hear us. Alapide observes, that the word understanding mentioned
by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 15. it is (...) in the Hebrew, which signifies
profound judgment, and (...) in the Septuagint, which signifies the acuteness
of understanding, the sharpness of it, the mind of the understanding, if there
be any more spiritual, and freed from the body. And thus we must sing our
Psalms and spiritual Psallite diligenter, ut nimirum vos intelligatis, and
sapiatis ea quae ps^llitis, et alii qui vos audiunt, ea quae vos psallitis
intelligant. Alap. Pr^ces Pontificiorum lingua ignota, non tam Oration sunt,
quam murmur.
songs. A learned man observes, We must relish what we sing. Now the
understanding must lead the way to the taste and the gust. Let me superadde one
thing more. The Apostle in the forementioned place, 1 Cor. 14. 15. says, He
will pray with the spirit, and with understanding; he will sing with the
spirit, and with understanding: So then we must sing, as we must pray. Now the
most rude and ignorant Petitioners will understand what they pray, rather then
they will Petition in the dark, they will confine themselves to a form, or to
the Lords prayer. None so ignorant as not to understand what they ask. Unknown
prayers are the soloecism of Religion, they are only a vain muttering, a
troublesome noise; Children know what to ask of their Parents, and their
minority does not speak so Luke 18. 13.
much ignorance, as to wrap up their requests in a cloud, Luke 11. 13.
that they cannot understand their meaning. It is well observed by a learned
man, That the prayers of the Papists in an unknown tongue, are not so much a
supplication as a murmur. Now ignorance in singing falls under the same
condemnation with ignorance in praying, and is as great a soloecism; when we
understand not what we sing, it speaks the harshness of the voice, the hardness
of the heart, and the impertinency of the service.

We must sing to the Lord: In singing of Psalms the direct intention of our
minds must be to God. And we must be Deo lauds et hymnos in gratiarum actionem
canamus. Ansel. Psalmus est signifer pacis, spirituale thymiama, exercitium
coelestium, luxum reprimit, sobrietatem suggerit, et lacrymas movet. Aug.
affected as the matter of the Psalm is, and our present condition does
occasion. Singing is part of divine worship, a piece of Gospel service. The
Apostles counsel is, That in singing we should make melody in our hearts to the
Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. And least we should omit this circumstance, which is the
substance of the whole duty, the Apostle repeats his counsel, Col. 3. 16. and
advises us to sing with grace in our hearts to the Lord. A learned man
observes, That the right singing of Psalms is an evidence of the holy spirit
inhabiting the heart, and a spirit of joy breathing in the Saints. And if the
spirit of the Lord be in us, he will be aimed at by us in all our duties. The
spirit will mount service upwards, will Psalm. 7. 17.
lift up the soul in prayer, Psalm. 25. 1. Isa. 37. 4. will lift Psalm. 30. 4.
up the hands in request, Psalm. 28. 2. will lift up the head Cantare in cord
domino, non vocem excludit, sed cordis affectionem cum voce conjungendam monet.
Dav.
with joy, Psalm. 110. 7. And will lift up the voice to God in singing. David
says, Psalm. 111. 1. I will praise the Lord with my whole heart. Deborah and
Barak sing their triumphal song to the Lord, Judge 5. 3. And the Psalmist calls
the songs of Sion, the songs of the Lord, Psalm. 137. 3, 4. Singing of Psalms
properly is nothing else but the lifting up the voice, and the heart to God.
One gravely tells us, Our In eo recte sentiebant, qui hunc spiritualem cultum
divinae naturae tribuendum judicarunt.
singings must not serve our pleasure, our wantonness, our gain, but our
Savior, our Christ, our God. In this heavenly music we must study, not so
much to keep time, that we do not spoil the Consort, as to keep the heart close
to God, that we do not spoil the Duty. The heathens celebrate their false gods,
Neptune, Mars, Jupiter, etc. with Songs and Hymns, and think that by this
service and worship they proclaim their greatness and Divinity: And shall
Christiani essent soliti ante lucem convenire, carmenque Chr^sto quas^ deo
dicere.
not we much more celebrate the praises of God and Christ, who has loved us,
and given himself for us, Gal. 2. 20. in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual songs?
shall not God have the sweetness of our voice, the melody of our hearts, the
songs of our lips, nay the music of our holy lives; that all that is within us
and without us too, may praise his holy and glorious name?

And thus at last, there is laid before us a Scheme of Sabbath observation, and
we are instructed how to keep the Lords day according to the Lords will; which
doing, we Psalm. 4. 8. ^
shall lie down at night with safety and satisfaction. A well spent Sabbath
will warm our bed at night, will strew our bed with roses, will sent it with
perfumes, nay strew it with pearls, and we may joyfully expect a full crop of
blessings the subsequent week; nay, our future life may be prospered with the
gifts of the right hand and the left, and drenched with the effusions of the
upper and the nether springs.

CHAP. XXXVI. Some supplemental Directions for the better observation of the
Lords day.
BY way of Addition and Appendix some other particulars may be annexed and
suggested for the furtherance S^bbatum est aureum vitae tempus.
of this blessed service. Indeed much of Religion is summed up in the care of
Gods Sabbath, and we should be as chary and tender of this trust, viz. The
Lords day, as Jacob was of Benjamin, in which Child his life was bound up. The
profane person wastes this golden talent, the formalist Luke 19. 20.
wraps it up in a Napkin, but the sedulous Saint puts it out to great
advantage, and will give up his account with joy. Bishop White tells us, The
keeping holy of the Lords Bishop White in his Preface to his Treatise on the
Sabbath.
day (and why then should he plead so much for recreations on that holy day.)
it is a work of piety, a Nursery of Religion and Virtue, a means of sowing the
seeds of grace, and of planting faith and saving knowledge and godliness in the
peoples minds: And our blessed Lord and Savior being duly and religiously
served and worshipped upon his own holy day, imparteth heavenly and temporal
benedictions. Thus this learned man seems to lay the whole weight of Religion,
and to entail the whole reward of godliness upon a due observance of Gods
blessed Sabbath: And let this ever be the praise of his learning. Undoubtedly
Religion and the Sabbath are twins, which live and die together: And the piety
of the Sabbath is the prosperity of the Nation. But let us hasten to some
further directions for the more sweet and full discharge of Sabbath piety.

We must keep Sabbaths not only personally, but domestically, not only by our
selves, but by our families. It is not enough for thee to pray, but thy family
must join in prayer. Abraham Genesis 18. 18.
caused his family to serve God, which gave him no small interest in the love
and heart of God. Joshuas holy resolution was, That he and his house would
serve the Lord. Josh. 24. 15.
On a Sabbath every house should be a lesser Temple, where all should meet to
worship. Every one must keep this holy Josh. 24. 15.
day in order: Superiors must be careful that inferiors observe (...) Exodus
20. 10.
it. Can a Master of a family be said to keep a Sabbath, when he is praying,
and his servant is sinning, his Child is gadding, his Wife is visiting? In
Heaven where there is an everlasting Sabbath kept, there the whole Host is
praising God; and the Inhabitants of Heaven are called a Family by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 3. 15. Our services must be the music of a Consort, not of a single
Instrument.

sanctification of the Sabbath, as well as Masters, and Children as well as
Parents. This blessed Command takes Necessitas obedientiae non ex cusat servum,
sed necessi a^ co^ctionis.
in the whole Family, within its circuit: And learned men observe, the
necessity of obedience does not excuse the servant from observing this day,
only the necessity of compulsion: Servants must not work this day by command,
but only by overpowering force and violence, as the Israelites did in their
Egyptian bondage.

no difference between bond, or free, male, or female, Gal. 3. 28. Every one
has a soul to look after, an account to give, a Christ to pursue, Communi
sanctificandi sabbatum lege constringuntur omnes ex aequo, herus and dominus,
pater and liberi, superiores, and inferiores. Muscul.
a Heaven to take by force, Mat. 11. 12. There dwells a piece of immortality
in the bosom of the meanest servant: And that Child which has no portion to
receive, has a Christ to ensure, which is the work of this holy day. Museulus
observes, The common Law for the keeping of the Sabbath equally reaches all,
and is a common bond to oblige all; and in this it is like the Lawgiver, It is
no respecter of persons, Acts 10. 34. nor must the power of Superiors
prejudice Religion. A Governor of a Family cannot lawfully call off his
Children, or Servants from religious observations, and so from the duties of a
Sabbath: and Religion is as much the interest of the meanest Servant, as of the
greatest Masters, of the most inferior Peasant, as of the most noble Prince:
Nay, the lower our condition is here, the more strictly we should keep the
Sabbath, that we may better our estate to come, in that place and condition
where all civil distinctions will be taken away. The greatest Magistrate is
called to be a nursing Father of the Church of God, Isa. 49. 23. and therefore
herein must he look that the Church be fed, and not delivered over to dry
Nurses. They are Gods Ordinance, and their power is of God, for of themselves
they can do nothing, Joh. 19. 11. And therefore they must honor God, and
uphold his Ordinances, 1 Samuel 2. 30. They must give to God the things which are
Gods, Rom, 13. 1, 2, 6.
Mat. 22. 21. and must employ their Power and Authority to the service and
glory of Christ: Wherefore seeing Christ is the Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2.
27. Mat. 12. 8. Prove. 8. 15.
They must take especial care to serve the Lord in fear and trembling, and
remember to keep the Christian Sabbath; Ezekiel. 46. 4.
because the Kingdom is the Lords and his Christ's, who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, Revel. 11. 15. The duty of Magistrates is,

1. To repress the profaning of the Sabbath, and to use all Qui non prohibet
peccare cum potest; jubet. Sen.
means for the accomplishment of that worthy and glorious design. Namely,

1. To forbid, Nehem. 13. 15. 2. To reprove, Nehem. 13. 17, 18. 3. To threaten,
Nehem. 13. 21. 4. To hinder, Nehem. 13. 19, 22. And, 5. To punish the profaning
of Gods holy day, Nehem. 13. 20.
Secondly, To command. and to compel the Lords day to be sanctified, 2 Chronicles.
34. 33. And

Thirdly, To sanctify it himself, his Children, his Court, his Attendants,
both privately, Psalm 5. 7. Acts 10. 1, 2. and also publicly, Ezekiel. 46. 2, 4. 2
Kings 11. 5, 7, 9. The duties of private and public sanctifying the Lords day,
tie and bind the Prince and other Magistrates, no less then the meanest of the
Subjects, and the most pedantique persons: And, where the Prince neglects the
strict, and holy observation of Gods blessed day, this sin will make his Crown
shake, and his Scepter tremble, and rip up his most stately Palaces, to let in
divine wrath and displeasure. It was the profanation of the Sabbath, which
hastened and ascertained Hezekiahs doom, as may be clearly observed, Jer. 17.
27. If ye will not hearken to me to hallow my Sabbath, I will kindle a fire in
the gates of Jerusalem, and it shall devour the Palaces thereof, and it shall
not be quenched. And lesser Governors, every Householder over his family, who
may be called an inferior Magistrate, in regard of his Authority in the little
province of his family; it is his duty to sanctify the Sabbath himself, he
must keep it with all care Ephesians. 6. 4,.
and diligence, and move in the circuit of Sabbath duties as Psalm. 101. 6, 7.
a star in its Orb: And he must command and compel his family Est. 4. 16.
thereunto, that they may effectually practice it, as well Sub pronomine (...)
tu intelliguntur 1 Personae dominantes, Patres et Matres familiae. 2. Personae
fulcientes filii et fi liae. 3. Personae ministrantes servi et Ancillae. Rivet.
as himself, and this he must do in his proportion as Magistrate in his own
Household. Surely, if Kings in the midst of all their glittering attendance,
their courtly delicacies, numerous addresses, arduous affairs, must not forget
to keep holy the Sabbath day, both themselves, and all their bespangled family,
much more must the private Governors of families, who lie not so open to
tempting avocations, nor are dazzled with such courtly appearances, take care
that themselves and families serve the Lord, on his own holy and blessed day.

Jor and Dan, have both met in a full stream to carry on this service against
all resistance. Ludovicus Proinde necesse est ut, primo sacerdotes, Reg^s, et
Principes, omnesque fideles huic diei debitam observantiam atque reverentiam
devotissime exhibeant. Lud. P. Council. Paris. sub Greg. quarto.
Pius the son of Charles the Great, put forth this Decree: That it is a
necessary duty, that in the first place Priests, and then Kings and Princes,
and all faithful persons, do most devoutly exhibit due observation to this
holy day. This serious Prince enacts the observation of the Sabbath for all:
that every one being fettered by a Law, might not loosely pass over this
heavenly day. And as the Edicts of Princes, enforce the general observation of
the Sabbath, high as well as low, an both equally, so the Constitutions of the
Church. The Council of Paris decreed, that all should keep the Lords day,
Governors, Kings, Princes, Priests, and all faithful persons should procure it
to be kept, and that no man pres^ me to make merchandise to do his pleasure, or
any country work, but that they with all endea^ours of soul do attend to
heavenly praises, etc. Ambrose, in his time complained of some Masters, Taeduit
mihi videre servulos ad ecclesiam fortassis festinantes ad venandum per dominos
avocari; quia sic voluptatibus suis peccata accumulant aliena. Ambr. (...) Lib.
7. cap. 19.
who would call away their servants to hunting, when they were going to Church
on the Lords day, and so by their own sinning drew others into the snare, not
remembering they should be guilty of their servants sin, and of the hazard of
their immortal souls. And a learned man of our own Nation observes: that in
those Constitutions commonly called Apostolical, it was expressly commanded,
That servants should be at leisure on the Lords day for attendance upon the
worship of God, and for learning of Religion. Those early days of the Gospel
commanded all, every one to mind the great work of Religion, and to inure
themselves to divine Knowledge. Our own Church is not the least in providing,
that all persons observe the holy Sabbath. So in King Edwards time, the express
words of the Homily are, Sithence which time, (the time of our Saviors
Resurrection) Gods people in all ages have always without gainsaying used to
Homil. de temp. and loc. precum.
come together upon the Sunday, to celebrate and honor the Lords blessed Name,
and carefully to keep that day in holy Rest, both Man, and Woman, Child, and
Servant, and Stranger, etc. And so in King James his time, it was enacted as
one of the Canons of our Church, among other things, That Parents and Masters
of Families should instruct their children and servants in the fear and nurture
of the Lord, especially Can. Eccles. Angl canae 13. An. Dom. 1603.
on the Lords day. Thus the care of all places where Christianity has been
professed, and in all ages which savoured any thing of Religion, has enjoined
the general observation of the Lords day; and the meanest Servant has come
within the compass of Royal Edicts, and sacred constitutions, as well as the
most considerable Eminent Superior.

bowels of Parents might enforce this duty. Can a tender Father, or an
affectionate Mother see their Children trifling away the time of a Sabbath,
slighting away the Ordinances of a Sabbath, and neglecting the private duties
of Redarguenda est Parentum segnities. qui in rebus seculi s^^^ sunt sallic in,
sed de pietatis incrementa, minus sunt solliciti. Riv.
a Sabbath, and not be filled with fear and amazement? How shall the fruit of
their loins stand before him, who gave the Commandment for the Sabbath in the
midst of a flaming Mountain, Exodus 19. 18. and be accountable to him who is the
Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2. 28. and who will judge the secrets of all men
according to the Gospel? Romans 2. 16. Can Parents see their children grieve the
spirit, who descended most gloriously on the Apostles upon the Lords day, Acts
2. 3. and break that Commandment which is one of Gods Ten Words, Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
Nay, pollute that Deuteronomy. 10. 2.
day which is founded on Christ's salvifical Resurrection, and not be surprised
with dread and consternation? I may expostulate with such, as once the Church
did with the Lord, where is the soundings of their bowels? Parents love their
Isa. 63. 15.
Children, so far as they love their better part; it is considerable, death
will strip them of all the fruits of their care, Job 1. 21.
excepting that which they have taken for their souls. Not only divine command,
Exodus 20. 10. but natural affection Ex una part Christum urgebat ad mertis
supplicium sustinendum, aeternum Patris decretum, and immensus humani generis a
mor. Chemnit.
leads us to the discharge of this duty, (viz.) To see our Family keep holy the
Sabbath day. What softness and tenderness did Christ show to his family! how
sweetly did he instruct them! Mark 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, etc. How pathetically did
he pray for them! Joh. 17. 9, 11, 15, 17, 20, 21, 24. How carefully did he lay
up for them a divine and glorious inheritance! Luke 22. 29, 30. And at last how
willingly did he shed his blood for them, and he was straightned till he drank
up his bitter cup for them! Luke 12. 50. Let us write after this Copy, and show
our love to our family, as our dear Jesus did to his; and then we show our love
to them, when we see, they show their love to God, in a careful keeping of his
holy day.

The excellency of the Sabbath should draw the whole family to an observation
of it. The Lords day is the Fort-royal of Religion, let us all stand in our
places to observe it, and so we shall preserve it; there are many who lay seige
to it, to race and demolish it: Some set their wits on work to oppose the
Doctrinal part of it; Some set their wills on work to oppose the Practical part
of it. Now let us countermine these miscreant endeavors:

1. By being much in prayer, that the Lord of the Sabbath would perpetually
preserve his own ordinance.

2. By being much in practice; that we and our houses serve the Lord on his own
blessed day. Standing and serious sanctity, if it cannot convince men to mind
their duty, it will engage God to secure his own institution. The Jews never
lost the Sabbath, until they rejected Christ, who is the Lord of it; they had
the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. till they repudiated the Son of God. In the Old
Testament, they went to worship God with their Flocks and their Herds (...)
Oracula test Hesichi^ primitus Judaeis a deo revelata sunt, illis Scripta per
prophetas tradita, ita ut illa non nisi per Judaeos ad Gentiles devenerint.
Alap.
with them, Hos. 5. 6. In the New Testament, let us take our Children and our
Servants with us in the worship of God; Let them be with us in the public, let
them be with us in private duties of Gods holy day, so we shall ensconce our
privileges: And every pious family shall be as a Macedonian pbalanx to secure
the Sabbath from violation and subversion. Sin and neglect makes the forfeiture
of spiritual blessings; a careless contempt of the Word, brings a famine of it,
Amos 8. 11. And the slight observance of Gods day exposes it to reproach; So
that often, the Wolves of the Forest, violent men, pursue it with persecution;
and the Hab. 1. 8.
little Foxes, closer Heretics infest it with their contagion. Cant. 2. 15.
Let us therefore with Moses, resolve, We will go with our Young and with our
Old, with our Sons and with our Daughters, for we must hold a feast unto the
Lord, Exodus 10. 9. Exodus 10. 9.
Chemnitius observes, That to the sactification of the Lords day, besides
public duties, there is work to be done in families, Chemnit. exam. Council.
Trident. Cap. de dieb. Fest.
as instructing of servants, rehearsal of Sermons, reading Scriptures,
counselling and quickening such who are under our care, that all may keep Gods
holy day. Ah! let not us and our families lose our Sabbaths, because we did no
better Luke 19. 44.
keep them, not forgeting that usually Children are wrapped up in a common
destruction, Luke 19. 44. And so much the more earnestly should we endeavor to
fold them up in a common salvation, Jude v. 3. Jude v. 3.


It well becomes the wisdom of the Governors of Families to see the Sabbath
carefully observed. Superiors must not leave the keeping of the Sabbath, as a
thing indifferent to the discretion of the family; they must entreat them, they
must provoke them, they must compel them. The Kings Command was to compel the
guest^ to come in, Luke 14. 23. The Deus gentes compellit introire ut sic suam
erga eos ostenderet charitatem; quia enim libenter vellet, ut ipsius essent
convivae, et cum eo in aeternum delitiarentur, non tantum benefici^s eos
invitat, quando venire ren^unt, in manum sumit mall^um legis, quo conterit
corda duriora, et eos humiliat, ut discerent leges, et justitiam suam, sola
enim vexatio dat intellectum auditui. Chemn.
sick child if he will not take his physic with a smile, he must do it with a
^od, the child must not die and miscarry. The ease of the flesh, the strength
of corruption, the insinuating temptations of Satan will all decry Sabbath
observation; and therefore here indulgence is the greatest injury, and mildness
is the sorest cruelty to the precious soul. Thy family had better endure sharp
reproofs, then scorching flames; As Mr. Shepherd used to tell his weeping
Audito^rs, It was better crying here then in Hell. As David said of Gods House,
Psalm. 69. 9. Psalm. 119. 139. so Governors of families should say of Gods day,
the zeal of it has eaten them up. Thy Children and Servants must keep the
Sabbath holy; there is an absolute necessity of it; and woe to the Governors
of families, if through their neglect, the day of God is slightly over-past.
Nehemiah caused the Sabbath to be observed, not so much by mild persuasions, as
peremptory command, nay, sharp and acute threatenings, Nehem. 13. 17, 19, 20.
And so this good man, espoused the Magistrate to the Saint. Let every Master of
a family go and do so likewise. And as Superiors must strictly enjoin, so
Inferiors must heartily embrace Sabbath observation. Children must enquire of
their Parents, Exodus 13. 14. And Servants must joyfully obey their Masters in
all holy and spiritual Isa. 28. 19.
commands, Col. 3. 22. They must spend frugally the time of a Sabbath,
solemnize seriously the ordinances of a Sabbath, perform readily the services
of a Sabbath, and as lesser stars shine in the holy and exemplary observation
of the Sabbath.

That swaying principle of interest should prompt Governors to this duty;

1. Interest, if they regard their present peace. Slight Sabbaths will make
sloathfull Servants, and stubborn Children. When we do not fasten the family to
the holy duties of a Sabbath, we leave them to the bias of their own
corruptions, Cor lubri^um, et in omnia mala et iniqua pro pensum.
which will easily carry them to every thing inconvenient. How many Servants in
the great City of the Nation, for want of care and zeal in their Masters, to
keep them to holy duties on Gods holy day, Court their Harlots, take off their
Cups, waste their Masters substance, and hazard their own in mortal souls, and
as Belteshazzar, drink Dan. 5. 2.
in the Vessels of the Temple with their Courtezans, and their Concubines? Many
by these courses anticipate their own ruin, and in reference to their days in
the world, for Luke 16. 6.
an hundred write down fifty, cast themselves untimely away, mortgage their
future hopes, and blast their present parts, and all from their riots on Gods
holy day. On the contrary, the Family which serves God most on the Sabbath will
serve the Governor best in the week. The awe of a Sabbath is not easily worn
off; as colors laid in Oil, are not washed off with every drop. A well spent
Sabbath is an Ark in the house, which sheds a prosperity on all the 2 Samuel 6.
12. (...) ab (...) Addidit.
affairs of it; it makes every one a Joseph, who carries increase and addition
in his very name, and concerning whom it was prophesied, He should be a
fruitful bough, even a Genesis 49. 22.
fruitful bough by a wall, whose branches run over the wall. Ex Josepho et
filiis ejus, duae tribus fuere propagatae, amplissimae, et potentissimae.
This holy care of sanctifying Sabbaths in, and with our families, would cause
the dews of heavenly benediction, not only to fall upon the head, and the beard
of the Governors, but the skirts also, the inferior branches of the family.

2. It is the interest of Governors to see their families Exigit deus rationem
a Ministris animarum nostrarum, si vel unica eorum culpa perierit. Par.
keep the Sabbath holy, as they will give up their account with joy. As the
Minister must be responsible for the souls of his people committed to his
charge, Heb. 13. 17. so the Master for his Family: At Gods Bar thou shall not
say, am I my Families keeper? In the time of the worlds infancy, the Governor
of the Family was the only Magistrate, he Minister onus et curam animarum
gerit, pro iis aeternae mortis periculo se exponit, si^gulorum probitas, et
salus ab eo exigetur in die judicii. Alap.
was both Master and Pastor; his household was his teritory, and dominion,
and he swayed his Scepter in exercising his power over it. Abraham was a Prince
and a Prophet in his own house; and he acted like a Prince, in commanding his
family to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. But still we are accountable
for those who are subordinate to us; and if we must be accountable for words,
as transient breath, Mat. 12. 36. much more for Children, the darlings of our
bosoms, and for Servants the objects of care, that living trust committed to
us. How often do Parents put their Children into the Masters hand, as Jacob did
Benjamin into the hands of his Brethren, Genesis 43. 14. with weeping eyes, with
aching hearts, with ardent prayers, and cry out, if They are bereaved, they are
bereaved; and shall the negligence of Genesis 43. 14.
Masters strike these trembling Parents under the fifth rib, because they did
not see their servants strictly observe Gods holy day, but left them to the
vanity of their minds, which gradually habituated them in evil, and paved their
way to destruction? Surely the grief of these disappointed Parents, shall no
more vie with the doom of the regardless Masters, 1 Kings 12. 11.
then the smart of a rod can compare with the burning of a Scorpion. But
Masters of families should do well beforehand to cast up their account, and
this would be a spur to their care and sedulity on Gods holy day.

That lovely principle of justice and equity might command this service. If we
find not our family employed in holy work on Gods holy day, what do we more for
them, then we do for our beasts? We give them rest from labor. Shall the care
of a soul, which endures to eternity, more valuable Mat. 16. 26.
then a world, no more sway with us, then the care of a beast which perishes?
The Cattle shall not travel, and the Psalm. 49. 20.
Servants shall not work upon Gods day, and so they shall be both equally
indulged with the same privilege; Is this suitable to the spirit of the
Gospel? Paul endures the pangs of travel, Gal. 4. 19. Christ endures the pangs
of death, Luke 23. 46. and thou shall not endure a little trouble and a little
care, not one act of zeal, or one drop of sweat in holy 1 Samuel 28. 14.
diligence for precious and never dying souls? Throw off the mantle of Samuel,
if thou and thy house will not serve the God of Samuel on his own day. And
moreover it is a great provocation, that our Servants must serve us in the
week, and we take no care that they serve God on the Sabbath. Our interest must
be on the Anvel, though the interest of Christ and Religion be laid aside; a
poor worm must be more sedulously served and observed, then the infinite
Jehovah: May not that exclamation be here seasonable, Hear O Heavens, and give
ear O Earth, Isa. 1. 2. The Shop must not be neglected, though the soul be: is
our present gain to run parallel with our servants future Crown? Must servants
be more mindful of our work, then their own everlasting weal? Indeed what
would it profit us, if we should gain the whole world, and our poor servants
lose Mat. 16. 26.
their immortal souls, will our profit compensate their loss? Surely this is
bruitishly to use our servants, and well befits the profession of a Demas, who
has forsaken the Gospel, and embraced the present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. But let
us not beguile our selves, says heavenly Greenham, for the blood of servants
souls will be required at Masters hands, who being lordly and tyrannical, make
their servants either equal to their beasts, or worse then their beasts, caring
for nothing but the world, never thinking of Hell, whereunto they are hastening.

We must endeavor to keep Gods day uniformly and harmoniously: Our families
must be on the Lords day, as the building of Solomon's Temple, where no Axe or
Hammar was 1 Kings 6. 7.
heard, no discord, or division. It is very deplorable to consider, Quot
homines, tot sententiae.
what confusions are in many families; so many persons, so many opinions; the
Master is of one Church, the Wife of another, the Child of a third, and may be
the Servant of a fourth: the Master possibly will sing Psalms, the Child or the
Servant happily cannot join in that heavenly duty: Are not these families too
like the speckled bird the Prophet speaks of, Jer. 12. 9. Or like the spotted
Leopard, Jer. 13. 23. too like Joseph's party-colored coat, which afterward
was dipped in blood, Genesis 37. 31. The Apostle (...).
assures us, that God is a God of Order, and not of Confusion, 1 Cor. 14. 33.
Christ's coat was not torn, though lots was cast for it. It was the praise of
the Primitive Church, They did serve God with one accord, Acts 2. 46. Magna
suit Ignatio cura (...) in Ecclesia. Ordo venustatem parit confusio
infidelitatem. Zach. 14. 9.
the same pulse beat in all, the same spirit acted them all, the same love
united and espoused them all, the same service employed them all. Divided
Families, like divided Kingdoms, cannot stand. The four and twenty Elders in
heaven sung the same song, Rev. 4. 11. The Angels all utter the same triumphal
words, Rev. 5. 8, 9, 11, 12. It is a blessed and glorious promise, That we
shall call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3.
9. How pathetically does the Apostle press unity, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. A consort
of Musicians play not several tunes, but one and the same lesson. Concord in
service is the Music of a family, when we all sing the same Psalm, all pray
the same prayer, fix our thoughts on the same truths, hear the same Sermon, and
variety is overruled by unity. Surely divisions are the wounds and jars of a
family, and such contrarieties are the flashing emblems of novelty, and sad
Prognostics of fatal skepticism. Let us then study that our selves and
families may serve the Lord on his own day, with one voice, with one shoulder,
with one lip; and with one heart. United stars make a constellation: When stars
do fight, it presages great slaughter, and is no less then miraculous. Jud. 5.
20.


We must act the services of the Sabbath freely and cheerfully. Our services
must be the fruit of love, not the effect of force. Holy delight must draw us
to the Sanctuary, not a pressing and rigorous conscience. God loves a cheerful
giver, and a cheerful worshipper. It was David's joy to go with the multitude,
Psalm. 42. 4. Our service on a Sabbath must not be as wine squeezed from the
grape, but as water flowing from the fountain. Our service must be the service
of children, not the homage of slaves. In this we must imitate Ezekiel. 10. 5
the Angels, who have their wings to fly upon every Neminem voluit cogi, sed
sponte and prompto animo offerri, quicquid unus quisque conferri vellet, voluit
deus hilares datores, etiam et spontaneos cultores, and eos solos acceptabat.
Obsequium enim involuntarie delatum, obedientiae nomen non moretur. Riv.
commanded service. It was a brand put upon the people of Israel, they were
weary of his Sabbaths, Amos 8. 9. The Sanctuary must be our Paradise, not our
Purgatory. In the time of the Law, those who would offer to the Lord, they must
do it with a willing heart, Exo. 35. 5. Rivet well observes, Involuntary
obedience deserves not the name, much less the reward of obedience. Our duties
on the Sabbath must be lively and vigorous. The true Mother cries, the living
child is mine, 1 Kings 3. 22. So God says, the living Sabbath is mine. It is a
character of Gods people, that they are a willing people, Psalm. 110. 3. The
Hebrew reads it, a people of willingness, to show how exceedingly willing we
should be in the day of the Lords power, which is principally his own holy day.
It is usually the sigh of a poor Saint, Lord, I would run faster, but my
corrupt heart hampers me. Sabbaths should be our element, not our burden. David
made it his (...)
only request, that he might spend his whole life in the Temple, Psalm. 27. 4.
Every thing in an Ordinance might flush our joy, and fledge our desires.

1. The superscription it bears; it has the stamp of Christ upon it. Preaching
is the preaching of Christ; the Sacrament is the Supper of Christ. Now the name
Jesus should be like Caesar his (Quirites) it should put new life into the
Saint.

2. The advantage it brings. It brings spiritual Life, Faith, Romans 10. 17.
Conversion. Ordinances bring spiritual lading to the soul. Acts 16. 14.
Lydia was converted by the preaching of Paul.

3. The end it designs, which is the everlasting good of the soul. We hear that
we may be holy, we receive that we may be hearty, we pray that we may be happy.
Eternal Justificatio praecedit gloriam and vitam aeternam. Fulgent.
life is the stage of all Ordinances, the center where the lines of every
Ordinance meets: And the Gospel is generally called the Gospel of life and
salvation, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Ephesians. 1. 13. Let us a little glance at the pleasing
gradation: Faith comes by hearing, Justification by Faith, and Justification
ushers in holiness here, and future glory and happiness. Thus every Ordinance
of a Sabbath may accent our dedelight, and put an emphasis upon our joy. We
must then Romans 8 30.
keep our Sabbaths in holy joys, in heavenly satisfactions, and the
Bride-chamber here below must be in our own bosoms. Psalm. 119. 97.
On this day our feasting must be converse with God, our meat and drink must be
to do our fathers will, Psalm. 119. 20.
and to do his will must be our meat and drink, Jobn 4. 24. On this day we must
be filled with the spirit, which is better Cant. 5. 1.
then new wine. The day of God is prophetically called a day of joy, Psalm. 118.
24. This day literally is a day of delight, it is the day on which Christ
sprang from the Mark 16 9.
grave, and gave a new life to the world. This day prefiguratively is a day of
rich consolation, for it prefigures an eternal Sabbatism with the Lord, Heb.
4. 9. It adumbrates that glorious state, when we shall enter into our Masters
joy, Mat. 25. 21. Our services then on the Lords day must be enlivened with
activity, and sweetened with alacrity.

Our services on Gods day must be solemn and serious. Though they must not be
without joy, yet they must be without lightness; we may be complacential, but
we may not be formal. Delight well becomes a Sabbath, but laughter does not.
We must consider we have Sabbaths to carry on soul work, which is an interest
of the greatest importance. Momentum unde pendet aeternitas. Alap.
Now, if ever, this is the Sabbaths Motto, This is our moment on which eternity
depends. Though there be no vacation for sin, yet the Sabbath is the Term-time
for the Torius mundi opes, non conducunt, nec sufficient ad redimendam unam
animulam deperdita^, sed omnes animae sunt redemptae pretio sanguinis. Chemn.
soul, the Sabbath is the Mart, the Staple, the Market for the soul; and not to
improve this opportunity judiciously, savingly, spiritually, with the greatest
intent of mind, with the greatest severity of observance, with the greatest
inclinations and workings of spirit, is the highest vanity and profaneness. A
slight vain spirit on a Sabbath, is like tears and sighs at a Nuptial Feast, or
laughter and jocularity in the house of mourning. On the Lords day we must pray
as for our souls, hear as for eternity, and improve Ordinances as those who are
to deal with an infinite God in Ordinances. What we do, we must do with all our
might, as Qui recte currit in Christianismo coron am gloriae accipiet. Chrysostom.
the Wiseman speaks, Eccles. 9. 10. Now especially we must run the race which
is set before us, and strive to enter in at the strait gate, and storm heaven
that we may take it by force. Sweat in our callings is our policy, but sweat
and labor in holy duties is our wisdom. In the duties of the Sabbath 1 Cor. 9.
24.
especially we wrestle for a prize, we seek for life, as those persons who
fetched water for David from Bethlehem with Luke 13. 24.
hazard and invincible magnanimity. Frozen duties will Mat. 11. 12.
speak cold answers; and a light, dead, careless frame of spirit, only teaches
God to withdraw his presence from our 1 Chr. 11. 18.
seeming approaches. We must pray and hear on a Sabbath, as David danced before
the Ark, with all our might, 2 Samuel 6. 14. we must stretch out the hand of
faith, lift up the 2 Samuel 6. 14.
voice of prayer, and breath out the longings and anhelations of our souls.
These heights of spirit do exceedingly become the holy and blessed Sabbath.

We must he frugall of the time of the Sabbath. The filings of Gold are
precious, much more the filings of a Sabbath. Every minute of a Sabbath is like
a pearl, small, but of great value. There are no loose minutes in the Lords
day; every little parcel of time is a holy fragment, which must be gathered
up, that nothing be lost. We must fill John 6. 12.
up every space of a Sabbath, either with holy thoughts, divine meditations,
ejaculatory prayers, reading of the Scriptures, or some holy duty correspondent
to that holy day. Every branch of this consecrated time must bear precious
fruit: we should in our Sabbath below imitate our Sabbath above, and there no
time will be lost, Not a drop of idleneness in an Ocean of rest. Though there
will be no pains in glory, yet there will be perpetual praises, eternal,
uninterrupted Hallelujahs, and there shall be no breach or chasm in our
Sabbatum e^t sanctum otium. Leid. Pros.
everlasting triumphs. Indeed the Sabbath is rest from our callings, but none
from our duties; it is an holy leisure for our souls, which must not run waste.
Grains of Musk Fragmentorum collectione, et asservatione, Christus nos monet
frugalitatis, ne insumendo, et prodigendo bona a deo nobis concessa uno impetu
perdamus, sed quae supersunt religiose colligamus, et seponamus. Lyser.
are sweet and valuable, so are the most minute pieces of a Sabbath. The Romans
were so ambitious of the Consulship, that one Consul dying the last day of his
Authority, one sued for the remainder of the time, whence that memorable speech
of Cicero, O vigilantem Consulem, etc. O watchful Consul, who slept not one
night in his Authority. Such holy ambition we should have for the time of a
Sabbath, we should sue for the smallest remains of it, to improve for soul
advantage. The Author of the Practice of Piety complains of some, who spent
their Sabbath, or a great part of it, in trimming, and painting, and pampering
themselves, and were like Jezabels, doing the Devils work when they should be
doing Gods. Surely such are the greatest unthrifts, Neque dominicis diebus,
quae sunt hilaritatis, praeter sanctitatem; aliquid dicere, aut facere
concedimus. Clem.
and are guilty of the most prodigious prodigality. It was a pious constitution
of Clemens, That on the Lords day we should give no way to mirth or earthly
delight, but all our words and facts should savor of holiness. Dr. Bound sadly
bemoans the custom of some great personages, who lay longest in their beds upon
Gods holy day, and made it a day of pleasing Sabbatum est observandum (...).
the flesh, which should be a day of sanctified rest: And says this worthy man
in an ecstasy of zeal, We must not give our selves to sleeping on this blessed
day, no more then to surfeting. The Prophet Joel tells us, On solemn Feasts,
the Priests were to lie all night in sackcloth, Joel 2. 13. And we know, Hester
spent three nights, and three days with her Maids in fasting and prayer, Hest.
4. 10. And can there be a greater solemnity then the Sabbath, the day Imperatum
suit ^ deo ut sanctifices et consecres totum Sabbati diem, et in illo toto die
divinis vacare possis. Zanch. Iren. contr. valent.
for transacting the great affairs of eternity, our golden spot of time to get
a Christ, to get a crown? Zanchy observes, That the whole of a Sabbath, without
abatement and curtail is to be consecrated to God. Irenaeus, one of the morning
stars of the Church informs us, That the Sabbath does teach us, there ought to
be a perseverance, and a continuance of a whole day in the service of God. And
the Council of Paris, an assembly of learned men, give in their suffrage to
this truth in these words. Let your eyes and hands be lifted up to God all this
day. To the same purpose speaks the Council Conc. Turon. cap. 40. Calv. in
Deuteronomy. Sermon. 34. Muscul. in quartum praeceptum. Pet. Martyr. in Genesis 2.
of Turon, But I shall not over-load or clog the Reader with humane
testimonies: Let me only subjoyn the attestation of incomparable Calvin. This
day, says he, is not ordained for us only to come to a Sermon, but to the end,
that we may employ the rest of our time to laud and praise God. Here we may
take up that of the Prophet, Mat. 1. 14. Cursed is the deceiver: And this is
too much to imitate Ananias and Saphira, to keep back part of the price of a
blessed Sabbath, Acts 5. 2. God will not have us to divide the Sabbath between
himself and our selves, this is to make a separation between God and us. Gods
day must be spent in Isa 59. 2.
Gods service; and to waste any part of it upon our gains, ease, or pleasure,
is to rob God of his offerings, which is Macrob. Saturn. l. 1 c. 16.
matter of complaint and condemnation, Mat. 3. 8, 9. While we make bold with
Gods day, we do but mangle it, and every Illorum dierum quibusdam horis fas est
jus dicere, quibusdam fas non est jus dicere. Macrob.
waste is a wound in it. Indeed Macrobius tells us, That the heathens had their
dies intercisos, bipartite days, which were divided between their God and
themselves, Semisolemnities: And the Papists have their half holy days, as St.
Blacies day, and others, etc. But we have not so learned Christ. It was an
excellent constitution of King Pepin of Abstinere in eo di^ primo mandamus ab
omni peccato, et ab omni opere carn^li, ^t ab omni opere terreno, et ad nihil
aliud vacare n^si ad orationem, et ad ecclesi^s concurrere cum summa mentis
devotione. Council. Forojul. cap. 13.
France. We command, says he, That all abstain from every sin, and from every
carnal work, and from every earthly work, and to be at leisure for nothing but
prayer, and Church assemblies, with the greatest and highest devotion, and with
charity to bless God, who upon this day rained down Manna in the desert, and
fed so many thousands with bread. Morsels, nay grains of time are savoury upon
a Sabbath. The soul can feed upon the crumbs of such a day. Sabbath wastes are
the throwing away pearls, the casting overboard the best goods which might
enrich us to all everlasting. That time thou mispendest on a Sabbath, might be
Gods time for the calling thee home to himself.

CHAP. XXXVII. Some further Directions conducing to the same End.
LEt the whole man be employed on the Sabbath.

1. All the parts of the body. The tongue in prayer, the ear in attending, the
knee in submission, the eye in contemplation, the hand in charitable
contribution. This Romans 12. 1.
would be a sacred symphony, and make the body not only a a reasonable, but an
acceptable sacrifice.

2. All the faculties of the soul must understand their several offices and
tasks.

1. The understanding must drink in truth, as the tender Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
herb the small rain, and the new mown grass the seasonable Nondum in
observatione externorum exercitiorum Sabbati plena est sanctificatio nisi eo
fine, quo institutum est, ut pie sancte et interius haec gerantur; Qui est
sabbatismus internus. Leid. Prof. Cant. 5. 16.
showers. Then the understanding must be as the lights of the Sanctuary, of
very great use.

2. The will must embrace the Doctrines of the Gospel. The understanding sees
the commodity, the will buys it: The understanding fastens the eye upon the
treasures of the Gospel, but the will fastens the hand; the understanding is
the purveyor of truth, but the will brings it home.

3. The affections must be employed in pursuing Christ, and in holy meltings in
sacred duties; the soul must be all afloat in loves, and delights on Gods
blessed day; then our affections must follow the prey, our dear Jesus, our
Beloved, who is altogether lovely.

4. The Memory must be the Scribe to set down every heavenly counsel, every
thing which drops from the heart of God; As that King of Syria, whose
Ambassadors catched at every word, 1 Kings 20. 33. The Memory must record
every soul-concernment, it must be the Exchequer where the riches of Ordinances
are reposited, and laid up: And after all, we must with the Virgin Mary ponder
all those things in our hearts, Luke 2. 51. Thus both soul and body must be
Luke 2. 45.
espoused in Sabbath service; they must, as Joseph and Mary, go both together
to seek Christ, as the two Disciples which went to Emmaus, both must join in
conversing with Christ, Luke 24. 15. Though the body act the part of Martha in
Luke 10. 29, 41.
the week, and is cumbred with many things, yet it must act Mary's part on the
Sabbath, and mind only the one thing necessary, and lie at Gods feet in holy
dispensations. Body and soul on the Sabbath, are as those two Disciples, that
went to Christ's Sepulcher, John 20. 4. but the soul is that Disciple, which
out-runs the other, and comes soonest to the end of their Enquiry; the soul
comes quickest in, and closest up to Christ. Mariners observe that the two
stars, Castor and Pollux, when they are asunder, they prognosticate Intus est,
in cord est sabbathum nostrum August.
foul weather, but when together, they portend a fair and calm season: so when
we bring only the body to the Ordinances of a Sabbath, it portends nothing but
sorrow and disappointment, but when soul and body both meet in sacred duties
upon this holy day, it is a good prognostication Mat. 6. 24.
of fair weather to the Christian, smiles from above, Luke 16. 13.
and peace from within. In the duties of a Sabbath, we must study devotion, but
not division; we must not think to please the flesh, and to please the Lord
too, on his own day.

Works of mercy do very well become the Sabbath: This is a day of love and
mercy. If in the times of the Law, the Law of Circumcision, a painful
Ordinance, was not to be omitted, Opera misericordiae, nemo illo die facere
prohibet, ut sub v^n^re egeno curare aegrotum, Opem, and consilium afflicto,
and laboranti afferre: Cujus cura illo die nobis maxim commendatur. Rivet. in
Decal.
John 7. 22. Much more in the times of the Gospel, a law of Love, must bind us,
and oblige us on a Sabbath. Love is under a Command, as well as Circumcision,
John 13. 35. Romans 13. 10. Mercy, it is the very music of Gods Attributes,
Psalm 108. 4. it is the Almoner to provide for man's wants, it is the service of
Angels, Luke 22. 43. And it is the comely dress, which sets off the beauty of a
Sabbath. That we have a Sabbath, is an Act of divine mercy; and we cannot duly
keep a Sabbath, without employing our selves in the works of mercy. Tertullian,
in one of his Apologies, joins Prayer, reading of the Scriptures. and giving
Alms together, as being all equally the duties of a Sabbath: With him joins
issue Learned and profound Huc referenda sunt reliqua misericordiae opera
quibus sabbatum minime profanatur. Just. Mart.
Chemnitius, who, speaking of the Church of Brunswick, says, That upon the
Lords day a great multitude of people are gathered together, to praise God, to
hear his Word, to receive the Sacrament, to holy Prayer, to give Alms, and
other exercises of godliness. Thus Charity is mingled with other holy duties.
Gualter cries out, Let us admire the goodness of God in giving us a day of
Rest; and shall not our bowels Dei bonitatem exoscul^mur, qui nobis consecravit
quietis diem. Gualt.
be softest on that day, when Gods mercy is sweetest? Man's pity is a good
handmaid to wait on Gods bounty. That day which is a day of life to us, should
be a day of love from us: Charity on a Sabbath, is like fire put to Juniper, it
turns it into a perfumed flame. Now there is a fourfold Charity we must
exercise on Gods holy day.

Charitas oeconomica, Charity to our Families. It is very observable, that
every clause in the 4th Commandment, Manifest praecipitur mandati verbis,
quieti sabbati rationem habendam esse, servorum, and ancillarum; quo quisque
admonetur de assectu charitatis erga domesticos suos, et insatiabilis avaritiae
impetus restringitur. Muscul. Quo magis a dei dilectione recedimus, eo magis a
proximi distamus; quantum vero dei ^haritati adhaeremus, tantum et proximi, et
proximi deo conjungimur. Biblioth. Patr.
is an injunction to Charity: We must be tender to our servants, they must not
work: we must be compassionate to our Children, they must not toil: we must
pity our beast, that must not drudge: we must have bowels to the stranger
within the Gates, he must rest and be refreshed: so that we may say with the
Apostle, Romans 13. 8. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. The Command for the
Sabbath is written in golden Letters of love and Charity. The Lords day must be
spent, not in the sweats of labor, but in the sweets of duty; not in wearisome
toil, but in holy rest. Parental, or despotical rigor, is an open breach of
this Command, which breaths nothing but sweetness and indulgence. The Sabbath
is no day for the forge, or the plow, it was never set apart to waste our
spirits, but to mind, and negotiate the affairs of our souls. Bishop Andrews
says, Mercy on a Sabbath, is the sanctification of a Sabbath. Surely, those
Governors of families do highly profane the Sabbath, where the maidservant
must toil at the fire, to provide for their luxury; The manservant must be no
otherwise employed, then to serve their company; Children must wait and serve
at the table, to show the grandeur of the family; where, instead of singing
Psalms, there is clattering of Dishes, and instead of gathering Manna, there
is gathering up of fragments, and instead of a composed lying at Christ's feet
Politicum illud est; ut qu^es concedi debeat iis qui subsunt alienae potestati
Jer 17. 21, 22. Psalm 105. 27.
in holy Ordinances, there is nothing but hurries, noise, and confusion. Here
it might be expostulated: Shall servants have no breathing for their souls? no
necessary pauses to mind eternity? Is not this more then Egyptian bondage? Is
not not this to cause our families to return back to the Land of Ham, to their
wonted captivity and thraldom? Can such Governors disciple it after Christ,
and yet have no bowels Quae officia hic demandata, etsi videantur levia, et
rusticae, ^bi de pecore aberrante red^cendo, et asino sublevando agitur; non
tamen nobis talia erunt. si perpendamus finem legulatoris, qui non tam
animalium rationem habuit quam hominum. Riv.
to the immortal souls of their inferiors? Christ shed his blood for precious
souls: and these will not dispense with a humor, with their pride, with a
feast, with an entertainment, for the good and advantage of a never dying soul.
But such cruelty and oppression, says Dr. Bound, is the scandal of
Christianity, and unravels all that mercy which is folded up in the fourth
Commandment. God in the Law commands us to pity, and show mercy to our enemies
Ox, Exodus 23. 4. to an Ox, which is a beast to be fatted for the slaughter;
to our enemies Ox, whose enmity might damp our charity, and yet here we must
show compassion: How much more must the soul of a Child, or a servant be
precious to us? Shall thy servants here lie among the pots, and hereafter among
the flames, and will thou do nothing to prevent it? Will thou not give them
Sabbath room to sail to Heaven in? Surely, this is the dregs of tyranny. Well
then, this piece of Charity we must show upon a Lords day; we must be tender to
our families, we must call them from all toil and labor to wait on God in his
sacred institutions. In a word, to despise our servants on a Sabbath, so as to
think they are only fit to drudge here, is an act of pride and insolency, Such
remember not, that Paul wrote an Epistle to Philemon for his servants sake: and
to employ our servants Philem. v 16.
on a Sabbath, and not regard what becomes of them hereafter, is an act of
inhumanity, and such forget that the poor receive the Gospel, Mat. 11. 5. The
lame and the maimed were brought to the Kings feast, Luke 14. 21. and the
difficulty Mat. 10. 25.
lies, how the rich man shall get to heaven, Luke 18. 25. Nay, Mat. 19. 24.
Christ himself took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. Mat. 16. 26.
2. 7. Thy servants soul is of an higher price, then the world. Mat. 11. 25.
It is observed by a worthy man, That in the fourth Commandment, Rest is
granted to those who have most need of it, to the poor servant, and the
friendless stranger; to show, that it is even a duty of nature to be pitiful,
and charitable to our families upon Gods holy day.

Charitas crumenae, a charity of the Purse, which Petit pauper suum pauculum
temporarium, Da, et recipies magnum eternum, Aug.
we must likewise show on the Sabbath. Now we must find objects to be the
Cisterns of our bounty, we must here occurrere ut succurramus, meet some, whom
we may minister to. Augustine, his rule is a golden Rule on this day, The poor
petitions a little of our temporals, give it him, thou shall receive it in
eternals. But if we object our inability: It is replied, It is not how much,
but out of how much, God looks at. The widows two mites was a commended
charity, even by Christ himself: But let this caution be minded, Caution.
let us take heed in our giving, that we do not take away on other days to
give on this day, rob the week to Recondet Christianus apud se, and cumulet
auctumque deinceps, et cu^^^latum deferat. Sclat.
adorn the Sabbath; this is pride, not charity, and the greatest portion is
given to Satan: But let our charity on the day of the Lord, be according to the
simplicity of the Gospel, and so our charity may make our purse the lighter,
but it will make our Crown the heavier, and what we have laid out in one world,
we have laid up in another. In the Conseruntur eleemosinae sec. discretionem
unius cujusque propter egenorum subsidium, aegrotorum et exulum solamen.
primitive times there were collections for the poor every Lords day, 1 Cor.
16. 1, 2. A consecrated day being fittest for a consecrated dole: the week day
being the seeds time, the Sabbath the harvest for Christian charity. This
sacred stock (as one calls it) which is laid up in the week day, will be put to
the highest, and the holiest usury on the Lords day, if the hearts of the poor
be filled with food and gladness, and the backs of the poor wear the livery of
our bounty. Just. Mart.
Justin Martyr, speaking of the order of Christians upon the Lords day in his
time, affirms, That Alms are given Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11. Hom, 43.
according to the discretion of every man, for the relief of the poor, the
fatherless, and the banished. Chrysostom observes, that the duty of charity is
most seasonable on a Sabbath, because it is a day wherein God appears in his
best and largest bounty to us, then he gives us his sweetest ordinances, then
he enricheth us with Gospel privileges, then he drops Qui aliquia recondit, et
thesaurizat pauperibus, hic sibi ipsi thesaurum, comparat, et coelo reponit.
Alap.
down upon us his divine graces. In our Churches at this day, the poors bread
is set up for distribution on the Lords day, which imports the sweet
correspondency between that day, which is a day of love, and the duty, which is
an act of charity. A learned man takes notice, that this custom of relieving
the poor on the Lords day, was grown obsolete at Constantinople, till the
worthy Chrysostom restored that commanded duty. And this custom well becomes
the Sabbath, for what are we but Almes-men at the throne of Gods grace on the
time of Gods day? Indeed the Sun of Righteousness as on this day arose, and
scattered his beams of light and love, and the world rejoiced in that
appearance; let us scatter our hounty and laudable charity on this day, that
the poor Confer in pauperes debemus in diem dominicum. Buc.
may rejoice in our seasonable contributions; Let us remember the word (...), 1
Cor. 16. 2. we render it, laying by, but it is treasuring up. He that lays up,
and treasures for the poor, lays up an everlasting treasure for himself. And
let us consider, charitable words are not enough; the love of the tongue only
is flattery, not charity, it is adulation, and not affection. Words are cheap,
and the pities of language Nehem. 8. 10. Johannes Archiepiscopus
are at no cost, or charge. The belly is not filled with roseat phrases, nor
the back clothed with the embroydery Alex^n^^^nus, (...), eo plus al^^nde
recipi^b^t; hinc ipse Deo dicere solebat, videbo Domine, quis citius deficiet,
an tu mihi dando, an ego ali^^ distribuendo. Alap.
of indulgent language; only to bid the poor be filled, or be clothed is not
compassion, but dirision: And therefore on the Sabbath, our love must be the
charity of the purse, and not only of the lip; we must act good works, and not
only give good words: Faith acts not without love, Gal. 5. 6. and love acts not
without works, Heb. 13. 16. When we are blessing God on a Sabbath, let the poor
be blessing us, it will be sweet harmony, when our heart, and the poors loins
both praise God together. On the Sabbath we must appear before God, Psalm. 42.
2. And the Old Law commands us not to appear before God empty, Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
Charity on any day is Silver Bullion, but on the Sabbath is Golden Ore. Let us
therefore on that holy day, feed the hungry, refresh the thirsty, receive
strangers, cloth the naked, visit the sick, and comfort those in prison; this
will redound to our account in that day, when acts of Charity are the recorded
Mat. 25. 36.
characters of a sincere and sympathizing Saint, Mat. 25. 35. And happily
capacitate us for the donative of a Crown.

Charitas Corporalis, Mercy and Charity to the bodies of others. It is recorded
of our Savior, that usually upon the Sabbath he visited the Sick, healed the
Criples, Mar. 1. 30, 31. Insigniora miracula edidit Christus in diem Sabbati.
Athan.
restored the Blind; and in this he leaves himself a president to others, and a
pattern for holy imitation. We meet with diverse Miracles which Christ wrought
on the Sabbath; on this day, the eye of his pity guided the hand of his power;
his strength and his sweetness both conjoined in acting; and on this day Christ
would be both Pastor and Physician: And in his miracles on the Sabbath diverse
things are observable.

1. He cures all varieties; he heals partial and external distempers, Mat.
12. 13. he heals the most durable and Nihil extra legem fecit Christus curans
in die Sabati. Iren.
lasting distempers, John 5. 8. he heals the most chronicall and habitual
distempers, Luke 13. 10, 11. he heals the most threatening, and drowning
distempers, Luke 14. 4. Nay, Christ on the Sabbath dislodgeth Satan himself,
Mark 1. 34. Diabolus vocatur potestas aeris, quia in Aere miscet ventos
tonitru, fulgura; et in A cre (i. e.) in mundo, inter homines potestatem suam
exercet eos tentando, et vexando et quoquo modo nocendo. Aquin.
Satan at his word shall fall as lightning, though he be Prince of the Air, and
God of this world. Christ casts out many Devils on the Sabbath; Legions of
Spirits are but atoms which scatter at his rebuke, and disperse themselves
after new enquiries. Thus all varieties of diseases are cured by Christ on a
Sabbath; and will ye know why upon this day? because this day is a season of
showing mercy.

2. That which is observable in Christ's cures upon the Sabbath, is, he
justifies all his Cures, as the sanctification, and not the profanation of the
Sabbath, Luke 13. 15, 16. Works of mercy are the perfume, not the pollution of
a Sabbath; not its eclipse, but its observation. And this Christ shows by the
custom of the rigorous Jews themselves, and Magnae est stultitiae prohibere
hominem a sanatione in diem Sabbati. Theoph.
by the light of nature, Luke 14. 5. Christ is the Lord, not the Task-master of
the Sabbath: And man's weal is to be carried on that day, by cures as well as
ordinances, and the sick bed, as well as the sick soul is to be visited. Mercy
is the sweetness, and the epiphonema of a Sabbath.

Iraeneus avers, that the true sanctification of the Sabbath Vera Sabbati
sanctificatio est, in operibus misericordiae. Iraen.
lies in works of mercy. We then keep the Sabbath, when we are pitiful to our
own souls, and to our brothers body; and we may serve God on that day, as well
in a dungeon in visiting a prisoner of Christ, as in the sanctuary in waiting
on an Ordinance of Christ. Iraeneus observes, Christ did more works of Charity
upon the Sabbath, then upon other Multo saepius Christus in die Sabbati officia
charitatis praestitit quam aliis diebus. Iren.
days. And let us in this imitate both our Priest and Pattern, who died for
us, and must go before us; and we taking up this practice weekly, let us follow
him. Surely melting bowels do bear a symphony with merciful Sabbaths. On the
first day of the week, the day of our Sabbath, God created Genesis 1. 2,
the world out of a chaos of confusion, Christ restored the Mark 16. 2.
World from sin and destruction; and on the same first day Acts 2. 3.
of the week, the holy spirit enlightened the world in falling down solemnly
upon the Apostles, and redeemed the Church from Judaical misapprehension: And
shall these glorious works which have put such a bright emphasis upon the
Christian Sabbath, not soften our bowels to pity the groans of the sick, the
sights of the prisoner, and comfort those who are in trouble and dejection? On
this day, the spark Buc. in Mat. 12. 11.
of our love should turn into a flame, the drops of compassion should swell
into a stream. Bucer makes the visitation of the Luke 10. 33.
sick to be a principal duty of our Sabbath. On which day Infundit vinum et
oleum Samaritanus: vinum denotat legem, oleum gratiam Evangelii: Sacramenta
sunt quasi alligamenta quibus labia vulnerum alligantur. Chemnit.
Christians should turn good Samaritans; they should drop tears into those
wounds they cannot drop Oil into, and pour in the wine of consolation, if they
have no other to offer, as a sacrifice of mercy. Bleeding hearts become a
blessed Sabbath. One well observes, It does behove us, as occasion is offered,
to spend some time of a Sabbath in visiting the sick, because this will fill
our minds with holy meditations, and fill our mouths with heavenly discourses,
and fill our hearts with serious apprehensions of death and judgment, which
will shortly encounter us, and there is no avoiding the stroke of the one, or
the Bar of the other.

There is Charitas spiritualis, spiritual Charity, which is Verbis exprimi non
potest, quantum homo, qui ad imagirem dei conditus est, et pro quo unigenitur
dei filius proprium suum sanguinem fudit, quem denique sp. sanctus per verbum
Evangelii, ad communionem filiorum dei vocavit, et sanctificavit,
irrationalibus et brutis animalibus praestet. Lys.
most apposite to the Lords day. One well argues, If our mercy on a Sabbath
must extend to the Ox and the Ass, Luke 13. 15. much more to man, who is Gods
Viceroy upon Earth, bears his own image, and is enriched with that nature,
which Christ himself took upon him; and if in outward things we must minister
to him, viz. man, much more in spirituals and heavenly, by how much the soul
transcends the body; and the wants of the soul are more dangerous, and for the
most part less felt then those of the body, and therefore to succor them is
more necessary, and less dispensable. Surely this is the highest mercy, to pull
men out of the pit of despair, out of the mire of profaneness, out of the
dungeon of ignorance, to unfetter chained sinners, to consolate and advice
distressed souls. It is observable, our Savior did not only heal the poor
woman of her bodily infirmity on the Sabbath, but delivered her from the chains
of Satan, with which she had so long been held, Luke 13. 16. It is our great
work on a Sabbath to show mercy to distressed souls. On the Lords day Christ
rose for our justification, Romans 8. 34. which was a spiritual benefit, not for
supply, but for our justification, not for the encrasie of our bodies, but for
the rescue of our souls. And the Apostle notes it with a (...), yea rather, in
the Text forementioned. And in soul advantage every Christian may have a share;
they may have soft bowels, who have not full purses; every one may give savoury
counsel, put up ardent prayers, labor to set home convictions, nay, enter into
heavenly discourses, and so endeavor to draw those who go astray to the
Sheepfold of the Great Shepherd of their souls. Every one may 1 Pet. 2. 25.
bleed over sinful revolters, and as St. John, who ran after 1 Pet. 5. 4.
the young man, when he was extravagant in his practice, they may run weeping
after straying transgressors. This willing mind, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
8. 12. may lodge 1 These. 5. 14.
in the breast of the meanest person; there may be zeal in the heart, when
there are rags on the back, and when their apparel is more contemptible then
John the Baptist's leathern girdle and Camels hair, Mat. 3. 4.

And that which enforces this duty, is,

The excellency of the work. To instruct, to admonish, comfort, and pray for
Brethren, is the greatest mercy, the softest pity, nay, even the work of Christ
himself, who shed not only his tears, but his blood to ransom immortal souls;
how did Christ grieve for a hard heart, weep over an unbelieving City, and lay
down his life for poor lost sinners! To Mark 3. 5.
rescue poor perishing souls is a heavenly work, and well Luke 19. 42.
is becoming a heavenly Sabbath. Mat. 18. 11.


The reward of the Service. Not a tear we drop over a wandering sinner, but
will turn into a pearl. The Apostle speaks expressly, Jam. 5. 19. Brethren, if
any of you have erred from the truth, and one has converted him, let him know,
that he has converted a sinner from going out of his way, he shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. This text it seems informs us
of a double reward: Romans 10. 14.


1. The salvation of a soul, the purchase of Christ himself; 1 Timothy 4. 16.
souls were the gains of his victories, Isa. 53. 11. The Redemption of souls
was the reward of all his sufferings. Luke 22. 32.


2. Here is the covering a multitude of sins; which only Heb. 12, 15, 16.
speaks blessedness, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. And it may likewise be inferred from this
text of Scripture; That God has made us Heb. 3. 13.
Guardians one of another; Acts of spiritual charity belong to the care of all
Christians: God has not only set conscience to watch over the inward man, but
has set us to watch over the outward conversation one of another, We must
exhort one another while it is to day, Heb. 3. 13. especially Luke 24. 17.
while the light of Sabbaths continues to us. When the two Disciples were
traveling to Emmaus, Christ joins with them; this blessed Physician came to
comfort, to satisfy, and to inform them, they were poor distracted, timorous
persons, and these he visits; Christ will not leave them in a maze, and
intricated with inexplicable apprehensions, but he will bring them home to the
knowledge of the truth; and this is Christ's Sabbath days work; He spends time
in opening Scriptures, preaching and proving his salvifical resurrection, till
the cold and dead hearts of these Disciples were warmed, and did burn within
them, and then he departed from them. In this, Christ was our safe and
seraphical pattern; let us go and do so likewise: But this duty of charity to
souls is comprehensive, and spreads it self into Luke 10 37.
many branches.

to draw sinners to repentance; we must set before them the severity of Gods
Justice against all impenitent Tristitia tan^um propter peccatum facta est, a
quo nata est, ideo ut tinea ipsum corrodit, et absumit. Chrysostom.
sinners; the free grace of God must likewise be intimated and unfolded; and
endeavor must be used to display the riches of divine mercy to humble,
brokenhearted penitents; what sweet embraces, heaven-breathing kisses, and
clasping arms returning Prodigals shall have, Luke 15. 20. God has soft
bowels for soft hearts, his eye pitties a tender spirit, he meets a yielding
sinner, and when the stubborn offendour lays down his weapons, he is presently
and pleasingly 2 Chr. 34. 27.
reconciled: If we bow, we shall not break.

We must instruct the ignorant in points and doctrines necessary to salvation.
No cloud so black as that of ignorance, it is that dark night makes us stumble
and stray; knowledge is the firstborn of graces, and is the conduct of our
steps. A knowing Christian must file off the chain to wander from Christ. The
murder of our Savior is charged by the Apostle upon ignorance, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
Infidelity, that killing sin, is the blackness of this darkness. Palpable
darkness was the judgment of Egypt, and spiritual darkness is the woe of
every sinner. Let us then endeavor to break this cloud where ever we espy it
hang over the soul: and let us remember, instruction is often the fruit of
correction, God chastens to inform, Psalm. 94. 12. But it is the necessary
forerunner of salvation. Our Savior says, John 17. 3. This is life eternal
to know God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus. Psalm. 51. 13.
Christ. Knowledge is the morning star which fore-runs the Dan. 12. 3.
Sun of faith, which lightens every one which comes into the world of
sanctified ones; we must know Christ, before we can embrace him, and so obtain
life by him. To inform others then, is part of a Sabbath days work, and the
discharge of that duty, which being made prosperous by divine benediction, may
lead both thy self and others to an eternal rest.

We must comfort the comfortless, who are dejected through the number, and the
hainousness of their offenses. The pensive, sorrowful sinner, is as the
Traveller who fell among thieves, Luke 10. 30.
and was stripped, and wounded; and our duty is, (especially on Ex parabola
hominis in latronum manus incidentis, mysterium redemptionis per Christum
collig^tur, et homo vulneratus est D damus per peccatum lapsus. Ambros.
the Lords day) to pour the oil of gladness into these wounds. We must set
before this mourner, the all sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice, the gracious
offers of the Gospel to burdened transgressors; in this sense, it is better to
go on a Sabbath to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting,
Eccles. 7. 2. If so be the tears of the penitent, be as one of the Fathers
said, The wine of Angels, surely they should be the motives of Saints to wipe
off those tears by words of Scriptural comfort and consolation, Romans 15. 4. Let
us show such Christ's smiles, to quiet their sighs, let us tell them of the
freeness of the promise, of the willingness of Christ to be reconciled, Mat.
11. 28. And that if the prodigal Son draw near, the Father will not keep at a
distance. We are commanded to speak comfortably to Gods weeping ones, and to
tell them their iniquities are pardoned, Isa. 40. 1, 2. In this we should
imitate the Sun, which often shines in a shower, and puts a gilding upon the
falling drops.

We must on the Lords day, exhort and stir up such as have Heb. 10. 24. (...).
begun well, to hold out patiently and constantly. The Crown is at the end of
the race. The throne is given, not to the Soldier, but to the Conqueror, Rev.
3. 21. Let us tell young professors, they that endure to the end shall be
saved, Mat. 24. 13. Perseverance is a pearl in a Christians graces; it is not 1
Cor. 9. 24.
to begin only, but to finish our course, 2 Timothy 4. 7. Only Non omnes
currentes accipient bravium, sed tantum been e^ rite currentes, ad metam usq.
Alap.
Conquest shall wear the spoils of a glorious eternity. To set forwards toward
Sion, and then to recoyle, this is to slight, not to get heaven. Happiness is
gained by forcing, not by fre^zing, Mat. 11. 12. not by growing more
lukewarm, but more importunat^. Christ is the Omega, as well as the Alpha,
Rev. 1. 8. and so is Christianity too. The Arrow which shoots home hits the
mark. The Sun does not only rise in the morning, but it goes off with flying
beams in the evening. The Saint must set with Christ in his heart, as well as
rise with Christ in his eye. And these things we must suggest to initiated
Christians, a work becoming Gods holy day.

We must rebuke and reprove such as are tainted with scandal, for their
offensive miscarriages. Thus John reproved Herod for Herodias her sake, Luke 3.
19. Thou must not suffer sin upon thy Brother, least it fall upon thy self; and
although this be an unthankful office, it must not be declined. Indeed Levit.
19. 17.
sin is often lovely, but sinners passions must not obstruct a duty of
Religion; Wounds must be washed, though they Gal. 4. 15.
smart in the washing. Thy reproof may be thy Brothers balm, which if
neglected, may be his bane: Those who are of David's spirit will prize smiting
more then smiles, and reproof as an excellent oil, Psalm. 141. 5. which is one
of those creature comforts which express the wealth of the world, Psalm. 4. 7.
And oil for its softness, as well as value and worth. The checks of a
righteous man, are the breaking of a stone upon a pillow, like a sword anointed
with balsom, which wounds and heals at the same time; and such rebuke is
the oil of gladness too it issues in nothing but peace and consolation.

We must reconcile differing and jarring Christians. And this is an eminent
branch of spiritual charity; to reconcile God to man, was the fruit of Christ's
passions, and is the blessed Phoenix which arose from the ashes of all his
sufferings, Col. 1. 20. To reconcile man to God is the labor and Illi rectius
pacifici sunt, qui primo in cord u^, deinde inter ratres dissentientes pacem
faciunt, and concordiam. Hieron.
attempt of all faithful Ministers, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. But to reconcile man to
man, is the duty of every real Christian, and a work most agreeing to the
sweetness of a Sabbath, a duty crowned with the promise of the greatest
royalty, Mat. 5. 9. The day of Christ's Resurrection (our blessed Sabbath) was a
reconciling day, It reconciled truth to the Promises, Mat. 20. 19. Mat. 27. 63.
Mark 8. 31. Mark 10. 34. Luke 24. 7. John 20. 9. it was the accomplishment of
the reconciling work of man's Redemption; And on this day, the soul of Christ
was reunited to his body, which was at a distance before: No work then more
befits the Lords day, then the healing of divisions, and the praying down
animosities between Christians.

On this blessed day we must endeavor to resolve doubtful Christians. Doubts
are the wedges in the soul, which both wound and pain; to pluck out these
wedges by Scripture Qui disceptat, and dubitat. s^n^ licitum, necne si
manducat, peccati, and damnationis incurrit rectum.
force, is a duty becoming the best of days. A doubting Christian is upon a
rack, he is as a ship upon the Sea in the night, he fears he shall either dash
upon the rock of error, or sink in the quicksands of mistake, he wants the
Pilotism of a knowing and faithful Christian, he tosses to and fro, and knows
not how to come to harbor: Now it is spiritual love and charity to relieve
this naval pilgrim. Oecumen.
Doubts are not only painful and vexatious, but harmful and noxious.

1. They are the enemies of faith, Mat. 21. 21.

2. They are the evidences of frailty, Mat. 28. 17.

3. They are the hazard of the soul, Romans 14. 23.

4. They are the disobedience of a positive and peremptory command, Luke 12.
29. And

5. They cat out all the profit of prayer, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Haesitantiae opponitur
fidu^ia, quae necessaria est omni oranti.
Doubts like cares, they are the thorns of the soul, which rend and tear the
mind with convulsions and distractions: And therefore the Apostle is so urgent
in his command, Romans 14. 1. That new and crude Professors be not admitted to
doubtful disputations; that was the way to unhinge Mark 11. 24.
them from the faith, and to take them off from the profession of Christianity,
which would seem nothing to them but a labyrinth and a maze wherein men may
lose, but not save themselves. This is charity then becoming a Sabbath, to
satisfy the doubts of poor trembling Christians, and to become as a harbor to
a tattered bark. Thus ye have seen the severals of that spiritual charity which
the meanest Christian may give, and the humble, if wanting Christian, will
receive.

Another direction for the better observation of the Lords day may be, Let us
seek God in Ordinances. Ordinances Direct. 8.
are only an empty cloud, unless the presence of God melt them into a fruitful
shower. David saw the power and glory of God in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 63. 2.
Ordinances are breathless institutions, unless God breathe the breath of life
Genesis 2. 7.
into them: The spirit must stretch himself over them, as the Prophet did over
the child, before any life will come, 2 Kings 4. 35. In hearing God must open
Lydia's heart, Acts 16. 14. In praying God must open our mouths, that Psalm 51.
15.
we may show forth his praise. The Sacrament is a gaudy Psalm 119. 18.
pageant, if God be not present; what do we drink, if not John 6. 55.
Christ's blood? what do we eat, if not Christ's body? It is the presence of God
makes an Ordinance the living child, 1 Kings 3. 22.
otherwise it is no more then the dead child, or a spiritual abortion. The
divine appearance, sweetens, fills, sanctifies, and makes effectual every
Ordinance. David loved the habitation of Gods house, but it was because that
was the place where Gods honor dwelt, Psalm. 27. 4. When men go to a certain
place to meet a friend, and they miss him, they return sorrowful and
discontented. Christ is thy friend Cum dei gloria in Christo, and in Evangelio,
quasi in speculo intuemur, and per hoc, quasi in eandem dei gloriam
trans^^rmamur, speculantes, (i. e.) per speculum videntes, non de specula
prospicientes. Aug de Trin.
who is to meet thee at Ordinances; if thou miss him, go home sorrowful.
Ordinances without God, they are a table without meat, and so a living soul may
depart hungry and thirsty. Sometimes Ordinances are compared to a glass, 2 Cor.
3. 18. Because therein the Christian beholds the glory of the Lord. Let us hear
the language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 84. 2. My soul longs, yea even faints
for the Courts of the Lord, my heart, and my flesh cries out for the living
Lord. Therefore David longed for Gods Courts, because the Lord was in those
Courts. Sometimes the sweet Singer of Israel compares his desire to thirst, of
which creatures are more impatient then hunger, Psalm 63. 1. Sometimes to the
thirst of a Heart, which creature being naturally hot and dry, in a very great
degree, is exceeding thirsty; but still the object of his thirst is God, Psalm.
42. 1, 2. It was communion with God in his life, love, and graces, nay, in his
comforts, which the Psalmist breathed after, the sweet smiles of Gods face, the
honey dews of his Spirit; this was David's Paradise of pleasute, and his heaven
below. When we go to Ordinances, let us with Moses, go up into the Mount to
converse with God there. It is God in the Word causes efficacy; It is God in
Prayer causes prevalency: It is God in Meditation which causes suavity; It
Psalm 104. 34.
is God in a Sabbath causes complacency. When we go to the waters of the
Sanctuary, let us say as Elisha to the waters of Jordan, where is the Lord God
of Elijah, 2 Kings 2. 14. So, where is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ? Where is thy Chariot, O Sun of Righteousness? why is it so long Judges
5. 28.
a coming, why tarries it, what clogs the wheels? O when will thou come to me?
Let us look on all holy duties and performances, as boats to ferry our souls
over to God. Saul himself was sad and sorrowful, when he enquired of the Lord,
and the Lord answered him, 1 Samuel 28. 15. Indeed; God is not only the Master,
but the Marrow of a Sabbath; and no Lords day can satisfy, without the Lord of
the day; Antiquus dierum Christus est; Ille enim corporaliter, and visibiliter
judicabit vivos, et mortuos, and Christus ideo vocatur Antiqus dierum; ut ejus
describatur Majestas et aeternitas. Hieron.
what is the best time, without the Rock of eternity? What is the best day,
without the Ancient of days? What are Sermons, Sacraments, seasons of grace,
without our Beloved? They are nothing but broken Cisterns, glorious dreams,
gilded nothings, embalmed hearses, and as a perfumed corpse. Ah then, let not a
Sermon satisfy, without Christ in a Sermon; let not reading a Chapter content,
without we read Christ in that Chapter; As once Bernard despised that Book,
wherein he did not read Christ. And let us always remember, that Ordinances
they are the institutions of God, and, he that made a brazen Serpent heal, Number.
21. 9. can make his own institutions effect our cure.

How shall I meet with God in Ordinances? who shall open the door into the
Gallery, where I may be with my Beloved?

to do, as well as something to enjoy; Our pain must go before our pleasure; we
must not be wanting to meet God, if we expect that God should meet us.
Therefore,

earnest in Prayer, we must cry out, O send out thy light, and thy truth, let
them lead me, let them bring me to thy holy Hill, to thy Tabernacle; then will
I go unto the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy, Psalm 43. 3, 4. We must
make our addresses to God, if we look for his approaches to us. God sends a
Preacher to a praying Paul; God Acts 9. 11.
sends an Angel to a praying Daniel: God comes himself to Dan. 9. 21.
a praying Solomon. Prayer is an humble summons for the 1 Kings 2. 3.
divine appearance; it can not only tie Gods hands, Exodus Acts 10. 2, 3.
32. 10. and command returns, Isa. 45. 10. But it can obtain Gods presence. If
Moses say, I pray thee, God presently Jam. 4. 8.
replies, My presence shall go with thee, Exodus 33. 13, 14. If thou will have
God meet thee in Ordinances, let thy prayers be thy Harbingers to prepare room
for him.

Be serious in preparing for Ordinances. The Sun scatters the Clouds, before it
shines in its brightness: The Bride dresseth her self to meet her Bridegroom.
And thou must Isa. 61. 10.
compose thy self with awful apprehensions, Sponsa ^rnata representat
ecclesiam, ornamentis gratiae, and fortitulinis decoratam, immo animam sanctam
gratiis, and spiritu adaptatam, et si debilis, et imperfecta. Haymo.


1. Of the Divine Majesty, with whom thou art to converse.

2. With the solemness of Gods Ordinance, thou art now going to enjoy.

3. With the sweetness, and advantage of the season, thou art now entering upon,
and then God will meet thy prepared soul. Joseph trimmed himself, and then he
goes into Pharaoh's presence. The Wise man advises us* ^ keep our foot when we
go into the house of God, Eccles. 5. 1. We should do well, in our applications
to holy Ordinances, to examine our selves, whether we are fit with loose
thoughts to meet with a dreadful Majesty? Or with filthy hearts to meet with a
holy God? Or with worldly and drossy minds, to meet with Grn. 41. 14.
our heavenly Father? Let us not complain, God retires, when we are not fit for
his presence. Let us then capacitate our selves by holy care, and serious
preparation to enjoy God in Ordinances.

Let us long for Gods presence. God loves affectionate Proselytes. A longing
David shall see a loving God, Psalm. 63. 1, 2. The Spouse is restless after her
Beloved, and then she meets him, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. The thirsting soul shall
be fed Fames est illa melior, and sanctior, quae est spiritualis, and jam in
Christo habebit saturitatem, and invita aeterna omnimodam satietatem ubi deus
erit omnia in omnibus. Chemn.
with milk and wine, Isa. 55. 1. Grace and Righteousness shall satisfy the
bungry, Mat. 5. 6. The Psalmist follows hard after God, Psalm 63. 8. God meets
with our pursuits, we shall then satisfy our selves in God, when nothing but
God can satisfy us. Cold suitors shall not meet with Christ in his espousals.
When the Wife longs, the Husband endeavors after the thing longed for. Mary
Magdalen bemoaned the taking away of her Lord, John 20. 2. We may expect to
meet with God, when his absence is our greatest. moan, and his presence our
sweetest music.

Let us come to Ordinances, with all reverential humility: God will look at him
who is of a poor and a contrite spirit, Humilitas est via ad deum. Aug.
and trembles at his Word, Isa. 66. 2. God dwells in the humble heart, Isa. 51.
15. God will raise those who debase themselves. Augustine tells us, That
humility is the ready way Super quem requieseit Sp. sanctus, nisi super
humilem? super humilem, non super virginem. Bern.
to God; It is the usher who brings the soul into the presence Chamber. Bernard
notably observes, That the spirit of God rested on the Virgin Mary, not for her
Virginity, but for her Humility. And if Mary had not been so low in her own
eyes, she had not been so lovely in Gods. Alapide says, Humility is a throne
of Sapphire, where God sits in Majesty. Let Humilitas est thronus Sappharinus,
in quo deus cum Majestate reside^. Alap.
us then come to Ordinances with a submissive spirit: God will cast an eye upon
the soul who lies at his feet; He sent an Angel to Daniel, when he lay in his
ashes, Dan. 9. 3. 21. God rewar^ the very counterfeit humility of Ahab, 1 Kings
21. 29. though his sackcloath was but as Samuels mantle, the attire of
hypocrisy. A dread of Gods presence, brings Prove. 16. 19.
a sweet sense of it; and a trembling at the Word of God, goes Prove. 29. 23.
before a triumphing in the enjoyment of God. Job abhorred himself in dust and
ashes, Job 42. 6. and then God hears him for himself, and his friends, and
gives him interest upon interest for all his sufferings and tribulation, Job
42. 10. A holy God will meet with an humble Saint.

Let us endeavor to be in the spirit upon the Lords day. Direct. 9.
The ecstasies of the Apostle John were on the Lords day, Revel. 1. 10. the
rapture was accomodated to the season. Christians should study to be above
themselves upon Gods holy day, then they should walk in Galleries above the
world. Hierome professes, That he sometimes found things so with himself, that
it seemed to him, as if he had been triumphing Hieron. de Virginit. servand.
among Troops of Angels, and singing hallelujahs with the Saints in Heaven, and
walking arm in arm with Jesus Christ. And Luther reports of himself, That
sometimes, especially on a Sacrament day, the death of Christ was so full and
fresh upon Luth.
his spirit, as if then he had been upon Mount Calvary, and as if that was the
day in which the Lord dyed. And Believers should be so in the spirit upon the
Sabbath, as if that was the very day, wherein Christ broke the bars of the
Grave, rolled away the stone from the Sepulcher, and enfranchised himself from
the restraints of the tomb. The Saints should be carried out on this day, and
make their sallies into the suburbs of Heaven; In a word, they should be in the
spirit, which duty must first look upwards,

We should strive to be in the assistances of the Spirit. Holy duties without
the holy Spirit, are only the carcasses of Religion, like profession without
practice, which is offensive and (...). Chrysostom.
useless; such services bring neither glory to God, advantage to our selves, or
benefit to others, and all are of no more significancy; then a body when the
spirits are fled away. On the morning therefore, we must incessantly beg the
divine assistances of Gods blessed Spirit. It is the Spirit fits for
Magistratical Luke 11. 13.
dignities, Number. 11. 25, 26. It is the spirit fits for ministerial Numb. 27 18.
services, 2 Kings 2. 9. and it is the spirit fits us all for Christian and
holy duties.

The Spirit directs us unto holy duties. Simeon came into the Temple by the
spirit, Luke 2. 27. the good spirit directed him to meet Jesus. How often does
Gods spirit excite, and provoke to holy Prayer, to secret meditation, and to
those close, devotions, wherein the soul tastes deepest of Christ's flaggons,
and apples. This inward Counselor is often Cant. 2 5.
restless in us, till it ^end our knees, lift up our hands, and raise our
hearts in sacred approaches to the divine Majesty. The Spirit leads the Saint
into solitariness to converse with God, as once it did lead Christ into the
Wilderness to be temped Mat. 4. 1.
of Satan; this divine principle with us, is importunate Luke 4. 1.
till it put us upon enquiries after God.

The holy Spirit quickens us in duties, John 6. 63. and makes us lively and
vigorous. Corrupt nature takes off the wheels in holy services, flaggs and
casts a damp upon us in Christus dicitur non spiritus vivens, sed vivificans.
(...) Spiritus vitarum. Theoph.
such heavenly intercourse, but the Spirit oils the wheels, to make them go
with greater speed. When the soul is carried out by the Spirit, how full is it
of holy hea^, divine zeal, and rare enlargement, as if of late it had conversed
with a Seraphim, his tongue is the pen of a ready writer, Psalm 45. 2. and his
heart is like a bubbling Fountain; he melts in prayer, as the Cloud into drops:
Paul assisted by this good Spirit runs on till midnight, Acts 20. 7. and knows
not how to break off his sacred discourses. And our ever 1 Cor. 15. 45.
to be admired Savior, raised and quickened by the same spirit, wrestles with
God in prayer all night, Luke 6. 12. the very arteries of that duty were
stretched out by that divine Spirit, which was given to Christ without measure,
John 3. 34. The Spirit then, is the animation of our holy performances, without
which they saint, and die away.

The holy Spirit sustains us in holy duties, Psalm. 51. 12. Man's spirit would
quickly fail in wrestling with God, was it Spiritus promptus, scil, graece
(...) Hebraice (...) alac^iter festinans: Lyrus habet duo vocabula Dolanta.
(...) rius, and (...) ^ucundus.
not under-propt by this good Spirit. The most sparkling wine if it stand long,
it will grow flat and dead; And though the spirit of man be willing, Mat. 26.
41. yet while it is in the body, it will be soon tired and flag in holy duties,
which are so contrary to corrupt flesh, but then the Divine Spirit comes in,
and renews poor man's strength like the Eagle, and so he runs through holy
services, and faints not; the anointing of the Spirit makes him agill and
fresh, and holy Ordinances are not his burden, but his satisfaction. Believers
offer their sacrifices, as Christ did himself, Heb. 9. 14. through the eternal
Spirit, who recruits them continually with additional strength and vivacity.

The blessed Spirit causes us to overflow in holy duties, Job 32. 18. Our rich
enlargements in Prayers, and other Gospel services, are from the good spirit of
God, when the heart Psalm 45. 1.
bubbles, and runs over in holy discourse, and when the Eructans cor significat
cordis locutionem, cum nondum ad os pervenit, et querit illam emittere, and
circum volvitur, et movetur huc et illuc, et volutatur egressum quaerens, quem
prae gaudio non primo impe^u invenit, etc. Felix Praton.
mind flutters and flies high in holy meditation, and when our affections
dilate, and follow hard after Jesus Christ; all this is from the Spirits
gracious, and divine assistance, 2 Cor. 3. 16. It is the holy Spirit spreads
our duties like Gold to greater extensions, and oftentimes makes the Saint in
duty, query, whether he be in the body, or out of the body, 2 Cor. 12. 2. His
heart is like the squeezed Grapes, overflowing with wine, which is better then
the drink of Angels. It was the Spirit enlarged Solomon's heart in that divine
Prayer at the dedication of the Temple, 1 Kings 8. 22, 23. It was the Spirit
enlarged Daniels heart in Prayer, to hasten deliverance from the Babylonish
captivity, Dan. 9. 4. It was the Spirit enlarged Jonah*s heart in Prayer; when
the Whales belly was consecrated into an Oratory, Numb. 18. 27.
Jonah 2. 2. It is the Lords good Spirit, which makes man's Deuteronomy. 15. 14.
heart as the gushing streams, or the overflowing Fat, or the Numb. 18* 30.
dropping Wine Press, in services Evangelical. John 3. 8.


It is the Spirit sweetens duty. As Christ when he was at prayer, rejoiced in
spirit, Luke 10. 21. Duties are sadned by man's sin, but are refreshed by Gods
Spirit. David acted Mat. 17. 1, 2.
by this blessed Principle, delighted so much in duty, Luke 9. 29.
that he begs to spend his whole life in the Temple of God, Psalm. 27. 4.
Ordinances become mellifluous by the concomitancy of Gods Spirit which often
turns them into a transfiguration. As it is reported of Basil, that when
Greg. Orat. de laud. Bas.
the Emperor came upon him, while he was at prayer, he saw such luster in the
face of holy Basil, that he was struck with terrous, and fell backwards. It is
the Spirit ravishes the Fructus spiritu^ est gaudium, sed impura voluptas est
similis voluptati, qua afficiun^^ scabiosi, cum se scalpunt. Chrysostom.
heart, indulcorates and captivates the soul in holy duty, and touches the
tongue with a Coal from the Altar, Isa. 6. 6, 7. which turns all into a
perfumed flame. The Apostle says, the fruit of the spirit is joy, Gal. 5. 22.
which is never so fresh and diffusive as in holy services. Ordinances are the
spiritual opportunities, wherein the Comforter, John 14. 16. sheds abroad his
comforts in the soul.

It is the Spirit which helps our infirmities in holy duties: As in Prayer,
Romans 8. 26, 27. so in other spiritual services: When we are flat, the Spirit
quickens us: when we are contracted, as a ship becalmed, the Spirit fills our
sails, which is that VVind which blows where it lists, John 3. 8. Spiritus
sanctus postulat. (i. e.) postulare, et gemere facit; est hebraismus, quo kal
ponitur pro Hiphil. Ansel.
When we are sad and dejected, the Spirit consolates and chears us, and flushes
us with that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Oftentimes we cannot lanch forth in a duty; the Spirit then helps us off from
the sands: Many times we are dull in hearing, and then the Spirit opens the
heart, Acts 16. 14. and makes us vigorous and attentive; And when we are at a
loss in Prayer, the Spirit puts life into our dead duty, and makes us groan, a
sign of Sex modis in orando erratur, primo si bonum temporale petimus animae
nociturum, Secundo si a malo aliquo quod prosit nobis liberari oremus. Tertio
siquid petamus ex ambitione, ut filii Zebedaei petebant primus in regno
Christi, quarto si quid petamus ex zelo indiscreto, ut filii Zebedaei optabant
ignem de caelo manasse in S^maritanos, Christum respuentes, quinto si petatur
ardentius, quod. utilius est differri sexto, si* petamus statum nobis
incongruum.
life, and furnishes us with suitable petitions to accost, and lay siege to
the throne of Grace; And when we are weak and stagger in a holy duty, the
Spirit takes us by the hand, and sets us with fresh strength to finish our
service; the Spirit corrects all our errors in holy duties. A learned man
observes, there are six great errors in Prayer:

1. When we petition some temporal good to the disadvantage of the soul.

2. When we earnestly desire the removal of some affliction, which conduces
much to the good of the soul.

3. When we ask something out of ambition, as the sons of Zebedee, that they
might have a prim^cy in the Kingdom of Christ.

4. When we petition any thing out of an indiscrete zeal, as the sons of
Zebedee requested fire from Heaven to consume the Samaritans who would not
entertain Christ, Luke 9. 54.

5. When we are earnest for that, which it was better it was delayed, that by
this delay our prayers may be more importunate, and our perseverance may be
more fully discovered.

6. When we beg that state of life in this World, which God sees inconvenient
for us.

Now the Spirit correct all these errors, and is the Censor of our miscarriage
in duty: He makes us more wise, more humble, more heavenly, more
self-resigning, more patient in duty. The guidances of the Spirit are the
Pole Star to direct us in every Ordinance* and holy service. The Spirit is our
advocate within us, John 14. 16. (...), so the Greek, which fits us with holy
pleas to sue with, when we address our selves to God, and carries out the heart
to urge its case with greater earnestness, with great weight and authority. The
Spirit is the President of our duties, to guide the soul that it write fair
without blot. In a word, The Spirit helps our infirmities in duty: Not a good
Angel, as Lyra; Not a spiritual man, a Minister, as Chrysostom; Not spiritual
Grace, as Ambrose; Not Charity, as Chrysostom. tract in Joan.
Augustine; But it is the Holy Ghost, as Pareus. And this blessed Spirit
helps us, as the Nurse helps a little Child holding it by the ^^^eve; As
the old man is stayed by his staff: or rather ^^^peth together, as that word
(...), Romans 8. 26. seems to imply; being a Metaphor taken from one, who is to
lift a great weight, and being too weak, another claspeth hands with him, and
helps him: So the Spirit is ready to relieve us in all our spiritual duties.

The holy Spirit succeeds, and prospers our holy duties,

It makes our duties prevalent with God. God attends, when we sing in the
spirit; God hears, when we pray in the spirit: Ephesians. 2 18.
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14. 15. When this Dove moanes within us, Romans
8. 26. God understands the groans of his own Spirit, and will give seasonable
answers: God Donum et efficacia orationis, non in verbis sed in gemit^
desiderio affectu, et suspiriis ignitis consistit. Alap.
gives his Spirit to assist in these duties; which he fore-determines to
accept. Man speaks words in prayer, but the Spirit raises groans. Alapide
observes, God is not so pleased with locution, as affection in that holy duty,
not so much with expressions, as inexpressible sighs, which are as incense in
his acceptance, As the smoke of that Cloud, a sign of Gods smile and favor,
Isa. 4. 5. A duty spirited by the Holy Ghost, shall never fail an expected end,
for God knows the mind of his Spirit, as the Syriack reads it, Romans 8. 27. As
the Mother knows the groans and cries of her tender Child, and presently runs
to help it, and to give it what it wants, and cries for. The Spirit is our
intercessour within us, as Christ is our intercessour above us, whose pleas
shall 1 John 2. 1, 2.
not meet with a denial. The Spirit moving upon the waters, Genesis 1. 2. produced
a World, and brought forth living Creatures: The Spirit moving upon the Word,
the dispensations of the Gospel, causes the New Creation, and makes living
Christians. O then, when we come under the Word, and are in the midst of the
waters of the Sanctuary, let us wait for the good spirit of the Lord: Other
Birds drive away, but let the Dove come in. Pareus observes, Suspiria
perturbata semper exaudiuntur. Primo. Quid sunt suspiria spiritus. Secundo,
Quia semper spiritus interpellat juxta placitum, et voluntatem dei. Pat.
that the groans of the Spirit within us, shall not vanish into air, and that
upon a double account:

1. Because the Spirit comes from God, John 15. 26. and is his Commissioner in
a gracious soul, and he will not deny his Leiger in a Saint.

2. The Spirit always intercedes according to the good will and pleasure of the
Lord; And pleasing petitions shall not meet with a repulse: what suits with the
heart of God, shall open the hand of God; Congruous desires shall be conquering
desires.

Spirit makes duties effectual to us: That Prayer which is animated by the
Spirit, shall not only gain upon Gods heart, but melt ours. If the Spirit open
our heart in hearing, we shall attend to the Word, and savingly entertain it.
When Christ by the Spirit opened the understanding of the Acts 16. 14.
two Disciples, Luke 24. 45. then they dived into Gospel mysteries, and
understood fully what was fulfilled concerning the death of the Messiah: When
the Spirit brings home a Sermon, he makes it fire to burn up the dross of the
soul; Jer. 5. 14.
he makes it a hammer to break the hardness of the soul; Jer. 23. 29.
he makes it a two-edged sword to divide between sin and Heb. 4. 12.
the soul. Ordinances are kindly Physic, and work the cure sweetly and
effectually, if this Physic be given by the hand of the Spirit, if the third
Person in the Trinity be our Physician; how then should the necessity of the
spirits assistance inflame our importunity, to sue out that precious John 15. 5.
Promise for the attainment of it, recorded in Luke 11. 13. In Ordinances
without the Spirit we can do noth^ng; Christ 1 Cor. 9. 26.
must work by his Spirit, or else in all our holy duties, we only beat the
air, to use the Apostles phrase.

Let us study to be under the impressions of the Spirit on Gods holy day. The
earth stands not in so much need of the beams of the Sun, as the soul does of
the influences of the Spirit.

Spirit is a Spirit of Truth to guide the Understanding, John 15. 26. It is a
Spirit of Counsel to enrich the mind, Isa. 11. 2. and fill it with knowledge:
How naked Ephesians. 5. 18.
is man's understanding, if it be not covered with the covering John 14. 17.
of Gods Spirit, Isa. 30. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 8.


Spirit is a good Spirit, Neh. 9. 10. to sanctify the will: It is a holy
Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. in relation to its effects and productions; it cures the
will of its pertinacy and Romans 1. 4.
stubbornness, and melts man's will into Gods. We may take 1 Cor. 12. 9.
an instance in Paul, Acts 9. 6.

Spirit is a Spirit of Grace, Zach. 12. 10. to beautify the heart, and
fructify it with all the sweet fruits of Righteousness: It is more then the
Sun to the Garden, It not 2 These. 2. 13. Phil. 1. 11.
only blows the flower, but it plants: The graces of the Spirit are those
stars which shine in the firmament of the heart, 2 These. 2. 17.
those vigorous principles, which carry out the soul to every good word and
work.

spirit of Glory, 1 Pet. 4. 14. to sublimate the affections, and raise them as
high as heaven, Col. 3. 2. The spirit discovers glorious things to us, shows
the soul its treasury 1 Cor. 2. 12. Ephesians 3. 8. 2 Cor. 5 21. Rev. 1. 6. Cant. 7.
8. 13. Col. 3. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 7.
where its riches lie; It opens Christ to a believer, who is the Wardrob of our
Robes; the Exchequor of our wealth, the fountain of our honor, the paradise of
our delight, or to speak in the Apostles language, who is all and in all to the
believing soul.

spirit of life to quicken the whole man, Romans 8. 2. God breaths into man, and
so he becomes a living soul; the Spirit breaths into man, and so he becomes a
living Saint. Genesis 2. 7.
Nay, God works all his works upon us, and in us, in Christ, by the spirit, it
is the spirit makes us upright and sincere, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
and so rectifies our obliquities, Psalm. 51. 10. It is the spirit snuffs the
understanding, which is the candle of the Lord, Ephesians. 1. 17.
Prove. 20. 27. and so enlightens our darknesses. It is the spirit 2 These. 2. 1^.
fixes and establishes us, and so settles our inconstancies, Psalm. 78. 8. It
is the spirit softens and suples us, Isa. 32. Sapientia hominis est, qua res
difficillimas scrutatur, et pervestigare conatur. Cartwr.
15. and turns our barren hearts into a fruitful field, and so fills our
vacuities: It is the spirit conducts us in our straights, John 16. 13. and so
prevents our miscarriages: It is the spirit takes us up, Ezekiel. 3. 12. nay,
lifts us up, Ezekiel. 3. 14. and so cures us of our pedantick and dreggish
succumbencies: for Man is the worm Jacob, Isa. 41. 14. and will naturally
grovel on, and immure himself in the Earth. The spirit of God is an excellent
spirit, Dan. 5. 12. and will create in the 1. Cor. 12. 11.
believer those excellencies, which will make him more excellent then his
neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. The irrigations, and pouring forth of the spirit, Isa.
44. 3. will make the soul fresh, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Corroborari in interiore
homine, est intellectu, voluntate, caeterisque animae partibus suffulciri.
and green, and be in a spring of grace, which is most pleasant to the eye of
God and Man. This holy spirit upon us, Isa. 59. 21. is not so much our
covering, as our Crown, our strength to encounter every temptation, Ephesians. 3. 16.
Let us then, not as Sadduces mis-believe the spirit, Acts 23. 8. But cry out,
Lord evermore give us of this spirit. And to set our selves under these various
and rare impressions,

purify our selves. The spirit is a holy spirit, which will dwell only in a
clean heart; flesh and spirit are combatants, and not cohabitants, they oppose
one another; Gal. 5. 17.
then grace triumphs, when flesh is subdued, and chased out of the field.

supplicate our God. The spirit is given to the Petitioner, and not to the
professor; How much more shall your heavenly father, give the holy spirit to
them that ask him, Isa. 63. 11. Ephesians. 4. 30. 1 These. 4 8. 1 Cor. 6. 19.
says our Savior, Luke 11. 13. Earnest prayer is the means to obtain the good
spirit, whose works are so many and so mavelous, and whose operations are so
secret and so sovereign.

upwards for the assistances, and the impressions of the spirit; So this duty
must look inwards; we have not only to do with heaven on the Lords day, and to
look up to Gods spirit; but we have to do with our own hearts too, and seek the
spirit to proportionate Prove. 4. 23.
them to the holy services of the Sabbath; and here our duty is twofold;

1. We must be in the graces of the spirit, and that too in a double sense.

grace habitual; We must come as Saints to the duties of a Sabbath: That of the
Apostle is highly observable; Our communion is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3. Observe the terms of Relation; Sancti est in
spiritu vivere (i. e.) internam habere vitam, et animum gratia spiritu,
etjustitia imbutum; sancti est in spiritu ambulare (i. e.) secundum spiritus,
et gratiae dictamen, ductumque incedere conversari, agere, operari, et Graecum
(...) significat, certo ordine, serie, et norma incedere. Alap.
the term Father speaks us to be Children. It is not, our communion is with
God, but with the Father and his Son. Saints properly are the guests of the
Sanctuary. Christ in us is not only the hope of our glory hereafter, Col. 1.
27. but our hope of acceptance here. We must bring Benjamin, we must bring
Christ, if we will ever see the face of God in Ordinances; wicked men defile,
not enjoy an Ordinance, John 17. 21. They are spots, not guests in that holy
Feast. It is only the spiritual man is fit for converse with God; Princes
converse not with Beggars, nor God with sinners: Christ in his incarnation
tabernacled with the Sons of men, John 1. 14. But in his communion he converses
with the Sons of God; he gives his people the meeting, Mat. 18. 20. The Sun
shines upon the stars, and they reflect its light with a glittering rebound.
Christ when he arose again gave not the meeting to the world, but to his
Disciples, Luke 24. 36. And so in his blessed fellowship he visits not the
formalist, but the Saint; Christ in his ordinances influences his living Ephesians.
1. 22, 2^.
members, not glass eyes, the speculative Atheist, not painted faces, the
varnished hypocrite, not 'wooden legs, with the silken stocking upon them; the
spruce and self-deceiving moralist, who with Agag are ready to depose, the
bitterness 1 Samuel 15 32.
of death is over.

in grace actual. On the Sabbath the soul is to be set on work in acting
several graces, and some seem to be of a different nature; As faith and fear,
heavenliness of mind, and humbleness of heart, repentings for sin, and relyings
on God, tremblings of the soul, and restings on Christ, a real longing for
promised mercies, and yet a quiet staying for those mercies promise, by hope
expecting good things to come, and yet by faith possessing those things at
present. This embroydery of grace must be on the heart of Lam. 3. 26,
a Saint upon the Sabbath; One of the Ancients compares Greg. Mor. l. 19. sect.
30.
holy men upon Earth, unto those holy Angels of Heaven, Rev. 4. 8. that are
said to be full of eyes within and without. In the week the Saints must use
their eyes without, Psalm. 77. 6.
looking after their necessary callings, and their occasions in Hos. 6. 3.
the world; but upon the Sabbath, they more solemnly set Ex cognitione dei
omnia utriusque tabulae officia tanquam ex font promanant et eatenus placent,
quatenus illam praelucentem habent. Riv.
on work their eyes within, looking inward upon the estate of their souls:
knowledge must open its eyes, and repentance must drop its tears, every grace
must be in ure and exercise. Indeed the Sabbath is the proper season for the
acting of our several graces, working as Bees in a Hive, making honey of every
ordinance. Sorrow and confession must begin, faith and prayer must carry on,
and holy thanksgiving must conclude the duties of a Sabbath. Our hearing the
Word must be introduced by holy appetite and desire, we must long to be in the
Courts of God; It must be entertained Psalm. 84. 2. Luke 8. 1. Heb. 4. 2. Mat.
13. 19.
by faith and affection; it must be improved by zeal and an holy conversation:
our lives must be comments on Gods sacred truths; and so all other ordinances
of the Sabbath must be the spears for our graces to move in, as stars in their
Phil. 1. 27.
Orbs; and this is to be in the spirit on the Lords day.

Let us study to be in the comforts of the spirit upon the Lords day: The joys
of the Holy Ghost are the music of heaven below, the hearts rapture, paradise
in the bosom, the sweet earnest of future blessedness, they are the echoes of
assurance, and the reverberations of a good God, and a good Conscience.
Spiritual comforts has many springs, but all most pleasing and complacential.

of God, 2 Cor. 1. 3. who is a fountain above us. The Father of mercies leaves
a seed of joy in the soul.

of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 31. who is a blessed spring within us, John 7. 37.
shedding those grateful streams of peace and joy, which drench the soul with
unspeakable delight.

of the Scriptures, Romans 15. 4. which are as sweet Gardens without us; every
promise being Consolatio omnis nititur promissionibus gratuit^, Dav.
as a sweet rose, every truth being as a flower of the Sun, and every
threatening being as wholesome wormwood in this salvifical garden.

of the Saints, Col. 4. 11. which are as lights about us for our more
comfortable passages to Sancti nos solantur invisendo, condolendo,
necessitatibus nostris administrando, et miserrimas nostras conditiones
sublevando. Dav.
our rest and happiness. Communion of Saints being not only an article of our
Creed, but an helper of our joy, in our travels to Canaan.

But to return to the comforts of the spirit; Gods people may find
soul-refreshing comforts in Christ the Lord upon his own day; and the measure
of their comforts may mount their souls so high, as to make them like Moses
upon Mount Pisgah viewing Canaan, the heavenly Canaan, flowing with that which
is better then milk and honey; the soul of a sincere Isa. 51. 12. 2 Cor. 1. 4.
Luke 2. 29. Isa. 56. 7.
Christian may swim in a sea of sweet delight; he whose heart has been as a
boat, which could not be got up all the week, because of low water, yet may be
brought up in an high spring tide of spiritual comfort upon the Lords day,
being ready to say with Old Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, Luke 2. 29. the soul may be so Psalm. 94. 19. Isa. 57. 18.
filled with joy upon Gods holy day in his house of prayer, that he may be
ambitious of his eternal Requiem in the bosom of Christ. Nay, upon the Lords
day, a believer being in the spirit, the worst evils may amplify his best
comforts, to think of sin remitted, hell removed, death vanquished, devil Genesis
42. 38.
conquered, all these make for him, that he may go down with Jud. 14. 14.
joy and triumph to the grave. Out of every eater comes meat; the upper and the
neither springs run all into the Josh. 15. 19.
same stream of comfort to the Saints: Every thing on a Sabbath is an occasion
of spiritual joy to them; If they look up Isa. 29. 19.
to God, they will joy in the Lord, Romans 5. 11. If they consider Isa. 35. 2.
the season of a Sabbath, that is the time, nay, the term Isa. 52. 9.
time for the soul, which is matter of joy, nay, as the joy of harvest, Isa. 9.
3. If they glance at the word, they receive the word with joy, Luke 8. 13. If
they act their graces, this is with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet.
1. 8. It was a brave speech of a Martyr to his cruel tormentors; Work your will
upon my weak body, as for my soul it is in heaven already, and over that Caesar
has no power. So it may be the case of a Christian upon a Sabbath, he may be
as in heaven beginning his triumphal hallelujahs. It is no wonder then Intus
est, in cord est Sabbatum nostrum. Aug.
if St. Augustine cry out, Our Sabbath is within, in our hearts; There indeed
is the musical spring of joy.

of grieving the spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. No fountain casts out sweet and bitter
water: a grieved spirit will not dash joys upon the soul, the mournful Dove
flies Offenditur spiritus verbis putidis, and etiam quo vis peccato. Hier.
away. We must cherish the graces, if we will possess the joys of the spirit.
The birds sing most sweetly in the spring, when every thing is fresh and green;
Gods spirit in the soul yields its freshest delights among flourishing graces,
when the Peccata sunt injuriae, and contumeliae spquae eum contristantur. Alap.
seared boughs of corruption are broken down. Sin and vanity break the strings
of the spirits music, and chase away the Comforter from our coasts; as birds
hushed away leave the place of their present abode.

Let us not suspend our answer to the spirits excitations. Let us listen to
every motion, and apply our selves to every counsel of this inward Monitor.
Slighted advocates plead no more: we must hearken to every whisper of the Holy
Ghost, who first commands, and then comforts. To stir up to holy duties, to
good works, to circumspect walking is the office of the spirit; but to ravish
the soul with divine delights is the reward of the spirit. Observe holy David,
Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts thy comforts delight my soul. He
was now acting the duty of meditation, and then the spirit besprinkled him with
dews of joy. A Deus per essentiem, est totus consolatio, immo Mare and Oceanus
consolationis, quem in servos suos etiam in hac vita effundit.
learned man says, God is an Ocean of consolation. Let not our sin and
disobedience be such banks and ramparts, that this Sea cannot overflow us with
complacential effusions. Obedience indeed and duty make way for the streams of
spiritual comfort. And to our case, let us keep the Sabbath circumspectly, and
we shall keep it comfortably: Let us follow the spirit in every duty, obey the
dictates of the spirit in every Ordinance: When the spirit prompts us to
prayer, let us tune our hearts to that duty, and not fold our hands in sloth
and negligence; when the spirit suggests to Prove. 6. 10.
us the import of an Ordinance, let us not be slight and careless in that holy
institution, and let us consider the motions Prove. 24. 33.
of the spirit go before the melodies of the spirit.

Let us study to be in the spirit on the Lords day. This duty must.

Look downwards, we must avoid whatsoever opposes the spirit, whatsoever may
quench that celestial flame. 1 These. 5. 19


lay aside all temporal cares. Cares at all times are thorns, Mat. 13. 22. But
on a Sabbath they are thorns in a flame, not only scratching, but scorching.
Indeed the Lords day is not without its cares, but they are heavenly, not
worldly cares, care to please the spirit, not to please the flesh, care to lay
up treasures in heaven, not to fill our coffers below. The soul then must be
Divina benedictio Sabbati est, qua sibi deus studia and occupationes asserit.
Calv.
cared for, how to prepare it for duty, how to pacify it with pardon, how to
beautify it with grace, how to fit it for eternity. Head and heart must be at
work on the Sabbath, but it must be for the soul, not for the outward man. But
to set our servants on work in our callings, to be in our counting Mat. 16. 26.
house, to contrive business for the following week on Gods holy day; this is
not only to defile the Sabbath, but to affront providence, as if God who takes
care for the Lillies of the field, Mat. 6. 30. could not provide for the strict
observers of his holy day.

We must throw away all worldly thoughts. How many are there whose thoughts are
as fresh, and affections as vigorous toward the world upon the Sabbath day, as
if they were trading in their shops, walking in the Exchange, or Exodus 8. 24.
posting their Books, and pursuing their bargains; I may say to such, as the
Lord to Satan, Zach. 3. 2. The Lord rebuke Plaga muscarum fuit foedo colluvies,
quae fuit numerosa, et molestissima, immo et nocentissima, et ideo
molestissima, quia numerosissima. Riv.
thee; what is this but to turn time into a chaos, where there is no
distinction between light and darkness, between the Egypt of the week, and the
Goshen of the Sabbath? This day is a day of light, life and salvation, and
shall worldly thoughts, that judgment of lice or flies stain and eclipse it?
Worldly imaginations on this day, they are the sacrilege of the mind, the worm
at the root of duty, the souls destructive avocation, the Shibboleth of a
covetous man, the bluster and gross miscarriage of a Christian; they are the
souls imprisonment when it should be enlarged in the way of Gods Ordinances.

We must take heed of unnecessary diversions. The heart is wholly to be set on
God, on his own day. One observes, The Law is spiritual, and so is the fourth
Commandment, and is not fully obeyed by outward conformity, but it requires the
Romans 7. 14.
inward truth and bent of the heart. Happily we shut up Psalm. 51. 6.
our shops on a Sabbath, so the Law of the Land commands; but do we shut up our
hearts on a Sabbath, that nothing unseemly may intrude? Do we bring our hearts
and Christ together, and lock them both in, that nothing may interrupt their
sweet and mutual intercourse? It is a vain thing to dissemble with God on his
own day; He can unriddle and will judge our splendid and varnished artifices.
Let us not play the hypocrites, but walk in the spirit the whole stage of Romans
8. 2.
the Sabbath. To keep our doors close, is an empty ceremony, unless we keep our
hearts close to God and Christ in Ordinances, in Family and secret duties.
Diverting imaginations are the cobwebs of the mind, the sores which In dic
Sabbati ab omnibus aliis curis, et studiis omnino obstinendum est. Gual.
fester the heart, as Dalilah her smiles did Samson, and so entangle the soul
that it cannot enjoy its freedom with Christ on his own blessed day. Such
divertisements disturb the Music of Ordinances, and eat out the profit of holy
Communion with God; if we will be working on a Sabbath, Let us work out our
salvation with fear and trembling. Augustine Phil. 2. 12, 13. Aug. de temp.
Sermon. 251.
speaks most excellently in one of his Sermons, That we may be fit and ready
for Gods service on his own day, there must be nothing to cumber us, and we at
that time must cast off the interposition of worldly solicitude. And so Calvin
presses, That on this day every man ought to withdraw himself wholly to
Godward, to mind him and his works, that we may be provoked to serve and
honor him. The Sabbath is Gods freehold, and all impertinencies, whither
foolish thoughts, 2 Timothy 2. 4.
vain discourse, or unbecoming actions, if they enter upon it, they are
trespassers. In a word, we must be in the spirit, not in the flesh, or the
deeds of the flesh, upon Gods holy and blessed day.

We must be very watchful on Gods holy day. This is a day on which we must be
on our guard. Christians on other days are Soldiers, but on this day they
must be sentinels 2 Timothy 2. 4.
The Sanctuary more especially is our Court of guard. Christ speaks to us now,
as once he did to his Disciples, Can Mark 14. 37.
ye not watch with me one day? Our Sabbaths are always besieged with enemies,
both within us and without us; and when the enemy is on the walls, nothing more
necessary then a strict watch.

watch our hearts. It is a fond piece of hypocrisy to watch our words and our
actions on a Sabbath, and in the Hic sc. ad cor, noct^rnas et diurnas excubias
collo^emus. Cartw.
mean time give scope and liberty to our wandering hearts to take its circuits
and ranges. A flatulent and a gadding heart is a great disturbance upon a Lords
day; a man can neither pray, nor hear, nor meditate, but he is troubled and
disquieted. It is the counsel of the Wise man, to keep our hearts with all
diligence, we must set double guards Prove. 4. 23.
upon them. The heart in it self is a wandering Dinah, and will be slipping away
to vanity, it is ready to fall into the snare; Cord nihil est fugacius. Bern
therefore we must watch it warily, and check it speedily, and overawe it with
the apprehension of Gods all-seeing eye. It is observable, that the Lord Jesus
appeared to his Rev. 1 14.
servant John upon his own day in a heart searching similitude; His eyes were
as a flaming fire, not only burning in jealousy against sin and sinners, but
bright and shining, as the searcher of hearts, and tryer of reins: And we
should do well to consider that on the Lords day more especially, our heart
lies under the view of that fiery flaming eye of Christ, and he is the judge of
all secrets, Romans 2. 16. And this should stop and bound our Quicksilver
hearts. Let the terror of the last day work upon our hearts on the Lords day.
The seat of the judge is fitly resembled by a cloud, not a throne of silver or
gold, but a cloud; now as we know the clouds are store houses of refreshing
showers, so also of storms and tempests; and thus doubtless the day of the Lord
will be a day of refreshing to some, of terror and amazement to others, and a
great part of the tempest of that day will fall upon the hearts of men; God
will have us accountable for ranging thoughts, and sinful desires, which are
aggravated and receive a double dye upon a Sabbath. Indeed on this day one of
our great works is to chain and fasten the heart to God; a loose heart then
only runs up and down and does mischief, it makes great waste, and is as the
Prodigal in his worst fits.

We must watch against Satan. The old Serpent who deluded our first Parents, is
the great adversary of the Sabbath, which was the first institution; the evil
one strives to Genesis 3. 1, 2, 3.
cloud the rising Sun, the early day of divine worship set apart by God from
the worlds infancy. It was the policy of Pompey, Vespasian, and Titus, most
sorely to assault Jerusalem on the Sabbath day: Upon the Sabbath day are the
Devils Die Sabbati non licet pomum ad carbonem admovere, ut assetur; Nec
allium, quod edere velit, decorticare, saltantem pulicem capere, Arborem non
licet ascend re, ne ramum frangas. Munst. ex Rabbin.
most desperate designs; He is ever bad, but worst on the best days; we must
look for a harming Devil on a helping day. Let us trace the evil one all along,
and we shall easily discern his malice against the blessed Sabbath. First,
Satan stirs up the Jews to clog the Sabbath with superstition: Ridiculous were
the assertions of that Nation concerning Sabbath observances, As, it is not
lawful to put an apple to roast on the Sabbath day, or to peel a head of
garlic, or to take a flea leaping upon the body, or to climb a tree, least we
break a bough on that day, etc. Vanities more foolish, as Gerard observes, then
the Sicilian scomms or toys. After, by the instigations of Satan, a persecution
is raised against the Church, which lasted some Centuries of years, beginning
in the time Beati martyrs in judicium vocati, a Proconsule interrogati sunt,
number Dominicum servasti? Cui respondebant se Christianos esse, et Dominicum
congrua religionis devotione celebrasse, quia intermitti non potest. Baron.
of Nero; And then, Dominicum servasti, etc. Have thou kept the Lords day, was
one of those ensuaring questions which brought many Christians to the crown of
Martyrdom. In succeeding ages, the great artifice of Satan has been to debauch
the world into a contempt of the Lords day, which is notably set down by worthy
Dr. Hackwell in these words, After ages much degenerating from the simplicity
of the Primitive times, they so infinitely multiplied holy days beyond all
measure and reason, that the Lords day began to be slighted, which no doubt is
an especial occasion of that thick cloud of superstition which over-shadowed
the face of the Church. In these last days Satan has been a perverting spirit
in the mouths of the Prophets, some decrying the strictness of the Sabbath as
rigorous and Judaical; others confining holiness 2 Chr. 18. 22.
only to the public worship, leaving the people afterward to the ranges of
their own corrupt fancy, to bowl, to wrestle, etc. and to follow any exercise
which may suit with corrupt nature; others shake the foundation of the Lords
day, as if that blessed day was only the issue of a prudential Canon of the
Church; but what this Church was, where the Council was held, who the
president, and what the Members of it, we could never yet learn or understand,
but yet some clamorously avouch the Lords day is bottomed only upon
Ecclesiastical Authority: And then if the Azor. institut. Moral. ps. secunda.
l. 1. c. 2.
Sabbath lie at the pleasure of the Clergy, as one worthily observes, Covetous
men, who are about their Farms and their Oxen, will easily set at naught a
humane Ordinance, and profane persons will hardly be whistled into public or
private duties for a device of men, but will give themselves free leave for
doing or neglecting, if there be nothing found in Scripture to bind conscience.
Others have raised the Jewish Sabbath out of the grave of Christ, to walk as a
Ghost up and down the world, when the Lords day has for more then sixteen
hundred years been its peaceable successor. And thus Satan has every way
endeavored to invalidate the power, and eclipse the glory of the blessed
Lords day, the holy observation of which, he is the greatest enemy of. And to
this day this Apollyon and Abaddon, a destroyer in any language, attempts Rev.
12. 9.
nothing more industriously then to draw men into a sluggish and sinful frame,
either to idle away Sabbaths, or to spend them profusely in riot and
profaneness. How many proud persons waste the Sabbath at a Glass or dressing
box? How many intemperate persons drown their Sabbath Ephesians. 5. 18. 1 Pet. 4. 3.
in luxuries and excess, and are filled with wine instead of the holy spirit?
How many are catched at the bait of a Procul abjiciamus impura carnis opera, et
insanum voluptuandi studium. Wall.
mad eagerness after pleasure and delight, as Walaeus calls it? But let us
watch against all these wiles and depths of Satan: And indeed we should double
our guards, for there is not an Ordinance but Satan attempts to evacuate, and
make it a barren womb, and a dry breast to the soul. If Joshua stand before the
Lord, Satan will be at his right hand, Zach. Rev. 2. 24.
3. 1. He cursedly ^nvies all our converses with God, and would raise a cloud
and thick darkness to hinder the transmissions of divine love: Now he cannot
beat life out of the Ordinance; prayer will be a prevailing duty, maugre Satan's
malice; and therefore he would beat love out of us, he would take us off by his
snares and enticements; either he would disturb us by his temptations, or charm
us by his persuasions, or disengage us from holy and close communion with God
by his flatteries and insinuations. This Serpent for his subtilty, and Lion for
his cruelty, will, like Tertullus Genesis 3. 1. 1 Pe. 5. 8. Luke 22. 31.
to Paul, Acts 24. 5. attempt us most forcibly when we are pleading the cause
of our souls in holy Ordinances on Gods holy day. If the Sons of God present
themselves before the Lord, Satan comes among them, Job 1. 6. If we attend in
hearing the word, the wicked one comes, and is Mark 4. 15.
ready to catch away the seed which is sown in the heart, Mat. 13. 19. Satan
enters Judas at the Passover, John 13. 1 These. 2. 18.
27. and some Divines assert, at the Sacramental Supper. How often does Satan
raise noise and disturbance, to divert our thoughts, and damp our desires, when
we are engaged in holy prayer, that so our distractions may sower and disaffect
our most melting devotions?

And therefore let us cast our selves upon this threefold experiment.

Let us Petition the Lord to fetter and chain up this roaring Lion, so to
muzzle him, that he may be a Lion without a paw, and a Serpent without a sting.
God cannot only tread Satan non deponit Odium, sed vertit ingenium et cruentas
inimicitias, ad quietas convertit insidias* Leo.
Satan under his own, but under our feet, Romans 16. 20. He can pinion Satan with
a check and a rebuke, Zach. 3. 2. He can chase him away with the prohibition of
a word, Mat. 4. 10. He that can bind Satan for a thousand years, Rev. 22. can
shackle him for a few Sabbaths. Satan is a cruel, but a conquered enemy, Heb.
2. 14. He is a wolf in a chain. Now prayer cannot only obtain the good spirit,
but Apostolus ait, Deus conteret satanam sub pedibus nostris, ut indicet
infirmitotem. nostram et salutem.
can restrain and bind up the evil one, and bridle both his injections and
disturbances; and if thou prayest that thy enemy strike not, Christ will pray
that thy faith fail not, Luke 22. 32. to shield off the fiery darts of the
Devil, Ephesians. 6. 16. And to stand against the wiles of the evil one, Ephesians. 6. 11.
Brayer can exercise the evil spirit; fasting and prayer can Acts 26. 18. 2 Cor.
2. 11.
cast Satan out of our bodies, Mark 9. 29. much more out of our duties.

Resist the Devil. It is the Apostles counsel, 1 Pet. 5. 9. and the benefit
will be, He will fly from thee: Now this Satan vetus hostis est, cum quo
praeliam gerimus, sex mill annorum complentur, ex quo hominem Diabolus
oppugnat, omni genere tentandi et arts atque insidias deficiendi usu ipso
vetustatis addidicit. Par ex Cypr. lib. de Exhort. Martyr. ad Fortunat.
resistance must be made by resting upon Christ by faith, so taking in Christ
as our second in the encounter, and being fixed in holy resolution, as the
Apostle hints in the forecited Text. It is true as Paraeus observes out of
Cyprian, Satan is an old and experienced enemy, but the shield of faith can
secure us, and the sword of the spirit can subdue him. Christ put him to flight
with a Scriptum est, It is written. Satan only batters yielding combats. The
bird is easily caught which flies into the snare. His fiercest stroks are
avoided by repulse. We best resist him, when we will not admit him into parley.
Let us remember he is the God of this world, and so cannot interpose for hurt
in spirituals, unless we give him the advantage. If he be a Prince, it is of
the Air, 2 Ephesians. 2. And so by his own power cannot endamage us in things
heavenly and divine. He never conquers, but when we let fall the weapons. We
never lose, but give away the Victory, and his insultation is the reward of our
pusillanimity.

Let us not tempt the tempter by a frothy and slight spirit. Indeed corrupt
hearts are his territories and claim: Satan makes his greatest rapes on
wandering and light spirits, he Genesis 34. 1, 2.
is Beelzebub, a God of flies, who buzzes about vain dispositions Psalm. 108. 1.
with his troublesome assaults; and therefore on Gods Luke 11. 15.
blessed day, let us say with the Psalmist, our heart is fixed, Psalm. 57. 7.
our heart is fixed, Psalm. 57. 7. If our hearts are centerd in God, we are
above the attachments of the evil one. Foolish men usually meet Satan's
temptations; but being immured in Ordinances, and only minding Christ in our
devotions, this common enemy chained at Christ's Cross, as Origin speaks, will
leave us as he did our Master, and dear Redeemer, Mat. 4. 11.

We must watch our Corruptions; they are never so violent in their sallies, as
on Gods own day. Pride will go in the most garish dress on the Sabbath, and
many happily will study more to bring a new fashion, then a new heart into the
Congregation. Vlcerous consciences on this day will quarrel with divine truth,
or at least with the messengers of it: Corrupt wounds will not endure the
lanching, nor scornful sinners the reproof. Our hearts are never so
treacherous as Jer. 17. 9.
on this day; then they are prodigal of time, sluggards in Homines sunt
fallaces, et insidiosi, et putant de^m ipsum posse decipi, et illi meros fumos
obsiciunt. Calv.
duty, enemies to the faithful preaching of the Word, then they pour out
their swarms of vam and impertinent thoughts, and catch at any diversion to
give them breath from close communion with God; and then slight and formal
Christians wind up the clock of the tongue, and that strikes nothing but
vanity. Indeed naturally there is an open opposition in our hearts to strict
religion, and particularly to the precise observation of Gods day; and this
opposition like rivers which are damm'd up, breaks forth then most violently.
As we know, Snakes will get into the greenest grass, and Spiders into the
fairest houses, so our corruptions beset us most, and besiege us most closely
in holy duties, and the most spiritual converses; and therefore let us most
strictly eye these Serpents in the bosom, observe their first motions,
Venienti occurrite morbo.
and strangle them in their birth. Young twigs are easily plucked up, weeds
when low, they only soften the walk, but when grown higher, they deform and
unbeautifie the garden. Let us let out the water of the first blisters of
corruption. If thou art proud, then say, did Christ come out of a Grave this
day, and shall I come out as a Bridegroom out of a Bride Chamber? If thou art
worldly, say, Christ Isa. 61. 10. Joel 2. 16.
rose this day, in order to his ascension to heaven, and shall sublunary
vanities entangle my soul this day? If thou art sluggish and unactive, say, the
Sun of righteousness rose this Mal. 4. 2.
day, whose motion of all motions is the swiftest; and shall I be clogged with
unseemly dullness and hebetude? If thou art sad and despondent, say, Christ rose
this day, to fill up the joys of his people, to consummate and finish his
victories, (...); cantus fuit Christiano rum sibimetipsis oc^urrentium in
primord^^ Ecclesiae.
which by holy faith become the Saints conquest, and shall my spirit be down
and sink on this triumphant day? If thy heart wander this day, say, the
glorious Morning Star this day appeared in the worlds Horizon, after a three
days cloud, and what more blessed object to fix my heart upon? Rev. 22. 16.
That still the risings of thy corrupt heart, which way soever it wind it self,
may be kept down, and stopped from Sabbath defilement. Now a little care may
prevent a great deal of sin: We must therefore.

1. Eye and observe,

2. Bitterly bemoan,

3. Pray against,

4. Forcibly check and keep down these unnatural productions of the
unregenerate part; and suppressed corruptions Exodus 14 30.
are like slain Egyptians, they will not disturb the Israelites traveling
toward Canaan: So they will be the spectacle of our joy, not the obstacle of
our duties, and we may with a Psalm. 119. 32.
pleasing liberty run the ways of Gods Commandments, upon his own holy day.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Some necessary cautions for the preventing of Sabbath Pollution.
more holy observation of Gods blessed day, some rocks are to be avoided, as
well as some rules to be observed. The careful Mariner studies to escape the
sands, that he be not swallowed up, as well as observes the wind, that he be
not becalmed, and so put upon unnecessary stays in the watery element: So
there are difficulties to run through, as well as duties to discharge on Gods
holy day; and therefore Care is as necessary as Zeal, and a watchful eye as
requisite as an affectionate heart; we must equally take care that we do not
offend, as that we do obtain.

Let us take heed of wearisomness in duties. It is very sad, when the Sabbath
is looked on as our burden, and not our privilege, and our attendance upon
Ordinances our task, and not our triumph, our bondage and not our blessedness.
Surely religious duties should not be our fetters, but our freedom. This was
the black character of the wanton Israelites, they cried out, When will the New
Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath be over, that we may set
forth Wheat? Amos 8. 5. What should weary us on a Sabbath? Is it because on
that day, Christ carries the soul into his Wine Cellar, Malus fructus, immo
malus morsus, quo Adam per Evam vitam perdidit: Bonus fructus quo genus humanum
per Christi mortem, mortem perdidit, et vitam invenit. Del. Rio.
and his banner over it is love? Cant. 2. 4. Is it because Christ on this day,
brings his living waters, and his best wine, and makes his feast of fat things,
and gives his sweetest bread? Do the delicacies of a Sabbath cloy us? Do the
rarities of it nauseate us? How shall we digest heaven, where such dainties
sublimated, shall be our eternal fare? What hearts have we, that we can
petrifie Gods Ordinances, and make them empty and unsatisfying, that they shall
yield no taste or nourishment? Surely it must needs be the reproach of a
Christian to grow weary of Communion with God, and to surfeit on the provisions
of the Sanctuary. Indeed to be cloyed at our tables is more usual, then
sinful; but shall we rise from the table of Christ without an appetite? Shall
we say of the bread which came from heaven, is there nothing but this Manna?
Upon the Sabbath, John 6. 55.
Christ takes the soul, as once the Eunuch did Philip, into Numb. 11. 6.
the chariot of his Ordmances with him, and there discourses of the affairs of
eternity; and shall this familiarity tire the soul Acts 8. 21.
which is posting to eternity? The Sabbath is the souls jubilee, a mellifluous
and blessed season; how many thousands souls have known it the day of their new
birth? And how willing have Gods people been, in this day of Gods power, in
Psalm. 110. 3.
the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning? Blessed is this day
among days, from henceforth all generations Luke 1. 48.
shall call thee happy; blessed be the Father which made thee, blessed be the
Son who purchased thee, blessed be the Spirit who sanctifies thee, and blessed
are they who prize and improve thee, and think the Sun on this day posts away
too fast, and makes too much have toward a setting. Indeed it must argue very
little holiness, if the blessing of the Sabbath be accounted the burden of the
Soul, and it must speak the dregs of corrupt nature to tire upon Mountains of
Spices, to be weary of walking in the Garden where the Rose of Sharon is. David
says, Psalm. 119. 24, 77. The testimonies of God are his delight, and he
rejoiced more in them, Cant. 2. 1.
then in all manner of riches; and yet truly some covetous Christus est rosa
(...) optime flos, quia florum flos. Del. Rio.
men tell over their riches with no small delight. The very Gospel is (...),
glad tidings; and can we be weary in hearing glad tidings, messages of love and
life from heaven, news of a Christ and a Kingdom? The soul which is tired on a
Sabbath, understands not its own interest, but as the Prophet Jonah says,
forsakes its own mercies, Jonah 2. 8. Can our conversation be in heaven, as the
Apostolical command is, Phil. 3. 20. and yet droop, and be flatted in heavenly
Sancti in coelis habitant, dum hic vivunt, atsi Aquilae quae in arduis nidum
ponunt. Greg.
duties, in heavenly ordinances, and pine after a dismission and release?
Burdens of Roses are not painful but pleasant: Ordinances are only bundles of
Myrrh to refresh and revive the Soul. Surely the Sabbath may plead with tired
professors, as once God did in another case, Mic. 6. 3. O my people, what have
I done to thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me: So might
the Sabbath expostulate, what is in me so burdensome? Is it my institution,
because it is divine? Luke 2. 37.
Is it my duration, because it is for a few hours only? David longed to dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, Psalm. 27. 4. And Anna the
Prophetess departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fastings and
Prayers Insabbato unusq^isq: s^dere debet in suo loco, Exodus 16. 29. et non
proceda^ ex eo. Quis est locus spiritualis animae? Justitia est locus ejus, et
veritas, et sapientia, et sanctificatio, et omnia quae Christus sunt, et hic
est locus ex quo eum non oportet exire. Orig.
night and day. Still the Sabbath may plead, are the Ordinances of God, my
Jewels and my Ornaments, such causes of surfeit? Or rather are they not the
Galleries for Christ and the soul to walk in, the very stages of Christ's
presence, Mat. 18. 20. The rich opportunities for soul-advantage, the spiritual
man's Mart? Here the sinner, like the sloathful servant, can answer nothing. It
is both our doom and degeneracy to be weary of divine Ordinances, and it loudly
speaks,

1. That Christ is not our beloved, else his company would ravish, not tire our
attendance, and be our satisfaction, not our surfeit. Lovers are not quickly
weary of their interchangeable converses.

2. That heaven is not the end of our race; surely if it were, we should not
then be so soon tired in the way. Ordinances are the road to glory. The
Traveller puts on till he allight at home.

3. That the world has too much influence us. The Jews were weary of the
Sabbath, Amos 8. 5. but it was, that they might set forth Corn. Carnal minds do
not relish spiritual duties; they are their clog, not their complacency. To be
in the flesh, in fleshly desires and delights, and to be in the spirit, are a
real contrariety: The love of the world will cast out the love of ordinances.
This and much more our wearisomness in and of ordinances proclaims to every
observer. It is the observation of Origin; that burdens were not to Onera non
sunt portanda die Sabbati, onus est omne peccatum. Orig.
be carried on the Sabbath day, Nehem. 13. 15. says he, What is this burden
but sin? And this is the mistake of many; when sin should be, they make service
their burden; when they should groan under vile practices, they groan under
precious Ordinances. One well observes, wearisomness in duties sucks out all
their sweetness, and makes them dry and unpleasant, and casts a dishonor on
the God of ordinances, Isa. 5. 20.
as if he was a fountain shedding bitter streams; but on the contrary, delight
makes duty savoury meat, and Gospel recreation. Jacob for the beauty of Rachel
served seven years, and they seemed but a few days, Genesis 29. 20. The Gal. 6.
9. (...). Genesis 27. 4. Psalm. 119. 97. Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 110 3. Dr. Full. Eccl.
Hist.
Saints in the beauties of holiness run through many services, and they are not
their toil, but their prerogative; they rise from duty, as Galen usually did
from his meals, with an appetite. Dr. Fuller observes, a Philosophical act did
once so please Queen Elizabeth, that her delight did drown all tediousness, and
she heard the Disputes till within night in the midst of Summer. And shall
Philosophy refresh and captivate more then Divinity? shall the handmaid more
please then the Mistress? Shall disputes of Nature be more satisfactory Deus est
nat^ra naturans, et creaturae sunt natura naturata. Baron.
then the God of Nature? Shall the Schools more delight then the Sanctuary?
Nay, shall the Mathematics of Archimedes so drown him in rational pleasure,
that being in his study, he heard not when Syracuse the City of his habitation
was taken by the Romans? Shall such raptures drop from the contriving of a
Mathematical Instrument, and is there no fruit on the tree of Life, no delicacy
in ordinances to affect our souls, and to wear off a cloyed irksomness from our
spirits on the blessed Sabbath? Surely it argues weak and faint grace, when the
breast that feeds it becomes troublesome, and the sincere milk of the word, 1
Pet. 2. 2. becomes sour, and stales, because it is not made use of.

Let us take heed of trifling away the Sabbath under the pretense of vain
excuses. The Sabbath is the solemn time of man's Aurum igne probatum, alii
intelligunt de v^rbo dei, Illud enim argento septies dec^cto est probatius Auro
obrizo desiderabilius; Alii intelligunt de fide qua sola divitiae caeleste
accipiantur quaeque igne afflictionis, quovis auro purgatior redditur. Coram
deo non facit divites aurum, sed fides Christum cum the sauris suis possidens.
2 Cor. 5. 21.
life, the souls gale of opportunity, the good wind for the harbor of Rest.
On this day God sets forth his merchandise, Rev. 3. 18. for man to buy up, to
enrich himself to eternity; then God offers his gold to make us rich in grace,
his white raiment to make us rich in beauty, his eye salve to make us rich in
knowledge. Pareus well observes, Adams fall proclaimed him bankrupt, and he
naturally labors under a threefold malady:

1. Of Poverty, and so God offers Gold, Rev. 3. 18. to set him up again, to
repair his lost revenues and estate.

2. Of Nakedness, when Adam sinned his first sin, Genesis 3. 7. himself, and so
after himself, his posterity was shamefully naked; and now God offers
(especially on a Sabbath day, the spiritual fair-day for such merchandises)
white raiment to cover our nakedness, and to adorn us with a beauty exceeding
our Primitive loveliness: He offers the righteousness of Christ, a fairer
Garment then Adams innocence, more large, and more lasting.

3. Of Blindness: Adam by soaring too high, lost his sight, and entailed that
blemish upon all his offspring: Now God offers eye salve to cure our
blindness; that we Quid est collyrium, nisi illuminatio spiritus ^ellentis
tenebras cordium, atque excitantis veram dei agnitionem et dilectionem in fide
justificatis, ut in cernenda sua miseria, et Christi beneficiis caeci esse
desinant. Par. Heb. 12. 17. Mat. 22. 5. Luke 15. 13.
may see the salvation of the Lord, and understand the things which belong to
our peace. Thus fraught with rich advantages, and rare commodities, is Gods
blessed day; which to triflle away, is not so much trespass, as frenzy, our
madness, rather then our miscarriage. Mariners do not sport with good winds,
nor Merchants with good markets, nor Husbandmen with good seasons; only the
Formalist slips his rare opportunities, a blessing he shall not long enjoy,
though he seeks it carefully with tears. The King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3. makes
a Feast on his own Resurrection day, and the Guests more study excuses, then
appetite, and are very dextrous to trifle away their own happiness; what
remains to these spiritual prodigals, but a fearful expectation of Judgment:
We may write a Mean Tekel, Dan. 5. 25. upon the fairest pretenses of these
triflers, who throw away the Heb. 10. 27.
inestimable benefit of Sabbath-grace. But let us observe the traces of these
self-destroying Formalists.

Some trifle away their Sabbath, in running from one place to another, and
fixing no where to hear a Sermon, and enjoy the Ordinances of God: Now they
stay a little in one Church, and presently slip away to another, and happily
visit a third, if not a fourth, and this has been a great sin in the greatest
City of the Nation. Here I may say with our Savior: To whom shall I liken the
men of this Generation? Mat. 11. 16. Indeed, they are like Children in the
Market, who run from stall to stall, to see every thing, but buy nothing: they
are Overseers of an Ordinance, they see the Sunt aliquid in omnibus, et nihil
in singulis.
goods of it carried away, and their souls are nothing the richer by it; these
are wandering stars, flying and so empty Clouds: curiosity is their Principle,
and emptiness is their Character: but let such consider, the itch of vanity
Jude v. 20.
is usually rubbed into the scab of profaneness; these general surveyors are
seldom built up in the most holy faith; these are only initial scepticks, they
rove up and down, Judges 7. 6.
till at last they lose themselves; they are like Gideons soldiers, Hos. 6. 4.
who only lap at an Ordinance, as they did at the waters, and so their
righteousness is as the morning dew; their Si aliqua necessitas oriatur
urgentiori action, prandium est praetereundum. Aug. contr. urbic. Epist. 86.
inconstancy is usually followed with darkness of mind, and deadness of
heart. Saint Augustine in a tract against Vrbicus, tells us, That in the
Primitive times, Sermons were not tied up to an hour, but were protracted to a
greater length if any occasion required, and Dinnertime was swallowed up in
the duty, Christians attending these prolonged services. What a burden would
this have been to these flitting Auditors? this would have put their roving
fancy into chains. It was a Custom in the golden Age of the Church, to follow
those with censures Ecclesiastical, who went out of the Auditory Ante finem
tractatus non est exeundum. Chrysostom. Hom. 83. in Matthew.
before the Minister had concluded his Sermon, whether longer or shorter, as a
learned man notes. And Chrysostom, in his 83d. Homily on Matthew, severely
reproves those, who went out of the Church, before the Minister had dismissed
the people: and positively affirms, whoever goes out of the Assembly before the
Congregation is dismissed, shall give an Qui ante dismissionem exit, ut
fugitivus rationem reddet, Chrysostom. Council. Carth. Council. Aurel. Council. Agath.
Qui sacerdote ve^bum faciente exibit, terribili excommunicationis censura
notetur. Council. carth.
account to God as a fugitive. The fourth Council of Carthage speaks thus in
the 24th. Canon: Whoever goes out whilst the Minister is preaching, and
continuing his discourse, let him be branded with the terrible Censure of
Excommunication. To the same purpose Council. Aurelian. Can. 28. An. 507. and
Council. Agathen. Can. 47. which was held An. Dom. 306. And this is further
observable from Antiquity, that Chrysostom, in his 19th. Homily upon Genesis,
does very much commend his Auditors, who heard his admonitions with great
alacrity, nor were they offended with the length or prolixity of them, but
still kept up a vigorous and continued desire to hearken to him, and persevered
in this desire to the end. And truly this deserved commendation. It is said of
our Saviors Auditors, that they did hang upon (...). Luke 19. 48.
his lips, Luke 19. 48. so the Original word bears it. And those who heard
Paul, waited on his Ministry till midnight, Acts 20. 7. But how contrary are
those gadding hearers we are treating of, to the serious Congregation of
Chrysostom; to the fervent Auditors of our Savior, and to the unwearied
Assembly, who sucked in Gospel truth from the Apostles lips at midnight? These
trifling Proselytes, they put Hag. 1. 6.
their spiritual riches into a bag with holes, and scatter their gleanings by
the way.

Some trifle away their Sabbath in hearing some new thing: These act the
Athenian more then the Christian; the old Acts 17. 21.
beaten way of godliness is trite, and worn out to them: but if they hear of a
new Preacher, then they flock to him: Quisquis es assertor novorum dogmatum,
Quaeso te, ut par^as humanis auribus, ut parcas fidei,
If they hear of some new opinion, then they run after it: this has been a
disease which has raged in many parts of this Nation: But these please fancy
more then faith, and study notion, more then religion: they remember not that
Satan can transform himself into all shapes, and as a Chamelian turn into all
colors: and feducers, his emissaries, can Hieron. ad Pammach.
put on a silken mask, and blend truth with error, to make it more plausible,
and the commodity more vendible. The 2 Cor. 11. 3.
smoothest tongues are oftentimes the Orators of false Doctrine, Micah 2. 11.
ctrine, as the finest paint stops up the deepest wrinkles: Incautelous Isa. 8.
20
Novelists, consider not the advice of God by the Mat. 4. 4.
Prophet, Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the Luke 16. 29
ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good Mat. 11. 29.
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls: 1 John 1. 4.
They consider not the fervent asseveration of the Apostle, Jer. 23. 16.
Gal. 1. 8. Though we or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto
you, then that which we have preached unto Gal. 1. 8, 9.
you, let him be acoursed: as we said before, so say I now again, if any man
preach any other Gospel to you, then that you have received, let him be
accursed. Observe how the Apostle repeats the Anathema against all novel
opinions, and in the heat of his zeal, how does he execrate any person
whatsoever, Retinenda est antiquitas, and explodenda est novitas.
Angel, Christian, Man, who shall introduce any thing different from, or
contrary to the received Doctrine. This text of Scripture might strike all
Novelists, seducers, and seduced, Lyr.
with Belshazzars Palsy, Dan. 5. 6. and might chain up frothy and unstable
spirits from their opinionative ranges. And we may not overpasse, how the
Apostle Paul charges the wavering Gallatians with effascination, Gal. 3. 1. And
yet how many fantastique spirits are there, who spend, or rather wast their
Sabbaths in running after this or that seducer, who corrupts the unblemisht
doctrine of the glorious 2 Cor. 4 4.
Gospel, who vents this new and strange notion, and the other upstart opinion,
and does happily as some do with their 2 Cor. 11. 15.
stuffes, who put a new and an amusing name upon an old and out-worn stuff;
call old and obsolete errors, new and Quidam audiens a daemone, Ego sum
Christus clausit o^ulos, dicens, Ego in hac vita Christum nolo videre, sed in
altera vita. Alap.
glorious light, and with these wares defraud the vulgar? How many, I say,
follow these seducers, till they are bewitched, (to use the Apostles phrase)
into some uncouth sect, or brutified into some irrational and soul-damning
opinion. Our unhappy Kingdom is too full of instances in this kind. Surely,
such never seriously consulted the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 13. For such are
false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ; but are as the unwary guest, who tastes every dish, though some are
poisonous, and will gather every herb, though by it they put death into the Pot.

giddy spirits, like the evil spirit, Mat. 4. 6. will bring Scripture for their
practice, especially that noted text, 1 These. 5. 21. Prove all things. To which
Objection it is answered.

explanate omnia, non omnes, Prove all things, not all persons. The injunction
does not oblige or enforce us, to run from one preacher to another till we have
heard every Minister, nay, every Tradesman who will undertake to be a Speaker;
we must not as the Sun, run through every sign of the Zodiac. And though I
shall not with Bellarmine restrain this command to Ministers only, and that it
appertains Bellar. de laicis. l. 3. c. 21.
not at all to the Laics; yet surely this Text speaks only thus much, that we
must try all Doctrines delivered by our own Pastor, or any other Minister whom
we providentially hear, and then bring them to the touchstone of Gods sacred
word. And so the Text commands us to be as the noble Bereans, Acts 17. 11. and
not as fantastic Athenians, Acts 17. 21. This Apostolical rule injoyns
discretion, and not inconstancy, that we should be deliberative, but not
wavering; Curiosity is not here indulged, but diligence. This rule gives us
power of examination, that we may weigh every piece of Doctrine in the scales
of the word; but it speaks no further, only that we should add prudence in
Phil. 1. 9, 10.
discerning, to diligence in hearing, and it couples a wise head with a good
heart. Wherefore the Lord prescribed Vt cum insultant nobis and nos interrogant
ea quae discimus vel sic pigritiam excutiamus, and divinas Scripturas
cognoscere cupi^mus. August. contr Manich.
rules to the Jews to judge Prophets by, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 18. 22. And
caused his word to be written, that it might be the Canon and measure of all
truth. And of this serious examination Augustine shows us this excellent
benefit, viz. That by this work we may shake off sloth, and be filled with an
arden^ desire of Scripture-knowledge. So then this Apostolical command is only
abused by flatulent and unsettled spirits, who waste their Sabbaths in the
pursuance of some unprofitable novelty, and it speaks no more but this: The
Apostle decries all implicit faith, and calls for a judgment of discretion in
every Christian, to compare every Doctrine delivered by the Minister, with the
standing rule of Rev. 14. 6.
the everlasting Gospel; and those Doctrines which are congruous to the rule,
to entertain and embrace, otherwise to reject them as the spurious inventions
and fictions of men. 1 Cor. 4. 24.
But to shut up this particular: Upon what precipices of danger do these
assertours of novelty walk, when so often false Doctrine is quilted in with
true, and as Chysostom, Theophylact, and Theodoret observe, False Prophets will
mingle Prophetis veris aliqui Pseudo prophetae clam immiscent. Theod. Chrysostom.
Theophil.
themselves clancularly with true and faithful Teachers? Full bags will not
want brass pieces, heaps of Corn will not be without its chaff, nor full
Markets without their bad commodities; And no more will the Church of Christ in
every age want lying Prophets, subtle Seducers, and plausible Heretics, and if
the novelist fall upon any of these, how near is he to a shipwreck of faith and
a good conscience? And besides 1 Timothy 1. 19.
in the formentioned text, it is very observable, the Apostle does not command
us to hear all things, but to prove all things; we must not run into every
corner to hear what ever is said or preached, this was an impossible
enterprise, and we may as soon take the Sea into the hollow of our hand; but we
must prove all things which we do hear from that Ministry we are obliged to;
the Apostle commands our Omnia probate (i. e.) dubia and incerta, and quae
maxim probatione egent. Alap.
industry and ingenuity, but not indulges our quick silvered curiosity. And
what Alapide takes notice of is not to be pretermitted; The Apostle, says he,
commands us to prove all things, viz. which are dubious and uncertain, and
stand in need of proof and trial; so the Apostle does not put us upon
unnecessary enquiries, to pry into every privacy where a Heretic is crept in,
Jude v. 4. But when matters are delivered by the Minister which are more
arduous and mysterious, then it behooves the Christian to sweat in Scripture
search, to find out the meaning of these difficulties, that his understanding
may be truly enlightened, and his conscience fully satisfied. But those who pine
after novelties and curiosities, should take notice the Lords day spends while
they are following the chase; and who shall recall that blessed season, if it
be wasted in impertinencies?

Some trifle away their Sabbath in fruitless visits: If they have a sick
friend, then (say they) to visit them is charity; and if they have a familiar
friend, then to visit them is love and amity; and if they have a friend with
whom they deal in worldly affairs, then to visit him there is a kind of
necessity; and they will be frugal of their time, though they are prodigal of
their Sabbath. It is true, visiting the sick is Qui operibus charitatis se
benedictos, haeredes, and p^^destinatos, proinde and ^^re fideles, vereque oves
Christi declaraverunt; Illis jure adjudicatur regnum.
a duty of the Sabbath, if the visit be sweetened with prayer, spiritual
discourse, and heavenly instructions. On a Sabbath Christ visited the sick,
Mark 1. 31. healed the sick, Luke 14. 1. And visiting the sick is one of those
duties, in the faithful discharge of which, we shall give up our accounts with
joy, Mat. 25. 36. But to visit the sick only for a little discourse, or to
pass a civility, or to spend some time, they know not how well otherwise to
dispose of, this is the waste of a Sabbath, and is the evil of too many in the
City and Nation. Indeed the Sabbath is a day of visits, but they must be
heavenly, not earthly, fruitful, not complemental visits: We must visit the
Sanctuary by our holy approaches, we must visit the throne of grace by our
humble addresses, we must visit our own souls by our serious searches, we must
try and examine our selves which is an eminent duty upon the Sabbath. Nay, and
God has his visits on his own 2 Cor. 13. 5.
day; he has the visits of his presence, Mat. 18. 20. He has the visits of
his grace, Rev. 1. 10. He has the visits of his sweet and endearing love,
Cant. 2. 4. But to these trifling visitants, we may say, ad quid perditio haec?
And why is Mat. 26. 8.
this waste? Are there so many P^rentheses in a Sabbath, so many loose and
vacant hours, as that they must be spent in chat about worldly affairs, or
passing of complements upon friends? Are the duties of this day so few, that
impertinent visits must be called in to fill up the time? Surely such neither
understand the worth, nor the work of a Sabbath. This day is a golden spot
which admits of no wa^te, no o^er-flowing moments to spend upon idle visits. A
gracious soul can espy no vacation in this holy season; he could snaffle the
Sun on this day, and rein it in, and sadly complains, the day out-runs the
duty, and the Sabbath is done before his work is done. But these vain persons
stand idle Mat. 20. 3.
in the Market place, and every slight occasion can hire them. Thou visitest a
friend on the Sabbath; is there a better friend then Christ to visit, and to
spend thy time with on his own blessed day? Thou visitest a customer, or one
Talis est conditio omnium sine vocatione dei, sunt otiosi, nec sibi, nec aliis,
sum utiles. Par.
with whom thou have some business; is not soul trade the best traffic, and is
it not the best industry and care to lay up treasures in heaven? Art thou not
more engaged to enquire after salvation, then to speak with a friend upon
worldly affairs? Did God ever give thee a day for eternity, to run a
considerable part of it out in frothy discourses, foolish caresses, or trifling
visits? Thy soul is thy business on Gods holy day, and heaven is the place of
thy visits. Let us consider the Sabbath continues no longer to us, then we are
employed in the services of it: And if we think it so long that we can spare
part of it for fruitless visits, what do we do but draw up an impeachment
against divine wisdom, which appointed an whole day for man's converse with
himself? But let such take heed, least their impertinent visits be not
over-taken with unexpected and destructive visitations of wrath and
displeasure. Isa 10. 3. Jer. 10. 15.


Some trifle away their Sabbath in recreative walks.

First, The fields must either be their way to a Sermon: Or

Secondly, They must be their pastime instead of a Sermon: Or

Thirdly They must be their recreation after a Sermon; they must take the fresh
air, and they can spare no other time for it.

first of these defraud their souls, viz. Those who must have a walk to a
Sermon, they put a cheat upon themselves, they pretend they only go a Sabbath
Acts 1. 12. Conscientia est judex incorruptus, et adversus impium exurgit,
clamat, exclamat, occusat, et judicat, et quasi ante oculos pingit peccatorum
turpitudinem. Chrysostom.
days journey, and it is to hear a Sermon, they do not neglect the bread of
life, they only go a little further to fetch it. But an all-seeing eye sees all
the disguise, and a just hand will tear thy Apron of fig leaves, Genesis 3. 7. Nay
conscience can tell thee it is not the Ordinance, but the walk draws thee to
that distance; thou may hear Sermons nearer home, and most probably thy own
Pastor; it is not the delight of the Sanctuary, but the pleasure of the fields
is thy attractive; thou walk to please thy curious eye, and not to advantage
thy precious soul. These are carnal Gospellers, or as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God.

second factors for sensual delight, who must have a walk instead of a Sermon,
These debauch their souls. Qui amant corporis voluptares non possunt offici
deo, et rebus divinis; voluptates spirituales erigunt animum ad caelestia, sed
carnales, et mundanae animum deprimunt et effaeminant. Theoph.
It is strange Merchandise to exchange an Ordinance for a walk, a sensual
delight, for a spiritual advantage; this is to put a low rate upon the soul;
these out-vy Esau, who sold his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage: he only sold
a temporal good, and in case of necessity; but these sell a spiritual good, an
opportunity of life and grace, when there is no necessity. Surely these never
tasted the sweets of an Ordinance, nor ever knew what it was to converse with
God on the Mount, or to meet with Christ in his banqueting house. Children
indeed throw away Gold, and cry after a toy and a trifle; and these more
childish throw away the word, which is better then fine gold, Psalm. 19. 10. Can
an opportunity of grace be compensated with a little voluptuous laziness, the
Isa. 47. 8.
gratifying of wanton sense, or the reaches of a vagrant heart? Tit. 3. 3.
Theophylact says expressly, That those who love outward pleasure, they can
never be affected with God, or the things of God, for sensual pleasures depress
and keep down the soul, and habituates it to softness and effeminacy. Thou who
vendest a Magna corporis cura, est magna virtutis incuria.
soul opportunity for a little pleasure, should consider the importance of
it; it cost more, even the precious blood of Jesus Christ; and while thou art
sporting and idling in the fields, God might have been speaking to thy soul.
Augustine was converted by a Sermon of holy Ambrose. Peter Martyr was brought
home to God by a passage of a Sermon.

a walk after Sermon, these impoverish their souls. Are there not family
prayers to procure blessings, family repetitions to digest the word, family
duties to warm the heart on a Sabbath day? Public Ordinances are too often as
land-floods to the soul, which will quickly disappear, unless the waters of
life sink in gradually by private repetition and meditation: Serious
consideration and fervent prayer at home, work into the heart those truths and
doctrines we heard abroad. These ill husbands for their better part, too
frequently drop in the fields, what they have picked up in the Sanctuary, and
the air is more fresh Absit ut dejicerem animum nobilem, et illum corpori
mancipium facerem.
then their memory. These field-walkers, how do they sink below some heathens.
It was the saying of a noble heathen, Far be it from me, that I should make my
noble mind a slave to my body. If we will have our pleasures on the Lords day,
let us meet with Christ in his Garden, Cant. 5. 1. let us gather fruits in his
Orchard of Pomgranates, Cant. 4. 13. Let us lie down by the fountain of
Gardens, Cant. 4. 15. Let us stay our selves with his Apples and Flagons, Cant.
2. 5. and sit down with our beloved in his banqueting house, Cant. 2. 4. And
then travel over the mountains of spices, Cant. 8. 14. Christ indeed is the
Paradise of pleasure; he can ravish us with one of his eyes, Cant. 4. 9. and
make us drink of the cup of Salvation. Divine pleasures become the Sabbath; not
the titillations of sense, but the refreshings of the soul. Let those then who
waste the Sabbath in taking the air, take Joh. 6. 58. Isa. 25. 8. Ephesians. 2. 2.
heed least they meet with the Prince of the air, considering these unnecessary
walks contain more temptation then recreation in them; they are Satan's refined
and plausible bate, to cause the incautelous Christian to let fall, and so lose
his spiritual morsels: we know it is his grand artifice to steal away the seed
of the word, Mat. 13. 19. and pleasing recreations give him the best aim.

Let us take heed of the sin of unbelief. The believer only sanctifies the
Sabbath; they truly keep it, who themselves are kept in their most holy faitb,
Jude v. 20. Every duty of a Mark 11. 24. Jam. 1. 6.
Sabbath requires faith; If we hear, we must mingle the word with faith, Heb.
4. 2. If we pray, it must be believing, Creed et manducasti, creed et bibisti.
Aug.
Mat. 21. 22. It is faith makes our prayers effectual. If we receive, we must
come to the Sacrament with faith. Augustine says, Believe and thou have eaten,
believe and thou have drunken. Faith is the chief guest at Christ's table. If we
meditate, faith sweetens that duty, and makes it lushious, not tedious, Psalm.
119. 97. Observe, Thy Law, etc. It was Heb. 11. 6.
the Law of his God, and that sweetened his meditation on it. If we read the
Scriptures, it is faith must make that duty effectual; without faith, the Word
is only a ^iddle, the Acts ^. 3^. (...) Christi.
puzzle, not the profit of a Christian; Faith then puts life into every duty,
and makes it both vigorous and vi^^^: Bu^ unbelief is a sin, which like the
C^terpillar eats up al^ (...) fruit of a Sabbath, and turns its Sun into
d^rkness.

Unbelief invalida^es our approaches to God, Heb. 11. 6. (...).
In vain the knee bows, unless the heart believes; in v^^^ we lift up the
hands of flesh, unless we lay hold on God by (...); s^d infid^^itas a ^h^isto
plane a^ (...) illius spiritu nos priv^t. et Satanae insidiis nos expositos
reddit. Lys.
the hands of faith: We must bring faith to make our way acceptable to the
Almighty. In the forcecited Text, Heb. 11. 6. the Apostle does not say, without
faith it is improbable, but it is impossible to please God. Without faith all
duties are acted in the dark, there must be an eye of faith to see our way to
God in Christ.

Unbelief prevents the work of Christ upon the heart, Mat. 13. 56. It
unqualifies us for spiritual successes: this sin is so great, it can cast
Christ into an admiration, Mark 6. 6. What great things might Ordinances work
upon the soul, if the heart was not barred up by unbelief? It was this sin
which unchurched the poor nation of the Jews, Romans 11. 20. It may be the
Epitaph of that ancient people of God, Here lies a people cast off by God,
because of unbelief.

Unbelief shuts up the gate of mercy, Heb. 3. 19. Faith melts the cloud of
Ordinances into a fruitful shower; unbelief makes ordinances a dark appearance
only, and turns Heb. 4. 6.
them into stones of emptiness, Isa. 34. 11. An Ordinance to an unbeliever is a
dead Child, the spirit of God does not breath in it: And therefore on a
Sabbath, above all thy gettings, get faith.

Unbelief it puts a defilement upon the sweetest Ordinances: They are as a
Jewel in a dead man's hand. The prayers of an unbeliever are an abomination to
the Lord. The Apostle Prove. 4 7.
says, Tit. 1. 15. To them who are unbelieving every Omnia opera infidel^um
sunt noxia, et pecc^t^.
thing is defiled. Unbelief damps the pearl of Ordinances, puts a flaw upon it.
The Schoolmen say, All the works of unbelievers are sins, and so then are all
his services; and they accommodate themselves to that of the Apostle, Romans
Gregor. Arim. Capriolus, C^tharinus, etc.
14. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: Unbelief blasts the sweetest duty,
as lightning does the fairest face. The Lord says to the unbeliever, What have
thou to do to take my word into thy mouth, Psalm. 50. 16. Why do I pray, if I do
not believe returns? What do I hear, if I do not believe doctrines? What do I
receive, if I do not believe Christ in the Sacrament? Ordinances to an
unbeliever, they are not dews Romans 1. 16.
but dreams, not Gods power, but Man's fancy; and Sermons are only the Romances
of the Pulpit. The Apostle, Heb. 11. per totum tells us of many Miracles of
faith, and unbelief Heb. 11. 11, 29, 30, 33, 34. Exodus 4. 3.
can work on, it can turn all our rods into Serpents, it can work the same
wonder Christ wrought on the barren figtree, Mark 11. 21. It can curse with a
perpetual blast. Augustine used to dispute from, John 3. 19. That unbelief was
the only damning sin. This sin, like popish Rome, is the Mother of Harlots,
Rev. 17. 5. And therefore against this sin, we must Ex hoc textu Augustinus
solebat disputare, solam infidelitatem esse peccatum damnans. Chemn.
be cautionated especially on the Lords day, which is faiths working day. It is
observable, that miracles are attributed to no other grace, but faith, Mat. 17.
20. This grace can remove mountanes, Luke 17. 6. Bring faith to an Ordinance,
it can remove the mountane of carnal reason, the mountane of prejudice, the
mountane of fleshly mindedness. A Believer at an Ordinance disputes it not with
God, is not disaffected with any thing of God, is dissolved into the will of
God; he puts up his prayers, as a wise Merchant, waiting a seasonable return,
Psalm. 85. 8. Hab. 2. 1. He hears Omnibus Evangelium praedicatur, sed non
omnibus creditur; omnibus deus salutem offert, sed non consert nisi fidelibus,
sicut medicina omnibus aegris pro ponitur, sed non medetur, nisi eam
sumentibus. Chrysostom.
the word, and he claps it close to his soul by personal application. Unbelief
throws away the plaster, but faith lays it on the wound. Faith is both the
mouth to receive in, and the stomach to digest spiritual food. The word
strikes boldly, and works miraculously under the banner of faith, Romans 1.
16. 1. Cor. 1. 21. 2 Timothy 3. 15. But there is a blindness in unbelief, which
cannot see the beauties of an Ordinance, and how lovely Christ looks in it.
Faith has an eye to see the excellency, and an ear to hear the melody of an
Ordinance, and to attend to Christ speaking loves to his beloved. Faith in the
threatenings of the word causes humiliation; Faith in the precepts of the word
causes subjection; Faith in the promises of the word springs consolation.
The unbeliever like a man in a swoon, shuts his mouth against the cordials of
the Gospel. Other sins indeed wound the soul, but unbelief, like Joab, strikes
under the fifth rib, and kills outright. This sin spoils all, sowres all,
disanuls all, 1 Pet. 2. 8. The word to an unbeliever is like rain upon the
Rock, like dew upon a barren Heath; The Apostles advice Heb. 11. 4. Ephesians. 3 12.
is sweet and sacred, Heb. 10. 22. If we will draw nigh to God with acceptance,
we must do it with affiance. Faith is an instrument which justifies both our
persons and performances. Of all Virgin Graces Faith is the Hester that God
will set the Crown upon. Let our design then be on a Sabbath, to avoid the rock
of unbelief, and get that indispensable and inestimable grace of faith. Let us
be earnest for the spirit to plant it, and let us attend seriously on the word
Luke 11. 13. Romans 10. 17.
to water it, that this blessed grace by a divine Chemistry, may turn the metal
of every Ordinance into gold.

Let us take heed of undervaluing the Ordinances of a Sabbath. Many make a bad
market of a Sabbath day, because they do not prize those things which are then
set to sale: They speak in the language mentioned by Job, Job 21. 15. What is
the Almighty, that we should serve him, and what profit shall we have, if we
pray unto him? And take up the peevish expostulation of the froward Jews,
mentioned by the Prophet, Mal. 3. 14. Ye have said, it is in vain to serve God,
and what profit is it, that we have kept his Ordinance? Slighted meals may
cloy, but not strengthen, they may be our surfeit, not our satisfaction.
Customary approaches will meet with dead Ordinances. It is the humble soul, who
highly prizes the opportunities of life, will be the thriving soul. David
prized the sanctuary, and he saw God there, Psalm. 63. 2. But indeed ignorance
is the cause of our disesteem; we do not value Sabbath love, because we do not
understand it; we slight the Ordinances of grace, because we know not the grace
which is conveyed from the Ordinances. Ignorant Children throw away Pearls; a
Lapidary would Canales gratiae a quibus aqua viventes affluenter diffim. duntur.
not do so. The Ordinances, they are the channels cut out by Christ, through
which the waters of life run to the soul, they are the spiritual Alymbecks to
drop the sweet stillings of grace upon the heart, they are the hives of that
which is sweeter then the honey and the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. They are the
Conduits which run with Wine on Christ's resurrection day, our blessed Sabbath.
These Ordinances, which many foolishly despise, but as God says, to their own
hurt, Jer. Genesis 41. 48.
7. 6. They are the Suhurbs of heaven, the Coelestical Exchange where Christ
and his people barter for spiritual commodities; they are Christ's Granary, and
storehouses to find the soul with bread. In these golden seasons God
exchangeth mercies for duties, (not as if our duties deserved mercy, but out of
his own free grace) and shortly will exchange glory for grace, Exodus 29. 43,
45. If Paul can come in the fullness Externis institutionibus utimur, tanquam
adminiculis ad veram conte^plationem, divi^^ Majestatis ^^ gloriae, ejusdemque
erga populum su^^ (...). Riv.
of the Gospel, Romans 15. 29. how much more our dear Jesus in his blessed
Ordinances? These are the Chariots to bring believers down into Goshen, a place
of light and pleasantness. Every holy day is a Sun beam which conveighs light
and heat to the inward man. Ordinances are those crystal glasses, wherein the
soul sees its beloved. Those divine graces which are for meat to satisfy, and
for medicine to heal, are found only growing on the banks near the waters of
the Sanctuary. Gods tabernacles are amiable, Psalm. 84. 1. And who will nauseate
beauties, the captivations of sense? In the Sanctuary there is strength and
beauty, Psalm. 2 Cor. 3. 1^.
96. 6. Christ is never more beautiful in the eye of the believer, Cant. 1.
14. Isa. 33. 17. Psalm. ^0. 17. Psalm ^^. 2. John 5. ^. John 9. 7.
then when sitting at his table, Cant. 1. 12. Or walking among his
Candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1. David desired to see the beauty of the Lord in his
holy Temple, Psalm. 27. 4. It must needs be Satan's artifice to beat down the
price of Ordinances: How many Criples have been healed in this Bethesda? How
many defiled souls have been washed in this Isa 53. 2.
Siloam? Thou who undervaluest Ordinances, look again, and see whether there be
no form, nor comeliness in them; cast thy eye upon the Author of them, the
Author and giver of them is God, they are his Institutions; He has appointed
Jer. 3. 15.
Prayer a means to prevail with himself for m^rcies and blessings, He has
commanded our attendance upon the word, (...)*
that the day spring from on high may visit us, and the Net being spread our
souls may be taken by the hand of Christ. God owns and he crowns Sabbath
Ordinances.

the nature of them; they are the sweet intercourses between God and the Soul,
the seasons of Per spiritum sanctum clamamus non voce, sed filiali et fiduciali
affectu, Abba Pater, prae dulcedine and teneritudine amoris, quasi teneri
insantes; qui charissimum parentem, etc. Alap.
our spiritual communion: In Prayer; we cry as Children to the Father: In
hearing, we receive messages from our Father, which relate to our inward man.
In our Prayer God opens his hand, in our hearing God opens his heart, Acts 20.
27. In Prayer we enjoy his bounty God gives us, even to his own spirit, Luke
11. 13. In Hearing we are admitted even to the Counsels of God, in that
forementioned text, Acts 20. 27. In a Sacrament, our dainties are the body and
blood of Christ, and he refreshes us, not from his Cellars, but from his
Wounds.

the effects of Ordinances: what wonders has that one duty of Prayer wrought?

1. It is able to overthow enemies, Isa. 37. 36. Vtpote pueri balbutiantes
blandula, and iterata vocula compellare solent, Pater, Pater; sic and
credentes, etc.


2. It is able to divert Judgments, Plagues, Pestilence, Famine, Sword, 1
Kings 8. 57.

3. It is able to bring down mercies. It is the key of Heaven, Jam. 5. 15. It
is the most efficacious engine in the world; it can open the doors of the
prison, nay, it can open the door of the womb, Acts 12. 7. 1 Samuel 1. 10, 20.

4. It is the sum of all wisdom, strength and policy.

5. It prevails against God himself, Genesis 32. 26. Hos. 12. 4. Exodus 32. 11.
Isa. 45. 11.

6. It can work Miracles; so Joshua by Prayer caused the Sun to stand still in
Gibeon, Josh. 10. 12. What amazing productions has this one Ordinance caused?
May we not then say of those who undervalue Ordinances, O foolish pieces of
frenzy and ignorance, who has bewitched you, Gal. 3. 1.
that you should trample upon Pearls, walk upon Amber, and neglect so great
salvation? Heb. 2. 3.

the tendency of Ordinances: these stars lead us to Christ. They are the womb
of grace, Romans 10. 17. And grace is the heir of Glory, Ephesians. 1. 14. When we Mat.
2. 9.
converse with God in Ordinances, we turn our faces Sionward, Isa. 51. 11.
and we are traveling home. The blessed Ordinances Isa. 35. 10.
are our fresh gales to carry us to our harbor of Rest; they are the birth
places of the Saints, the ready way to the new Jerusalem; therefore whoever
thou art, who call prayer a vain breath, hearing a dry attendance,
Sacraments empty meals; retrench thy error, and let the love of Christ
constrain thee to better thoughts of these blessed Seasons.

And let not a word be unseasonable, to show thee the cause, and cure of this
jejune apprehension of divine Ordinances.

modern Ehionites, who have so low thoughts of Christ's institutions, they are
henighted with ignorance, they Ebion sumpsit nomen suum ab (...) pauper, and
indigus, quia misellam de Christo habuit opinionem.
do not know there is a God in Ordinances, that they are animated by a divine
spirit. Who opened Lydia's heart in hearing? Who pricked the heart of the
Jews, Act. 2. 37. in the same Ordinance? Who showred down the Spirit, when the
Assembly met for Gospel dispensations, Acts 10. 44. when God rained heaven out
of heaven? Indeed, Ordinances are the sphere, where the Sun of Righteousness
Mal. 4. 2.
turns, the waters where the Angel moves, John 5. 4. And if the Angel move, the
waters heal: but these inapprehensive sinners, like Balaam, see not the Angel,
Numb. 22. 23.

They are prejudiced by inexperience: they cannot say with David, Psalm 66. 16.
Come, and I will tell you what God has done for my soul. Paul's Companions did
not see Jesus Christ, they only heard a confused noise, Acts 9. 7. These
unhappy sinners never tasted how good and gracious the Mat. 11. 23.
Lord is in a sweet Ordinance, they never felt the power of a truth, they were
never enriched with the flush returns of Psalm 34. 8.
Prayer: A Promise well pressed home and applied, never reverberated Acts 2. 37.
upon their souls with influential joy; they never Psalm 85. 8.
had their hearts raised to Heaven in Gospel Revelation, and 2 Pet. 1. 4.
in the glorious discoveries of divine Love. Blind men admire Nos transeramus
affectus, ad coelestem illam vitam, and oremus dominum, ut panem qui d^^cae lo
descendit, l^rgia^^.
not the Sun. The Indians more prize a log, a gewgaw, or a piece of brass,
then Gold, Gemms, or Spices. To them who have tasted Christ, he is precious:
The converted soul says of Ordinances, Lord, evermore give us this bread. Such
cry out, O sweet Sacraments, those divine festivals! O fructiferous Prayer* But
now to cure this sinful and destructive mistake, and to raise the price and
esteem of Ordinances, John 6. 34.


Look on them as the means of Grace. The Sun shines through the air, and Christ
works by Ordinances: Preaching is not the breath of man, but the power of God
to salvation, Romans 1. 16. The Word is that immortal seed, which is able to save
our souls, 1 Pet. 1. 23. These Oracles delivered in Romans 3* 2.
Preaching, are able to make us wise to eternal salvation. It is the power of
Ordinances raises us from the grave of sin, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
plants in us the flowers of grace, causes the day to dawn in 2 Pet. 1. 19.
our souls: If ever thou come to heaven, the wind of the Spirit, John 3. 8.
filling the sails of Ordinances, will carry thee thither.

Look on them as the resemblances of glory. Sitting at a Sacrament resembles
our eating and drinking with Christ at his table in his Kingdom, Luke 22. 30.
the Communion Cant. 1. 12.
resembles the fruition. Let us then prize Ordinances, which Matthew. 11. 23.
are the twilight, and dawning of Glory.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Lords day is a day of Rest, but not of Idleness.
LEt us take heed least we interpret, the day which God calls a day of Rest, to
be a day of Idleness. God gives us relaxation Exodus 31. 15.
on his own day, but it is not, either for sport or sleep, but for duties, not
for pastime, but for prayer. Our ground Quies non fuit ignavum otium, ut
Christiani nihil agerent, sed ut divina curarent non sua. Riv.
lies fallow sometimes, that we may plow it, and sow it to the better
advantage. Rest is given us, because the body and the soul cannot both well be
employed together, earth and heaven cannot both be minded together: Now this
divine indulgence must be a spur to holy duties, and not our leave to play with
lying vanities. The Sabbath is a holy leisure, our spiritual vacation, to
attend on the affairs of our precious souls; Sabbatum est sabbatum cessationis,
requies sancta and sanctificata.
it is our happy Champion, upon which we run the Race which is set before us.
Mr. Bernard of Batcombe observes, that Sabbath includes Rest in its very name,
and in the holy tongue signifies no more but rest and cessation, but this rest
must be a holy rest, Exodus 31. 15. A rest to the Lord, Exodus 16. 23, 25. set
apart, and separated to the service of God, as a sanctified Septimodie
quisecas, eum vero diem, non tibi, sed domino sanctifices. Muscul.
day of Rest, Isa. 58. 13. Musculus takes notice, This day is not to be kept to
our selves, but to the Lord; not to please the flesh, but to serve the soul.
This day is consecrated time, and therefore not to be employed to sinful or
secular uses. Ease and idleness are the locust and the Palmer worm, which cat
up the pleasant fruits of Gods holy Sabbath. Have thou nothing to do on a
Sabbath, when thou have a soul to save, Ignave sabbatum servare, sabbatum est
houm, and asi no^um.
an account to give, and a heaven to get? So the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Bodily labor profits little; so on a Sabbath, bodily ease profits as
little. It is a worthy speech of learned Andrews, To keep a Sabbath in an idle
manner is the Sabbath of beasts, not Men, of Oxen and Asses, not of
Sanctificare sabbatum, est illius otium habere religiosum sanctum, and sa cris
exercitiis deputatum.
Christians and Saints; a Sabbath suitable to Nebuchadnezzar, when he kept his
belluine Court in the Field, and the bruit beasts were the Princes of his
train, Dan. 4. 33. It is the observation of a learned man, It is not said in
the 4th. Commandment, remember to keep the Sabbath, but, remember to keep holy
the Sabbath day. Now to keep holy the Sabbath, is to dedicate its rest to holy,
pious, and sacred exercises: Postulandum est secessum, ut melius intendamus, et
toto hoc die deo vacondum est.
the Sabbath is the souls recesse, its holy retirement for service, its pause
from the things of the world, and from the noise of earthly affairs, that the
Saint may hear what the Lord will say, for he will speak peace to his people,
Psalm 85. 8. It is a seasonable calm, that we row to shore without danger or
disturbance. Indeed, as Bishop Andrews Andr. Sabbatum da tum est ad con
sideranda dei opera, et ad meditandum ex lege Dei. Aben. Ezra.
affirms, and that worthily: Such is the perverseness of man's nature, that when
God speaks rest, then we say, labor: and when he says labor, then we speak
rest: nay, we make it a policy to find labor on that day, which he has denied
us to labor in. But this is the perverseness of nature, not the office of
grace, Romans 8. 2.

There has been a general disgust in the World against idleness on the Sabbath
day. The Sanedrim among all varieties of men have voted it down: If we run back
to the earliest times, the Jews inform us, the Sabbath was given us to
contemplate on the works of God, and to meditate in his Law; so Aben Ezra, a
famous Rabby among them. Another of the same Nation and profession tells us,
That the Rabbi Kimchi, in Psalm 92.
Sabbath is more grateful to God, then any other day of the week, because then
Man diverts himself from the negotiations of the world, his abstracted mind is
conversant in the sacred Wisdom, and service of God: So Rabby Kimchi. And it
is most certain, that Gods blessed day was never instituted for mere cessation,
that man might sit down and rest himself, and so take his ease, but that we
should meet for holy Eusebius. de praep. Evang. cap. 2. lib. 8. Ex Phil.
worship, and congregate for exercises of Piety. Philo the Jew is most copious,
in recording the savoury behaviors of the Jews on the Sabbath, which Eusebius
industriously takes notice of, and does likewise observe the great advantages
Notabilis errer est, putare otii ergo sabbatum esse institutum.
which that Nation gained, by their careful and strict observation of the
Sabbath, though afterward unhappily they were too remiss in this kind, and
gave occasion to the rebukes and scorn of many Writers in those times; And
indeed, when they fell short in Sabbath observations, the crown of their glory
was fallen. Mannasseh Conciliator, in some heat cries out, It is a notable
error, to conceive that the Sabbath was ordained for carnal ease; That this
should be the ultimate end of that consecrated day, to lie on a Pillow, or sit
on a Couch, to ease a lump of flesh, And the Jerusalem Talmud, that sacrary of
Jewish learning and Talm Hierosolym.
knowledge, positively affirms, that the Sabbath was given to the people of
Israel, only to meditate on the holy and blessed Law of God. Thus we may see,
that the Jews sacred Code finds employment to take up our Sabbath, and not to
waste it in sloth and idleness. Si otium sanctificas, tum negotium contaminat,
sed datur otium ad cognoscendum deum, Quia cognitio dei est magis necessaria,
quam otium.


And if we cast our eye on the golden times of the Gospel, the Primitive
Fathers with much zeal declamed against sluggish Sabbaths. Athanasius makes the
knowledge of God to be the chief end of the Sabbath, and gives us this reason,
Because knowledge is more necessary then rest. When God imposed rest upon us in
the fourth Commandment, at the same time he commanded religious actions, for
rest must be given to some end or purpose; God and nature does nothing in vain,
as Aristotle observes. And to what end should holy Ath^nas. de Sab.
rest be given, but to holy uses? that man being freed from worldly cares, he
might apply himself wholly to the contemplation of God and his word, and that
the soul might leisurely converse with its beloved. It is an excellent
Paraphrase Aristot de coelo. l. 1. c. 4
of Cyrill, one of the glittering lights of the Primitive Church (those stars
which seem so little, because they are so remote from us) To hallow the
Sabbath, says he, is to Cyril in 8. ^. cap. Amos.
make the rest of it devout, holy, and employed to Godly exercises, whereby the
mind may be instructed, exercised, and grounded in things pertaining to
godliness; and to the same purpose Gaudentius Brixianus. Ignatius that blessed
Martyr, who led the Van of all the Societies of the Fathers, and lived thirty
years with the Apostle St. John, he thus sharply argues in his Epistle to the
Citizens of Magnesia, Let us not Sabbatize after the Jewish manner, as
rejoicing in idleness, (...), etc. Ignat ad Magn.
but let us keep Sabbaths spiritually, rejoicing in the meditation of the Law,
not in the remission of the Body, admiring the workmaniship of God, not
drinking things lukewarm, nor walking measured paces, not rejoicing in
dances, etc. And Chrysostom urges with much holy fervency, That on the Sabbath
we should lay aside all the affairs of this life, and withdraw our selves from
them, and spend all the leisure of the Sabbath in things spiritual and divine,
which concern our souls. This eminent Person makes a difference between sloth
and rest; the one concerns the body, the other the soul; (...). Chrysostom. Tom 5
p 225.
and he clearly states the Question, that the Sabbath was never given us to
please a piece of clay, but to serve the interest of that piece of eternity,
which every one of us carry in our own bosoms. And on this manner Augustine
courts his Auditors, We must know, dearly beloved, That it is therefore August.
appointed of our holy Fathers, and commanded to us Christians, that upon the
Lords day we should rest, that reposing (...). Council Load. Can 29.
from all worldly business, we might be more fresh and prompt for Gods divine
worship, and may with more ease attend upon the will and service of God. Nay, a
whole council, viz. of Laodicea, in the twenty ninth Canon has these words. It
does not become Christians to Judaize, and to be idle on the Sabbaths. This was
the spirit and temper of the Primitive times; they press that our Sabbaths
might be spiritualized, not that our work should wholly cease, but only should
be changed, that the labor of the hand should be turned into the working of
the heart, that manual operations should be turned into mental contemplations;
and on this day our work must not be servile, but seraphical; we must not throw
away the Pen, but we must write the fairer.

In the middle times of the Church, when such dark Thom. Aquin. 22dae quaest.
122. 4 3. 11. and 3 did. Art 15 Quest 1.
clouds had overspread it, that spiritual worship was as Saul among the
Prophets, rare to a Proverb; yet then the employing of the time of a Sabbath in
holy service, was accounted moral in the fourth Commandments; and scoffs were
bestowed freely by the writers of those times, on those who wasted the Sabbath
in plays or idleness. This bright Alex de Alens p. 3. quaest 32. Scol, l. 2 de
instit. qu 4. Artic. 4.
truth, like a star in the night, made its way to shine in the darkest times.
The fine spun disputes of the Schoolmen could not distinguish it away, but it
brake through all their curious webs. This truth was so fastened in the Church,
it could not be disputed out by the School. And let Semper eadem not only be
Queen Elizabeth's Motto, but the Sabbaths holy observation. In the dawning of
Reformation there was light enough to discover this truth, many eminent Divines
(those burning and shining lights, which blaze more because they are nearer to
us) give in their suffrage, for spending the Sabbath in holy exercises, sharply
decrying Hinc colligimus deum non de re nihili, aut fl^cci loqui, cum
sanctificationem Sabbati nobis commend^verit. Calv.
sluggishness and sloth on this blessed day. It is the grave observation of
incomparable Calvin, That God speaks not of a small matter when he commands the
sanctification of the Sabbath, but does exhort us to a diligent marking of it,
and our want of care to mark is a breach of this Commandment. This worthy man
could not imagine, that a Memento should Preface a day of sloth and idleness,
that we might take our carnal ease without such an alarm. To walk in the
fields, to sit idling at the door of our house, to chat in a room upon a
Sabbath, are no such importances, as to require such diligent attention or
exact observation, there is little holiness in any thing of this. A carnal man
may rest from labor, and never much mind or need a command. Nature will let us
to take our case without any special command from the God of nature. The great
Jehovah had never needed, in the midst of thundrings and lightnings with great
Exodus* 10. 18.
terror and Majesty, to give out a command for us to go to a Bench to sit on,
to a couch to talk on, or to a bed to lie on. A Schoolmaster need not make a
set speech, or tune his language to strains of Oratory, to persuade his
Scholars to go to play and be idle. Idleness needs no great enforcements, wants
no arguments of reason, nor paintings of Rhetoric; we can prate of worldly
affairs, and take our pleasing pastimes without any attractive engine. Zanchy
speaks very pregnantly to this purpose, I call, says he, this days rest
Zanch. de oper. creat. p. 3. l. 1. c. 1.
divine and holy, because as God is never idle, so he would have us take rest
in soul and conscience after that manner, that yet notwithstanding we be
always employed in those things which are of Gods spirit, and which appertain
to the glory of God, and to the good both of our selves and others. The cause
of commanding rest upon the Sabbath, was not for rest sake, and that man might
be idle, but that he might altogether spend that whole day in divine worship.
Thus this Reverend Person Sed ut toto illo die possint vacare cultui divino.
Zanc. in quartum praecept.
rightly state^ the Question, and truly asserts, that as rest is included in
the Commandment, so holy and spiritual worship is the end of that rest. God
calls us off from Earth to mind Heaven; and the body must have a vacation, that
the soul may have a Term; the body must decrease, that the soul may increase.
Corporal rest is only the means, by Non igitur cum Ethnicis sentiendum, festos
dtes tantum quiet^s, and remissionis causa suscipi: quorum finis ^sset
reco^datio beneficiorum dei in convocatione sancta, etc.
which we may pursue our eternal rest. This, learned Rivet looks upon it as a
brutish and heathenish Opinion, to think that God should give us a holy day for
sloth and remisness; and he positively tells us, That the end of the Sabbath
must be the recordation of divine benefits, and to refresh our memories with
most grateful rehearsals of Gods bounty, and to put up prayers for future
grace, for the leisure of Saints must not be fruitless. The echo of this
golden sentence is true and sweet. A godly man's leisure must not run waste;
When the world gives him a short quietus est, he must rest in God; His spare
hours from his outward affairs, must be his serious hours for his soul. The
Saints have always work to do on this side eternity, but especially on that
day when rest is commanded us to look after eternity. Hospinian here accents
Finis tertius est Sabbati, ejusque otii, and ille est subli^^or: Vt vir
spiritua^is ad aeternam sui salute^ propior accedat, ut vitae sanctae ^ffici^^
occupetur, and operum sui ante-actorum recordatiom sese applicet, etc. Hosp.
Dicitur Sabbatum Domini, et Sabbatum sanctit^t^s, et sanct^tas Domini, quia non
modo dei sancti est, sed et sanctum e^, et rebus domini public, et privatim
dicatum, et impendendum est, etc. Leid. Prof.
this truth most sweetly; There is, says he, a sublime end of the Sabbaths
leisure, viz. That we might get nearer to eternal salvation, that we may follow
the duties of an holy life, that we may remember our former actions, and so
dren^h our selves in tears of repentance; and this says he, the very Jews can
not deny. Our Sabbaths, according to this worthy man, are only post days for
heaven, opportunities for grace, which is the morning star of glory, and the
dawning of blessedness. Nay let us hear a Quaternion of Divines, the
Professors of Leyden; Cessation of work, say they, is commanded, not that we
should only enjoy corporal idleness, but fall upon spiritual business, holy
duties and exercises. It is not called the Sabbath of man, but the Sabbath of
the Lord; not only because God is the Author of it, but likewise, because it is
to be dedicated to, and spent in the things of the Lord, both publicly and
privately, and is to be directed to the sanctification of his name. These
Champions of truth direct us to the proper end of the Sabbath, which is not to
waste, but to work, not to consult our ease, but to consult our souls. Our
temporal affairs must be suspended, that our better affairs may be minded. The
poor soul should have been wh^lly neglected, had not the God of it appointed
one day in the week for its service and salvation.

This truth is so apparent, that our very adversaries join issue in the
attestation of it. Mr. B^erewood, who wrote so zealously for sports on the
Sabbath, yet in his second Tract, page 15. acknowledges, That the Commandment
for the Sabbath enjoynes,

1. The outward worship of God. Manifestum est non mo^o legis hujus judicio,
sed ips^^sima expe^i^nt^^, non facere ad v^^ae religionis profectum, siotia
multiplicentur. Musc.


2. Cessation from works, as ^ necessary preparation for that worship; that as
the end, and this as the means. So then, by his confession, to holy rest we
must join holy work: And experience tells us, says Musculus, that too much
leisure never makes for the increase of Religion, no more then the Countryman
gains by his fallow ground.

Nay the very Heathens themselves laughed at idleness upon the Sabbath: And
Seneca derided the custom of the Jews upon their Sabbath, because they spent it
in things vain and impertinent, and not in the worship of God; and said, The
Seneca derisit Sabbatum Judaeorum, quia non vacabant divinis, sed rugis, et
inutilibus. Aquin.
Jews threw away the seventh part of their lives. And surely that sin must be
grievous, which becomes the scom and derision of an Heathen; that crime must
needs be great, which lies open to the discoveries of Natures light.

But the Scriptures, which are the most authentic testimony in this case, will
bring in most ample witness; they will find us employments for the Sabbath.

1. If we look into the Old Testament, we shall find the sacrifices to be
double on the Sabbath day. Two Lambs of Number. 28. 9, 10
the first year without spot, and two tenth deals of flower, with a meat
offering mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof; this is the burnt
offering of every Sabbath, besides the continual burnt offering, and the drink
offering, Numb. 28. 9, 10. There must, ye see, be an overplus of sacrifice on
the Luke 23. 3.
Sabbath; then our worship must be in the full, and not in the waine, in the
strongest tide, not at low water: Likewise Convocatiosancta fuit tot^us populi
ad opera sacra, et divina.
on the Sabbath there was to be an holy Convocation; and surely the Jews did
not meet solemnly to look one upon another. Their meeting in the Temple or the
Synagogues spoke worship, something of Service Divine. Likewise on the Sabbath
there was the reading of the Law, Gods will was then opened to the people,
Nehem. 8. 8. The Sabbath was not a day of sloth but instruction, it was not a
day to be in (...) Cantica singu laria Sabbato unoquoque occinenda erant. Leid.
Prof.
the rubbish of ease, but to be built up in the most holy faith. And on the
Sabbath there were certain solemn songs chanted forth to the praise of the
Creator; and therefore the ninety second Psalm is inscribed, a Psalm for the
Sabbath. And there was likewise reasonings and discourses of Divine things, as
we have hinted, Acts 17. 2. There were exhortations given to the people for
their furtherance of faith and godliness, Acts 15. 21. Moses was preached every
Sabbath day, as the Apostle James speaks in the forecited place. So then, the
Sabbath wanted not its employment in the times of the Law.

Nor did the Lords day run waste in the times of the Gospel; then the Disciples
met together, the Sacrament was administered, the Gospel was preached, Acts 20.
7. And charity was collected, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Which duties unquestionably
wanted not the concomitancy of fervent prayers and supplications; so then there
was an aggregation of holy and solemn services. Holy duties were not as a
single star, but as Isa. 65. 8.
a constellation, and in that cluster there was a blessing. So Old and New
Testament are a twofold witness, to condemn Mat. 18. 16.
sloth and idleness upon Gods blessed day: And by the mouth of two witnesses,
especially if infallible, every thing shall be established.

And indeed idleness on any day carries its brand in its Milites otio si
incipient luxu diffluere, murmurare, pecuniam inclamare, Ordinem omnem turbare,
a^ tandem rebellare. Alap.
forehead: Idle Soldiers will easily turn mutinous. Idle Scholars will easily
degenerate into sin and ignorance: and idle Tradesmen will easily sink into
want and poverty. Abundance of idleness was one of the sins of Sodom, the worst
of places, Ezekiel. 16. 49. It is the sink of sin, the Common shore of evil, it is
the rust of the soul, which eats out its noble faculties. Themistocles used to
say, It was burying men alive. And idle persons, like wanton widows (to use the
Apostles phrase) are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5. 5. And Ephr. Sir. de
consummat. seculi.
the Apostle makes idleness the source of many other sins, 1 Timothy 5. 13. It was
once the saying of Ephrem Syras, Do not fly labor, least the Crown fly from
thee. Idleness is every way sinful.

It is opposite to man's condition. He was born to labor, Genesis 3. 19. Dew is
not more natural to the surface of the Homo natus est ad laberem, sicut avis ad
volatum.
Earth, then sweat is to the brow of man. Toil and labor is man's Scutchion,
and the first Arms he gives. The bird does not fly more naturally, then man
should toil. Man in his innocence was to dress the Garden, ever since the fall
he is to dig it.

All creatures read a Lecture against idleness. The Sun is swift in its travel,
the stars speedy in their motion, the fire flies upward, not a little spark but
is upon its flight. The beasts of the field do our work, carry our burdens,
they are active for the service of man. The wiseman sends us to the Ant and
the Pismire to learn industry, Prove. 6. 6. Prove. 30. 25. These little creatures
are the confutation of sloth and idleness.

Idleness will much inhance and imbitter our account. God has not endowed the
soul with quick and sparkling faculties, and the body with strength and
potency, and all in vain. Qui nobis vires idoneas ad laborandum suppeditavit,
ille in die judicii parem quoque a nobis in laborando industriam reposcet, Bas.
Basil positively determines, He who has given us apt and fit strength, in the
judgment day will expect an account of a suitable industry. There is strength
for labor, and there must be sweat in labor.

Idleness is the Nurse and Pander of corruption. Augustine observes, that Rome
decayed and fell after Carthage was conquered, because it wanted a Competitor
to find it employment. Chrysostom asked the Question, What advantage does the
ship bring which lies upon the shore, or the sword which hangs up and rusts in
the hall? etc. When David rose Chrysostom. hom. 35. in Acta Apostol
from his slothful bed, then his corruption caught fire, which turned into such
a flame, that it scorched both himself and 2 Samuel 11. 2.
his family.

But idleness on a Sabbath day lies under greater aggravations; It is not the
spawn, but the Serpent; it is not the Cockatrice egg, but the Cockatrice. Let
us trace it a little.

Idleness on Gods day is a dishonor to the Author of it. What honor can
accrue to God by an idle and lazy rest? Is the Minister graced by sleepy
Auditors? It is the weeping eye, the bended knee, the praising tongue, the
working heart brings honor to the Almighty. Shall an oscitant and sleepy
worshipper pay the tribute of a dream? Shall the glory of God be promoted, by
frequenting the Wakes, walking the fields for recreation, frivolous
communication, or any other such method of idleness, on his own blessed day?
Surely the disciples of Bacchus can act as much solemnity to their jocular idol.

Idleness on the Sabbath is only an invitation to Satan to forge temptations,
and to make his attempts. Standing waters putrify. When we stand sti^^, we
give the better aim for Pugnat cum hoc prae^epto diem sacrum consumere ignavo
oti^, Ger,
the adversary to shoot. Satan has his full scope against a lazy sinner.
Indeed he that does nothing, will soon do evil. He that sits at the door on a
Sabbath, will soon be drawn to a Tavern. Holy services are a Bulwark against
Satan; and his attempts are rather troubles, then temptations. The Psalmist
observes, That wicked men devise mischief Psalm. 36. 4^.
upon their beds. When they are at ease, then they lie op^n to Satan's assaults.
Gerard worthily takes notice, That to spend Gods holy day in idleness is a
contradiction to the very command. Communion with God is our close guard, and
Satan then must leave us as he did Christ, Mat. 4. 11. Or get behind us, as our
Savior spoke to Peter, Mat. 16. 23. It is the calm stops the ship in its
voyage; and laziness on a Sabbath is the remora which stops our sailing to the
Port of glory.

To be idle on a Sabbath is to invert nature, and, as Heliogabalus the Roman
Emperor, to turn day into night. Thus, viz. in idleness; We may serve God as
well sleeping as waking, Psalm. 22. 2.
in the shades of the night, as within the veil of the Sanctuary. Psalm. 134. 1.
We need not the lamp of the Sun to light us to do Psalm. 77. 6.
nothing. David tells us of his services and duties by night, Psalm. 119. 55.
Psalm. 63. 6. but not of his sloth by day, especially on Gods day. Should we
run out our Sabbath in idleness, God had no need to have added day to the
Sabbath, in the fourth Commandment, night had been as good, for carnal rest is
a property affixed to that season.

To be idle on this holy day is a great loss of time. Subbaths are our golden
spot of time, and idleness takes off the gold from this spot. The Sabbath is
our term for our souls, and it is frenzy to loyter in our term. Indeed we may
say of Sabbaths, as Jacob once said of his Children, If we are bereaved, we are
bereaved, Genesis 43. 14. If we lose our Sabbaths, what salv^ have we that we
should not lose our souls. Lyra observes out of one of the Rabbis, That the
double offering was so proper to the Sabbath, that if it was at any Lyra in
Numer.
time omitted, it could not be supplied on other Sabbath days. One pertinently
adds, And there is good reason for it, for every Sabbath day must be kept holy.
Take notice all ye vain and idle persons, who waste your precious and
irrevocable Sabbaths. The Sabbath is most properly the day our Savior speaks
of, John 9. 4. in which we must work, for the night comes, and then no man
shall work. And in this, that of the wise man is most true, Prove. 19. 15. The
idle person shall suffer hunger. Idleness if it get into our hands, it will
ruin our house, Eccles. 10. 18. If it get into our tongues, it will hazard
our souls, Mat. 12. 36. If it seize on our persons, it loses our Sabbaths, we
trifle away the day, and we catch nothing.

To be idle on the Sabbath swerves from the pattern. It is true, God rested on
the Sabbath, Genesis 2. 2. but it is, as Divines speak, from the production of new
species, and kinds of creatures; he rested from his creating work, but not from
A creatione novarum specierum cessavit, et quievit deus. Muscul.
his governing work, from new productions, but not from his constant
providence; for our Savior says expressly, Joh. 5. 17. The Father works
hitherto, and I work. And so must we rest from our secular works on a Sabbath,
but not from our spiritual. To be idle on a Sabbath is a contradiction to our
perfect and most absolute pattern: Idleness is inconsistent to the Divine
Majesty, as being an evil. Musculus decries it as a great error, to think deum
ociari, that God is now idle, Solemn deus semel creavit, sed hunc quotidie oriri
facit; hominem ex terra semel condidit, sed adhuc hominem fingit in in utero
materno.
because he has finished the worlds Creation: No, but God still propagates,
moderates, perserves and governs his world; the Sun which he created, he now
causes to rise every day; the waters which he created, he now either restrains
to calmness, or leaves to rage; Man whom he created, still he forms him in his
Mothers womb, Psalm. 139. 16. And in this we must imitate God, who is not only
the Legislatour to command, but the pattern to exemplify Sabbath Rest; we must
be still working, we must on that holy day work out Phil. 2. 12.
our salvation with fear and trembling; and this is our greatest providence,
the great work of Government for us, to subject 2 Cor. 10. 5.
our souls to the obedience of Christ.

2. Idleness on Gods holy day swerves not only from the pattern of the Father,
but likewise from the example of the Son. Jesus Christ was, as the Schoolmen
speak upon another John 5. 8.
account, purissimus actus, all activity upon the Sabbath: Luke 13. 12.
then the wrought his wonders, then he made his cures, then Luke 14. 4.
he preached his holy and heavenly doctrines, then he enriched Luke 4. 32.
the world with his heavenly discourses, then he went up and Luke 14. 16.
down doing good.; The Sabbath was the sphere of his love, Acts 10. 38.
the orb of his light, the testimony of his power, and the Mat. 12. 13.
stage of his most glorious actions. It is observable, Christ Luke 4. 3^.
enriched the Sabbath with all variety of good; then he taught the soul, then
he cured the body, then he healed men of their sicknesses, and women of their
infirmities, then he cured patients of spiritual maladies, then he cast devils
out of them, these embroydered robes of love and power; Christ clothed the
Sabbath with; and can thou sinner eye Christ, and slide over a Sabbath either
doing nothing, of that which is worse then nothing? Can thou melt a Sabbath
into dross by idleness? Shall the head be so vivacious, Fug tiniquitatis est
signaculum gratiae. Alap.
and thou who pretendest to be a member, be in a Lethargy, in a Swoon, be
crampt with sloth and laziless on Gods holy day? Either name not the name of
Christ, or depart from this iniquity. Study to draw Christ upon a Sabbath, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
and this will be as Aristotle's iron ball in his hand, which when he fell
asleep, fell into a brass basin, and so awakened him; this will keep thee
active and vigilant; say, Christ, and this, this will put thee upon work and
service.

Idleness on a Sabbath is neglecting great salvation: the idle sinner on this
day loses great opportunities of life, great Heb. 2. 3.
condescentions of love, great advantages for the soul. How many have been
delivered from the womb of a Sabbath, new 1 Pet. 2. 2.
born babes in the Church, when God has said to the loins of an Ordinance,
give forth, and to a spiritual opportunity, keep not in. When the wind blows
strongly, the waterman Quid prodest Christum sequi, si non contingat consequi:
sic currite ut comprehendatis. Bern.
sets up his sail, rnd plies at the Ore more industriously. Sabbath
opportunities are our good wind for heaven; now we must set up our sail by
diligent attention, and sweat at the Oar by earnest devotion; now we must row
hard toward the shore of rest and happiness; we must not be as the Drone, but
as the Be sucking honey from the flower of every Duty, and every Ordinance.
Indeed sloth is one of the blackest spots in the feast of a Sabbath: And yet
how many are sitting 2 Pet. 2. 13.
idly at the doors of their houses, when they should be Jud. v. 12.
knocking at the door of heaven, and enquiring for the way of salvation; they
are talking frivolously, when they should Luke 16. 17.
be speaking to God in holy Orisons and Supplications; they are throwing away
time, when they should be laying up treasures, Luke 12. 33.
even treasures in heaven; I may say to such foolish sluggards, in the same
language, which the Mariners spoke to Jonah, Jon. 1. 6. What mean ye sleepers?
why do not ye gather your clusters in the vintage of a Sabbath, why do not Mat.
20. 6.
ye reap your advantages in the harvest of a Sabbath, why do Omnes sine
vocatione dei, sunt otiosi, nec sibi, nec aliis utiles. Par.
ye not follow the suit of your eternal souls in the term-time of a Sabbath?
Pearls are not found in every Rock: Gums do not drop from every Tree, Mines are
not sprung in every field: nor is Manna for the soul to be gathered on every
day. The careful traveller will not spend his day in sleeping in an Inn. And
let us consider, the Sabbath is a day of diversion, but not impertinency.

CHAP. XL. Some incident cases proposed, to satisfy Conscience in
Sabbath-observation.
THe Lords holy day, as it is enriched with many sweets, Sicut mercatoves per
cancellos vimineos transeuntibus merces e domo ostentant, non prope, et
distinct, sed procul, sic deus se nobis ostentat in hac vita. Alap.
so it is encompassed with some scruples; not as if there was any obscurity in
the command, or cloud in the day; but man in this life knows only in part, 1
Cor. 13. 12. And a twilight knowledge engenders doubts, hesitations and
scruples, and as in other things, so in Sabbath observation. And therefore this
Chapter shall be spent in directing conscience, least it lose it self in by
ways, and irregular ranges, which a faint light may subject it to. Several
cases may serve us, instead of several lights, to guide us in the way of peace
and security on Gods blessed day.

What we must do in the nonperformance, or in the maleperformance of Sabbath
duties. Many in the close of a Sabbath Psalm. 137. 2.
are ready to hang their harps upon the willows, and to shed a shower of tears,
when they look back and think, they have been in the Wine-cellar of Christ, but
they have not refreshed their souls; they have sat with Christ in his
banqueting house, but they have enjoyed no divine or spiritual Cant. 2. 4.
delight; many duties they have neglected, more they have formally passed over;
the Sabbath is run out, scarce any stoopings left, and yet they have not
quenched the thirst of their souls; the term time is gone, and their cause is
as it was, or rather is further off then before; they are very sensible, though
they have not filled up the spaces of a Divine Mat. 5 5
Sabbath, they have dropped into the vials of divine displeasure: This is their
case, and this is their moan, and let it not Lamen. 1 12.
be nothing to all those who pass by. Now therefore to satisfy Revel. 16. 1.
this case,

short, or superficial in the duties of Gods blessed Sabbath, Let them lie in
the dust. Sabbath sin should cause seri us sorrow. Titus an Heathen Emperor,
when a day was past, and he h^d done no good Pedr. de Mex. Hist. Imper.
on that day, was wont to break out into sighs and sorrow; to those who were
about him, and cry, O my friends, I have l^ft a day. The loss of any day is
matter of moan, but Ezekiel. ^9 14.
to lose the Lords day, and the Lord in that day, this is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation. In nature, the interp^sition of the Earth between
the Sun and the Moon causes an e^clipse; and surely when earth, vain thoughts,
earthly discourse, froth, and neg^ect have interposed between God and thy soul
on his own day, what an eclipse of sadness Eccles. 12. 5.
should it cause upon thy heart? Upon the loss of friends, we go in mourning,
and why not in the loss of Sabbaths, which are good friends to the soul? Christ
waited for thee in every Ordinance, thou did not give him the meeting; go
home, and like the Dove bemoan the loss of 2 Kings 2 12.
thy m^^e. It is most equal, when Ordinances are not our Tristitia nobis data
est, ut dole ^m^s, non de morte, sed de peccato, ibi sol^^^ utilis est
^^^stitia, alibi est inutilis. Chrysostom.
treasure, that they should be our trouble, and what we want in good, we should
make up in g^i^^. When Elisha went with Elijah, and a chariot of fire parted
them asunder, carrying Elijah to heaven, and leaving Elisha on earth; Elisha
looked up, and cried, my Father, my Father. Has God and thee, O Christian,
been parted asunder on a Sabbath? and has the Lord left thy heart on earth,
and himself gone to heaven? O think sadly of this, and with bitter moan cry
out, my Father, my Father, Repent for the loss of the Lords day, and lament
after the Lord of that day. Sad hearts do well become empty Sabbaths. It is
very doleful to pine for thirst at the wells mouth; If thy heart has been dead
in duties, let it be drowned in sorrows. Christ looks through the lattice in
every Ordinance; if thou have turned thy back upon him by neglect, or a vain
spirit, say with the Church, Is any sorrow, like unto my sorrow? Lam. 1. 12.


Search into the cause of this heartless and fruitless passing away Gods
precious Sabbath. It is good for a Christian to examine what way-l^id his work,
what kept God and his soul a sunder.

not tune thy heart by holy preparation. Lo^se strings make no music; every
peg must be wound up: Undressed gardens yield no delightful prospect, Mattaina
praeparatio necessaria est per diligentem cultus consideratiorem et opis
divinae implorationem. Riv. in Decalog.
nor do the nowers grow, but on the b^ds, where the Gardener has used his
industry and his artifice. Thou have not happily pl^wed up thy heart aforehand
by prayer and meditation, and so it is fallow when it comes to Ordinances. Holy
duties themselves are harsh when the heart is out of tune. Marshalled armies
engage in battle: and prepared hearts engage most properly, and most
beneficially in Ordinances. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
To examine our selves, is not only the preface to a Sacrament, but to every
holy Ordinance. No wonder thou art dead in the Sanctuary, if thou art deficient
in the Closet: thou did lose the morning, and therefore thou did lose the
day. See, is not this the cause, thou art so heavy and so stupefied in holy
Administrations. The clock was not wound up, and therefore it did not strike:
Thou wast not Jer. 14. 9.
with God in secret, and therefore thou did not meet God in public; so thou
looked'st for healing, and behold trouble. The fire must be blown before it
turn into a flame. Prepared physic contributes to the cure; there must be the
Apothecary to prepare, as well as the Physician to prescribe Medicines.
Barascue est feria sexta, qu^m nos vocamus diem veneris, quae praeparationis
nomine appella tu^ quia Jud^i s^l^bant illo the necessaria pa^are ^^ prox^me
(...) Sabbatu^ (...) ^b omni op^re servili cess^^d^m erat. Ger.
Our hearts must be taken pains withal, before they are fit for the Ordinances
of a Sabbath. The Jews had a Preparation day, as well as a Sabbath day, John
19. 43. The heart must be broken by repentance, raised by meditation,
spiritualized by prayer, overawed by a sense of the Divine Majesty, before it
is fit for communion with God. It was a serious prayer of holy Hezek^ah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. The good Lord pardon every one, that prepares his heart to
seek, God, and the Lord God of his Fathe^s, though he be not cleansed according
to the purification of the Sanctuary. And in the subsequent verse, it is said,
The Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. Experiment this
preparatory work, and no doubt but thy complaint will cease, and the case will
be satisfied.

It may be thy thoughts are low of Sabbath gains. Men will not run a race for a
trivial prize: Merchants venture to Sea, Phil. 1. 14.
not for Pibbles, but Pearls: Thou look on Ordinances as empty breasts, and
so thou lie carelessly at them, But this is a strange and a sinful mistake.
Faith the best of graces, is the fruit of hearing, Romans 10. 17. The Spirit, the
best of gifts, is the fruit of praying, Luke 11. 13. And Christ Christus ill^
trid^^ (...) et sepulturae fuit ^^^ciculus My^rhae propter d^l^rem, sed p^st,
triduanum dol^rem absorpsit laetitia, et f^ctus est ^t botrus Cypri^n vine^s
enged^i; illa myrrha ^^mmutata est in vinum suavissinum et salutare.
the best of banquets, is the fruit of Sacramental receiving, Mat. 26. 26. Are
not Ordinances, the Exchequer of soultreasure, more sweet then the clusters of
Camphire? Lam. 1. 14. more transcendent then mountanes of Spices, Cant. 8. 14.
More pleasant then the Vineyards of Enge^di, Cant. 1. 14. Surely thou art
mistaken sinner; Did thou ever consider, Prayers have held the hands of the
Father, Exodus 32. 10. Gospel doctrines have employed the tongue of the S^n,
Luke 4. 43, 44. And a shower of the spirit has fallen upon the Congregation at
a Sermon, Acts 10. 44. Nay, the whole Trinity have been present at a Baptism,
Mat. 3. 16. Such fruitful womb^ must not be called Barren. But this sinful
level, which so prostrates Ordinances, is no more then the evidence of Satan's
power, and that he leads thee to much Del Rio.
captive at his pleasure. None will call Ordinances empty, but the Father of
lies.

neglect of, or slightness in Sabbath duties? It may be the force of a
temptation. Satan has an enmity to our communion with God. It was the Evil one
hindered Paul from going to the Thessalonians to scatter and disseminate the
truths of the Gospel, 1 These. 2. 18. He stirred up the Jews against the
Apostles, when they were Mat. 13. 19.
propagating the blessed Word, Acts 14. 2. Acts 17. 13. He John 13. 27.
endeavors, either to keep us from the Word, or to steal the Acts 20. 9.
Word from us. The evil one enters Judas at the Passover, Mat. 4. 6.
rocks Eutichus asleep at a Sermon, uses the word, as a weapon against Christ,
and attempts to make it a sword to destroy, Ephesians. 6. 17.
which is given for a sword to defend. In Ordinances, we are seen by good
Angels, and tempted by evil: Good Angels observe our behaviors, and evil
Angels corrupt them. God is no where more pleased, and the Devil no where more
1 Cor 11. 10.
busied, then in the Assemblies of the Saints. And therefore it may be Satan
has shaped his temptations into wedges Isa. 4. 5.
to divide between God and thee in Ordinances; and this makes thee complain of
slightness of spirit in those holy seasons.

some unrepented sin damps thy heart to, and in Ordinances. Jonah when he had
sinned, then he falls asleep in the ship. Sin clogs thee, and therefore
opportunities do Jon 1. 6.
not please thee: Thou fear thy title to Christ, and that makes rhee so
remiss in thy pursuits after him. Stopped stomachs have no appetite. Holy David
longs to appear before Psalm 42. 1, 2.
God. Trembling consciences, like aguish fits, take away all delight. Music
sounds not to a Prisoner: Guilt unremoved by repentance, flats the taste of any
Ordinance. David will wash his hands in innocence, and so he will compass Gods
Altar, Psalm 26. 6. The Curtizan in the arms, will keep the wife from the
bosom. Purity and repentance make ordinances as the honey comb. It is
Christian prudence, first to throw out the beam of sin, before we look up to
the Sun Psalm 19. 10.
of Ordinances; and to cast out that which grieveth the spirit, Job 6. 6.
before we come to taste the spirit in holy Communion with Ephesians. 4. 30.
God. Offending slaves love not to see their Master: Sin makes Isa. 59. 2.
us shie of Gods presence. Adams fall drives him to the trees for a hiding
place, and sowred Paradise it self to him. Choice Genesis 3. 8.
diet does not fatten one in a consumption. Any one sin not vomited up by
hearty repentance, and self-abhorrency, will nauseate the soul in Ordinances:
Sins are the souls obstructions, which may cause more flushes, but less
digestion of the holy Word. When Jonah was thrown overboard, then the Sea was
calm: Let sin be thotowly bemoaned and repented, and Christ will be sweet in
Ordinances. Sin not disgorged, sucks the sweetness out of all holy duties, and
makes them dry, and jejune.

read lectures upon thy own heart: thy formality arises from disproportion;
(...).
thy heart is not suitable to holy Duties. The Apostle speaks of a savor of the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 2. 14. We want this savor and relish, and this strains the
juice out of every Ordinance; our hearts must be assimilated by grace, Psalm
42. 4.
before they leap for joy in Ordinances, as John the Baptist in Luke 1. 41.
the womb, or as David danced before the Ark. Carnal 2 Samuel 6. 14.
hearts are dragged to the Sanctuary, Romans 8. 7. As we see paint drops from the
face, that not being its proper place, but it stays and remains upon the sign.
The unsanctified heart is in Ordinances, as a Bird in the Cage, it flutters a
little, Cognitio Christi est dulcissimus et fragrantissimus odor, tanquam ex
praestantibus herbis aut pretiosi^ aromatibus exhalatus.
but it does not fly, it is cooped up, and wants its desired freedom; it
works at an Ordinance, as the Israelites did at their bricks, they work,
because they must give an account to their task-master. When we are superficial
in Ordinances, let us see the naughtiness of our own hearts. Sickish palates
find no meat savoury. There are three glasses, in which we may best see our
hearts.

1. In the glass of temptations. Sharp storms try the house, sharp encounters
try the soldier, and soft temptations 2 Samuel 11. 4.
try the heart: How soon did Bathsheba's beauty enthral David, though otherwise
he was a pattern of sanctity.

2. In the glass of afflictions. Fire which refines metals, burns up dross.
When Christ was seized upon, then all the Disciples left, and forsook him, Mark
14. 50. Birds which sing in the spring, hide in the winter.

3. In the glass of Ordinances. If the Spirit has not breathed upon thy heart,
it will not be lively in holy Ordinances. Indeed, a gracious heart melts at a
reproof, clasps Genesis 2. 7.
about a Promise, hides truth as its treasure; but a slight heart, will either
rage at the smart, fret at the length, or be Luke 2. 51.
offended at the spirituality of an Ordinance. Nothing more puts the heart upon
the test, then holy duties. Many followers of Christ left him upon the account
of a Sermon, John 6. 66. If therefore thou have not understood more of God on a
Sabbath, then study to understand more of thy self: thy heart is an useful book
to read. (...).


Take up resolutions of stricter communion with God for the future. Bones which
are broken, if well set, grow the stronger. Let the sense of former neglects
prompt future Ex malis moribus bonae nascuntur leges.
care; thou have been slight in Ordinances, resolve thou will be serious, and
wherein thou have done evil, to do so no more, Joh. 5. 14. The heart of man
stands in need, not only of Gods work, but of man's care, the Spirit must
sanctify it, Prove. 4 23.
and man himself must watch it: When thou come to Ordinances, bend thy ear,
gird up the loins of thy mind, incline 1 Pet. 1. 13.
thy heart, and summon thy conscience to every truth Cant. 8. 14.
in hearing, to every petition in praying. Ordinances are like Mountains of
spices, sweet when we are got up, but there is some difficulty to get up; we
must keep our foot Eccles. 5. 1.
when we go to the house of God, and we must keep our heart when we come there.
Gods Ordinances are high and sublime, and the Psalmist says, Man's heart is
deep, Psalm 64. 6. Now there must be some toil, some labor and Per labores
magnos, ad praemia magna pervenitur.
pains, to bring them both together: God must make an Ordinance stoop, and man
must pullice up his own heart to an Ordinance. It is man's privilege to enjoy
Ordinances, but it is his artifice to improve them: much strength must be put
forth to over-master the heart in holy duties,* there must be a sense of Gods
eye, and man's account, to enforce a suitable frame. The Scholar can scrible by
himself, but the Masters hand, and his own eye too, is little enough to make
him write well. That of the Wise man, Eccles. 9. 10. is chiefly true in the
Sanctuary, what ever our hand finds to do, we must do it with all our might:
And holy resolution best answers this case, with a serious endeavor, that
former negligence shall be repaired by future diligence.

If thou have been formal, or neglectful on a Sabbath, shame thy self in the
observation of the melting behaviors of others. There was once a General, who
when his soldiers fought faintly, and cowardly, he allighted from his Horse,
and run into the middle of the foot-souldiers, and shamed his Army by his own
valourous example. When thou see Agendum est a nobis secundum ideam divinam.
one weeping in the Congregation, another sighing, anotehr hanging upon the
lips of the Minister, by serious and vigorous attention, say within thy self, O
my soul, why art thou Psalm 43. 5.
so formal, so dead and superficial, and why art thou so Exodus 25. 40.
discomposed within me? Curious pictures are drawn from Heb. 8. 5.
lovely persons; and thou should do well to correct thy formality by the
serious examples of others. Emulation in spirituals 1 Cor. 11. 1.
is very commendable, and it does well become a Christian to copy out the
religious custom of an Isaac in holy meditation, Genesis 24. 63. The gust and
satisfaction of David in holy Ordinances, Psalm. 63. 5. The humility of a Daniel
in holy Prayer, ^an. 9. 3. The attention of a Lydia in hearing the Word, Acts
16. 14. The melting frame of a Josiah Vides fratrem profluentem lacrymis, huic
colluge, et condole. Ita enim fiet ut alienis malis castiges propria. Bas.
in re^ding the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. The heartbreaking expressions of an Ezra
in confession of sin, Ezra 9. 3, 4, 5, and t. Thus others music may shame our
jarring, and cause our harmony: truly, sometimes, the sight of another man's
carriage does more inflame us, then the sense of Gods presence; the Assembly
which we see does more affect us, then God whom we do not see. In Ordinances,
the Apostle his counsel is very authentical, we must rejoice with them that
rejoice, and weep with them that weep, Romans 12. 15. Symphony is the sweetness
and credit of an Ordinance. The Prophet speaks of one Name, and one Lord,
Zach. 3. 9. Zach. 14. 9. It may be added, one weeping eye, and one melting
heart does very much beautify social worship. In a word, others humble
carriage in Gospel opportunities, should constrain ours: we will thank a beggar
who puts us in the way. Thus much for the first Case.

What must we do in the good performance of holy duties, and the happy
enjoyment of God in Ordinances. It is sometimes the felicity of Gods people to
be in a flame in holy services, Exodus 34. 30.
and to enjoy much of God, on the day of God; their faces shine while they are
in the Mount with God; with holy David, Obiectam habuit saciem Moses prae
splendore vultus, quem Israelitae intueri non puterant. Lyppom.
they see the glory and power of God in the Sanctuary, Psalm 63. 2. with the
two Disciples traveling to Emmaus, their hearts burn, Luke 24. 32. whilst
Christ communes with them in Gospel dispensations. As once it was said of
Viretus his Auditors, they were ever rapt up into heaven in holy Prayer: and
in the evening of a Sabbath thus satisfactorily spent, they are ready to sing
Requiems to their souls, and to say, one day in Gods Courts is better then a
thousand, Psalm 34. 10. In this case, when duties have been transformed John 2.
8.
into delights, as water turned into wine, by a miracle of Love. Then it is
incumbent upon us,

To be thankful: Surely gratitude becomes us, is our comely oblation, as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 33. 1. is our convenient sacrifice, as the Syriack reads
it, (...)
when God gives us not only the space, but the grace of a Sabbath, not only
the Sabbath of mercy, but the mercy of a Sabbath. The stone wall reflects the
beams of the Sun which shine upon it. If beams of love and joy have visited
Paulus raptus est ab eo quod est secundum naturam, ad illud quod est supra
naturam, vi superioris naturae. Thom.
us in holy opportunities on Gods blessed day, reflections of praise are our
suitable tribute: it is most rare mercy, with Paul to be caught up, when we
have been in the lower stories of Gospel Grace. Nehemiah blessed the Lord for
the privilege of a Sabbath; how much more should thou for the divine
pleasures of it, when thou have tasted how good and gracious the Lord is, and
thou have discharged thy self sweetly and sincerely in holy performances? The
Hallelujahs of Heaven, 2 Cor. 13. 2.
are the glorified Saints only offering for their seraphical Nehem. 9. 14.
and eternal Rest. Indeed, the enjoyment of God in Ordinances, is our clearest
Sunshine on this side glory. If thou Psalm 27. 5.
have had such an enjoyment, speak in the language of the sweet Singer of
Israel: Bless the Lord, O my soul, let all that Psalm 103. 1.
is within me bless his holy Name.

To be careful. The Saints usually after the best spent Sabbaths, meet with the
worst assaults, It was the speech of an experienced Christian, I look for the
Devil every Monday morning, I am sure he will come to rob my soul of Sabbath 1
These. 3. 5.
good, if it be possible. Have our hearts been raised, ravished, enlivened, and
enlarged upon the Lords day? we Datur morbus mentis, etiam et morsus serpentis,
est malum inn^tum, est* et seminatum. Bern.
had need watch the tempter, least he damp our joys, and so grieve our
spirits, and embitter our sweets, and lest our mind, which one day has been
heavenly, the next day become haughty, for pride is a worm which is apt to
breed in the best weed. It is a rare observation of Bernard, That the mind can
swell, as well as the Serpent can bite; we have evil within us, as well as
assaults without us: When we have comfortably waited on our God, we must as
sedulously watch over our own hearts, or else our sweet raptures will turn into
swelling conceits, as refreshing fires send up a black smoke. It was not for
nothing, that Paul had a thorn in his flesh, after 2 Cor. 12. 7.
he had had a Paradise in his view. We are apt to surfeit on the richest
Banquets. Too much light does not increase, but dazzle the sight: After
well-spent Sabbaths, let us admire our good, and double our guard: If the Devil
will steal away the seed, Mat. 13. 19. he will surely attempt the harvest: the
Thief will sooner fetch away bags, then pence.

To be faithful. If our souls have been sweetened by holy Ordinances upon Gods
holy day, let us study to keep this divine relish upon our hearts: we are apt
to catch cold after Cum malum committitur, bonum amittitur.
the greatest heats. Let us look to our selves; that we do not lose the things,
which we have wrought, and after close and sweet communion with God, grow lax
and remiss. Sweet water is as easily spilt, as ordinary water. The rarest
Cordials (...).
are put into glasses, which are easily broken: there may be a rejoicing, which
is only for a season, John 5. 35. the Greek reads it, for an hour: If thy
heart has been wound up toward heaven on a Sabbath, a little carelessness
will let it down again. If thou have spent the Sabbath comfortably, Heb. 12. 14.
be faithful to thy soul, and interest, and spend the Ephesians. 4. 30.
week holily. Purity will keep peace; it is sin grieves the spirit, Spiritus
sanctus cum agimus aut loquimur turpia aut mala offenditur. Alap.
who is the Comforter, Joh. 14. 16. Our inward joy is only chased away by
trespass, which is a thron in the breast of this Nightingale. To be unloosend
on the Sabbath from weekday bonds is comfortable: but in the week-time to
unloose the Lords days bonds, is abominable.

To be fruitful. Comfortable Sabbaths call for conscionable lives. Soft showers
make fruitful fields: If on the Sabbath we have enjoyed the comforts of the
Lord, it is but meet we John 15. 5.
should always abound in the work of the Lord. Our weekday 1 Cor. 15 58.
carriage should be the springing up of the Sabbath days seed; our whole lives
must be a walking in the strength of our Sabbaths. Diverse of the Ancients are
very copious, and pathetical in persuading men, so to practice Piety, and
pursue sanctity, as to perpetuate a Sabbath. We should mingle the Sabbath with
the week, but not the week with the Sabbath; as we should be in the spirit on
the Lords day, so Tertul com. in Jud. 4. Orig. in Numer. Hom. 23. Chrysostom in
Mat tract 29. Aug. de Civit. dei lib. 12. cap. 30. Buc. in Mat. 12. 11.
we should walk in the spirit on the week day, Gal. 5. 25. It is a remarkable
speech of Bucer, Have we served the Lord on his own day? let our manners show
it, let our works prove it, let the holiness of our lives abundantly declare
it. A pious Conversation is the only evidence we have been with Jesus; we
should be in such a frame every Lords day, as if that was the first Sabbath
that ever we spent, and as if that was the last day, that ever we should live,
or, as if the weight of all our work lay upon that single Sabbath, for which we
were sent into the world, nay, as if our eternal being was to be determined
hereby; and yet after the day is over, we must endeavor as much to be doing,
as if nothing was done on the Sabbath, and all that we had done, was to be
abated on the account. Sabbath comforts are not to be dews, but showers, not
suddenly to be dried up, but to soak into our future lives. J^hn the
Evangelist, after he had been Rev. 1. 10.
in the Spirit on the Lords day, writes the Revelation, the worlds Chronicle
within a Veil: Moses, when he had been Exodus 32. 22.
on the Mount with God, was filled with holy zeal, and Sinai did not flame
more, then his heart. Heavenly sweets are 1 John 1. 3.
only incentives to holy services; and the tastes of divine communion are the
genuine bribes to an holy conversation.

How we must keep the Sabbath alone, in the deprival of Christian and
comfortable society. There are many cases may befall a Christian, which may
render him solitary upon the Psalm 63. 2.
Lords day, and for the present enforce him to be an exile Psalm 96. 6.
from the public Assemblies.

1. As in the case of traveling: we may meet with an Inn, when we cannot meet
with a Sanctuary. Isa. 16. 12.


2. So in the case of imprisonment: we may be confined to Psalm 102. 7.
the darkness of a dungeon, and want the glorious liberty of Psalm. 84. 3.
the people of God, the freedom they enjoy in the house of Prayer.

3. So likewise in case of sickness: we may be chained to (...).
our beds, and not enjoy the freedom of public Ordinances; And Mr. Perkins
instances in the disease of the dead Palsy: so that now Aristotle's definition
of Man, to be a sociable Creature, will not comport with our present condition.
Isa. 16. 12.


4. And it may be instanced in case of hard service, and slavery; when our
groans are ready to drown the music of Israelitae ita affligebantur animi
maerore, et dura servitute, qua spiritu qu^si intercludebantur, ut non
attenderent verbis Moses de deo serviendo. Riu.
a Sabbath, and we are necessitated to lie down in silence, and solitariness.
We do not read that the Jews kept any public Sabbath in their Egyptian
bondage: their tasks jarred their triumphs: and they did not only make brick
without straw, but they passed over Sabbaths without any visible observation;
but yet no case can wholly incapacitate us from conversing with God on his own
day; we are never so lonely, but we may enjoy communion with the Father, and
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3.

1. If we are traveling, we may likewise travel toward Exodus 6. 9.
Canaan. Holy duties will turn an Inn, into a Sanctuary. Psalm 134. 2.
Paul prayed by the Rivers side, Acts 16. 13. Peter preached in a private
house, Acts 10. 34. and Christ administers the Genesis 24. 63.
Sacrament in an upper room, Luke 22. 12. Now, we may meditate in every Field,
and pray in every Chamber. To Dan. 6. 10.
Christians, says Dr. John Reynolds, No Land is strange, no ground unholy,
every Coast is Jewry, every Town is Jerusalem, every house is Sion, every
faithful body is a Temple to serve G^d in: And to think otherwise is to savor
of Judaisme, as Hospinian observes.

2. Suppose thy self in prison on the Lords day: If an Angel can break a prison
door, Acts 12. 7. surely Christ can, and give thee the meeting on his own
blessed day: When thou art in fetters of iron, he can draw thee with the cords
of a man, Hos. 11. 4. If we must visit our brethren, surely he will visit his
Saints in prison. Prison doors are no obstruction Mat. 25. 36.
to the divine illapses of the good spirit, and Prison-straights are no
confinement to the enlargements of a Saints heart; a fervent prayer can pierce
the roof of the closest dungeon, and flies as high as Heaven. Paul and Silas
sang Acts 16. 25.
Psalms, one duty of a Sabbath, when they were fettered in their Chains, and
enclosed in their Goal.

3. Put case thou art confined to a sick bed; Jacob worshipped Genesis 49 18.
Onkelos hanc exclamationem Jacobi ad Christum resert para^hrasi plane pia. Non
expecto salutare Gideon filii Joash, neque salutare Sampson filii Manoe, quae
salus est plane temporalis, sed expect^ salutem and redemptionem Christi filii
David, quae est solus aeterna. Onkel.
God on a dying bed, and waited for his glorious salvation: On a bed of
sickness, thou may bend thy heart, when thou can not bend thy knee, and
stretch out the hand of thy faith, when happily thy distemper will not suffer
thee to stretch out the hand of thy flesh. Sicknesses usually spiritualize
duty, not obstruct it. Then the patient prays more feelingly, weeps more
heartily, converses with God more greedily. A sense of approaching death,
affects the soul with more earnest pursuits after a better life: A Christian
under a disease may more pathetically improve, he need not wave a Sabbath.

4. If providence shall cast us into a severe and hard service: the man servant
is kept back from holy Ordinances by the profaneness of the Master; the maid
servant is kept to her drudgery on Gods holy day, by the pride and vanity of
her Mistress; Nay, happily our case is, a Turkish Galley is all the Temple we
have to worship in; yet then, though we have lost our freedom, we have not lost
our Sabbaths. Isreal's worship was not lost, but revived in the wilderness, and
there Moses talked with God, as a man with his friend. The uncouth and solitary
wilderness, was the Sanctuary Deuteronomy. 26. 10.
where the Jews enjoyed the closest communion with God. Exodus 33. 11.
Paul gave spiritual exhortations in the ship, and in a storm Deus non
terribiliter, sed amice cum Moyse egerit. Riv.
too, when he was ready to be dashed into the pit by every wave, Acts 27. 20.
The rage of remorsless masters should make believing servants not to pray less,
but as the vassalized Israelites, to groan more; not to be weary of Sabbaths,
but Exodus 6. 5.
to be more wary in their observation; the bondage of the Acts 7. 34.
body is no ways eased by the hazard of the soul. The Heavenly Master must be
served, especially on his own day, notwithstanding all the frowns and
countermands of the earthly, that imperious worm. If threats could have
prevailed with the three Children, they had worshipped a golden Image, and not
adventured a fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 18. Hard service should make us more
heavenly, not more heedless in Sabbath observation. If our case is hard upon
earth, we should then the more endeavor to make it more glorious in heaven,
and Sabbath-holiness bids fair for it. Now therefore this being premised,

Thus we must keep Sabbaths in our greatest solitariness, when the world is
turned into a Patmos to us:

Let us encourage our selves, that this is not our case alone, to serve God
without company: Moses communed with God alone upon the Mount; there was no
press of people, or society Deuteronomy. 5. 31. Dan. 6. 10.
of Saints to heighten his enjoyment: Daniel conversed with God in his Chamber
alone, and his sacrifice was sweet, though single. Peter was praying alone at
the top of the Acts 10. 9.
house, when he gets the company of an Angel, that messenger from heaven
salutes his pleasing recess. The woman John 4. 13.
of Samaria enjoys solitary, yet salvifical communion with Jesus Christ, and
her soul lay under the distillations of his heavenly doctrine, nay, waters of
life did flow more freely, then the waters of the well, which did afford her
the plenty of that Element. And to come nearer to our purpose, the blessed
Apostle John was in his Patmos, when he was sublimated Revel. 1. 10.
with unusual raptures, and that upon the Lords day. A single Lute can make
sweet music. The Sun which gilds the world, is but a single Planet. And thy
soul serving God alone on his day, may be taken into galleries to walk Cant. 7.
5.
with Jesus Christ, and feed upon the honey and the honey Psalm. 19. 10.
comb of an Ordinance. The Word was more to Job, then his necessary food, when
he lay on the dunghill alone, Job 23. 12. And Christ acted to him above his
promise, Mat. 18. 20. He was present, though two or three were not gathered
together.

alone, be much in prayer. In this single devotion, Christ is both our
President, Luke 6. 12. And our Legislatour, Mat. 6. 6. The Cum privatim et
solitary oramus, ostentationem et affectationem humanae gloriolae omnino
respuimus. Chemnit.
Prayer of one Elijah could work miracles, Jam. 5. 17, 18. The Prayer of one
Daniel could hasten deliverance, Dan. 9. 23. The Prayer of one Moses could
preserve a whole Nation from impending ruin, Exodus 32. 23. Solitary prayers
have their peculiar prerogatives; in them we avoid all ostentation, as
Chemnitius well observes, and more imitate the votary, then the Pharisee: In
them we can search our hearts more accurately, deal with God more faithfully,
and give a fuller account of our sins and provocations. Closet devotion is not
stopped, because confined, no more then the meditations of David were lost in the
darkness of the night, Psalm. 63. 6. in Mat. 6. 6. Psalm. 63. 6. Rev. 1. 10. 1 Samuel 1. 10.
which he framed them. Christ came to John in Patmos, when the Island was his
bolted Chamber, not with bars, but with waves. Hannah prayed and wept alone,
and then she obtained a Samuel, 1 Samuel 1. 10. The heart can work in Acts 10. 4.
1 These. 5. 17. Col. 3. 17.
prayer when there is no company to excite it, and oftentimes God is most
effectually present, when man is wholly absent; therefore if we must spend a
Sabbath alone, let part of it be taken up in fervent prayer and supplication.

of solitariness, let us be filled with holy meditations: This holy duty of a
Sabbath, is advanced not obstructed by loneliness and retirement, nay, it
cannot well be performed Genesis 24. 63.
in company: the noise of any associates hush away these pleasing
contemplations which light upon the mind, or Psalm. 92. 5, 6, 9.
are started by the excitation of the good spirit. In thy solitary Sabbaths,
let thy head work in meditation, as well as thy heart in prayer and
supplication. These duties coupled, like Castor and Pollux are a good
prognostic, and promise fair weather to the soul.

Meditate on thy sins. Sin is first viewed by meditation, and then moaned by
confession, and so consequently cashiered by repentance; and this order is very
proper and genuine, first to cast the eye on sin, and then to rend the heart
for it, and from it. The head will affect the heart: take then the opportunity
of a solitary Sabbath, to cast up thy accounts, and Psalm. 4. 7. Jer. 31. 18,
19, 20.
to look backward on thy sinful life, that thy soul may kindly melt, and the
Lord may graciously smile, and lift up the light of his countenance upon thee.
Moaning Ephraims are pleasant Children.

Meditate on Gods works: Thou may see the glory of a Creation through a
prison grate, or within the curtains of a sick bed; thou may contemplate on
the Sun, when thou do not see it, that emblem of Gods power, and the worlds
glory. The Stars shine as bright to meditation in the day, as in the night; and
we may take an intellectual, when we do not take an ocular view of them.

Meditate on the state of the Church; to rejoice in it, or to grieve at it: The
Jews in Babylon could weep savourily in the remembrance of Sion, when they did
consider its present Psalm. 137. 1, 2.
calamity, and its former glory. Every Christian should Psalm. 122. 6.
be of a public spirit, and lay the case of Sion to heart, either for tears or
triumphs. When nothing of the Church is Isa. 62. 6, 7.
in thy eye, much of it should be in thy thoughts. Much of Psalm. 137. 5.
piety is discovered in sympathy. It was one of Isreal's great offenses, they
had not a fellow-feeling of the afflictions of Amos 6. 6.
Joseph. The Prophet advises those who make mention of the Name of the Lord,
to give him no rest, till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth, Isa. 62. 6,
7. When thou art alone on a Sabbath, and thy condition necessitates thee to it,
let the many thoughts of Sion keep thee company, and be thy congregation to
join with.

Meditate on the attributes of God: Those glorious beams can shine into the
darkest and most solitary dungeon, as well as into the most solemn assembly.
Think of Gods power in creating a world, his justice in burning of a Sodom, his
wisdom in contriving a way for man's redemption, his love in John 3. 16.
sending his Son to dye for sinners, his faithfulness in making and keeping his
Covenant. Such heavenly meditations, might sweeten a prison, might mitigate a
distemper, might alleviate Psalm. 104. 34.
the severity of service or slavery, and might comfort thy soul on Gods blessed
day, in the greatest recluse and solitariness.

Spend some time of this solitary Sabbath in conversing with the Scriptures.
The Bible is the most delightful companion Romans 3. 2. Omnia mea mec^m porto.
Bias.
in the want of all others; the Saint with these Oracles may say with the
Philosopher, I carry all my estate with me; Caesar so prized his Commentaries,
that being enforced by the Egyptian Army to leap into the Sea, he did swim with
one hand, and held up the Book of his Commentaries in the other; his life and
his book should both perish together. Our Bible is the most seraphick
Commentary upon Gods love, and Josh. 1. 8.
man's heart. God commanded Joshua to meditate day and night in this sacred
volume. Indeed the Scriptures, they are a hive of sweetness to delight the
soul, a choice treasure Psalm. 19. 10.
to enrich the soul, more then necessary food to support the Job 23. 12.
soul, The sword of the spirit to defend the soul, a transcendent Ephesians. 6. 15,
17.
Paradise to consolate and refresh the soul. Every truth in the Scriptures is
brighter then a star, every promise Romans 13. 12.
in the Scriptures is richer then a Mine, every threatening in Heb. 4. 12.
the Scriptures is sharper then a sword, every offer of grace contained in the
Scriptures is more valuable then a world; therefore in thy lonely Sabbaths, say
with the Psalmist, O how I love thy Law? It is my meditation all the day, Psalm.
Facit Scriptura consolationes per exempla quae narrat, per promissiones, and
praemia quae offert, His nos consolatur, and inspem beatitudinis excitat, and
erigit.
119. 97. And this converse with sacred writ, will be a good prognostic of
success and happiness. It is reported of Queen Elizabeth, that in her great
afflictions in her sister Queen Mary's reign, she was much conversant in the
holy word, and as the word of God sweetened her soul, so the Providence of God
smiled on her condition; for after the flight of a very few years, she wore the
Diadem of this Nation, flourished many years in the throne of her Royal
Progenitors.

Fill up this solitary Sabbath with the Collection of former experiences. David
when he was kept waking in the night, Psalm. 77. 3.
he remembered God; his thoughts were taken up with that In concilio Parisiensi
hoc facinus Patribus dolori fuit, quod licet dies dominicus a quibusdam dominis
venerando custodiri vide batur; a servis tamen eorum servitio pressis per raro
debito hono^e ^^li inven^r^tur.
divine object. When thou art kept from the solemn assemblies by a sick bed, or
a close prison, or a sharp Master, Remember thy experiences which thou had of
old.

1. All thy providential mercies, as the Psalmist recounts his promotion, that
God took him from a sheepfold to a throne, and at such a time advanced him to
the Sovereignty of the best people in the world, Psalm. 78. 70, 71. Then
remember thou the additions God has made to thy Estate, or to thy Family, thy
escapes from imminent dangers, thy often deliverances, etc. Experiences of
divine love, receive new life from meditation and serious recollection.

2. All thy seasonable mercies. The Psalmist comfortably Council. ^aris.
relates, That when his Father and his mother fors^^k him, D^o sunt, quae
s^ntertiae grat^^m and dignit^t^ co^ci^iant, (...) si (...) ad (...) ration^m
accommodetur. Cartw.
then God did take him up, Psalm. 27. 10. Then the rare providence of God are
most rare and remarkable, and to be noted with an Higgaion Selah. As words, so
favors in season, are like apples of Gold in pictures of Silver, Prove. 25. 11.
The season is the emphasis of every mercy. Even at the red Sea, Psalm. 106. 7.
This amplified Isreal's sin, they offended even at the red Sea, where they were
crowned with a stupendous and seasonable deliverance. Cast thy eye back in thy
solitary Sabbaths upon those mercies which were eminent for their season.
Health after sickness, supply in wants, rescue from temptations, from sinful or
destructive company, when thy soul was plucked out of the snare. Ah how sweet
was water to a thirsty Samson, deliverance to the poor Jews when their
destruction was signed and sealed. Such pleasing recollections would abundantly
sweeten a solitary Sabbath.

3. Thy unexpected mercies; those loving-kindnesses which thou did not think
of, nor pray for, which thy want did not proclaim, nor thy moans pursue. An
Angel comes Acts 10 3. Luke 1. 26, 27.
to Cornelius in his prayers, when he looked not for him. Happily many mercies
have befallen thee, which like Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, have brought not
only good, but unexpected news. On a solitary Sabbath view over thy unlookt
for mercies, which were returns of love, without a prayer to solicit them;
the ship came home without any other gale to cause its arrival then divine love.

4. Thy spiritual mercies. A Sabbath is best accommodated for a review of
spirituals; then remember the sweets of Psalm. 66. 18.
former Sabbaths as David remembered the joy he used to have when others called
him to go to the house of God, Psalm. 42. 4. We should then cast in our
thoughts, what reproof of the word cut sharpest, what truth struck deepest,
what Ordinance came closest to our souls, who was the instrument of our
greatest good, what Sabbath was the time of our choicest loves. Peter Martyr
could tell the very sentence of a Sermon which first wrought upon his heart.
Thy soul, if thou belongest Jer. 2. 24. John 9. 11. 2 Kings 5. 10.
to God, had a month when Christ took thee. Spiritual mercies are most sweet
in contemplation, more smooth then the waters of Siloam, more healing then the
waters of Jordan. And thus thou may travel through the pleasant plains of a
Sabbath, when thou art alone, and have no company.

If there be occasion, join fasting to the rest of thy holy duties on thy
solitary Sabbaths. It is true, the Sabbath is not a fast but a feast day, a day
of rejoicing, not of mourning; yet Nehem. 1 4. Dan. 9. 3.
extraordinary cases make extraordinary Sabbaths. Days of great sorrow may draw
out tears upon the Lords day, (...). Zonar.
and turn that celebrity of joy and gladness (to speak in the language of the
Council of Gangra) into a day of fast and sorrow. Sometimes Gold chains are put
in cypress, and a golden Sabbath may be veiled with sadness in the Churches
misery and calamity: If such a case fall out in thy solitary Sabbaths, ashes
and sackcloth are the most suitable dress.

How Conscience may be satisfied, objecting, that flesh and blood cannot hold
out a whole Sabbath in the due and strict observation of it. It is not without
remark, that the Apostle asserts man's inability in himself to receive the
things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Nay he scrues the peg higher, and positively
affirms, That the carnal mind is enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. It stands upon
its guard to keep out whatsoever is of God, and he instanceth in himself; that
the Law in his members continually disturbed the Law of his mind in every
spiritual undertaking, Romans 7. 21, 23. And if he delighted any thing at all in
the Law of God, it was after the inward man, Romans 7. 22. I say, in this
particular, the Scriptures are written for our instruction, 1 Cor. 10. 11. For
the soul is never more sluggish then in spiritual attempts, then there is a
Lion in the way, Prove. 22. 13. A carnal man looks upon holy duties as his
Physic, not as his food, and he keeps the Sanctuary as he keeps his Chamber,
only in a case of necessity. In his worldly pursuits he can rise up early, and
go to bed late, he can stretch the day to the longest, and be willing to clip
the wings of it, because it flies away so fast; but in the pursuits of higher
concernments, he complains of the length of a Sabbath, as if the glass stood,
and did not run in its usual speed. Man's nature indeed is very remiss in
spirituals, and studies more apology then duty; as the invited guests sent
their excuse, when they should have brought Mat. 5 22. Numb. ^3 28
their persons to the Marriage feast. As the murmuring Israelites, who would
not attempt the conquering of Canaan, because the Sons of Anak were there, when
their cowardice was the greatest Giant.

But I shall rather study to remove then amplify this pretended scruple, and
easily evince that this case of conscience arises rather from sloth, then
incapacity. Now to the Case,

It is very true, flesh and blood cannot hold out a spiritual Caro et sanguis
naturalis, et corruptibilis homo, qualis fuit terrenus Adam, regnum dei non
possidebit. Ambros
Sabbath, not only for the length of it, but likewise for the services of it;
Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. And Paul says in
another place, flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.
50. And the same principle which acts our service in glory, must act our holy
services here, though not in the same degree, though more faintly and
imperfectly. So then the dregs of nature are not competent for Sabbath
observation; the terrene man, as Ambrose and Theophylact speak, a lazy piece of
clay, cannot run through the several duties of a Sabbath; but when we cast our
selves on the spirit, we are carried as upon Eagles Isa 40. 31.
wings, and then we labor and faint not, we run and we are Phil. 4. 13.
not weary. It is true, flesh and blood will be wearied at Animus si non
praesumat de se sed si confortetur in deo, potuit utique dominari, et etiam
reddi quodammodo omnipotens. Bern.
the first on-sets of holy service, but pains must be taken with the heart to
spiritualize it in the morning of a Sabbath, that thou may come as a
Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoice as a strong man to run a race, Psalm.
19. 5. As holy Bernard most excellently, Faith resting on Christ gives us a
kind of omnipotency. A Saint in the strength of Christ, by the assistances of
Christ, with the encouragements of Christ, can come leaping over the mountain
of a Sabbath, as his short Cant. 2. 8.
and recreative travel, his pleasure, not his toil.

However God must not lose his right of service from us, because we have
procured to our selves wretched natures, which Audi O anima, qualis sis,
onerataes peccatis, irretiti vi^^is, capta ille^ebris, affixa membris corporis
inquinati fl^gitiosis. Aug.
are soon weary of spiritual duties. If Sabbaths are tedious to us, this must
be our moan, not our excuse; we must weep over this occasion of complaint, we
must not watch for it; this case must not stir up our scruples, but our tears.
Ad^m was vivacious enough to keep Sabbaths before the fall. Let the prisoner
never complain, he cannot run, when his sin and trespass has put him in
chains. A sense of tyredness on the Lords day should deeply humble us, and put
us upon filling Psalm. 56. 8.
Gods bottle with our tears, that he would fill our hearts with Luke 11 13.
his spirit, (that glorious and active principle) to carry us out in the
discharge of Sabbath-performances. Ah! It is our sin has crampt our faculties,
and caused that lameness, that we cannot run the short race of a Sabbath.

Lazy servants can hardly undergo any labor, much less to hold out a whole
day, yet the aw of their earthly Masters makes Vae humanae miseriae? propter
unius, aut duarum horarum segnitiem omnis laboris mercede frustrari. Ab. El.
them to do it; so should Gods fear move us to keep a whole Sabbath. Thou
say, thou art not able to keep a Sabbath, but can thou lose an eternal
Sabbath? It is a cursed exchange to forfeit everlasting rest for a little
sloth. Sabbaths must be kept, if thy soul be saved. Let the sense of a future
judgment, when every Sabbath shall be brought into the account; let the dread
of an infinite God, who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. Let the golden and
precious trust of a He. 10 31.
Sabbath, all spur thee on to Sabbath duties, to make thy way more pleasant and
delightful. Let that be done which must be done, or else thou art everlastingly
undone: Things of absolute necessity are to be effected, not disputed. If thy
Pedibus timor addidit alas.
servant must go of his errand, or turn out of doors, this makes him run. Here
we act for our souls and Sabbaths, whole Sabbaths* must be kept, or our souls
will perish in the action; thy murmurs cannot silence divine wrath.

Imperfections through corruption of nature are one thing, for they are in the
best, but to nourish them, and willingly to yield to them, is another. I cannot
do what I ought, by nature; Jer. 5. 31.
shall I not therefore endeavor to do what I should, by grace? To say, thou
can not keep a whole Sabbath, does not only speak thy corruption, but that
thou love to have it so. Ease corrupts nature, and makes it putrify, nay, it
sets it backward in the things of God. If the Clock be never Prove. 15. 19.
wound up, the wheels will rust: say to thy unactive heart, John 1. 6.
a wake thou who sleep, my eternity is bound up in the due observation of
Gods day. The slothful servant was condemned, Dilectio et charitas dictat, immo
imperat, ut serviamus domino inomnibus virtutum offici^s. Alap.
Mat. 25. 26. not he that spent, but he that hid his talent. Thou have a trade
to drive on a Sabbath, away with sluggish nature: flesh, like the sensitive
plant, if touched, will withdraw from spiritual performances; but force it by
holy violence. It is Apostolical counsel, and most seasonable for the Lords
day, that we should not be slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, Romans
12. 11. The Sabbath should be our sphere, not our servitude; we should then be
as the Sun, which needs no whips to scourge it forwards. Mr. Bernard of
Batcombe, asks the question, Why we should be more indulgent to weak nature,
more yielding to the flesh in and about the 4th. Commandment, for the keeping
Mr. Bern in his Tract. on the Sabbath.
of a day wholly to God, then in or about our whole service in obedience to the
other nine? Indeed we should breath after communion with God on his own day, as
once Christ did after the Cross, to dye for his people, when he was straightened
in his own spirit, Luke 12. 50. till it was fulfilled and accomplished.

To say, we cannot keep a whole Sabbath to the Lord, is an imputation cast upon
divine Wisdom. God never commands impossibilities, and yet he severely
commands the full observation of a whole Sabbath: and yet to say, God is an
Exodus 20. 8.
hard Master, deserves the brand of an unprofitable servant. Luke 19. 22, 23,
24.
The Yoke of Christ is easy, not galled with an incapcity of bearing of it. If
we can honor our Father and Mother, Exodus 20. 12.
which is the next Commandment, why not keep Matthew. 11. 30.
Gods Sabbath? There is a (...) a natural affection sweetens the 5th. and there
is communion with God, a more noble attraction, indulcorates and facilitates
the 4th. Commandment. Lazy flesh must not commence a suit with infinite
Wisdom. God knows our frame, and we must know our Psalm 103. 14.
duty, nay, in this particular, our privilege: for to keep a Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
day with God is a temporary Paradise, nay a transient heaven Romans 11. 33.
our elevation above the world. Let us not then inveigh against the rigor of
the Command, but deal with our own hearts to run cheerfully, and sweetly
through the heavenly circuits of Gods blessed and holy Sabbath.

Quicquid factum fuit, fiat: Whatsoever has been done, may be done. Now David
lays it down, as a Character of (...)
a godly man, to meditate in the law of God day and night, Psa. 1. 2. The
Syriack reads it, as if his whole will and pleasure was wrapped up in the Law of
God; the life was to be spent in holy contemplation, not a day, not a few
hours: nay, the Psalmist gives an instance in himself, the Law was his
meditation all the day; and if he (...)
might have his option, he would dwell; The Hebrew bears it, he would Sabbath
it in the house of God all the days of his life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. This blessed man thought his life too short
a moment to converse with God, and to behold his beauty. The beauties of God
delight, not dazzle the eye of the soul, and such prospects drown all
tediousness. The Apostle Paul preaching on a Lords day, continued his
discourse till midnight, Acts 20. 7.
not imping, but spreading the wings of the Evening, Psalm 139 9.
for greater latitudes in holy Communion: and no doubt, but many a Saint could
put a curb into the mouth of Sabbath time, to stop its speed, that his weekly
Jubilee should not fly away so fast. Therefore let not any make this objection
of sloth, to say, flesh and blood cannot keep a whole Sabbath: surely such
objectours, are part of the world, who know not the meat, the Saints have to
eat in the Banquets of the Lords day. When Peter and the two other John 4. 32.
Mat. 17. 1, 4.
Disciples saw Christ in his transfiguration, they would build tabernacles, to
fasten their abode. Sabbath Communion, is only a more duskish transfiguration;
And why should we tire so soon, when the way is so pleasant! (...), etc.
Chrysostom. de sacerdot.


Primitive times, the reading of the word, and the preaching of the Gospel,
took up some part of every day. And Chrysostom took good notice of the profit
of that diligent course: Men's minds were more babituated to the things of God,
and became richer treasuries of holy truth. It was not then accounted tedious
or irksome to spend some time every day with God, for soul advantage. The
Primitive Church thought time spent in spiritual converse, their term, not
their toil, and the School of Christ was open, not only (...), etc.
on a Sabbath, (as Janus his Temple among the Romans, only in a time of peace)
but on every day. The worthy Chrysostom highly commends his Auditors, That
they turned a day which might have been spent in the service of Satan, into a
day with God, in attending on holy Ordinances. This was the spirit of the
primitive times, they accounted all time gain and advantage, which was spent in
Divine Communion: And indeed this is for Adams posterity to re-enter Paradise.
Gregory Nyssen in his second Oration, which he Greg. Nyss. Orat. 2da de 4to
Martyr.
made concerning the Martyrs, makes mention of some things he had instructed
his people in, the day before; and in another Oration, bids them call to mind,
those things he had delivered before in the week time; this eminent light of
the Church evidences in his own practice, that it was the custom of the Church
in those times, to enrich the week with Nudius terti mi et hesterni diei
sermones, sequitur hodierna lectio, c and.
many seasons and opportunities of Gospel dispensation; so far were those times
from Subpenaeing flesh and blood to attest an incapacity for the services of a
whole Sabbath. Augustine in many places of his incomparable works, mentions
Aug. in Joan.
his daily labors with his people for spiritual edification. So Tom. 2 dus. in
Psalm. 68. Tract. 16. Joan. Tractat. 18. in Joan. Tract. 22. in Joan. Cyprian
was likewise taken up in daily travels with his hearers to promote the increase
of their faith and knowledge. Nicephorus reports in his Ecclesiastical History,
that Alexander did daily exhilarate the Niceph. Hi^t, lib 8. cap. 5. (...).
Chrysostom.
Church with divine Institutions. Indeed these orient times of the Church were
made more celebrious, by the painful labors of the Ministers, and the diligent
attention of the people every day; for as Chysostome speaks in his tenth Homily
upon Genesis; Holy discourses are calculated for every day. No day is
incongruous for heavenly Communion. And the learned Father well comports with
the sense and language of the holy Apostle, Phil. 3. 20. For our conversation
(...), vita civilis.
is in heaven, from whence also we look for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

But on the Lords day, in the primitive times, holy duties Licet n^^ ing^^ere^,
spirituali doctrinae non praejudicat, Chrysostom.
were multiplied; nay, the Minister must not give over preaching, though the
night comes on, if Chrysostom may give in his verdict. Basil in one of his
Homilies tells us, That his own course was, to begin his Sermans early on the
morning of a Sabbath, and toward the evening to preach a (...). Basil.
second time: The morning Sermon he called the morning food; and his evening
Sermon he styled, his evening joy, which he used to bring to his Auditors:
Thus this worthy person made it his triumph to spread morning and evening Hic
igitur et n^s Orationem hanc nostram ad rotum, quietemvs deducenda esse
censemus. Basil.
dainti^s, before the people who came to feed upon them. Nay, thus he speaks
in one of his Homilies, Behold the evening commands me silence, the Sun being
now set, yet I judge it fit to lengthen out my discourse, to the time of bed
and rest. So unwearied were the Ministers and people in those glori^us times,
in holy duties and administrations. Augustine In diebus do minieis ab omnibus
aliis feriantes soli cultui divino simus intenti.
in his second Sermon upon the 88h Psalm, mentions his reduplicate labors upon
Gods holy day. The rest of the Lords day, says a learned man, must be wholly
taken up in divine worship; Then the level of the soul must be wholly
heavenward, all diversions to earth or ease are deviations. To mind any thing
but the soul on the Sabbath, is not impertinency, (...). Chrysostom. Non miremint,
fratres charissimi, si hodie ter sermonem deo adjuvante P^rfece^o.
but impiety. Chrysostom has an excellent speech, The Sabbath, says he, is
not given us for ease, but for rest, and that rest must be spent in things
spiritual: To which is accommodated a speech of another of the Ancients in an
Epistle of his, to his brethren in the wilderness; Do not wonder, says he, if
in Gods strength I have preached thrice this day. Now to object, flesh and
blood cannot keep a whole Sabbath, this is a contradiction to the servent
spirit of the primitive Church, this is a spirit fit for the dregs of time.

serious Jews thought the Sabbath but seant measure, and too short a time for
soul enlargements. Among the Jews, some began their Sabbath so^ner then others,
as those who dwele at Tyberias, because they dwelling in a Valley, the Sun did
not appear so soon to them, as it did to others. Some again continued their
Sabbath longer; This was done by those who dwelt at Tsephore, a City placed
upon the top of a Mountane, so that the Sun did shine longer Buxtorf Comment.
Masor. cap. 4. ex Masar.
to them then to others: Hence R. Jose wished, That his portion might be with
those, who began the Sabbath with those of Tyberias, and ended it with those of
Tsephore. This good man would take the first dawning of a Sabbath, and wait the
Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
last appearance, that his soul might enjoy a larger space for Psalm. 84. 10.
communion with God. A gracious soul thinks the longest visits Phil. 1. 23.
Cant. 7. 5.
are the sweetest, and duration crowns their fruition. Surely war is sweet, and
Sabbaths long, to unexperienced persons. Dulce bellum inexpertis.


the nakedness of this objection, and more fully to answer the case, we must
take notice, there are great varieties of duties and ordinances to sweeten a
Sabbath, and to render it free from all nausea and tediousness. Several
Instruments make the Consort, and raise the music Prove. 30 15.
to a greater delight and pleasantness. On a Sabbath we do 1 Samuel 3. 10.
not only say, Give, give, in holy prayer, nor do we only cry with Samuel,
speak Lord, for thy servants hear, in hearing of the word: But the duties of a
Sabbath, are like the gifts of the spirit, full of diversity, 1 Cor. 12. 4.
There are Sacraments Eucharistia est convivium dominicum, and in die domini^o
ab ecclesia administrari solita fuit. Tertul.
to give us a prospect of Christ, Holy meditation to sublimate our souls
heavenward, reading of the Scriptures for spiritual instruction, Singing of
Psalms in imitation of the Hallelujahs of heaven, spiritual discourses for
mutual consolation. Harmony is the Sabbaths melody; and our tiredness in one
duty, is removed by the sweetness of another. The Sun with speed and fleetness
runs through the twelve signs of the Zodiac, nor is it alw^yes lodged in one
house. Variety of things which are excellent, is not a little ground Omni modo
Orationibus insistendum est, ut si quid negligentiae per sex dies acciderit per
diem resurrectionis dominicae precibus expietur. Greg. M. lib. 11. Epist. 3.
of complacency: variety of choice voices please the ear: variety of curious
colors delight the eye; variety of sweet dainties is acceptable to the taste;
and so varie^y of holy duties make a Sabbath grateful and complacential. God
has set forth his worship in several services, that it might be the more
pleasing, and the less wearisome; Sometimes on a Sabbath we are praying to him
for the supply of our necessities; sometimes we are praising of him for his own
infinite excellencies. Sometimes the ear is busied in hearing truth, sometimes
the Dies dominicus est dies panis per Eucharistiam. Athan.
hand in giving alms, sometimes the eye in weeping tears, sometimes the knee
in doing homage, always the heart in willing obedience: Thus the same meat is
dressed several ways to make it more delightful and pleasing to the palate.
To see several towns pleases the traveller, and makes Dies dominicus est dies
lucis, per baptismum. Chrysostom.
his journey the less tedious, and the more recreative. In Sabbath worship, the
bending of the knee is relieved by the hearing of the ear, and the hearing of
the ear by the singing of the tongue, and the service of the tongue may be
refreshed Die dominico pro arbitrio quisque suo, quod visum est contribuat, et
charitatem suam deponat.
and relieved by the contemplations of the mind. So then the Sabbath cannot be
tedious, whose duties are so various. Several birds singing, make the Grove a
common music room. That soul must needs distaste every Ordinance, which cannot
be pleased with variety. Just. Mart. 10.


But no further to amplify the vanity of these objectours, who put this case,
I shall now a little rectify their mistake, by showing them, how flesh and
blood may keep a whole Sabbath spiritually and sweetly to God.

Let them be earnest in prayer for the spirit of grace: this is that principle
which can turn the soul to any point, that spirit which can guide our way, Romans
8. 1. which can produce the new Creature, John 3. 5. which can fill our sails,
John. 3. 8. which can heal our Natures, 1 Cor. 6. 11. which can help our
infirmities, Romans 8. 26. that spirit which can Acts 16. 14.
open the eyes to behold, Acts 26. 18. and can open the heart Joh. 7. 38. 39.
to embrace Gospel mysteries, 1 Cor. 2. 14. that spirit can sweeten Ordinances,
and accommodate our souls to them, that Spiritualia spiritualiter examinantur,
et spiritualis judicat omnia qui spiritum rectorem animae habet, and Doctorem.
Ansel.
the streams of a Sabbath may run smoothly without the stop of weariness, or
storm of discontent. The spirit of God can fit our spirits to the things of
God; and where there is no disparity, there can be no dissatisfaction. Indeed
the Ordinances are the ship, and the spirit is the wind: As the ship of an
ordinance cannot move without the wind of the spirit, so the wind of the spirit
will not blow without the ship of an Ordinance; but when the wind carries on
the ship, it is pleasant and delightful sailing. Therefore let John 3. 8.
these Objectours beg the spirit, and we have an assured promise to encourage
us, Luke 11. 13.

present Sabbaths are Sabbatum est sabbatisini primordium, initiale benificae
fruitionis odoramentum.
only the first fruits of an eternal Sabbath. The Spring is pleasant, though
not so fruitful as the Harvest. Our present days of grace have their glory
and their verdure, though not elevated to the raptures of heaven; Sabbaths are
heavenly days, though not heavenly eternities: Now our Savior bids us rejoice
at the putting out of the leaf, for then Summer draws near, Mat. 24. 32. This
should silence all scruples of a floathfull heart. Sabbaths are golden, though
little spots; they are pensions of grace, though not portions of glory; they
are earnests of better things; and he that is to receive the sum, will not
easily be weary in telling of the earnest. The Israelites rejoiced in the
Clusters, before they came to the Vintage, Numb. 13. 23, 24. Our precious
Sabbaths are Cant. 1. 14.
our clusters of Camphire, before we come to the mountanes of Spices. Think not
a Sabbath tedious, which is only a little stream running into the Ocean of
Eternal Glory.

wants more, and their ease less: Their necessities call for every Ordinance of
Grace, which fills up the time of a Sabbath; their empty cruze Mat. 6. 11.
calls for the duty of Prayer; their dark understandings call Hos. 6. 3.
for the Ordinance of hearing; their faint graces call for the Isa. 25. 6.
feast of a Sacrament, their sadned spirits call for the joyous Jam. 5. 13.
service of singing Psalms; their ignorant Families call for Genesis 18. 19.
the duty of Catechizing; and their frail memeries call for the Phil. 3. 1.
seasonable recruit of Repetition; and when these Services are faithfully and
spiritually performed, the time of a Sabbath Eadem scribere, dicit Apostolus,
est (...) tutum; Ambrosius vero inquit, est (...) necessarium. Ambr.
flies away, and there is no room for the objection of flesh and blood. We are
much provoked to see Beggars lie sunning themselves in ease and laziness. Let
these Objectors pass industriously and cheerfully through the Ordinances of a
Sabbath, or else find some other way for the supply of the necessities of their
souls. But thus much for the fourth Case.

What shall we do, when after our serious attendance upon Ordinances on Gods
holy day, we taste no sweetness in them, Saepe etiam pi is successus in
laboribus vocationis denegatur, non male, sed certo consilio dei, cum vero
Petrus sine successu laborasset, non ex impatientia murmurat, non rejicit
vocationem. Chemnit.
nor reap any advantage from them? It was once the complaint of the Disciples;
that they toyled all night, and could catch nothing, Luke 5. 5. The Saints
labors in this life are not always successful; they may plow upon a Rock, and
sow the Seed, though presently they do not reap the Harvest. Beautiful Rachel
was barren for a time, and she who had so much comeliness, had no Child. Answers
to prayer are not always on the speed, but sometimes they are suspended; and
many wait on God in a Sabbath, and yet in the evening do not carry their
sheaves with them, Psalm. 126. 6. they may toil all the Sabbath in the fire of
Ordinances, and yet not for the present be sensible of their melting and
refining power. But what shall be done in this case?

Such should examine themselves, whether they bring not too much of the world
with them to Sabbath opportunities. Happily when they are at prayer, or any
other duty, their thoughts look back, as Lots wife did upon Sodom, and so that
duty is, as it were, turned into a pillar of salt, a monument Duo contrarii
amores in eodem cord, locum non habent nec habere possunt. Zanch.
of shame: And so in hearing the Word, they bring the cares of the world with
them, and they are thorns which choke the blessed Seed of the Word, Mat. 13.
22. and it becomes altogether unfruitful. And again, worldly thoughts do very
unseasonably mix with heavenly duties: we do ill to be in the vale, when we
should be on the mount Exodus 24. 18.
with God; to be supping up the dregs of the world, when we should feed on the
marrow, Psalm. 63. 5. and drink of the Isa. 25. 6.
wine well refined in blessed Ordinances; this is to power contempt upon the
provisions of the Sanctuary: To say, our communion is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ on a Sabbath, when yet our hearts are fluttering over the
John 1. 1. 3.
world, this is to delude, not to satisfy the Soul.

no sweetness in Sabbath duties, yet we are bound to continue our diligence; we
must observe our duty, though presently we receive not the mercy. It is Job 1.
9.
the badge of Mercenaries to plead, no Recompense, no Obedience. Indeed the
recompense of reward may be in our eye, though it be not our end. In the work
we do, we may have a love to the reward, though the mere love of the reward
does not attract us to do the work. God is our great Lord and Master, and
though it is not servile obedience, yet it is the obedience of Servants we ow
him continually, and much more upon his own day. Cassian observes, That he
Cassian. l 4. c. 24.
knew a young man, who merely in obedience to his Superiors command, for a
whole year together went two miles every day only to pour water on a withered
stick. We ought every Lords Angeli quomodo discurrunt medii, inter deum, and
nos? Bern.
day to come under Gospel waterings, though our hearts remain withered and dry,
though we feel no softnings or comforting; it is enough, we have a command; the
duty is ours, the day is Christ's, who is over all, God above all, blessed for
ever. It is a favor God will employ us, though he Romans 9. 5.
should never reward us. The Angels rejoice that God will engage them in his
business, though they receive no new recompense; they are cheerful to increase
the duty, though they do not enlarge their glory: The Angels, says the
Apostle, are Bernardus solitus est dicere Angelos secum cooperari unoquoque die
dominico.
all ministering spirits sent forth to minister, etc. Heb. 1. 14. This is their
property; they think themselves happy, in that God thinks them worthy to do his
work in the world: And so must we esteem our selves honored in conversing with
God in Ordinances, though we do not hear the spouts run Hab. 3. 17, 18.
with the waters of life, and though the fingers of Christ do not drop Myrrh,
Cant. 5. 5. nor do we taste the honeycomb in them, Cant. 5. 1. For Ordinances
in themselves are Jude 14. 8.
as Sampsons Lion, with the swarm and the honey in them; they are in their own
nature pots of perfume, more reviving then the smoaks of incense; and though
our resentments be not so quick, yet we must follow the scent. It is a good
observation Hos. 6. 3.
of Chrysostom, As fountains, says he, send out water, though no pitcher be
brought to fetch from them; so Pastors must preach, and Auditors must hear,
though no fruit be received: For as to keep Sabbaths is indispensable for men,
so to bless them is arbitrary with God. But if God shine not forth from between
the Cherubims of holy Ordinances, Psalm. 80. 1.
yet it is incumbent upon us to wait at the door of the Sanctuary, always
remembering that subjection is ours, but benediction is his, and he will have
mercy, on whom he will have Romans 9. 18.
mercy.

not successful to us, what peace or profit can we expect if we lay them aside?
Upon the same account all other times of holy duty, and the exercise of
Religion may be waved and left off; and then what can there be but a fearful
expectation of judgment? Hierom upon Heb. 10. 27.
that place of the Apostle, Romans 9. 16. It is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows Hieron in Psalm. 107.
mercy: Sure then, says he, It is not of him who sleeps, nor of him that
idleth, nor of him who neglects duty, for on such the Lord will have no mercy.
And Chrysostom well observes upon that speech of our Savior, Mat. 16. 24. If
any will Chrysostom. in Matthew. homil. 56.
come after me, let him deny himself, etc. Christ says not as this Father
observes, If any man stand still, or sit down; for the Kingdom of God is not
given to standers, or to idlers, but to walkers, and to workers. So it may be
concluded, the comforts of God are not given to any person, who upon any
pretense whatsoever shall omit or neglect his duty, especially Iter monstrat
Apost. quo fiat ut semper gaudeamus; Per orationem nimirum quae non cessat, and
gratiarum actionem. Theoph. Non erit glo riosa victoria, nisi ubi fuerint
laboriosa certamina. Ambros.
upon the Lords day. For any to pretend, they have performed duties and waited
on Ordinances, and yet fail of success; what good success can they expect upon
the ceasing of those duties? The Apostle bids us pray without ceasing, 1 These.
5. 17. So then we must pray though the blessing do not presently come; we must
obey the command though we do not receive the reward. If men may use the means,
and yet miss the end, surely such must miss the end, who will not use the
means; let none think to better their souls condition, by laying aside Sabbath
transactions.

desired success in their Gospel communion, Let them smite upon the thigh, and
reflect upon themselves. The word is fire, and why am I cold? The Psalm. 6. 6.
word is quickening, and why am I dead? Ordinances are the means of grace, and
why have I no grace or comfort by the Psalm. 43 5.
means? Some are at Sermons and Sacraments with their Psalm. 42. 4.
hearts leaping, and go away with their faces shining, and Christi^ne, fige tui
cursus profectusque me tam ubi Christus posuit suam. Bern.
those who see them, see they have been with Jesus; but why go I mourning all
the day? Thus we should put our selves upon the search and scrutiny. Skilful
Physicians search into the cause of distempers, and so should skilful
Christians; the wound is searched before cured, and the tent is put in before
the balsam. If Ordinances have lost their taste to us, the soul is sick of some
distemper: If we can not be triumphant, let us be inquisitive; if we are not
filled with comfort, let us presently feel our pulse. But however, we should
set upon amending of duties, but be never prevailed with, for the omitting of
duties; we should be as Fishermen when they have caught nothing, then they fall
to mending their nets; let us not throw away our nets in discontent. If the
Archer shoots short, he shoots again, and directs his arrow more level, and
draws his bow with more strength, that if it be possible he may hit the mark:
So if we Psalm. 19. 10.
in discharge of Sabbath duties, do miss of desired mercies, let us draw the
bow with more strength, stir up our selves, put more life into duty, and
quicken our selves with more Cant 3. 4.
care, that at last we may meet with our beloved, and say with the Spouse,
Cant. 3. 4. we have found him whom our souls love. In a word, we must not
conclude through humane frailties, we will do this days work no further; but
we must resolve, through divine assistance, to do the work of the day better.

of soul-afflicted Saints, though they are not sensibly good, yet they are
certainly good and acceptable to God; God sees that in their aimings, they
cannot see themselves in their actings; that which they cannot see in John 1.
1, 3.
their work, God can see in their will; God knows after what the soul reaches;
surely not after a bare duty, or being Vident mulieres juvenem, ut c^rnerent
nostrae resurrectionis aetatem, vident juvenem, quia nescit resurrectio
senectutem, neque aetates rec^^it aeterna perfectio. Chrysostom.
in service, but therein after a clearer beholding of God, a closer communion
with Christ, to keep a divine intercourse with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The
gracious soul looks not so much after the Ordinances of God, as God in the
Ordinances: I know whom ye seek, says the Angel to the Women, Mat. 28. 5.
Jesus of Nazareth who was Crucified: there they saw the Sepulcher wherein
Christ was laid, and there they saw the linen clothes wherein Christ was
wrapped, but all will not satisfy, it was not the Sepulcher of Christ, but
Christ who had been in the Sepulcher they sought for: So it is not so much the
Sabbath of Christ, as Christ in the Sabbath; not so much the Gospel of Christ,
as Christ in the Gospel, the people of God groan after: They cry out almost in
the language of Bernard, Lord, unless I give thee my self, it is not all my
duties on the Sabbath will satisfy thee; and except thou give me thy self,
it is not all the privileges of the Sabbath will satisfy me. And all this the
eye of God sees, and so accepts the sacrifices of his humble people, Psalm. 139.
12. (...) Psalm. 51. 17.
though they do not smoke with incense to delight them who sacrifice.
Philosophers observe, That fire which smoaks in the Chimney, is most clear in
the Element of it: And so those duties may have a smile from God above who
receives them, when happily they give no sweet gust to man below who performs
them. In a word, if God accept, let not us with Jonah fret, because we do not
taste them. Our services may be a pearl in Gods eye, when they are a stone of
emptiness Jon. 4. 3.
in ours; and it is not much material if we sense them to be dross, if God look
on them as gold. And thus much for this fifth and last case.

CHAP. XLI. A Charge drawn up against profane Persons, who live down the
Sabbath by loose and vicious Practices.
WHen God on Mount Sinai gave the two Tables, wherein the Decalogue was
written, the text tells us, Exodus 19. 18. The mountain burnt with fire, and the
smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furuace, and Deuteronomy. 4. 11. Exodus 19. 18.
the whole mount quaked greatly: And all this was to cast an aw upon the Jews,
that they might serve God with fear and Ignis est signaculum aptum divinae and
regiae Majestatis, and sic terrebant, quae in Sinai fiebant. Riv.
trembling, in keeping those Commandments which were then delivered, and among
others, in the holy observation of the blessed Sabbath: And it were well for
the world, if still some burning Sinai, some tremendous prospect was exhibited
to affect and over-aw the hearts of the people to a due and reverend
observation of Gods holy day. In nothing Cavendom est ne festis abutamur, ad
atium, luxuriam and voluptates turpes Christianis omnimodo indignas. Dav.
more man's heart had need to be shackled, it being so prerient and propense to
break the hedge of that sacred enclosure. Some make bold with the name of God
in words of profaneness, and some with the day of God in acts of profaneness.
Many turn the Sabbath into a Market day of Satan, and like the foolish
Israelites, they love to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. How many spend much of the
Sabbath in the methods of Pride, in consulting the glass, in fitting the dress,
in plaiting the hair, when yet the crookedness of the Prove. 5. 20.
heart is discerned in the curles of the hair, nay in patching the face, and
fashioning the garb, as if they went to the Sanctuary to meet with some amorous
lover. Some spend their Sabbath, as the Prodigal did his Estate, Luke 15. 30.
with harlots and curtezans, and study more their lust, then their Christ, the
sinful embraces of the strange woman, then holy communion with the beloved,
Cant. 2. 16. Nay others defile the Sabbath with riots and excesses. Riotous
company is their Congregation, healths are their Ordinances, idle Prove. 23. 29.
Songs are their Psalms; their eyes are filled with fire for their redness, and
not with water for their tears, and they Isa. 5. 11.
are inflamed with commessation, and not devotion. These Ebrietas est demon
voluntarius, Malitiae matter, and omnibus virtutibus inimica. Basil.
justly demerit that reproach which the Jews unjustly cast upon the Apostles,
Acts 2. 13. They are filled with new wine. Plutarch a heathen Philosopher
believed that Sabbatum the Sabbath, was derived from (...), which signifies to
be riotous and drunken, and the occasion of this derivation of his was, the
Jews loose and debauched manners on the Sabbath day. It is strange impiety to
sin against the light of nature, and as strange to be loose on a day of grace.
To follow vile practices on a precious Sabbath, what is it, but to throw dung
upon Roses? The Apostle says, that they who are drunk, are drunk in the night,
1 These. 5. 7. It is too shameful a sin for the day to behold; and Job says,
the Adulterer waits for the twilight, Job 24. Graviter incessimus diei
dominicae prophanatores, qui intemperantia, luxu, omnique genere, flagiorum eam
vio lant, in irreparabile infirmorum scand^lum, and in horrendum Christiani
nominis dedecus.
15. These sins need a dark Lanthorn, they avoid and shun the light, least
their shame be published by every Spectator: And the Prophet observes, that the
Israelites committed their Idolatry in secret; they had their chambers of
imagery, Ezekiel. 8. 12. They would put some covering upon their sin. But how
great is our abomination to dabble in our paint, to roll in our vomit, to be
inflamed in our lusts, to wallow in our sensualities, and wantonize in our
vanities upon Gods holy day? When the Sun of Nature and the Sun of
Righteousness both shine together to scatter all clouds and covering? It is a
pathetical, but a holy speech of a Learned man, Who without mourning can endure
to see Christians keep the Lords day, as if they celebrated a Feast rather to
Bacchus, then Leid. Prof.
to the honor of Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the world, for
having served God an hour or two in outward show, they spend the rest of the
Lords day in sitting down to eat and drink and rising up to play, first
ballasting their bellies with eating and drinking, then feeding their lusts in
playing and dancing. Against these riots holy Augustine bitterly inveighs,
August. 4. Tract. in. Joan.
and says, It is better to spin then to dance on Gods holy day.

Indeed, it is an observation of Lactantius: That the Lords Lactant. lib, 7.
cap. 1.
second coming shall be on the Lords day; And then how little joy shall they
have, who shall be overtaken in their carnal sports, when their Master should
have found them in their spiritual exercises, on his own day? the profane
wretch then will wish, that Christ should find him rather kneeling at prayers
in the Sanctuary, then skipping like a Goat in a dance, that he should be found
dropping tears like a penitent, rather then drinking healths like a miscreant,
or caressing Sidon. lib. 1. Epist. ad agricolam.
harlots, like an impure Gallant. Sidonius observes, that in the primitive
times, some of the Jews did so abuse the Sabbath to gluttony, and
drunkenness, and to lascivious dances, that the Ethnicks, and heathen
suspected, they Quanquam hoc, aliquo sensu concedi possit, varia peccata
aggravationem aliquam inde accipere, si die tam Sancta perpetrentur Ames.
adored Bacchus, not Jehovah. It is the observation of Dr. Ames, That all sins
receive an aggravation on this day: which oftentimes is more then the sin it
self, as the dye is sometimes more costly then the cloth; To be intemperate,
proud, worldly, wanton on a Sabbath, this is to wear the spots of a Leopard,
and to be in the hue of an Ethiopian. Some men make the Sabbath a weekly
Aequinox their pleasures, and their duties are of equal length; But others
drown the whole Sabbath in vanity and excess, as if they would read the 4th.
Commandment backward, and would provoke the God of Heaven, to please the God
of this world. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
It may be said to those who thus profane the Lords day, have ye not days
enough of your own, to work or play in, or despise ye the Lords day? It is a
sin, yea, a provoking sin, to use the Lords Table, as your own table, to eat
sacramental bread, as if it was common bread; and is it no sin to use the Lords
day, as if it was a common day? Let us therefore see the image and
superscription of Christ engraven upon the Matthew. 22. 21
Lords day, and then let us give unto Christ, the things which are Christ's.
Cyril complained in his time, That many Christians Christiani ludis
illiberalibus, crapulae, choreis, et aliis mundi vanitatibus se dant; and in
nullum alium finem tendunt, etc. Cyril.
indulged themselves in luxury, dances, plays, and worldly vanities on the
Lords day; And what, says he, will be the end of these things, but that Gods
Name will be derided, and Gods day much contemned and scorned? The Apostle
calls our walking on any day, in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquettings, working the will of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4. 3. It is
an heathenish act to adventure upon such unnatural impieties, but to act all
these sins upon a Sabbath, it is altogether diabolical; this is to wound a
Prince on his Coronation day. Those who profane the Sabbath Hi omnis generis
delitiis, non Christo domino, sed satanae servitur; Non salus nostra curatur,
sed perditio conciliatur, et ira dei provocatur, non placatur, mores non
corriguntur, sed corrumpuntur. Muscul
by scandalous sins, says Musculus, they sacrifice to Venus, not to God, and
serve Satan, not Christ; they neglect life and salvation, and assure to
themselves loss and perdition, Gods anger is provoked, not appeased, and their
manners are not corrected, but corrupted. Let us consider, the two tables of
stone, are still tables of testimony, Exodus 31. 18. to witness against the
profanation of this holy day. God did not write this Commandment for the
Sabbath with his finger, that we should sponge it out by our life, and if we
shall attempt it, he can turn the writing, into an handwriting on the wall
against us, which will make not only our knees, but our hearts to tremble,
Dan. 5, 6. Let us seriously weigh in Mark 11. 25.
the balance, that the beauty of a woman does but aggravate her wantonness:
and the rich man's great estate does but amplisie his extorsion, and so the
holiness of a Sabbath does dye every sin which is acted upon it with a scarlet
color: Christ would not suffer the money changers to remain in the temple,
Mat. 11. 15. How much worse merchandise is it, when we set our souls to sale
on that holy day, which is given for life and salvation? But further to dilate
upon the impiety of Sabbath-prophaneness.

To act scandalous sins on Gods holy day, is a most daring presumption, it
throws Gods Memento, with which he Deus non indicit recordationem istam, ut eo
die g^uderent, tripudiarent, aut sibi vaca^ent, etc. Oleast.
prefaced the 4th. Commandment, into his face, and says to Christ, who is
Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2. 28. we will not have this man to reign over us,
Luke 19. 14. God says, Exodus 20. 8. keep my Sabbath holy; and these daringly
reply, we will keep it diabolically. This sin commenceth war with heaven it
self, and throws down the Gantlet to the infinite Jehovah. Oleaster very well
observes, God had not needed to have fastened a Memento to the 4th.
Commandment, to mind us of dances, and revellings, frequenting a ring, or a
stage; our own corrupt natures will be officious enough to usher in such
pleasurous vanities: Disobedience to other Deus graviter eorum pertinaciam
objurgat, quod profano contemptu legem sabbati violassent. Rivet.
commands, may be termed nonconformity; but, to throw the filth of scandalous
practice into the lovely face of a Sabbath, is an impudent opposition of the
most High, and as God himself accounts it, the breach of all his Commandments
and Laws, Exodus 16. 28. And this, Rivet calls the Israelites stubbornness.

To pollute the Sabbath with scandalous practices, raises complaints in heaven
and earth. When God draws his endictment against Israel, immediately before he
sentenced them Isa. 1. 13.
to the Babylonish captivity, one chief part of their charge Ezekiel. 20. 13.
was, They profaned his Sabbaths, Ezekiel. 23. 38. And this Ezekiel. 22. 8.
he calls profaning of himself, Ezekiel. 22. 26. which is a strange Ezekiel. 23. 38.
expression. And for this sin, he brought wrath upon them, Nehem. 13. 18. This
provocation opened the sluices of divine fury. There are three things God is
very jealous of,

1. Of his worship; And of this he has taken care in the Israelitae non
sabbata, sed B^alis festa observabant. Alap.
second Commandment.

2. Of his Name; The glory of which, he has secured in the third Commandment.

3. Of his Day: Which he has hedged about with a hedge of thorns, in the
fourth Commandment: And when men by their profaneness, break this ^edge, he
makes his complaints from heaven against this prodigious evil. Jer. 40 3.


In the Primitive times, the universal complaint of the Fathers was against
profaning of the Lords day. Clemens Clem. Alexand Paedagog. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Alexandrinus, complained in his time, That the people after they were gone out
of the Church, they laid aside the counterfeit vizard of gravity, and fell to
delight and sport themselves in an impious manner, with love-songs, and noise
of Minstrels, etc. Augustine called the profanation of the Lords day, by
dancing, Plays, or rev^lling, A Jewish sabbatizing, to be Aug. de conser.
Evangel. lib. 2. cap. 27. and Enar. in Psalm. 32. and de december chor. dis. cap. 3.
abominated by all good Christians; As if it was a sin not to be named among
those, who did wear the livery, and glory in the name of Jesus Christ, who was
perfection incarnate, the Beauty and desire of Nations, Hag. 2. 7. The Lords
day, is that Virgin light which must be espoused by holiness, by exact and
suitable carriages, and not subjected to the rapes of sin Greg. Nyssen. Orat 2
de resurrect. carnis.
and profaneness: as Gregory Nyssen speaks most piously. Sins which are deeds
of darkness, John 3. 19. Ephesians. 5. 11. are no way becoming the Sabbath, which
is a day of the sweetest Opera carnis sunt opera tenebrarum. Glos. interlin.
light; and therefore we may take notice, that whereas the Evening and the
Morning made up every day else, Genesis 1. 5. Genesis 1. 8. Genesis 1. 13. Genesis 1. 19.
Genesis 1. 23. Genesis 1. 31. No duskish morning, or declining evening are mentioned,
as Si prohibetur die festo opus aliquid, utile ad vitae necessitatem, annon
potiori jure. quae non nisi c^m peccato aguntur et gravi offensione dei. Cyril.
lib. 8. in Joan. cap. 5.
the integral parts, to make up the Sabbath. Cyril with much reason argues, If
those works are forbidden upon a Sabbath, which are subservient to the
necessities of man's life, much more those works which tend to the disgrace of
man's life, which cannot he done, without a grievous provocation of the Lord. O
let us take heed, says Primasius, that we do not celebrate Gods festival in
luxuries and banquets. Gregory Nazianzen, in an Oration of his against Julian
the Apostate, passionately persuades the holy observation of the Sabbath; and
plainly tells Christians, That to keep the Sabbath in a more costly attire, in
a more plentiful meal, in a neater dressing of our house, in a more metrical
dancing to the music, or in a more impudent lusting, this better becomes the
Gentiles custom, then the Christians practice. This excellent person (...).
Naz.
thought such sinful vanities a fitter livery for Pagans, whose right eye is
put out by divine praeterition. And Chrysostom sha^ply inveighs against
Commessations, and drinkings upon Gods holy day; and affirms, It much redounds
to the dishonor of that blessed season. The breathings of the heart, not the
banquets of the flesh; the pouring out our souls in holy Prayer, not the
pouring out of Wine in intemperate healths; to be filled with the Spirit,
Ephesians. 5. 18. and not with new Wine; becomes that day which Christ is the Lord
of.

In these latter times, holy and Reverend Divines, have Hisce diebus opera
carnis non sunt toleranda, nec profana negotia, etc. Bucer de regno Christi.
lib. 2. cap. 10.
with much moan bewailed, and entered their caveats against profanation of Gods
holy day. Bucer writing to King Edward the sixth, Our English Josiah, cries
out, On those days, (viz. the Sabbaths) the works of the flesh are not to be
allowed, nor profane businesses, nor licentious sports, nor any other vicious
pleasures. And this was a good Memento, for a learned man to suggest to a
religious King. Indeed, to serve Satan upon Gods day, is not only the blemish
of particular persons, but the bane and ruin of Kingdoms; it lays a Nation
open to the invasions of man's sword, and to the effusions of Gods wrath. King
Henry the 8th. who was no Nonesuch of Piety, yet he strictly commanded all
Bishops and Preachers diligently to teach the people, That they all The
institution of a Christian man; A book set forth 1543. inscribed by King Henry
the 8th to all his loving subjects, and approved by both houses of Parliament.
offend against the fourth Commandment, who will not on Gods day cease from
their own carnal wills and pleasures, but pass away their time in idleness,
ingluttony and riot, in vain and idle pastimes, which is not according to the
tenor of the fourth Commandment, but after the usage and custom of the Jews.
So that now, Nazianzen says, To profane the Sabbath is after the custom of
the Gentiles. And King Henry the 8th. says, it is after the usage of the
Jews: So that it must be concluded: to defile Gods holy day, by loose and
profane practices, does better become a hardened Jew, or a darkened Gentile,
then a holy Christian, whose conversation should suit with a glorious Gospel.
The learned Gualter 2 Cor. 4 4.
bitterly exclaims; How do they sin with manifold impiety and sacrilege who
attribute this day to Mammon, Bacchus and Venus, who can feast, drink, play,
dance, whore, and follow their luxury and pride, and live so, that they never
serve the Devil more then on this day, which ought to be wholly consecrated to
God? And it is no way to be doubted, this is not the least cause of the evils
and calamities of our age: And because the wantonness of the flesh is most
untameable, and there is a ready passage from idleness to lust, Magistrates
should be awakened to consider, that it is their duty, to reduce the profane
contemners of the Gualt. 162. Homil. in Matthew. and 28. Homil. in Marc. Et 56.
Homil. in Luc.
Sabbath into order. And in another Homily, the same Author cries out, What
shall we say to them, who dedicate the sacred day of the Lord to Bacchus, Mars,
Venus, whilst they rest in drunken feastings, or play the wantons in lascivious
apparel, who whore, commit adultery, dance, and play the gladiatours, or are
busied about the sight of Spirituali honor hunc diem dominicum venerari
oportet, non convivando, non vinum prosundendo, non ebrietati, et choreis
vacando. Chrysostom.
most filthy plays; all these things are done at this day, and if it may be
lawful to confess the truth at no time; are there more, or more heinous
wickednesses committed, then upon the Sabbath, which should wholly be spent on
God, and in the works of piety? Thus feelingly this worthy man expresses
himself; and indeed the sharpest of his expostulations may be calculated for
the meridian of our English Nation. Englands Sabbath-breaking has been the
Trojan Horse which has brought misery into our Gates: The Pandora's box which
has let in those diseases which has sent so many thousands to their dust.
Hospinian made this sad Hospin. de Orig. Festor. Tigur. 1592. lib 1. Cap. 3.
complaint; That on no day more then on the Lords day, did the people give
themselves to dancing, to surfeting and drunkenness, belly-chear, and all kind
of voluptuous vanity. And Simler avowedly professes, That luxury, Simler
Comment. in Exodus Cap. 20. Tigur. 1588.
surffeting, drunkenness, and riotous feastings accompanied with dancing, did
visibly fight with the sanctification of the Sabbath. The doleful complaints
of others who have been eminent and famous in their Generations; Arel. Probl.
Theol. loc. 123. Oecolamp. farraq. in Annot. in 20. Exodus
as of Arclius, Oecolampadius, Zanchius, Chemnitius, etc. who sadly complained,
That God was not so grievously offended on other days, as on that day which
was most peculiarly devoted to his service; I say, these complaints might more
largely be set down, but dirty ways do not please the traveller. Nor shall I
lead the Reader further through the tears and sighs of those worthies, who did
sensibly lay to heart the profanation of Gods blessed Sabbath. We see then,
that the Sabbath has been wounded in the house of its friends; It Is
profanation has put grief into the hearts, tears into the eyes, and gall and
vinegar into the pens of worthy men, and they have left their moans upon
record, for the instruction and reformation of successive generations.

The violation of the Sabbath by loose and vicious practices, is reckoned among
the most horrid impieties: Sins as well as sinners are known by their company.
Every vain word is Gal. 5. 19. 20.
not put into the chapter of treasons; But Sabbath profanation is one of the
foulest deeds of the flesh, one of the blackest Solemn justititiae offuscant
nebulae peccati.
clouds which darkens the Sun of Righteousness. This sin is sometimes coupled
with a contempt of divine judgments, Ezekiel. 20. 13. which is a manifest piece
of rebellious Atheism. Sometimes this sin is reckoned with open Idolatry, Ezekiel.
20. 16. Romans 1. 20.
which is man's forgetfulness, not only of his Religion, but his Reason.
Sometimes Sabbath-prophanation is associated with disobedience and obstinate
rebel^ion, Ezekiel. 20. 21. which is a raising of Arms against heaven, and to
draw against the incomprehensible Jehovah. Sometimes this sin is reckoned with
a despising of Gods holy things, his Ministers, his Ordinances, his Sanctuary,
Ezekiel. 22. 8. which is nothing else, but to trample upon Pearls, and to pour
disdain on the means of salvation, nay, to tread under foot the bread of life,
which is a wickedness hardly out-vied, and leaves a people without remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Mr. Carthwright Carthw. in Proverb.
recko^s Sabbath-prophanation among the sins of Idolatry, gross superstition,
and enchantments; as if, when we were scandalous on a Sabbath, we consulted
with Hell it self, and Noscitur ex socio, qui non cognoscitur ex se.
we were bewitched into such wickedness: If we cannot read Sabbath-prophanation
in its definition, we may read it in its companion. This sin is one of the
heaviest links in the chain, a sin which the good Angels did never commit, and
the Devils cannot; the good Angels never had a Sabbath to profane, and the
evil Angels never had a Sabbath to enjoy; a sin it is which usually goes in the
worst company, and is seldom or never put into the endictment alone.

To profane the Sabbath by scandalous practices, is to re-act Belshazzars
madness, who did carouze in the vessels of the Insultat Belshazzar in vasis
templi dei, et statim ultio consecuta est. Hier.
Temple, Dan. 5. 2, 3. and what is this but to unconsecrate those things which
are set apart for the worship of God, and to unhallow Gods name? It was
Belshazzars crime to prostitute sacred things to unholy practices; and so do
those who profane the Sabbath, they deflowre a consecrated day; they spend
upon Gods monopoly, and lay open that day as Cant. 4. 12.
common and unclean, which is Christ's enclosed garden. It is Bishop of Armagh
in his Annals.
recorded of Ochus King of Persia, that being angry with the Egyptians, he
took their God Apis (which was a Cow they worshipped) and cut it into pieces,
and gave order to his Cooks to dress it, and to serve it up to dinner to be
Haeccine solennes dies deceant, quae alios non decent? Malorum licentia pietas
erit? Occasio luxuriae religio deputabitur? Tertul.
eaten; which sacrifice so enraged the Egyptians, and so inflamed Bagoas an
Egyptian born, that he kills Ochus, and when he was dead, cut his flesh into
gobbets, and left it to the Cats to eat, and instead of it put somewhat into
the Coffin, to be buried in the time of his Funerals, and of his thigh bones he
made hafts and handles for swords: Thus the profaning of this Idol, was sorely
and severely revenged; And shall not God, the infinite Majesty of heaven and
earth, Jer. 5. 9.
much more revenge the abuse of his holy and sacred day, when it is served up
to please the palate of the intemperate, Deuteronomy. 32. 42.
the curiosity of the proud, and the lust of the wanton sinner? Shall not the
Lord be avenged on such a Generation as this? If a fancyed veneration being
affronted, make men vindicative; surely a due and just honor being Isa. 43. 24.
abused by luxury and profaneness will inflame the God of revenges, to pursue
those sins with the greatest severitie. Servivi, inquit deus, vestro ex
sacrifi^iis quaestui, honori, epulis, and voluptatibus. Stor.
To pandorize the Sabbath to our lusts and vanities, what is it but to make God
serve with our sins; Or as our Savior phraseth it, To turn the house of prayer
into a den of thieves? Mat. 21. 13. Is it fit for the witch of Endor to put the
Devil into Samuels mantle, 1 Samuel 28. 12. And for wicked Ahaz to put the Idols
Altar into Gods temple, 2 Kings 16. 14, 15. Indeed the same wickedness they
act, who make the Lords day vile and cheap by sinful abominations, which
should be honorable, Isa. 58. 13. in holy worship and service, and those
adorations which become the Lord of the Mark 2. 28.
Sabbath.

To vitiate the Sabbath by visible profaneness, opens a way to all
licentiousness, and will be bitterness in the latter end. Sabbath-breaking is
usually the preface to other sins. The 2 Samuel 2. 26.
breaking of the two tables commonly begins at the fourth Commandment; we first
make bold with Gods day; and then with Gods name, and so break the third
Commandment; and then we can trinkle in his worship, and so violate the second;
and by degrees we can slide into thefts, adulteries Deuteronomy. 5. 21.
and murders, and so dash all the Commandments in Isa. 28. 8.
pieces: he will easily covet his neighbors Wife for wantonness, Claudius
Tiberius Nero, vocatus fuit, Claudius Biberius Mero propter ebrietatem, and
intemperantiam. Sueton.
who will sacrilegiously arrest Gods holy day, for his excess and drunkenness.
It is the observation of an ingenuous person, That he has heard many
malefactors at their execution, bitterly bewail their profanation of the Lords
day, and humbly acknowledge that sin was the leading cause of all ensuing
mischiefs and miseries: At the Gallows, their Conscience has pointed at the
very sin which had been the chief actor in their woeful tragedy: When Satan
has prevailed with us to violate Gods holy day, he has got his head in, and
he will easily draw in his whole body. Profanation Gulones nihil faciunt nisi
ingerere, digerere, et egerere. Bern.
of the Sabbath is the gates of Hell, the foundation upon which all other sins
are erected. Indeed the careful observation of this day is a chain upon the
soul, and ties it up from sinful vagaries; it casts an awe upon the heart,
that it cannot presently startle; but when the chain is filed off, there is no
end of licentious ranges; as Cattle when they are got out of the pound, they
run into every ones field: This sin of Sabbath-breaking it is like a Serpent,
whose sting is in its tail. Indeed sanctified afflictions turn a Serpent into a
rod; but Sabbath-prophanation turns a rod into a Serpent, and brings the most
prosperous sinner into unexpected calamity. It is observable of the people of
Israel, that sighs and groans Exodus 3. 7.
brought them out of Egypt, and Songs and Vanities on Gods day brought them
into Babylon. The Hebrew phrase Ezekiel. 23. 38.
in Ezekiel. 20. 13. is very expressive, the same word (...) Chalal, which is
rendered to pollute and profane, viz. the Ezekiel. 20. 13.
Sabbath, signifies likewise to tripudiate and dance, as the (...)
Daughters of Shiloh did, Judges 21. 21. where the same word is used; to denote
unto us, one method of the Jews in profaning the Sabbath, viz. They passed it
away jocularly Psalm. 87. 7.
in sinful frolicks and immodest vanities; and this was one of the chief sins,
they might sit down by the waters of Babylon, Psalm. 137. 1. Cyril.
and weep over. It is undeniable, that the prostituting of the Sabbath by
profane practices, both has, and will ruin Gaud^ntius etc. Judaei non deo
sed sibi, die Sabbati ociantur. Muscul.
Nations, Families, Persons, and dig the grave to bury all comforts in. It was
generally complained of by holy and devout men in the primitive times; that the
Jews neglecting spiritual duties which God commanded, abused the Sabbath The
Jews which were killed at Jerusalem by the command of Florus, were 630. By the
Inhabitants of Caesarea were 20000. at Scithopolis 30000. at Ptolemais 2000. at
Alexandria 50000. at Joppa 8400. at Askelon 1000. at A^haca 15000. at Gariz^m
11600. at Jotopata 30000. at Gamala 9000. at the si^ge of Jerusalem 1100000,
etc. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
to case and luxury, and wasted that holy day in gluttony and idleness, and
idle delicacies; and this accusation in the first times of the Gospel became
proverbial, so that to keep the Sabbath loosly, was to keep it after the manner
of the fews. And what judgments God brought upon them in those days, how he
did scatter them, unchurch them, unpeople them, and leave them to be a vagabond
Generation to all successive ages, who knows not, is a great stranger to
Antiquity. It would fill a Volume to relate the several slaughters of them, and
their exiles from Nations, France, Spain, England, and other places; so that
even at this day their mask is their best security, and their veil is their
only safety. The Quotations in the margin give in some evidence of the infinite
slaughters which were made of them, they were a prey even to all Nations, as if
they were only fit to glut the Sword of an enraged enemy. Let us therefore
observe the Apostolical advice, and take these perishing Jews for an ensample
of Gods heavy displeasure against debauched practices on Gods holy day.

To serve our lusts upon a Sabbath, is to throw off Jehovah, and to serve other
Gods. The person who is intemperate on a Sabbath, does he not serve Bacchus?
The effeminate person, does he not serve the Goddess Venus? And Phil. 3. 19.
the luxurious person, he makes his belly his god; He that In nostris ecclesiis
diebus dominicis carnis voluptatibus profusissime absque ulla dissimulatione
servitur, quemadmodum Judaei, qui die Sabbati ociantur, et libidinantur, acta
vero, et studia carnis Baccho, et Veneri, luxui, et sastui omnino deputan^ur.
Muscul.
prates away a Sabbath, does his devotion to Mercurius; he that plays at
Cudgels and wrestles, in a seeming valor acts his service to Mars; he that
sports away the Sabbath in Courtships and caresses, offers his sacrifice to
Jupiter, that wanton God, whose effeminacies are the best part of the Legend,
we have repored by Pagan Historians. Strict and holy communion only becomes a
holy God on a holy day. Musculus very piously and gravely cries out, Let us
throw off all cloaks of dissimulation, and if we spend our Sabbaths in the
pleasures of the flesh, let us never say we keep a day to the Lord Jesus, but
let us say, we will worship Bacchus and Venus, or some Idol God, who is the
Patron of such wickedness. And indeed a Tavern or Alehouse on the Lords day, is
a fit temple for Bacchus; a Stews or Whorehouse is a fit Sanctuary for Priapus;
a Table full of vain chat, is a fit tabernacle for Mercurius. The beauty of
holiness is written on Gods house, where Ordinances are marrow and fatness, and
communion with Christ the wine on the lees. Let us no more halt between two
Opinions. If Jehovah be God, let us keep his day holy; but if with Julian we
have Apostatized to the Idols of the Gentiles, let us proclaim it to the world
by making the Sabbath a stage to Dagon est deus venture, quia ventris gratia
colebatur, and deducitur a (...) frumentum Alap.
act our lewdness upon. Alapide does elegantly and pregnantly observe, that
Dagon mentioned in the Scriptures, 1 Samuel 5. 2, 3, 4. is nothing but a belly
god; if then we will turn Philistinis and worship their Idol, we may with more
excuse pursue our surfets on the Lords day. In the Primitive times a holy
observation of the Lords day was an infallible sign of a Christian Professor;
and in all times lewdness upon that day, spoke a totalchange from that holy
profession; but if we are still ambitious of the name of Christian, let the
holy observance of Gods blessed day be our testimonial, for to live in
pleasures on that day speaks us dead while we live, 1 Timothy 5. 6.

To pollute the Sabbath by vioious practices, is to break many Commnadments at
once. The Adulterer on a Sabbath breaks the 7th. and the fourth Commandment;
the Swearer breaks the third and the fourth Commandment; the rioter breaks the
sixth and the fourth Commandment. Profaneness on a Sabbath is a multiplied
sin, a twisted wickedness; it is as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 5. 18. to draw
iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope. We may say
of this lowdness, as Leah said of Gad, Behold a troop, Genesis 30. Si quis ad hoc
Sabbatum requitsceret, at memoriam beneficiorum dei recolerct, interim tamen in
aliud peceatum incidit; Annon judicandus erat violasse hoc praeceptum de
sanctificando Sabbato? Est.
11. Estius sharply expostulates, If God give us a Sabbath to solemnize his
great and glorious benefits, if on this day we fall into any sin, shall we not
be accounted violatours of this holy day? Both the streams meet, the particular
sin committed, and the breach of the Sabbath. This Sabbath profanation brings
forth twins at least; this evil is as the grapes of Sodom, which were in
clusters, Deuteronomy. 32. 32. It is not a common seam-rent, but it is a rent in the
whole cloth. This cursed emphasis may be annexed to every lewdness on the
Sabbath; the sinner added this to all the rest of his evils, he brake the
Commandment also concerning Sabbath-holiness and observation. Luke 3. 20.


To profane Gods holy and sacred day, is not only morally sinful, but it is
opinionatively evil and Popish. It is the Finito prius sacro licet iter facere,
venari, studere super lites propter pecuniam. Vendere, Animalia occidere ad
victum, constituere Theatra prospectaculis. Tol. inst. Sacerdot. l. 4. c. 25.
round assertion of Cardinal Tollet, That the public service being over on the
Sabbath, it is lawful to ride journeys, to hunt and follow the game, to plead
Causes for money and advantage, to kill beasts for provision, to set any thing
to sail, and to set up Theaters for plays and shows. This then is the Doctrine
of the Romish Conclave: So we see, to act loosly on the Lords day, is not only
the corruption of our life, but of our opinion, and it taints our judgment as
well as our conversation; it is the distemper of the head as well as of the
heart, and is a plain striking hand with the Mother of Harlots, Rev. 17. 5. So
that to act our debaucheries upon Gods holy and blessed Sabbath, it is to turn
Jew, to turn Heathen, to turn Papist, nay to turn every thing, but Saint; and
in so doing we are not only profane, Felis. f. 305. Catan. in Chatec. Romans f.
235. Tit. Fest. f. 185.
but heretical. To add only one thing more, to what has been said; a Learned
man observes, that it is put into the Roman Catechize, that it is lawful to
kill provisions, bake fish, mend and repair Bridges, Highways, Churches,
teach Vaulx. Chatec. c. 3. f. 53.
profane Arts, Card, Fence, Fiddle, and make music for gain and hire on Gods
most blessed day.

CHAP. XLII. An expostulation with Enthusiastic persons, who cry down the
Sabbath, under the specious pretense that every day is a Christians Sabbath.
IT has been the lot of the Christian Sabbath in all ages of the Church, even
from the very Resurrection of Christ, and the first dawnings of the Gospel, to
run the gantlet, and to endure the lashes of virulent and impetuous
adversaries. Ebionitae Sabbatum diei dominicae pari observantia celebrandum
adjungebant. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 21.
Presently after the Apostles, the Ebionites vented their malice against it,
and did proclaim to the world that the Jewish Sabbath was to be observed by all
with great Reverence, nay with equal respect to the Christian; both were to
walk hand in hand with equal degree of honor and veneration, as Eusebius that
Ecclesiastical Historian of Renown informs us at large. Others there were, who
treading in the steps of former Heretics, asserted the Jewish Sabbath to
deserve as rich a Crown as the Christian, and to be celebrated with as much
care and observation: And these are mentioned by Clemens Roman. Episc. l.
Constit. Apostol. 2. c. 63. etc. 7. etc. 24.
Clemens Romanus in his second book of Apostolical Constitutions. But against
these, the venerable Council of Laodicea passed sentence, in detestation of the
error, as may be seen in the Canons of that Council. But it is no wonder if
those who deny the Divinity of Christ's Person, as the Ebionites S^n. Laodic.
Can. 29.
did, will likewise take away the honor of his day, and bring in an obsolete
Festival to strip it of a moiety of its glory and observance; whenas two Suns
may as well become the firmament, as two Sabbaths the Church.

In the grosser times of Popery, Gods day lay under some Chatec. Romans part 3.
in tertium praecept. Catan. in Chat. Romans fol. 234.
eclipse, as well as his truth; and then it was horribly defiled by stupendous
idolatry, by Will Worship, Mass-worship, Bread-worship, Saint-worship,
Image Worship, and other Mysteries of Antichristian hypocrisy; then it was
hard Canis. Chat. cap. 3. fol. 84.
to find the gold of a Sabbath in the rubbish of superstition.

In these latter days our Christian Sabbath (like Christ the Author of it)
has been Crucified between two thieves; Profane persons on the one hand, and
Familistical spirits on the other; the former wounding it by grosser
abominations: How many in these latter ages have known no Temple but a Tavern,
no Sanctuary but a Stews, no Chalice but a drinking Bowl, no Psalm but an
immodest Song, no Communion, but good fellowship, on Gods holy day? And indeed
how much do these Sons of Belial cloud Gods blessed day with their deeds of
infernal darkness?

But there is another generation risen up in our present Incessimus diei
dominicae eversores sub praetextu libertatis Christianae; ut body sunt
Anabaptistae. Prof. Leid.
age, who sub larva pietatis, under a pretense of religion, attempt to
overthrow, and wholly to subvert the Lords day, and yet they are so passionate
in their love to the Sabbath, that they would have every day a Sabbath. As he
said, would all the Lords people were Prophets, Numb. 11. 29. so these wish all
the days of the week were Lords days. They think they give Christ too scant
measure, to give him but one day in the week; they conceive our whole life
should be a continual Sabbath. And thus the Devil, according to his wonted
custom, turns himself into an Angel of light, that he 2 Cor. 11. 14.
may the more undiscernedly deceive and beguile incautelous souls. But the work
of this Chapter will be, to ferret this opinion out of all its lurking holes,
and to show that the feigned sanctity of these pretenders, is only a vain
pretense, Multitudo medi^orum interfecit Regem.
for by a seeming multiplication of Sabbaths, they annihilate the true Sabbath,
and thrust it out of the world. And as it was once said of the Grecian
Emperor when he was sick, that a multitude of Physicians killed the King: So a
multitude of pretended Sabbaths, will destroy the true one, which Ignatius
calls the Queen of days. (...).


There is some difference among Divines, upon whom to father this demure fancy,
this feavourish zeal, which runs over into all kind of absurdity. The learned
Professors of Leyden, affix this opinion upon the Anabaptists, and in downright
terms, call them the over-throwers of the Lords day, notwithstanding, with
guilty Adam, they run among the trees to hide themselves from the charge of the
truth, and think to take sanctuary in the notion of Christian liberty. Dr.
Twisse (that mirror of learning) lays the brat at the door of Swenkfeldus, as
if he first gave new life to this old error, and received it by a large stride
from Manes, the father of the Manichees, who threw this wild fire up and down
in the Primitive Church; against whom holy Augustine planted his batteries with
glorious success: Yet the Reverend Twisse will not exempt the Anabaptists from
their share in the propagation of this pestilential error. Walaeus, one of the
Leyden Professors tells us, that the Anabaptists turn the fourth The Manichees
of old made all days equally holy, under the Gospel. Mr. Shep.
Commandment into a mere Ceremony, and so that Sun being set, we are left in
the dark, and so know no distinction of days; and he assures us, that the
Socinians are brethren in this iniquity. The learned Rivet, another of the
Leyden Professors, in his tract upon the Decalogue gives in his free suffrage
to the judgment of his Colleague Walaeus. The Familists likewise have set to
their shoulder to carry on this work of Satan, to level all days, and so
depose the Lords day Mere ceremoniale esse quartum preceptum, ac proinde per
adventum Christi plane abolitum body fere sentiunt Anabaptistae. Wall.
from its just royalty and honor. These brainsick persons, who delight to
call themselves the family of love, have willingly drowned the Sabbath in the
deluge of all other days: But let it be the shame of all these Sects, to make
all days equal, and equally to be regarded; for so instead of Christian
liberty, there is brought into the Church an Heathenish licentiousness: Nay,
the Heathen^ had always their set and solemn days, nay weekly, nay some of
them the seventh day in imitation of, or allusion to the Sabbath, which first
was fixed on that day: and at this day, the barbarous Turks have their weekly
festival every Friday, the first day of Quid est haec opinio, nisi barbarie^
petulantia? Chemnit. in Exam. Council. Trident.
Mahomets Kingdom, when he fled from Mecca to Jethrib, and thenceforth
constituted that day, the first day of their week, and of their year.
Chemnitius calls this levelling error, rude impudency, and barbarous folly.
Nay, it is the very dregs of ignorance, not to observe that day with all due
solemnity, which has so long been kept by the universal Church of God. Against
these Familists and Libertines, many of our modern Divines have drawn up the
battle, wherein Truth has gained a triumphant Victory: But these spiritual
levellers, who make all days alike, (and would they not make all Estates
alike?) and give no pre-eminence to the Lords day, have some paper forts to fly
unto, to prevent a rout, which are partly built upon pretended reason, and
partly upon mistaken Scripture, I shall give them the full scope of their own
defense, and easily show the vanity of their pleas and allegations.

merely ceremonial, and ceremonies are only for a Ceremonia (...). Bishop Andr.
time, they include decay in their very name; and expired ceremonies are no
obligations upon us, to obedience or observance.

rest of the decalogue should not follow, and Quartum praeceptum est pars
Decalogi, in quo nihil mere ceremoniale praecipitur, quum lex Decalogi est lex
morilis, et aeterna, duabus tabulis a deo inscripta, et december verba non novem
tantum amplecti asseritur. Wall.
the other Nine Commandments breath out their last with the Fourth; and so the
hedge of Gods Ten Words being broken down, we may leap over into any sin; for
the Apostle avers, That where there is no Law, there is no transgression, Romans
4. 15. Sin is the transgression of the Law, as another Apostle affirms, 1 John
3. 4. And the Law being expired and disanull'd, the transgression cease; So
we may covet our neighbors wife without immodesty, the law against it being
out of date and cassated; and what a gap would this open to all licentiousness?
How would this turn the world into a Stews and a Brothel house? For as Walaeus
rightly argues. The fourth Commandment is part of the Decalogue, one of Gods
ten words, in which nothing merely ceremonial is commanded, seeing the Law of
the Decalogue is moral and eternal, written in two Tables by God Exodus 34 28.
himself, Deuteronomy. 10. 4. and is called Gods ten words, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. not his nine
words, to intimate the indivisible Exodus 19. 16.
union between the fourth, and the rest of the Commandments. Exodus 31. 16.
Considering likewise it is a Commandment partaking Levit. 19 3.
of the same privileges with the rest:

1. It was delivered with the same admirable Majesty.

2. It was written with the same finger of God. Levit. 23. 3. Exodus 31. 13.
Jam. 2. 10.


3. It was pressed with the same, if not greater severity, with the rest.

4. It was laid up in the same Ark with the other Nine; Quod pronunciatum
Apostolus, Christianis ad quod scribit, applicat, cujus veritas constare
nequit, nisi and illud sub N. T. de quorti Praecepti transgressione locum
habet; alioquin en^m, si in hoc praecepto nihil morale sit, qui illud non
servarit, is non esset reus violatae ligis, sed potius legis ejus rectus
observator, et Christianae libertatis rectus assertor. Wall.
and therefore we may fairly conclude, that the same casualty which befalls the
fourth, most inevitably overtake the other nine Commandments. This likewise is
demonstrated by our Saviors assertion, Mat. 22. 37. in his pressing love to
God and our Neighbor, as the sum and scope of the law, which sum is moral and
perpetual, and includes the fourth as well as the other Commandments, for how
can we love God, and not keep his day? And we may likewise take notice, that
the total sum always takes in every particular figure. The learned Walaeus
very well observes from that text of the Apostle James, Jam. 2. 10. For
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of
all. I say, this learned man observes, this injunction of the Apostle James
could carry no weight with it, and bear no stress, if the keeping of the
Sabbath by force of the fourth Commandment, as well as the observing of the
other nine Commandments, was not necessary; for then Christians might break
this Commandment, and be innocent, nay, rather be observers of Gods will, and
faithful assertors of Christian liberty; for that Commandment which now is not
moral, the breach of it is no violation of any Law, and so no offense: but who
can see, how the fourth Commandment slips out of the rest of the Law, how comes
this Pearl to drop from the Chain, that this Precept should not require our
conformity, as well as the other Commands of the immutable Decalogue? And how
can the whole Law, 2 Samuel 10. be observed, if so important a Command, as the
fourth is, be left to our liberty to break and violate? And I may here reassume
the forementioned Text, Jam. 2. 10. how solicitous and careful should we be to
keep the fourth Commandment, which is so considerable apart of the whole Law;
for offending in this one point, we shall wrap up our selves in the guilt of
the whole Decalogue, and sin against the dignity and authority of the whole
Law, we shall be liable to the same punishment, as if we had scratched every
Commandment. This solemn text of Scripture might overawe our hearts to a holy
Violet homo totam legem, et si non totum legis. Accipienda sunt december
praecepta, non disjunctim, sed conjunctim, et completive, tanquam una lex
absoluta, Justitiae, et sanctitatis regula. Dr. M.
obedience to the Commandment of the Sabbath. It is a notable observation of a
learned Man: The precepts of God are not to be taken disjoyntly, but
conjoyntly, not severally, but altogether, as they make one entire Law, and
rule of Righteousness; the contempt reflecting upon the whole law, when it is
wilfully violated in any part. A grave and worthy speech. The Decalogue is a
body, he who injurieth any one member, wrongeth the whole body; he who slights
any one Commandment, suppose the fourth, sheds a dishonor upon the two Tables.

Besides, there are many things in the fourth Commanment, which loudly proclaim
its continuance, and standing morality. The working six days, which is the
indulgence of the command, speaks it m^st just and equitable, that we
Justissimum est et aequissimun, ei cujus toti sumus, unum diem e septem
co^secrare, sex alios nostris laboribus concessit, ^um tamen po^uisset jure
suo, etc. Riv.
should consecrate one, (viz.) that day which remains to the service of God;
and there is nothing more agreeable to natural reason and justice, as Rivet
speaks; and therefore to lay all days open, to follow the bias and sway of
our wills, is most fantastic and irreligious, and speaks the Assertours of
such an opinion, an irregular Sect, and salt which has lost its savor, as a
holy man calls them. And that rule of Zanchy is most observable and
authentical, It is a most wretched and wicked thing to assert, there are no
days set apart for the more special worship of God, and to despise those
Imptum est, et iniquum, aut nullos esse dies divino cultui dedicatos asserere,
aut eos qui sunt, contemnere. Zanch.
which are set apart to the same intent. Nor can the sanctification of the
Sabbath be ceremonial, or vanishing; for Prayer is as needful for us, as the
Jews; and so hearing of the Word, receiving of the Sacrament, and those
Ordinances which fill up the Sabbath. Moreover, rest and refreshing for our
selves and families, for our Servants and Cattle, is as well accommodated to
the weakness of the flesh in the times of the Gospel, as in the times of the
Law. To all which may be added, that the great end of the fourth Opus
creationis e^t opus stupendum, immo (...).
Commandment, viz. the serious consideration of the great and stupendous works
of the Creation, and so to be led to admire the Creator, the great Workmaster
of this admirable structure of the World, is no way unbecoming Christians,
Ratio praecepti quarti est, quia sex diebus deus fecit caelum, et terram, and
die septimo requievit, jam regula est, ratio immutabilis facit praeceptum
immutabile, and ratio hujus praecepti nunquam transitura est, praeceptum ergo
in perpetuum durabit. Dr. Andr. Epis. Winton.
nor heterogeneous to their vivid and holy speculations, which are only
heightened to us, by an additional argument, of the mellifluous work of man's
Redemption: But to draw out the Answer no further; It is most remarkable, and
to be noted with an Higgaion Selah, that in the 31 of Exodus 14. God presently
after the exhibition of the Decalogue, the whole body of the ten Commandments,
singles out the fourth Commandment alone, and tells the Jews, Ye shall keep
the Sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you; every one who defiles it, shall
surely be put to death; for, whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall
be cut off from amongst his people: It is a Sabbath of Rest, holy to the Lord,
v. 15. The Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, they shall observe the
Sabbath throughout their Generations for a perpetual Covenant, v. 16. How does
the Lord again and again press the keeping of the Sabbath, two or three times
in one Verse, and one Verse after another, as if this was his darling
Commandment, and he took the greatest care of it, and did give it the primacy
over all the other Precepts; And indeed, it is a golden chain which joins the
two tables, and if this clasp be broken, all falls asunder. Nor can it possibly
be demonstrated, that this blessed Command for the Sabbath, dying and expiring,
as a fading Ceremony, all the rest must not necessarily be laid asleep in a
final abrogation: And therefore the Antinomians, Cowd. and Palm on the Sabbath,
part the 2 d, p. 51.
and many of the Anabaptists, roundly cast off the whole Decalogue, as nothing
appertaining to, or concerning Christians: so worthy Mr. Cawdrey, and Mr.
Palmer observe. It is the observation of Rivet, that the observation of the
Sabbath, is thrice solemnly mentioned in the Book of Exodus:

1. When it is reckoned among the Moral Laws, Exodus 20. 8. and safely sheltred
among the rest of the ten Commandments: S^n^iri denvo et commendari
observationem Sabbati omnes vident, et j^m ter de Sabbato actum est. 1. In
praecepto quarto. 2. In legibus illis politicis quae habentur in Exodus 23. 12.
quod magistratus incumbit cura, prioris tobulae et ^osterioris, et hic severe
interdicit transgressores eos supplicio copitali addicens. Rivet.
and would be so still, was it not worried out by the violence and absurdities
of brainsick Heretics; And thus lodged, it is to be pressed by the zeal of
the Minister.

2. When it is reckoned among the Political Laws, Exodus 23. 12. And so the
observation of it, is commended to the care of the Magistrate.

3. When it is singled out by its self, and earnestly urged by God, Exodus 31.
14, 15. as if his honor was more concerned in this Command, then in any other:
and so it is propounded to the practice of every professor of Religion to the
end of the World; the Sabbath being still a sign between God and his People,
even to all generations. To wind up all, It is no less, then an impeachment of
divine Wisdom, to think God would urge an expiring Ceremony with such
diversity of reasons, Exodus 20. 8. with such variety of Arguments, and motives,
Exodus 31. 15. with such severity of threats, Exodus 31. 16.

be ceremonial, because it was ordained in Paradise, Genesis 2. 3. before
Ceremonies had a being: For all ceremonies point at something in the Idem etiam
manifestum est, quod ab initio creationis, cum nullus locus fuit ceremoniis, ad
Christum Redemptorem spectantibus unusdies eseptemcultui dei fuit consecratus.
Ames.
Gospel, as the Pole Star turns to the North. Now Adam not being f^llen, there
was no need of a Gospel; Christ came into the world, to save that which was
lost, Mat. 8. 11. And in the state of innocence nothing was lost, there was not
a freckle upon man's beauty, and therefore no ceremony could take place; And
besides, the Sabbath continued, when all ceremonies left their being, and
Christ was come into the world. The Sun rising, all stars disappear. Now Christ
discoursing with his Disciples privately, Mat. 24. 3. Among other things, he
advises them to pray that their flight be not on the Sabbath day, Mat. 24. 20.
which counsel related to sad and dolorous times, Institutionem Sabbati non esse
ceremonialem, et temporalem, ex eo apparet, quod nihil habet proprium Judaeis,
aut tempori coremonialis legis. Ames.
which were to befall them when he was ascended up to his Father; and yet we
may observe a Sabbath in being, which evidently shows, that the Sabbath no way
can be a ceremony, Christ's coming in the flesh chasing away all such evanid
shaddows: I need not mention, that the Lords day spoken of, Rev. 1. 10. when
John was in his Vision, is by all concluded to be our Christian Sabbath, the
set weekly day of our solemn worship, and this was many years after Jerusalem
was in its ashes. And it is acutely noted by Dr. Ames, that the observation of
the Sabbath, has nothing in it, more proper to the Jew, then to any other
Naitno: for to worship God solemnly, and frequently, one day in the week, is
Ratio naturalis dictat, consentaneum esse, ut dei cultus frequenter exerceat^r.
Ames.
most convenient for all Professors of the true Religion, be they of what
Nation they will, and therefore our own necessity dictates the profit of such
solemn, and set communion with God. Nay, it is a Principle familiar to the
Heathens, who know no light, but that dim light of Nature, to appoint set times
and solemn seasons for the worship of their Idol gods: and therefore the
Sabbath participates nothing of the nature of a Jewish ceremony.

level all days, making them alike, and know no Christian Sabbath, but the
bosom of the Father, typified Saltmarsh's sparkles of glory p. 265.
in the seventh day of the first Creation, as some of these men are pleased to
speak, I say, they have another subterfuge for their wild opinion. And thus
they argue, The Christian liberty, whereby we may, where and when we list,
worship and serve God, frees us, not only from the circumstance of place, John
4. 21, 23. But also delivers us ftom being tied to any circumstance of time:
But as we may worship in what place we will, so likewise at what time we will,
without the breach of any command. To which it may be replied,

this liberty which is pretended, is no way authorized by Scripture: We find
our Savior speaking of a Sabbath, after his ascension to the Father, Mat. 24.
20. The Prima Sabbati, post Sabbatum fuit dies dominica.
Apostle and diverse Christians meet on the first day of the week for Gospel
Ordinances, as now the fixed Sabbath of the Christians, Acts 20. 7. And Paul
lays it as an injunction Oecumen.
upon the Churches of Galatia and Corinth, to bring their collections on that
day, for then the Christian Assemblies met together for holy converse with God,
1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Dies dominica est prima hebdomadis feria, qua dominus a
mortuis resurrexit, quae jam et tum Christianis sacra est, Aposto^orum
authoritate, congressibus ecclesiasticis, in locum Sabbati judaici, dicata, ^t
videre est ex 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. et Act. 20. 7. Est igitur dies dominicae ex
traditione Apostolica vetus observatio: and Apostoli immediata dei
inspiratione, divinas litteras scribebant, et hanc feriam in ordinem
Ecclesiasticum deponebant. Hinc dominicae diei seriam, non modo Ecclesiae
Christianae sacram fecerunt, sed in Scripturam sacram quoque retulerunt, et jam
dies dominica est tenenda, quia non tenetur, praeter sed juxta Scripturas. Par.
And this day is called the Lords day, Revel. 1. 10. as being set apart for
communion with the Lord. Now, if the Scriptures allow us not this liberty, it
is insolence and wantonness to lay claim unto it. Christian liberty must be
bottomed on the word of Christ, or else, it is not liberty but licentiousness,
the loosning of the r^ines, not the laying hold on our Privilege.

To that which is cleared from Scripture, may be added the testimony of the
Reverend Perkins, who writing on Revel. 1. 10. says thus, The day which is
here called the Lords day, among the Jews was the first day of the week, called
sometimes by us Sunday; It is called the Lords day for two reasons:

1. Because on this day Christ rose from death to life, for Christ was buried
on the evening of the Jews Sabbath, which is our Friday, and rested in the
grave, their whole Sabbath, which is our Saturday, and rose the first day of
the week early on the morning, which is our Sunday.

2. The first day of the week (according to the Jews account) came instead of
the Jews Sabbath, and was ordained a day of Rest for the times of the New
Testament, and sanctified for the solemn worship of the Lord, and for this
cause especially it is called the Lords day; the manifestation whereof (as some
think) John chiefly intended in this title. And it is most consonant to the
tenor of the New Testament to hold, That Christ himself was the Author of the
change of the Sabbath from the last, to the first day of the week, and my
reasons are these:

1. That which the Apostles delivered, and enjoined in the Church, that they
received from Christ, either by voice, or instinct, for they delivered nothing
of their own head: But the Apostles delivered and enjoined this Sabbath to the
Church, to be kept a day of holy rest to the Lord, as appears, 1 Cor. 16. 1,
2. where Paul ordained in the Churches of Galatia and Corinth, that the
collection for the poor, should be on the first day of the week; this he left
not to the choice of the Church, but appointed it by Authority Apostolical from
Christ. Now the day of collecting for the poor (as appears in the Histories
of the Church) was on the Sabbath day, when the people were assembled for Gods
service. For this was the custom of the Church for many years after Christ:
Apostolica institutione Collecta fieri solebat die dominico; ubi conveniebant
fideles in ecclesia. Hinc patet Apostolorum tempore muta tum esse Sabbatum in
diem dominicum.
First to have the Word preached, and the Sacraments administered, and then to
gather for the poor. And for this cause in the writings of the Church, the
Lords Supper is called a Sacrifice, an Oblation; Because therewith was joined
the collection for the Poor, which was a spiritual Oblation, not to the Lord,
but to the Church, for the relief of the Poor; and this collected relief was
sent to the poor Saints abroad.

2. The Apostles themselves kept this day for the Sabbath of the New Testament,
Acts 10. 27. And it cannot be proved, that they observed any other day for an
holy Rest unto the Lord after Christ's ascension, save only in one case, when
they came into the Assemblies of the Jews, who would keep no other, then their
old Sabbath of the Law.

All this and more, that man of renown in the Churches of Christ, has left
upon record, to assert the Christian Sabbath, as a set and standing day for the
solemn worship of God every week, till the second coming of Christ. And
therefore clamorously to plead a liberty to worship God, as where, so when we
please, in Gospel Times, is not only a contradiction to holy Writ, but it is
likewise a giving the lie to the Testimony of the most approved Lights of the
Church.

To be left to our selves to serve God when we please, and not to be tied to
any set day of solemn worship is not Christian liberty, but unchristian misery.
This is our snare, not our privilege: If we may serve God at any time, we will
serve God at no time. Man's corrupt nature is not so accommodated Romans 8 7.
to spiritual Ordinances, that it should be often fledged with satisfaction and
delight. The Jews who had a clear command for Sabbath observation, were weary
of Quidam asser^^ ^t omnes dies esse aequales, and quilibet dies est Sabbatum
Christianis; sed hi dum Sabbatum multiplicant, annihilant; and multitudo
festorum interficiet Sabbatum.
their Sabbaths, and wished them over, that they might set forth Wheat, Amos 8.
5. And yet this people was disciplined by God himself, and carried in his
bosom, Numb. 11. 12. Shall men be left to themselves to serve God when they
please? when will the worldling shut up his shop, to be at leisure for holy
worship and communion? And when will Proud persons leave consulting the Glass
in their Chamber, to consult with the glass of Gods word? The covetous person
will hardly spare time for solemn and divine services, and to wait upon the
worship of the Almighty. Voluptuous persons will be lovers of pleasure, more
then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. And those who frequent the stews will seldom
approach the Sanctuary. Truly to leave man to his own liberty to serve God, is
only to give the reins to loose nature, to range in the broad way which leads
to destruction. We see experimentally, that all Laws divine and humane which
concern the Sabbath cannot shackle corrupt man, and keep him close to a due
observation of it: Some sin it away in acts of gross profaneness, some trifle
it away in foolish talk and recreations, some formalize it away in sleeping at
Ordinances, or neglecting family duties; and he who keeps it strictly and
purely is a Job 33. 23. De iis timendu^ qui omnes dies aequant, dum dies
aequant, aequarent etiam and divitias, and dum arripiunt praeceptum e decalogo,
opes arriperent e loculo.
Professor one of a thousand. To take all obligations from conscience that it
may serve God when it pleases, and not be tied to any set time, is to spur
forward corrupt man to irreligion, who is too forward of himself. A grave man
seriously asserts, Lay waste the Sabbath, and lay waste all Religion; that
blessed day being the hedge to keep in Man to his duty, which being broken
down, how should we turn as wild beasts of the forest! So that this ruinous
opinion will easily prove the unhappy Parent of a thousand souldestroying
mischiefs; it not being probable, that laying aside Mic. 5. 8.
the Sabbath of the Lord, we should lie under the smiles of the Lord of the
Sabbath.

all places (in a fair sense) are equally holy; but it does not follow from
hence that all times are so; and Walaeus stands stiffly to it, the Mat. 18. 20.
argument is invalid. For it is not easy or meet, but is very John 4. 21.
dissonant from divine wisdom, to appoint in his word all 1 Timothy 2. 8.
particular places where his people should meet, their meetings Mat. 1. 11.
being to be in so many thousand several Provinces and Nobis jam quoniam
Christus adveniens expiavit universam terram, Omnis locus est Oratorium. Aug.
Countries, in so many various situations; for so the variation would be
endless, and so incongruous and useless to set them down in the word; but it is
not so in respect of solemn time, or a solemn day for divine worship; for here
in the Lord may easily appoint a particular day to be observed, according to
the rising and setting of the Sun proportionably throughout the whole world.
And so the Church of God in all Ages have observed the same Precinct of time,
viz. The Lords day for the solemn worship of the most high.

But these familistical spirits have not only their argumentative pleas, but
they can bring Scripture too; as Satan will never want a text of Scripture to
varnish over an error, and put a good face over an evil opinion; especially
since he fought a duel with Christ himself, by the dint of the sword of the
spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. And there are three texts of
Scripture which they usually urge for the Mat. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
support and confirmation of this wild fancy; I shall examine them severally,
and see what strength is in them.

first text is, Romans 14. 6. He that regards a day, regards it unto the
Lord; and he that regards not the day, to the Lord he regards it not. This
therefore argues our Christian liberty, in respecting all days alike, which
are not discerned, but only by command of the Magistrate, say these familists;
of the Church, say the Rhemists; but of neither Isli homines abutuntur Scriptur
is, et ab^iis concludunt, quod non est concludendum. Zanch.
says Mr. Fulk, but of the Commandment of God only; and so this place might be
answered: But as Zanchy says of these Enthusiasticks, They know how to abuse
Scripture. Allegation, it is replied, this Text speaks of indifferent things,
which may be observed or not observed, without sin or impiety. Things
adiaphorous and indifferent are properly the subjects to act our liberty in,
they may be fastened or loosned as we please, they are De adiaphoris hic agit
Apostolus, et intentio little qui fuerunt imbelles fiebat ex^^sabilis. Par.
only the garbs and modes of Religion, which may be left off without offense;
the highest pretense to them is only decency, which is subject to a variety of
opinion, to think it, or not think it so. Bishop Davenant vehemently decries
the necessity of holy days, some of these indifferent things, and says, they
are of a mutable nature; and as they are enjoined, so they may be abolished by
humane Authority. Non est statuendum ecclesiam Christianam oliqua necessitate
astringi, ad immotam festorum dierum observationem, sed statuendum est dies
hosce humana authoritate constitutos, et eadem posse tolli, et mutari. Dav.
But now to put the Lords day into the account of such indifferencies, is an
error of the highest nature, putting an eclipse upon Christ's Resurrection,
the glory of which is celebrated and commemorated every first day of the week,
which the Apostle John calls Rev. 1. 10. the Lords day: Such an opinion would
put dross into this gold, and embase it with a sinful allay. To suppose the
observation of the Lords day a thing indifferent, what need then of the
Apostolical practice to be our President, the general observation of the Church
to be our incentive, the Decrees of Councils and Constitutions of godly Princes
to be our encouragement, the universal Tenent and consent of Professors in all
ages down to this very day, without any heats of dividing disputes, without
disgusts of separating Sects, to be our enforcement to the holy keeping of it?
Never was any thing indifferent so warmed in the bosom, and so warranted by the
obedience of all Christians in every Century; and besides this, no man will
deny but it is convenient, nay necessary, It is to be remembered, that the
Apostle in this text, Romans 14. 6. Speaks only of things indifferent, not in
their nature only, but also so left to us as in regard of their use. Esnath.
Parre.
(therefore not indifferent) that some particular day be set apart for solemn
worship: For

1. Hereby our selves, our servants, our cattle have rest, which is one end of
the Sabbath.

2. Hereby faith and good manners are furthered, and we are built up by public
prayers, reading, and preaching of the word.

3. Hereby the love and joy of Christians is increased, through the mutual
beholding one of another, as Hierome observes.

4. Hereby the poor have opportunity to receive the Gospel, other days being
taken up in the works of their Callings, to get a mean livelihood, and a poor
maintenance for themselves and families.

5. Hereby the glorious Mysteries of God are opened and discovered to the
people, and those inestimable benefits we enjoy in and by Christ are unravelled
to poor and precious Aug. ad Januar. Epist. 118. 119.
souls. This Pearl of price, the Lord Jesus, is principally shown in its
brightness and excellency on his own blessed day. How many beams and rays of
invaluable use shine forth from Sabbath observation! It is therefore no
indifferent evil to reckon this day an indifferent thing.

2. The Apostle in this text speaks of Ceremonial days, Hieron. Comment. in
Epist ad Galat.
which is evident by joining these days with those meats, which were
Ceremonially clean or unclean. And it is readily acknowledged, that it was a
weakness in some to think Alias sc. Judaeus judicat diem, alium prae alio esse
festum, et sanctiorem, alias sc. Gentilis aliter sentit. Hieron.
themselves bound to certain Ceremonial days, as well as to abstain from
certain Ceremonial meats. But will it hence follow, it is a part of our
Christian liberty to abandon all days as Ceremonial, and that it is a part of
the weakness of Christians to observe any day under the Gospel. This has not
any face of reason for it from this Scripture, wherein the Apostle doubtless
speaks of Ceremonial, not moral days, as our Christian Sabbath most
assuredly is. The ancient Fathers, as Origin, Ambrose, Primasius, Oecumenius,
Anselm, understand the Apostle to speak of fasting Verum quia Apostolus
praecedentibus, et sequentibus agit de festis, ^^ de delectu ciborum. Hinc
melius hic dies non ad festos sed ad dies jejunii referat. Chrysostom. Jon. 4. 6.
from meats on certain days, which were peculiar days of abstinence; and
Calvin, Bullinger, Beza, Olevian, Piscator, Erasmus, Lyra, nay the very
Rhemists themselves construe this text of Jewish Ceremonial days, and of
Ceremonial observances. This Scripture then being so understood, as it must be,
it no way imports or includes the blessed Lords day practiced in the New
Testament by Apostolical Authority. Thus the text urged to patronize this fond
opinion, is like Jonah his gourd, which is soon withered, as to the intended
purpose, for which it is alleged.

their leveling fancy, is 2 Col. 16. 17. Let no man therefore judge you in meat
or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the New Moon, or of the
Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ. To
this text it may be replied,

restless Jews, who Conjunctio illativa ergo significat haec inserri a
praecedentibus, praecipue ex ver^^^ 6. et 11. hujus capit^^, et jam infert non
esse audiendos judaizantes, qui ^^horum delectum, et dies festos a lege vetere
praescriptos; et consequenter caeteras legis veteris ceremonias a Christianis
observandas esse docebant. Aug.
were still opposing the Doctrine of the Gospel; or else against Judaizing
Christians, who were too much caught in the snare: And Augustine tells us, that
the illative particle in the beginning of the text, therefore, refers to what
was said before in the Chapter, especially in the 11. and 13. verses, which
relate to Jewish Circumcision, and so he bends his plea against them. The
Apostle here warns the Colossians to beware, as of the Gentiles Philosophy,
ver. 8. so of the Jewish Ceremonies in the text now under examination, ver. 16.
Chrysostom tells us, some of these Judaizing persons began to mince the matter,
and to say, some of the Jewish Feasts were to be observed, but others were to
be laid aside. Now here the Apostle prohibits the Colossians, to whom he
writes, all participation of Jewish rites, either of their meats or their
Festivals, whether their New Moons, or their Sabbaths. And now what are these
observances to our Christian Sabbath? What are these superannuated and
cancelled Ceremonies which were abolished by the coming of Christ, to our Lords
day, which shall endure to Christ's second Epist. 59.
coming? Surely the Jews would never plead for our Est scopus hujus Epistolae
ad Colossenses agere contra simonianos, et Judaizantes. Ambr. Ansel. Theod.
Oecumen. Theoph.
Sabbath; and therefore the Apostle gives the Colossians no caveat against it.
This text therefore cannot in the least refer to any Christian observations.

2. All Interpreters understand this text of Jewish festivals, so fur as they
were Ceremonials, Figures, and Shadows of things to come; and being abolished
by the coming of our Savior, ought not to be observed any longer: And Sicut ab
sent imperatore imago ejus habet authoritatem, present vero non habet; Sic
and haec ante adventum dominitempore suo fuerunt obs^^vanda, praesente autem
^arent authoritate. Ambr.
this; the circumstance of place, the manner of speaking, the noting of the
names of the days and times in the plural number, do abundantly confirm; and
this is so clear, that Erasmus, one, whose Religion was too much blended with
Popery, a mere medium participationis, and Bellarmine that Champion of the
Popes, the Rhemists, those Secretaries of Rome, all concur in this
interpretation, and roundly aver, that the Text speaks only of Jewish
festivities; to which assent the stream of the Greek Fathers: But I shall close
this particular with a speech of Zanchy. The Apostle, says he, in this place
does not forbid that there should be any certain days publicly solemnized in
the Church, wherein the faithful might assemble to pray, and to receive the
Sacraments Si solennes dies ad cultum dei non habebimus, praesentissima
impendet ecclesiae perturbatio et ruina. Calv. instit. l. 2. c. 8.
together: For the Apostles themselves and other godly persons did usually come
together on the Lords day, and would that all things should be done in order in
the Church. Wherefore unless we would affirm, that the Apostle did contradict
himself, it must be confessed, that the Apostle in this place of the Colossians
did nothing less then preach, that no days should be solemnly observed in the
Church of Christ. And worthy Calvin adds, If we have no certain solemn days at
all, present ruin and confusion inevitably befalls the Church of Christ. Thus
the univers^^ consent of eminent men in all ages thus interpreting this text,
wholly invalidates any tendency in it, to assert this loose and wild opinion of
levelling of days, or making every day a Christian Sabbath. But

3. One gives a threefold answer to this text, all most savoury and consonant
to the truth.

1. The Jews had other days ceremonial besides Sabbaths, which the Jewish
teachers strongly urged, Gal. 5. 3. And there is no necessity of limiting the
days mentioned in the Text to the seventh day Sabbath: When the Apostle
condemns the observation of days, he does not condemn the observation of all
days, for then days of fasting and thanksgiving must be condemned, as well as
resting days under the New Testament, which yet none will grant or assert.

2. Suppose the weekly Sabbath be here comprehended under days, and that by
Sabbaths be meant the weekly Sabbath, yet here cannot be meant the Christian
Sabbath, but the Jewish Sabbath, for the Apostle condemns that Sabbath, and
those Sabbath days which the Jewish Teachers pleaded for among the Colossians;
now they could not plead Daven in Col.
for our Christian Sabbath, but they were strong Proctors for the old seventh
day Sabbath, which was the religion of Wall. in quartum praeceptum.
their forefathers.

3. There is a double observation of days; 1. Moral. 2. Ceremonial. Now the
Apostle in the text mentioned, speaks against the ceremonial observation of
days, that Pharisaical piece of counterfeit, but not against the Moral, For
days of fasting are to be observed under the Gospel: Our Savior tells us,
that his Disciples, when he was withdrawn to Glory, should fast, and they had
the greatest measures of John 16. 7.
his spiritual presence. Mat. 9. 15. 16.


Now we are to observe such days with moral, not ceremonial observation, such
as the Jews had, in sackcloth, in ashes, in tearing the hair, rending the
garments, etc. and such other ceremonial trappings: we are to rend our hearts,
Joel 2. 12, 13.
and cry mightily to the Lord upon those days, which is the moral observance
of them. So it is in reference to the Sabbath; no Sabbath under the Gospel, is
to be observed with Ceremonial or Pharisaical observation, with Jewish
preparations and sacrifices, and such like formalities; but it does not hence
follow, that no Sabbath is to be observed under the Gospel with moral
observation, in hearing the Word, in receiving the Sacraments, in singing of
Psalms, etc. The Apostle therefore may not only hint the day, but the manner
of observation, in his prohibiting the Colossians, their meddling with obsolete
days and festivals.

To add to all which has been laid down; if any man shall put any holiness in
a day, which God does not, and so think one day more holy then another, this is
fond superstition, and this indeed is to observe days, and of this the Apostle
seems to speak, when he says, ye observe days: But when the Lord shall put
holiness upon one day more then another, we then do not put any holiness in the
day, but God does it; nor do we place any holiness in one day more then
another, but God places it first; And this is no observation of days, which
the Apostle condemns, but it is the will of God, which we must be subject to.

strange notion, is, Gal. 4. 10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and
years, I am afraid of you, least I have bestowed on you labor in vain.

third text of Scripture, subpaenaed in to serve a turn, but speaking little to
the purpose; It is replied, Dies observatis, scil. Judaicos Dies uti Sabbata;
menses, uti Neomenias; tempora uti Pascha, and Pentecosten. Annos, septimum
remissionis and quinquagessimum Jubilaei.


1. That if we consult the context, we shall find the Apostle very angry with
the Galathians, for leaving Christ the substance, and betaking themselves, even
in point of justification, to the carnal observation of Jewish shadows, which
after Christ's coming were to disappear, which the Apostle in an holy heat calls
beggarly rudiments; and he the rather terms them so, because now they were
antiquated, and out of date; but the Sabbath (I do not say the seventh day from
the Creation) is no such thing, but for the equity and substance of it, is
still of the same use as ever, (viz.) fit Hieron. Chrysostom, etc.
for man's refreshing, and Gods more solemn worship; nor is it, nor will be
insignificative, till we sing a requiem to our souls in glory: and therefore by
no means to be numbered with An ve^o nullum est discrimen temporum observandum?
Male igitur agricolae tempora state sationis, et agriculturae observ^nt? Male
d^stinguimus dies menses, et annos in Politia? Male dominicum diem observamus
in Ecclesia? Minime: Apostolus non improbat discrimen temporum, quae deus ipse
ordinavit, nec dies festos in ecclesia, ordinis, and doctrinae gratia. Par. in
Galat. Tertul. contra Marcion. lib. 1. cap. 20.
the observation of days, and months, and years, (seeing the Apostles
observed the Lords day, weekly and sabbatically, and not monthly or yearly) as
were the Jews Sabbaths, and holy days, which pertained to the bondage and
servitude of weak and beggarly rudiments, of which the Apostle here only
speaks. And it was far from the Apostle to reckon any of the Ten Commandments,
where the Sabbath is lodged, as a weak and beggarly rudiment, and so let it be
abhorred of all Christian hearts. The Moral Law, the Apostle James calls a
Royal Law, Jam. 2. 8. so far is it, or any Commandment of it, from being
beggarly and pedantick.

But to answer the Text fully and succinctly. All interpreters, both Protestant
and Popish, interpret these times mentioned in the text, of Jewish times; the
several festivals of the Jewish Church being couched under one of the terms in
this text of Scripture. By days we must understand their Sabbaths; by months,
their New moons, by times, their four feasts in the year.

1. Their Passover, which was the feast of the spring, Exodus 12. 2, 18. which
was celebrated in the month Nysan, answering to our March.

2. Their Pentecost, which was the feast of the summer, Acts 2. 1. which was
celebrated in the month Sivan, either in the latter end of May, or the
beginning of June. Festa Christianorum hic non damnantur, nam sic et dies
dominicus damnatur, quem tamen et ipsi servant haeretici, sed tantum damnantur
fes^a Judaeorum quae a Christia^is pulchre distinguuntur. Alap.


3. Their feast of Expiation, Lev. 23. 27. which was celebrated in the month
Tisni, the feast of the Autumn, answering to our September. And

4. The feast of dedication, Joh. 10. 22. which was their winter feast, and was
celebrated in the month Cislieu, which answers to our November. By years, which
the Apostle mentions in the text, we must either understand the seventh year,
which was the year of release, when every creditour which lent any thing to his
neighbor, released that loan, and was not to exact it, Deuteronomy. 15. 2, 3. or else
the fiftieth year, which was the year of jubilee. All these therefore being
manifestly Jewish feasts, they nothing appertain to Nota synechdochen per
observantias dierum Apostolus intelligit omnes ceremonias legis veteris. Alap.
in Gal.
the Christian Sabbath. It is very observable, that Alapide, a learned, though
Jesuitized Papist, and Paraeus, a learned and worthy Protestant, both agree in
the very words commenting upon this text of Scripture, saying, That here, the
observation of days, by a synechdoche of the part for the whole, is put for
the whole body of Jewish Ceremonies; One particular branch for the whole mass
and kind of them. Thus Species una, pro toto genere ceremoniarum ponitur,
observatio, scil. dierum.
the interpretation of this text, is so clear and manifest for Jewish
Festivals, that the most differing writers center in the same exposition, as
the Jew and Gentile accord in the pleasantness of the Suns light. And so these
three texts of Scripture, which our deluded Opinionists supposed a threefold
Par. in Gal.
cord which could not quickly be broken, Eccles. 4. 12. Cuivi^, textus (...)
consideranti erit extra Controversiam.
are easily answered, and the cord untwisted, and left to the judicious Reader
to consider, whether they are not the most impertinent allegations.

But further to discover, not only the weakness, but the wildness of this
opinion, let us take notice,

To make every day a Christian Sabbath, is to contradict the wisdom of God; for
the wise God could have appointed Romans 11. 33.
some part of every day to be kept holy, rather then one whole O alta
divinitas! O profi^^dos thesauros sapientiae et scientiae dei! O abyssalem et
immensam sapientiam de^! Ambros.
day together; but his unsearchable wisdom saw this proportion of time on every
day most unmeet, and in respect of man's many cumbers, which do too easily
entangle his thoughts, and surprise his mind and affections, altogether
unfitting for him: For within some small piece of a day, he cannot ordinarily,
nor so easily recover himself, and unloose himself from the world, to find the
end of Sabbath service, which is a most sweet and full rest in communion and
holy converse with God. But now, when a whole day is set apart for that sacred
purpose, man can better call off his thoughts from Dies Sabbati gratus est deo,
prae aliis hebdomadae diebus. Rab. Kimchi. in Psalm. 92.
secular affairs, and compose himself for divine intercourse, he can more
conveniently dress his soul to meet with his beloved. But suppose man could
prepare himself every day for this holy converse with his Maker, yet Gods Name
would lose by it, if God should not have the honor of a solemn day. Idols have
their set days for their worshippers to celebrate their honor in. And Kings
have their birth days. Pharaoh had his birth day, Genesis 40. 20. And Herod had
his birth day, Mark 6. 21. which was solemnized with great joy and festivals.
And so Princes have their Coronation days, which are annually kept, with the
highest observation. And is it not meet and just that Gods Name should be
magnified by us, Commonly, by setting apart some time every day, which we may
well spare out of our employments and callings for God? and this does honor
him; but a day, a set, solemn day much more, when all Christians in the whole
world shall harmoniously and unanimously meet to worship Acts 19. 28.
and to honor the great Jehovah, and shall cry out, Great is the God of the
Christians. Set days of worship do reflect much honor upon God, as the stated
Noon speaks the elevation of the Sun.

To keep every day a Sabbath, subverts the design of a Sabbath, which was to
rest after our worldly labors, and to set apart that rest for the service of
the Lord. So the very words Sabbatum est sanctum otium, cultui sacro deputandum.
of the fourth Commandment, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. And we have this rest in imitation of
Gods rest. Now God did not rest every day, but only the seventh: Nor did
Christ rise every Dominicus dies Christi resurrectione declaratus est
Christianis, et ex illo coepit habere festivitatem suam.
day, but only the first. That which put life into the old Sabbath, was Gods
resting one day; and that which authorizeth the Sabbath of the new Testament,
is Christ's rising one day; it is still one day, not many days: If God had
rested every day, where would have been the work of creation? And if Christ had
been always rising from the bed of his grave, where would have been the work
of Redemption? Aug. Epist. 119. cap. 13.
Thus praecedaneous work ushers in a Sabbaths Rest; and so it must be still: To
rest every day, plucks up the very foundation of a Sabbath, upon which it is
built, and as Frederick Barbarossa did Millaine, sow it with salt.

To keep every day a Sabbath dasheth upon many absurdities, and supposes
impossibles. We must understand the definition of a Sabbath; It is a day of
divine appointment. which must Hanc ob causam deus septimo die ab omni opere
quievit, ut and nos ab omni opere externo vac^ntes ipsi uni, and soli hoc die
vacaremus. Idcirco and hunc diem benedixit, and sanctificavit, (i. e.) in usum
suum separavit, et elegit Oecol^^ p. in 4turn praecept. Tom. 3. Oper.
be consecrated wholly to the service and worship of God. Now should we do
nothing every day, but attend the service of God in spiritual duties and holy
Ordinances, what would become of the Commonwealth, the Magistrate, the Master,
the Subject, the Servant? How can the one rule, and the other obey? Who shall
provide for our Families? whilst we (worse then Infidels) cast off the care
thereof?

1. This opinion overthrows all commerce, traffic, it plucks down all Empories
and Cities of trade; or shall we continually fly from the Sanctuary to the
Shop, from unlading our Souls in prayer, to unlade our goods from the Key or
the Ship? Shall we hurry in Gods Ordinances, and suddenly start from them to
look after our Merchandise?

2. This opinion countermands all those injunctions of God which were given
before the Law. In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, Genesis 3. 19.
And so likewise in the Law; Six days shall thou labor, Exodus 20. 9. And after
the Law, in the times of the Gospel: We command them to work with quietness,
and to eat their own bread, 2 These. 3. 12. And if any would not work, neither
should he eat: So that this fancy drives men into the extremity of irreligion
and Atheism.

3. This opinion takes away all distinction of our general and particular
calling Christians have not only their general calling, viz. To profess the
name of Christ, that heavenly Calling, Deus vocavit nos vocatione sancta, dum
nos ab infidelitate, et peccatis, ad suum fidem, et sanctitatem, vitamque
sanctam, et divinam Et hac vocatione spes Christianorum acuitur cum Evangelio
and pro Evangelio. pati.
as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 3. 1. That hopeful Calling, Ephesians. 4. 4. That high
Calling, Phil. 3. 14. That worthy Calling, 2 These. 1. 11. That holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Now besides this Calling all Christians lay claim to, particular
Christians have their particular Callings, their Trades, their Vocations, and
several employments: Shall we then serve God, hear, pray, or receive Sacraments
continually and without intermission? Where would be the time for our Callings?
Then we might as the Woman of Zareptah said of her little Oil in the cruse, and
the little meal in the barrel, 1 Kings 17. 12. Even shut up our shops and die;
our hands then should not minister to our necessities, as the Apostle assures
us his did, Acts 20. 34. This being true, Every day must be a Christian
Sabbath, then the Apostles must not mend their nets, Mark 1. 19. Nor Paul make
his Tents, Acts 18. 3. This fond opinion subverts every trade, ties up every
painful hand, breaks all working instruments, it silence the Lawyers tongue,
and benums the Scholars brain, and withers the Plow-mans hand, and the Smith at
the forge shall sweat no more then the Prince on the Throne, and so the world
shall have a writ of ease, to go down in a pleasant dream to the silent grave.

4. This fancy puts God upon constant miracles, to rain down Manna for our
daily supply, and again fetch water Exodus 16 35.
out of the rock, for we must not apply our selves to worldly Numb. 20. 8.
labors, for that is inconsistent with a Sabbath, and every day (say these
men) must be a Christian Sabbath, which we know must be most strict and
serious; and what is all this but daring presumption? Truly this opinion fairly
leads us back from Canaan to the wilderness again.

5. This opinion makes man perfect in this life; for weak flesh cannot keep a
constant Sabbath. If Paul lengthen out his discourse more then ordinary,
Eutichus falls into a deep sleep, and drops from the third Loft, and destroys
himself, Acts 20. 9. Nay our Savior complains that the Disciples could not
watch one hour with him, but they were surprised Quot sunt remorae Christianae
vigilantiae aut risus diffusio, aut intemperantiae gravamen, aut quaelibet
superfluitas, aut mundi cura, et ille cibrae, immo mill temporalium rerum
onera, quae nos adigunt ad irregularitatem. Chrysostom. homil. 9.
with drowsiness, Mat. 26. 40. And yet our sweetest Savior puts a good
construction upon this failing. And if the Apostles of Christ cannot hold up,
how shall ordinary Christians of the lower form in Christ's School? Few are
vigorous as they should be on Gods holy day; what would they do, if every day
must be a Sabbath? This is impossible to flesh and blood. Man carries clogs
about him to holy opportunities, which yet are soon over; he carries a naughty
heart which is apt to wander, and a faint nature which is apt to tire, and a
heavy eye which is apt to close; besides he never leaves Satan behind him, to
be at least the shadow to darken the light and joy of Ordinances: And therefore
to assert a constant Sabbath, an every day Sabbath, is to throw a mountain upon
an infant. And

6. This opinion takes away all distinction between our Vltra hunc mundum est
very Sabbati observatio. Orig.
Sabbath on earth, and our Sabbath in heaven. In heaven indeed we shall keep a
perpetual Sabbath, and all shall be true which this opinion holds forth; there
shall be no labors, no shops, no merchandise; All our employment shall be to
celebrate the praises of God, and the Lamb who sits upon the Throne, Rev. 5.
13. But to fancy such a Sabbath in this life, is to act the Pr^soner who dreams
of golden Rev. 4. 9, ^0, 11.
treasure, pleasing delights, sensual satisfaction, and wakeing in the morning
finds himself shackled in an iron chain, and locked up in a dark dungeon. And
let this be added, to dream of a perpetual Sab^ath here and so lay aside the
Lords day as groundless and useless, is the next way to miss of an everlasting
Sabbath above.

To make every day a Christian Sabbath, is only a more subtle design to
undermine the public Ordinances. Such would be every day in private, that they
may be no day in public; and so they set the closet against the Sanctuary, and
so the pretense of secret duty shall wholly subvert the reality of solemn
worship: For it is not to be imagined that all people should meet every day in
public and solemn assemblies. Mark 14. 49.
And how unsuitable is this to a Saints spirit: David his emphatical option and
desire was to dwell in the Temple, Psalm. Luke 19. 44.
27. 4. And he bewailed his loss of opportunities to go with Acts 17. 10.
the multitude, Psalm. 42. 4. The Jews kept the Temple worship Acts 18. 4.
till they turned their backs upon the Messiah. Paul Acts 13. 14.
preached in the Synagogue, and commanded the Hebrews not Joel 1. 14.
to neglect the public assemblies, Heb. 10. 25. Now the Heb. 10. 25.
drift of this wild fancy is, to leave all Christians to their Certum est ad
cessationem simplicem Sabbatum non suisse institutum; sed ut convenirent
Christiani ad ea pietatis eteercitia, quae toti multitudini erant communia. Riv.
own private observations, to their Chamber and closet duties, that so there
may be no use of public Ministers, public Administrations, public Schools,
and public Universities, or a public solemn day for divine worship; and what
is this, but to bury all Order, Discipline, and Beauty, in ruin and confusion?
This is to act Dioclesians part, to destroy the devout ministry; to act Julians
part, to shut up the Schools, and so hinder all Knowledge and Learning; and to
run with Faustus Socinus, to pluck up the Lords day; and at last to slide into
the blasphemies and insolence of Lucian and Porphiry, to deride all Religion.

To make every day a Sabbath, solemnly condemns the practice of the Church in
all ages. The Church of Christ never understood but one Sabbath in a week,
which is the blessed Lords day. Shall we run it up to the fountain head, and
take a prospect of the practice of the Church in every Century?

purest times of the Church, holy Ignatius, the Disciple of the Apostle John,
the Martyr of Jesus Christ, lays it upon Christians, as they would show any
love to Christ, (...), etc. Ignat.
that they should keep holy the Lords day: So zealous was this blessed man and
Martyr for the observation of this particular day; and its most probable, if
not most certain, that he should know the mind of God, when he lay in the
Apostle John's bosom, and John lay in Christ's, John 13. 23. And Ignatius calls
the Lords day the Queen of days, and therefore all days are not equal, but
every day of the week is (...). Just Mart. Apol. secund.
inferior to this Supreme of days. Justin Martyr, who lived in the second
Century, relates the practice of the Church in his time, telling us, That on
Sunday solemn Conventions of people meet together in Villages or Cities for the
exercices of divine worship. This holy man and Martyr who sealed the truth of
Christ with his blood, is the unbiassed Historian of Sabbath observation in the
most orient and glorious times of the Church, when the truths of God were warm,
newly dropped from the mouth and heart of Christ: Then Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 22.
the Lords day was called Sunday (for reasons hereafter to be shown) not
Saturday, not Friday, not every day, but it was the best and highest of days,
and was solemnly set apart Tertul. de Idol. c. 14.
for solemn and Gospel Worship. Dionysius Corinthiacus, who lived in the third
Century, speaks of his observation of Prima Sabbati est initium dierum et tunc
ecclesia erecta perficiebat deprecationes. Basil.
the Lords day; and the same attests Tertullian, who was his Contemporary, and
speaks largely of the solemn keeping of that blessed day. One day is still
solemnized, not every day, no more then every one in a Nation can be crowned,
and wear the badge of Supremacy. Basil, who lived in the fourth Century, calls
the Lords day the beginning of days; and every Greek Letter is not Alpha: And
this renowned Father says, That the Church then devoutly poured out their
prayers to God. And with him join Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Hilary, those
bright and burning lights of the Primitive Church, whose copious descants upon
this holy day, it will be too much to set down. Now this opinion has no
patronage from antiquity, unless it be from the mistake of Clemens, or the
figurative fancy of allegorizing Origin.

darkest times of the Church, when it was overspread with palpa^le darkness,
even then Authority commanded Exodus 10. 21.
Sabbath-observation, one solemn day, not every day, that was a strange notion
in the very midnight of the Church. When the clouds were thickest, so much
brake forth, to lead the Christian World, to keep one day every week to the
Lord. Charles the Great thus Carol. Mag. leg. Ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap 202.
begins his solemn Edict to this purpose: It is our pleasure, that all the
faithful do reverently observe the Lords day, in which the Lord rose again.
And his Son Ludovicus Pius in his Additionals, repeating the self -same
constitution of his Ludovic. Piu^ ibid. Addition. cap. 9.
Father word by word, does only add these words; Therefore it is necessary,
that first Priests, Kings and Princes, and all the faithful do most devoutly
give all due observance and reverence to this day. These Princes, not more
happy in the Kingdoms they governed, then unhappy in the times they lived in,
yet had such an impression upon their souls, as to see to the holy observation
of the Lords day, a day, not days; one day, not every day: This levelling
principle never yet got into the Courts of Princes, into the Sessions of
Councils, nay, not into the writings of any famous Patriot of Religion, no not
into the worst of times, when the Church wore her blackest veil.

reforming times of the Church, when the Sun of truth brake the cloud of popish
ignorance and idolatry, then Calvin. in Deuteronomy. conc. 34.
our great reformers, who reformed by their Pens, as well as by their
Preaching, all unanimously utter their complaints against the profanation of
the Sabbath day, and press the Bulling. in Apocal. Concion. 4.
observance of it: but still it is one day, not every day; The Sabbath day,
which is more honorable, and not week days, Muscul. Comment. in Mat. 12.
which are more inconsiderable. And here I might cite Calvin, Bullinger,
Musculus, Aretius, Walaeus, Bucer, Gualter, etc. Nay, the Waldenses, and the
Albigenses, those zealous assertours Aretius Prob. Theolog. Loc. 123.
of divine truth in the midst of Popish rage and fury: I might here mention the
Parliament of Prague held 1524. Wall. Epist.
and the Synod of Dort in the fourth Session, who petitioned Dedic ante librum
de Sabbato.
the States, that they would emit severe Edicts, against sports and servile
works upon the Sabbath day. Thus every age of the Church commands the solemn
sanctification Bucer. de regno Christi. lib. 1.
of one day, not every day, of Gods day, and not ours. This fancy has been an
unheard of dream in every Gualt. in 162. Homil. in Mat.
century of Christianity. The Scripture, Church and State, that threefold
binding Authority, does wholly disclaim it. Histor. Wald. et Albigens. Part.
3. lib. 1. cap. 9.


But to wind up all; 1. There is Sabbatum internum, an internal Sabbath, which
is a rest from sin, for the more holy walking before God.

2. There is Sabbatum externum, an external Sabbath, Quies dei fuit septimana,
Quies Judaeorum in Palestina, Quies sanctorum in puritate, and quies
glorificatorum in aeternitate. Alap.
which is a rest from labor, for the more solemn worship of God. The first
indeed ought to be perpetual; but the second is temporary, and continues only
for the space of twenty four hours every week. Now these two do not abolish,
but establish one another. A resting from sin continually, does more fit us for
a weekly Sabbath; and the keeping of a weekly Sabbath does more fit us for the
resting from sin continually. The Jews were to keep the internal Sabbath, they
were always to rest from sin, though they were commanded a seventh day
Sabbath: And so Christians must keep an internal Sabbath, they must always
rest from sin, though they are enjoined the first day Sabbath, the blessed
Lords day. Ephesians. 5. 11.
These two are subordinate, not contrary one to another; and 2 Cor. 7. 1.
to make them inconsistent, that the internal Sabbath should God will have the
external Sabbath for the beginning and perfecting of the spiritual Sabbath.
V^s.
chase away the external, is not only gross weakness and mistake, but it is
Satan's mine to blow up the Lords day, which being lost, Religion presently
faints away and dies; as take away the breast from the infant, and it quickly
dwindles away into the grave.

CHAP. XLIII. There was a time when the Jews were exemplarily strict in
Sabbath-Observation.
THis Treatise now spending it self, and so drawing nearer to a conclusion; the
remaining task of it, will mainly consist in pressing conscience upon the due
and holy observation of the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath. Now to make way
for the better accomplishment of this design, I shall give the Reader, as in a
Landscape, the Jewish practice on Exodus 20. 2.
the Sabbath, which indeed was sometimes very commendable, when they did
remember the Lord their God, who brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and
out of the house of bondage, Exodus 20. 2. And we may well take our rise to this
duty of keeping Gods blessed Sabbath from the advantage they give us. It is
true, there were some seasons when Judaei spiritualia officia negligentes, quae
deus praecepit, in diem Sabbati peragenda, nefarie omiserunt, and otio et
luxuriae in eundem diem se dederunt. Gauden.
they were very remiss in the observation of Gods holy Sabbath, especially not
long before the Babylonish Captivity, and in the Primitive times of the
Christian Church; then by their brutish sensuality on the Sabbath, they drew
out the Pens of Christians, and opened the mouths of Heathens: but there were
other times, when their care of Gods day was written in a fair character, and
might inflame a Christians heart, who has any love to the Lord of the Sabbath,
Mark 2. 28. to a serious and a holy deportment on this sacred day.

Now to enucleate and set before you their practice on the Judaei Sabbata
insumunt in crapula, et ebrietate, et infructuosis delitiis et voluptatibus.
Cyril.
Sabbath, we should begin with their preparation to it, for they were so exact,
that the best and wealthiest of them, even those who kept many servants, did
with their own hands further the preparation, insomuch that sometimes the
Masters themselves would chop herbs, sweep the house, cleave wood, kindle the
fire, and such like, as Buxtorf observes; and which is very observable, all the
four Evangelists Buxtorf. Synagog. Judaic. cap. 10. ex Talmud.
take notice of the Jews preparation day to their Sabbath: But of this I have
spoken largely already, and so I shall pass it over, for ingenuity forbids
coincidencies and vain repetitions.

But to come to the Jews observation of the Sabbath, a Mat. 27. 62. Mark 15.
42. Luke 23. 54. John 19. 42.
learned man observes, They dress no meat this day, and therefore the Heathens
heretofore thought they had fasted on that day. And indeed a serious practice
it was to keep down the body, and prepare it for spiritual duties. When the
senses Aug. cap. 76. de jejun. Sab.
are cloyed, the soul is much interrupted in heavenly converses. Pampered
bodies usually accompany pining souls. The Sueton. Martial. lib. 4. Epigr.
over-laying the fire with wood puts it out. The Disciples plucked a few ears
of Corn on the Sabbath, Mat. 12. 1. to be patterns of modesty and temperance.
But I shall not insist on this practice of theirs, it being rather their
custom then their obedience; however, if from their dressing no me^t we would
learn a spare diet on Gods holy day, much sin would be prevented, which is the
blemish and shame of Christians: But their carriage on the Sabbath was very
remarkable, which may be descried,

In the nature of their services; Their services on a Sabbath are not only
carnal, to offer up sacrifices, two Lambs of the first year, two tenth deals of
flower mingled with oil, the one for a burnt offering, and the other for a
meat offering, to which was added a drink offering, Numb. 28. 9, 10. But their
services likewise were of a more spiritual nature;

1. They had their thanksgivings to God, that heavenly service, Psalm. 26. 12.
Psalm. 35. 18. They sung Psalms, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. which are the joyful harmony
of a devout soul; nay, the ninety second Psalm was composed on purpose (...)
for the Sabbath, as the inscription of it does clearly inform us. And it was
the joy of the holy among the Jews to be thus spiritually and seraphically
employed, Psalm. 84. 10. Ordinaria lectio illius Sabbati fuit locus ille Isaiae,
scil. 53. et in eo fuit singular consilium dei. Chemnit.


2. On their Sabbath the Scriptures were read, Acts 15. 21. (as was hinted
before) A New Testament quotation to assert it, which is not omitted in the
Old, Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13. And our dear Savior in the days of his flesh, took
advantage of this service for soul edification, Luke 4. 17, 18, 19, 20. and so
did the Apostles, Acts 13. 14, 15, 16. This service made way for glorious
expositions, and for new revelation 2 Chronicles. 30. 22.
velation of the Divine Will, and for apt and seasonable applications. 2 Chronicles.
35. 2.


3. Besides the reading of the word, the Jews used the Preaching of it on the
Sabbath: For the Priests office was to teach, Mat. 2. 7. Deuteronomy. 33. 10. And they
looked on it as a great misery, when they wanted a teaching Priest, 2 Chronicles.
15. 2. Or if they were unhappy in ignorant and unskilful Priests, whose lips
did not preserve knowledge, Jer. 2. 8. Or such Priests whose lives contradicted
their Doctrine, Mat. 23. 1, 2. And this preaching was either in the exposition
of the words as they read them, Nehem. 8. 3, 8. Or else in an exhortation, or
as we call it, in making a Sermon upon the words, Luke 4. 17, 18, 19, etc. Acts
Luke 4. 31.
15. 21. Mark 6. 2.


4. They had their devout prayers on the Sabbath, reverently Luke 13. 10.
kneeling in an humble and submissive behavior, 1 King. 8. 54.
Psalm. 95. 6. 2 Chronicles. 6. 13. They did not only offer the Ezr. 6. 10.
sacrifice of their lambs, but the calves of their lips, Hos. 14. Acts 16. 12.
2. They did not only pour out their oil into their deals of flower, Numb. 8.
9, 10. But they poured out their souls into the bosom of God, Isa. 56. 7. Their
prayers ushered in their services, and most profitably wound up their duties.
A^urata sit exquisitarum sententiarum enarratio quae non summis incidit
auribus, sed per auditum penetrat in animum ibique firmiter inhaereat. Phil.
Jud.
And in the Conclusion of their holy exercices upon the Sabbath, there was a
blessing pronounced on the people, 2 Chronicles. 30. 27. Levit. 9. 22, 23. as the
Lord commanded, Numb. 6. 23, 27. And then the Congregation brake up, Acts 13.
43. And the people departed. Thus the services of the Jews on their Sabbath
were not only ceremonial, but spiritual. Their ear was attentive in hearing,
their knee was bowed in praying, their tongue was employed in singing, and
their heart was taken up in complying with every service of the day.

The Jews carriages were remarkable on the Sabbath, in the design of their
services, which was to converse with God. To Sabbatum datur ad consideranda dei
opera. Aben Ezra.
consider his works, says Rabbi Aben Ezra, to be conversant in his service and
worship says Rabbi Kimchi, to consult with his word, and to pry into the more
arduous and deep passages of it, says Manasseh Conciliator. Nay the Jerusalem
Talmud, which I may call the Jews sacred Code, a In Sabbato homo conversus a
negotiis hujus mundi, and anima illius pura est ab occupationibus corporis, et
sese exercet in servitio dei. Rab. Kimch.
system of their Doctrines, Rites, and Laws, allows nothing to be the end of
the Sabbath, but divine meditation in the Law of God; thus from the most
approved of their own Authors, we have, what they aimed at in their Sabbath,
viz. To walk above the world in holy contemplation, to go into the treasury of
Gods word by serious inquisition, and to wait upon the Lord of glory in humble
adoration. Their design was not the ease of the flesh, Manasseh Conciliator
calls it a notable error to think so, for idleness, says he, is Notabilis
error est, otii ergo Sabbatum esse institutum. Otium, enim matter est omnium
vitiorum; Et sic plus sane mali quam boni ex Sabbato proveniret. Sed Sabbatum
est institutum ut homo expeditus, et sepositis ^um animi, tum corporis curis
semet totum legis studio applicet, et gravibus locis sacrae Scripturae, de
arduis quaestionibus interrogare. Man. Council.
the Mother of all vices, and this Learned Jew adds, should we indulge our
selves in ease and delight, the Sabbath would have more evil then good in it:
Their design was not pleasing of sense, the same Learned Manasseh tells us, We
must strip our selves of all encumbrances both of body and mind, that with more
freedom and activity we may apply our selves to Gods Law, Isa. 2. 3. Nehem. 8.
13. Now sense-pleasing is the rust of the mind, the shackle upon the soul, and
the Canker of holy worship. And it is the zealous expression of the
forementioned Author,, That the whole man must be given up to God on his own
holy Sabbath. What more savoury could drop from a Christians Pen, and what more
serious could be breathed from a Christian heart? And in writing after this
Copy we may easily mend our hand.

The Jews carriage on the Sabbath was most remarkable in the exactness of their
services,

1. In the morning of a Sabbath, John 8. 2. They began with private preparation
as they were commanded, Eccles. 5. 1, 2.

2. And they durst not adventure upon holy worship till they had reconciled
themselves one to another, Mat. 5. 23, 24. Malice and Enmity were not to tread
in Gods Courts. Sabbata Israelitis non nisi ad meditandum in lege data sunt.
Talmud. Hierosolym. Isa. 66. 3. Psalm. 50. 16.


3. And they were to look to their conversations, to see them clean before they
took the Law of God into their mouths, Psalm. 26. 6. And their neglect of this
duty in aftertimes highly provoked the Lord, Isa. 1. 12, 13.

4. They had a high esteem of the assemblies of the faithful as holy
Convocations, Levit. 23. 3. And they looked on the place of their meeting as
the house of God, 1 Chronicles. 9. Psalm. 27. 4.
27. And thought those blessed who dwelt there, Psalm. Psalm. 84. 1, 2.
84. 4.

5. When they were going to the place of worship, it was Mic. 4. 2.
with singular affection, Psalm. 26. 8. and vehement longing, Psalm. 42. 2.

6. It was customary among them to excite one another to approach to God in
holy and solemn worship. The Pastors stirred up the people, Jer. 31. 6. And the
people stirred up one another, Jer. 50. 4, 5. And the parties excited were glad
thereof, Psalm. 122. 1.

7. Joy and praise made their way to the house of God, Psalm. 42. 4.

8. When they entered into the Congregation, they worshipped at the very gate,
Ezekiel. 46. 3. They kissed the Datum est Sabbatum ad meditandum in lege dei. Aben
Ezr. in. cap. 20 Exodus
very portal where Gods honor dwelt: So zealous and devout (when time was) was
this poor people.

9. When they departed they would carry a blessing with them, 2 Chronicles. 30. 27.

10. After the dismission, they did meditate on what they heard, Psalm. 1. 2. if
at all times, much more on this blessed day: And they did not survey what they
heard in a secret contemplation, but in a serious examination, Acts 17. 11.
They searched the Scriptures afterward, touching those things in which they
were taught. The Scriptures were their golden Mine, not only to look upon in
meditation, but to search into by scrutiny and holy discussion.

11. When they were come home from public Ordinances, Deuteronomy. 11. ^9.
they taught their Children: For this was a charge laid upon them daily, much
more on Gods day, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Exodus 31. 14, 15.
And if they were to teach their Children when they walked by the way, much
more when they came from a Sermon, heated with the incense of holy duties.

12. O^ this holy Sabbath they were to charge their meditations with their
deliverance from Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15. And to think on the sanctifying power
of God, Ezekiel. 20. 20. And to contemplate on the eternal rest, the everlasting
Sabbath which was to come; and to see in all things they delighted in the Lord,
and accounted his day honorable, and denied all their own thoughts, and
delights, and works on this blessed day, Isa. 58. 13. Let us go and do so
likewise, Isa 58. 14.
as our Savior speaks in another case, Luke 10. 17. And when we deviate in
Sabbath duties, let us take this glass and so mend our dress.

The Jews carriage was most remarkable on their Sabbath in the multiplicity of
their services.

1. They had preparatory work (which has already been touched upon, and
therefore no further to be pursued.)

2. They had legal sacrifices to offer both forenoon and afternoon, and these
sacrifices were to be doubled on the Number. 28. 9, 10.
Sabbath. They had their burnt offerings, their meat offerings, their drink
offerings, besides the incense which was Quod spectat ad usum Altaris aurei,
debuit in singulis diebus mane et vespere in eo suffitum offerri ab Aarone et
ejus successoribus. Rivet.
to be burnt on the Altar both Morning and Evening, Exodus 30. 7, 8. And this
offering of incense is a perpetual service throughout their Generations: And to
this offering up of incense David alludes, Psalm. 141. 2.

3. They had spiritual duties to perform, holy prayers to pour forth, Dan. 9.
21. Luke 1. 10. Holy Scriptures to read, holy instructions to give to their
Children and Servants, holy meditation to entertain, holy Sacraments to
administer; Sometimes the Passover, John 19. 36. And often Nehem. 8. 5.
the Circumcision, John 7. 22. Their spiritual duties Luke 4. 20.
like stars, did shine in the firmament of their Sabbath, to render it bright
and glorious. Nehem. 8. 3.


4. They had works of charity to act: And these were of two sorts.

1. Either to brute creatures, for the Lord allowed them to lead their Ox and
their Ass to watering, Luke 13. 15. to make their lives more comfortable.

2. Or Secondly, to themselves, they had liberty to provide for their placid
and cheerful performances of holy duties: But most principally they had
Collections for ^he poor on the Sabbath which the Scripture mentions, Luke 21.
1, Mark 12. 41. Deinde edicitur, nequis sit impedimento Judaeis, caetus aut
collectus facientibus, aut Hyerosoly^^a eas mittentibus more patrio. Phil. Jud.
in legate. ad Ca^^n Cesarem.
2. And Philo Judaeus in his Apology to the Emperor. Caius Caligula stands
much upon this service of theirs for the justification of the Brethren of his
Religion, and recapitulates it, as a privilege granted them by Caesar
Augustus. Thus we may observe, how busy the Jews were in running through the
several stages of duty, till they came to the end of their Sabbath. No wonder
then, if one of their Rabbis, called idleness on a Sabbath, a notable error.

The Jews carriage on the Sabbath was remarkable in the continuance of their
services: They began their Sabbath betimes, and ended it late. We read they
came early on the Psalm. 139. 9.
morning to the temple, Luke 21. 38. they did fly to holy duties upon the wings
of the morning, that no Sabbath time Luke 21. 38. John 8. 2. John 18. 20.
might run waste; And this their earliness is taken notice of in three several
places of Scripture, to show how pleasing it was. Christ rose early to teach,
John 8. 2. and the people Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
rose early to bath their souls in that morning dew which fell from heaven; And
the Scripture records, this early resort was no fit of novelty, but their
constant and continual practice, John 18. 20. And if it be said, But happily
their service passed away as the dew which is soon dried up; it is answered, it
is thought most probably, that the Jews did Convenimus semper et curcti magno
silentio utuntur, nisi ad laudem doctorum; nec aliquis verbum emittit Sacerdos
unus e senioribus legem recitat, et exponit, et hoc fit ad totum diem usque ad
crepusculum: Deindo abeunt, et sacrarum litterarum peritiores, et pietate multo
munitiores. Eusebius. de Praepar. Evan, lib. 8. cap. 2. ex Philon*
hold out from the beginning to the ending without any intermission; there was
no breaking up of the Congregation till all was done, Acts 13. 43. Nehem. 8. 8,
9. But Philo, one of the most eminent among the Jews, gives us this fair
relation of their behavior on the Sabbath; We have our Conventions, says he,
on the Sabbath, and sit down with great silence, and the people speak not a
word, unless it be in the praise of their Teachers: one of the most grave of
the Priests, reads the Law and expounds it; and this is done all the day long
till twilight, and so the people g^ away more knowing in the Law of God. And
this relation Eusebius takes notice of in his eighth book of Evangelical
preparation, the second Chapter. Thus then upon the credit of one of their most
famous Authors, it was the shutting in of the evening put a stop to their
public services, besides the remains of duty to be acted at home; so that
their whole Sabbath was a golden thread spun out in heavenly and devout
performances; which may cover the faces of many Christians with shame, who
trifle away their precious Sabbaths in vain and flatulent impertinencies.

To add but a word; The Jews zeal for Sabbath-observation, sometimes gave so
good an heat, that mistaking the force of the fourth Commandment, In it thou
shall do no manner of work, Exodus 20. 10. they would not adventure to roast an
Apple, to pluck an herb, to climb a tree, or those things which are most
harmless and inoffensive, nay, not to defend themselves, when assaulted by the
enemy on the Sabbath day; and by this means they became a prey to their Joseph.
lib. 12. cap. 8.
Adversary Antiochus Epiphanes, whereupon Matthias made a Decree, that it
should be lawful upon the Sabbath to resist their Enemies, which Decree, they
understanding Joseph. lib 14. cap. 8.
strictly, as if it gave them only leave to resist when they were actually
assaulted, and not to use any stratagem on that day to prevent their enemies,
by raising of Rams, or setting of Engines, undermining, etc. They became a prey
a second time to Pompey. But afterward they arrived at a (...)
better understanding of this Decree; and now they have a Proverbial speech,
Peril of life drives away the Sabbath: As the Christians use a Proverb much to
the same purpose, Necessity knows no holy days. And this scruple concerning
such small things as were before mentioned, as likewise not Hospin. de Orig.
Festor. cap. de Sab.
warring on the Sabbath, Hospinian puts a fair construction upon, and thinks it
rather mistake, then superstition. And so we have seen the fair portraicture of
Sabbath-observation, as it was sometimes drawn by Jewish practice, when they
were serious and advised, and not effascinated with sensuality and idolatry;
and truly it was very commendable, and deserves imitation, and will certainly
heat the furnace of eternal fire seven times hotter to Sabbath-breaking Dan. 3.
19.
Christians.

CHAP. XLIV. Holiness does as well become the Christian, as the Jewish Sabbath,
if we look back to the Infancy of the World.
IT is not unusual with many persons to look upon the strict observation of the
Sabbath, as a piece of servitude, which only belonged to the Jews; and that
Christ's coming Externus dei cultus a naturae lege et jure existit, cum illud a
natura comparatum est, ut tempus aliquid iis quae ad cultum pertinent
opportune, et liberaliter demiss. Azor.
loosned the reins, and gave Christians a greater liberty: Now to refute this
unhappy fancy, shall be the design of this, and some subsequent chapters, and
the only way to accomplish the attempt, is to show, that the Sabbath every way
belongs as much to Christians, as to Jews; and therefore the holy keeping of it
concerns as much the one as the other, for holiness is the end of the Sabbaths
command. To cease from servile works is the Command, and Sanctification is the
end of that Command, as the Schoolmen speak.

Now to evidence this the more plainly and demonstratively, we must run up the
Sabbath to the fountain head, to Genesis 2. 3. Septimum diem deus non accommodum
putabat ad creandum, sed ad quietem adaptum statuit. Theodor.
the primitive institution of it, which we find in the very infancy of the
World, Genesis 2. 3. The Sabbath at first was given to the Sons of Adam, and not
to the Sons of Abraham; and it was a Sun which did not only shine upon the
coast of Judaea, but upon the whole world, and so every way belongs to us, as
well as to the Jews.

This will be more clear if we canvass the words of the institution recorded in
the forementioned Genesis 2. 3. And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
because that in it he had rested from all his works, which he had created and
made Observatio sab bati omnino praecepta suit, ante Mosen, quia in prima
creatione deus eam sanxit. Par. in Genesis
Before I pass to a further explication of the text, I shall take notice, (as
others have done) that all our translatours of the Bible in the Contents of
this Chapter, put in, the first Sabbath instituted: And therefore the
apprehension of these learned men which put the sacred Scriptures into an
English dress, and made them speak our mother tongue, might prevail much
against the cavils of any of our own Nation.

But for the more clear explication of Genesis 2. 3. we must enquire into the
meaning of these words, Blessing and Sanctifying; and I suppose the worthy
Chrysostom may here be an authentical expositour, and thus he descants on this
text, Genesis 2. 3. He sanctified it; wbat means that word, he Chrysostom. in Genesis
sanctified it? he separated it; therefore the Divine Scripture, teaching us
the cause why he sanctified it, adds, because in it he rested from all his
works. Now hence God would teach us from the beginning to separate and set
apart one whole day in the circle of every week, to the exercise of spiritual
things; For, for this cause did the Lord finish* all the fabric of the world
in six days, and honored the seventh day with his blessing, and sanctified
it, because in it he rested from all his Illa sanctificatio Sabbati nihil aliud
esse potest, quam mandatum de illo die sanctificando Adamo datum. Dr. R.
works. To this worthy Father, let the famous Bishop of Armagh succeed, in the
explanation of this text; To sanctify a Sabbath, says he, is either to keep
it holy, or to make it holy; and seeing God cannot keep any day more holy then
another, the meaning must be, he made it holy, which is as much as to command
the keeping of it holy. And it is observable, God blessed the Sabbath, not with
natural blessings, that the Sun should shine brighter, and the weather prove
fairer on Zanch. de hom. Creat. lib. 1. Sab. fin. libr.
this day, rather then another; but the blessings of a Sabbath are of another
nature, they are spiritual blessings, converse with God, holy and divine
meditation, etc. which blessings proclaim the Sabbath to be Originally
destinated to worship Thom. Aquin.
and divine service. It is the observation of Zanchy, That Vt sanctifi^es, (i.
e.) ^t sanctum et feriatum habeas ab opere servili cessando. Ger.
Jesus Christ on that day, when first the Sabbath was instituted, did take an
humane shape, and conversed with Adam, and did instruct him in most holy
Colloquies, and so was busied that whole day with our Parents. This was the
apprehension of that worthy person, who was not much subject Primum deus
sanctificavit diem scptimum; Quia sacra ordinatione eam segregavit ab aliis, et
sibi suoque cultui illam appropriavis.
to fancies or enthusiasmes. The blessing of the Sabbath, says reverend
Calvin, was nothing else but a solemn consecration, whereby God claims to
himself the studies and employments of men on the seventh day; (whether the
last or the first of the week.) First, God rested, and then he blessed this
rest, or he dedicated every seventh day to holy rest; and thus expounded is
this text by the most famous writers of our own and foreign Nations; thus
Zuinglius, Junius, and Tremelius, Vrsinus, Piscator, Paraeus, Danaeus,
Bullinger, Aretius, Chemnitius, Hospinianus, Bertramus, etc. expound this text;
and besides these mentioned, there are many Neque enim Sabbatum per Mosen primo
est institutum, caelitus exhibito Decalogo, sed religio Sabbati recepta fuit a
sanctis Patribus. Zepper.
worthy Divines of our own Nation give the same interpretation. Thus Willet,
Bownd, Greenham, Gibbons, Perkins, Babington, Dod, Scharpy, Williams, etc.
Paraeus well observes, the word sanctify signifies four things in Scripture.

1. To make that holy, which was impure and propharie; and so the Saints are
sanctified by the blessed spirit of grace.

2. To set apart any thing from a common to a sacred use; So God sanctified the
Priest, the first fruits, the tabernacle, and the utensils of it, Levit. 27. 8.

3. To celebrate that as holy which is holy in it self; so Prima requies fuit
Sabbati, qua deus Genesis 2. 3. in honorem, et memoriam creationis suae et
quietis, jussit homines quiescere ab omnibus operibus die septimo. Alap.
we sanctify Gods name, when in prayer we address our selves unto him, and
proclaim the glory of it.

4. To sanctify, signifies to be vacant for holy employments, and so we are
commanded to sanctify the Sabbath, to be at leisure for divine affairs. At
first, says Paraeus, God sanctified the seventh day, viz. By an holy
Ordination he set apart this day, and appropriated it to his own worship, and
as a day of rest to the Lord; and this Ordination implies a command, which is
moral and binds all men. And that no other exposition can be fastened on this
text is further evidenced Verisimile est observationem sabbati apud Patres in
usu fuisse sicut et sacrificiorum, a primordiis mundi. Riv. in Exodus
from this, that the Lord in the promulgation of the fourth Commandment upon
Mount Sinai, fetches this text of Scripture, as comprising the Original of the
Sabbath, laying the ground of his precept to keep it holy upon this his
institution, repeated in Exodus 20. 11. And it is observable, that to bless a
day is no where spoken of in the whole Bible, but here in this text, and in
Exodus 20. 11. And as the latter text, Exodus 20. 11. is supported by, so it is
an interpreter of the former, viz. Genesis 2. 3. And God in the solemn
promulgation of the fourth Commandment, does there as Moses does here, Genesis 2.
3. couple the same things together, and so confirms the truth of Moses his
narration: So then, in the text of institution, Genesis 2. 3. we have four things
considerable.

1. Here is a Sabbath made.

2. Here is Gods own example for man's imitation, and so Benedixit deus diei
septimo ut in ipso homines quiescerent et cultui divino vacarent. Pet. Mar.
it is, Exodus 20. 11. Gods example is for resting on the Sabbath.

3. Here are the words of institution, in that he says, he blessed it, he
sanctified it, (i. e.) he ordained it to be a holy Sabbath; he dedicated it to
his own service.

4. Moses confirms it with a reason, therefore it is the Lords institution, and
to be kept holy of us, because then God rested from all his work which he made.
Nothing can be more obvious or plain, did not the unhappy wit of some men cast
a cloud to darken and veil it. Peter Martyr Rabbi Agnon.
among others give us a full explication of this text, (so that many beams may
proclaim the Sun) God blessed the seventh day, This blessing God gave to it,
that it should only be employed in Divine worship. Rabbi Agnon says, That God
blessed the seventh day (i. e.) he passes a blessing upon the due observers of
it, which could not be, unless there was an institution of the Sabbath; for
Obedience requires a command, and blessing is the usual fruit of obedience.

And most probable it is, that the Sabbath was ordained (...). Theod.
in the state of innocence (though whether it was ordained before the fall, or
presently after the fall, is all one to my purpose) for it did well agree with
a state of innocence, for Adam to be an imitator of God, resting upon the
Sabbath as proportionating himself to that admirable pattern and example; and
besides, Adam was to work six days (though his labor was delightsome, not
toilsome) in imitation of God, and therefore to rest the seventh day, because
God did so. And though Adam toiled not his body with pain and sweat before the
fall, yet intent he was upon his business whilst he did labor, and six days
were destinated to his labor, but on the seventh day his body was altogether
freed from all labor, and his mind from attending to it, and so the whole man
set apart for an holy rest to the Lord, which well befitted him. And though on
other days Adam served God, yet neither the days, nor he on those days were
immediately consecrated to God as this day was, and held also for holy duties,
and to attend upon God more immediately, who in that happy estate did
unquestionably appear unto him. And Adams perfection and knowledge, his
holiness and uprightness, his innocence of life, and rare accomplishments, did
all furnish him with matter of contemplation, and made Cum Adamus diversae
naturae negotiis, eodem tempore non potuerit convenienter vacare. Aratione non
est alienum, illi statum tempus, ad utrumque ommode perficiendum, a deo suisse
assignatum. Quo posset libere hortum Edenis colere, et dei cultum publicum
solenniter celebrare.
him bold to present himself before God upon that day in a more special manner.
And indeed a blessed and sanctified day very well accorded with a blessed and
sanctified an estate, and so no jarring or disagreement would intervene. And
this day of Gods resting was not only exemplary to Adam, but to all his seed,
and so to Christians as well as Jews, (the seventh in number, though not in
order.) And it is further observable, that Adam had on him, and so should all
men have, a double calling, the one for his body, for which he was allowed six
days, and the other for his soul, for which the seventh day was ordained: So
then this observation of the Sabbath was no way disagreeing to the state of
innocence. Man in that blessed condition could not conveniently attend upon two
things at the same time, viz. the dressing of the Garden, and the solemn
worship of God. And as one well observes, If heaven it self be a perpetual
Sabbath, why should it be thought incongruous for man to keep a Sabbath in
Paradise?

And indeed it cannot be incongruous, that the Sabbath should be kept in
Paradise, when the Sabbath it self is a kind of Paradise; there is something to
resemble a tree of life; here the soul tastes of Sabbath Ordinances, and life,
nay eternal life flows from them; and the pleasures of a Sabbath, not a little
resemble the delights of Paradise: The Rev. 1. 10.
soul being in the spirit upon the Lords day, much resembles Adams rejoicing in
Paradise; and no doubt but the sweetness of Paradise did most principally
consist in the intimate communion Psalm. 63. 2.
Adam had with God; and the same communion sheds the delight and prerogative
upon the Sabbath, or else wherein does the Sabbath out-vy and excel other
days?

And that the Sabbath was instituted from the beginning is not only most clear
from Scripture, but most consonant to reason.

Patriarchs of old had their solemn worship. Cain and Abel offered sacrifices,
they called upon the name of the Sanctificavit deus diem septimum (i. e.)
sanctum and celebrem haberi voluit, and a caeteris diebus segregavit. Catharin.
Lord in a solemn way, Genesis 4. 26. And no doubt, this they learned from Adam,
and he from God; they had their Altars, Genesis 12. 8. yea their set Altars, Genesis
13. 4. for ordinary worship: And if they had set worship, they must have
stinted time; for how shall we meet together to perform ordinary worship
without set times? And then no doubt, but the seventh day was that time, for we
have not the least shadow of any other ordinary time. And it is very unlikely,
Gibbons Quaest. and disput. in Genes. Quaest. tertia.
that if there had been any, that no mention should be made thereof in
Scripture; therefore seeing mention is made of this day, Genesis 2. 3. before
mention is made of any public worship, and no other day is noted in all story,
till the 16th. Willet on Exodus 16. Quaest. 34. Voluit deus diem septimum sibi
tribui, et d^cari, ut caelestibus, et divinis rebus intenti, deo gratias agamus
pro acceptis beneficiis. Cathar.
Chapter of Exodus, where again mention is made of the Sabbath, Exodus 16. 25,
26, 30. And the fourth Commandment ratifies the same day upon the reason
assigned in Genesis 2. 3. It surely must be sufficient and satisfactory to all
reason, that the seventh day was the ordinary day appointed for those times to
perform solemn and public worship to God.

And as when man has run his race, and finished his course, and passed through
the larger circle of his life, he then returns to his eternal rest; so it is
contrived and ordered by divine wisdom, that he shall in a special manner
return unto his rest, once at least within the lesser and smaller Romans 11. 33.
circle of every week, and so his perfect blessedness to come, might be
fore-tasted every Sabbath day, and so be begun here. And look as man standing
in his innocence has cause, thus to return from the pleasant labors of his
weekly Paradise employments; so man fallen, from his more toilsome labors to
his rest again: And therefore as because all creatures were made for man, and
man therefore was made in the last place after them; so man being made for God
and his worship, thence it is, that the Sabbath wherein man was nearer to God,
was appointed immediately after the Creation, as learned men observe. For
though man is not made for the Sabbath, merely in respect of the outward rest
of it, yet he is made for the Sabbath, in respect of God in it, and the
holiness of it; to both which, then the soul is to Dr. Field.
have its weekly revolution back again, as unto that rest which is the end of
all our lives and labors, and in special of all our weekly labor and work.
Dr. Field professes, That to one who knows the story of the Creation, it is
evident by the light of Nature, that one day in seven is to be consecrated to
Gods service and worship.

a time allowed to every purpose, which is Inest homini naturalis inclinatio ad
hoc, quod* cuilibet rei necessariae deputetur aliquid tempus, sicut corpori
somnus, et refectio, etc. quae requirunt tempus; sic animae, tempus requiritur
ad ejus refectionem, qua men's hominis in deo reficitur, Sayrus.
necessary and indispensable; so for our bodies, there must be a time to eat,
to drink, to sleep, etc. For civil affairs, there must be a time for work and
labor, trade and merchandise, to promote and sustain our civil interest; and
shall not there be a set time for soul-refreshments, when the precious soul may
be recruited? Shall our Estates have their seasons for their increase, and our
Bodies for their support, and not our Souls for their delight and edification?
What is this but to debase the soul, and degrade it from its due honor and
dignity? The Image of God is most lively impressed upon the soul, Eternity is
riveted into the very nature of the soul, Jesus Christ died for the Redemption
of the soul, and shall only the soul want its term, its appointed season for
its spiritual converse? Shall there be a Change time, and not a Church time?
shall there be a time to Work, and not a Naturae instinctus est, ut aliquid
temporis cultui divino impendatur, et animus in hoc se recreat. Azor.
time to Pray? This is a principle of Nature, and therefore draws its original
from the worlds beginning. Nor can it be conceived, but the soul stood in as
much need of communion with God in divine worship, in the infancy, as in the
old age of the world, and therefore the Sabbath was as necessary to Adam and
his immediate heirs, as to his more remote posterity.

That the Sabbath was from the beginning, and so belongs Sabbatum Moses Exodus
16. 23. scripta lege restituit, cum ejus diei cultus abi^rat, Azor.
properly to the Sons of Adam, and not particularly to the Sons of Abraham, is
more evident and clear, if we take notice, that in the history of Gods raining
down of Manna, there is frequent mention made of the Sabbath, and this was
before the Law was given upon Mount Sinai. In Exodus 16. 23. the Lord speaks
of the Sabbath, wherein no Manna was to M^j^ris momenti et fi^^itatis est, quod
ass^r^ur, Exodus 16. 24. ubi Sabbati, tanquam diei inter Israelitas celebris, et
noti mentio sit; et sic verse. 26. His verbis Sabbatum non instituitur, sed
tanquam rem antea institutam, propter Mannae collectionem violandum non esse a
deo praecipitur. Wall.
be gathered, as a thing in use amongst them, and no unheard of novelty; the
Sabbath then was no wonder to the people of Israel; but indeed the Commandment
for not gathering Manna on that day was a new thing. The Sabbath is again
mentioned, verse. 25. To day is a Sabbath unto the Lord; where we have no words
of institution, as if now the Sabbath first commenced a weekly festival; but
this blessed day is spoken of, as of an usual, and well known solemnity: And
which is very observable, the Lord speaks expressly concerning the Sabbath,
verse. 29. That he had given them a Sabbath, in the preterperfect tense, as a
thing of former times, not of any present institution; he gives them Manna in
the present tense, but he has given them a Sabbath in the preterperfect tense,
which most clearly evinces the antiquity of its institution. Moreover, the
ready obedience of the people in resting upon the seventh day mentioned, verse.
30. evidences its former institution; they did not dispute, but obey, not
admire, but submit: New Laws raise Questions, but here was none: Every
circumstance in this whole story gives in clear evidence to this truth. Nay, in
the 28th verse, God chides the people who went out to gather Manna on the
Sabbath day, as breakers of his Laws and Commandments: So then the Sabbath was
an ancient Law among them, nay, an Eminent Law, and therefore called Laws in
the plural number, verse. 28. The Jews gathered Manna on the Sabbath, and this
was their sin, and this could not have been their transgression, unless there
had been a Law for The mentioning of the Sabbath, Exodus 16. 23. comes in
occasionally, as concerning Manna, and not of purpose to institute a Sabbath.
Mr. Bern.
the Sabbath, for sin is only the transgression of a Law, 1 John 3. 4. And one
thing more is observable, the Lord works a miracle at that time, to honor the
Sabbath, the Manna which was gathered the day before, did not putrify on that
day, according to the nature of it, Exodus 16. 24. by which God showed how
greatefull the due observance of that day was to him: So then to wind up this
particular, we find in this Chapter the Sabbath observed, which could not be,
unless instituted before, for only institu^ions are the matter of our G. J. p.
11.
observation; and no less is acknowledged by our adversaries Cogita i^ Egypto
ubi serviebas etiam ipso Sabbato, per vim te esse coactum ad labores. Man. Ben.
Isr.
in this point: And to fasten a nail on this argument, that it may not
unravel, Manasseh Ben Israel, one of the most eminent of the Jewish Rabbis,
very well observes that the Lords enjoining the Israelites, the observation of
the Sabbath, tells them they were Servants in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. This the
ancient wise men among the Jews do apply in this manner; Think with thy self,
how that in Egypt where thou Quae dicuntur de Sabbato videntur innuere, vel
ejus observationem, tum fuisse institutam, vel saltem innovatam and miraculo
confirmatam. Riv.
servedst by force, thou wast constrained to work even on the Sabbath day. Thus
the Jews most knowing in the doctrine of the Sabbath, spoke of a Sabbath in
their Egyptian bondage, which was long before Mount Sinai smoaked, to preface
Gods giving the Ten Commandments. Two things more must here be inserted, as in
their proper place;

1. The Lord argues, Exodus 16. 28. with the Israelites for violating the
Sabbath, with this expostulation, How long will ye refuse to keep my
Commandments? which argues most clearly the Antiquity of the Sabbath, for God
would not thus reprove the first breach of this Commandment, but it plainly
discovers their custom in this sin.

2. And so in Exodus 31. 15. the keeping of the Sabbath is not urged from the
Commandment lately given in the decalogue, as reason would in man's judgment;
but from Exodus 31. 15, 16, 17.
the seventh days rest and refreshment after six days work, which points
clearly at the Sabbaths first institution.

a fresh light to Heb. 4 5. Vis est in (...) ea quies praeteriit olim, rursus
tamen quietem promittit, ergo haec alia est a priore. Par.
this truth; there the Apostle seems to dispute ex concessis, from the
observation of the Sabbath from the beginning of the world. The Question was,
how those words of the Prophet were to be understood, (viz.) If they shall
enter into my rest: Now says the Apostle, there is a twofold rest mentioned
in the Old Testament; the rest of the Sabbath, and the rest of the Land of
Canaan; but it cannot be meant Ex dictis sequitur aliud Sabbatum, aliam requiem
restar^ populo dei, pu^a requiem gaudium, et solennitatem caelestem figuratam
per quietem, et festum veteris et Judaici (...)
of either of these rests, for they are long since passed, one at the
beginning, the other at the time of Joshua, and therefore it must be meant of a
rest to come. The minor of this syllogism, the Apostle proves by parts, not
the rest of the Sabbath, for that was entered into by man from the beginning,
seeing the works were finished from the beginning, Heb. 4. 5. not of the rest
of Canaan, for if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have spoken of
another rest, verse. 8. the conclusion then follows, there remains therefore a
rest for the people of God, verse. 9. And that is the rest of Heaven, whereof
Alap.
the other two rests were either types, or fair resemblances; We see therefore,
that the Apostle taakes the first, (viz.) of the Sabbath, as from the beginning
of the world; and this Divine Authority is beyond all dispute or exception: and
whosoever shall cast a cloud upon so clear a truth, we may truly say, the hand
of itching currios^ty, or design is in it, nothing but singularity, or interest
could raise such a steam or vapor.

Remember, prefatory to the fourth Commandment, clearly speaks the primitive
institution of the Sabbath: For Memory alwayss looks backwards; we Deus in
Decalogo pronunciando memoriam refricat Israelitis, and primaevae ordinationis,
quando deus eam innovavit. Riv. in Dec.
cannot remember what we formerly did not know: at least Memory, like Janus
among the Romans, must look with two faces; the one must look backwards, and
the other must look forwards: And so in reference to the Sabbath, If the word
Remember, look backward, it refers to the institution of the Sabbath, if
forwards, it refers to the observation of the Sabbath. Rivet well observes,
that in the word Remember, God stirs up the Memory of the Israelites, that Deus
a primordio mundi sanctificavit diem septimum, requiescendo ab operibus suis
quae fecit; and inde Moses dixit ad populum, mementote diem Sabbati, et
sanctificate eam, Ter.
they should not forget that holy Institution which was of old: So then, the
Sabbath when commanded on Mount Sinai, was only the second Edition of it, the
Renovation of an old Law, a primitive Statute put in a fairer Print, or like as
it was in Pharaoh's Dream, this Law was repealed, because it was more firmly
established, Genesis 41. 32. Thus Colors are put in Oil, that they may be the
more lasting. The first Institution of the Sabbath, and the more solemn
promulgation of it upon Mount Sinai, are two Witnesses by which this Truth
shall be fully established, viz. That the seventh part of every Week shall be
consecrated to God, till the second coming of Jesus Christ: the solemn
proclaiming of this Law upon Mount Sinai, was only the Sabbaths duplicate, In
Monte Sinai Deus Sabbati diem innovavit. Riv.
the Original we had hefore, and now we have the Counterpane: the Sabbath was
put in a fresh dress on the flaming Mountain, and then, like rich Arras, the
Sabbath it self was refreshed. And if the Sabbath was from the beginning, as
has been clearly demonstrated, the Christian lays an equal claim to it with
the Jew, and is as much concerned in its observation.

the Worlds Infancy; and indeed what reason can put it to the question? For
were the Bodies of men before the Law more adamantine, that they need not be
refreshed? Or were not our Bodies before and after the Law equally attempered
and conditioned? Were not the sweet Intervals equally necessary and welcome to
both? Did not a devout sequestration to pious Exercises as well suit and become
the Soul^ of the Patriarchs and the Church of God in those days, as those Nobis
cum veteri populo quoad hanc partem communis est necessitas. Calv.
who lived after the promulging of the fourth Commandment? Let us look into
the End peculiar to the Sabbaths Institution, was it not to eternize the honor
of the Creation? And does not that belong to those before the Law, as well as
those after? Is not the benefit of the Creation common and universal? Do not
all participate of it, especially the Elect, and that inexplicably? Had not the
Church before Moses as ample a share in Blessings upon the Sabbath, as those
since? And ought it not then as freely, Hospin. de Orig. Temp. lib. 2. cap. 14.
and as frequently, to celebrate its sacred Festival? And if then before, as
since the Law, there was the same reason, sure then there was the same thing
observed, and the same commanded: for from the reason of the Law, we may rise
to the Law it self, as from the Cause to the Effect, and from Omnis actio dei
nobis pietatis, and virtutis est regula. Basil.
the End to the Means. The example of God's resting, and the benefit of the
Creation, being the same to those before, and after the Law, it must needs
follow, the Sabbath was given in the Worlds Infancy, and so belongs to the
whole Posterity of Adam.

ancient Institution of the Sabbath was so generally known in the World, that
the very Heathens had a dimmish light of it: Hesiod, a Gentile and a Greek Poet
(...). Hesiod.
says, That the seventh day is a holy day. Lampridius tells us, that Alexander
Severus the Roman Emperor, and an Heathen, on the seventh day usually went
into the Capitol, there to offer Sacrifices to the Gods. Homer an Heathen
says, The seventh day is holy, and was the day in which all things were
perfected. Callimachus says the like, and that it is the birthday, chief and
perfect. Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. stromat. lib 5.
shows, That not only the Hebrews, but the Greeks also knew the seventh day to
be holy. And Eusebius affirms, That almost (...). Clem
all, not only Philosophers, but Poets, know that the seventh day was most
sacred and venerable. Certain of the Ethnic Doctors were wont only to dispute
on Sabbath Days, because they were most signal and remarkable, and therefore
the more to be honored: So Diogenes used to dispute at Rhodes, as Aulius
Gellius reports, Lib. 13. Cap. 2. Seneca Eusebius. de praepar. Evang. lib. 13. cap
7.
in his 99th Epistle, showing that Exhortations are not enough, but we need
obliging Precepts, yea, the Decrees of wisdom, he reckons up the Sabbath as a
Festival day for Religion. Aretius has these words, The Greeks and Latins
Causab. in Sueton. lib. 3. cap. 52.
call the Sabbath a Day of Rest, thinking it unfit for civil Actions and
Warlike Affairs, and fit only for Contemplation. How shall these rise up in
judgment against sensual Sen. Epist 95.
and formal Christians, who trifle away their Sabbaths, when all Books shall be
opened in the day of account? Eusebius brings in Plato and Solon, those Sages
among the Aret. Probl. Theol. loc. de Sabbat. observantia.
Gentiles, sublimating the Sabbath with their Seraphick Eulogies, and putting
an high estimate upon it. Thus the generality of the world had some gust and
taste of the sanctity of a Sabbath, which gives in full testimony of its great
Antiquity, Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 7.
and that it had its rise from the very beginning of the World: and if so, then
all Mankind, both Jew and Christian Lucian. in Pseudologista.
are concerned in it.

The Jews who should be best acquainted with the Doctrine Dies Sabbati and
natura privilegium habuit, ex quo mundi natalis factus fuit. Phil. Jud.
of the Sabbath, generally affirm, that the Sabbath was ordained from the
beginning of the World. Philo Judaeus says, That the Sabbath Day has its
privilege from Nature it self, and is become the Worlds birthday. Kabbi
Kimchi in his Commentary upon the ninety second Psalm, testifies, that the
Doctrine of the Jews in their Darash is, That Adam first compesed that Psalm in
Paradise upon the (...)
Sabbath Day, and after that he sinned, and profaned the Sabbath. The Chaldee
Paraphrase gives this Inscription to the ninety second Psalm, A Praise and Song
which Adam, the first of men, spoke on the Sabbath Day. And a learned man well
observes, that Tertullian in all his heat cannot deny, but that the Jews held
the Sabbath Day to be sanctified Chald. Paraph
from the Worlds beginning, long before the sacred Decalogue Tertul. lib. 4.
adversus Judaeos.
was oracularly delivered upon Mount Sinai. And the forementioned Philo, so
eminent among the Jews, that he was sent in an Embassy to the Roman Caesar, in
the behalf of his Countrymen: And therefore there is a Book of his, entitled,
Legatio ad Caesarem, His Embassy to Caesar. I say, Philo (...).
this eminent person calls the Sabbath (...), a thing known to all Nations from
the beginning of the World; and Nostrum jus (inquit) omnes admonet officii
Barbaros, Graecos, Continentis, and insularum, Incolas Occidentales and
Orientales, Europaeos, and Asiaticos, etc.
dilating upon the honor of the Sabbath, says, The Barbarians (as the Jews
called all the World besides themselves) Graecians, both of the Continent and
the Islands, both Eastern and Western, both of Europe and of Asia, nay, all the
habitable World to the utmost extent of it, are Admirers of our Privilege; for
who does not honor that holy day, which returns at the winding up of every
Week? And a learned man notes, That it was the general Doctrine of the Jews,
That Adam kept the Sabbath Day, and that that holy day derived its Original
from the beginning of times. Josephus the most learned Josephus Judaeus
litterat^ssimus agnoscit deum, septima requieviss^, and ab operibus cessasse,
atqu^ eo nomine Judaeos hanc diem, quam sabbatum appellant vacationem ad cultum
divinum celebrare. Joseph. lib. 2.
Historian among the Jewish Nation, says expressly, That God rested on the
seventh day, and ceased from the works of Creation, and upon that account the
Jews keep that day; they call the Sabbath a vacation to the Worship of God.
Thus Rabbi Jonathas, and the whole Sanedrim of the Jews, Gods ancient and
select people, give their free concurrence to this truth: So that none of the
Jewish Doctors seem to dissent, excepting Maimonides; as Truth will have some
always to oppose it. And this Augustine takes notice of, and accounts it as the
general opinion of the Jews, which never was blasted with the heats of
difference and contention: and it is pregnantly animadverted by a learned man,
That though August. tract. 20. in Joan. Solom. Jarchi. in Genesis 26. Rabbi Simson
in Isa. 58. Rabbi Kimchi Manasseh Even Israel in Deuteronomy. 5. Aben Ezra in Exodus 20.
Septem praecepta Noachi enumerantur in Schindlero in Radice (...)
the observation of the Sabbath was none of the seven Precepts of Noah, yet in
as much as the Lord gives command and express charge, That the streangers
within the gate should observe the Sabbath, Exodus 20. 10. It seems it was
comprehended under one of them: and some think it was comprehended under that
which was Entitled (...) Birchath Hashem, (i. e.) The Worship of no other God,
but the Creator of Heaven and Earth. And the famous Mr. Joseph Mede gives us
this reason, That the observation of the seventh day, was the badge of those
who worshipped the Creator of Heaven and Earth: According to that, The Sabbath
is a sign between me and you, that I am Jehovah your God; Because in six days
the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the
seventh day. Thus it is clear by the Opinion and Observation of the Jews, that
the Sabbath was in force among the Patriarchs, not only after, but before the
Flood, for undoubtedly they worshipped the Lord God, Creator of Heaven and
Earth.

As for the Fathers, among them there were few Dissenters, Sabbatum primum est,
q^od ab initio de c^etum est, ac dictum a domino in creatione mundi, etc.
^piphan. (...) Athanas. de Sab. Chrysoss. in Homil. 16. in Genesis
they generally concluded, the Sabbath to be from the beginning of the World.
Epiphanius speaks expressly, The first Sabbath is that which the Lord from the
beginning ordained and pronounced in the Creation of the World. This learned
Author, whilst he is beating down Error and Heresies by his learned Labors,
forgets not to establish this great and weighty Truth of the Sabbaths Original:
Athanasius in his Comment upon Matthew. 11. 27. distinguishes between the
Sabbath Day, and the Lord's Day, affirming the Sabbath to be the end of the
first Creation, and the Lordsday to be the beginning of the second Creation.
Beda solemnly professes, That the Rest of the seventh day after six days
working, was always wont to be celebrated: And if always, then before the
Children of Israel's coming forth out of Egypt, before Abraham, before the
Flood, even from the beginning of the days of Adam, the first of men. And
Chrysostom is most clear, and full in this point; New even from the beginning,
says he, God insinuates this Doctrine to us, teaching that in the circle of
the week, one entire day is to be segregated and set apart for spiritual
operation. Many of Clem. Alex.
the most glorious Stars of the Primitive Church give in abundant Theodor.
light to this truth. August Epist. 86 and in Epist. ad Casulan. Sabbati usus
fuit apud veteres prius quam apud Hebraeos increbuit. Aug. Septenarius numerus
a condition mundi authoritat^m obtinuit, quoniam in sex diebus opera dei
complet a sunt, ut septima consecrata quieti, quasi sancta, and solennitate
vacationis honorata, and a spiritu sanctificatore attitulata. Cyp Christus
legem adimplevit dum ipsum Sabbati diem benedictione^ Patris a primordio
sanctum, benefactione sua sanctio em effect.


There are only three or four who are looked upon as dissenting Votes, but upon
a mere mistake, as the Learned observe; they speaking only of observing the
Sabbath after the Jewish manner, which was not before the Law was given on
Mount Sinai; they speak not against Sabbath-observation before the Law, but
against the observation of it ceremonially, after the manner of the Jews, in
their double Sacrifices, Meat Offerings, Drink Offerings, etc. Numb. 28. 9, 10.
Augustine in many places of his Works acknowledges, that the Sabbath was
observed among the Ancients, before it grew so common among the Hebrews; and he
avers, that the Sabbath was before Moses, and afterward it came into the
Church of the Jews: What more plain? And whose testimony bears more sway in the
Church of Christ, than that of the incomparable Augustine? whose Person and
Learning was little less than a Miracle. Cyprian says, That God sanctified the
seventh day after his six days works, and this day is honored with a solemn
Rest and Vacation, and is entitled holy by the sanctified Spirit. And to the
same purpose Laciantius; nay, Tertullian, who is often suppoenaed as a Witness
to both parties, in this Controversy, yet speaks most expressly: Christ
fulfilled the Law, says he, whilst he makes the Sabbath more celebrious and
holy by his own benefaction, which was consecrated from the beginning by the
Father's benediction. The beforementioned Lactantius tells us; The Sabbath
took its rise not from the History of Manna, but from Gods resting on the
Sabbath Day, after the finishing of the six days works. Theodoret most
elegantly observes, That least the seventh day should want its honor, nothing
Tertul. contr. Marcion. lib. 4. cap. 12. Septimo die deus nihil facit, sed hunc
diem benedictione honoravit.
being created thereon, God set it apart to be a Sabbath, a day of holy Rest.
And indeed Gods chief work on the Sabbath is forming the new Creature, 2 Cor.
5. 17. not creating the Man, but the Saint; not springing man out of the dust
of the Earth, but raising him out of the Theodor. quaest. 43. in Exodus
dregs of sin, That he may be his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, Ephesians. 2. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24. On the holy Sabbath, the works of God are works
of grace, not of nature, and he does not multiply, but beautify the Creation:
God does not create on it new species and kinds of Creatures, but new hearts,
and new spirits.

The Schoolmen who lived in the Iron Age of the Church, Estius in lib. 3.
Sentent. Did. 37. Sylvestranus. Richardus de media villa. Alex. Alens. part.
3. quaest. 39. fol. 128 Benedixit, and sanctificavit deus diem septimum (i. e)
sanctum and celebrem esse voluit. Sanctificavit i e. consecravit. Caeteros dies
operum exercitio deputans, il lum suo cultui emancipavit. Hugo Card. Sabbatum
est dies requiei, i. e. vacationis ad deum. Alex. Alens.
and rose at Midnight, yet by their dark-Lanthorn they could see this truth;
they generally refer the Institution of the Sabbath to the beginning of the
World, and fairly conclude, That Gods blessing and sanctifying the Seventh day,
was its consecration to be a day of holy Rest, and a future Sabbath. Alexander
Hales says positively, That the Sabbath was observed of the Fathers before the
Law. Hugo Cardinalis truly asserts; That the other six days God deputes to the
affairs of the world, but the seventh day he has ordained for his own worship,
and this was originated from Gods sanctifying the seventh day in the primitive
Institution. The Schoolmen generally say, God sanctified the seventh day, Genesis
2. 3. and this is no more, then his separating of it to holy purposes, for his
own more solemn and immediate worship. Gerson the famous Chancellor of Paris
speaks even the same words with Hugo Cardinalis: and as the Schoolmen of the
middle times of the Church heartily assented to this truth, so those of latter
times agree in the same opinion. Suarez says, It is most probable, that the
Sabbath was from the beginning, and so propagated by tradition to posterity.
For we must know, that the Church in the first times of the world, was immured
in Fami^ies, and most easy it was, for one Family to hand down to another
those Solemnities which God enjoined them, and more especially the blessed
Sabbath, wherein those pious Ancestors were to enjoy more solemn and sweet
communion with their glorious Jehovah. To frequent Gods worship is most
adaequate to natural reason, says the abovementioned Suarez. Surely this
great truth of the Sabbaths origination, must gain much credit from the
School-mens attestation, when they were Similiter est naturali rationi
consentaneum, ut dei cultus frequenter exerceatur, and ideo temporis
determinatio est ex morali ratione. Suarez.
too prone to dispute every thing, and to make the most evidential truths
problematical. The Schools were ever for pro and con, to question every the
most sacred truth which passed by, they would bandy those Scriptural assertions
which carried most light with them, and subject those things which were most
taken for granted, to their discussion and ventilation. But to close this
particular with a good rule of the Schools, viz. To dedicate some time to the
service of God, this is natural; to dedicate the seventh part Filiut. Mor.
Quaest. Tom. 2 in tertium Praeceptum. Bannes secunda secundae Quaest. 44. Art.
1.
of the week to the service of God, this is moral: but to sanctfie this weekly
Sabbath as we should, this is supernatural, the spirit of God teaches us to
sanctify the Sabbath, this is only from grace. In the midst of all their
Sceptiscims, this is a most worthy speech.

And as for our modern Divines who stood upon Giants shoulders, and therefore
had a fairer Prospect of divine Covarruv. Resol. l. 4. c. 19.
truth, They generally assert the Sabbaths original from the beginning of the
world. Luther (who led the Van of the great Ministers of Reformation) plainly
asserts, That if Ambros. Cathar. enar. in Gen 2. toto dejust. and jure l. 2.
Quaest. 3. Cultus est a natura, modus a lege, virtus est a gratia. Scholast.
Adam had never fell, yet he should have kept holy the seventh day as a Sabbath
to the Lord, and should have transmitted the knowledge of this day, which was
to be spent in divine worship: Other days Adam was to till the ground, to look
to the Beasts of the field, but this day to converse with God; and this day,
(says Luther) Adam kept solemnly after the fall, and a testimony of this, are
the sacrifices of Cain and Abel; therefore the Sabbath was designed to the
worship of God from the beginning of the world. What more full, more clear, Si
Adam in innocentia stetisset tamen habuisset sacrum diem septimum, eo die
decrevisset posteros de voluntate and cultu dei laudasset deum, et gratias
egisse^* and ob^u^^sset* aliis diebus coluisset agrum, and pecora curasset.
Immo post lapsum habuit diem illum septimum sacrum. Luther. in Genes.
more plain? Zuinglius agreeing with Luther, says roundly, That the Sabbath
was ordained from the beginning of the world, and took its first rise from the
close of the Creation. This blessed man, who lost his life in defense of the
Protestant cause, sealed this, with other truths with his precious blood.
Calvin says expressly, That God rested on the seventh day, and then blessed it,
that this day might be through all ages dedicated to rest; not to idleness, but
to holy rest, that our minds might be freer for boly contemplation on God the
great Creator of heaven and earth. For God, says he, is no way pleased with
empty leisure, that man should do nothing but with a necessary vacation for
converse with himself. And Reverend Beza, who was so rare in sacred Critics,
gives us in his judgment, acquiescing in this truth, and plainly tells us, That
the seventh day stood from the Creation of the world unto the Resurrection of
Christ, when the seventh day Sabbath was turned into the first day Sabbath by
the holy Apostles; Zuingl. com. in Exodus 20.
So that now we cannot say of the Sabbath, as is said of the River Nilus, that
its fountain head cannot be known, when Primum quievit deus, deinde benedixit
hanc quietem ut seculis omni bus inter homines fancta foret, and septimum
quemque diem quieti dicavit. Calv. in Genesis
the most eminent of every age, and Nation has beheld this rising Sun, and
rightly calculated the time of its rise, even from the first week in the world.
The Learned without the help of Astrology have cast the Sabbaths nativity. It
is a worthy saying of the Learned Andrews, when putting the question, But is
not the Sabbath a Ceremony, and so abrogated by Christ? He thus answers, Do as
Christ in the cause of divorce, look whether it was so from the beginning; now
the beginning of the Sabbath was in Paradise, before there Dies ille Sabbati
stetit a creatione mundi ad domini resurrectionem, quando in diem dominicum
demum ab Apostolis mutatus est. Bez. in Apocal.
was any sin, and so before there needed any Savior, and so before there was
any ceremony or figure of a Savior. Bullinger, Aretius, and Gualter rightly
observe, that the Sabbath was ordained in the beginning of the world, but
confirmed in the giving of the Law: Paradise was the place of its institution,
Mount Sinai the place of its more solemn promulgation, of its second and fairer
Edition. It were endless to run over the several authentic testimonies, which
are copiously and dexterously given to this truth; Rivet reckons no less then
thirty Hoc Sabbatum primo a deo fuit observation, and institu^um est a
creatione mundi confirmatum autem per Mosen. Aret. loc. com. loc 30. Zanch. l.
1. part. tertia, de oper Creat Gual. in Mat. 12. Homil. 162. Merc. in c. 2. Genesis
Protestant Divines of note, who give in their concurrent verdict; and what
place can be left for stumbling, when we have so much light to walk by? And
therefore Franciscus Gomarus was better employed in his fervent disputes
against the Arminians, then in raising batteries against a truth so generally
owned, and so strongly supported.

And as for that fancy of anticipation first Midwiv'd into the world by
Abulensis, viz. That God should only show us what he intended to do in
after-ages, when he rested on the seventh day and blessed and sanctified it,
Genesis 2. 3. He did not appoint the Sabbath to be presently observed, but only
manifested his purpose, what he intended for the future, when the Law should be
given on Mount Sinai. I say, let Catharinus answer Testatus, who was of the
same Religion Bertram. de Polit. Judaic.
with him, a Papist; and of the same order with him, a Bishop; and he calls
this fancy, ineptum figmentum, a foolish Jun^us, Paraeus, Zepper, Martin,
Allsted, etc.
figment. And Catharinus speaks only as the Foreman of the Jury, for
Steuchius, Eugubinus, Gilbertus, Genebrardus, Jacobus, Satianus, Cornelius
Alapide, Emmanuel Sa, Ribera and Steuch. Eugub in Cosinopoea c. 2.
Suarez, all give in their verdict with their foreman. This invention of
Tostatus is so ridiculous, that Amesius gravely says, No man ever thought of
anticipation in this place, who Gilb. Genebr. in Cronol.
was not first anticipated with some manifest prejudice: And he further goes
on, and says, No such kind of anticipation Jacob. Satian, in Annal.
can be found in the whole Scripture. Nay, the phrases of the Sabbaths
institution, Genesis 2. 3. convince the contrary, for Corn. Alap. in Genesis 2.
the blessing of the seventh day, and the sanctifying it, (i. e.) making it
holy for man's observation, are so plain, that to Emman. Sa Riber. Suarez
create a Prolepsis, is to paint the Sun, to parget over a Rose, and to raise
an imaginary vanity to cloud the truth. And Haec prolepsis mea sententia omni
probabilitate caret. Wall.
besides, it is very injurious to Scripture, to force figures upon the plain
words of it, when there is no necessity. And it is a rule among Divines, That
the Scripture ought to be understood according to the true property of the
Oportet ^cripturam intelligere, secundum verborum proprietatem, ubi non cogimur
evidenti absurditate. Eellar. de Baptis. l. 1. c. 4.
words, when we are not diverted by some manifest absurdity. It is true, it is
an easy thing to invent Tropes and Figures, or a vain prolepsis, to supply a
fancy, but let us observe, God blessed the seventh day; what is this blessing,
but the dispensing a peculiar favor toward it? And God fanctified the seventh
day; what is this sanctification, but a separation and consecration of it to
holy worship? what more plain and clear? And therefore furely, who ever
cherishes Nihil sacilius est quam dicere Tropus est, figura est, modus quidam
discendi est. Aug.
this fiction in his brain, or patronizeth it with his pen, he may justly be
attached either of singularity or design. Bellarmine himself lays down this
rule, We must not recede from the plain words of Scripture, unless some other
text of Scripture, or some Article of faith, or the general sense of the Church
enforce us to it: which if Nisi cogamur ab aliqua alia
this be true, as I suppose it will be easily granted, we are Scriptura, aut ab
aliquo articulo fidei, etc. Bellar.
safe enough from this figment of anticipation.

to free this truth, (viz. of the Sabbaths original from the beginning of the
world) from all sieges and disturbance, which will be taken up in answering
that Objection, that the Patriarchs did not observe the Sabbath, as we find
mentioned in Scripture.

not mentioned in Scripture, is a large and loose inconsequence; for as the
historical Narration of Moses, speaks Non dubium est Sabbati observantissimos
esse Patres, quotquot ante legem vixerunt, et quorum fides Scriptura
comcommendatur. Gualt.
nothing of the observation of the day after its institution; so we may find,
that after it was commanded in Mount Sinai, no mention is made of it or its
observation in the book of Joshua, nor in the book of Judges, nor in Ruth, nor
in the first and second Books of Samuel, nor in the first Book of Kings; shall
we therefore conclude, that in all this time valiant Joshua, the worthy Judges,
holy Samuel, zealous David, and others, did not observe the Sabbath? In all the
Book of Hester no mention is made of Jehovah, shall we therefore say, that
neither Mordecai, nor Hester, nor the Religious Jews worshipped the adorable
Jehovah?

Genesis 2. 3. has been plentifully proved; and so the Patriarchs ought to have
observed it, which if they did not, it was sin in them; but the Reverence we
owe to those holy men of God, binds us to think better thoughts of them: Surely
good men could not forget their solemn and set day for converse with God. Dr.
Twisse positively concludes, Because the Scriptures Dr. Twisse de Sabbat.
record, that the Lord blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, therefore the
Patriarchs did certainly observe it; and says he, the truth is, until the
coming of the Israelites Anne superfluum putandum erit, quoslibet dies pro
operibus secularibus ordinare, unumque pro cultu divino. Selneccerus.
out of Egypt, we read not of the Church of God any where, but in single
families; and will it therefore follow that the holy Patriarchs, did set no
time apart for Gods service, how uncharitably will this consequence fall in?

Genesis being an history of two thousand five hundred years, and so brief as
it is, it neither could, nor ought to relate every thing observed by the
Patriarchs. Dr. Willet Willet in Exodus 16. 20. Quaest. 34.
very well takes notice, that the Church had from the beginning a public
external worship of God, and it could not be, but they had certain time, and
then what more correspondent season, then that which God had sanctified by his
own blessed and holy example? Surely our first Fathers knew well the Creation,
and Gods resting on the seventh day, and his segregating it for holiness and
sanctification; and to impute such an oscitancy and neglect to them, that they
should wholly omit the sacred Sabbath, is to give charity a wound under the
fifth rib.

Patriarchs for the most part did not keep the law of marriage, for generally
they lived in Poligamy, and yet that Law was in force, for one man to marry one
woman: So then Genesis 2. 24.
supposing the Patriarchs were remiss in Sabbath observation, yet the Law for
the Sabbath was in full force: And let it not be our curiosity, to find out
errors in them, when Si hoc ipsum concedatur, observationem hujus diei maxima
ex part fuisse neglectam, primam tamen institutionem, non magis reddere
debeat, quam Polygamia eorundem temporum, sacras conjugii leges primo ipsi
conjugio non esse coaevas possit demonstrare. Ames.
we have no Scripture to witness and attest it. And truly to draw an argument
de facto, from the Patriarchs not keeping of the Sabbath, against the right and
institution of it, is very improper; and though it is not expressly said,
Abraham kept the Sabbath, yet he is commended for keeping Gods Commandments,
Genesis 26. 5. And is not the Sabbath one of those Commandments, the breach of
which, is accounted the breaking of all? Exodus 16. 27, 28. And can we probably
think, that Abraham neglected other moral duties, because they are not expressly
mentioned? Again it may as well be doubted whether the Patriarchs observed any
day at all, because it is not expressly mentioned: Again, it may be said with as
good reason, that the sacrifices which they offered, were without warrant from
God, because the Commandment for them is not expressly mentioned; but we know
Abel offered by faith, and faith must have a precedent word: So as the approved
practice of holy men does necessarily imply a Sabbati dies, et ejus ratio et
usus, notissimus suit priscis Patribus, quod ex ipso, Gen 2. pr^batur. Bertram.
de Polit. Judaic.
Commandment; so the Command given to Adam does as necessarily enforce a
practice. And if no duties to God were performed by the Patriarchs, but such as
are expressly mentioned, and held forth in their Examples, we should then behold
a strange face of a Church for many hundred years together; and so we should
condemn the generation of the Just for living in gross neglects and impieties,
there being many singular and special duties, which doubtless were done, which
were not particularly mentioned in that short Epitome of above two thousand
years together in the Book of Genesis. In a word, that all the holy Patriarchs,
those Seminaries of Religion in the world, who laid the foundation of Gods
Church, those Ancestors of piety and holiness, who brought up Religion in its
infancy; I say, that all these should want the blessed Sabbath, that sweet day
of converse with God, and live in a fatal ignorance, and inobservance or
contempt of Gods holy day, this is beyond the belief of the most fondly
credulous, and against the charity of the most sour professor.

To conclude, the Sabbath and Marriage were the two In initiis et primordiis
mundi, dies septimus sanctus haberi caepit. Azor.
first institutions in the world: But God first provides for his own worship,
and then for man's comfort; spiritual mercies being of right, to have the
precedence of temporal, and divine worship being always to take place of
humane convenience. Well then the Sabbath was given to Adam, and in him to all
his posterity, and so holiness becomes the Christian, (...) Phil. Jud.
as well as the Jew, or any other, on that blessed day, we being all the issue
and posterity of Adam: And therefore to fasten the strict observation of the
Sabbath upon the Jews, as being most concerned in it, what is this, but to
turn a common privilege into a monopoly, and to be weary of that prerogative,
which is the suburbs of Heaven it self? Or else the bottom of the design is, to
throw off the restraints of a Sabbath, not being willing that our corruptions
should be pinioned. However the observance of Gods holy day, is too great a
mercy to be appropriated to the cast off, and repudiated Jews: It is a good
saying of Dr. Twisse, As for the sanctification of this Rest, I trust we are as
much bound to the performance therefore, and that in as great a measure, and
with as great devotion under the Gospel, as ever the Jews were under the Law.
And let the Authority of this excellent person shut up this Chapter.

CHAP. XLV. Sabbath-holiness does as well become the Christian, as the Jew, if
we look back to the infancy of the Law.
THat the Sabbath was given to Adam, and in him to all his posterity, to us
Christians, as well as to others, has already been largely discovered: Now my
task is to show, that in the second edition of the Sabbath upon Mount Sinai, it
was given as a moral command, for every one to obey, and not as a ceremonial
precept, whose force must end with the Jews, and their pedagogy; for we must
know, that all ceremonies were buried in Christ's grave, and their honor
Dicitur Chyrographum esse deletum; i. e. ritus ceremoniales, jam abrogatos
esse, q^ia ipso debito persoluto per Christum, non aequum est has syngraphas
extare, quae testificent nos esse debitores, et re^tum peccatorum nostrorum
nondum esse expiatum. Daven.
was laid in the dust with him; for when the Sun came, the shadows were to
disappear, and when Christ triumphed on the Cross, then the handwriting of
Ordinances (as Ceremonies are usually called) was blotted out, Col. 2. 14.
Those inferior garnishes of Religion, were then to be taken away.

Now to evidence the morality of the fourth Commandment, and that it concerns
us Christians, every way as much as the Jews, will be best attempted; by
showing, 1. Negatively, it is not Ceremonial. 2. Positively, it is clearly
Moral, and binds us Christians as much, as any Precept in the Decalogue; nor
has the Christian more liberty to be loose on a Sabbath, then he has to cast
contempt on his Parents, to break the door of his neighbors house, or attempt
the chastity of his neighbors wife; as much guilt is folded up in robbing God
of his day, as in robbing man of his goods; the chain is as strong to bind us
in the fourth, as in the sixth Commandment, and the sin is the same to loosen
the one, as well as the other: Every Command in the Decalogue is of equal
Authority, which to resist, is an equal provocation to the Legislatour.

for the Sabbath, is not Ceremonial: And here I must reassume a notable speech
of Bishop Andrews, whose eminency and Bishop Andr. Pattern of Chatechist.
Doctr. p. 233.
learning was not of an ordinary stature; This learned man puts the Query, But
is not the Sabbath a Ceremony? and then answers, Do as Christ did in the cause
of divorce, look whether it was so from the beginning; now the beginning of the
Sabbath was in Paradise, before there was any sin, and so before there needed
any Saviors, and so before there was any ceremony or figure of a Savior. Thus
this learned Man clears the fourth Commandment of all ceremony. Ceremonies have
in them aliquid oneris, some thing of burden, which cannot be asserted of the
state of innocence, in which the Sabbath Simul cum peccato introivit mors in
hominem, sicuti lictores intrant in bona, et domos reorum. Alap.
was first ordained. Sin only lays load upon us; and as it first opened the
door to death, Romans 5. 12. so it first opened the gap to Ceremonies. It is
observed by learned men, that the Evening and the morning was the first day,
and so the second, and so every day of the six days; But no Evening is
attributed to the seventh day, to show us, that no shadow of rite or ceremony
first attended that blessed day. The Sabbath is the firstborn of Institutions,
and was brought into the World without any wen of ceremony upon it: And though
the Lord of it, Mark 2. 28. in his infancy was wrapped up in the meanest
swadling-cloaths, suitable to the manger wherein he lay; yet the Sabbath in its
first production was not wrapped up in beggarly elements, as ceremonies are
called by the Gal. 4. 9.
Apostle.

that solemn preparation of a smoking mountain, of a sounding trumpet, of a
flaming fire, to usher in a Exodus 19. 18, 19.
poor, flying, dying ceremony. A transient rite did not require so much pomp
and state. Beggars have not their trains to Deuteronomy. 5 5.
go before them. We sound not the trumpet at the lighting Terrae vero et montis
velut salientis ad dei praesentiam motus non sunt quaerenda in natura, cum enim
quaecunque facta sunt, ad mirecula petineant. observetur dei gloria, cum agit
immediate, etc.
of a candle. Surely ceremonies are but a candle light, which casts but a faint
light, and soon expires: nor does it indeed comport with the infinite and
unsearchable wisdom of God, to preface a ceremony with so much grandeur and
solemnity, a ceremony which must so soon be buried in the grave of oblivion.
Short Leases are written in a little paper, and need no sheets of Parchment.
Israel trepidates, and shakes to hear those noises, and see those sights which
prepared the publication of the fourth Commandment among the rest; and
thought, their death should have borne the date of the Exhibition of those ten
words. And therefore it must needs savor of presumption, to call that a
Ceremony, Riv.
which was published with so much awful and tremendous solemnity.

be ceremonial, because it was given by God himself. Now Divines rightly
distinguish between Law and Ceremony: the Law comes Deuteronomy. 4. 13, 14.
immediately from God; the Ceremonies were either instiuted by Moses, or at
least given by him; God left those Rudiments Josh. 1. 2.
to his Servant: But God himself wrote the fourth Commandment with his own
finger, and proclaimed it with his own voice, nay, delivered it himself with
all glorious solemnity: and therefore the Decalogue is called his Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. to show the stability of it: God does not draw his people into
Covenant with himself upon the account of a Rite, nor tie himself to them, by
the breaking thread of a Ceremony; his Covenant of Salt does not so easily lose
its savor.

Andrews once more; this is a principle, says he, that the Decalogue is the
Law of Nature revived, and the Law of Nature is the Image of God; now in God
there is no ceremony, but all must be eternal, and so in this Image, which is
the law of Nature, and so in the Decalogue. And so I suppose the Bishop of
Winchester has silenced the Bishop White of the Sabbath, page 34. Decalogus
est lex naturae rediviva.
Bishop of Ely, who wrote to a contrary purpose. To what is laid down by Bishop
Andrews, accords Chrysostom, when he calls the Law of the Sabbath, (...), an
unmovable Law; and where there is no change, there can be no ceremony. And
reverend Sprint has a suitable speech accommodated to this purpose; The
observation of the seventh day, Sprint on the Sabbath, page 34.
says he, is of the Law of Nature, and whatsoever is found in the fourth
Commandment appertains to the law of Nature. And so holy Master Walker; The
observation of the seventh Mr. Walker an the Sabbath.
day was established before Christ was promised, and therefore it is not
ceremonial, but of the law of Nature, and perpetual. Quod natural est, puta
diem septimanae quemque deo sacrum esse illud permanet, quod positum est, nempe
illum diem, qui septimus creationis est, diem esse Sabbati, etc. Jun.
Thus the suffrages of those who have been most eminent, do freely concur in
establishing this great truth, (viz.) that no ceremony can be found in the
fourth Commandment; and let the adversaries follow the scent of a ceremony with
never so much diligence and speed, they can no more overtake it, then the
Egyptians can find out the head of the River Nilus; or the Israelites trace
Moses his Grave: and this is, to seek the dead among the living, a little to
allude to the speech of the Angel, Luke 24. 5.

this Ceremony among the moral Precepts? How came it to shelter it self there?
Is not this to make the fourth Commandment like Nebuchadnezzars Image, partly
Gold and Silver, durable Metals, and partly Clay and mouldring earth? Doctor
Bound positively asserts; The fourth Commandment can be no more partly Moral,
and partly Ceremonial, than the same living Creature can be partly a Man, and
partly a Beast. Bishop Hooper says, That all Bishop Hooper on the ten
Commandments.
the Commandments are of one virtue and strength, and therefore if one be in
effect ceremonial, so may others too. The same speaks Iraeneus, God did
pronounce the Decalogue to all alike; but the other Laws were given by Moses
Iren contr. Valentin. lib. 4. cap. 13.
unto the people of the Jews. So clearly does this Father distinguish between
Moral Laws pronounced by God, and Ceremonial Laws given by Moses. Nay, Aquinas
is Omnia praecepta decalogi sunt moralia. Thom. 2da 2dae, quaest. 100. Artic. 2.
sensible of this, when he pronounces all the Precepts of the Decalogue Moral;
and would not this mixing Ceremonials with Morals in the same Decalogue produce
confusion and disorder; or as Doctor Bound says, Open a wide door to all kind
of looseness and Atheism: And if this be true, that the Law for the Sabbath is
Ceremonial, and all the rest Moral, then we have only an Ennealogue, not a
Decalogue, so God must lose one of his ten words, and pay tithe of his. Deuteronomy.
4. 13.
Commandments to the wild and desultory fancies of men: for if the fourth
Commandment be a Ceremony, it dies at the coming of Christ. But we have the
just division of the Commandments in Scripture, they were written in two
Tables, we have their full number, they were ten, so many and no more: and
therefore as we must not unite them into one Table, so we must not contract
them into nine Commandments; and if this fourth Commandment be ceremonial,
why is it not rased out of the Commandments? How came it in, is a question,
and no less, how stays it in? The Papists cashire the second Commandment, and
divide the last into two to make up the number, forbidding in the Canis.
chatechis. quaest. 18.
former to covet our Neighbors wife, in the latter to covet our Neighbors
goods: and if we still admit a Ceremony Sabbatum dierum est ordinarium, and
perpetuum, and non inter figuras and ceremonias Judaicas annumerandum, etc.
Wolph Chronol. lib. 2. cap. 1.
in the midst of the Commandments, why may not Atheists put a Ceremony upon
the first, and Swearers put a Ceremony upon the third: Nay, Antinomians put a
Ceremony upon them all? and so the two Tables shall be broken the second time,
and so rendered useless and impertinent to mankind? It is a sage saying of
Wolphius; The Sabbath is not to be reckoned among the Figures and Ceremonies of
the Jews, both because it was ordained in Paradise before the fall of Man, and
also because it is commanded in the Decalogue, which contains in it nothing
ceremonial, nothing typical, nothing to be abrogated. As once it was the wonder
of the people of Israel, Is Saul also among 1 Samuel 10. 12.
the Prophets? And may we not with as much astonishment cry out, And is a
Ceremony put in among the Moral Precepts? Nor is it suitable to God, who is a
God of Order, to mis-place a Ceremonial among Morals. Holy Greenham observes;
Admitting one Ceremony into the Decalogue, why may there not be two, or three,
or more? Concerning this mixture, we may say, many Heresies by it are Ponitur
quartum praecep^um inter mandata Decal^gi in quantum est praeceptum morale,
etc. Aquin. 2da 2dae quaest. 122. Art. 4. ^ Hook. Eccles. Polit. lib. 3. cap.
11.
crept into the Church, and it cannot be avoided if the fourth Commandment be
ceremonial, and this is to confound the Ceremonial Law with the Moral. The
learned Hooker, most sagely, according to his manner, thus discourses: The
moral Commandments were uttered by God himself, in the presence of the whole
multitude, written by his own finger, given without restraint to time, how
long, to place, where; Contrariwise, the Ceremonial Law given to Moses only,
and by him declared to the people, called Ceremonial Judgments, Ordinances, and
limited only to the Land of Jewry. All that I shall add is, Take the fourth
Commandment, and see it in this Glass, and then you will see how like a
Ceremony it looks.

Doctor Amesius will not have the Command for the Sabbath Ceremonial, because
it wears nothing of a Jewish Livery, whereby it may be appropriated to them,
and so Institutionem istam non Juisse ceremonialem, et temporalem, ex eo satis
liquet quod nihil habet proprium Judaeoru^, aut temporis legis ceremonialis.
Ames.
made part of their transient Pedagogie. To set apart a day for God, is as
necessary and congruous to Christians, as to Jews. To remember the works of the
Creation, and the Rest in the close of it, is no more unseemly or impertinent
for Christians than for Jews, when both are Gods Creatures and Subjects: to see
our Families keep the Sabbath, as well as our selves, does as well befit the
times of the Gosspel, as the time of the Law, is every way as decent and
comely: to forbear servile works on a Sabbath is as convenient for the
Christian Church, as the Jewish Synagogue. How then comes the Sabbath to be the
Jews monopoly? for indeed it must be so, if it be a Ceremony: But if the
Sabbath in the fourth Commandment has nothing peculiar to the Jew, let us not
lose our claim in this blessed day, but let us receive our Inheritance, which
was first given us in Paradise, and this Will further ratified on Mount Sinai.
It is strange, that so many should so easily part with one of Gods ten words to
an abrogated Jew, only to please a design, or gratify an interest in some men;
that the Sabbath being expired as a Ceremony at the coming of Christ, and so
all days in the week lying common, it may lie in the power of the Church to
erect a new Sabbath, which is a Trophy of their Plenipotentiary Grandeur: and
this will make the Mitre look more splendid. But others plead the Ceremoniality
of the fourth Commandment; that the Sabbath being abrogated and cancelled as
out of date, they may have no Sabbath, but of humane institution, and then they
may break it with more ease, than Sampson did his Withs, and so still lie in
Dalilahs lap of pleasure and delight, the noise of a Clerical Institution being
too faint to awaken them. But let every gracious heart more study duty then
interest; and what becomes him in conformity to the will of God.

Lex Ceremonialis omnino per Christi adventum evanuit, sed nullo modo sequitur
legem Decalogi quoad obligationem per Christum desusse, est enim lex illa non
Mosaica, sed naturalis, aeterna, and immutabilis. Alap.
But the Sabbath went over Christ's grave, for Mat. 24. 20. Christ commands his
Disciples to play, that their visitation be not on the Sabbath day, which
visitation was many years after Christ's Ascension to the Father, So then, the
Sabbath survives after the decease and Funeral of all legal Ceremonies. By the
coming of Christ, the Sabbath suffered a change, but not a loss; the
circumstance of time was altered, but the substance of the command was no way
impaired; the Sabbath did only slide down, upon a new and most glorious
occasion, from the seventh day to the first.

any character of a Ceremony in it.

typical, it did not praenote any thing to be accomplished under the Gospel. If
that fancy of the Jewish Cabala be true, that the world shall continue but 6000
Quartum praeceptum est morale, quatenus praecipit, ut e septem diebus unum
consecremus cultui divino, et quotenus tale, nunquam abrogari potest. Zanch.
years, and then the day of Judgment shall follow, it might prefigure that, and
yet no Ceremony proved, for the type must continue till the thing typified be
fulfilled; so this rather evinceth the duration, then the abrogation of the
Sabbath.

particular relation to the Land of Canaan, the proper place of Ceremonies, nor
yet to the Jews, the proper subjects of Ceremonies; (and this has been proved
before.) But now if it be objected that the Sabbath was a sign between God and
the Jews, Exodus 31. 13, 17. Ezekiel. 20. 12, 20. It is answered, the Sabbath was
at that time a mark of difference and separation betwixt the Jews and the
Gentiles: But was it so as a seventh day? No, Eos, a quibus deus non celebatur
merito ipse neglexit. Aug. de Civit. dei l. 2. c. 14.
that which caused the distinction, was the sanctification of them upon that
day, not any thing in the number seven: Gods seposing of a time for them, and
only for their sanctification, was an argument he had a more special care of
them then of other Nations, and they were his only people.

the Jews as any burden or yoke: The Sabbath is a day of joy, not toil, our
blessing, not our I^ praefatione quarti praecepti, ita deus alloquitur
Israelitas speciatim, ut in eo tamen omnes gentes comprehendat. Beza.
burden. In the explanation of the fourth Commandment, it is rather recited as
an Ordinance of comfort and refreshing, of mercy and favor, and not of rigor
and severity, of depression and servitude. The Sabbath in its own nature is a
day of relaxation to the body, and of reviving to the soul; a day of unbending
the bow to the outward man, and of heavenly visits to the inward man; there is
no knot in the cord to hold out any sharpness in this blessed Ordinance; the
Sabbath is our term, not our task-master. On a Sabbath we are not sent out to
make brick without straw, we are not to perform duties without promises of
assistance, Romans 8. Exodus 16. 29.
26, 27. without promises of acceptance, John 14. 15. If we put our selves upon
meeting Christ that day, he has engaged himself, Mat. 18. 20. to give us the
meeting. The Sabbath is not a task, but a gift, Ezekiel. 20. 12. not a symptom of
servitude, but a sign of love, Ezekiel. 20. 12. The golden knot between God and a
people, and not the iron chain.

any special favor showed to the Jews, it was a memorial of Gods creating the
world in six days, and his own resting on the Genesis 2. 3.
seventh: But this being a benefit wherein all mankind are Per Sabbata quasi
per elementa omnes discerent deum creatorem et gubernatorem omnium. Alap.
equally concerned, and enter common, the Jews can claim no property therein
peculiar to themselves; and so yet there is no tidings of a Ceremony, and so no
cause of abolition. One very well observes, that seeing the same Authority is
for the Sabbath, as is for marriage, one may as well conclude, the Law for
marriage is Ceremonial, as well as the Law for the Sabbath; nay, we may
seriously consider, that whereas Mat. 19. 6.
marriage is but once termed the Covenant of God, Prove. 2. 17. Levit. 23. 3.
because instituted by God in the beginning, the Sabbath Deuteronomy. 5. 14.
is every where called the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, because Exodus 20. 10.
ordained by God in the same beginning, both of Exodus 16. 29.
Time, State, and Perpetuity, and therefore no way Ceremonial.

a rule of life to conduct them to their end; now if the whole Decalogue be
Gal. 2. 20.
not it, what shall be? The Gospel is a rule of our faith, John 5. 24.
but not of our spiritual life which flows from faith, the Law therefore is the
rule of life; now if nine of these be a complete rule without a tenth, exclude
that one, and then who sees not an open gap made for all the rest to go out
also? For where will men stop if once this principle be laid, that the whole
Law is not our guide and conduct? May not men justly say, the Decalogue is not
a rule of life, and so a way laid open for all looseness and enormity; and if
the Sabbath be a Ceremony, we have but nine Commandments left.

a Ceremony; there is no part of Scripture wherein their is not something
remarkable about the Sabbath.

The institution of it we find in Genesis, where the Sabbath Genesis 2. 3.
is one of the best flowers in the Garden of Eden.

The solemn promulgation of it we meet with in Exodus, Exodus 20. 8.
when the mountain smoaks, fire flames, trumpet sounds, at Exodus 19. 17. 13.
the second Edition of this perpetual statute.

The manner of the sanctification of it, we may take notice Levit. 16. 3^.
of in the Book of Levitious; God there turns paraphrast for Levit. 23. 3.
the further dilucidation of this law.

The profanation of it is vindicated in the Book of Numbers, Numb. 15. 3^.
where God builds a wall about it with the stones, which stoned the man who
gathered sticks upon that blessed day.

The pressing arguments for the sanctification of it, we may Deuteronomy. 5. 14.
observe at large in the Book of Deuteronomy; God knowing the advantage of
Sabbath-holiness, presses man urgently to pursue his own interest. 2 Kings 4
23. 2 Kings 11. 5, 7, 9. 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. 1 Chronicles. 9. 32.


The historical part of the Bible has some remembrance of it, either as
observed, or profaned.

There is in the Book of Psalms, a Psalm appointed for it, viz. the ninety
second Psalm.

The Prophets are very frequent in complaining of the violation, Nehem. 13. 15,
16. 18, 19. Isa. 56. 2. Ezekiel. 20. 12, 13. John 5 18. Luke 6. 6. Acts 13. 42.
Acts 16. 13. Acts 20. 7.
and in pressing the observation of it.

The Gospel has often mention of it, and takes notice of Christ's preaching, of
his healing, of his debating cases with his adversaries upon that day.

The Acts of the Apostles have likewise touches both of the old and the new
Sabbath.

The Epistles hint and insinuate the institution of a Christian Sabbath, when
the old Sabbath lost both its place in the week, and its title in the
Scutcheon, and now the Sabbath which closed, begins the week; and that holy
festival 1 Cor. 16. 2.
which was the Evening star of the work of Creation, is the Morning star of the
work of Redemption.

The Revelation discovers Gods right to it, and gives it the title of the Lords
day; besides all this, the observation of Rev. 1. 10. Ezekiel. 20. 24. Ezekiel. 44.
24.
the Sabbath is ranked by the Prophets among the most substantial and perpetual
duties of Religion.

Now shall Scriptures be thus copious in mentioning, be thus powerful in
pressing, be thus severe in revenging a flying, dying Ceremony? Surely this
must cast too much contempt upon the blessed and eternal spirit of God.

Having followed the chase thus far, and yet starting no Ceremony in the fourth
Commandment; it would be enough to say, it not being Ceremonial, it must needs
be Moral. But we will take a review of this blessed command; and upon our
better search, no doubt but its morality, and so its perpetuity will be more
evident and perspicuous.

Let us therefore look upon this Commandment

order of it; Is it comely and good to have God to be our God, in the first
Commandment? to worship him after his own heart and will, in the second? to
give him his worship, L^^ moralis perfecta^, adeoque non externam tantum
obedientiam, sed totius naturae conformitatem cum regula illa, et norma
justitiae atque sapientiae in Decalogo expressam postulat. Reliquae legis
species de ^^terna tantum ^^edient^a and ^r^^^^tione (...) scriptorum (...), et
officiorum politi^^rum loq^^ntur. Zepper.
with all the highest respect, and reverence of his name, in the third? and is
it not as comely, good, and suitable, that this great God and King should have
some magnificent day of state, to be attended on by his poor servants, and
creatures, both publicly and privately, with special respect and service, as
often as he himself sees meet, and which we cannot but confess to be most equal
and just according to the fourth Commandment? In the first table, one
Commandment is linked to, and depends upon another: God must be our God, and
then he must be worshipped, and with all (...) reverence to his name, and so
there must be a set time (...) this; and who shall appoint this day of worship,
but he who h^^h appointed the manner of it? The close co^nexion of the precept
to another speaks the inseparability of it from the rest and so its perpetuity
with the rest. And let us (...), i^ all the precepts of the second table be
moral, (...) only concern man; why should any of the first table ^^ll short of
that glory, which do immediately concern (...) Shall man's weal be more cared
for, then Gods worship? Nay, shall man have six Commandments, the greater (...)
and all of them morally good, and God have bu^ ^our, ^^ ^esser number, and one,
or more of them not so? May we not here say, (a little to invert that in the
Prophet) are not all the Commandments equal? but are not man's cavils, and undue
expositions unequal?

site and position of it; it is put into the besome of the Dec^logue, Pr^ceptum
hoc q^^si ^^^ermedium inter praecepta primae et secundae tabulae, et
sanctificatio Sabbati, et quasi nervus intelligentiae et obedientiae. Riv.
that it might not ^e (...), as we put letters and things into our bosoms,
which w^ ^re m^st chary of; it is the Golden clasp which joins (...) Tables
together; it is the sinew in that (...) were written with Gods own finge^ (...)
precept which participates of the (...); and the due observance of which, is as
(...) wh^le Law: And as Christ was a (...) (...) and Man, Heb. 8. 6. so this
blessed (...) hinge upon which the Precepts of the (...) God, and the Precepts
of the Vt aliqua dies in septimana sit deo dedicata, praeceptum est stabile and
aeternum.
seco^^ (...)* do principally turn; it no way being pro^^ble, (...) who is
spiritual and serious in the observation of Gods holy day, should fly into
Idolatry to break the second, into theft, to break the eighth, or other gross
evils to violate the rest of the Commandments. This Command Jacob. de Valent.
ad curs. Jud.
for the Sabbath is set by God in the very heart of the Decalogue, and we are
enjoined obedience to it by a peculiar memento: And therefore to any
unprejudiced mind, it is very unlikely, that this Commandment alone should be
overtaken with the shadows of the evening, should fly away as Observatio
sabbati est caput Religionis, and totum cultum dei continet. Will.
an empty and useless ceremony. One tells us, The Command for the Sabbath is
put in the close of the first, and in the beginning of the second table, to
denote, that the observation of both Tables depends much upon the
sanctification of this day: And indeed let us break the clasp, and both tables
will fall asunder.

Let us look on this command in the reason of it. No command has more reasons
to enforce it. 1. Its own equity: Quum deus noster singulari sua erga nos
charitate e septem diebus unum d^nt^xat instaurand^ fidei nostrae, atque adeo
vitae aeternae sanctificavit; deploratum sane ille se contemptorem demonstrat,
sicut salutis pro priae, sic et divinae beneficentiae, quicunque non studeat,
illum ipsum diem domino suo glorifi cando sanctificare. Bucer.
Shall man have six days for himself, and shall not God have one? It was Adams
ingratitude, that he had but one tree forbidden him to eat of it, and yet he
must eat of that tree: And surely it is the highest sacrilege, when God
forbids but one day in a week for our pleasures and affairs, and yet we should
entrench upon that. Bucer well observes, If God be so bountiful to give us six
days, we should be so dutiful to give him one; If we have six days for our
affairs, surely God must have one for his glory; If we have six for our labor,
shall not God have one for his worship? And indeed our interest is more wrapped
up in the observation of the seventh, then in all our toil and gains on the
six days. Gods day concerns our better part, the week days only our outward
man.

2. Gods bounty in giving us a day for converse with himself. The Sabbath is a
day wherein Christ gives his visits, the spirit works his wonders, the Father
shows his face to the children of men; this blessed day is the morning star of
happiness, the worlds choicest festival, and those who are blessed with it, may
say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 147. 20. God has not dealt so with every Nation.
It is Sabbath-enjoyment makes every Province a Goshen, every place a Paradise,
every nation a Canaan, and every City a Jerusalem. The Sabbath is still a sign
between him and his people, that he is among Ezekiel. 20. 20.
them, and the footsteps of his presence remain with them.

3. Gods own pattern. God rested on the seventh day, that he might be
presidential to us in our holy rest. In the command for the Sabbath, God is not
only our Sovereign to enact a law for us, but our example to set a copy before
us; and therefore in this we must be perfect, as our Father in heaven is
perfect, Mat. 5. 48. Philo Judaeus bids us spend the Sabbath in holy
contemplation, and the study of spiritual wisdom, In hoc deum sequeremur
operando sex dies, septima vero requiescendo, vacando contemplationi, et studio
sapientiae, sequere deum; h^bes dei exemplum, et praescriptum. Phil. Jud.
and in this follow God who is an example of holy rest; ye have not only his
prescript, but his pattern. And indeed as Mr. Byfield observes, Gods example
does not court us, but bind us to an holy imitation.

4. Gods benediction which he sheds on the Sabbath, is a reason to enforce the
command. God blessed this day above all days; we may say of it, as once it was
said of the Virgin Mary in another case, Hail, thou art highly favored, the
Lord is with thee, thou art blessed among days. Morning and Evening does not
describe this day, as it did other days; no Evening predicated of it, to show
its prerogative above all other days; this day is all light, all day, all
sunshine, to prefigure our eternal joys. God does most delight to dispense
Luke 1. 28.
his grace on this day. Heathen Princes are wont on their Coronation days to
cast about Gold and Silver, and Genesis 1. 5, 8.
largely to scatter their donations: God on this solemn day is present with us
in holy duties, and sheds abroad in our hearts his holy graces; then he comes
and speaks with his people, and is magnificent in his royal and spiritual
donations. And what need so many reasons to press a rite, a ceremony, to urge a
shadow, Col. 2. 17. A mere command is sufficient to enjoin a fainting ceremony,
an ordinance calculated only for a time; there need not so many cords of
reason to bind a ceremony upon us, which will soon die away, and be evaporate.
Let this be superadded; In the fourth Commandment God gives us reasons, which
are common to us Christians, with the Jews: As namely,

1. Conformity to Gods Image, which is no less proper to us, then the Jews.

2. The memorial of the Creation; for which benefit, the Ex creatione, nos
omnes possumus, et debemus deum agnoscere, and cognoscere. Alap.
Patriarchs before the Law; and we since, are no less bound to be thankful to
God, then the Jew.

3. Rest of our selves and families, a common necessity to us, as well as to
them; therefore this Commandment appears moral, and to be given to us as well
as to them. And seeing the reason of this 4th Commandment does urge, as well as
the reason of the second, third and fifth Commandments, why should not this
Commandment tie us to the observation of it, as well Ratio immutabilis facit
praeceptum immutabile.
as the other, and why not Christians, as well as Jews? Its reasons are as
strong, why should not its obligations be so too?

Let us look upon the fourth Commandment in the congruity of it, how agreeing
to the principles of nature. The learned Twisse argues most profoundly; we are
to distinguish three things in subordination, the latter to the former:

1. The first is, a time in general to be set apart for Gods worship.

2. The second is the proportion of this time. Igitur deus benedictus cupiens
Sabbatum, cujus sanctimoniam tantis documentis approbaverat in aeternum ab
omnibus coli; december praeceptis illud inseruit, quo scientes praecepta aeterna
esse, etiam hoc quartum praeceptum inter ea habendum intelligerent. Manasseh
Ben Israel.


3. The particularity of the day, according to the proportion specified. Now
the first seems of necessary duty by the very light of nature, to as many as
know God, and acknowledge him to be the Creator; and this is the highest
degree of morality in the fourth Commandment. As to the second we are something
to seek by the light of nature, as whether one day in a week, or one day in a
month, or more, so that herein it is most fit we should seek direction from
God, who is the Lord of the Sabbath;

1. Because the service of the day is his; and it is but fit, he should cut out
what proportion of time he thinks fit and convenient.

2. Because of the maintenance of uniformity therein, and least otherwise there
may be as many divisions thereabouts, as there are Churches in the world. For
reason of a conjectural nature is various, and therein commonly affection bears
the greatest sway, and draws the judgment to comply with it; but when God has
determined a certain proportion of time, we shall find great congruity therein
even to natural reason, more then in any other. Dr. Field, as Mr. Broad
reports, professes; That to any one who knows the story of the Creation, it is
evident by the light of nature, that Consentaneum est maxim rationi, ut post
dies sex opera rios, unus cultui divino consecretur: Et hoc praeceptum manet,
et est perpetuum et jure naturali et lumine constitutum.
one day in seven is to be consecrated to Gods service. And Azorius the Jesuit
in his moral institutions acknowledges, that it is most agreeable to reason,
that after six working days, one day should be consecrated to divine worship.
Now by the light of nature, it seems far more reasonable, that one day in seven
should be employed in Gods service, then one day in a month; for such long
strides, and great chasmes would quickly breed an estrangement between God and
the soul: and if a seventh part of our time be consecrate to God, better a
seventh day, then the seventh part of every day, because the Azor. Instit.
Moral. Part. 2 dae. cap. 1. lib. 2.
worldly occupations of each of those days must needs cause miserable
distractions. Thus reason may discourse in a probable manner, when God has
gone before us to open a way to us. Certainly, when God has once determined
the proportion of time, it is so far to be accounted moral and perpetual, that
it is to hold till God himself shall alter it: and as for the particularity of
the day, according to the forementioned proportion, therein we should be far
more to seek, were we left to our selves: therefore this also is ordered by God
himself, and that in great congruity, as appears Exodus 20. 11.
to as many as are acquainted with the story of the Creation; for the Lord
having dispatched all his works in six days, and resting on the seventh,
commanded men to imitate him: This being thus ordered by the Lord of the
Sabbath, Mark 2. 28.
it must be in force of perpetual observation, as a requisite determination of
the morality of this Law, and it cannot be of an alterable nature, unless it be
by the same Authority by which it was ordained.

Now by the fourth Commandment it is clear;

1. That God commanded some time to be set apart, and Hoc quartum praeceptum
est magis morale qu^m ceremoniale, et ideo in Decalogo, ad qu^m omnes tenemur
semper, praecipiendum erat. Gerson.
sanctified to his service.

2. The proportion of this time to be one day in seven.

3. That the particular day under this proportion, be the seventh, and that
unto the Jews in correspondency to the seventh day from the Creation, wherein
God commanded them to rest from all their works; but then when God manifests
his pleasure for the alteration of this day from the seventh to the first, we
are to be an obedient people; thus far the worthy Twisse. (And that this change
was made, will be further seen in the next Chapter) to all which may be added,
such Laws as necessarily flow from natural relation, both between God and man,
as well as between man and man; these are good in themselves, because suitable
and comely even to humane nature: for there is a comeliness and decency Mat. 1. 6.
which attend those rules, to which our relation binds us: there are scarce any
question the duties of the second Ephesians. 5 28, 29.
table, because they are so evidently comely, suitable, and agreeing to humane
nature; as to honor Parents, to secure our neighbor, not to destroy him, etc.
And shall not the morality of the rules of the first table be as evident and
fully manifest? For if there be a God, and this God our God, according Quoad
observationem unius diei in singulis hebdomadis, sabbatum non est legis
caremonialis, sed moralis, quae immota est and perpetua. Ravanel.
to the first Commandment, then it is most comely, most meet, most suitable to
love him, to fear him, to trust on him, to delight in him; and if this God must
be worshipped by man, in respect of the mutual relation between them, then it
is comely and meet, to worship him with his own worship, according to the
second Commandment; to worship him with all holy reverence, according to the
third; and if he must be thus worshipped, and yet at all times he cannot be
solemnly honored and worshipped, in respect of our necessary and worldly
employments, then it is very fit and comely for all men to have some set and
stated time of worship, according to some proportion, which the Lord of time
can only best make; and therefore a seventh part of time, which he does make
according to the fourth Commandment, is most suitable to man, and most comely
for him to obey God in, and nothing more decent then for man to serve God in
his own proportionated time.

Now let the case be reasoned, with any religious Soul, yea, with any rational
man; Is it not a point of moral equity to pay tribute out of all our times to
the Lord of time, who holds our Souls in life, and in whose hands our time and
breath is? Do we not owe him a piece of every day, and shall we think it too
much to give him a day in every week? Shall he give us six, and shall we deny
him one? And is it just and meet that since man's life upon earth is but a
pilgrimage, and he has no abiding City here, but looks for one above, that
Heb. 13. 14. Ne pigeat nos murdo valedicere, ut ad Christum veniamus,
fluxitatem vitae praesentis ob oculos ponentes. Neque enim indigenae, sed
hospites sumus in hoc mundo, non habentes civitatem sed domicilium. Par.
he shall spend all his time and thoughts upon the trifles of the world; but
rather (as some time every day, so also) some one day in every week, to retire
himself from the world, and to draw near to God, and to enjoy communion with
him, with whom he looks to live for ever? Again, in respect of Servants, and
Cattle, is it not grand equity and reason, that one day in the week they should
enjoy some relaxation, and not always toil in their servitude and bondage? that
poor drudging Servants, who bear Gods Image as well as our selves, should have
a breathing-time, one day in a week, a day of weekly Rest for their wearied
bodies, and one holy day in a week for their precious Souls? Can we in equity
afford them less? and what meeter proportion for the solemn service of God,
than one day in seven; when Natura non habitandi, sed commorandi diversorium
hic nobis dedit. Sen.
Experience tells us, that the necessities both of civil and soul affairs,
require a mutual interchange of speedy dispatches, and quick returns, which
cannot be less then one day in seven, and not well more? and therefore Gods
proportionating this time in the fourth Commandment is most suitable to the
infinite wisdom of the Divine Legislator; as once Ptolomaeus Philadelphus said
of all Gods Laws. And this one day in seven, was the tribute which was paid to
God in the times of the old Testament, and much more is it due in the times of
the new. This proportion of time is moral and perpetual, being of Gods
assignation, of the Churches constant observation, and of it self a most exact
proportion: and this fourth Commandment is holy, just, and good (to use the
Apostles Language) and so never was subject to Romans 7. 12.
the decays and instability of a withering Ceremony.

Let us look upon the fourth Commandment in the spirituality of it. The
corruption of our nature, found in the manifest Nitimur in vet^^um. Elementa
sunt ceremoniae l^q^^, et sunt infi^ma ^^essecta mutili, imp^^entia, (...)
(...).
opposition of wicked men, and in the secret unwillingness of good men, to
sanctify sincerely the Sabbath Day, sufficiently demonstrates that this
Commandment is holy, spiritual, and heavenly: Rites and Ceremonies are but the
trappings of Religion at the best, the splendid O^^aments which set off Divine
Worship in the Jewish Pedagogie: Paraeus well observes, That the ceremonies of
the Law are called beggarly Elements, ab inutili effect^^, from their
inefficaciousness to profit, they bring nothing to the comfort of the Soul,
they contribute nothing to eternal salvation: How shall a Ceremony heal a sick
Soul, relieve a trembling Soul, or raise^^ dead Soul? They are all but as
Elijahs Staff, which can (...) no good to the dead; they only point at Christ,
Who is the way, the truth, and the life; they are only the Gnomon on John 14 6.
the Dial; but Christ is the Sun: But now the fourth Commandment is no such
thing, it commences war with 2 Kings 4. 31.
our lusts: If we are covetous, we must not work this day; If we are
voluptuous, we must not sensualize this day; If we are profane, we must not
sin against the holiness of this day; we have a Memento to stop us. Exodus 20. 8.


This Commandment, like Grace, sets up its Standard against all the Cavils and
corruptions of man's heart: And can a dying Ceremony rally up this force to
encounter man's potent lusts? As Bishop Davenant tells us, the Schoolmen give us
a threefold reason why legal Ceremonies ceased at Christ's coming:

1. Because they were obscure in point of signification.

2. Imperfect in point of operation.

3. Burdensome in point of observation. Now to charge these defects upon the
fourth Commandment, is not only to Triplicem causam afferre solent
scholastici, cur cessare oportuit legales ceremonias post Christi adventum,
Primo: Quia obscura erant quoad significationem; Secundo, Quia imperfectae
erant, quoad of ficaciam; tertio, Quia onerosae erant quoad observationem.
Daven.
challenge Divine wisdom, but also to confute common Experience. The
Commandment for the Sabbath is clear, without a Mask, and plainly tells us, we
have a day every week for converse with the most High. This Command, like Moses
who delivered it, has its face shining, that every one may take notice of it.

2. The Command for the Sabbath is perfect, without defects, for God would
never have written an imperfect Command with his own finger, and it is
wonderfully efficacious. How often on the Sabbath are sturdy sinners appaled,
profane persons converted, doubting Souls satisfied, weak Christians
strengthened, secure Professors awakened, and all varieties of Divine operation
accomplished? The Sabbath is the rest-day of man, but the working-day of the
blessed Spirit. Powerful Acts of divine Grace are exerted on this day.

3. The Command for the Sabbath is full of indulgence. The Sabbath must be our
delight, Isa. 58. 13. It is our honor, not our burden: This blessed day is the
Saints spiritual work-day, and his weekly jubilee. Thus the fourth Commandment
is diametrically opposite to the very nature and purport of a vanishing
Ceremony.

the stability and morality of the fourth Commandment, let us consider the
circumstances with which it was attended.

1. There is no Commandment excepting the second (which likewise the Papists
ceremonialize into nothing) which is in words larger, or in reasons fuller,
then this of the Sabbath: as if the Lord had foreseen that these Commands would
meet with the greatest batteries of opposition, they being most contrary to the
wisdom of the flesh; The one opposed by superstition, and the other by
profaneness.

2. The fourth Commandment is both Negative and Affirmative; the other
Commands are either Negative or Affirmative.

3. There is a Memento prefixed to this Command, which Exodus 20. 8.
Note is not prefixed to any other; and is a Note, as some of our Divines
observe, of special observance and animadversion: Calvinus.
It is a peculiar Asterisk annexed to this Precept, requiring Musculus.
more than ordinary attention, and more than common Zanchius.
practice.

4. No such particulars as in this Commandment; Thou, Exodus 20. 10.
thy Son, thy Daughter, thy Manservant, thy Maidservant, thy Cattle, the
Stranger.

5. No such reasons affixed to any Commandment.

1. God has given us six days. 2. It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.
Ceremoniae sunt umbra, quia sicut umbra per se nihil valet, aut potest, sed
corporis proprium est, sic illae ceremoniae per se nihil possunt ad remissionem
peccaterum, sanctificationem, aut salutem, Daven.
3. God rested on the seventh day. 4. The Lord hallowed the seventh day.
6. No such works intimated in any Commandment; works to be avoided, all civil
and secular works; works to be accomplished, all works tending to the
sanctification of this blessed day: All these circumstances are set down, and
made more observable, and notable to us, by the unspeakable wisdom of God. Now
such a train of circumstances would never have attended a beggarly Element,
Gal. 4. 9. Kings make not a Proclamation with enforcing Arguments, for things
trivial or contemptible: Nor would God have embroidered this Commandment with
such rich circumstances; had it been only a Ceremony, which will soon faint
away and give up the ghost; had it been only a shadow, 2 Col. 17. which is
full of darkness and fugacity.

the morality of the fourth Commandment will be yet more conspicuous, If we
look on the Solemnities Exodus 20 8. Deuteronomy. 5. 22. Exodus 31. 18. Deuteronomy 9. 10.
Exodus 32. 16. Deuteronomy. 10 4.
by which it was honored.

1. It was as the rest of the Decalogue, pronounced and promulgated by the
immediate voice of the incomprehensible Jehovah with thundering and lightning,
those Heralds of Divine Majesty; and all this in the common audience, and to
the great amazement of the people of Israel.

2. It was, with the rest, written and engraven upon Tibles of stone, not on
leaves of Paper, not on sheets of Parchment, but on Tables of stone; and not by
some Scribe, or Amanuensis, but by Gods own blessed singer; and on stone, as to
denote the hardness of man's heart, and how difficultly he would comply with
this Command, so likewise to show the continuance and perpetuity of the
Commandment it self.

3. According to Gods own appointment, this Commandment with the rest, was put
into the Ark of the Testimony, Deuteronomy. 10. 2.
within the most holy place of the Tabernacle, as 2 Chronicles. 5. 10.
being a chary Treasure, not to be lost in their frequent removes. And the two
Tables are called the Tables of Heb. 9. 4.
the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. all denoting the importance and stability of this,
with the other Commandments. Exodus 20. 2.


4. This Command with the rest, had the same Proeme, containing a general
motive to provoke the people to obedience. Praeceptum hoc quartum suit ore dei
promulgatum, digito dei inscriptum, et in area dei reconditum. Inquiunt
Chrysostomus et Theophylactus tempore Mosis fuisse solas tabu^as legis in area,
sed postea a Jremia urnum (...) Mannae ^^ vir^^m ^aro^^ in A^^a fuisse
rep^si^a. (...) Catharinus tempore Mosis omnia f^^sse in Area, sed temp^re
Solomonis solas ^^bulas l^g^s.
God being as tender of conformity to the fourth, as to any other Commandment.
And thus this Commandment partakes of the same Honors and Prerogatives with
the three before it, and the six after it: And how comes it then, that it
should be worse metal than the rest, and be embased with a notion of a Law, and
elementary Ceremony? Chrysostom and Theophylact observe; that in the time of
Moses, only the Tables of stone were in the Ark, and that afterward in the
time of the Prophet Jeremy, Aarons Rod and the Pot of Manna were put in. And
Catharinus says, That in the time of Moses, all the forementioned Particulars
were in the Ark; but in the time of Solomon there were only found the two
Tables of stone, upon which were written the ten Commandments. However it is,
still the Tables of stone were in the Ark, to show, that in all times God was
tender of his Decalogue, where the fourth Commandment was placed: Surely such
providential care would never have attended the wing of a flying Ceremony.

moral, if we take notice of the motives by which it was enjoined: The first
Commandment has but one reason annexed to it; the third Commandment has but
one reason appendant Filius qui honorat p^ren^es, licet cite moriatur, tamen
diu vixit. N^m tempus est mensura non otii, sed operis et actienum non malarum,
s^d bonarum.
to it; the fifth Commandment but one reason to reinforce it; Nay, the second
Commandment has only two reasons to engage obedience to it: But now in the
sourth Commandment, the Lord goes beyond all this, and binds with a threefold
Cord, which cannot easily be broken; for God sets down three reasons, as so
many forcible and pregnant motives to induce, or rather to enforce obedience;
not only to command the excellency, but to show the necessity of keeping this
Commandment. Abulens.


1. God shows us the equity of the Command; If man may have six days, surely
God may have one.

2. God shows us the Presidency of himself, he goes before Vatab. in Genesis 2. 3.
us in Sabbath-rest; and this blessed Pattern is a strong Argument for
imitation. Jun. in Genesis 2. 3.


3. God intimates to us, it is a blessed day, besides the blessings of other
days, by the Law of Nature; this day has Peter. Martyr in Genesis 2. 3.
a peculiar blessing of holiness, it is a day of divine munisicence, wherein
God featrers his Diamonds, his choicest blessings Bulling. in Roman.
among his obedient Worshippers. And was not the fourth Commandment a standing
Rule of conformity, Hospin. de Origin.
what need the twisting of so many Arguments? and why does God more consult
man's practice in the pressing of this, Templ. lib. 2. cap. 14.
than any other Commandment? Surely Gods jealously, least it should be
violated, shows not only the eminency of this Precept, but its abiding
morality.

Divines generally conclude, That the substance of the fourth Commandment lies
in this Clause, viz. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy; and this is the
preceptive part: Quod natural est puta diem septimum quemlibet deo sacrum
esse, illud quidem permanet. Jun.
For the other three parts of the Commandment, viz. The Directive, six days
shall thou labor, but the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; Nay, the
argumentative part; For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and rested
the seventh day: And the benedictive part, Therefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day and hallowed it; all these only enforce the Command: but the sum
and substance of the Command lies in the first clause, Remember the Sabbath Day
to keep it holy. And shall not the keeping of a Sabbath to God be moral and
perpetual? The spending of a seventh part of every week in holy service, and
spiritual worship, shall not that be standing and permanent? Does not the
necessity of our Bodies require a seventh days rest, and the Exigence of our
Souls a holy rest? Surely we will not sink below the dregs of Paganism, who
Recordare diei sabbati, ut sanctifices illum; Haec verba sunt ipsa praecepti
quarti moralis sub. stantia Zanch.
had their set times of sacred solemnity to their Idol Gods? And the Church of
Christ in all Ages had its Sabbath, when it was most clouded with Superstition
and Idolatry: the Sabbath was never suspended by any Emperors Edict, nor
Excommunicated by any Popes Bull: Sion never wanted her Sabbaths, when she lay
in her lowest ashes. Surely then to keep a Sabbath to God is most fully and
entirely moral; and this is, as Zanchy says, The substance of the fourth
Commandment; the other part of it, being taken up either in explication, how
we must observe it, or in reason and argumentation, why we must observe it; Or
in motive, and insinuation, that we must observe it: It is a blessed day, and
blessings are the greatest courtship to the Soul. And in one of the Homilies of
the Church of England, we meet with Homil. of time and prayer.
these words: By the fourth Commandment we ought to have a time, as one day in
a week, and this appertains to the Law of Nature, as a thing most godly, most
just, most needful for the setting forth of the glory of God, and therefore
ought to be retained, and kept of all Christians. Thus the Church of England
lays down this as a fundamental, that every seventh day (not in order but in
number) be consecrated to God.

a moral law.

1. It is not reversed or repealed in the Gospel; for though the old Sabbath be
reversed, yet the Commandment for (...) day in seven is not; and indeed, why
should it (...) the whole Decalogue is Gods royal law, Jam^^ (...) the golden
rule of our obedience?

2. It is ratified in the Gospel, and that many (...)

1. In general, together with the Decalogue, (...) (...).
Whosoever shall break one of the least of these Command^^nt and teach men so,
shall be called the least in the King (...) Heaven. Now the fourth Commandment
is one of the^^ commands, which it is so dangerous to break and (...) late.

2. By the designation of the Lords day, of the same number, (...). c. 11.
of the same use and profit, which is a real ratification of this law.

3. This law of the Sabbath is neither weak nor unprofitable, but exceeding
useful for the ends for which it was first intended, which was the glory of
God, the good of souls, and the preservation of Religion. It was the speech of
a Learned man, Let any man show me in this law either weakness (...).
or unprofitableness, I yield, and bid it vanish; but it has, and will have as
much strength and force, as any Law can have from the Author, Consent,
Multitude, Custom, and express approbation of all Ages. Profit it has too, and
has been preserved without any man's complaint for the thing it was designed to.

4. This fourth Commandment is part of the Decalogue which is an immatable and
eternal law, and was delivered with as much solemnity and Majesty as any other
Law.

ten is the perpetual number of Gods Commandments, so delivered by God, Deuteronomy.
4. 13. Q^^rtum praecep^um (...) morale, qua^^^^^ praecipit ut e septem diebus
unum consecremus cultui divino, and proinde quat^nus tale nunquam fuit
abrogatum nec abrogari ^^test. Aquin.
and so preserved by Moses, so received in all the Churches of God to this very
day. Now this law for the Sabbath is one of the ten, and therefore perpetual to
hold up the number, unless with the Papists we will cleave more Commandments,
to make way for the flight of this divine law of the Sabbath: And the ten
Commandments being Gods Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. We may neither add thereunto,
nor take therefrom: Man's Covenant being once confirmed, no man disanulls it, or
takes away any clause in it; and may any take from the Covenant of the Lord?
Then as this Covenant is perpetual, consisting of the number of ten words, no
(...). Gal. 3. 15. Hominis licet sit Testamentum, tamen si sit approbatum, nemo
illud reji^it, aut illi a liquid addit. Vatabl.
fewer in the Tables which were first written, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. nor in the tables
which were written the second time, Exodus 34. 1. 28. nor was any thing added in
the recapitulation and rehearsal of them, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. Therefore most
irrefragably this fourth Commandment, as one of the ten words, remains
perpetual, as is the Covenant it self.

This truth of the morality of the fourth Commandment is so evident, so clear,
so indisputable, that all varieties come in to give their free assent, and full
attestation: Ask a Jew, and Manasseh Ben Israel will tell you, Therefore the
blessed Manasseh Ben Israel. Chrysostom. homil. 19. in Genes. Ideo deus diem
septimum sanctificavit, ut homo sciret in circulo hebdomadae diem unum esse
cultui divino tribuendum. Par.
God desiring that the Sabbath may be observed for ever of all, whose sanctity
by so many Commandments, he has commended, placed it in the Decalogue, and
made it one of his ten Commandments, to the end that we knowing these precepts
to be everlasting, we should understand that this Commandment also was to be
accomplished amongst them. What more fair, more full, more satisfactory? Ask
one of the Fathers, Chrysostom tells us, That from the beginning God has
intimated to us this Doctrine, instructing us to set apart one day in the
circle of a week for spiritual exercises. Ask a School-man, Jacobus-de Valentia
tells us, That the Commandment for the Sabbath is moral for the conditions of
it. Natural est diem septimum quemque deo sacrum esse. Jun. Morale est ut ex
septem diebus unus cultui divino consecretur. Conrad. Dieteric.


1. In regard of the rest.

2. In regard of the sanctification of that rest: far the Sabbath was first
given to man for his rest, that he might cease from all his worldly labors,
and so he might with more ease and facility be a commodated to the service and
worship of God; and one day in the week must be dedicated to God for this
sanctification and worship; and thus the precept is stable and everlasting. Ask
a Jesuit, Azorius tells us, It is a most rational Morale est sanctificare unum
e septem dieb^^. Bald. cas. Conscien. circa Festa, l. 2. c 13. cas. 2.
thing, that after the works of six days, the seventh should be a rest
consecrated to God and his worship; nay, ask a Cardinal, whose Princely
altitude might lift him above the tenure of this truth, Bellarmine tells us,
The Divine law required, that one day in a week should be sequestered for holy
worship. Ask a more inferior Romanist, Terus tells us, God will have one day
in a week at least to be allowed him. Ask a Lutheran, V^luit deus ad minus unum
diem in hebdom^da sibi impendi. Ferus.
Baldwin tells us, It is moral to sanctify one day in seven. Ask a Protestant
either of a Foreign Nation, Zanchy tells us, The fourth Commandment is moral,
as it bids us dedicate one day in a week for the service of God, and so
Junius, God therefore sanctified the seventh day, that man might know that in
the weekly circuit, one day is to be bestowed upon the public worship of God.
Or of our own Nation; thus the Reverend Hooker, We are to account the
sanctification of one day in a week, a duty which Gods immutable law does exact
for ever. So Dr. Done, God required a seventh part of our time for his
exterior worship. But I will not tire or cloy the Reader with a multiplicity
of allegations; only this is very observable, that all these Divines fix the
morality of the command upon the seventh day in number, and not in order, as
some incautelously and erroncously do.

Nay the Morality of the fourth Commandment shines Stella.
with so many beams of light and conviction, that the very adversaries may be
subpoenaed in by their own Consciences and Writings, to give in their testimony
and assent unto it. Thus Stella the Papist, In the sanctification of the
Sabbath, this is Moral, to observe one day in the week. Arminius, the King
James his Declar. against Vorstius.
great enemy of God, as King James calls him, tells us, It is Moral to set
apart one day in seven for Gods service: And those who are adversaries to this
truth in particular, accord in the same confession. Dr. Heylin says, The
Decalogue contains the Moral law, or the law of nature, a Law universal Dr.
Heylin his hist. of the Sab.
in it self, and general, equally appertaining to Jew and Gentile: We can
desire no more then this full confession. Mr. Primrose confesses, That the
Sabbath is Moral in its foundation, end, marrow, and principal substance, and
that a stinted time is Moral, and grounded on the principles of nature, Primr.
par. 2. c. 6. Sect. 15. 19.
and therefore the Gentiles had their set days of Religion, and this is
ratified by the Gospel. Nay, the Learned Ironside freely acknowledges, That all
the Commandments of the Decalogue are Moral, and so is that of the Sabbath, it
is Moral for substance, but not for circumstance. Now the acknowledgment of an
Adversary is very evidential to the truth Irons. Quaest. 2. c. 9.
of a position: Thus every way the fourth Commandment, that holy, that just,
that good precept for the Sabbath, has been vindicated from the imputation of
a Ceremony, and it is Romans 7. 12.
too much to be feared, it was the body of a design cast that shadow upon it.
The worthy Twisse roundly concludes, Never Lex Deca^ogi, est lex moralis and
aeterna. Wol.
any man was found to devise any ceremoniality in resting one day in seven;
they may as well give themselves to devise a ceremoniality in setting apart
some time in general, for Gods holy worship and service: So then the fourth
Commandment being a Moral law, it binds all persons, Christians as well as
Jews; it binds in all places, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, as well as in
Palestine and Judea; it binds at all times, since the coming of our dear
Redeemer, who drew a line over all Ceremonies, and expunged them, that they
should have no more existence in the Church of God, as well as before Mat. 4. 2.
this glorious Sun appeared to beautify and revive the world.

CHAP. XLVI. The Sanctification of the Sabbath is the Christians homage, as
well as the Jews, if we look back to the infancy of the Gospel.
HAving already shown that the Sabbath in the first institution Dies Domini^^^
^hristianis (...) bear festivitatem suam Aug Epist. 119 cap. 13. ad Januar.
of it, was given to Adam, and in him to all his posterity, and so it belongs
to us Christians as well as to other^; and that the command for the Sabbath, in
the second Edition of it upon Mount Sinai, was Moral and perpetual, a standing
Law, and so binding all mankind, Christians as well as Jews: I shall now go
one step further, and show, that the Sabbath is still the same, though the day
be changed from the last, to the first day of the week, and that by Divine
Authority.

Now to make way for the clearer evidence of this truth, Exodus 20. 9.
so much decried and contradicted by some, who too much amplify Ecclesiastical
Power and Authority; I shall begin in discovering, that two days weekly cannot
be observed.

repeal the indulgence of God in giving us six days every week for our secular
affairs, and worldly Sexto considera and illud, quod sex dies operibus, et unus
tantum quieti datur; et certe in hac re divina sapientia non quid probabile,
sed quod populo conducibile spectavit. Muscul.
labors, to sustain our selves and families, and to acquire the good things of
this world; but it tacitly impeacheth the wisdom of God, who in the fourth
Commandment has accommodated himself to the frame and constitution of man, who
knows his weakness and frailty, and therefore frankly and bountifully has
bestowed upon him six days, knowing that he must get his living in the sweat
of his brows, Genesis 3. 19. And likewise considering, that in spirituals, the
spirit may be willing, but the flesh is weak, Mat. 26. 41.

to outvy Gods blessed example, who rested one day only, and no more, for our
future and constant imitation; His Presidency binding us, as well as his
Precept.

two days would be as the twins in Rebekah's womb, always struggling and
striving who should have the pre-eminence, and how with Zebedees Genesis 25. 24.
Sons, they should be both nearest Christ; nor can it easily Mat. 20. 21.
be conceived, what confusion this may engender in the Church, competition
being always the womb of dissension.

confirm the Jews in their blasphemous obstinacy, and hinder them from closing
with their Messiah, when their Sabbath shall still be retained and dignified
with a solemn and reverential observation? Surely they will interpret it
conscience in Christians, and that in keeping the seventh day Sabbath, they do
no more then their bounden duty; and how will this feed their insultations, and
put their hope upon the wing, that the Christian Church is coming back to the
Jewish Synagogue: If the head of their Sabbath be got in, they will strongly
conjecture, that in Manifestum est non solum legis judicio, sed and ipsissima
experientia, non facere ad verae religionis profectum si otia multipli^entur,
sed abunde satis est, unum in septimana diem religionis exercitiis esse
deputandum. Mus.
time the whole body of ceremonies will follow after: As the Apostle most
critically and prudentially joins all the solemn feasts of the Jews together in
their discharge and abolition, Gal. 4. 10. Col. 2. 16. wisely foreseeing, that
if any one was continued, the whole train in process of time would unavoidably
follow. Pleas for the one would easily be raised into arguments for the others:
And it is very well argued by Musculus, It never contributes, says he, to the
progress of Religion, that rests should be multiplied to the people, for one
Sabbath every week is abundantly sufficient for vulgar capacities.

two days every week, is more then the Law requires, or the Gospel allows. And
here Exodus 30 8. Acts 20. 7.
Chrysostom is most Elegant, The week contains seven days, says he, now see
how the Lord has distributed these days; he Chrysostom. Tom. 5.
has not taken the greatest part unto himself, and left the least to us,
neither has he taken half and left half; No, the Lord page 523.
is more liberal, he has given us six, and taken but one for Rev. 1. 10.
himself. And both Law and Gospel speak the same. And if we take five days
only for labor, we make void the Law Note Synecdochen, per observantias
dierum, mensium, annorum Apostolus intelligit omnes ceremonias legis veteris,
quasi ex part torum. Alap.
in this particular; and besides how inconsistent is it to Gospel liberty to
keep two days every week; this would outvy all the Jews Festivals in number,
and bring us again under a severer yoke; and this would at once both break the
bonds of Christian Unity, and the bonds of Christian liberty, and render the
golden yoke of Christ's Gospel heavier then the iron yoke of Moses his Law.

As for that objection, that the Apostles kept the seventh day Sabbath, and
preached on that day among the Jews, Acts 13. 42. Acts 16. 13. Acts 18. 4. To
this it is answered;

some time must be granted for the wearing away of an old usage. A Sabbath
Aequum fuit aliquid temporis intercessurum ut populo melius innotesceret
Sabbati Judaici abrogatio, ejusdemque sepultura honori sicentissima.
which had continued in the world much about four thousand years, the world
could not presently be awakened to take notice of its abrogation: Old customs
are removed with some difficulty, and the religion of our Fathers takes so
great impression upon us, that it is not easily eaten out, notwithstanding we
see clear reason for it. Antiquity in things natural is their weakness and
unbeautifulness, but in things spiritual it sheds a greater luster upon them.
Time then must be granted to convince the world, that the old Sabbath is now
deceased, and honorably buried in Christ's own grave.

both Sabbaths, Jewish and Christian, were observed by the Disciples for a
time, the Jewish, least they should offend the Jews, and the Christian, Damus
fortean and concedimus quoad sententias aliorum, Discipulos utrumque diem per
aliquot annos observasse, Judaicum, scil. ne Judaeis and Dominicum, ne
Christianis oriretur scandalum. Dr. Wilk.
least they should scandalize the Christians; what inconveniency would follow?
Man naturally is hard of belief, and to evince the abrogation of old things,
and the surrogation of things which are new in their stead, is a work of some
pains and difficulty; therefore that the Jews might be taken off from their
fondness, and the Christians firmly established in the truth, some time must be
granted, and some allowance made of absolute necessity. And that a respect was
had to both days, it was only for the term of some years, which when expired,
the morning-sun of the Christian Sabbath did shine without a competitour; and
during that little and short time of the observation of both days, we may
consider,

in all the Churches; for the custom of holding solemn Conventions and
Assemblies on that day, never obtained Sozomon. lib. 7. cap. 19.
in the Churches of Rome and Alexandria; whereas all Churches had their
Church-meeting on the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath.

solemn festival, for in many Churches it was a weekly fasting day; whereas
every Lords day throughout the year was held a solemn festival; Constitut. lib.
7. cap. 14. and lib. 5. cap. 15.
the Jews Sabbath, as in a fainting fit, was kept with sorrow and abstinence.

All Ordinances were never administered with that uniformity on the Old Sabbath,
as they were on the Lords day; As the Ordinance of the Lords supper, which in
the purest Acts 20. 7. Dies Panis. August Epist. 118.
Churches was appropriate to the Lords day, which was therefore called, dies
panis, the day of bread, in the primitive times; hence that memorable speech of
Athanasius, who being accused for breaking a Communion Cup, clears himself
Socrat. Schol. lib. 5. cap. 22. Athanas. Apol. 2.
thus, That time instanced by his accusers, was no communion time, for it was
not the Lords day.

ever arbitrary, not urged as of necessity, unless by the Arch-heretick Ebion,
Dominicum servasti, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum. Baron.
and his followers, who were therefore condemned as Heretics: but the
observation of the Lords day was ever held a Christian duty, and none was ever
branded with the name of heretic for the observation of it; Nay, this
observation was the badge and Character of a Christian in the best times of the
Church.

the Christian Sabbath, (...), etc. Ignat.
or day of rest; but a working day, and used as another day; and let us never
give that day a prerogative, which the best times of the Church laid open and
common. Festinatio Apostolorum ad concionandum, non fuit propter festum, sed
propter multitudinem.


The Apostles and Disciples of Christ never observed the seventh day as a
Sabbath: It is true, they took an opportunity then to dispense and disperse the
Gospel, because multitudes were then conveened and met together; an happy
opportunity was then put into their hands for the insinuating of Christ, and
the doctrines of the blessed Gospel into Chrysostom. Homil. 43. in Acta Apost.
the minds of the people, now in an unwonted concourse. The Apostles did then
cast the heavenly bread upon many waters. Acts 18. 4. Acts 17. 18 Acts 19. 9. 2
Cor. 4. 4.
The zeal of a faithful Minister, much more of an holy Apostle will take the
best opportunities for soul-advantage, and for heavenly instruction. It was not
the Sabbath, but the Season, not the circumstance of time, but of place,
invited Ecclesia Graecorum ad paululum septimum diem una cum primo observavit,
sed in causa fuit, quia in Orient initio nascentis ecclesiae viguerat haeresis
quorundam qui vetus testamentum execrabantur tanquam a deo Authore male
conditum, and sabbati cultum aspernabantur, eaque de causa tali die jejunium
suscipiebant orientales ergo Christiani, hanc heresin detestati, and deum ipsum
V. T. Authorem profitentes, caeperunt Sabbati judaici festivitatem retinere;
non quod illam more judaeorum colerent, sed n^ cum haereticis consentire
viderentur: et in orient in illis temporibus multi erant judaei ad Christi
religionem conversi, qui quando animi simplicitate putabant Sabbatum una cum
die dominica in honor habendum; caeteri Christiani ne eos conturbarant,
Sabbatum colebant, non quod id fieri oporteret, etc. Azor.
the Apostles to the dispensation of the Word; not the feast, but the
multitude, as Chrysostom well speaks; nor did the Apostles any more keep the
Jewish Sabbath, then Paul worshipped the Gods of the Gentiles, when he preached
in the field of Mars, and disputed in the Schools of the Heathens; these places
were only the sudden Sanctuaries, in which he disseminated the glorious Gospel.

It is true, as a learned man observes, in the Eastern Churches, for a time,
the Jewish and Christian Sabbath were both observed: Now the reason was, there
was a sort of Heretics who did disuse and disgust the Old Testament, and said
it was evilly compiled of God, and did throw off with scorn the Sabbath day,
and usually fasted on that day in a way of contempt and contradiction: Now the
Eastern Christians in detestation of this cursed heresy, and to show that God
was the Author of the Old Testament, as well as of the New, did for a while
retain the old Sabbath; not that they worshipped on it, after the manner of the
Jews, they were far enough from that; but some observance they gave to it,
least they might seem to join issue with the forementioned heretics: And
moreover in the East, were many Jews in the early days of the Gospel, which
were newly converted to Christ, who in the simplicity of their hearts, did bear
still a reverence to the old Sabbath, and therefore did observe it with the
Lords day: Now the Christians were to deal tenderly with those, and not to
offend Babes in Christ, and not to create any perturbation in the Church, but
to keep peace and unity; and so they gave respect to this day, not that they
thought it any way necessary, or a duty to be done, but for peace-sake, and
that salvation-work might not be retarded, nor the Church of our dear Redeemer
shattered, or crumbled into Schisms and Factions; and so (as the Apostle speaks
in another case) the Christians of those times became all things to all men,
that if possible, the late Converts of the Jews might have no temptation to
apostasy, nor the Proselytes of the Gospel have any occasion of disturbance.

But now in the Latin Churches, where this Heresy never took root, nor spread
it self, the Jewish Sabbath was never observed, but rather marked with a Note
of sadness and sorrow, viz. The memory of Christ's death, our Jesus lying in his
Grave as on that day; and this sprang fresh tears, and did yield new and
constant matter of mourning, to the Christians of those times. And it was no
strange thing in the primitive times, in a surplusage of zeal, to run down one
Extreme, by running into a another; as we see, to make a stick straight, we bend
it on both sides. Socrat. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Thus then at last we see, that we cannot keep two Sabbaths, no more then we
can serve two Masters. Mat. 6. 24. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 10.


Then one Sabbath must be discharged, which can be no other than the old
seventh-day Sabbath, which was fairly laid asleep in the Grave of Jesus Christ,
and the Christian Sabbath rose up in its stead, in the resurrection of Christ.

To evidence this truth more clearly and methodically, we must know, a thing
may be discharged and abrogated two ways; by expiration, and so a Law is
expired, when the reason of giving that Law being ceased in respect of time or
persons, ceases of it self, and so the Law is laid aside as useless, and there
needs no formal repeal: And thus we may argue for the expiration of the old
Saturday Sabbath.

the old World is then expired, when that World it self is ended (except it be
revived, and renewed in the new.) But this Law concerning the old seventh day,
was given to the old World: Now for the clearing of this, we must take notice,
that the Scripture Genesis 2. 3. Heb. 1. 1. Heb. 1. 2. Acts 2. 17. Heb. 9. 26. 1
Cor. 10. 11.
speaks of two Worlds: the first, which begun at the Creation, and ended
presently after the passion of Christ; the second beginning at Christ's
resurrection, and ending at the general Judgment. The Apostle speaks of Worlds,
1 Heb. 2. viz. The old World, and the new; the one before, (...). Athanas. de
Sabbat. and Circumcis.
and under the Law, and the other under the Gospel: and the new World, viz. The
time of the Gospel is sometimes called A new Heaven, and a new Earth, Isa. 65.
17. The second World, the invincible Athanasius calls it, Another Generation,
when the old Sabbath was to cease, as well as Circumcision, and the Lord's Day
was to begin (...).
as a Monument of the looked for reparation. Upon all this let us assume the
first Argument.

The old Sabbath, as also the whole manner of service, was limited to the term
or time of the old World, and so must necessarily expire with it; It is not
said, the Command^ment expired with it, for that was moral for one day in
Athanas.
seven, to be consecrated to the service and worship of God; but the old
seventh-day Sabbath instituted at the beginning of the old World, is together
with that old World expired, and a new one come in its room.

the reason of any Law ceases, (for that is the life, and the Soul of a Law)
then the Law it self ceases: But the reason of the institution of the old
Sabbath ceased at the end of the old World, and the beginning of the new, viz.
The resurrection of Christ. The reason of the institution of the old Sabbath,
was Gods honoring that day in resting from all his works, and for the memory
of the Creation, which was implied, and to be supposed, till a greater work Sic
Romae Aerat et Epoche fuit ab urbe condita tali, aut tali anno.
should be finished, to be the ground of the institution of another day, which
was the work of Reparation or Redemption. To make this out a little further;
let it be observed, that the ground and reason of the institution of days,
which are set and solemn, is some memorable work falling out upon such days:
The very Heathens chose out Nativity days, the days of founding Cities, of
memorable Victories, etc. Now the first Sabbath was instituted upon such a
reason, viz. Gods honoring that day by his rest from the great work of
Creation: And so Mr. White of Dorchester urges The way to the Tree of life,
page 278. Mr. White.
this, after this manner, That day which is honored by God above other days,
by his most eminent work of mercy to Mankind, shall be the day of his holy
Rest, to be consecrated to him for his worship; But the day in which Jam vetus
expiravit, et mundus, et sabbatum, septimaeque diei commemoratio Christi tumulo
sepelitur, Resurgit Christus, resurgit et sabbatum Christianum; mutatur dies,
sed non minuitur observatio, quod ut evidentius sit, notandum est; Deus habuit
opus, habuit opus et Christus; Deus habuit requiem sic requiem habuit et
Christus; Deus quievit post creationem, et Christus post redemptionem; quietem
ab opere creationis commemorat dies septimus, quietem ab opere Redemptionis
commemorat dies primus orb christiano universaliter observandus.
God ended and perfected the Creation of the World, is honored and advanced
above all other days, therefore that day shall be a day of holy Rest. Now the
Proposition will serve the turn for the Lord's Day, and thus; That day which is
honored by God above all other days, by his most eminent work of mercy to
Mankind, shall be the day of holy Rest: But the first day of the week, in which
Christ rested from the work of Redemption, is the day honored and advanced
above all other days, old Sabbath and all; therefore this is the Christians day
of solemn Rest. The old Sabbath indeed was to continue upon the reason given,
viz. Gods rest after the Creation, till a greater work should appear, and then
it must expire and resign unto a new Possessor. Indeed the latter work, viz.
Man's Redemption, so great, so necessary, so glorious, even puts out the memory
of the former, and so antiquates the reason of it, and thereupon the day it
self expires, and obliges to no more observance: The Redemption of Mankind then
being the greater work, (as shall be more fully showed hereafter) and having a
stronger reason in it, has swallowed up the memory of the stupendous work of
Creation, as Doctor Young calls it; not that the work of Creation should be
forgotten, (for that glorious work gave us our esse, our being, as the work of
our Redemption gave us our been esse, our well-being) but rather that it should
be more adorned and perfected: we still retain the memory of the Creation, in
keeping one day in seven to the Lord, and the memory of the Redemption, in
keeping the first of seven. Our contemplations on the wonderful work of the
Creation are heightened, not stifled by the memorials of a fresh and additional,
and more glorious work of Redemption.

of the Jews expires, by the surrogation of another day in the room of it, upon
a more remarkable and eminent occasion, and by the same Divine Authority: The
substitution of another day, viz. The Lords day, puts out the observation of
the former. A new Mayor of a City being elected, the Authority of the old
ceases, and he becomes dis-authorized: As a Candle is put forth, and the Stars
dis-appear, when the Sun arises. So the observation of the Lords day thrusts
out the observation of the old Sabbath, and takes all the honor of it to it
self; and this it does by virtue of the fourth Commandment, which requires one
day in seven: So then the old Sabbath being buried in its Grave, the Lords day
is Heir apparent to it, and like Jam tempore gratiae revelatae, observatio illa
sabbati ablata est ab observatione fidelium. Aug. Genesis ad litter. lib. 4. cap.
13.
another Phoenix arises out of its ashes to succeed it. The substitution of the
new Sabbath is the abrogation of the old; and the Lords day appearing (which
shall be plentifully proved) the Saturday Sabbath vanishes, and is evaporate,
as the scattered cloud at the breaking out of the Sun. In a word, God had his
work, and so had Christ; God had his rest, and so had Christ; God rested after
the work of Creation, and Christ after the work of Redemption; the seventh day
Sabbath commemorates Gods rest after the work of Creation, and the first day
Sabbath commemorates Christ's rest after the work of Redemption, which is
universally to be observed in the Christian world.

It is rationally argued by a learned man, that the old Sabbath is abolished by
the death and resurrection of Christ, Constat Apostolos biduo in maerore
suisse, and propter motum Judaeorum se abscondisse, qui die dominica ex
hilarati, non solum illum festivissimum voluerunt, verum etiam per omnes
hebdomadas frequentandum esse duxerunt. Humb.
and God Almighty has appointed a new form of Divine worship according to the
Evangelical law. Now the form of worship being changed, it was expedient that
the outward circumstances of place and solemn time should likewise be altered
from what they were before; and concerning the time of solemn worship, the
Lords day succeeds, upon which Christ rises and rests from the great work of
man's Redemption. Old Sabbaths and old sacrifices being twins (though both
honorable and serviceable in their time) yet like Hypocrates his twins, they
must live and die together, and let both be buried together: But let our Gospel
Sabbath take life from our Saviors Resurrection, which brought with it a new
creation, a new world, making all things new, and giving a new life to lost
mankind. Holy Ignatius contemporary for many years with the Apostle John with
some indignation rejects the Jewish Sabbath, (...), etc. Ignat.
and charges us as we have any love to Jesus Christ, to lay it aside, and keep
the Lords day, the supreme and Queen of days: And this blessed Martyr speaking
of the Jews converted to Christ in his time, gives them this most Christian
character, viz. That they did no longer keep the Sabbath of the Jews, but led
their life according to the Lords day, in which our life arose. Augustine
brands the keeping of the old Sabbath, with the odious term of Judaizing. And
Ne Judaizemus servando Sabbatum judaicum. Aug.
indeed it can be n^ less then great contempt cast on our dear Messiah; It is
well observed by one, We cannot possibly retain the old seventh day Sabbath,
but we must Memorize our creation above our Redemption, which is to admire the
Star more then the Sun, or the Candle more then the Star, and is expressly
contrary to the ancient, both promise and prophecy. The Council of Laodicea
was so zealous Incongruum est veteris creationis Sabbatum novae creationi.
Lightf.
against the observation of the old Sabbath, that it pronounced an Anathema
against the obstinate observators of it. The words of the Council are these,
Christians ought not to Judaize, and to rest from work on the Jewish Sabbath
day, but prefer the Lords day before it, and rest thereon from labor; if any
shall be found to Judaize, let him be an Anathema. Here we may note, that this
Venerable Ista legalis septimi diei deputatio, and consecratio neminem
constringit prater Judaeos, idque non nisi ad tempus; Non autem in Novo
Testamento, quo lex Mosis una cum sacerdotio Christo servatori cessit. Muscul.
Council which was held Anno Dom. 314. One of the most primitive Conventions of
the Christian Church, commands as under a severe penalty to follow our works on
the Saturday Sabbath, and to put the crown of rest and holiness upon the head
of the Lords day. I suppose the Canons of this Council are a good Comment upon
the spirit of those times. It is well observed by Musculus, That the deputation
of the seventh day Sabbath belonged only to the Jewish paedagogy; now the Jews
being hissed off the stage by the just judgment of God, and being unchurched
and unpeopled, their Sabbath is folded up in silence, and we have nothing to do
with it, and so we fairly lay it to sleep, and draw the curtains about it, no
more expecting its rise (...). Athanas.
or revival. Let me conclude this particular with a saying of Athanasius, In
the old time of the Jews, the seventh day Sabbath was highly esteemed; but now
under the Gospel, the Lord has changed it, and translated it into the Lords
day; for the old Sabbath appertained to their pedagogy, and to the rudiments of
the law, and therefore when the great Master came and fulfilled all that which
was prefigured by it, it then ceased, even as a Candle is put forth at the
rising and appearing of the Sun. Now what can be more evident for the
dismission of the legal, and the admission of the Evangelical Sabbath?

old Sabbath then is discharged, and is not the fourth Commandment discarded
with it, and buried in the same grave?

indefinitely, not definitely, a seventh day, not the seventh day; a seventh
day not in order, but proportion. Junius very well observes, That the natural
equity of the fourth Commandment is, that one day Naturalis aequitas quarti
praecepti est, unum e septem diebus, deo et divino cultu^ esse destinandum,
etc. Jun.
in seven be consecrated to God, whether the first day, or the last day of the
week; and the Scriptures telling us, it is now the first, we are still obedient
to the fourth Commandment. Indeed the law of sanctifying the Sabbath is
natural, and perfectly Moral in respect of the substance of it, which is this,
That every seventh day is to be kept holy to the Lord, and this remains
still, though the very seventh day be changed. The equity of the fourth
Commandment is drawn from the proportion of six days labor, and a seventh
days rest. One thus opens that phrase in the fourth Commandment, Six days
shall thou labor, but the seventh is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. What
seventh, says he, Exodus 20. 8, 9.
pray note it; the Lord says not, the seventh from the Creation, if he had,
the Law had confined us to that day, But because the Lawgiver intended to
choose a new day, and not to change the old law, he has left it at large in
general terms, neither can it be restrained to one day more then to another:
And though the old seventh day was occasionally pointed at in the fourth
Commandment, as a seventh day, which the Jews were to observe, as by the fifth
Commandment they were bound to honor their Parents then living, yet these
occasional circumstances might be, and were altered without any impeachment to
the morality of these commands. The altering of a mutable circumstance either
of time, place, or person, is far from abolishing the substance of a law, and
it is to be considered, That this proportion of one day in seven is no where
directly stated by a perpetual precept, but in the fourth Commandment, and
therefore there it must be determined; that it must be some where determined,
is evident, because it is substantially profitable to Religion, to the glory of
God, and the good of souls: For if men were left to their own liberty, to
choose their own proportion, in all probability Religion would be very much
damnisied, and endangered, either it would be starved with too little, or
surfeited with too much Sabbath-time; either Popery would create almost every
day in the week a holy day, or profaneness would be content with one day in a
month. Let sinful man have liberty to pluck up Gods bounds and alter his
proportion one way or another, and experience will show the inconvenience and
mischief of it.

And that which is very observable in the fourth Commandment is, that the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day; not the seventh day, but the Sabbath day, the day of
rest is blessed: And the fourth Commandment both opens and shuts, both begins
and ends with the term Sabbath day, and not the seventh day; we must sanctify
the Sabbath day, so in the beginning of the precept; and God blessed the
Sabbath day, so in the close of the Commandment. The word Sabbath, like a
finger points forward and backward, directing us how to expound the whole
precept in a large, and not a limited sense. Doubtless if God had intended to
tie up the Church in all ages to the seventh day from the Creation, he would
have fixed the Commandment upon that day only, especially in the conclusion of
it; for why should not that precise day be mentioned in the close of the fourth
Commandment, as well as in Genesis 2. 3. There God is said to bless the seventh
day, here only the Sabbath day, the most probable reason is, the Commandment is
a larger extent then the institution.

Moreover the learned, zealous, and pious servants of Dr. Bound on the Sab.
God, affirm the same thing, viz. That the Commandment Willet Hexapl. in Genesis
for the Sabbath is moral for one day in seven, and not for the old seventh
day. Twisse Sect. 6.


These Champions for the truth have given in their full attestation to this
fair and true interpretation of the fourth Mr. Bern. Mosaic. Sab. p. 70.
Commandment: And as Attersoll very well observes, as in the first institution
of the Lords Supper, Christ made use of unleavened bread, yet his example binds
us only to the use Mr. White in Genesis and Moral. of the 4th. Com.
of bread, and not that which is unleavened; so for the first institution of
the Sabbath, God rested on the seventh day from the Creation, yet his example
binds us only to a day of that Mr. Byfield Doctr. of the Sab. vindicated. Mr.
Fenner on the Sab. etc.
number, and not that particular day. And if in the preceptive part of the
fourth Commandment, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, this be restained to
the seventh day in order, there was then a plain tautology in the command; it
was, as if God should say, Remember the seventh day Sabbath, for the seventh
day is the Sabbath, which is a flat tautology, and unbecoming infinite wisdom.
No, it is evident, that the precept is comprehensive and large, and not limited
to one seventh day more then another; for Sabbath day in Quies (...) ceu
quievit.
the Hebrew is no more then a day of rest, and that is any day set apart for
holy worship, by Divine Authority, and is applicable to the first day of the
week, as well as to the last, which may be illustrated by this instance. By the
force of the fifth Commandment, we must honor the King; if Saul be King,
honor him; and if he be dead or displaced, and David be King, then honor King
David. To neither of 1 Pet. 2. 1^.
them the Commandment is levelled directly, but successively, and so the
Command is consequentially accommodated to both. So, Remember the Sabbath to
keep it holy. Whilst the seventh day was a day of Rest, the Jews were bound to
sanctify that day; if that day be changed, and another succeed, if the first
day be placed in its room, we are as much bound to sanctify that day; all this
by the force of the fourth Commandment; for as the change of the person takes
not away Hacratione nos quoque praeecptum hoc servamus; dum sanctificamus diem
dominicum, quia scil. est dies quietis nobis, sicut judaeis fuit dies septimus.
Zanch.
the precept of honoring the King, so the change of the day makes not void the
Commandment for the Sabbath: And thus we Christians in keeping holy the Lords
day, keep the Sabbath as much as ever the Jews did; the Lords day being a day
of holy rest to us, as the seventh day Sabbath was to them.

Moreover let us a little further consider; that in the first giving of the Law
upon Mount Sinai in thunder, flames and lightning, the Sabbath is wholly
enforced from the work of Creation, and Gods example in resting from that
stupendous work; but in the repetition, and the second giving of this Law, by
the hand of Moses, a typical Mediator, Exodus 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15. The reason from the Creation is quite left out; And the
Sabbath is altogether enforced from a type of Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15.
our Redemption, (viz.) The deliverance of the people of Israel from their
Egyptian bondage; for so says the Text, Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Remember that thou wast
a Servant in the Land of Egypt, and the Lord brought thee thence by a mighty
hand, therefore he commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day; lively intimating by
all this, the sistence and abiding of the fourth Commandment under the Gospel,
and the binding authority of it, by the incorporation of a new reason drawn
from our redemption or spiritual deliverance by Christ, typified by the Jews
deliverance from Egypt, instead of the old reason drawn from the Creation,
which is here wholly omitted; and we must take notice, that surely the Jews
deliverance from Egypt literally considered, was no way comparable to the work
of the Creation, that it should here in the second giving of the Law by Moses,
be propounded as the reason of the Sabbath, and the other wholly left out, but
only as a type of the most glorious and admirable work of our Redemption; so
there came so much weight in it, that in the review of the Commandment, it
became the reason of the Sabbath; and if the type it self was so significant,
how much more the Ante-type, which excells all types in glory, as much as the
Sun does the flying and dark shadows? Thus we then see, the old seventh day
Sabbath was never propounded as the substance or special subject of the fourth
Commandment.

reason it self compells us to put this sense and interpretation upon the
fourth Commandment.

The order of the day is no way substantially profitable to Mandata legis
sancta sunt, justa and bona: sancta quia praescribunt quomodo deus sancte coli
debet; Justa, quia praescribunt, ut proximum non laedas, sed eiquod suum est
tribuas; Bona, quia praescribunt ea, quibus quisque in se bonus sit, et bonis
moribus et virtute praeditus. Alap.
religion, nor if altered, is any way prejudicial; we may be as holy, as
heavenly and spiritual on the first, as on the last day of the week: Order only
cannot elevate the mind, influence the heart, or work upon the soul and
affections, it can contribute nothing to a holy sublimation in us; one day is
as good as another, so Divine appointment fix it. But now we must consider, in
all other Commandments of the first table, which concern Religion, only that
which is substantially profitable is placed in them, and so they are concluded
moral and perpetual; and so it must be in this fourth Commandment, that which
is substantially profitable must be put into the command, and therefore the
order of the day cannot be it. And what prejudice arises to Religion from the
alteration of the day from the seventh to the first, so God make it? (which
that he did, we shall see hereafter.) Cannot Christians serve God with as much
heavenly devotion, seraphical affection, nay, with as much care and
circumspection on the first day of the week, as the Jews did on the last? Well
then, the order of the day cannot be the substance of the fourth Commandment:
God does not interlace his holy Commandments, especially his Ten words, with
things which are not substantially profitable.

reasons in the Commandment are for the number, not the order; for a seventh,
not the seventh day. The first reason Exodus 20. 9. Exodus 31. 15.
in the Command to persuade to the observation of the Sabbath, Luke 13. 14.
is taken from the concession of six days for our own labors, six days shall
thou labor, but the seventh is the Sabbath, Augustini fuit expostulatio, qu^
modo deus in Creatione mundi sex dies insumpserit, cum in uno momento illud
stupendum opus perficere potuerit; Respond. ut homines opera sua mag^^
contemplarentur, et eum in operando sex diebus, et quiescendo uno faeliciter
imitarenter.
etc. But these words are directly for the number, only indirectly for the
order; and the genuine sense of them is, thou art permitted to work six days,
but on the seventh is the Sabbath, and then thou shall abstain from all kind of
work; thou have six days for thy self, and God must have the seventh, where
most plainly number, not order is the substance and sense of the command.

And 2. God wrought six days, no more, and no less, and rested one, no more,
or less, and therefore thou shall labor six days, and rest but one. Now if
God did so, who needed not to have wrought one day, being able to have made all
things in a moment, nor to have rested one hour, as not being subject to any
weariness, much more poor Man needs a competent time for his affairs, and for
his rest to the service and worship of God, and for the refreshing of his soul;
and if God did that for man which he needed not to have done, (viz.) to work
six days, and rest one, how much more are we bound to observe the same
proportion, and to imitate this blessed example? So that not order, but
proportion is the soul of this Commandment.

directly, and in the substance of it, command the seventh day Sabbath, and
Nulla lex a Christo condita, Christianis potestatem dedit ritus judaicos
observandi; immo vero Apostolus illud plane voluit, dum non modo circumcisionem
abrogabat, verum etiam hortabatur, ut de festis nulla sit dissentio. Socrat.
Hist. Ecclesiastic. lib. 5. cap. 20.
not the Sabbath indefinitely, then either we Christians must keep that day
still, and so fall back to Judaism, and in effect deny the Lord that bought us,
and cast a damp upon the ever blessed Resurrection of Jesus Christ, or else the
fourth Commandment is purely Ceremonial, and so utterly void and abolished, all
which has been refuted already. Now both these consequences are so opposite to
truth, and so abhorrent to most Christians, that it is far more rational to
grant, the seventh day in proportion was commanded in that holy and immutable
precept, then to dash our selves upon either of these two rocks, which may be a
Scylla or Charybdis to the soul.

in order, draws a whole train of absurdities after it.

1. Why a Ceremonial command should be placed among all morals; so the fourth
Command must be, if abrogated, and we observe another Sabbath differing from
the seventh day.

2. Then why a special command concerning only the people of the Jews, (for we
have rejected their Sabbath) should be placed among general Commandments, which
concern all the world; for the other nine do so, and is confessed by all, but
Papists, Antinomians and Familists, and such others of the litter of Heretics.

3. If the seventh in order be the substance of the fourth Commandment, it
thrusts men upon two dangerous rocks and extremes to the great disquiet of the
Churches peace: One, that the fourth Commandment is only ceremonial, which is
a gate to licentious liberty: Or, Secondly, it is only moral for that seventh
day, which is to bring us back into the Wilderness again of legal Rites and
Judaisme.

4. Those who hold the seventh day in order, to be commanded in the fourth
Commandment, are forced to fly to a miserable distinction at the best, that the
fourth Precept is partly moral, and partly ceremonial; for the substance of the
command is, that a seventh day be consecrated to divine worship, which if the
day mentioned in the command be ceremonial, then the whole precept is so. And
therefore to disintangle our souls from these intricacies of error and
absurdity, we must conclude, that a seventh day in proportion, and not the
seventh day in order, is the substance and equity of the fourth Commandment;
and so the practice of the Church in all ages, which is the best interpreter of
this command, has fully shown and declared.

The fourth Commandment then enjoins one day in seven to be weekly observed,
and this is the reason and the substance of it. Now the old seventh day, which
was the Jews Sabbath being antiquated and discharged, what day remains for the
Christian Sabbath, for the Disciples of Christ to meet upon for holy and divine
worship?

It is the first day of the week, the blessed day of our adored and admired
Saviors Resurrection.

what Authority is this day made the Christian Sabbath? To which it is
answered,

Ecclesiastical Authority: And Mr. Perkins gives us the reason, The Church,
says he, has no power to ordain a Sabbath, or to change the present Sabbath
into any other day in the week, as to Tuesday, Wednesday, etc. for time is the
Lords, and the disposing thereof in his hands; therefore Christ says to his
Disciples, it is not for you to know the times and the seasons, which the
Father has kept in his own hands: Now if God has the disposing of times in
his hands, then it belongs not to the Church to dispose them: And it may be
hence Acts 1. 7.
gathered, if that which is less belong not to the Church, then that which is
more does not: But the knowledge of times and seasons, which God has in his
power belongs not to the Church, much less the disposing of times and seasons;
I may add, and far less the appointing of a weekly Sabbath. And thus the
Reverend and worthy Pe^k^ns: And indeed to sublimate Church Authority so far,
what is it, but to put man into Gods chair? And to make him King of the Church,
and so take the Scepter out of Christ's hand? It is a worthy saying of Bishop
Lake, The Church has received the Lords day (not ordained it) not to be
liberae observationis, of free observation, as if man might at pleasure accept
or refuse it; but it is to be perpetually observed to the worlds end: For as
God only has power to apportion his time, so he only has power to set out a
day for his portion; he is the Lord of the Sabbath, the work of the day, is the
ground of the hallowing of the day, and therefore Mark 2. 28.
as no man can translate the work, so no man can translate the day; and this is
an undoubted rule in Theology. And thus this Learned Person has both asserted
the Divine Authority of the Lords day, and given us good reason for it. Man
therefore being impotent and incapable to lay the foundation of a weekly
Sabbath by some glorious work, especially equivalent to the work of Creation or
Redemption, let him never presumptuously pretend to the appointment or
institution of it.

Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2. 28. Now in reason, who shall appoint this day,
but he who is Lord of it? And considering Mark 2. 28.
it is his holy day, and it is expressly said, Psalm. 118. 24. This is the day
which the Lord has made, the whole Isa. 58. ^3.
stream of Interpreters expounding this text of the Lords day: So then the day
is of the Lords making, and not of man's making; and moreover, there can be no
cause why man should desire such a liberty; for it is much to be feared, if
there were twenty days in the weak, there would be twenty differences; every
one, every Church at least would choose its own day, and admire the issue of
its own institution. What jars and digladiations would this bring into the
Church of Christ? how would this tear Christ's seamless coat in pieces? The
dissentions between the Eastern and the Western Churches about the observation
of Easter day are not forgotten, when Victor, Bishop of Rome, was ready Dr.
Twisse treat on the Sab. page 141
to draw the Sword of Excommunication. Indeed the appointing of a day for
weekly worship and divine communion, is a task too great for weak and unstable
Man, and can be only the product of an infallible spirit: As Dr. Twisse happily
and closely argues, Christ calls himself Lord of the Sabbath; and as he
constituted it, so none but he can abrogate it, and place another in the room
of it. And in the Apostles days, the first day of the week was set apart for
the Christians Sabbath, which could not be but by the joint consent of the
Apostles.

never offer to alter it, no not in the least, if so be such power and liberty
was put into their hands as to ordain and Praeterea generalis omnium
ecclesiarum consensus in hac fessivitate divinam ejus auth^ritat^m ^vinci^; et
observandum est quod in aliis observationibus, ab Apostolis non receptis, sed a
postera ecclesia ad tempus observatis ecclesiae a se invicem discesserunt,
veluti in Festo Paschatis, in jejuni^s observandis; Ita sine dubio in Domini^^
celebranda contigisse^, si divina authoritate per Apostolos accepta ejus
observatio apud Christianos non constitua fuisset.
appoint it. Among us nothing more usual, then for one Parliament to unravel
and disanul what another has done and enacted, as being unsatisfied in the
thing it self, or else to show their own plenipotentiariness: And no doubt, had
the Church been fledged with this power to ordain a Sabbath for the Church of
Christ, in some age or another, they would have given us a cast of this power,
and would have attempted to pluck up a plant of their own planting, and would
have inoculated the Sabbath into the stock of some other day: Darkness and
Division there has been enough in the Church, to quarrel with institutions and
appointments of former times. But the perpetual silence of the Church in this
particular, infallibly shows the Divine right of the Lords day: And the
Churches are so hush, because they dare not attempt such a piacular enterprise,
as to raze the foundation of a divine institution: And in case they should put
in practice such a pretended liberty, what inconvemences would fall out, to be
bewailed with tears of blood? for this liberty must be equal in every Church,
and so our English Church might institute the Monday, the French Church the
Tuesday, the Belgic Church the Wednessday, the Germans might ordain the
^^ursday, the Danes the Friday; and other Churches might keep the present day
to be the Lords day: And so, so many Churches, so many Sabbaths, and what
int^llerable scandal would this procure to the Church of Christ; and what feuds
would it disseminate among Christians? Nay, how would this confusion strike the
Christian profession under the fifth rib, and give it its mortal wound? This
Ecclesiastic power and liberty, would likewise open a way to revive and reduce
the Jewish Sabbath, Dies dominicus nomen suum adeptus fuit propter dominicae
resurrectionis memoriam ad finem usque mundi celebrandum. Muscul.
or the solemn day of the Turks, which is every Friday; nay, we know not with
what Heathens we might concur in their weekly solemnity: And when the Pagans
shall well espy our dissentions, how much we disagree about our Sabbath, this
may reinforce their detestation both of us and our Religion. Now if the Church
had power to ordain the Sabbath, they have likewise power to alter and change
it, which we see, may be the womb of irreparable mischiefs. Is it not then far
more rational and convictive for the prevention of those miserable disorders,
to take the Sabbath as marked out by God himself, the institution of Christ by
his Apostles, which is now the first day of the week, a day founded and
bottomed on Christ's glorious Resurrection? And thus the Church of Christ, his
little, but precious flock, may keep the Luke 12. 32.
Unity of the spirit in the bond of Peace: No doubt then, the Ephesians. 4. 3.
Lords day is of Divine, not Ecclesiastical Authority, otherwise Romans 4. 25.
men's spirits would never have been so overawed, and their hands tied from
presumptuous undertakings. The truth is, our Christian Sabbath must be built
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ (by his
Resurrection) being the chief corner stone: And because nothing can fall out in
the world comparable to the Resurrection of Christ in glory and power;
therefore no day can be set up like unto this, neither can it be changed into
any other. The like cause can never be offered to change this day, which at
first occasioned the choice of it; and therefore it must remain until the end
of all things. And they who ever they be who go about to raze this day, must
first pick out Christ's mark which he has wrought into it by the work of
Redemption, and so blot out the testimony of the four Evangelists concerning
Christ's Resurrection on the first day of the week, the happy Basis of our
Sabbath.

fresh and frequent in the Apostles days, they being yet alive, and
excercising a superintendency over the Church, who should Stab Apostolis adhuc
in v^vis dies dominicus observatus fuit merito illorum ordinationi ascribendus
est. Aut enim per ipsos, and eorum authoritatem, aut per alios ecclesiae,
doctores sine illorum consensu institutus erat, quorum posterius est valde
absurdum, and insul^um, non suit ecclesiae Apostolis leges praescribere.
interpose to ordain this holy day of worship but themselves? If any other
Governors of the Church, they did it either with the consent of the Apostles,
and then their Authority was subordinate, and so swallowed up in the power
Apostolical: For the Apostles were the Supreme guides of the Church, and had
the ordering of the affairs of Christ's flock, the care of the Churches was in
the first place committed to them, 2 Cor. 11. 28. Or else this Committee of
Church Governors (who they were, where they met, or what they did, could never
yet be discovered) did appoint the Christian Sabbath against the consent of the
Apostles; and surely then, their presumption would have been taxed in holy
writ, for a perpetual reproach of the thing, or else they had fallen under the
Pens of Ecclesiastical Historians: of all which ne quis quidem, not any thing
appears to the most critical Observator, in their most curious searches and
inquisitions. But it can never be imagined, any should dare to impose a day of
their own invention upon the Church, the Apostles, those infallible Spirits,
being yet in the land 1 Cor. 2. 16.
of the living.

Church appoint the Christian Sabbath, let her be called the Lady of it, and so
Christ will lose his title of Si beati Apostoli ex authoritate sibi a Ch^isto
delegata Dominicum non instituissent, sed ejus observationem liberam
reliquiss^nt, tum merito diceremus ecclesiam ipsam.
Lord of it, Mark 2. 28. which as Paraeus observes, is one argument of Christ's
Divinity; for none can be Lord of the Sabbath, but he who appointed it, and he
whose Sabbath it is: and surely such an attempt can hardly be excused of the
most daring Sacrilege; to rob God, not of his Tithes, but of his Titles, and
so put Christ's Arms into their Scutcheons, this indeed savours too much of
arrogance, and it cannot be fastened on the Flock of Christ, who hears his
voice, and follows the accents of it. And how our Sabbath should be the Lords
day, and yet of humane institution, is such a knot I know not how to untye, and
am not (...) quod tamen praeclarum testimonium est divinitatis Christi, quod
ipse per Apostolos suos diem dominicum instituit. Par.
over-hopeful to see the Riddle unfolded by any other. That the Church should
give the Sabbath a being, and the Lord should give it a name, is such a
partage, I think few will own. Seyrus the Casuist has laid down a good Rule,
viz. The Church can abolish holy days, because she determines them, and custom
prevails much among men, but the sanctification of a day is only from a Divine
Law. Let the Church then move in its own sphere, and follow the letter of its
Commission; but to set apart a Sabbath for the World, let it not avouch any
such Authority; this is for the Spouse Cant. 5. 4.
of Christ to disturb, and awaken her beloved.

her Charter and Commission out of the Old or New Testament: But it is to be
supposed, she can show none sufficient to authorize her for this transcendent
act, to determine the solemn and sufficient Nemo est sabbati dominus nisi qui
sabbatum instituit and cujus sabbatum est. Par.
time of Gods solemn and ordinary worship: Could she have brought forth her
Credentials, the world should not have been kept in the dark so long? and if
she cannot, it is not so easy to impose upon men's belief: all Christians are
not acted by an implicit faith; nor will they lean too hard upon
Ecclesiastical Authority, and submit, because Cant. 2 7.
they say so; a bare and naked Asseveration will not salve all Cant. 3. 5.
their doubts. Besides, God appointed the Sabbath, which Cant. 8. 4.
was celebrated in the times of the Law; and shall not he Ecclesia non debet,
nec potest mutare sabbatum, and qui aliter dicunt, falso me interpretantur.
Prideaux.
appoint the Sabbath which is celebrated in the times of the Gospel? Nay, is it
not necessary, and agreeing to natural equity, that he who appoints the manner
and matter of worship, should also appoint the sufficient and necessary time of
worship? Are not all men, even the Governors of the Church, and the greatest
Potentates, obliged to render to God the homage of observing a sufficient time
for worship? Or shall we deny God the privilege, which every common Landlord
assumes to himself to appoint the days of payment of his own homage? What if
the Church cannot Quando deus sanctificat sabbatum est sanctificatto
constitutiva. Cum homo sanctificat sabbatum, est sanctificatio invocativa.
Weems.
agree, if she apostatize or grow heretical, which is no new thing in the
world, where then shall God find his sufficient time for Sabbath-observation?
In a word, all the power of the Church is founded on the fifth Commandment,
and not on the fourth, and she may as well appoint the worship it self required
by the second Commandment, as the sufficient time of it required by the
fourth. And it is well observed by the learned Weemes, God only may sanctify
a Sabbath for himself, for the Sabbath is not to be reckoned among private
goods, but it is to be reckoned among such things as are common to all, as are
the fire, and the water; therefore Tempus non est inter privata bona, sed inter
bona communia, qualia sunt ^er and aqua, and quod divini juris est nullius ^^
bonis est. Weems.
man cannot separate time, as God does, for his service and worship, and there
separation is but occasional, accidental, and mutable. Thus learnedly and
rationally this worthy man argues, that the Sabbath being a common good to the
world, the institution of it is not to be attributed to any Convention of
fallible men, but only to him who is the Lord of Heaven and Earth: And surely
he who created the Sun, the Index of time, does and must appoint the Sabbath,
which is the quintessence and best part of time. These sublime institutions, as
the Sabbath, Sacraments, Ordinances, etc. which have a general concourse in the
good, and to the benefit of Mankind; as they speak the glory, so they evidence
the determination of God their Author.

same Authority which institutes a day, may abrogate it, and alter it; but the
Church cannot abrogate and alter Ejusdem est refigere ^ujus est fig^re.
the Lords day: It is a Canon of the Civil Law, They who can enact, can repeal;
and this may be instanced in the Festivals and Sabbath of the Old Testament;
God alone ordained them, and he did cancel and abrogate them. Now it is the
judgment of our most classick and authentical Divines, That the Church cannot
alter the Lords day; So Certe quamvis dies dominicus sit juris canonici
consuetudine, tamen nunquam abroga^^tur. Azor. Quid ergo? An diem dominicum
jure divino esse stabilitum asseremus? Ego quidem Auditores, sine cujusdam
praejudicio, lubentissime concedo in istam sententiam. Prideaux.
Dr. Fulk, that eminent Champion of the Protestant Religion, who profligated
the Romish Cause, in answering the Rhemists Testament; he thus avers our Plea,
To change the Lords day, says he, and keep it on a Monday, or any other day,
the Church has no authority; for the Lords day is no matter of indifference,
but a necessary prescription of Christ himself, delivered to us by the
Apostles. This is most clear and plain; and let the learned Professor of
Oxford, the famous Prideaux, give his opinion in this Cause; I am not
satisfied, says he, with the Ordinance of the Church for the Lords day,
because Church-Ordinances may with the same facility be broken, as they are
made, which absolutely to affirm of the Lords day were unadvised. And besides,
could the Church remove the Lords day to Monday, Tuesday, or any other day,
what becomes of the day of Christ's resurrection, the first day of the week?
upon which not only the Fathers in the primitive times, but likewise our later
Divines, do so confidently and truly bottom and found it? And will it not sound
very harshly and unseemly, that the Nox est tempus ante Christum plaenum
tenebris infidel^tatis, and peccati: sed dies est tempus praesens evangelii.
quo Sol (i. e.) Christus lucis suae, gratiae et amoris radios toto Orb
diffundit. Cyprian.
great and eternal Jehovah should ordain and appoint the Sabbath of the Old
Testament; and a company of fallible men, subject to be attached by a writ of
Error, should institute the Sabbath of the New Testament, when Religion shone
with a brighter ray, and scriptural ministrations were far more glorious: Or to
speak in the Apostles language, When the Night was far spent, and the Day was
at hand, Romans 13. 12. That day so much rejoiced in by Abraham, and his
believing Posterity, so much admired by the Martyrs in the primitive times.
Once God and Man wonderfully united in the same Person, made one Savior, but
God and Man strangely are Copartners to make two Sabbaths: and that the old
Sabbath now entombed in the Grave of Christ, should have a divine Author, and
the Christian new Sabbath, which is to endure to the worlds end, should only
be fixed upon humane Authority, is, I suppose, beyond the reach of ordinary
apprehensions. But the learned Prideaux wisely observes, The Canon of the
Church does not Dies dominicus practice and moraliter est immutabilis. Suarez.
give to this day any Divine Authority, which before it had not, but shows
rather what they received from their Ancestors, to be transmitted by them to
their posterity. Nay, Suarez the Jesuit will acknowledge, That the Lords day
practically and morally is immutable, and subject to no alteration; and
therefore it cannot be of humane Authority.

whole Fabric of Religion, should an humane Ordinance limit the necessary
Ecclesiastica disciplina, and Authoritas nimia facilitate enervatur, et irrita
redditur. Alap.
time of Gods worship, Or that the Church should not assemble, but at the
pleasure of the Clergy, and then perhaps not well agreeing among themselves:
for what would men busied about their Farms, their Yokes of Oxen, and domestic
affairs; would not they set at naught a humane Ordinance? Would not profane
men easily dispense with Nonnullum quod audivimus, aut vidimus, argumentum nos
adhuc in contrarium flexerit, quin ut nomen illud (...) aeque respexerit
institutionem Christi ac resurrectionem. Dr. Wells.
their absenting themselves from prayers and preaching, and give themselves the
leave of doing, or neglecting, any thing, was there not something found in
Scripture, which more than any humane institution can bind the Conscience? Man's
institutions may overawe the outward-man, they will little influence the
inward; men may be shackled with something from the sacred Scriptures, but if
they are loose from those Bonds, they will easily please themselves in their
fancied liberty. It is the rule of the word, not humane dictates, will bind
men, and stake them down to Obedience: and it is no wonder if our Christian
Sabbath be thrown upon the Dunghill of profaneness, if it has nothing but
Ecclesiastical Authority to show for its institution; if our Sabbath come among
other holy days, and acknowledge no other founder, we cannot marvel, if sports,
and walks, and visits be the usual celebrations of it. The result then of the
whole is, The Church in the earliest days observed, but not instituted our
Christian Sabbath, and the Lords day is so called, not only from Christ's
resurrection, but his institution.

The Lords day then is not of Ecclesiastical institution; no Synod, no Council,
no Convention of men subject to error could give it its being, or adopt it
into its honor, that John 1. 12.
that it should have power to be called the Day of God: Something more than
humane power must authorize this blessed day, and make it a weekly and standing
Festival to the Christian Church.

Indeed some refer the institution of it to Christ himself, (...).
and so run up the crystal stream to the fountain head. Athanasius, who was
the sword, and the buckler of truth, and both received and repelled the darts
of the Arrian World, He positively affirms Christ to be the institutor of our
Christian Sabbath; Of old, says he, The Sabbath was in great esteem among the
Ancients, but the Lord has changed the Sabbath day into the Lords day. Now
what can be more plain? Chrysostom in his tenth Homily upon Genesis, calls God
the Athanas. homil de Semente.
Author of this institution. And Eusebius in one of his Orations, in the praise
of the Emperor Constantine, flies into a seraphick admiration of Jesus Christ,
and deriding the vanity of the Gentile Gods and Potentates, Who, says he,
among the Heathen Gods has appointed a solemn day weekly to all the
inhabitants of the world, whether they dwell on the Land, or travel on the
Seas, to celebrate the Lords festival, and has taken care, not only for the
refreshing of bodies with the provisions of the creature, but for the feeding
and supplies of the Soul with discipline and divine repasts? Thus this worthy
man, speaking of the glory of his Master Jesus Christ, produces this eminent
argument for it, (viz.) He appoints a weekly Sabbath for all the world to
observe and celebrate. Nor was this doctrine only authentical, and approved in
the (...), etc. Eusebius. de laudibus Constable. Causa* mutationis est resurrectio
Christi, cujus beneficii commemoratio successit mem^riae creati^nis, non
traditione humana, sed Christi ipsius observatione, et instituto. Jun. in Genes.
primitive times of the Church, but in the latter days of Reformation, some of
our choicest Divines, have with much delight and resolution embraced and
published this truth. Learned Junius, one of that couple who made the Old
Testament speak Latin, and so brought the Scriptures something nearer to the
worlds understanding; he solemnly professes, That the old Sabbath is changed
into the Lords day in the Christian Church upon the account of Christ's
resurrection; and that the Author of this change is not humane tradition, but
Christ's own observation and appointment. And Piscator, a man eminent in the
Church of Christ roundly asserts, That though there be no express command for
the Lords day in the Scriptures, yet the facts of Christ and his Apostles on
that day, do undoubtedly declare its Divine Original and institution. But not
to surfeit the Reader with too great a concourse of testimonies concurrent in
this opinion, there are not deficient many considerable and undeniable reasons
asserting and affirming the Lord Jesus Christ to be the Author and Institutor
of his own blessed day.

the Lords denominatively, that he is the Author and Institutor of; As for
instance, The Lords Supper, because he ordained it, 1 Cor. 11. 20, 23. The
Sabbath of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5. 12. Because he commanded it; The Temple of the
Lord, Jer. 7. 4. because he appointed it: the people of the Lord, because he
chose them, the Messengers of the Lord, because he sent Exodus 3. 7. 1. Cor. 4 9.
them; the Apostles of Christ, because he put them into that office. And no
instance can be showed to the contrary, but the Christian Sabbath is called the
Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. Nay, and Beza notes, that he has seen an old copy, that
which is called the first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16. 2. styled the (...), the
Lords day; not by Creation, for so every day is his from the beginning; not by
destination, for so properly the day of judgment is called, the day of the
Lord: But our Christian Sabbath is called the Lords day by Divine Institution,
as other things are said to be the Lords; and so Christ is the Author and
appointer of it; and therefore Bishop Andrews, that library of learning, in one
of his Sermons upon Dies dominicus non ab alio, sed ab ips^ Christo est
institutus. ^ilen. Synt. loc. 44. p. 2^6.
the Resurrection, puts the query; How can it be called the Lords day, but that
the Lord made it? And Bishop Lake in his Sermon on the Eucharist, says
positively, That Christ did substitute the Lords day in the place of the Jewish
Sabbath. Doctor Fulk fears not to affirm, That the Lords day is a necessary
prescription of Christ himself. And Doctor Lin^^^^ Bishop of Brechen, in his
Preface to the Assembly at Per^^, and many other Divines heartily concur in
this judgment.

If God by resting from his work of Creation, and his blessing ^eas. 2.
of that seventh day, made it a holy day for his set and solemn worship and
service; then Jesus Christ resting from Genesis 2. 3.
the work of Redemption, and his blessing of that day, makes it a holy day for
his solemn and set worship and service; for there is the like, or greater
excellency in the resting of God the Son, and the blessing of his day, as there
was in the resting of God the Father, and his blessing of the seventh day.
Christ's work of the worlds redemption, and the renovation 2 Cor. 5. 13. Fact^
s^nt (...) nova, ut novum cast^llum (...). Bern.
thereof, the making of all things New, a new Heaven, and a new Earth, is
equal with, if not ^u^passing of the Fathers work of Creati^n: The S^ns
blessing likewise of this day is of no less excellency then the Fathers
blessing of the seventh day.

Nay, how many ways did Jesus Christ bless his own day?

Glorious Resurrecti^n, when the Sun of Righteousness di^ ri^e wi^h healing in
his wings, to visit and make Mal. 4. 2. Romans 13. 12.
happy the world, and to make it day among the Sons of Men.

several apparitions on this day, when Christ did exhilarate and revive his
sadned and disconsolat^ Disciples St. Aug. de C^vit. dei lib. 22. cap. 30.
with the bright intervals of his pellucid and salvifical presence. (But of
this more hereafter.)

heavenly instructions on this day, Luke 24. 25. when as Elijah, now he was
going to heaven he dropped his Mantle, and showed his Disciples his mind by
revelation, 2 Kings 2. 13.
before he showed them his face in glory.

illuminating the minds, and opening the understandings ings of his Disciples
more eminently on this day, Luke 24. John 20. 22. John 20. 28. Rev. 22. 16.
45. On this day, not only the morning star arose in the World of inhabitants,
but in the hearts of the Disciples, and he opened not only the curtains of the
grave, but of the minds of his Apostles by his redoubted and omnipotent
operation.

breathing the Holy Ghost upon his Disciples, John 20. 22. as on this day. When
Christ did that by his breath, which the Minister cannot do by his Zeal, the
Scholar by his Art, the Friend by his love, nay, Nature it self by its force,
Aug. Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost.
(viz.) inspire the heart with holy principles, and the head with holy
knowledge, and spiritual understanding.

installation of his Apostles into their supreme jurisdiction; giving them
power to bind and to loose in heaven and in earth, John 20. 21, 22, 23. On this
day the Apostles received, not their Miter, but their Mission; and the emblem
of their dignity, was no ceremonial vesture, but a supereminent power; All
which blessings Christ scattered on this solemn day, our Christian Sabbath;
and on this day, as an essay of converting power. Christ by the Ministry of
Peter, turned three thousand to his own Divine self. Now all these blessings
which Christ heaped on this day, Acts. 2. 41.
what are they but so many acts of consecration? They are only the pouring out
of the oil, to anoint it to be far above its fellows, and to be the Christians
solemn and weekly festival. And thus Ignatius calls our Sabbath, the Highest
and Psalm. 45. 7.
Queen of days. The argument then is very forcible a pari; if the Fathers
blessing a day made it a Sabbath to the world before, and in the times of the
Law, then the Sons blessing a day, must needs make it a Sabbath to the world in
the (...) etc. Ignat. John 5. 23.
times of the Gospel. And this is the more to be taken notice of, because
Christ says expressly, John 5. 23. That all men shall honor the Son, even as
they honor the Father.

Faithfulness in his Church proclaims him the institutor of his own day. God
the Father, when he had ordained Expendendum est, quod non solum ritus, et
ceremonias populo suo dedit deus quibus* ad fidem, charitatem and gratiarum
actionem, and observantiam dei imbuerentur; sed et certa tempora praescripsit,
in quibus vigore legis praescriptas Ceremonias exercerent: Haud permisit illis
libertatem ut ferias quas, et quando vellent pro suo libero arbitrio figerent,
out refigerent, mutarent, tollerent, multiplicarent, minuorent, sed ferias
servandas tradid it ex quibus est Sabbati sanctificatio. Muscul.
his worship, leaves it not to Moses, nor to the people of Israel, to appoint a
set and solemn day for it; but he himself first ordains it in paradise, Genesis 2.
3. and then revives and renews it on Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. 8. Nay, when the
Idolaters among the people of Israel did invent a worship, they who invented
it, instituted a day for it, Exodus 32. 5. Jeroboam when he devised a worship,
he likewise ordained a day for it, 1 Kings 12. 32, 33. So Nebuchadnezzar when
he set up an Idol, and appointed a worship for it, he set apart a day for the
performance of this worship, Dan. 3. 2. The miscreant Prophet Mahomet, as he
gave laws to his Proselytes, and prescribed a form of worship, so he himself
instituted his solemn day, viz. Every Friday: And he did not leave it to the
arbitrary will and pleasure of his worshippers to ordain or solemnize what day
they pleased. Therefore from all this we may conclude, unless Christ should
fall short of the example of his Father; Nay, of the very Idolaters; he must be
the institutor of his own day for it cannot be proved, that at any time, or in
any age, that any public worship was ever invented to be observed, but the
Author and institutor of it, was also the institutor of the day for that
worship, not leaving it to others will to appoint the same for him. Now Christ
is the great Lawgiver of his Church, the glorious founder of Gospel Worship,
the Sacraments were ordained by him, Prayers must be made in his name,
Discipline is of his institution, the Ministry of his calling and sending; and
shall our blessed Mediator be only excluded from the appointment of a day for
weekly Mark 16. 16. Luke 22. 19, 20. John 20. 22. Mat. 21. 22. James 4. 12.
Mat. 28. 19. Mat. 26. 26. John 14. 15. Mat. 18. 18. Romans 1. 1. Cant. 2. 16.
H^g. 2. 7. Rev. 15. 3. Ephesians. 1. 22. Mat. 18. 20. Psalm. 89. 7. Heb. 12. 2.
and solemn worship? Shall that cursed caitiff Mahomet (as was hinted)
constitute and appoint a weekly day for his worshippers to observe to himself,
and read that system of Vanities, that miscellany of lying inventions, the
Alchoran; and shall not our beloved, the desire of Nations, the King and
Sovereign of his people, the Head of his Church, not only influential, but
authoritative; shall not he be invested with a power to set apart a weekly
Sabbath for his people, wherein they may meet in his name, and assemble in his
fear, and congregate to hear his glorious Gospel, and to participate of those
blessings which attend his salvifical presence? Or did Christ forget his main
import, when he ascended to his Father, his approaching joy swallowing up his
thoughts of, and care for his poor Church, which he left behind? Surely we must
make Christ the institutor of his own blessed day, or inveniencies too many
will arise, which no salves will be able to smoother or suppress. Should Christ
have left it to his Church to appoint a day, what end would be of the discord;
and disagreements which unavoidably follow? When should the whole Church meet
to enact such a constitution? Or shall one part of the Church, being as is
supposed, inferior, be concluded in the determination of another part, being,
as is presumed, of greater dignity? And from whence arose this inequality?
Therefore intricacies and unanswerable difficulties will multiply, unless we
ascribe to our dear Jesus the appointment of his own day for weekly and solemn
worship. Besides, it is very considerable, that which is of universal
observation, none but God can impose by his supreme Authority, to which all are
equally subject; and such is the observation of the Lords day, which equally
belongs to all persons, at all times, and in all Acts 20. 24.
ages; there are none exempt from obedience to it, and Rev. 20. 12.
therefore no particular men could ordain this universal observance, Romans 2. 16.
which must be submitted to by all, who will give 2 Cor. 5. 10.
up their account with joy in the day of the Lord Jesus.

seventh day Sabbath was by Gods immediate institution, Genesis 2. 3. Exodus 20. 8.
And therefore the change of it into the Lords day must be by the immediate
institution of Jesus Christ: And the reason of it is, there has never been a
religious change made of any Ordinance of God immediately prescribed by him,
but by God himself, and by his own Authority: For if the institution be
immediate by him, the change into another must be by the like Authority also,
for he who ordains has only power ^o alter.

1. Man cannot change such an Ordinance, for it is complained of as a sin for
the people to change Gods Ordinances, Isa. 24. 5. And if any but God have
Authority to change his own Ordinances immediately appointed by himself, their
Authority is equal with his: But to assert this, is both ridiculous and
blasphemous. No, the whole Church assembled together, has no such authority,
it is but humane at the highest; and besides, if unstable man could alter an
immediate Ordinance of God, what stability Lex dei est aeterna, et in aeternum
d^ratura, et deus exscindet eos, qui mutant jus, *i e) leges, et jura.
could there be in these Ordinances, or what tie could they fasten upon men's
consciences?

2. All religious changes of every Ordinance of Gods own immediate appointment
has ever been by himself* and instances to the contrary cannot be alleged.
The Tabernacle was of Gods immediate institution, and the Temple ^rected in the
stead of it was likewise of his own appointment; David minding to build it, and
Nathan approving his 2 Samuel 7. 2, 3.
intention, but without the command of God was afterward prohibited: Neither
did God leave it to the wisdom of Solomon, though the wisest of men, but he
himself gave the pattern of it, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12, 19. The time of
celebrating the Passover, was the fourteenth of the first Month appointed by
God himself, Exodus 12. 6. which time Moses durst not dispense with, nor allow
any other day for some to keep it without Gods immediate warrant, Numb. 9. 8,
11. Times and seasons are in Gods hands, Acts 1. 10. And therefore the Month
Tisri is turned into the Month Nisan to begin the year withal by Gods
immediate command, Exodus 12. 2. And Antiochus Epiphanes is condemned Dan. 2. 21.
for changing times. Thus we see Gods Ordinances, for Dan. 7. 25.
Places, for Persons, for Times, being immediately appointed by God, cannot be
changed but by God; and therefore the seventh day being the immediate
institution of God, could not be changed into another day (as now it is) but by
God Romans 9. 5.
himself, even by Jesus Christ, who when he was come in the flesh, changed the
place of worship, John 4. 20, 21. changed the Law and the Priesthood, chap. 7.
of the Hebrews, into the Doctrine and Ministry of the Gospel; Priests and
Levites he changed into Apostles, Evangelists, Ministers; Ephesians. 4. 11. The
carnal worship Christ changed into spiritual, John 4. 24. Circumcision he
changed into Baptism, the Passover into the Lords Supper, and the seventh day
Sabbath into our blessed Lords day.

the due ^bservation of which, tends to Gods glory, and his public worship, to
Man's instruction and building up in the most holy faith; which day was
solemnized by the holy and heavenly inspired Apostles, which likewise Christus
est dei sapientia, tum (...), quia est (...) aeterni Patris. Luke 11. 49. Tum
Revelata, quia in Christi cognitione salutaris sapientia est sita. Par.
is approved, and greedily embraced with great spiritual comfort and joy by the
most holy Professors, zealous Ministers, and fervent Proselytes of the Gospel;
this day must needs call Christ its Author, and must needs be the institution
of him who is the wisdom of the Father, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Nay that day which is
disputed against, cavilled at, withstood and profaned by the most carnal,
ungodly, corrupt, and vain persons, must needs be the appointment of the Holy
One, as Christ is called, Psalm. 16. 10. Now such a day is our Lords day. A
cloud of witnesses might here be raised to attest this undeniable assertion,
but the mouth of constant experience has spoken it, and what need we of any
further witnesses?

Chemnitius has a notable descant upon Luke 8. 22. Sic paulatim discipulos
suos Christus deducere et docere voluit ad dici dominicae observantiam, et
demonstrare quae sit vera illius sanctificatio; nimirum, quando ex verbo ipsius
praecipua ejus opera, quae illo ipso die diversis temporibus in mundo ad
salutem humani generis edidit, consideramus, et de illis disserimus; Qualia
sunt opera creationis, cujus initium fact^m est hoc ipso die: Opus Redemptionis
quod etiam hoc ipso die perfectum est; opus sanctifi^^tionis qu^^ etiam hoc
(...) coelitus ^^^sso sp. (...) ^^choatum est. Deinde etiam quando falsa
doctrina l^xatur, vitia corriguntur, securitas s^cta^^rum verbi retunditur, and
Pietas ex v^rbo dei plantatur, etc. Chemnit.
where Christ is said to launch forth with his Disciples upon the first day of
the week which is now our Christian Sabbath; Christ by degrees, says he,
draws his Disciples to the observation of the Lords day, and would by little
and little instruct them wherein the true sanctification of it did consist,
viz. In a serious consideration and discourse of those works which God wrought
upon that day for the benefit of Mankind, and for the good of his Church; such
as the work of Creation which was began on that day, Genesis 1. 1. Such as the
work of Redemption, which was finished on that day, John 20. 1. Nay such as the
work of Sanctification: On that day the Holy Ghost descended visibly on the
blessed Apostles, Acts 2. 1, 2. not only as the result of the promise before,
or as a token of honor which God put upon his blessed Apostles, but as an
earnest of that plenteous effusion of the spirit which should be in
Gospel Times. This day, says the same Author, is sanctified when we seriously
consider, that on it false Doctrine was plucked up by the foundations, the
Calumnies of miscreant calumniators were refelled and silenced, the security of
Christ's Disciples was reproved and condemned, Vice was checked and corrected,
and piety propagated and disseminated. In the view and practice of those things
Sabbath sanctification is fairly comprised. But it is observable, that this
learned man takes notice, that Christ began betimes to instruct his Apostles in
the duties of the Lords day, the first day of the week, which does evidently
secure us, that the day it self was the institution of Christ himself. And we
may justly retort upon thos^ who fasten the Lords day upon humane Authority,
from the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 8. But the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness after the night of a Grave made our Sabbath day. And this weekly
festival is given to the world both by Christ's re-entry into it, from the dark
shade of the grave, and by virtue of those commands mentioned Acts 1. 2. the
command for the Lords day being one of them without doubt or dispute.

But that no beam of light may be withh^ld from making a full discovery of this
truth, we will fetch our rise from the earliest times of the world.

typified by Circumcisi^n which was administered on the eighth day, the next day
after the Jew^sh Sabbath, and the very day of our Christian. One of our
Homilies says; That the first day after the Jewish Sabbath is our Sunday; It
is our Lords day, say the Divines of Ireland: and Augustine proves, That by
the eighth day of August. Epist. ad Januar. 119. cap. 13. Nam quia octavus dies
(i. e.) post Sabbatum, primus dies futurus erat, quo dominus resurgeret, and
nos vivificaret, and spiritutlem nobis daret circum^isionem, etc.
Circumcision, was shadowed forth our Lords day: And Cyprian says, That
Circumcision was commanded on the eighth day, as a Sacrament of the eighth day,
on which Christ should rise from the dead. And this holy Martyr proceeds, and
gives us the reason of his words; for because the eighth day, (i. e.) the day
after the Sabbath, was to be the day on which the Lord should rise and quicken
us, and give us the spiritual Circumcision; this eighth day, (i. e.) the first
day after the Jewish Sabbath went before in a shad^w. So then the precise time
of the circumcision of the flesh, did only prefigure, the day of Christ's
resurrection, or our Sabbath wherein Christ rose for the circumcision of the
heart, for that which was spiritual, and so more effectual circumcision. Dies
sabbati er^t dierum ordine posterior, sanctificatione autem in tempore legis
Anterior, sed ubi finis legis advenit, viz. Jesus Christus, and resurrectione
sua Octavam sane sanctificavit, caepit eadem prima esse, quae octava fuerat,
habens ex numeri ordine praerogati^am ex resurrectione domini sanctitatem.
Ambros.
Hilany points at the same thing; Upon the eighth day, says he, which is also
the first day, we rejoice in the festivity of a perfect Sabbath: And this
eminent person has left a most memorable Record behind him, of the Churches
practice in his time, which was about An. Dom. 355. Ambrose most elegantly
descants upon this subject; The Sabbath, says he, was the last in order of
days, but the first in sanctification under the Law, but when the end of the
law was come, Romans 10, 4. viz. Jesus Christ, and by his resurrection had
consecrated the eighth day, that which was the eighth day began to be the
first, being dignified by the precedence of the number, and sanctified by the
resurrection of the Lord. Thus the primitive times, which are the best Comment
on Gospel Institutions, as having the advantage of being nearer to the rising
Sun, could easily discern the thing typified in the type, the substance in the
shadow; the eighth day, the usual time of circumcising the flesh, clearly
prefiguring the day of Christ's glorious rising to circumcise the inward-man,
the hidden man of the heart, and to purge away the pollutions and filthiness
both of flesh and spirit. The Lords day was prophesied 1 Pet. 3. 4.
of by holy David, Psalm. 118. 24. This is the day which Ezekiel. 36. 25.
the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. It is not an easy
thing, says Dr. Ames, to reject this Scripture Neque faciliter rej^ciendum est
quod ab antiquis quibusdam urgetur, Psalm. 118. 24. Eo enim loco agitur de
resurrectione Christi, ipso Christo interpret. Matthew. 21. 42. Ames. Cyprianus,
Augustinus, and Ambrosius, hunc diem in Psalm. 118. 24. citatum, de
resurrectione Christi interpretantur.
so much urged by the Ancients, and wholly and only applicable to Christ's
resurrection-day, if Christ may interpret the meaning of the Prophet, Mal. 21.
42. Or if the Apostle may interpret the meaning of his Master, Acts 4. 11, 12.
And a learned man observes, that the word has made in the Text, (...) in the
Hebrew signifies not simply to make, but to sanctify and to observe holy, as
is most usual, when it is referred to feasts or days, as Deuteronomy. 5. 15, 16. Deuteronomy.
10. 13. The man then, who was after Gods own heart, and who was most likely to
understand Gods own mind, he has foretold this blessed day, when by a
prophetic spirit foreseeing the glory of the Resurrection-day, as a most
eminent day among the seven days, as the Sun among the seven Planets, salutes
it with a magnificent style and Title, This is the day which the Lord has
made. Thus the Psalmist did foresee, that the Lord would magnify and exalt
his resurrection day; and why? Because on this day the glorious work of man's
redemption was to be accomplished: The stone which the builders refused became
the head stone of the Corner, Psalm. 118. 22. Dominicum ergo diem Apostoli, and
Apostolici viri ideo religiosa solennitate sanxerunt, quia in eadem Redemptor
noster a mortuis resurrexit. Aug.
And thus is the resurrection day prophetically crowned with honor above all
other days, the Holy Ghost putting an emphasis upon it. It is a day which the
Lord has made; how made? not by way of creation, for so it was made before,
Genesis 1. 1. but by way of institution; The day which the Lord has made; what
has God made it, a working day? so it was before: If therefore he has made it
any thing, it must be a holy solemn day; a day more solemn, more sacred, then
all the days that God ever made before. So then it is evident, a day of solemn
worship is here intended, and Christ's Resurrection day most clearly pointed at
as a day which the Lord would institute, as a day which the Church should
celebrate: we see then a clear Scripture proof for the Divine Authority of the
Lords day; nay, in this text, Psalm. 118. 24. The Psalmist proceeds to the
prophetical delineation In diem solis laetitiae indulgemus. Tert.
of the duties of this day, Let us be glad and rejoice therein, as when the
Temple was finished, the head stone was brought forth with shouting, Zach. 4.
7. crying, Grace, grace; so when the work of our Redemption shall be finished,
Dies ille quem fecit dominus est dies dominicus. Arnob.
and Christ exalted as head and corner stone of his Church by his triumphant
Resurrection; the Psalmist intimates the solemn gratulation and public praise,
that the Church should offer on that day, so Psalm. 118. 23. And indeed praise
and thanksgiving is the most proper music of our Haec dies, quam fecit
dominus; Haec sunt verba populitrium phantis regno Davidis; sed multo magis in
gloriosa resurrectione Christi, omnium rerum, and dierum gloriosissimo.
Heresbach.
Christian Sabbath. The learned Twisse observes, That if ever any day deserved
to be a festival, surely it was the day of our Saviors Resurrection; and in
that day to rejoice in the Lord, according to Psalm. 118. 24. And the ancient
Fathers, says he, accommodate this place thereunto; the two preceding verses
carrying in their very forehead a manifest relation unto Christ, as the
proprietary of that renowned prophecy; for when was the stone which the
builders refused made the head of the corner, but when Christ gloriously rose
from the dead? thereby mightily declaring himself to be the Son of God: And was
there ever any work more mavelous in the eyes of Gods Servants then the
Resurrection of Christ? This scattered all the unbelief of the Disciples, Luke
24. 21. This removed all the fears of the good Women, all the sorrows of the
Apostles; this gratified the hopes of all succeeding Christians. Hierome avers,
that all the Jews interpret this Hieronymus.
text, Psalm. 118. 24. to be a prophecy concerning the Messiah, the Psalmist,
say they, Showing his ignominious death, when he should be a stone rejected of
the builders, and his glorious Resurrection, when he should become the chief
stone of the corner.

wa^ ^^stituted upon the account of Christ's most glorious Resurrection. What a
mark of honor, nay what a crown of glory is it to this day, that it had favor
Dies dominicus Christi resurrectione declaratus est, and ex illo cae^it habere
festivitatem suam. Aug.
above all the days of the week to be Christ's Resurrection day? The Sun in the
firmament arises and shines upon other days as well as this; but the Sun of
Righteousness never arose upon any day but this: And indeed the institution of
the Lords day had its foundation here. The maxim of Divines here fully takes
place, It is the work makes the day, some special work, always makes some
special day, the Lords Factum domini fecit diem dominicum.
deed made the Lords day; and we cannot better keep alive the memory of this
glorious mercy, viz. The blessed Resurrection of Christ, then by keeping a day
weekly in the solemn commemoration of it. This day brought the greatest good
John 10. 25.
to fallen man, even a complete Redeemer, who on this day John 14. 19.
redeemed us with triumph from the tyranny of Satan, the domination of death
and hell, and restored us to life and salvation, Nos observamus diem solis, ex
usu Apostolorum, and propter memoriam resurrectionis domini, qui est verus Sol
justitiae, et pleno immortalitatis jubare illo die est exertus. Alsted.
yea assured it unto every believer. And because nothing can ever fall out in
this world comparable to Christ's Resurrection in glory and power, therefore no
day can be set up like unto this day, neither can it be ever changed for any
other; therefore men only kick against the pricks while they oppose the Lords
day. It is a good saying of Augustine, The Lords rising has promised to us an
eternal day, and consecrated to us the Lords day, or the Dominical day of the
Lord; that which is the Lords day, seems properly to belong to the Lord,
because on that day the Lord rose again. And it is a most significant and
elegant observation of the great Athanasius: Two worlds there are, says he,
The first ended at Christ's Passion, the second begins at Christ's Resurrection,
and that blessed day is the feast of them, who are in Christ a new Creature.
And it is observable, it is not said by the Ancients, that the Church took
occasion from the resurrection to consecrate the Lords day; but that the
Resurrection it self did consecrate it, the resurrection was a real
consecration. And if, as Bishop Andrews speaks, That the Acts of the Apostles,
as well as their sayings and writings were of Divine Authority, being inspired
by the Divine Spirit, how much more shall the Act of of their Lord and Masters
Resurrection be a divine and sufficient Authority to institute the Lords day?
The Reverend and Learned Hall speaks well to this purpose; Because the Sun
Bishop Hall Decad. 6. Epist. 1.
of Righteousness arose upon this day, and gave a new life to the world on it,
and drew the strength of Gods Moral Precept, (viz.) the fourth Commandment unto
it; therefore justly do (...) Andr. Caesar.
we sing with the Psalmist, This is the day which the Lord has made. But why
should we mention the Authorities and Testimonies of these latter days?
Ignatius, who was as a morning star in the Primitive Church, speaks fully and
home to this purpose; Setting aside, says he, the Jewish Sabbath, Let every
one that loves Christ keep holy the Lords day, etc. To the same purpose Justin
Martyr, Athanasius, Augustine, Innat. Justin. Mart. Athanas. August, etc.
etc. who bottom the Lords blessed day on the Lords blessed resurrection, that
glorious work which must be outvied, before any shadow of reason can be
assigned, for the transmutation of it into any other day. Besides the Sun which
rose this day will never admit a setting. The Christians in the Deb^mus plus
gaudere propter resurrectionem gloriosam, quam dolere, propter passi^nem
Christ. ignominiosam. Lern.
Primitive Church, were wont when they saw one another, to give this joyful
salute, The Lord is risen; and the others ordinary answer was, True, the Lord
is risen indeed. We should not so much m^urn, says Bernard, at Christ's
ignominious passion, as we should rejoice at his glorious resurrection. The day
therefore of Christ's rising, may well give being to our Christian Sabbath.

was honored with Christ's frequent apparitions; Christ's appearing on this day
was most signal and remarkable; he showed himself five times on that very day
on which he arose. First, to Mary Magdalen in the morning, Mark 16. 9. Secondly
to the Women, Mat. 28. 9, 10. Thirdly, to the two Disciples, Luke 24. 18.
Fourthly, to Christus notat non tantum modum, sed tempus ipsum apparitionis
suae Discipulo, et Apostolo Thomae, diem ergo octavam, hebdomadae primum
dominicum diem esse necesse est.
Peter, Luke 24. 33. Fifthly, to the Eleven, Mark 16. 14. excepting Thomas,
John 20. 24. When the Disciples were assembled, Christ came in, and he stood in
the midst among them, as the tree of life was in the midst of Paradise; and
unto his Disciples, he spoke Peace, and gave Power. And then the Disciples
rejoiced when they saw the Lord; never did their spirits so spring within them,
never did such a day of comfort dawn upon them: And this was part of those
triumphal hallelujahs which celebrated Christ's glorious Resurrection. And it is
observable, he appeared not to all sorts of persons, but to some chosen
witnesses, who were either eminently devoted to his service, or designed to
teach, and inform others. Nor did Christ make his appearance every day, but
principally and most usually upon that day which was more immediately designed
for his solemn worship and service, being consecrated by his stupendous and
blessed resurrection; So that Christ more especially vouchsafed his visits to
holy men, for holy purposes, and to determine and define which should be his
holy day, our weekly Sabbath. However it may be supposed, that our Savior did
appear on other days, as once he did upon a week day, yet no other day has
the honor to be denominated the day of his appearing, but the first day of the
week only, John 20. 19. And therefore it is most observable, it is never said,
Christ appeared on the second, or on the third day, much less on the (...).
John 20. 19.
last day of the week, the day of the old Sabbath, but the first day is
expressly and emphatically noted by name in the forecited Text, John 20. 19. Nor
must we over-pass one remarkable more, (viz.) That Christ often appeared on his
own resurrection day, and says the text, John 20. 26. After eight days; again
his Disciples were within, and Thomas with them; then came Jesus, the doors
being shut, and stood in the midst of them, and said, Peace be unto you. And
this was the next first day of the week; and here Christ puts an Higgaion
(...). Nazianz.
Selah upon it, and it is necessary this should be the Lords day, say some of
the Ancients. And Nazianzen upon this makes an Oration on purpose, and styles
it (...). (...), The new Lords day: because it was the first Lords day Cur vero
illo ipso die Resurrectionis Christus voluit discipulis apparere* tribuendum
est hoc fervori charitatis, ut Christus discipulos ab infidelitate liberaret
praedictionis suae certitudinem, et resurrectionis suae veritatem assereret.
Ger.
solemnized in the weekly revolution, after the Resurrection day. And now may
not this plea in consociation with other arguments, sufficiently evince any
Christian of the divine right of the Lords day? We see Christ Jesus our Lord
was often seen upon it, between his Resurrection and Ascension day; seen in the
Assembly of his Saints, seen in his royal robes, seen in his state of
immortality; and not only seen but heard preaching peace to poor sinners,
opening Scriptures, clearing, quickening, warming cold and dead hearts, filling
disconsolate spirits with unusual joy, John 20. 20. When the eleven Disciples
see him, then their hearts rejoice, Joh. 20. 20. when the two Disciples hear
and see him, then their hearts burn, Luke 24. 33. And all this on the first day
of the week. Nay, Junius is very confident, that the Lord John 20. 20. Luke 24.
33.
appeared the first day of every week between his resurrection and his
ascension. Dr. Lightfoot, and Mr. Fenner tell us, that Christ's appearing on a
Mountane in Galilee, mentioned Mat. 28. 16, 17, 18, etc. was likewise on the
first day of the week.

The apparitions of Christ on the first day of the week, our Christian Sabbath,
are still more considerable, if we take notice what Christ did in those
appearances; we may observe his gracious speeches, his remarkable actions and
transactions, tending chiefly to prove his resurrection, the ground of our
hope, and the hinge of our Sabbath, upon which it turns; and to this purpose we
may observe, how sweetly our gracious Redeemer condescended to his poor
doubting, and perplexed. Disciples, manifesting himself to all their senses:

1. To their hearing, by his heavenly voice.

2. To their seeing, by his visible presence.

3. To their feeling, by offering his sacred body to be touched and handled by
them, he was unwilling to leave the tincture of any doubt upon them; and
therefore he gratified not only their graces, but their senses. Nay,

4. He manifested himself to their tasting in feeding, and making a meal with
them, John 21. 12, 13. Nor

5. Was their smelling forgotten in conversing with him, who was the Rose of
Sharon, Cant. 2. 1. Nor did Christ only Luke 24. 46.
gratify the senses, but the graces of his Disciples.

1. By giving them heavenly instructions, and so increasing John 20. 19.
their knowledge. Christ opens the Scriptures, and preaches peace to his
Disciples; and having slain enmity on the cross, he now comes and preaches
peace on this first day, and brings an Olive branch to the world, and to his
Disciples in the first place.

2. Christ by convincing demonstrations of his own resurrection abundantly
confirms the faith of the Disciples, that now the Sun appearing, all the shades
of doubt and unbelief might fly away. Thomas his hand of faith could tremble no
more, after he had put his hand of flesh into the side of his Redeemer.

3. Nor did Christ forget to fill up the joy of his Disciples, when unexpected
he mingles with them in their assembly, John 20. 19. and more then a cou^ting
Angel, salutes the trembling fraternity. And these among others were the great
transactions which Christ honored this day with, instructing, inspiring,
blessing, and inaugurating his holy Apostles, and performing all these unwonted
and solemn actions on this blessed day, speaks fully Christ's election of it for
solemn and religious worship, for sacred assemblies, and Sabbath exercises for
his Church in all ages to the end of the world.

yet more illustrious by the extraordinary d^scent of the Holy Ghost upon this
day, Acts 2. 1, 2, 3. Christ Mat. 3. 16. Spiritus sanctus dat homini triplex
bonum. 1. Pignus est salutis testimonium, scil quod filii dei sumus. 2. Robur
est vitae, ut in laboribus, vigiliis, et in omnibus observantiis delectabiliter
incedamus.
now ascending up to his Father, sends down his own blessed spirit in an
extraordinary and amazing manner; the spirit comes not now in the shape of a
D^ve, but in cl^ven tongues, as opposite to Satan's cloven foot; so likewise to
inspire the Apostles with an unusual elegance ^f speech, to captivate their
auditors to the obedience of the Gospel, and to prognosticate these rare
gifts, which being heated with the fire of divine zeal, should fecundate and
sublimate the succeeding Church; but when was this unusual illapse and descent
of the holy spirit? Why it was on the first day of the week, to put a fairer
print upon the seal of our Christian Sabbath. A blessed bargain was here made
between Heaven and Earth. 3. Scientiae lumen est, et author spiritualis
intelligentiae. Bern.
To triumphing Saints was given the corporal presence of Christ, to militant
Saints was sent the visible efflux of the spirit: surely that cannot hut be a
holy day, wherein the holy Ghost came down. And this is another indelible mark
of honor, which Christ has fixed on the first day of the week, Concludimus
ergo diem hunc primum septimanae ab Apostolis Sabbatho fuisse institutum; et
ecclesiae commendatum, non tantum potestate ordinaria, qualem omnes pastores
habent sed potestate singulari, tanquam ab iis qui in universam Christi
ecclesiam irspectionem habuerunt, et quibus tanquam extraordinar^is ministris
Christi concreditum est, ut fideles essent. Wall.
our Christian Sabbath; this was his royal gift when he came to heaven, such a
princely largess, such a glorious donation as was never given before, but when
God gave his own Son. God so loved the world, that he gave his Son, John 3. 16.
And Christ so loved the world, that he gave his Spirit: And as Christ was given
according to the fullness of the Promise, so was the holy Ghost given; And
Christ's resurrection, and the spirits descention, were both upon the first day
of the week: On this day then, the Church was visited from on high, the promise
of the Father was sent, Acts 1. 4. The blessed spirit came, the Disciples were
assembled, thousands were converted, as a hansel of the spirits power, and a
fruit of the spirits descent; and why was the Church assembled on that day? why
the holy Ghost descended? why preaching? why conversion, and administration of
Sacraments? why the promise of Christ accomplished, and all on this very day?
But still to declare the will and ordinance of Christ blessing and sanctifying
this day to the Church, and so marking it out for solemn and weekly worship, as
a day, in all its prerogatives, superlative to all other days; the day of our
Saviors resurrection, by which we are justified; the day of the holy Ghosts
descention, by which we are sanctified. The learned Twisse observes, That Dies
dominicus est Traditio vere Divina, et ab Apostolis spiritu dictante instituta.
Beza.
as at the first, the holy Ghost descended on the Apostles upon our Sabbath
day, so stili the same spirit descends ordinarily on the same day upon his
faithful Ministers in the dispensation of the Word, and administration of the
Sacraments, and in the putting up of prayers to the most high, for the
sanctifying and edifying the body of Christ, even the Church of God: The day of
Christ's Ascension, he departed from the Apostles, as touching his presence
corporal; but on the day of Pentecost Christ came down upon them as touching
his presence spiritual, and so be does still in our Sabbath exercises, though
not in an extraordinary manner, yet no less effectually to the edification and
sanctification of our souls. And here I cannot omit a rare speech of the
incomparable Bishop of Armagh; At the time of the Passe^^e^, says he, Christ
our Passover was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. and lay in his grave the
whole Sabbath following; so on the morrow after the Sabbath (when the sheaf of
the Bishop Usher in his Learned Letter to Dr. Twisse p. 91, 92.
first fruits was offered to God) Christ arose from the dead, and became the
first fruits of them wh^ slept; many dead bodies of the Saints who s^ept,
arising likewise after him; from whence was the count taken of the seven
Sabbaths, or fifty days; and u^^n the m^rr^w after the seventh Sabbath, which
was our L^rds d^y, was that fam^us feast of weeks, the day of Pentecost, Numb.
28. 2.
spoken ^f Acts 2. 1. Upon which day the Apostles having Exodus 34. 22.
themselves re^eived the first fruits of the spirit, beg^t three Jam. 1. 18.
thousand s^uls by the word of Truth; and presented them as Rev. 4. 14.
the first fruits of the Christian Church to God, and unto the 1 Cor. 15. 20.
Lamb: And from that time forward, does Waldensis note, Mat. 27. 52, 53.
That the Lords day was observed in the Christian Church, and was su^stituted
in the place of the Jews Sabbath. Thus far Sicut pascha typus e^^t Christi, sic
pan^s ^^^mi sunt typus Christianorum, eorum scil. innocentiae, and p^r^tatis.
Alap.
the famous Usher. And to wind up this particular, the Holy Ghost being sent
down among the Disciples in an eminent manner, was the special benediction of
this day to such solemn ass^mblies; to teach them, and the succeeding Church,
when, and on what day they should more especially expect the sweet illapses and
effectual descents of Gods holy and most blessed spirit.

The Lords day was kept and sanctified by the practice of the h^ly Apostles:
Now the blessed Apostles were men intimately Praecipua regiminis ecclesiastici
cura Apostolis deputata est, quorum unus quisque (...). Deinde speciali
authoritate ad ecclesiam (cujus f^ndamenta jacere Apostolicae dignitatis est)
ex pr^misc^a omni^ g^nti^m multitudi^^ (...) Christus e^s misit (...) sp s
gratia ab^nd^nte ad ministerium sibi a domino commendatum erant instructissimi
ut (...) veritatem Evangelii praedicarent.
acquainted with the secrets of Christ (being most of them trained up in his
School) and personally conversant with him after his Resurrection; besides,
they had immediate inspiration from him, and auth^ritative mission to manage
the public affairs of the Church: Our Savior gave them their credentials to
preach in his name, and to act as his substitutes, as if he himself had been
personally present, John 20. 21. Luke 10. 16. Mat. 28. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 19,
20. Neither does this extend only to verbal preaching, but to visible preaching
also, I mean, their practice, at least in things Evangelical, Moral, and of
general and perpetual concernm^nt to the Churches of Christ, otherwise why is
their practice propounded as a pattern? Phil. 3. 17. Phil. 4. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 2.
1 These. 2. 14. Now these blessed Apostles met for solemn worship on this day,
our Christian Sabbath, so Acts 20. 7. And upon the first day of the week, when
as the Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready
to depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight. Now the full
discussion and ventilation of this solemn text will give much strength to this
great truth, viz. That the Lords day is of Divine Authority: In this text then
note:

When this solemn assembly met together, on the first day of the week, says
the text, the day which all the Evangelists witness to be Christ's Resurrection
day; on this day the Disciples were congregated. But why the first day of the
week? why not the last day of the week, which was the old Sabbath? strange! if
that had continued a Sabbath, that the Primitive Christians had not m^t on that
day, especially seeing Vn^ Sabbati (i e.) die domini^o, and dies domini^a est
re^ord^tio domi^icae resurrectionis. Vener. Beda in Act. 20. Tom. 5.
it was but the day before; yet more strange, that we hear not a word of Pau^s
keeping it, though he tarri^d at Troas seven days; but most strange, that w^
read not one word in all the New Testament, of Paul's owning that day in a
Christian Church, only he solemnly preaches to a Christian Congregation on the
first day of the week, Surely this is a pregnant argument, that the day was
changed upon the account of our Saviors Resurrection.

the first day of the week; but how? Privately it may be, no, Publicly and
openly; nay, most probably the comp^ny was very (...), and Isa. 60. 8.
the Congregation flocked as D^ves to the wind^ws.

full assembly m^t upon the first ^ay of the week; but for what? To ^reak
^read, says the t^xt, to receive Mat. 26 26. Acts 2. 46. 1 Cor. 11. 24. Dies
dominicus ab ipsis Apostolis sacris actionibus est consecratus. Bucer.
the Eucharist, says the Syriack translation; and what more seemly and
suitable, then to receive the Lords Supper upon the Lords day? And can this be
done without preparatory prayer, and other Sabbath exercises? Surely this would
have been a mutilated and a faint devotion; nay, and breaking of bread is here
put by a Synechdoche, the part for the whole, and there no more reason to
exclude prayer, Consentaneum est Aposlolos hanc ipsam ob causam mutos se diem.
Melanct.
singing of Psalms, etc. because they are not mentioned, then to exclude
drinking of wine in the Sacrament, because neither is that expressed, but
breaking of bread only: So then, the first day of the week is here celebrated
with a confluence of Gospel Ordinances.

Paul called the Disciples together, because he was to depart the next day, or
that they purposedly Hoc institutum, ut dies dominicus in locum Sabbati sub
stitueretur, non ab hominibus, sed ab Apostolis sp. s. dictante, quo regebantur
nos accepisse credendum est. Merito dixerimus Apostolos sp. s. duce pro septimo
illo die primum substituisse. Faius.
declined the Lords Supper till that day, because of Paul's departure: But the
Text speaks it as of a time, a day usually observed by them before; and
therefore Paul took his opportunity of preaching to them, and seems to stay on
purpose, and wait seven days among them, Acts 20. 6. And at Troas, where these
Ordinances were observed, and this day solemnly kept, was the Rendezvous of
Christians to meet in the greater company, Acts 20. 5. And though Paul might
privately teach and instruct the Professors of Troas the other seven days, yet
his preaching is now mentioned in regard of some special solemnity in their
meeting on this day.

first day was honored above any other day for these holy duties, or else why
did not they meet on the seventh day Sabbath? and how comes that solemnity to
be swallowed up in the solemn convention of the first day, when these holy
exercises are performed? To speak then plainly with Bishop Andrews, It was,
says he, the Lords day on which the Apostles and Disciples met; the Gospels
all four keep one word, and tell us, Christ rose (...), that is, after the
Hebrew phrase, the first day of the week; and the Apostles then held their
Synaxes, their solemn conventions Mat. 28. 1.
and assemblies, to preach, to pray, to break bread, or Mark 16. 2
celebrate the Lords Supper, Acts 20. 7. (...), Luke 24. 1.
the Lords Supper, on the Lords day, and this John 20. 1.
is the Apostolical phrase: So far this learned man. So then, (...). Bishop of
Ely.
as another Bishop speaks, Our weekly observation of the Lords day is warranted
by the example of the holy Apostles. One sharply concludes, and says, How can
he have any grace in Petrus Al phons. in Dialog. contra. Jud. Tit. 12.
his heart, who seeing so clearly the Lords day to have been instituted and
ordained by the Apostles, will not acknowledge the keeping holy the Lords day
to be a Commandment of the Lord. The very Jews, says this learned man, confess
this change of Chrysostomus, Ambrosius, Theophylactus, Beda, Anselmus.
the Sabbath to have been made by the Apostles; and therefore we may safely
conclude with Gallasius, Walaeus, Melancthon, Beza, Bucer, Faius, Junius,
Piscator, Perkins, and other eminent Divines of the Reformed Religion, that the
Holy Sedulius et Primosius unam Sabbati Act. 20 7. and 1 Cor. 16. 2. expressam,
interpretantur diem dominicum.
Apostles, by the guidance of the infallible spirit, removed and suppressed the
old legal Sabbath, and substituted the Lords day, the first day of the week, in
its room and place.

Let us assume a second text, which will further strengthen this truth, viz. 1
Cor. 16. 2. Upon the first day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in
store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. This
solemn and noted place has many considerables in it, to prove the first day of
the week to be the Christian Sabbath, and that not so much by the Churches
practice (that was cleared before) as by the Apostles precept, in which many
things remarkable offer themselves to our consideration.

any day for the poor Saints; yet why does the Apostle limit here to this day
the performance of this duty? Surely something there is in it more then
ordinary.

only the Corinthians to this 2 Cor. 11 28. Diei dominicae nomen et
institationem ab Ap^stolis derivatam, non est dubitandum. Estius.
day, but also all the Churches of Galatia, 1 Cor. 16. 1. and consequently all
other Churches, if that be true 2 Cor. 8. 13, 14. where the Apostle professes,
he presses not one Church that he might ease another, but that there might be
an equality; and then why must all the Churches make their collections on the
same day?

limit them with wishes, and counsels only to do it, but (...), as I have
ordained, or instituted, In hoc Apostoli mandato, nihil ecclesiae Corinthi^cae
mandetur, quod a tota Christi. ecclesia non requiritur.
and therefore binds their Consciences to it: And if Paul ordained it,
certainly he had it from Jesus Christ, who first commanded him so to appoint
it; for he solemnly professes, That what he received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.
23. that only he commanded them to do.

this day had not been more holy, and more sit for this work of love, than any
other day, the Apostle would not have limited them to this day; nor would he
have honored this day above the Jewish Sabbath: for the Apostle was always
very tender of Christian liberty, and would never bind, where the Lord has
left his people free; for in so doing, he should rather make Snares than Laws,
and go expressly against his own doctrine, and that in this very point of the 1
Cor 7. 28. and 35. Gal. 5 1.
observation of days, Gal. 4. 10. He may give his advice indeed in things
proposed, 1 Cor. 7. 25. but he always distinguishes between his own counsel,
and Gods command, and makes the Command necessary, but the other only
expedient.

immediately appoint and institute a Sabbath, but supposes it to be so
already; and we know duties of Mercy and Charity, as well as of necessity
Primr. part. 3. cap. 6.
and piety, are Sabbath duties; for which end, this day was most fit for these
collections, because they usually Quando quidem ^postolus collectas die
dominico faciendas statuit, dubium non est, quin praecipiat ut diem ipsum
celebrent, quando finem requirit, quid non and media ad finem du^entia
praescribat.
met togethet publicly on this day, and so then collections might be in a
greater readiness: and partly also that they might give more liberal^y, it
being supposed, that upon this day, their hearts were more weaned from the
World, and more warmed by the Word, and more elevated by other Ordinances to a
vigorous faith, and a lively hope of better things to come; and so having
received spiritual things from the Lord more plentifully on this day, every man
would be the more free to impart his temporal good things for refreshing the
poor Saints.

limit the Church of Corinth to this day, either for extraordinary or private
collections, and such special acts of mercy, unless the Lord had hon^ured this
day for acts of mercy, and much more of piety, above any Et si primaria Pauli
intentio scil. collectam praecipere, tamen quia vult illam fieri d^e d^min^co*
dubi^^m no^ est, q^^n ^raecip^^t etiam ut Dominicum diem celebrent; qui enim
vult finem, v^lt media.
ordinary or common day? What then should this day be but the Christian
Sabbath, imposed by the Apostles, and magnified and honored in all the
Churches in those days. It is rightly observed by Bishop White, Although this
Text of St. Paul, says he, makes no express mention of Church Assemblies on
this day; yet because it was the custom of Christians, and so likewise it is a
thing convenient, to give Alms on the days of Christian Assemblies; it cannot
well be gainsaid, but that if in Corinth and Galatia, the first day of every
week was appointed to be the day for Alms and charitable contributions, the
same also was the Christians weekly holy day for their religious Assemblies.
Thus this learned man rightly and genuinely Vedel. Exercit. in Ignat. ad
Magnes. cap. 7.
draws the inference; I^ the first day of the week was the day for Alms, it was
likewise the day for Worship. Chrysostom upon the evidence of this Text,
concludes positively, That in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, the Lords
day was made a weekly holy day by the Apostles, for they governed these
Churches at that time. Philo Judaeus and Philo Judaeus.
Josephus relate, That it was the custom of the Jews who were scattered in
other Countries, to make Collections every Josephus.
Sabbath Day, which were sent by the hands of eminent persons to Jerusalem
every year, and for the use of the Temple and the Levits; and this custom the
Apostle seems to follow in the Text, now under discussion, in enjoining
Collections every first day of the week, our Christian Sabbath, to be sent for
the relief of the poor Saints at Jerusalem, who were oppressed by a multitude
of strangers, and subjected to persecutions and wants for their zeal and holy
fervor to the blessed Gospel.

Apostle enjoins Collections on the Lords day, Chrysostom gives us a good
answer, he says, That was a Sacrament-day, and d^u^tless that was a powerful
Argument to prompt them to liberality; it was strange ingratitude to spare a
little from the poor, when it is considered God spared not the blood of his own
Son, which Chrysostom.
is lively represented in the sacramental feast. Beza observes, Acts 20. 7.
That Justin Martyr after he had described the order and manner of the
primitive times in sacramental Administrations on the Lords day, he adds, That
their Collections were made according to every ones free will, and those Acts
1. 2. 4.
Collections were distributed by the chief Minister, to Orphans, Widows, sick
persons, and those who were in want, for their relief and seasonable support.
So that this sacred custom and holy day were propagated by the Apostle to the
succeding ages of the Church. And indeed what better H^ctenus ex hisce tribus
locis scripturae, conjunctim consideratis, and ex communi sententia, quam tota
fore reformata exlesia ex iis constanter colligit, d^ei dominicae usum ad
Apostolos esse referendum. Wall.
exposition of an Apostolical Precept and practice can we meet withal, than the
universal practice and observance of the Church of Christ? We must then shut
up this particular, with what Walaeus takes notice of; For these two Texts,
Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. says he, joined with Revel. 1. 10. have caused
almost all the reformed Churches to conclude, that undoubtedly the observation
of the Lords day must necessarily be referred to the Apostles, as the Original
Founders of it: And let this be added, That the Apostles transmitted the Lords
day to the Church, most probably by the immediate command of Christ, most
certainly by the infallible guidance of the Holy Ghost, that unerring conduct
of them in the affairs of the Church.

The Lords day is more illustrious from its eminent Title, Revel. 1. 10. where
it is styled, the Lords day. If ye ask why? Augustine will tell you, because
the Lord has made it. This Ignat. Epist ad Magnes. Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. lib.
3. cap. 21. Dionys. Corinth. Histor. lib 4 cap 22. Cyprian. Epist 59.
Caeperatinterea post tristia Sabbata foelix dies qui nominis alti culmen a
domino dominante trahit, etc. Sedul.
name and title was so sweet to the Primitive Church, that most of the Fathers
call our Sabbath by this name, and embrace its honor with an holy and
triumphant ambition; they took an advantage from the very Title, to use this
blessed day with greater veneration, Titles among men commanding respect and
submission. Our Sabbath is called the Lords day, says a learned man,

1. Because the Lord did constitute the solemnization of it; (as the Lords
Prayer is so called, because Christ did dictate it.)

2. Or because on this day the Lord is more solemnly worshipped.

3. Or because Christ our Lord on this day rose from the dead, opening a door
for us to an everlasting Sabbath and Rest.

Surely it is some additional honor to this illustrious Day, that, as it was
the first day of time, mentioned in the first Genesis 1. 1.
Book of the Bible, so it is the last day of fame, noted in the beginning of
this last Book of the Bible, to the praise of Revel. 1. 10.
him, who is our Alpha and Omega, Revel. 1. 11. The very Omnes fere sacrae
^cripturae interpretes, tam veteres, quam recentiores, de primo die hebdomadis,
Revel. 1. 10. intelligunt. Wall.
Name speaks Christ the Author of this day; and his resurrection (whereby he
was declared both Lord and Christ) must needs be the occasion of it. Ignatius
who lived in the times of John the beloved Apostle, makes the Lords day the
Christians weekly Festival, which they then observed in the room of the Jews
Sabbath; So does Tertullian, Athanasius, Hierom, Augustine, etc. and indeed who
not? By this title of the Lords day we may trace it down from the Apostles
times, through the Ocean of the Fathers, Councels, Schoolmen, Arguimus
appellatione ejus, Revel. 1. 10. (...), etc. Sic appellari non potuit ille
dies, nisi eum dominus instituisset; ut in caera et Oratione dominica factum
est. Eatonus p. 73.
to this present age in which we live. And to cast our eye on Scripture; there
seems to be much in that which Beza observes, out of an ancient Greek
Manuscript, wherein the first day of the week is called the Lords day: And the
Syriack Translation tells us, That the Christians meeting together to receive
the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 20. was upon the Lords day. Bucan says, The
Sacrament is called the Lords Supper, as in respect of the institution, and the
end of it, so also in respect of the day on which it was wont to be
administered, (viz.) the Lords day: And we may fairly expound the Lords day,
Rev. 1. 10. by the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 20. Here we may take notice, that
the spirit of God, who had his choice of words, and never spoke any thing but
with admirable reason, never vouchsafed this title of honor in the Caena
domini dicitur ab anthore, vel etiam a fine, nam a domino instituta est, et in
ejus memoriam celebratur; vel etiam a tempore, quia diebus dominicis celebrari
consuevisset. Bucan.
New Testament, but only to the Supper and the Day, the Lords Supper, and the
Lords day: Now therefore the phrase being the same, and thus singular, the
sense must needs be the same: Look therefore in what notion the Supper is the
Lords Supper, and in the same sense is the day styled the Lords day. The Supper
is the Lords, because the Lord Christ did institute and ordain it, yea, and
substitute it in the room of the Passover; And why not the day his because he
instituted it, and substituted it in the room of the Old Sabbath? It is
evidently a day of Christ's institution, a day of the Lords making, and with
reference to Christ's resurrection; and let any other day be set up in
competition with it, and it will evidently and easily be nonsuited. One well
observes, That from these Texts, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. See Mr. Perkins in
his cases of Conscience.
Rev. 1. 10. may well be gathered the laudable and Evangelical practice of the
Apostles, and the excellent confirmation, countenance and authority that God
gave thereunto in this point of sanctifying the Lords day: So that God did bear
witness thereunto by signs and wonders: On this day Eutychus was raised from
the dead, Acts 20. 10, 11. On this day three thousand are raised from the
grave, or rather from the hell of sin, Acts 2. 37. And on this day John the
Apostle is in his raptures and ecstasies, Rev. 1. 10. And besides the more
remarkable Acts 1. 2, 4.
benefits and fruits of this day, upon which the Holy Ghost has put a Selah,
still the Lords day is a wonder-working day; What sense have many of the Saints
on this day of peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, and great increase
of grace, holy knowledge, and the fear of the Lord? And indeed the advantages
and precious fruits of this day, are manifest to common and constant
experience. Dies dominica dicitur, eadem ratione, qua sacra Eucharistiae caena
vocatur caena domini, 1 Cor. 11. 12. quia scil. a domino nostro Jesu Christo
fuit instituta, et ad eundem etiam dominum in fine et usu refe^ri debet. Ames.
Learned Rivet tells us, that all Interpreters do expound Revel. 1. 10. of our
Lords day, (viz.) the first day of the week, excepting one single Gomarus; as
when ever was truth published which was not snarled at by some humorous and
impatient adversary? And one thing more is very observable in Rev. 1. 10. It is
called, (...), not (...), the Lords day, not the day of the Lord, for so is
every day, he being the Lord and Master of time; but it is called the Lords
day, by way of singularity and conspicuous eminency.

But to draw toward a conclusion in the discussion of this particular, of much
moment indeed, and therefore of more curious disquisition: We may take notice,
that the Riv. Dissert. de Orig. Sab. cap. 10.
Lords day is not only the most proper name of our Sabbath, and most in use in
the days of the Apostles; but it is most expressive, being both an Historian
and a Preacher; For the Huc facit quod
Lords day looking backward minds us what the Lord has Johan. Apost. in die
dominico correptus fuit, ita ut spiritu viderit, and audiverit Apocalypsi^ de
statu ecclesiae deinceps futuro, unde colligitur eum tum sanctis
meditationibus, quae diem dominicum decebant va^asse. Piscat.
done for us, as on that day, (viz.) He arose from the dead; And looking
forward, it admonishes us, what we ought to do for him on the same day, (viz.)
spend it to the honor of the Lord in the proper and sacred duties of it.

In a word, In the Lords day three things are considerable:

1. A day founded on the light of Nature. Mere Pagans destinate whole days to
their idolatrous service.

2. One day in seven, grounded on the moral equity of the fourth Commandment,
which is perpetual and inalterable.

3. Our seventh day, being indeed the eighth from the Creation, but one of the
seven in the week; and this is built on Divine Right, having analogy in the
Old, and insinuations G^oria aeterni regis gloriosa sua resurrectione emicans;
primatum cum religime diei dominicae concessum voluit sanctos retinere Sedul.
demonstrative in the New Testament, with the universal practice of the Church
in all ages.

Thus we have traced the Divine Right of the Lords day, which appears clear and
orient to every unprejudiced eye. We will now pursue it to all ages, and here
will come in a full concourse of witnesses to attest the Honor and Authority
of it.

by all laws; not only by divine law, (as has already been largely proved) but
by Die dominico nihil agendum, n^si deo vacandum, nulla opera^io in ea die
agatur nisi tantum hymnis, et Psalmis, et ca^^ticis spiritualibus, dies illa
transigatur. Linw.
Canon law. Linwood the Canonist tells us, That we are to do nothing on the
Lords day, but to be at leisure for God: No work must be done on that day, but
singing of Psalms, chaunting of Hymns, and warbling forth spiritual Songs to
the praise and glory of our dear and blessed Redeemer. Spiritual work best
becomes this sacred day. Nay, the Canon law takes so much notice of our blessed
Sabbath, that many learned men have fastened it, upon the Authority of the Canon
law. So Cajetan, Thomas Aquinas, Turrecremata, Scotus, Tabiensis, Navarrus, and
many others. Panormitan says, That all the Canonists who write of Festivals,
teach that the Lords day is Aquin. 2da 2dae quest. 122 Turrec. cap. 1 de
consecrat. Did. 3. Wall. de sacramental. lib. 16. Scot lib. 2. de instit.
quest. 4. Tabiens. in verbo dominic. number. 2.
carefully to be observed and sanctified, in Cap. pronunciandum de Sab. And if
the Canon law lay claim to the institution of the Lords day, much more to the
confirmation and establishment of it. In the Decretals of the Church then, we
find our Christian Sabbath both owned and honored. And indeed in the whole
body of the canon Law, the law for Sabbath-observation must needs be the head,
and most eminent constitution.

by the Civil law. Constantine the first Christian Emperor, who thought Eusebius.
de vita Constant. lib. 4. cap. 18. Constantinus legem tulit, ut die dominico
omnes ab obeundis negotiis vacarent. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8.
the chiefest, and most proper day for the Devotion of his Subjects, was the
Lords day, thus declared his pleasure, and enacted, That every one who lived in
the Roman Empire should rest on that day weekly, which is instituted to our
Savior, and to lay aside all businesses, and wholly on that day to attend the
Lord. An excellent Pattern here is for Princes; On the Lords day, say the
Imperial Constitutions, The whole minds of Christians and Believers should be
busied in the worship of God. Leo the Emperor follows the steps of his
Predecessor L. Omnes cap. de Feriis.
Constantine, and makes this remarkable sanction; It is our will, says he,
according to the meaning of the Holy Ghost, and of the Apostles by him
directed, that on the sacred day wherein we were restored to our integrity; all
men should rest themselves, and surcease from labor; for if the Jews did so
much reverence their Sabbath, which only was a shadow of ours, are not we which
inhabit light, and the truth of grace, obliged to honor that day, which the
Lord has honored, and therein delivered us from dishonor and death? Are not
we bound to Leo Constit. 54. God. lib. 3. tit. 12. de feriis, et Justinian.
lib. 3. tit. 12.
keep it singularly and inviolably, and sufficiently contented with a liberal
grant of all the rest, and not encroaching on that one, which God has chosen
for his service; nay, were it not a retchless slighting and contemning of all
Religion, to make that day common, and so think we may do thereon, as we did on
others? A most excellent and truly imperial law, fit to be written upon the
Ga^es of every City, upon the doors of every House, upon the thoughts of every
Christian. And this law, the Reverend Hooker takes notice of, with a just
emphasis of Hooker Eccl. Polit. lib. 5. sect. 72. p. 385.
praise and commendation, as being a seasonable corrosive of former remisness
in the Empire; the Lords day before being in an exinanition by neglect and want
of due severity, and by degrees fainting into contempt and disregard. The
Emperor Theodosius, a most worthy Prince, enacted; That Cod. Theod. An. 384.
peoples minds should be wholly bent to the service of God, and that all
Theaters and Cirques should be shut up on the Lords day, and that no lawsuit,
or pecuniary affairs should pollute that day; that no officers of the Exchequer
should be molested by any persons addressing themselves to them, Nullus die
solis spectaculum praebeat, nec divinam venerationem consecta solennitate
confundat. Theodor.
on that holy and venerable day. Such care did this excellent Prince take for
the observation of our blessed Sabbath. And that famous and renowned Charles
the Great, An. Dom. 789. published his Royal Edict, saying, We do Ordain,
according as it is commanded in the law of God, that no man do servile works
upon the Lords day, but that they come to Church to divine worship, and
magnify the Lord their God for those good things, which on that day he Great.
Valent. Cod. Theodos. lib. 15. Tit. 5. Lex. 5.
has done for them. Here we may hear the victorious Emperor, justly called
the Great, not only clearly acknowledging the Divine institution, but likewise
strictly commanding the Divine observation of the Lords day. And the Emperor
Ludovicus Pius, the good Son of a Noble Father, (viz.) Charles the Great,
enacts this Constitution; It Ludov. Pius leg. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 202. and
addit. cap. 9.
is our pleasure, That all the faithful do reverently observe the Lords day, in
which the Lord rose again; for if Pagans for the memory and reverence of their
Gods, do celebrate certain days, and the Jews do devoutly observe their
Sabbath, how much more ought this Day to be honorably observed and celebrated
of Christians: Let not Christians upon this holy day attend upon Fables, etc.
but let Believers do so, that all may know such to be true Christians. Thus
still the same strain of spiritual and holy zeal runs in the Acts and Edicts of
these worthy Potentates. And the prosperous Justinian the great Compiler of the
Civil Laws, and therefore the body of them is called Justinians Code, when he
was Emperor of Constantinople, Justinian. Cod. lib. 15. tit 5.
he enacted this savoury and rare Constitution; On the Lords day, says he,
which of the whole week is the first, let the whole mind of Christians be taken
up and occupied in the service of God, let them know there is a great
difference between times of prayers, and times of pleasures; and therefore
avoiding all Jewish impiety, and devilish Paganism, let them be wholly implied
in the duties of the day. Thus that magnanimous and judicious Emperor. And it
is very observable, Justinian does not only enjoin the observance, but takes
for granted the divine institution of our christian Sabbath; as Charles the
Great before him. And one thing more is most observable, That these Emperors,
who took most care of the Lords Day, and established it by their Authority,
they were most sound in their judgments, most successful in their
achievements, most eminent in their persons, and most famous in their esteem
throughout the world; indeed they were the greatest Ornaments of the Imperial
Throne: as Constantine the Great conquered the Pagan, and Charles the Great
conquered the Martial World; and Religion spoke them both truly the Great. So
Ludovicus Pius was a Pattern of Patience, and Justinian an example of advised
wisdom. But I shall not clog the Reader, lest a Surfeit take away the taste of
those sweets which have been spread before him.

our Christian Sabbath has not only been honored and established by Divine
Canon and Civil Law, but likewise by Common Law; and here I shall confine my
self to our own Nation. King Alured about the year 900, did publicly King
Alured.
prohibit all marketting on the Lords Day, as all other work whatsoever, and
laid severe Penalties on the transgressors of this Proclamation. Canutus went a
little further, King Canutus
and forbad not only Markettings, but Courts or public Meetings, and
executions of Malefactors, as also hunting, and all kind of secular
employments. But to draw nearer to K. Edward the sixth.
our times, King Edward the sixth, our English Josiah, Enacted in Parliament,
For as much as men be not at all times so mindful to laud and praise God, so
ready to resort to hear Gods word; and to come to the holy Communion, as their
bounden duty does require; therefore it has been wholsomly provided, that
there should be certain days appointed, wherein Christians should cease from
all kind of labor, and apply themselves wholly and only unto the aforesaid
holy works, properly pertaining to true Religion: Be it therefore Enacted, etc.
And so the King and his great Council go on to establish Sabbath-observation by
a Law. Queen Elizabeth that Renowned Q. Elizabeth.
Princess, initiates and begins her Reign with a severe Injunction for the
holy observation of the Lords Day. Let us take a taste of her Langague, All the
Queens faithful Subjects shall from henceforth celebrate and keep their holy
day according to Gods holy will and pleasure, that is, in hearing the word read
and taught, in private and public prayers, in acknowledgment of their
offenses, and the amendment of the same, in often receiving the Communion of
the body and blood of Christ, using all soberness and godly conversation. Thus
this happy Princess laid the foundation of her future prosperous Reign in that
which is better then Saphires. The like was decreed in Parliament the same
year, when this worthy Queen made good her Motto, Semper eadem, Always the
same, joining heartily with her great Council in restraining the profanation,
and promoting the sanctification of Gods holy and blessed Day And her Successor
King James over-hears the Echo, and K. James.
takes it at the rebound, and expresses his zeal for the Lords Day in this
Royal Proclamation, Whereas I have been informed, that there has been in
former times a great neglect in keeping the Sabbath Day, therefore for the
better observing of it, and for avoiding all impious profanation of it, I
straightly charge and command, that no Bearbaitings, Interludes, Common Plays,
or other like disordered Exercises or Pastimes be frequented; kept, or used at
any time hereafter on the Sabbath Day. And thus King James begins his Reign,
and lays his first step to the English Throne, not in polished Ma^hle, but in
pious devotion. And King Charles the first, following the steps of his Father,
was pleased in his first Parliament, to Enact a Law K. Charles the first.
promoting Sabbath-observation; the tenor of the Law runs thus, That from
henceforth there should be no Meetings, Assemblies, or concourse of people out
of the Parishes on the Lords Day, for any Sports or Pastimes whatsoever. And in
this Law it is taken care, that the Highways should not be frequented by the
Traveller, nor the Shop visited by the Labourer, but there must be a cessation
of all unnecessaries and seculars, to give way to more sublime, and to use
Chrysostoms phrase, and spiritual observations. Thus the English Statute-book,
as well as Justinians Code, proclaims the honor of the Lords Day.

Statutes of the Realm, but by the Constitutions and Canons of several
Councils, that Church and State may both cry out, Thus shall it be done to the
day which the Esth. 6. 11. The Councils of Carth^ge. Arragon. Orleance. Mascon.
Angiers. Collen. Friuli. Aken. Rome. Petricow. Eliberis. Laodicea, etc. All
confirming and establishing the Lords day, and Enacting Canons for the due
observation of it. To which may be added Council. Agath Can. 47. Council.
Aurelian. Can. 27. Council. Paris. Can. 50. Council. Rhemens. Can. 43. Council.
Antisidor. Can. 16. Council. Tral lan. Can. 19. Council Constantinop. Can. 8.
Lord has honored. The Council of Carthage decreed to petition the Emperor,
That there might be no Shows or any sinful Vanities on the Lords Day. The
Council of Arragon prohibits by Canon, All Suits of Law, and such litigious
Controversies on the Lords Day. The Council of Orleance, Prohibited all servile
works on the Lords Day. The Council of Mascon decreed, That the Lords Day
should be kept holy, for it is the day of our new Birth, insinuated unto us
under the shadow of the seventh-day Sabbath in the times of the Law; and
therefore the people must go to Church on that day, and there pour out their
Souls in tears and prayers, and celebrate the day with one accord, and offer
unto God their free and voluntary service, exercising themselves in Hymns, and
singing praises to God, being intent thereon in mind and body. In the Council
of Angiers, it was decreed, That no Tradesman should follow his Calling on the
Lords Day. The Council of Collen decreed, That the people should be diligently
admonished, why the Lords Day, which has been famous in the Church from the
Apostles time, was instituted, that all might equally come together to hear the
word of the Lord, to receive the Sacraments, to apply their minds to God alone,
and this day to be spent only in Prayers and Hymns, in Psalms and spiritual
Songs. The Council of Friuli decreed, That all Christians should with all
reverence and devotion honor the Lords Day, and abstain from all carnal
actions, and all earthly labors, and go to the public Assemblies devoutly.
The Council of Aken, which was held 800 years ago, Forbids all Marriages on the
Lords Day, as being too often introductive of unseemly vanities, most improper
for that holy day. In a Council at Rome it was decreed, That no Market should
be kept on the Lords Day, no sentence should be past, though the offense of the
Malefactor should require it. In a Council at Coy it was decreed; That men
should do no servile work, nor take any journey on this day. At a Council in
Petricow, it was decreed, That Tavernmeetings, Dice, Cards, and such like
pastimes should be abandoned on this Holy day. The Council of Eliberis decreed,
If any man inhabiting the City come not to Church for three Lords days
together, let him to kept so long from the Sacrament, that he may well seem
corrected for it. And the famous Council of Laodicea decreed, That Christians
ought not to Judaize and to rest from work on the Jewish Sabbath, but prefer
the Lords day before it, and rest thereon from labor, If any be found to
Judaize, let him be Anathema. And thus we may say with the wise man, Prove. 11.
14. In the multitude of Counselors there is safety, the Governors of the
Church in their grave and solemn Conventions, have in all ages remembered to
establish the honor and Holy observation of the Lords day.

veneration in all ages of the Church. In the Primitive times, it was
universally Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. 4. Iren. l. 4. c 19, 20. Tertul. Apol. c.
39. Orig. contra celsum. Ambros. Sermon. 62. August. tract. 5. in Joan. Eusebius.
eccles. Hist. l 4. c. 23. Hieron. Epist. ad Eustochium. Cyril. in Joan. l. 12.
c. 58. Greg. l. 11. Epist. 3. Justin Mart. Apolog. 2.
embraced, owned, and observed: And Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Origin,
Tertullian, Basil, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, and Augustine,
etc. were but the trumpets of its praise. These famous lights in the best days
of the Church liberally contributed to the glory of the Lords day, and cast in
freely to the treasury of its commendation and observance: And these Orthodoxal
Fathers, both Greek and Latin, do with one mouth testify concerning the
Christian Sabbath,

1. The Original thereof, which they say was first established by Christ's own
blessed and inspired Apostles.

2. The cause and occasion of this day: In memory of the resurrection of Jesus
Christ our Lord, who rose as upon this day, and triumphed over death and hell.

3. They bear honorable testimony, exhibit general approbation, and give
notice of their continual practice in the sanctifying of the Lords day in their
several times and ages.

4. They effectually established it by their practice, preaching, Athanas. de
circumcis and Sabbat. Chrysostom. Sermon. 5 de Resur. Felis. f. 292. Vaulx Cath. c.
3. Ribera in Apoc. Catech. Roman. part 3. f. 319. Stella in Luc. Rhem. Test. in
Apoc. Eccii. Enchyrid tit. de sestis fol. 134. Hos. confess. fol. 300.
and writings, that the memory of it might never be l^st, nor the prefixed time
be changed or altered.

The Papists coming between the primitive and the later purity (as a Nettle
between two Roses) as they kept the Letter of Gods word, the matter of Baptism,
the Doctrine of the Trinity, so they kept the time and doctrine of the Lords
day. And they did always acknowledge,

1. That the Lords day was by the Apostles themselves established; and some of
them say, Dominico jussu, by the command of the Lord himself.

2. That this was done by them in the memorial of the Lords resurrection.

3. That those texts of Scripture, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Rev. 1. 10. do
manifestly confirm this day.

4. That it is a day above all other days to be honored and esteemed.

5. That the observation thereof is, pars cultus divini, part of divine
worship, and so consequently jure divino, of divine right: All this the Papists
have freely acknowledged, although they are so subject to the epilepsie of
error, and the spiritual falling sickness; nay, although they are so biased
by interest, their fundamental maxim, and so closely chained to the Popes
Chair: But in this particular we will grant them infallibility.

Nay in the darkest times of the Church, when the Sun of Abbas in cap. de
feriis, A^gelus in verbo Feriae. Sylvester in verbo Dominici. Quaest. 1. Et
dicit hanc esse communem opinionem, quod dies dominicus est jure divino.
Pisanella in verbo dominica
truth shone most faintly, and was behind the blackest cloud, even then many
Schoolmen of note and eminency acknowledged the Divine right of the Lords day,
and gave in their plentiful attestations to that important truth. And
Sylvester, one of them, is bold to assert, that this was the common opinion
among them; the Lords day was so venerable in the Church, it could not be
contemptible in the Sch^^l^.

Learning in the very worst times, knew not how to become sacrilegious, and to
rob the Lords day of the honor of its di^ine original; it knew not how in the
very midst of the triumphs of Idolatry (which was most rampant in the middle
times of the Church) to sink down the Lords day into An. Dom. 189. An. Dom. 822.
an humane Ordinance. And one thing is observable, that those two famous Edicts
of Charles the Great, and his Son Ludovicus Pius, concerning the holy
observation of the Lords day, were dated from those times when the Church of
Christ was covered with the blackness of darkness, and the Spouse had on her
the thickest veil.

As for the times of Reformation, these latter ages of the Melanct in Cateches.
Bu^^r de regno Christi Gallas. in Ex^d Jun. in ^enes. Faius in These. Zanch. in
quartum praecept. Chemnit. harm. Evangel. Beza in The Geneven. Piscat. in
observat. in Gen 2 3.
world have not blemished the glorious work of reformation with degrading the
Lords day from its due, just, and Scriptural honor: More then a Jury of
Foreign Divines acquitting this blessed day from the mean original of an
humane institution: And if they shall be called in, they are ready to avouch
it. Beza, Junius, Piseator, Rolloche, Chemnitius, Walaeus, Bucer, Melancton,
Gallasius, Viretus, Amesus, Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Pareus, and Faius, etc. all
concurring in their sentence, That the Lords day was consecra^e^ ^y the holy
and infallible Apostles. Nor are there deficient, Divines of note of our own,
who give in the same verdict, and join issue with the suffrages of those beyond
the Seas: what the eminent Perkins his opinion was in this cause, has already
been suggested: Let me now produce the testimony of the famous Mr. Joseph Me^e,
whose worth and learning was not of an ordinary s^^ture, and thus he expresses
himhimself, I say therefore, that the Christian as well as the Jew after six
days spent in his own works, is to sanctify Mr. Joseph Mede in a little tract
on the Sabbath.
the seventh, that he may profess himself thereby a servant of God, the Creator
of Heaven and Earth; for the quotum then, how much time, the Jew and the
Christian agree, but in the designation of the day they differ; for the
Christians keep for their holy day, that which with the Jews was the first day
of the week, and call it Dominicum, the Lords day, that they might thereby
profess themselves the servants of that God, who as on the morning of that day
vanquished Satan, the spiritual Pharaoh, and redeemed us from our spiritual
thraldom; by praising Jesus Christ our Lord risen from the dead, begetting us
unto, instead of an earthly Canaan, an inheritance incorruptible in the
heavens. In a word, the Christian by the day he hallows, professes himself a
Christian (that is) as St. Paul speaks, to believe on him who raised up Jesus
Christ from the dead. But might not (you will say) the Christian as well have
observed the Jewish Sabbath for his seventh day, as the day he does? I answer
no, he might not, for in so doing, he should seem not to acknowledge his
redemption to be already performed, but still expected; for the deliverance of
Israel out of Egypt by the Ministry of Moses, was intended for a type or pledge
of the spiritual deliverance to come by Jesus Christ; their Canaan also to
which they marched, being a type of that heavenly inheritance which the
redeemed by Christ do look for; since then the shadow is now made void by the
coming of the substance, the relation is changed, and God is no longer to be
worshipped as a God fore-shewing and assuring by types, but as a God who has
performed the substance of what he promised; and this is that which St. Paul
means, Col. 2. 16, 17. where he says, Let no man henceforth judge you in
respect of a Feast day, New Moons, or Sabbath day, which were a shadow of
things to come, but the body is Christ. Thus largely this worthy man shows us,
that the foundation of the old Sabbath is rased and plucked up, and the new
Sabbath is settled upon as strong a Basis, even upon the accomplishment 2 Timothy
2. 19.
of the glorious work of our redemption in the blessed resurrection of Christ,
and we may now say, This foundation stands sure, the Lord knows which day for
weekly solemnity is his, the time of our Sabbath is set by that rising Sun
which will decline no more. And we are as much bound to keep our Sabbath upon
the account of the work of Redemption, as the Jews were upon the account of the
work of creation, or their Egyptian deliverance; the work makes the day in
both, and therefore no human device or institution can here lay the least claim.

Thus let us run the stage of every Century, we shall never want those who had
so much Scripture Heraldry, as to know that the Lords day was divinely born;
and that at least the holy Apostles, both by their practice, Acts 20. 7. and
precept, 1. Cor. 16. 2. give life to it, that it might survive in the Church,
till the end of all things and times.

no age was so corrupt to disown, so no place was so barbarous as to shut out
the Lords day. But in all places where Christianity was embraced, they sang
Hosanna to the highest of days. The observation of this day was much scattered
in the very Apostles days: It was observed at Jerusalem, Dominica ideo nobis
est venerabilis, atque solennis, quia in ea Salvator noster. velut Sol Oriens,
discussis infernonorum tenebris; luce Resurrectionis emicuit, and propterea ea
dies ab hominibus seculidies solis vocatur, quod Christus, Sol justitiae, eam
lucidissime illuminavit.
John 20. 19, 26. at Troas, Acts 20. 7. in the Churches of Galatia and Corinth,
1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Then in Patmos, Rev. 1. 10. and the lesser Asia, then in the
Grecian Churches, as the Greek Fathers beforementioned testify; then in the
Latin Churches, as appears by the Latin Fathers called before to witness and
attest it, which they plentifully declare, and in process of time, the fame and
observance of this blessed day was scattered far and wide. It was observed in
Africa by the injunction of the Council of Carthage; it was observed in Spain
by the decrees of the Councils of Arragon and Eliberis; it was solemnly kept
and observed in France by the decrees and Canons of the Council of Orleance,
Paris, Rhemes, Angiers; it was observed in Italy by the Canons of the Councils
of Friuli and Rome; it was kept in Germany by the strict injunction of the
Councils of Aquisgrane, Mentz, and Collen; it was observed in Poland by
imposition and advice of the Council of Petricow; it was Author. Clem. constit.
l. 5. c. 13.
kept in Lydia, a Province of the lesser Asia, by the determination of the
Council of Laodicea, which solemn convention gave much honor to our Christian
Sabbath; it was observed in Greece by the strict injunction of the Council of
Constantinople; it was observed in England in the early days and dawnings of
the Gospel, by the advice and Canon of the Council of Cloveshow, as some say,
near Canterbury. Thus in every place, where the Christian Religion was planted,
the Lords day was inaugurated with praise and observation; so that we may here
apply that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 68. 11. The Lord gave the word, and great was
the company of those that published it. The Gospel and the day of Psalm. 68. 11.
Christ both kept equal pace, and traveled in company together through all
converted Nations. To entertain a Savior, and not a Sabbath, the Lords will
declared in the Gospel; not the Lords day was ever a soloecism, and an
absur^ity in the world.

our Sabbath be only jure humano, an humane ordinance, how we can expect the
same blessing on our Sabbath, which the Jews might or did on theirs? for surely
divine institution entails divine benediction; God does not water plants with
the dews of his blessing, which are Mat 15. 13.
not of his own planting: But he often complains of introductions Satanas habet
plantationes quae sunt zizania, et homines habent plantationes quae sunt
traditiones, sed ambae sunt eradicandae, et evellendae. Chemnit.
into his worship, by the devise and counsels of men, Jer. 7. 31. How the
Sabbath of the Jews had manifestly a divine institution, which is undoubted and
undenied by all; If ours therefore want a divine authority to appoint and
ordain it, their fleece may be still wet with blessing and denediction, and
ours wholly dry. It is not easily to be imagined, that an Ecclesiastical
constitution (as some make our Sabbath to be) can fall under the same smiles
and influences with a divine ordinance, enlivened by Christ's command, or
midwived into the world by Apostolical precept or practice. The infinite
distance between the Authorities must needs conclude a vast difference between
the benedictions; nor can the Canon of a Council tie conscience so fast, or
bless the obedient so much, as the Canon of Scripture, our enemies themselves
being Judges; nor can in the least any Scripture be produced to authorize the
Church, to set up a Sabbath for the Christian World. God usually blesses his
own institutions. Prayer is powerful, because He commands it; Preaching John
14. 15.
effectual, because He en^oyns it; the Sacraments comfortable, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
because He ordains them; and so the Lords Day is often Luke 22. 19, 20.
bedewed with showers of the choicest love and benediction, because it was
Christ's institution, either more immediately by his personal command, or else
mediately by his inspired and infallible Apostles: And therefore let us fall
down before the force of truth, and conclude, the blessings of our Sabbath,
speak the beginnings of our Sabbath, to be in Gods breast, and not in man's
will; God usually accepting the worship at Jerusalem, and not that at Dan and
Bethel; he loves those festivals of which himself is the Author.

from Providence. What signal judgments has God punished the prophaners of
Peccatum est dei^idium, ^ Christici^^um* est summum malum, spomane^ infania,
somnus et mors anima, ex sui natura mortem meretur, grav^ est onus animum
deprimens, cibus durus nullo stomacho digestibilis, and morbus pesti
lentissimus, and putidissima corruption. Alap.
the Lords day with? (as shall be shown more fully hereafter.) Now the
profaning of the Lords day, must needs be a breach of the law of God, or else
how can it be a provocation of the wrath of God. God punishes only for sin,
which the Apostle says, is (...), a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. Now
if our Christian Sabbath be only a law of Man, where is the positive and
provoking sin in the violation of it, where is the infinite evil which should
so inflame divine displeasure, as to pour out his fury on the violatours of it,
and to follow them with tremendous judgments? Is it probable, that God would
strike so deeply, and punish so fearfully and wonderfully, for the breach of a
Canon of the Church, or a Decree of a Council? It is true, was the Lords day
bottomed on Ecclesiastical authority, it would be a piece of disobedience to
the Church, to violate it; but still where is the infinite evil, (as every sin
is) to stir up so much indignation in the Almighty? Surely the breach of a
humane constitution could never raise such storms in the world, nor pelt so
many untimely into their dust, and oftentimes on a sudden, and in a stupendous
and terrible manner, (as shall be fully showed hereafter:) And again, we meet
with no such tragedies in our sporting upon holy days, and those festivals
which are of the Churches appointment; those days run waste in mirth and
jollity: nor do we meet with broken limbs, sudden deaths, fearful diseases,
unexpected blindness, etc. the common issues of the profanation of the Lords
day, to be the success and consequence of that vanity. Providence then makes
the distinction between days of the Churches appointment, and that blessed
day, our Christian Sabbath, which is of divine institution.

To conclude then this particular, Let us cloth the Lords Quid hac die
f^^icius est, qua domin^^ judae^^ mortuus est, and nobis resurrexit? In qua
cultus Synagogae oc^ubuit, et est ortus ecclesiae, in qua nos homines fecit
surgere, et vivere secum, et sedere in coelestibus. Haec est dies quem fecit
dominus, exultemus, et laetetemur in illo: Omnes dies fecit dominus, sed
caeteri dies possunt esse ju daeorum, possunt esse Haereticorum, possunt esse
Gentilium, sed dies dominica dies est resurrectionis, dies Christianorum est,
dies nostra est. Hier.
day in all its royal Apparel, and put on all its Jewels and Ornaments, and
then we shall see this Queen of days in all its splendor and glory. A day it
is of honor and renown above all days, that ever the Sun shone in; the most
gloririous day that ever God created; the most solemn day that ever the Church
celebrated; a day which Christ has crowned with the greatest glory of any day
that ever dawned upon the world: It is a day of the Lords power, a day of his
perfection, the day of his praise and glory, and a day of his b^^^nty and
blessings, the day of his espousals, and of the gladness of his heart. When
Christ was born, the Angels celebrated that day with Songs and triumphs, Luke
2. 13. When Christ rose from the dead, (or else why was he born?) Let the
Saints celebrate that day with weekly solemnities and praises, and not pass
away their laud in a transient music, as the Angels did; On this day, (our
Christian Sabbath day) there was a confluence of wonders, and wonderful
transactions wrought by him, whose name is wonderful, Isa. 9. 6. In a word,
this day is the highly favored of God, a map of Heaven, a taste of Glory, the
golden spot of time, the market day of souls, the day break of eternal
brightness, a day to be marked of thousands for their new birth day; a day on
which many have been redeemed from more then Egyptian bondage; a day of light,
of joy, of love and delight; a day which is truly, delitiae humani generis, the
delight of mankind, as once Titus was called. Ah! how do men flutter up and
down on the week days, as the Dove on Romans 1. 4. Luke 13. 32. John 20. 22, 23.
the waters, and can find no rest for their souls, till they come to this day,
as to an Arc, and this day takes them in? On this day the light was created,
the Holy Spirit descended, life has been restored; Satan subdued, Sin
mortified, Souls sanctified, Cant. 3. 11. Hos. 2. 19, 20. Acts 13. 34. Sex
praerogativae recensentur ad diem dominicum propiissime pertinentes. Beda in
lib. de officiis Eccles. Cap. 1.
the Grave, Hell and Death conquered. O! the mountings of mind, the ravishings
of heart, the solace of soul, which on this day men enjoy in their dearest
Savior. Our Lords day is the first day of the week, was the first day of the
world; On it the Elements were formed, the light was created, the Angels were
produced; On it Manna was first rained down; On it, say the Fathers of the sixth
General Council, was Christ born; On it did the Star first appear to the wise
men who came out of the East; On it was Christ baptized in Jordan by John the
Baptist, as the Council of Paris observe; Sextum Concilium generale
Constantinopoli celebratum.
On it, says a learned man, Christ wrought his first Miracle by turning water
into wine: And on this day, says Junius, the Israelites passed the Red Sea on
dry ground Council. Paris. sub Ludovico Pio, et Lothario celebratum.
securely by the help of a Miracle. And to wind up all, on this day the light
of the firmament, and the Sun of Righteousness first rose, and appeared from
darkness and death.

And thus the Lords day is brought to its Throne; and let Jun. in Deuteronomy.
all who love Christ, say, God save the Christian Sabbath, and preserve it from
the fury and rage of malevolent pers^cutors, John 2. 49.
from the virulent and sophistical pens of adversaries, from the fancies of
familistical and enthusiastical heretics, and from the blemishes, and
discrediting practices of profane persons. And let our fervent prayers to the
Lord of the Sabbath Mark 2. 28.
be, that as this blessed day had a divine institution, so it may be ever
honored and celebrated with a spiritual and heavenly observation.

CHAP. XLVII. A Plea with Christians to out-vy the Jews in Sabbath-holiness and
observations.
HAving now bottomed the Lords day upon its Scriptural basis, and given it its
due and just authority; let us further consider, how its original may influence
our practice, and how its institution running parallel with that of the Jews
Sabbath, may overawe our consciences, and sublimate our minds to a more holy
and severe observation. It is a good note of a learned man, If, says he, The
people shall be made to believe, that the Lords day stands upon humane
authority; all the power of Princes, and all the policy of Bishop of Ely.
Prelates, shall never be able to preserve it from the peoples profanation, as
we evidently see in the Church of Charles Dow of the Sabbath, p. 56.
Rome. But Adversaries in this point are enforced to acknowledge, (as much as
may be learned from their confessions) That seeing God did require of those
stiffnecked Jews, burdened with the yoke of Ceremonies, one day in seven to be
employed in his service; how can less suffice Christians who have obtained a
greater measure of divine grace, and who are freed from that yoke and burden?
Nor must we permit this Vere dico, Fratres, satis durum, and pro pry nimis
impium est, ut Christiani non habeant majorem reverentiam diei dominico, quam
Judaei observare videntur in Sabb^to. Caesar. Arelatensis.
consideration, that the obligation of Christians to serve God and Christ upon
his heavenly promises, is greater then that of the Jews. In the former times of
shadows and darkness, the Lords people observed a weekly Sabbath; then surely
we should be ungrateful, and negligent of our own salvation, if we should fall
short of the same observation, nay, if we should not keep our Sabbath with
greater exactness, and more accurate devotion. Golden talents call for quicker
trading, and greater privileges summon us to a more strict obedience.

And indeed to come closer to our purpose; what can lie upon the Jews as an
argument for the sanctification of the Sabbath, which does not reach us?

six days granted for their own affairs to labor and work in, and is it not
so with us, are not we indulged with the same bounty? have not we an equal
latitude with them for the gain and acquest of these outward things?

ours is the Lords day, as well as theirs; nay, their weekly festival was
called Sabbath from its manner of observation, Exodus 20. 8. Rev. 1. 10.
servation, ours the Lords day from its Divine Author.

example is as strong to move us as them; our Father is our pattern, and his
preceding practice does tie us as forcibly to imitation, as it can do them.
Mat. 5. 48.


our right observation of our Sabbath, as well as it did upon their faithful
discharge of Sabbath-duties, and holiness obtains the birth right in Longius a
^^ebus sacris remo^enda sunt, quae castis labem, integris probrum, et sin ceris
corruptelam afferunt; Festivitates dominicus honorate, non mundane, sed divine,
non instar gentilium sed instar Christianorum. Ephr, ^yr.
both: And therefore what can be suggested to oblige them, which does not
engage us? One of the Fathers passionately cries out, Shall the Jews be so
strict on their Sabbath, which only is in umbra, in a shadow, and a type of
something to come, which only did presigure Christ's resting in the grave; and
shall not we ^e se^ious and solemn on our Sabbath, which is so in ve^tue, in
truth, and shall endure to the end of the world? Our Sabbath, says Chrysostom
is (...), An unmovable law, and therefore lays claim to a greater
solemnization. Ephrem Syrus cries out, Let us solemnize our Lords day as
Christians, and he thinks then he had said enough; the Apostle telling us, He
that names the name of Christ must depart from iniquity.

But if we shall discuss this point more fully, the Chri^tians 2 Timothy 2. 19.
incentives to Sabbath holiness, will easily be found to have a sharper edge,
and a stronger bias then those of the Jews.

We have greater measures of knowledge: The Jews lived under Star light, but
the Sun of Righteousness arose on our Mal 4. 2. Exodus 34. 35. Col. 2. 17. Mat.
27. 51.
Sabbath day. Moses his face had a vail upon it, 2 Cor. 3. 13. Their pedagogy
was enveloped in many types, and shadows, ceremonies which cast it into a
twilight; but when our Savior dyed, not only the veil of the Temple, but of
the Judaeis vetus Testamentum est velamine obductum, ut non videant internam
ejus lucem; Novo Testamento Christus hoc velamen abst^lit, tanqu^m a lege Nova.
Alap.
type was rent: Now here our Saviors rule takes place, To whom much is given,
of them much shall he required, Luke 12. 48. And the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.
14. But the minds of the Jews are blinded, for until this day remains the
same veil untaken away in reading the old Testament, which veil is done away in
Christ. Our knowledge then is far greater then theirs, our ministration of the
spirit is more glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9. Now much knowledge, as it does
amplify guilt, so it does engage duty; as it is a greater weight to sin, so it
is a sharper spur to service; the light of knowledge most properly guides us in
the way of holiness: And shall we who live under the light of the most glorious
Gospel, be outdone Illuminatio Evangelii, est sublustre quiddam, et praegustus
cl^rae lucis et (...) etiam gloriae divinae, quae revelabitur in caelis. Theoph.
in Sabbath-holiness, by them who had but our dawnings, who only fed upon the
crumbs of the bread of life? We see Christ with open face, they only through
the Prospective of a type or a ceremony, by the light of a burnt offering; and
indeed, what information could they receive from the slaying of a sacrifice?
Let not them, O Christians, who groped in the dark, keep better Sabbaths then
we who live in the Sunshine. Our means being greater, our light brighter, our
Gospel beams stronger, let our services on Gods blessed day be more sublime and
accurate. And it is observable, our light sprung upon our Sabbath, to bear
stronger Man. 16. 2. Mat. 28. 1.
witness against all deeds of darkness on that day; O let us then pity the Jews
incapacities, and testify to all the Natitions we live under the Gospel of
Christ, because we are so strict upon his own day.

As we are endowed with more knowledge, so we are embraced with more love then
the Jews were: The love of God to mankind was never so fully revealed as in
these latter times, Heb. 3. 2.
John 3. 16. And hereupon undoubtedly it is, that our Savior Prophet^
docuerunt ut Prophetae (i. e.) ut homines futura de Christo, et ecclesia dei
praenunciantes, et praevidentes obs^ura: Jam vero in lege nova Christus filius
dei, qui clare vidit, et penetravit omnem Patris sapientiam; non docet sicut
membra corpori, et sic Prophetae Christo cedant.
professes, That from the time of John the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent takes it by force, Mat. 11. 12. To such an
height of devotion has the love of God manifested in his Son, inflamed his
true Servants. Indeed love is the genuine incentive to obedience: now we have
warmer love, as well as clearer light then the Jews, which does strongly engage
us to stricter Sabbaths then they were accustomed too. They had Christ in a
type, we had him in truth, they had him in a shadow, we have him in substance;
they saw him afar off in a promise, but we saw him bleeding on a Cross dying
for our sins, and rising again for our justification, Romans 4. 25. Romans 8. 34.
They saw Christ through the lattice, and we with the window open; they beheld
him behind the cloud, but we when the cloud was broken away: And what is the
inference? Let this endearing love inspire us with g^eater zeal upon the Lords
day, that we may travel further in Heavens way on Apparuit dei potentia in
creatio^^, d^i sapientia in re^um g^bernatione, sed benignitas miserico^diae
apparet in Christi humanitate. Bern.
that blessed season. The love of a Father, caused him to send down his Christ,
the love of a Christ, caused him to lay down his life, the love of the spirit
causes him to bring home his work to a believing soul; and this love of the
Trinity should constrain every Christian to the holy observation of the Lords
day: When we understand how strictly sometimes the Jewish Church kept the
Sabbath; let the fire of love set us all in a flame, and let the blushes of
shame recruit our resolution, concluding we have tasted deeper of the sweets of
John 3. 16. John 10 17.
Christ's unspeakable love: And if thou love Christ, keep his Commandments,
John 14. 15. And among the rest the f^urth.

were tolerated in some things offensive, which will not be permitted to us, as
in case of Polygamy; so Jacob, Genesis 29. 28. 1 Samuel 30. 5. ^ Kings 11. 3.
David, Solomon, holy and excellent men had their variety of wives, and yet we
read not of the thunder of a Ne quis adulteretur, aut fornicetur. Deus* in
remedium concupiscentiae instituit honorabile matrimonium, illud cuivis
amplecti licet. Si eo relicto adulteretur quis, aut fornicetur, inex^usabilis
sit, ideoque a deo judicandus et damnandus. Alap. in Hebr.
threat, or the thunder-boult of a judgment falling upon them for that fact and
practice. There was something of a connivence; God seemed as the Apostle
speaks, in the times of ignorance to wink at that un^^stifiable procedure, Acts
17. 30. But now in Gospel Times, this plurality of wives incurs the penalty of
the law of the land, much more of the law of God, and is a sin most scandalous
and abominable, well becoming the brutishness of a Turk, or the barbarism of a
Gentile. Well then, to come nearer to our purpose, spots are sooner discerned
in the garment of a Christian; we have no shelter of connivence to fly unto, if
we break the law of marriage, the Apostle tells us plainly, Whoremongers, and
Adulterers, God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. And so in the law of the Sabbath, we
have no toleration to plead, or connivence, as a skirt to be thrown over the
breaches of it: If we Christians break the Sabbath, we are arrested by divine
wrath without any bail or mainprize, nor can we expect any suspension of divine
displeasure: Indeed God will something bear with offenses in the duskish time
of the law, but he will Mat. 10. 15.
scourge those very sins with scorpions in the times of the glorious Gospel.
Our tie therefore is not only stronger, but our Mark 6. 11.
interest and reason is clearer to engage us to Sabbath-holiness. It will be
more tolerable for the people of Israel, and Luke 10. 12, 14.
the inhabitants of Judah in the day of judgment, then for Christians who shall
presume upon Sabbath-violation.

The Gospel is a constant alarm to holiness: There is no profession of the
Gospel without an abju^ation of all sin and uncleanness, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The
Gospel adds weight to every sin; sin under the Gospel, is like Adams
transgression, which was acted in Paradise, a place of pleasure and abundance
of purity and undefiledness; it is like the sin of the buyers and sellers in
the Temple, their sin was inhaunced by Romans 13. 12.
the place: Gospel light and love adds Vinegar to the Gall John 3. 19.
of every offense. Greater then must be our breaches of Gods holy day, our
profanation of it must be of a scarlet dye, and Heb. 12. 14.
of a crimson tincture; the poor Jews had never the argument of a Gospel to
urge Sabbath-obedience, or to inhance Sabbath-guilt; they were in the Night,
Romans 13. 12. The Nox^^^ te^pus ante Christ^m, plenum terebr^ infidelitatis, and
peccatorum; sed dies est rempus evangelti, quo sol justitiae lucis suae radios
toto orb diffundit; Praesente jam Christo et luce evangelii in hoc die opera
tenebrarum abjicere, et honest ambulare, et Christian vivere debemus Cypr. 2
Cor. 4. 4. Mal. 5. 15. Cant. 1. 7.
dayspring from on high never visited them: but our day shines bright upon us,
which clears up our way to sanctity and holiness. Let not Christians then under
a pure purifying Gospel, under a Gospel* which will both discover and condemn
every evil way, under a Gospel which was indicted by a holy Spirit, which leads
to a holy life, which suits with a holy heart; let not such brutifie
themselves, and sensualize upon Gods holy day, let them not waste that golden
spot in trifling recreations, let not them formalize and dissemble away the
Market Day of their Souls; surely their doom will be aggravated with all
circumstances of horror and amazement. Fond Christians, who idle away and
unravel their precious Sabbaths, see not the Witness behind the Curtain, viz.
the blessed and glorious Gospel, which will come in against them, to sharpen
their sentence and condemnation: we Christians cannot violate Sabbaths at so
cheap a rate, as others may, more especially a poor benighted Jew, who has
lost his way, and is wandering to eternal perdition. Let every Christian
consider, Christ makes his flocks to rest at noon.

The Jews never had those patterns of Sabbath-holiness, as we Christians have
had. It is true, God rested the seventh day after the finishing and
accomplishment of the stupendous Gen 2. 3.
work of the Creation, and his Rest was both exemplary and preceptive to the
world to keep that day as a day of holy rest: But the great Jehovah was in
Heaven above the eye of observation. But now Jesus Christ, the great Archetype
of sanctity, he was a visible Pattern of Sabbath-holiness John 5. 8.
to us; and let us trace our dear Redeemer in his Sabbatical actions, and
wherein they are imitable, they are admirable: Mat. 12. 13.
we shall find our Beloved on that day, either working Luke 14. 4, 5, 6, 7. 8,
9.
his Cures, or showing his Miracles, or breaking out into holy discourses, or
preaching abroad his heavenly doctrines, Luke 6. 6.
or pouring out his Soul in holy prayers; something or other Luke 6. 12.
like the Son of God, he is doing on the day of God. And so the holy Apostles,
those blessed Spirits, as one calls them, Those Penmen of the Holy Ghost, as
all call them, they were rarely exemplary in Sabbath-observation: Not to
mention, how affectionately they grasped the opportunity of the Jews Christus
utitur exemple ovis in soveam incidentus in die Sabbati, post ^e^^cta ea, quae
ad Sabbati ministerium et cultum pertinent.
Sabbath as a fit season to preach Jesus Christ, and to throw their Net into
many waters; How did they manage the true Sabbath, the Lords day, (now taking
possession of its right, in becoming the weekly Festival of the Church?)

1. They were most frugal of the time of it; Paul preaches on this day till
midnight, Acts 20. 17.

2. They were most copious in the duties of it, they preach, they administer
the Sacrament, which undoubtedly was accompanied Chemnit.
with fervent and solemn prayer.

3. They take care of the poor. Acts 20. 7.


And 4ly, One of this Apostolical society is in high raptures, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
and sublime elevations on this day. Nay, the Apostle of the Gentiles acts
charity to a miracle, Acts, 20. 10. thinking Revel. 1. 10.
nothing too great to add to the celebrity and honor of this holy day. Now do
the Jews tell you of a zealous Nehemiah, who shut the Gates of Jerusalem the
Evening before the Sabbath, to keep God in, and shut profaneness out; Nehem.
13. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
we may reply, a little to invert our Saviors speech, A greater than Nehemiah
is here, one whose shoo-latchet that worthy man is not worthy to unloose; to
speak in the language of John the Baptist, Mark 1. 7. We then having fairer
Luke 11. 31.
Copies, it is no reason but we should mend our hand. The Limner draws the
Picture according to the person who sits, and the more lovely the person is,
the more beautiful is the Picture: How should we then keep the Sabbath holy,
who have the pattern of him, who is the fairest of ten thousand? Psalm. 45. 2.
And how does this upbraid their practice, who make the Sabbath a day of sloth
and idleness, when the holy Apostle on the same day labored in preaching of
the Gospel Acts 20. 7.
till midnight? Let us then in the fear of the God of Jacob keep Sabbaths, as
we have Christ and his blessed Apostles for our ensamples.

more liberty, and desirable freedom, than the 1 Cor. 11. 1.
Jews had in sanctifying the Sabbath; their sanctification of that holy day
consisted in a multitude of purifications, washings, and cleansings, and in a
number of Sacrifices and Oblations; they had their burnt Offerings, and their
Number. 28. 9, 10.
Meat Offerings, nay, and their Drink Offerings, and all these Sacerd^s
singulis sabbatis lignum subji^it ad nutriendum ignem in Altari, and Movebantur
panes propositionis, etc.
were doubled (as was suggested before) on the Sabbathday; their observation of
the Sabbath was more toilsom and laborious, they were employed in more
drudgery, they were to look after their Flour and their Oil, killing, of
Beasts, and such things which were of a more inferior and carnal nature; their
duties on the Sabbath were clogged and burdened with more sweat and ^^^poral
painfulness, and were of a grosser al^oy. The Priests among the Jews on a
Sabbath Mat. 12. 5.
were busied in cutting of word to feed the fire of the Altar, that it might
not go out, and in preparing of bread to put upon the Table of Shewbread, and
to remove that which (...)
was there before: All these Operations, as Chemnitius calls them, required the
hand, not the heart, and were works of the lower form. To all which may be
added, that the Jews Levit. 23. 6.
besides their weekly Sabbath, they had the Passover, the Levit. 23. 16.
Feast of Pentec^st, the Feast of Trumpets, the Feast of Tabernacles, Levit.
23. 24.
the day of Atonement, which was the tenth day of Levit. 23. 27.
the seventh Month; and these were all called Sabbaths, Levit. 23. 34.
Levit. 23. 24, 32, 36. And some of these Feasts and Solemnities Levit. 23. 8.
were celebrated diverse days together. Levit. 23. 36.


Now it is not so with us under the Gospel, the Apostle Exodus 12. 3.
has eased us at once of all these legal Festivals, 2 Col. 16. Exodus 23. 14.
Let no man condemn you in respect of an holy day, or of the new Gal. 4. 9, 10.
Moon, or of the Sabbath days, viz. Jewisn. And so Gal. 4. 9, Non sunt damnandi
christiani tanquam divinae legis transgressores, out violatae conscientiae rei,
quod non observant festa legis ceremonialis, quicquid contra superstitiose
ogganniunt Pseudo. Apostoli. Daven.
10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, which are weak and beggarly
rudiments. All these Festivals are of no use to us, but are fully cancelled and
cashiered.

Thus God has sweetened our Sabbath far above that of the Jews; Prayers are our
only Offering, Sighs our Incense, Sacraments our Passover; we have no
Drink Offering, but to drink in truth; in the hearing of the word, we have no
Meat Offering, but to feed upon the bread of life, when we attend upon the
preaching of the word: and generally as our Estate is better than the condition
of the Jews, in respect to the whole worship of God, so likewise more
especially in our worship upon the Sabbath; our privileges are more, and our
burdens are less than theirs; our worship is more spiritual, more easy, more
sublime and heavenly, and more above the Alphabet and rudiments of their
Religion: Their lisping Sacrifices proclaimed their minority, but ours speak
more plainly the Dialect of Heaven.

Nay, which is very considerable, in those things wherein we are equally bound
with them, we much exceed them: are we bound to meditate in the law of God day
and night, yet Psalm. 1. 2.
we are not commanded to carry it about in the skirts of our Numb. 15. 38.
garments, and upon our bracelets, Deuteronomy. 6. 8, 9. And though Romans 32.
it is our duty, as well as theirs, to teach our Children the Oracles of God,
Deuteronomy. 6. 7. yet we are not charged with Scripturae sacrae in iisque
promissiones et Pacta Divina, et suturorum mysteriorum prae dictiones; haec
fuerunt eloquia dei Judaeis concredita. Alap.
the writing of them upon our gates, and the posts of our doors, Deuteronomy. 6. 9.
And so in our Sabbaths we are free from the servilities and rudiments with
which the Jews were chained, as a sign and token of their bondage and
servitude. Though we are charged to rest upon the Lords day, and so keep it
holy, yet we are not overcharged with Sacrifices and Ceremonies; they are all
laid asleep in Christ's Grave, and we are freed from these Fetters, and so enjoy
a more glorious liberty.

The inference of the whole will be this: Has God filed off all Chains of
servility, plained off all knots of difficulty, has he put an end to all legal
Sacrifices, and chased away all shadows of Ceremony, that nothing might
encumber our Christian Sabbath? How exact then should we be in the observation
of it? Divine indulgence, as it is properly a curb to sin, so it is a forcible
spur to duty; the Lord has abundantly sweetened, therefore let us more
carefully sanctify our blessed Sabbath; he has freed it from the Jewish
thraldom, let us therefore keep it with Christian freedom: the Sabbath of the
Jews, like the Infant Moses, floated among the Reeds, but ours has its Nest
among the Stars, Obad. 4. Let its sublimeness and spirituality engage us more
strongly to a due and holy solemnity; nothing can more soften unto obedience,
than love and indulgence, which is written in the fairest character upon the
Christian Sabbath: It is a most natural Induction, that we being loosed and
unfettered, should run with more swiftness the way of the fourth Commandment
now spiritualized to us by Jesus Christ.

Our Sabbath triumphs in a more glorious occasion, then that Genesis 2. 3.
of the Jews does: That which occasioned the Old Sabbath, was the finishing of
the work of creation: but that which Mat. 28. 1.
occasioned ours, was the accomplishment of the work of redemption, which
glorious work far surpasses the other, as the Temple exceeded the Tabernacle.

more precious. As man's gaining the world cannot recompense the loss of the
soul, so Gods making the world does not equalize Christ's redeeming the Mat. 16
26. Inutile est mundi lucrum cum perditione animae conjunctium, perditio enim
animae est irreparabile damnum. Chemnit.
soul; Christ's recavering must needs exceed Gods creating a world; to draw men
out of an enthralled bondage, is more then to bring man out of a confused
Chaos. In the Creation God was to deal with no Enemy; but in the work of
Redemption, Christ was put to combat with all the Devils in Hell, and to
overpower men opposing their own mercies.

is more pressing; It made the soul of Christ heavy unto death, Mat. 26. 38. In
this work Christ did not only fight with the Devils, but God Himself seemed to
combat with Christ, and to put him to grief, Isa. 53. 10. The worlds creation
was finished without difficulty; but the Redemption of mankind was a work
knotted with much pain and grievance. The world was created with the speaking
of a word; it was only, Let it be done, and this was all; the Sun, the Stars,
and all other Creatures, they sprang from the Energy, and power of a Command,
from the force of an omnipraevalent fiat; but the work of Redemption was not
wrought, but by the expense of Christ's dearest blood.

Redemption is more profitable; Indeed to have Earth to tread on, Air to breath
in, Meat to feed on, Christus vicit and triumphavit non virtute, et sudore
aliorum ^t mumdani Imperatores solent, sed sua sola passione, and sua solius
virtute. Daven.
Light to walk by, these are benefits,, and good natural supports; but the
subduing of Satan, the removing of the sting of sin, with all the astonishing
and sad sequels of it, the pacifying and quenching of the flames of Gods anger,
the reparation of man's nature; these are transcendent benefits, and bid
defiance to an hyperhole. The work of Redemption yields a far greater crop and
harvest of joy, peace and happiness. We may be Gods creatures, and yet fall
upon the spikes of eternal ruin: But Christ's Redeemed ones shall come with
singing to Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and they
Quomodo illum diem, qui a domino dicatus est, nosque ab exilii dedecore
liberavit, venerari par est. Isych.
shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away, Isa.
51. 11. Isa. 65. 17. The work of Redemption is the fullest treasury of man's
happiness. And as it was long ago prophesied, Hag. 2. 9. That the glory of the
second Temple should outshine that of the first; So the glory of the
Redemption, out-shines the glory of the Creation. Indeed the work of Creation
is a lesser good to us, as the Law is a lesser good then the Gospel, and the
Old Testament then the New, Redemption must be owned as the greater work,
inasmuch as things spiritual are more valuable then things natural, and Gods
last works are his best, the first being only preparatory to the last; and
indeed, he who shall question whether Redemption be a greater work then
Creation, knows little what a Redeemer is, or what the ransom of an immortal
soul is worth, Psalm. 49. 8. In creating the world, God did much for me; he gave
me a body admirably and curiously wrought, Psalm. 139. 15, 16. He likewise
endowed me with a rational soul, and endowed this soul with rare and excellent
faculties; but all these had been only capacities of misery, and receptives of
wrath and ruin, had not the work of Redemption interposed: And therefore
Christ in shedding Ephesians. 1. 7.
his blood, in conquering death, in satisfying for sin, has done more for me,
and laid the foundation of a better world, then this created universe, this
beautiful artifice of Divine Power. Again, in the Creation there was nothing to
withstand; but in the work of Redemption, there was Justice against Mercy,
Wrath against Pity, In the Creation God brought something 2 Cor. 5. 21.
out of nothing, but in the work of Redemption, God Gal. 3. 13.
brought one contrary out of another, Good out of Evil, Life out of Death, an
immortal Crown out of a shameful Cross. Indeed the great discoveries of Wisdom,
Grace, Power, Justice, Mercy, were all seen in the glorious work of man's
Redemption: The Heavens are the work of Gods fingers, Psalm. 8. 3. But
Redemption is the work of his Arm, Isa. 53. 1. Isa. 52. 9, 10. So that if it
shall be demanded, wherein does the work of Redemption excel the work of
Creation; it may be answered, as the Apostle in another case, much every Romans
3. 2.
way.

these two works in the scale, and we shall find the work of Redemption to
weigh down the work of Creation; as Gold of all metals is the weightiest. In
Ephesians. 2. 4. John 3. 16. 1 John 4. 9, 10. Gal. 4. 4. Phil. 2. 6, 7.
the creation Adam was Head, but in the work of Redemption Christ was the Head:
by the creation we have a temporal life; by the work of Redemption we obtain
eternal life. In the creation Adam was espoused to Eve, but in the redemption,
the poor soul is espoused to Jesus Christ. By creation Non solum de me, sed de
omni quoque quod factum est; Scriptum est, dixit, et facta sunt, At vero, qui
me tantum, et semet fecit, in restituendo, et dixit multa, and mira gessit, et
pertulit dura, nec tantum dura, sed etiam et indigna. Bern. de diligendo deo.
man enjoyed an earthly Paradise, but by redemption we enjoy an heavenly
Kingdom. In the creation Gods wisdom and power was principally seen, but in the
work of redemption, All his glorious attributes were seen in their greatest
splendor; In the creation man was produced out of nothing, but by the work of
redemption, he is produced out of worse then nothing, a state of enmity and
opposition, Romans 8. 7. Thus the glory of the work of redemption shines with a
brighter ray, and glitters with a stronger beam, then the work of creation.

And shall not this most glorious work, of which our Sabbath is the weekly
memorial, enforce us to a more devout observation? Let us consider, we equally
enjoy the benefit of the creation with the Jews, but they nothing at all, of
the benefit of the redemption with us. They are Strangers to the Covenant of
grace, and the commonweal of the true Israel, Ephesians. 2. 12. Let us then see the
beauties of free grace in the glass of our redemption; and let this put new
life into us to walk closely with God upon his own day; when we are remiss in
the duties, let us reflect upon the occasion of the day; and let us remember,
that the conquering of Death, the chaining of Satan, the subduing of Sin, the
quenching of Divine Wrath, the perfuming of the Grave; these several branches
made up that blessed work which calls upon us for the keeping holy of the Lords
day.

their Sabbath strictly, Christ came not to licentiate us, and to enlarge our
carnal and sensual liberty; Christ's people are a willing, but Psalm. 11^. ^^ 2
Tit. 14.
not a wanton people: The Son has made us free, and so we are free indeed, as
Christ himself speaks, John 8. 36. But this freedom is from burdens, not from
duties, a freedom it is to Debita (...) ^^minicae obse^vatione (...) minuitur
quicquam Christiana libertas; Non enim est libertas sed licentia Christina, ut
nos libera^i putemus ab observatione illius praecepti e Decalogo; Et
experientia docet licentiam, et rerum sacrarum non curantiam magis, magisque
invalescere, ubi diei dom^nicae ratio non habetur.
run the ways of Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. 24. That can be no christian
freedom to indulge our ease, to flatter our sense, to please the flesh, to
pursue our sports, to gratify our fancy with dalliance and delight upon Gods
holy day: this kind of liberty Christ never died to purchase: Christian liberty
is quite another thing, it is a liberty from ceremonial yokes, and legal
impositions, Gal. 5. 1, 2, A liberty of access to God, to cry Abba Father, Romans
8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. A freedom it is from sins vassalage, from Satan's slavery,
from the worlds drudgery, and lusts dominion and tyranny. Christ did not die to
make us free to sin, but free from sin, Tit. 2. 14. It is a harsh and injurious
interpretation of Christ's coming, to suppose he came to make the broad way
broader then before: that before Christ came, the people of God were tied to a
strict observation of the Sabbath, but since, we have a latitude and liberty
for sports and delights, for ease and recreation on that blessed day, and that
now we are not so pinnion'd and shackl'd, as in the times of the law. This must
needs be some loose construction of a carnal Gospeller, who Ames.
is become Antinomian in the fourth Commandment. Christian freedom is a
dilatation and enlargedness of beart in holy Isa. 61. 1.
services, when the soul can freely vent it self without contractedness, Luke
4. 18.
and drawing their praying breath with difficulty. Gal. 5. 1, 13.
Sensualliberty is a privilege which better becomes the Disciples James 1. 25.
of Bacchus or Epicurus, and well suits with a feast of Priapus. Ruffinus
pleads hard in his prescriptions for Sabbath-observation, That we do not spend
it carnally and in delights; this is to act the Jew, not the Christian. And Die
Sabbati nihil exomnibus mundi octibus oportet operari, si ergo desi^^^* ab
omnibus socularibus and nihil mundanum geras, sed spiritualibus operibus vaces,
lectionibus divinis, and tractatibus aurem praebeas, ut non respicias, ad
praesentia and visibilia, sed ad invisibilia, and futura, haec est observatio
sabbati christiani.
Origin in a passionate heat, cries out, Let us lay aside the Jewish mode of
keeping Sabbaths, and let us observe them as Christians, discarding all worldly
acts and secular employments, let us be conversant in spiritual works, in
reading the Scriptures, in hearing the word, not eying things present and
visible, but looking forward to things to come, and invisible: and this is the
observation of a Sabbath, which will become a Christian.

The Fathers of the primitive times could not bear with any carnal liberty on
the Lords day, well knowing how contrary it was to the mind of Christ. Nor can
it be supposed, that it was any part of Christ's purchase, to procure us a
freedom to handle a Bowl or a Cudgel, or to frisk in a Maurisk-dance on Gods
sacred and solemn day: And indeed sensual latitudes and relaxations are rather
our thraldom, than our liberty, and the end of that mirth is heaviness, Prove.
14. 13. the impediments of holiness, and avocations from duty, and serve only
to recruit the force and strength of temptation. When David was at ease walking
in his Gallery, Orig. Quid dicendum est ad eos, qui magis seculo, quam deo
vacant.
then his sloth coupled with the temptation of Dalilahs beauty, and produced
those cursed twins of Murder and Idolatry; the defiling of the Wife, and the
destroying of the Husband, 2 Samuel 11. 4, 15. Hierom complained of some in his
time, who were more at leisure for the world, Hier. Decalogi verba deus per
semetipsum locutus est, and ideo permanet apud nos, extensionem et augmentum,
non dissolutionem accipiens per carnalem Christi advantum.
than God, upon his own day: And this that devout Father interpreted a crying
sin. Irenaeus says positively, That the Decalogue, in whose bosom the
Commandment for the Sabbath lies, received extension and increase, not
remisness and enervation, by the coming of Christ. And a learned man observes,
That liberty for sports and ease on a Sabbath Day, is not liberty, but
licentiousness: and where it is admitted, there follow the greatest decays of
piety and godliness.

Well then, Christian liberty, which was the purchase of Iren. advers. Her. l
4. cap. 31. Ephesians. 1. 7. 1 Col. 14. Liberatio ab obligatione ad poenam, a metu,
et solicitudine irae divinae, et maledictionis, et mortis aeternae. Bucan. ibid.
Christ's blood, is not the indulgence and ease of the flesh; it is something of
a more refined nature, something which has a taste and smatch of heavenliness,
and that glorious liberty of the Saints above: And Bucanus makes four branches
of it.

1. It is a freedom from the killing power of sin, and so consequentially an
immunity from the second death, Romans 8. 1, 2. and this is the liberty of life
and righteousness, as this learned man is pleased to call it.

2. A liberty from the obligation of the ceremonial, and from the condemnation
of the moral Law, Gal. 3. 13. Romans 6. 14. so that the moral Law is the Rule,
but cannot be the ruin, the guide of, and cannot be the handwriting against a
true Believer.

3. A freedom of boldness and access to the throne of grace, that we may go to
God, as Children to a Father, and not as Gal. 2. 4, 5.
Prisoners to a Judge, with trembling on our lips, paleness in our face, and
agonies in our spirits, Romans 8. 15.

4. A liberty from the old Mosaical Impositions, that Gal. 3. 25.
puerile Alphabet accomodated to the nonage of the Church. Now in all this
there is nothing mentioned of Luke 1. 74, 75.
fleshly ease, or carnal liberty; one cries out of such kind of liberty, O
egregious liberty, a fair purchase for the blood of the John 8. 36.
Son of God. In a word, our strict and holy deportment on the Sabbath, was no
stumbling block that Christ came to remove, no yoke that he came to break, but
the clean contrary; Christ came to procure closer and stricter communion Romans
8. 21.
between God and the Saints, that Believers might serve 2 Cor. 3 17.
him with greater care and devotion, he has purchased for us more spiritual
intercourses: and one well says, Duty is Gal. 5. 13.
the greatest liberty, and sin is the greatest bondage; we cannot Jam. 2. 12.
be left to a greater thraldom, then to walk in the ways of our own hearts; the
sinning Angels are said to be kept Eccles. 11 9.
in chains of darkness, Jude 6. A wicked man is in bondage here and hereafter;
here insnares, 2 Timothy 2. 26. and hereafter in chains, Matthew. 22. 13. Oftentimes
we cannot endure the restraints of the Word, or the serverities of Religion,
and we look upon them (which is the case now in hand) as an infringement of our
liberty; but we should seriously consider these blessed ties and confinements
are not our bolts, or our griefs, but our ornaments, Psalm. 119. 45. this is
only that free and uncontrolled life, which is spent in serving, in loving, in
enjoying and praising of God: the glorified Saints above have rest, not ease,
they inherit seraphical and divine, not sensual delights and liberties: that
Soul enjoys most freedom on a Sabbath, who has enjoyed closest communion with
God, and relaxed the least from spiritual services, 2 Pet. 2. 19. Wicked men
who most rove in the ranges of sin, Roma est domitrix mundi, et captiva
vitiorum. Aug. de civ. dei. Josephus suit liber, sed domina ejus suit captiva,
quia suis obedivit libidinibus. Chrysostom. homil. 19. in prior. Epist. ad
Corinth.
are the greatest slaves; as it was said of Rome, She was the Mistress of the
World, but the drudge of sin and lust. Wicked Cham his curse was to be the
servant of servants. Chrysostom elegantly observes, That Joseph who resisted
the temptation was the free man, but his Mistress who promoted it was the
captive, for she obeyed her swaying lusts. The people of God especially in
their holy converses are the Lords free men.

1. They have the assistance of a free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 12.

2. They proceed in a free state, in a state of Sonship, and well-pleasing,
Romans 3. 13. A Believer in all his spiritual actions, acts with an ingenious
liberty and confidence, Gal. 4. 15.

heavenly freedom, and therefore they plead for a sensual; and to justify
their claim they urge Scripture, especially that of Mark 2. 27. The Sabbath was
made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: From whence they conclude, that the
undue restraints which some rigorous Preachers impose upon the people on the
Lords day, are only the sowrness and fancy of their own melancholy and
disturbed Brain; our Savior here gives us liberty, which they shall not be
willing to part with, upon the opinion of a rugged Disciplinarian.

threefold interpretation of it; but none of them look that way, our Sabbatum
propter hominem factum est, non homo propter sabbatum: Hoc argumentum sumptum
est ex fundamentis institutionis sabbati; homo enim conditus fuit ante
institutionem sabbati; ergo non homo propter sabbatum. etc. Sabbatum enim
propter usum commodum and utilitatem hominis institutum fuit Duebus enim modis
propter hominem institutum est sabbatum: 1. Quoad corpus, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. ut
requiescat servus tuus, ancilla tua, etc. 2. Quoad spiritualem aedificationem
animae, Exodus 39. 13. Ezekiel. 20. 12. Sanctificavit deus sabbatum (i. e.)
deputavitillud homini ad cultum divinum exercendum; hoc fundamentum christus
pulchre opponit Pharisaeorum accusationibus, vos malletis, (quasi diceret)
propter sanctificationem sabbati discipulos meos esurientes potius affligi,
quam spicas aliquas discerpere, item malletis hominem perire, quam Sabbatis
sanari, atqui hoc direct pugnat cum Deuteronomy. 5. 14. Sabbatum propter hominem,
etc. sensus igitur est; Nec cum noxa, nec cum exitio, aut damno homi^i^
^^^genda e^t ^xterna obs^^vatio Sabbati: Sicut in exemplo Davidis est
manifestissimum. Chemnit. John 8. 36. Psalm 119. 164. Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm. 84. 10.
Libertines would fasten upon it.

1. They say, the Sabbath was made for man, because man was created before its
institution, and therefore this festival was ordained for his entertainment in
the world, for his profit and advantage, but not for his play, sports, and
recreations: This institution of the Sabbath ^yed man now newly created, and
made Gods Viceroy upon earth.

2. The Sabbath was made for man, that is, for his corporal good, that on this
day he might rest from the toyls of the world, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. In the Commandment
for the Sabbath, God consulted man's weakness, but not his wantonness; he
studied his frame, but not his fancy; God appointed the Sabbath, that man
should not over-bend the Bow, but relax and remit his painful labors, and so
be more composed and at leisure for spiritual service and worship; so the
Sabbath was made for man, for the good of his body.

3. The Sabbath was made for man, viz. for his spiritual good, that man on that
holy day might be built up in his most holy faith, and that he might enjoy
sweet communion with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3.
How often is the Sabbath the Souls nuptial day, wherein it is esponsed and
married to Christ; it is a day of divine support, of refection and recruit to
Grace, and often of the execution and mortification of lust and corruption. The
Sabbath is the Souls banqueting day, a fit season for strengthening and repast,
while it travels upon the Mountains of prey, and feeds with the flocks of
Christ at noon, Cant. 1. 7. Psalm. 76. 4.

However they who shall torture this Text to the utmost, and put it upon the
strictest wrack, shall force it to speak no more then thus much, That man must
not run the hazard or peril of life for the outward observation; of a Sabbath,
man must observe it, but not with an apparent danger of himself; if it cannot
be observed without harm and certain damage, the external observation must be
suspended, and man's life and good must not be impaired; and our Savior
instanceth, in David's eating of Shewbread, an extraordinary and unjustifiable
action, yet it may be apologized for, and maintained in a case of necessity:
and so the Disciples of Christ plucking the ears of Corn, it was for support
and necessary satisfaction: And so man's life is more considerable than the
outward observance of a day, especially considering that the Sabbath was
calculated for man's good in its first original and institution; and the whole
man, both Soul and body, was taken into consideration, when it was first set on
foot in the world. Now this fair and candid construction of the Text detests
all carnal liberty, and all swinges of pleasure and sensual delight, upon Gods
sacred and solenm day.

In a word, it is no ways suitable to a gracious spirit to be importunate for
carnal liberty on Gods holy day. The sensual delights of this life, they are
the clog, not the comfort of a Saint; their fetters, rather then their freedom.
A believer is never more himself, then when he travels over spiritual objects
in holy meditation, and freely vents himself in holy prayer and supplication:
He complains not of being clogged, unless when he is bird-limed with a
temptation, or staked down by a malepert corruption, that he cannot rise and
fly up to God in holy devotion; he knows not any liberty but the liberty of
Ordinances, and he is then only free, who is manumitted by Gods good spirit;
his confinement is the transiency, not the length of a Sabbath, and he is
dismissed from an Ordinance with a sigh. Fleshly ease pleases not him on a
Sabbath, because it keeps him from his beloved, nor dare he exchange duty for
recreation: He thinks it a poor and incontemptible thing to be running after a
bowl on the Lords day, when he should be running his race, and pressing forward
toward the Mark, Phil. 3. 14. Nor can he mind a sport, when he is to look
after a prize. The Saint thinks recreations on a Sabbath, are not only the loss
of time, and an empty Parenthesis; but they are Dalilahs, to rock him asleep,
that so he may lose Praeterea arbitrium nostrum, and voluntatem nostram
Christus in aliquam partem libertatis ponit, dum donat nos spiritu sancto,
cujus gratia corrapta nostra natura instaurata and spontaneo est, ut juxta prae
ceptum dei, been agamus, and pietati studere incipiamus prompto, Matthew. 19. 8.
spiritu, nam ubi spiritus est, ibi est libertas, Chemnit. Eccl. 9. 10. 2 Cor.
3. 17.
his spiritual strength: Whatever he does on a Sabbath, he does it with all his
might, and he knows there is no more work nor device in a recreation, then in
the grave. And truly, it too much savours of a carnal heart, either to be an
Advocate to plead for, or to be an Actor to engage in sensual delights on Gods
Holy day: from the beginning, from holy David, from zealous Nehemiah, it was
not so.

CHAP. XLVIII. The first Decad of Arguments, to persuade conscience to an holy
observation of the Lords day.
THe design of pressing conscience to a due observance of Gods blessed day is
already begun, and the rise has been taken from the sometimes solemn and
accurate carriage of the Jews upon their Sabbath: And shall a Vagabond Jew
out-vy us? shall that branch which is cut off, be Romans 11. 19.
more fresh and flourishing in Sabbath-observation then the branch which is
engraffed and implanted in its room? Shall In die dominico tantum deo, tantum
divinis cultibus vacandum est. Aug.
the slave be more obsequious then the Son? The vassal more obediential then
the Heir? The Jews still, though blasted with a Curse, yet they, at least some
of them keep their Sabbath with great zeal and devotion: And shall not
Christians, who lie under dews of divine blessing, and live under Sun-shines of
Gospel heat and light, be more frugal of the time, and more spiritual in the
duties of the Lords day? Let not a disinherited Jew rise up in judgment against
us. (But of this already.) But now further to press conscience to a holy
keeping of the Lords day.

Let us consider how much folly is bound up in profaning Gods day: We put away
from us all those golden promises Jer. 17. 24, 25.
which God has entailed upon a due observation of it.

1. Temporal promises, Isa. 56. 5. Lev. 26. 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Etiam and
Amen promissiones verissimas esse confirmat. Amen enim significat vere,
firmiter, fideliter, stabiliter and Hebraeis vox est confirmatis, and sic
Christus vocatur Amen, Rev. ^. 14. (i. e.) stabilis, constans, verus, ipsaque
stabilitas constantia, et veritas. Ambros.


2. Spiritual promises, Isa. 58. 14. He who prophanes the Sabbath loses the
sweets which are to be found in a God, and disinherits himself of those
plenties which are to be reaped in a flourishing earth: He tramples upon
pearls; for the promises which are to be made good in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20. are
the riches of the Gospel. Let us review this folly in the severals of it.

1. The profanation of the Sabbath argues much contempt, it spurns the crown
of a promise, and despises the riches of divine grace, it refuses the breast
of a promise, which is a breast not filled with milk, but consolation, Isa. 66.
11. It is worthy our notice; God has made promises to every duty of a Sabbath.

1. To Prayer, John 14. 15. Mat. 21. 22. Nay, it is part of the Covenant of
Grace, that the Saints should fly to God by prayer, and that the Lord should
hear from Heaven his dwelling place, Psalm. 89. 26, 27.

And 2dly, Promises are made to the right receiving of the Sacrament, Mat. 26.
29. That blessed banquet wants not a blessed promise.

3. Hearing of the word is encouraged by a promise, Isa. 66. 2. That duty also
is like Benjamins sack, with a cup in 2 Cor. 7. 1.
the mouth of it. Romans 9. 4.


4. Acts of charity, a necessary and comely duty, which fills up the services
of a Sabbath, they are bribed with a promise, Heb. 11. 33.
Psalm. 41. 1. Every silver piece we give, shall be turned into gold by the
inhancing nature of a promise. Heb. 6. 12.


5. Meditation, another duty of a Sabbath, has the experience of divine
sweetness, and soul-satisfaction, Psalm. 104. Heb. 8. 6.
34. Now when all these duties are carefully and spiritually acted on a
Sabbath, under what a golden shower of promises 2 Pet. 1. 4.
does the active Saint lie? Let those who profane the Sabbath be ashamed of
their contempt, to slight the treasure of so many promises. We may take notice,
that the promises are the Saints best estate, they are the Churches
privileges, Promissiones sparsim in scriptaris celebres, sunt bona in coelis
nobis propter Christum promissa. Alap.
Romans 9. 4. They are the highest encouragements, 2 Cor. 7. 1. They are the
rewards of faith, Gal. 3. 16. They are the believers inheritance, Heb. 6. 12.
They are the varnish, and the wealth of the Gospel, Heb. 8. 6. What is the
Gospel but a golden mine filled with promises with the stamp of Christ upon
them? The promises are the cordials of grace to keep it from fainting, Heb. 11.
13. They are the most pregnant incentive to obedience, Heb. 11. 17. They are
the exceeding great and precious donations of the soul, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Nay they
are the believers fairest revenue:

For 1. They are in the surest hand, 2 Cor. 1. 20.

And 2dly, They shall be paid in the most seasonable time, Psalm. 50. 15.

3. They contain in them most glorious acquests, John 3. 16. Luke 11. 13. The
spirit and glory are folded up in the promise.

4. We shall be spending upon them to eternity, Heb. 11. 13. Now what base
contempt are they guilty of, who profaning the Sabbath trample upon these
glorious and precious promises, these despise the riches of divine goodness, to
use the Apostles phrase, Romans 2. 4.

2. Profanation of the Sabbath speaks much infidelity: Did we believe Gods
promises which he has made to Sabbath holiness, we should be more precise and
strict in our Infidelis solo generali concursu dei potest proferre nomen Jesu,
aut de eo habere cogitationem aliquo modo benam, sed absque vera fide non
obtinet remissionem peccatorum, et gratiam supernaturalem, et beatitudinem.
Anselm.
observance. Indeed unbelief is the damp of every duty, it puts a faintness and
languor upon holy services. The primitive Saints who were acted by a principle
of faith, Heb. 11. 33, 34. run upon, and accomplished glorious things; this
grace shows us the crown, realizes all the promises to us, Heb. 11. 1. And so
it puts animation and life into every holy duty. Constantine the Great, when he
saw the Cross in the air with this Inscription, (...), In this overcome, he
summoned up his undaunted courage, and obtained a noble victory. Many look on
the promises of God, as bonds without a seal, as debenters which are not like
to be paid; and this makes the Chariot of duty drive heavily, and causes men
to slight Sabbaths with so much carelessness and indifferency. A believing soul
will double the tale of his duties, he will hear attentively, he will pray
devoutly, he will Redemptionis a Christo factae apertum documentum factum est
in resurrectione Christi: O quanta ergo est ingratitudo hominibus, charitati
Christi non re^pondere. Ambros.
meditate divinely, and discourse savourily on Gods blessed day; and all this
as eying the recompense of reward, and preying upon the rich incomes of the
promises. It is cursed unbelief sowers and flags the duties of a Sabbath, that
men either desperately neglect them, or else carelessly perform them.

3. A profanation of the Sabbath discovers much ingratitude. Does God give
thee a Sabbath, a Jewel of great price, to throw away into the Sea of idleness
or profaneness? Men who are slight on the Sabbath do not adore the rising Sun,
for the Sun of righteousness arose as upon this Mat. ^ 2.
day. Our Sabbath is Christ's resurrection day, which is the foundation of all
our happiness; had the grave detained him, hell had enclosed us. Christ opening
the prison of the grave, opened our way to the throne. How ungrateful then
shall we be to wound Christ on his own resurrection day? Shall we be formal,
drossie, vain, talkative, sensual, upon that day, when the Sun rose to give
light to a new world? what blackness of darkness had we eternally been wrapped
in, if this blessed Sun had not risen after the night of a grave, to be our
conduct and guidance to a better life? Sabbath Breakers may wear the scars and
brand of the most loathsome ingratitude.

4. Profanation of the Sabbath is soul-prodigality, it is a disinheriting sin
too? Can we expect a Sabbath to eternity, and not keep a Sabbath here? Can we
neglect the service of (...)
a day, and yet look for the reward of more then many ages? It is a good
observation of a Learned Man, That our Rest-day Heb. 4. 9.
is not called (...) Manuchah, a Common rest, but (...) Sabbath, Caelum est
illa requies, ubi fugit dolor, tristitia, gemitus, and omnes solicitudines; Ibi
nec invidia, nec zelus, nec morbus, nec nox, nec mors, nec tenebrae, sed omnia
pax, gaudium, jucunditas, voluptas, bonitas, etc. Chrysostom.
which signifies a holy Rest; to show us, that the due and holy observation of
our Rest here, is the ready way to our perfect rest hereafter. It is a sad
contemplation to take a view of profane persons, how they impose upon
themselves in a dream of glory. Can they possibly conjecture, that they can
sing their songs here on a Sabbath, take their cariere in sensual delights,
play away, walk away, prate away their precious Sabbaths, and at last sing
Hallelujahs in the Sabbath above? Is not this to conceive a Mountane to be
Chrystalline, because it is covered with snow, which bears some resemblance to
the color of it? Well then profanation of Gods day is a complicated evil, a
chain of darkness with many links in it a body of sin made up of the four
Elements, of Contempt, Infidelity, Ingratitude and Soul-prodigality, it is an
heretical vice which practically denies the resurrection of Christ.

There is much in the day, to solicit our holy observation: It is a Sabbath of
spiritual delights, it is the souls festival day, a day of fat things, and wine
upon the lees, Isa. 25. 6. The Cant. 2. 4.
Sabbath is the season in which Christ brings his beloved into Psalm. 118. 24.
to his banqueting house: Christians on this day are to rejoice in the Lord, as
the memorial of the greatest benefit which Dies dominicus domini resurrectione
declaratus est, and inde caepit habere festivitatem suam.
ever accrewed unto them: Their life rose this day a conqueror, and in him
they are more then conquerours, as the Apostle speaks most triumphantly, Romans
8. 37. And therefore holy men in all ages have waited with impatience for the
coming of this day, and have rejoiced with unspeakable joy at its approach.
This day is the darling, is the delight Aug. Sermon. de temp.
of days, and all other days are to be obsequious unto it. It is recorded of
holy Mr. Dod, and heavenly Mr. Bruen, that Deuteronomy. 32. 49.
they were even in heaven upon a Lords day. This day is Heb. 2. 10.
the day of Christ's visits, the souls spiritual market and fair; in it we have
our prospect of Canaan upon Mount Nebo, the Hujus diei laetemur^ festivitate.
Hil^r.
day it is of holy Discipline, to train us up in the School of Christ. Hilary
cries out, Let Christians be exceeding glad on this day of their festivals.
This day is the souls seeds time, Officia hodie praestanda spiritualia,
mirificam in se complectuatur jucunditatem; O quam suave est communione cum
Christo frui and in via Ordinationum, per quam Christus transire solet, ipsi
occurrere!
and glory shall be its harvest: this is the most special time for the
recruiting of the inward man, and strengthening it with all might. The duties of
this day are not only the plowing, but the reaping of the soul; they are in
themselves not only work, but wages, for in acting of spiritual duties, there
is great reward. As one says, Sabbath-service implies a wonderful sweetness,
as the music of the spears, which is included in its own circumference. How
delitious is it to enjoy communion with Christ on his own day, and to embrace
him in the way of his Ordinances, as Zaccheus, to meet him in the way as he
passes by, Luke 19. 5. Christ indeed is sweet to our enquires, much sweeter to
our acquests, when we have found our beloved, Cant. 3. 4.

Now then the Sabbath being a day of joy and jubilee to the soul, how
spiritual, exact and heavenly should we be? The Sabbath is joyous in its
constitution, let it be so in our disposition; let not this joy be damped by
our sin or neglect, let us not jar the music of it by our sloth or
sensuality, our carnal ease, or fleshly delights, for so we may at night go
down with sorrow to our bed. Genesis 42. 38.


Not only the pleasure of this day might allure, but the profit of this day
might enforce our greatest care and devotion: On this day, the soul makes its
greatest merchandise, and drives Deus in suo opere conquiescens benedixiti,
huic diei, and eum sanctificavit in ecclesia sua, ut sanctus haberetur in ea,
and benedixit illi, et benedicetur.
its most gainful bargains; on this day the poor believer follows the chase of
a Christ, of an heaven, of an eternity; this day is a day of ble^sings; how
many have met with their beloved, recruited their faith, amplified their joy,
and gained a better insight into their spiritual condition on this holy day?
Their souls, as Hannah, have begun the Sabbath with sighs and sobs, but in the
close thereof have gone away, and have been no more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 18. It is
usually on the Sabbath, Jun. in Genesis
that the believer makes his greatest journies toward his home. God says of
this day, as once Isaac said concerning Die dominico videre est animae
mercaturam quaestuo^issiman et opulentiorem omnibus mundi opibus, maj^r certe
est utilitas frui praesentia de, quum Margaritas, ac fodinas aureas acquirere.
Jacob, I have blessed it, yea, and it shall be blessed, Genesis 27. 33. On this
day, the gracious soul enjoys Christ's presence, communion with the blessed
Trinity, and the happiness of those spiritual Ordinances which are the Mines,
and the means of grace. On this day he drinks more deeply of the waters of
life, and participates more freely of the good things, of the graces of the
spirit, and tastes more sensibly of the prelibations of future and eternal joy,
Rev. 1. 10. Indeed on the Lords day, the believer makes up himself for the
decays and losses of the week, and drives the spiritual trade to the best
advantage.

Now profit should engage us to care and sedulity, and add a wing to our
zealous and holy industry: when we are sloathful or sensual upon the Sabbath,
we do not only sin away our tim^* ^ut our treasure, and lose our season for
advantage. Limn^rs will be very exact in drawing that picture for which they
are well rewarded: a high price will procure the most curious works; and why
should not a gainful Sabbath, which will pay for all our pains, engage us in
the greatest strictness of observation? Profit is the great engine which
prevails with worldly men. Some Nations will sell Swords Diei dominicae lu^rum,
non crumenam, sed animam spectat.
and warlike furniture to their open and proclaimed enemies for profit and
unusual gain; and surely the riches of Ordinances are finer gold, then the
treasures of the Mine, though they be dug in Ophir.

honor of this blessed day commands our severest observation. The Sabbath
contains all the three arguments in it, which some calls the worlds Trinity,
Pleasure, Profit, Honor: And if these arguments have so much force in
temporals, why should not they be as cogent in spirituals? spiritual good
things,

1. They yield most. Sure there is more in a grace of the spirit, then in the
stuffing of a bag, or the lining of a cost^r.

2. They last longest.

3. They are purchased with greater difficulty, they are bought with a price,
with the blood of a Redeemer. Dies dominicus omnium dierum matter est. Hieron.


4. They enrich our better part; and shall not they more influence our care and
our devotion? Our Sabbath is solemn in its own dignity, let it be so in our
observation. God has crowned this day with honor, why should we degrade it by
our sin and vanity? Our heavenly carriage does best comport with the glory of
this day. Hierom calls our Christian Sabbath, the Mother of days, not only
intimating its own antiquity, but pointing at the veneration we should give to
it: And so the fifth Commandment comes in to the support and assistance of the
fourth. We must honor this Mother of days, that our days may be happy and
long in the land, Exodus 20. 12. Nor unfitly is the Sabbath called a Mother,
when it has so fruitful an issue, and has brought forth so many Children to
Christ, who is its Lord and Master. Ignatius Mark 2. 28. (...), etc. Ignat.
calls our Sabbath the Queen of days, and all other parcels of time are only
handmaids to wait on her; now every evil fact is aggravated, which is
committed in the presence chamber. The Holy Ghost calls our Sabbath the Lords
day, Rev. 1. 10. And God does not call this day by his own Name, but to
intimate thus much to us, that we should likewise honor it by a holy and
careful celebration. Sin then and vanity is a blot in the Escucheon of the
Sabbath, and the profane person as much as in him lies, lays the honor of it
in the dust.

The Jews had a very high esteem of their Sabbath, and they compared it to a
Queen; their other festivals they compared to Concubines, and ordinary days
they compared to handmaids, and they made a six fold difference between their
Sabbath, and other festivals.

parasceue, or preparation going before them; but the Sabbath had still a
preparation, and it was called (...), or pervigilium Sabbati, the Vigils of the
Sabbath: John 19. 14. we meet with the preparation to the Passover; and
therefore a preparation was not peculiar to the Sabbath. preparation to the
Passover, because at that time, the Sabbath and the Passover fell both
together, Mat. 17. 62.
and then the Jews transferred the Passover to the Mark 15. 42.
Sabbath, and therefore it was called the great Sabbath; Joh. Luke 23. 54.
19. 31. That Sabbath day was an high day says the Text, John 19. 42.
because both feasts fell on the same day. But the preparation mentioned, John
19. 14. was then in respect of the Sabbath, and not in respect of the Passover,
which was drowned in the Sabbath. For other feasts besides the Sabbath, needed
no preparation.

Sabbath of the Jews had a prerogative above all other festivals, in that other
festivals were translated to the Sabbath, Alios festivitatis dies transfer
solebunt ad Sabbatum propter olera and mortuos. Judaic. Proverb.
but the Sabbath stood unmovable, and could never be transferred to any other
festival, and therefore they oftentimes made the feast day a common day, and
upon it they prepared their meat, and buried their dead, and they transferred
the religious exercises which did belong to that day, to the Sabbath.

Sacrifices of all their festivals gave way to the Sabbath: Their daily Evening
sacrifice was killed at eight of the clock, and half an hour past, according to
the Jews counting of the hours, half an hour before three with us, and offered
at the ninth hour and an half past, which with us is half an hour after three;
and this they did that they might rest the evening of the Sabbath.

double sacrifice upon it, Numb. 28. 9, 10. Whereas all other festivals had
only their particular services and sacrifices; which as it was to distinguish
the Sabbath from all other feasts, so to mind us of that industry and sedulity
we should show on the holy and blessed Sab-Sabbath.

kept in the wilderness, and in the captivity; and he who violated and brake
the Sabbath in the Wilderness was stoned to Death, Numb. 15. 35. But other
festivals were not kept in the captivity, and the Passover but once in the
wilderness, Numb. 9. 5.

whole week took denomination from the Sabbath, Luke 18. 12. Acts 13. 42. And
besides all this, every Sabbath day they came to hear the Scriptures read and
expounded, (...), in medio septimanae.
Mat. 1. 21. Luke 4. 31. But on the week days they met occasionally. The
Sabbath was the appointed time for those holy exercises. Now shall the Jews be
so curious Acts 14 15.
in drawing of their Sabbaths Eschutcheon of Honor, and marking its dignified
prerogatives, and shall we give less veneration to the Lords Day? I mean not,
in verbal praises, or rhetorical panegyricks, but in holy practices. Our
careful Preparation for the solemnities of it, our serious behavior in the
duties of it, our frugal improvement of the time of it, our unwearied diligence
in the service of it; this, and this only speaks our Sabbath honorable. Piety
and Devotion best proclaim the dignity of this holy day; when we act, as those
who believe, that Christ is not only the institutour of our Sabbath, but will
be the Judge of the world. Let us Rom 2. 16.
then consider the Lords Day under what notion we will, either as the souls
jubilee and festival day, or as the souls market 2 Cor. 5. 10.
day, or as the Churches best and most glorious day, yet still nothing but
holiness becomes it, and its beauty is best seen in our sanctification; Our
holiness is the foil to set off the glory of it.

Let us look upon our Sabbath, as a day of distinction, the observation of
which distinguishes Christians from the rest of the world; and this meditation
will prompt us to holiness. What Sabbatum est signum quod deus Israelem
sanctificavit, (i. e.) segregando eos a gentibus profanis, in peculiarem sibi
populum. Lavater in Ezekiel.
the Lord said to the Jews, Exodus 31. 13. Verily my Sabbaths shall ye keep, for
it is a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am the Lord who does
sanctify you; is as applicable to us, as it was to them; and it is, as if the
Lord had said, the keeping of my Sabbath shall be a distinctive badge and
cognizance of Covenant holiness, a sign that I do sanctify you, and separate
you to my self for a holy and peculiar people. Let us cast our eye upon our
Sabbath as our discriminating and differencing badge: And shall we shame our
livery? Shall we make our Sabbath a day of riot or excess, Sabbatum est signum
et symbolum inter deum et Israelitas; ut se dei esse profiterentur, et ut a
reliquis gentibus discernerentur; ^uit enim sacramentale quoddam quod illos
sibi deus sanctificaverat. Riv.
of sloth or idleness, and so mingle with the profane world? Do we profane
our Sabbaths, how can we distinguish our selves from a sensual Jew, or a
miscreant Turk; they likewise have their Sabbaths? And will a diurnall
distinction serve the turn; that the Turk keeps his Sabbath on the Friday, the
Jew on the Saturday, and we Christians the First day of the week? It is a poor
shift, and a faint distinction to keep a different day; will not the world
scoff at this distinction? It is not the Day only, but the manner of
observance. The Apostle says, that Christ's people are a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, 2 Tit. 14. And so our Savior makes the distinction of
his people from the rest of the world, John 17. 14. It is observable, that the
Hebrew word (...) Chadash signifies two things; 1. To separate from common use.
2. To sanctify, to teach us, our sanctification is our only separation from
the rest of the dregs of the world: Therefore still let our holiness upon Gods
blessed day, be a sign between God and us, that he has sanctified us. This is
his will, and let it be our work, as always, so peculiarly on the Sabbath, our
sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3. Exodus 31. 13. Sabbatum sanctis usibus et
religiosis formaliter deputatur, etc. Rivet.
Let Christ know us to be his sheep by this, our will is not only melted into
his will, but our obedience is fully calculated for his day. Rivet has a
pregnant note, The Sabbath, says he, is given formally for holy uses, for
hearing the Word, for Prayer, for receiving the Sacrament, by which our
sanctification is ripened and accomplished.

No command but that of the Sabbath has a memento prefixed Hic specialis
observatio requiritur, ita ut nunquam obliviscamur, quia agitur de operibus
humanis intermittendis, et de opere dei suscipiendo, quae sunt naturae hominis
depravatae omnino contraria, etc. Riv.
to it; As if our obedience to this command was our chief business, which we
must not forget: God does not usually annex his mementoes to any thing, but to
matters of the greatest moment. As 1. Sometimes to press his Laws, Number. 15. 39,
40. And 2. sometimes to press his Love, as a motive to obedience, Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
3. Sometimes to mind us of himself, Deuteronomy. 8. 13. 4. Sometimes to mind us of his
Enemies, Deuteronomy. 25. 17. And 5. Sometimes to mind his Sabbath, Exodus 20. 8. God
puts an Higgaion Selah upon this Commandment, that as among the Jews, the
singing of it caused them to raise their voice: So among us in keeping
Sabbaths, it should raise our hearts to a holy observation. Now God prefixes a
memento to the Commandment for the Sabbath upon diverse designs, which will very
well suit with our purpose.

opposition of man's corrupt heart to this holy Command, Romans 7. 12. Depraved
man cannot endure Homines parati sunt ad fervorem operum suorum oc^upantur suis
commodis, and suis voluptatibus facilime irretiontur; sed cultui divino, etc.
Riv.
the snaffle of a whole days service, he loves not to be bridled to spiritual
duties, and therefore God here awakens us by a shrill memento; the learned
Rivet observes, That men are upon the wing in flight, and heat after their own
works, and they are most easily entangled in the snare of their own pleasures
and delights; but to do Gods work upon his own day, this goes against the grain
of corrupt Nature.

Memento shows the venerable antiquity of the Sabbath. God has been pressing
the Sabbath upon us from the beginning of the world, (as has been shown
already:) The Genesis 2. 3.
good Lord is jealous, least an ancient should be an antiquated institution.

this Memento to mind us of the strict account we must make hereafter for all
our Sabbaths. When a Master gives his servant many errands, but says he, be
sure you remember this above all the rest; if that errand be forgotten he
breaks out into a greater passion. God remembers us to keep inviolably his holy
Sabbath, to assure us he will else remember to punish severely the breaches,
and violations of this Emphatical Commandment. His expostulation hereafter will
be, Did not I give you my Sabbath with a Memento?

sum of Religion lies in a due observation of the Sabbath. It was a good saying
of worthy Mr. Rogers, Take away Gods Sabbath, and Religion will soon Toll
Sabbatum et cito marcessit omnis Religio. Rog.
dwindle and faint into nothing. Jacob gave a severe charge to his Sons about
Benjamin, because he lay nearest his heart; And is it not an evidence, that the
fourth Commandment lies nearest to Gods heart, that he gives so severe a charge
about it? That much of Religion is wrapped up in it, nay, the very quintessence
of piety is dropped into it?

We are more apt to forget the fourth Commandment then Observandum est, quod
deus non simpliciter dicit, Diem Sabbati sanctificabis, sed memento, ut diem
Sabbati sanctifices; Genus hoc praecipiendi non est leve, and vulgar, sed
grave and serium, et significat praecipirem seriam, nec ullo modo negligendam,
sed summa cura et diligentia servandom; sic solent Parents liberis suis, et
ser^^^ Heri, obtervantiam eo^^^ inculcat^, quae omnium maxim negligi notant;
Admonemur etiam verbo (...) Recordare, et memor esto ad observantiam
praeceptorum dei. Requiritur enim memoria, ut noctes et dies de illis servandis
cogitemus, nec unquam obliviscamur quid praecepti, and a quo illud accepimus.
Muscul.
any of the rest. And it is observable, when any duty is charged by God with a
Memento, it argues a proneness to forget it, so Eccles. 12. 1. Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy Youth; which charge intimates to us, no age is so
prompt to forget God as Youth, which usually is snarled and entangled in diverse
lusts, called by the Apostle, Youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22. And there are many
reasons why we are so apt to forget this Commandment:

1. Because the rest of the Commandments are written in our hearts by the light
of Nature; but this only was given by outward Ordinance and Institution, and we
are more apt to forget Instructions then Inclinations.

2. Because this Commandment more restrains natural liberty then all the rest:
the other Commandments restrain only things sinful, but this prohibits things
lawful at any other time, nay, it restrains our very words, Isa. 58. 13. and
our very thoughts; our lawful works, and secular employments must be laid
aside on this day; we must not think or discourse of the world, and the things
of it on this blessed day.

3. Because of the multitude of our affairs on the six days, which had need to
be remembered to be finished seasonably, or else they will breed distractions on
the Lords day; nor is it so facil and easy to keep off their impressions and
intrusions, when we are to converse with God on his own day.

4. Because the Devil will assuredly prompt us* to forget this Commandment; so
to quench the memory both of the Creation, and the work of our Redemption, that
he may the more readily draw us to despair by forgetting the salvifical work of
our Redemption, or else to Atheism, by forgetting the stupendous work of the
Creation; for as the work of Creation first give us a Sabbath, so the work of
Redemption afterward gave us our Sabbath. Now to prevent these mischicvous
inconveniences, we are alarmed and quickened with a Memento to keep this
Commandment, as a means to preserve the memory both of Father and Son, and so
to keep on foot holy and divine worship.

This Commandment of the Sabbath, is of most weight to be remembered, for the
observance of all the rest of the Commandments depend much upon the keeping of
this: Let us cast our eye upon the Conversion of sinners; where one has been
converted on the week day, many have been brought home to God on his own day;
God does delight to dispense his graces on his own day: so that in keeping this
day, we preserve an opportunity when God does confer his graces on the Sons of
men, and in a careless observing of this day, we put from us an opportunity of
getting and obtaining the grace of God: So then, keep this day, and we keep
all; neglect this day, and we neglect all the proper means for life and
salvation. This is the season when the Angel comes down to stir the waters, and
then is our time to step in and be healed. John 5. 4.
This indeed is the fundamental command, on which the superstructure of piety
and religion is fastened and built. On this day God draws nigh to his people,
and they to him; nay, the way to lay hold on Gods Covenant, is to keep his
Sabbath: there is some hopes of a man's salvation when he makes conscience of
keeping this holy day.

7. The reason why this Commandment is of so much weight to be remembered, is,
because in it we are made more (...).
spiritually minded; it frames our spirits to be more fit and adequate to every
good word and work, we are as not of this world; the Apostle says, Heb. 4. 9.
Verily, there remains a Rest for the people of God: Implying that the Saints in
Heaven keep a Sabbath-Rest; meditating divine things, singing praises, and
minding only the things of Heaven. Nothing more fits and accommodates our
spirits to the supreme good, Vis in die quem dicunt solis, solemn colitis. sicut
nos in eundem dominicum non solemn, sed resarrectionem domini veneramur.
then a holy observation of the Sabbath; it is the beginning of heaven here,
our hearts then work up more and more to their center, to their God, to their
Christ.

8. We must remember this Commandment. In keeping the Sabbath, we keep in mind
Gods chiefest mercies, the benefit of our Creation, and of our Redemption: the
first giving us our beings, the second our well beings; the first being the
Aug. Contr. Faust. Manich, Lib. 10.
fountain of Nature, the second being the spring of Grace: And whereas there
are Three most glorious persons, showing themselves in their several works
tending to man's good, the due observation of the Sabbath puts us in the
remembrance of them all; Of the Father who created us, and then gave the Genesis
2. 3.
world a Sabbath; of the Son who redeemed us, and on this day ascended from the
Grave; of the Holy Ghost who inspires Acts 2. 1, 2, 3.
us, and sheds a beauty upon us, who as on this day descended from heaven in a
miraculous flame upon the blessed Apostles, which was an infallible earnest of
those plenteous effusions of the spirit, which should be poured forth upon the
Church in all ages. Thus upon weighty reasons, a Memento Dan 5. 6.
is affixed to the fourth, and only to the fourth Commandment; which if it be
not a note of observance, to point out our Sanctificatio Sabbati est, diem a
deo antea sanctificatum pro sancto habere, et exercit^is religionis, et fidei
exercendae sedulo in^umbere; Atque ita sanctificationem dei haudquaquam
prophanare, sed illibatam conservare. Muscul.
great concernment in the holy keeping of it, it will be an handwriting on the
wall, to make us tremble to all everlasting. A learned man observes, That God
should preface this Commandment with a Memento, it implies that some serious
thing is commanded, something of the highest importance, which upon our peril
must not be neglected or forgotten: This command is a treasure committed to us
with a great charge. And it is observable, it is not said, Remember that thou
keep the Sabbath day; but remember the Sabbath to keep it holy, Exodus 20. 8.
God stops not at Sabbath day, but adds, to keep it holy, evidently implying,
that to set apart the time of a Sabbath is not considerable; but to spend that
time in holy duties, and in the holy exercises of faith and religion, this is
the fulfilling of the Commandment: When Gods sanctifying of Sabbatum non est
mere quies. Leid. Prof.
the day, as Musculus speaks, is not profaned by us, but kept pure and
unspotted. The Memento then in this Commandment is only the usher of holiness,
Gods, loud call to strictness and sanctity on his own day; the significant
harbinger to tell us, Christ is coming, and on this day he must lodge in our
hearts.

No Command is sweetened with more equity then that of the Sabbath. There is
that which Aristotle calls (...) in it, a Facillimum est, et aequissimum, ei
cujus toti sumus, unum diem e septem conservare, qui sex alios nostris
laboribus concessit, cum tamen potuisset jure suo plures illis servandos
judicare. Riv.
just and moderate Imposition, there is not so much voluntas imperantis, the
will of him who commands, as ratio impe^andi, the reason of the command it
self. In this command God rather exercises jus Patris, quam jus Domini, the
right of an indulgent Father, then of an Authoritative Lord. Man's good and
benefit is twisted into Gods Command, as rich embroydery is put upon a piece of
sine cloth. This is a Precept not only prefaced with a memento, but seconded
with an appeal to man's reason and conscience. Let us take a view of the force
of this equity.

most equal that God should have one in seven, (to add somewhat to what has
been said already) If God gives us six days, shall we deny him one? It is the
confession of Mr. Brerewood, (Our adversary in this cause of the Sabbath) That
it is meet, that Christians dedicate the Lords Day wholly to the Lord, and to
the honor of his name; and that we should not be less devout in the
celebration of the Lords day, then the Jews in the celebration of their
Sabbath, because the obligation of our thankfulness is more then theirs. Thus
far our adversary pathetically exhorts us to keep Gods blessed day wholly and
fully to himself. Holy Greenham says, If God had given us one day for our
selves, and kept fix for himself, it had been equity in him to command, and
duty in us to obey: But now God has kept but one for himself, and that for our
profit too; to break this Commandment then, when God has shown such
liberality, it must needs be a stupendous sin. It was a rational discourse of
Joseph with his Mistress, Genesis 39. 9. My Master has kept back nothing from me,
but thee, because thou art his Wife, and therefore how can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? God has kept no day in the week from us but
only the first day, because it is his Sabbath; how then can we do this great
wickedness to profane his Sabbath, and sin against God? This amplified Adams
guilt, he was only forbidden one Tree in the Garden, and he must eat of that;
and this will aggravate our sin, we are only forbidden one day in the week, and
yet we must do our own 2 Samuel 12. 4.
work, please our own corruptions, and gratify our flesh and Datur Sabbatum
homini, ut se segreget, et quiescat propter dei gloriam. Aben. Fzr.
sense on that very day. Nathans parable which he used to David, 2 Samuel 12. 3,
4. is rightly calculated for every one who prophanes Gods day. Has God only
one day which he has kept to himself, and sanctified to his service, and laid
as it were in his bosom; and shall men be so unworthy, then when their hearts
tempt them to vanity, they must take the time of this one day to please and
gratify their own corrupt hearts, when they are rich in time, and have six
days every week given them for themselves? I may here take up that of the
Apostle, Romans 8. 1. Shall we sin, and continue in it, because Grace abounds?
Gods bounty should encourage, not dispirit our duties; it should be a spur to
holiness, and not a gap to profaneness. Psalm. 119. 164.


most equitable it is, that Time being one of the most precious blessings on
this side eternity, a jewel of inestimable worth, a golden stream dissolving,
and as it were continually running down by us out of one eternity into another,
yet too seldom taken notice of, till it be quite passed by us and from us; It
is most just, I say, and meet, that he who has the dispensing of other things
less precious and momentous, should be the supreme Lord of our time, especially
Eccles. 9. 12.
when he takes so little to himself as one day in seven.

our guilt must boil up to a great height, if we dash the eighth Commandment
upon the fourth, to break both in pieces, and rob God of his little spot of
time, the Sabbath (...). Chrysostom Homil. 5. in Mat.
day, to waste it upon our lusts, sloth or vanities. It is a zealous and
pathetical speech of the excellent Chrysostom; What desperate folly is it,
says he, for people to bestow five or six days upon the affairs of the world,
and not to give one day to spiritual things? Therefore let men be persuaded,
that at least they would set one day apart wholly to these things; whatever
they do on the week days, one of the seven days must be set apart to our
common Lord. Let us observe the Argument of this holy man: not only Gods
indulgence, but our own dependence commands Sabbath-holiness; God is the common
Lord, and shall we not consecrate one day in the week to his service, to the
great Jehovah, in whom we live, move, and have our being? Acts 17. 28.
His time is not only in our hand, but our times are in his hand, Psalm. 31. 15.
And if we abuse his time, he can shorten ours. And besides all our labors,
which are as the humming of a Be, or the fluttering of a Butterfly, are not so
valuable to take up six days, as his sacred worship, which is Psalm. 31. 15.
not only our homage and tribute, but our way to life and salvation, to take up
one day. Gods honor and glory, which is promoted on his own day by all devout
and holy Christians, is infinitely more considerable then all our worldly
gains, and petty interest which is carried on the other six days. Bucer says
most truly and gravely, He discovers himself a most deplorable despiser, not
only of his own salvation, but of divine bounty and indulgence, and not fit to
Deploratum sane i^se contemptorem demonstrat. sicut salutis prop^iae, sic
admirandae dei erga nos beneficentiae, ecque omnino indignum qui cum populo dei
vivat, qui non studet tum ipsum diem domino deo suo glorificando, et
providendae suae propriae saluti, sanctificaro maxim quum deus, nostris
nego^iis et operibus, quibus praesentem vitam sussentemus sex dies concesserit.
live among Gods people, who does not study to spend one day in seven, (viz.)
the Lords day, to the glory and honor of the Lord, and to look after his own
salvation, especially seeing God has given us six days for our labors and
employments, to sustain our selves in this present life. This holy man thinks
him unworthy of any station in the Church of God, who has so far sunk himself
below the shadow of all reason and justice, as not to take Gods grant in giving
us six days for our selves, and so to conscerate the seventh in holy duties
and exercises to the glory of a bountiful and a gracious God. And indeed the
waste and profanation of Gods day, only one in seven, would fill any pen with
gall, and turn the smoothest tongue into a sword; such sacrilegious and
unreasonable men who profane this blessed day, a day in a week, would fill any
face with blushes, and any tract with sharpness. Dr. Twisse observes, that
Gomarus and Rivolus two learned men, though much differing from other Divines
in Sabbatical controversies, yet in this particular they speak very plausibly,
not without a note of good zeal; For thus they speak, That in reason it is fit,
now under the Gospel, to allow more time for Gods service, rather then less.
Gospel seasons call for greater services. Buc. de regn. Christi.


And indeed in this we heartily accept their just acknowledgement. It is a
witty descant of the learned Weems, Vt aliqua dies in septimana sit deo
dedicata, praeceptum est stabile, et aeternum.
God gives us, says he, six whole days for our use, and therefore we should
give him one whole day for his Sabbath, or else we have two measures in our
bag, a little one to meet out with, and a great one to receive in with, which
is an abomination to the Lord. Jacob. de Valent.


Divinum magis est, et utilius spiritualibus fidei, et religionis vacare, quam
terrenis operibus esse intentum. Muscul.
earth is a pilgrimage, and he has no abiding City here, but looks for one
above, therefore he should not spend all his time, his thoughts and studies
upon the trivials of the world, and the services of the week; but (as some time
every day) so also some one day every week, to retire from the world, and to
draw near to God in his holy and fructiferous Ordinances, and to seek communion
with him, with whom he expects to live for ever in glory and blessedness.
Videamus in sacra scriptura totum divinum cultum in sabbato comprehendi: Atque
ideo haec lex tam saepe in scripturis repetitur, diligenter inculcatur,
graviter urgetur, obedientia ejus plurimum laudatur, et neglectus ejus severe
vindicatur. Leid. Prof.


No Command pressed with more vehemence than that of the Sabbath. God in his
word does not press things trivial or indifferent, but those which are most
necessary, and of the greatest importance. As the Apostle speaks of the
Ministers preaching in season, and out of season; so it may be said of Gods
pressing this Commandment, he takes all occasions to urge and importune it:
and the Leyden Professors give us this reason, Because all divine worship is
comprised in a due observation of Gods holy day; And the breaking of this
Command God calls the breaking of all his Commandments, Exodus 16. 28. Let us
glance a little at the jealous God, and see what methods and importunities he
has used to preserve his Sabbath holy, and that it might not be defiled and
polluted.

upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. 18. Exodus 20. 8. But he gives a new and strict
charge for the due observation of his Sabbath, Exodus 31. 13. and thunders out
his threats against all, who ever shall violate or make any breaches upon it,
Exodus 31. 15.

insinuates an Argument of love to endear the people of Israel to this
Commandment, Exodus 31. 16, 17. and tells them it shall be a perpetual Covenant
betwixt Hoc de Sabbato mandatum toties inculcari videmus, ut necessatio sit
credere, illud in populo fuisse magni momenti. Riv.
him and them, the very tie of friendship and amity between them, and it should
be a sign of Gods owning them for his peculiar people, and their owning him
for their only God. The Jews should be known to belong to Jehovah by their
observation of his Sabbath, that should be the Shibboleth to distinguish them
from the Chaos of the rest of the World.

after this, a few days sliding away, God renews his Command for the Sabbath,
Exodus 35. 1, 2. in a full assembly of the people, that none might plead
ignorance, and that a repeated Law to their Ears, might be a rivetted Law in
their hearts.

Israelites might interpret this Law of the Sabbath positive only, and so
transient, God presently after this inserts it among the Laws natural, that if
the Jews Qui Sabbatum custodiebat, hoc ipso tacit profitebatur, Deum esse
conditorem coeli, et terrae; qui vero contemnit Sabbatum, videtur inficiari
deum esse creatorem mundi; sic qui diem dominicum celebrare recusat, videtur
negare Christum resurrexisse. Vatabl.
should forget Mount Sinai, they might have a principle in their own breasts,
to lead them to the obedience of this Law; God tells them, Levit. 19. 3. They
must honor their Father and their Mother, and keep the Sabbath. God would have
the one Law as fairly written, and as deeply engraven on their hearts, as the
other, and he joins neighbor Commandments together; Nature leads them to
reverence their Parents, Religion, Gratitude, Reason, Obedience, and much of
Nature should draw them to keep Gods Sabbath.

same Chapter, Levit. 19. 30. where God reckons up his Feasts which he will
have observed throughout the current of the year; there God takes an occasion
to begin with his Sabbath; and so Levit. 23. 2, 3. that Feast must be looked
upon in the first place, they must first seek the observation of the Sabbath,
and all other Feasts shall be added unto them, for greater splendour Mat. 6. 33.
and solemnity.

Jews of his Sacrifices, what kinds, in what order, on what seasons he will
expect them, he enjoins duplicate Sacrifices on the Sabbath, Numb. 28. 9, 10.
to intimate plainly to us, that the more service he has from us on that day,
the more grateful it is to him.

Moses repeats the ten Commandments to the people of Israel a little before
his death, he forgets not the Commandment for the Sabbath, Deuteronomy. 5. 14. that
lies still in the bosom of the Decalogue, as the beloved Disciple leaned upon
the bosom of Christ, John 21. 20. this Command has neither lost its site, nor
force.

of the Jews, from Judges to Kings, still the observation of the Sabbath is the
same, 1 Chronicles. 9. 32. There may be a change in the times, there must be none in
the Sabbath; the care of the Sabbath is the duty of every Governor, by what
Name or Title soever he be distinguished.

after Ages, the Prophets press hard for the observation of the Sabbath, Jer.
17. 21. And this was one considerable piece of their message to the people, God
still alarms his people to Sabbath-holiness.

how sharply does God upbraid them by his Prophets, Ezekiel, 20. 12. as a most
ungrateful and inconstant people, and how bitterly does he expostulate with
them, as a froward, and shortly to be forlorn Generation, Ezekiel. 20. 13. and
looks upon the violation of his Sabbath, as a contempt poured out upon all his
Laws and Statutes, Ezekiel. 20. 16. and yet in the midst of his anger, his Sabbath
is so dear to him, that if they will yet keep his Sabbath, his wrath may be
withheld and restrained, Ezekiel. 20. 20. and better days may befall and betide
them.

pollution of his Sabbath is so great and so gross an abomination, that God
knows not how to put it up, and therefore he goes on in his complaints,
reiterating his charges against them, and bringing in new Bills of Indictment
for the violation of his Sabbath, Ezekiel. 20. 24. Ezekiel. 22. 8. 26. Ezekiel. 23. 38.

sorest judgments against Israel, he at last comprises them all in one, he
tells them Hos. 2. 11. He would cause her Sabbaths to cease, they should lose
that darling mercy, which they had so much abused.

Now then, all this importunity of God in urging Sabbath-holiness, does but the
more alarm us to break off our sin by keeping holy this blessed day: Surely the
sanctifying of Gods day is a matter of the highest moment, else God would not
so multiply his Injunctions and charges about it, for the Scriptures know no
vain repetitions.

No Command is rewarded with more bounty, than that of the Sabbath: God has
set the richest crown on the head of Sabbath-obedience, like Jacob it has
obtained the Blessing: Genesis 27. 30.
and if you ask, what blessing, it is answered.

God rewards the holy observation of his day with spiritual blessings, and
indeed they are the choicest blessings, they are most refined, not mingled with
the dross of earth and inconstancy, they most concern the Soul, which is man's
more sublime and better part: and for these was the Sabbath principally
ordained, that God in the use of Ordinances on this day, might enrich our Souls
with spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. and with
these blessings will the Lord bless a conscientious observation of his day; so
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 20. 12. I gave them my Sabbaths, that they may know, that
I am the Lord who sanctifies them. We shall find and know, that the Lord will
sanctify us, both with the beginnings and the increases of grace in our
hearts, Psalm. 92. 13.
if spiritually and sollicitously we keep his Sabbaths; yea, the Lord has
promised, Isa. 56. 6, 7. to every one who Isa. 56. 6, 7.
keeps his Sabbath from pollution, that he will make them Exodus 31. 13.
joyful in his house of prayer: and in Isa. 58. 14. that they Levit. 26. 2. 11.
shall delight themselves in the Lord. By these two Texts of Isa. 58. 14.
Scripture, it appears, that God has bound himself by promise, Isa. 56. 4, 5.
not only to work sanctification, increase of holiness, Ezekiel. 20. 12.
and power over corruptions, but also by his spirit of adoption to increase in
their hearts a lively sense of his favor, Judaei laetantes ibant in templum
domini, ibique exaltantes orabunt, canebant, psallebant omnibus instrumentis
musicis, atque ex victimis deo oblatis epulabantur coram domino. Alap.
assurance that he hears their prayers, and accepts their oblations, as
likewise peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost, which are the
blessings the Christian prizeth above ten thousand Worlds.

These spiritual mercies then are the reward of Sabbath-holiness: and indeed
how often does the devout Soul on Gods holy day, sensibly feel the power of
Ordinances, the workings and impressions of grace, the very drawing out of
Christ's heart toward them; and whilst they meet with the people of God in
their holy Assemblies, the presence of God breaks out, like the Sun in a bright
Morning, and the Holy Psalm. 122. 1.
Ghost falls upon them, Acts 10. 44. manifold experience might be subpoenaed in
to attest and verify this truth.

God rewards Sabbath-holiness with temporal blessings: this is a top-branch of
that godliness, which has the promises of 1 Timothy 4. 4. Huic sanctificationi
sa^ba^i prom^^tur benedictio tam privota, tam publica, et custodient Sabbatum
nunciatur ^ea^us. Leid. Prof. Per altitudines, ubertas terrae intelligatur.
Sanch. Allevabit super bona terrae. Sept. Terra excelsa vinetis and fructibus
abundat. Isa. 56. 2.
this life that now is. Sabbath-holiness can entail blessings on the Throne,
and make that splendid and illustrious, Jer. 17. 25. it can pour blessings upon
the family, and make that wealthy and prosperous, Isa. 58. 14. I will cause
thee to ride upon the high places of the earth; which must be meant of
fruitfulness and abundance, as Expositors inform us: the phrase refers to
feracious and flourishing Mountains, which are the richest pasturage; or else
to the Land of Canaan, much swelling with Hills, which was the most plentious
spot of ground (while God was with his people there) that was in the whole
world, some observing that, that small Land of Canaan maintained at once no
less than thirty Kings: High-grounds, as a learned man conceives, are places
for the most flourishing Vines, and the rarest fruits; and the Septuagint
interpret these high places of the earth, the good things and increases of the
earth: However, rich temporal blessings must be implied, which shall certainly,
as there is truth in the promise, be the portion of those who are holy and
devout upon Gods blessed day.

Sabbath-holiness will bring down blessings upon single persons:

1. Upon the more inferior. The very Eunuchs, who were Moses arcebat Eunuchos
suorum caetu, et e templi ministeriis, et publicis officiis, et Eunuchus notat
populum Gentilem, qui vere est Eunuchus (i. e.) sterilis pietatis et bonorum
operum. Alap.
pieces of contempt, and in the time of the old Law, were not to enter into the
Congregation of the Lord, but their infirmity sued out a Writ of
Excommunication against them, Deuteronomy. 23. 1. and they served only for a type of
the Gentile Nations, who were barren of piety and good works, yet says the
Lord, Isa. 56. 45. Unto the Eunuchs who keep my Sabbaths, I will give to them
in my house a place, and a name better than of Sons and Daughters: So grateful
to the Lord is the holy observation of the Sabbath, that it can make an Eunuch
fruitful, and put the meanest person into the Bond of the richest promise.

2. As the holy observation of Gods day, can raise the meanest, so it can
honor and bless the greatest. Nehemiah was an excellent example of zeal for
Gods day, and his zeal flamed out so much, that it scorched presumptuous
despisers of it; and this sacred heat of zeal was rewarded with great success,
his combat against Sabbath-prophanation was vigorous, and his victory was
glorious, Nehem. 13. 15, 16, 17, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
18, 19, 20, 21. his contest was sharp, and his conquest was sweet.

The good observation of the Sabbath can bring safety to a City: so the Prophet
speaking of the keeping of Gods Sabbath, Jer. 17. 24. which if it shall be
done, Jer. 17. 25. Si custodie^ur Sabbatum Jerusalem flarebi^, and templum
mire frequentabitur.
This City shall remain forever. Nothing can better encompass a City with
walls, barricado a City against danger, preserve a City from decay, and secure
a City from ruin, then when the Citizens are not more industrious in their
shops on the week day, then they are zealous in the Sanctuary and in their
families upon the Sabbath. God watches over that City for good, where the due
observation of the Lords day is most strictly practiced, and the profanation
of it, is most severely chastised.

The sanctification of the Sabbath can cause the state to Flourish: It can fill
the Court with splendour and glory, Jer. 17. Extendit deus fructus hujus
promissionis ad totum corpus postquam de proceribus locutus est, simul adjungi^
plebem fore fociam hujus benedictionis, and gratiae dei. Calv.
25. If ye hallow my Sabbaths, then shall there enter into the gates of this
City Kings and Princes sitting on the throne of David, riding in Chariots, and
on Horses, etc. Indeed Religion, and so that eminent branch of it,
Sabbath-holiness, is the beauty and luster of Courts, and that which fills them
with glory, as Gods presence in the cloud, filled the temple with amazing and
astonishing glory, 1 Kings 8. 10, 11. God indeed keeps Nations, as they keep
his day, and when they are loose upon his Sabbath, God is more indifferent in
his protection over them, and benedictions upon them. It is very observable,
that God did most complain of Sabbath-pollution, Ezekiel. 20. 13, 16, 21, 24.
Ezekiel. 22. 8, 26. Ezekiel. 23. 38. immediately before the Jews going into
Captivity. When a people despise Gods Ministers, and profane Gods Sabbaths,
then there is no remedy. Nay in our Nation of England, immediately after the
Book of sports was set forth for recreations and liberty upon the Lords day,
that bloody civil War began, which turned England into an Aceldania^; 2. Chron.
36. 26.
and it was infinite mercy, that that field of blood was not like that flood of
waters in Noah his time, to drown all the Nation, and leave only one family
surviving.

The sanctification of Gods day can bring prosperity to the Church: It cannot
only fill the throne, but the temple with Deus erit modis omnibus beneficus ad
populum, si modo Sabbatum observent, et puro cord se addicunt ad dei cultum,
cum in templum ascendunt, and hilariter offerunt juge sacrificium, ex vicina
regione advenient cultores dei, qui dres festos celebyem; et pro more florebit
Religio et vigebit in Sabbato observando, immo et sacrificia laudis offerentur;
huc spectant omina sacrificia, ut nomen dei celebretur, etc. Calv.
glory, and bless not only the shop but the sanctuary: Our spiritual
privileges shall be like Aarons rod blossoming, Numb. 17. 8. If the Sabbath,
like the Sun, shine hot with zeal and devotion. Let us hear God speaking by the
Prophet, Jer. 17. 24, 26. If they shall hallow my Sabbath, etc. They shall come
from the Cities of Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the
land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the south, bringing
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, and meat offerings and incense, and bringing
sacrifices of praise unto the house of the Lord. In this glorious promise are
comprised all the Characters of a flourishing Church.

1. Here is a multitude of worshippers, they should flock to the house of God
from all circumjacent parts, from all adjacent quarters, from the plain, and
from the mountains, from Judah, and from Benjamin, the two most considerable
tribes from the South, etc. And indeed a confluence of proselytes is the glory
of a Church, when believers are as the corn of the valley, and not as grapes
after a vintage, Mic. 7. 1. Then the primitive Church became glorious to a
wonder, when thousands were added to it, Acts 2. 41, 47. Acts 4. 4. Acts 5. 14.
Churches are then prosperous, when believers flock as Doves to the windows,
Isa. 60. 8.

2. Here is the variety of sacrifices, burnt offerings, meat offerings, emblems
of legal worship, sacrifices of praise, the evidence of worship Evangelical.
Gods Altar ever flourishes when there is most incense offered, and the Church
is in its best estate when the Saints have liberty to worship God in every
Ordinance. Variety of Ordinances is the joy and harmony of the Church.

3. Here is likewise observable in this precious promise, Christiani charitate,
et spiritu sancto ferveant, quasi igne, impetu quodam animi sint succensi,
ferveant ad officium faciendum.
the zealous affection of the profelytes, they shall come from the Cities of
Judah, etc. And indeed zealous Saints make a prosperous Church. Zeal is the
natural heat of holy duties, and speaks us to be living sacrifices, Romans 12. 1,
11. And our services to be lively services. Heat is always a sign of life, as
in naturals, so in spirituals. Nor is it to be over-passed, that in this
promise, there is employed Gods presence, which is the true glory and flourish
of every Church, Levit 26. 2, 11, 12.
so the text, They shall come to the house of the Lord, where the Lord will
give them a meeting, else these words were an Irony, not a promise. For to come
to Gods house, and he withdraw, this is a judgment, not a promise, for the Sun
may sooner want light, then a promise sweetness: If then the Divine Presence be
enclosed in the promise, what a glorious Psalm. 63. 3.
thing is Sabbath-holiness? For what can we enjoy more then a God? His smiles
are heaven, his frowns are hell. Our condition is calculated and computed
according to the nearness of God to us, or his remoteness from us, if God be
with us, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 31. Who can be against us? I may say, who
can be above us? Communion with God is our throne, his absence is our dunghill.
Our condition 1 John 1. 3.
is gradually advanced or depressed according to the degrees Omnia possidet,
qui illum possidet, qui omnia possidet. Aret.
of Gods approach or retirement: The hiding of his face is the blackness of
darkness, and his presence is the sweetness of every mercy, the fullness of
every Ordinance; nay, the glory of heaven it self. It is the presence of God
which fills the hearts of glorified ones with perpetual joy, and their tongues
with perpetual Hallelujahs. And it is this presence which invites our holy
observation of Gods Sabbath. It is an elegant note of Origin, I demand, says
he, When Manna first began to fall from heaven? and it is apparent from the
holy In nostra etiam die dominica semper pluit dominus Manna de coelo. Orig.
Scriptures that Manna was first given upon the Lords day, for if, (as the
Scripture says) they gathered it six days together, and ceased the seventh
day being the Sabbath day, without controversy it began to fall on the first
day which is the Lords day, and still upon our Lords day, the Lord rains Manna
upon his people, the true Manna did not cease in the wilderness, but is still
showred down upon the due observers of Gods holy day. Divine blessings more
sweet, more pleasant then Isreal's Manna, or bread resembling wafers, or
Corianders seed, shall enrich and refresh the devout soul on Gods holy day.
Exodus 16. 31.


No command is punished with more severity then that of the Sabbath, when it is
broken and disobeyed. Sabbath profanation is a sin which will be beaten with
many stripes: For the better discovery of this great truth, we shall follow it
by degrees.

God eyes Sabbath-prophaneness most exactly. If it be but the carrying of a
burden, Jer. 17. 27. God takes notice of it, and it sets all in a flame. There
are two things God is most Sabbata Dei sunt ejus delitiae, sunt ejus
faelicitas, et illa in dei contemplatione consistunt, quibus a seculi curis et,
laboribus vacantes divina opera et judicia contemplemur. Alap.
jealous of,

1. Of his truth.

2. Of his day: God will see little spots on his own day. Little flaws are seen
in a jewel, every one takes notice of spots in the Moon, which is a bright and
glorious luminary, the finer the cloth is, the more damageable the rent is
which is in it. Gods Sabbath is one of his most precious things, it is not
said, Jer. 17. 27. If any commit a gross sin upon my Sabbath, But if any bear a
burden. Secular works are sinful works on Gods holy day, every toil is a
trespass, and to bear a burden upon the back, is to draw guilt upon the soul.

God threatens Sabbath-prophanness most sharply: The threats of God are the
drawing of his bow, they are the sharpning of his sword, and the fitting it for
execution, they Ter poenam capitalem infligendum deus exprimit vilatoribus
Sabbati, quam poenam certum est, immo de temporali morte et supplicio,
infligendum transgredienti esse intelligendum, quod etiam ex praxi constat. 15.
Number. 32. Et haec quidam. (...) infligebatur ad exemplum. Obstinatis etiam
aeternam mortein fuisse denunciatam non inficias imus. Rivet.
are his warning-pieces which he shoots off to affright secure sinners, they
are his frowns which are the evidences of his wrath and indignation: Now God
surely threatens the violations of his Sabbath, he threatens them not with a
light affliction, but with death it self, Exodus 31. 14, 15. The soul which
shall profane the Sabbath shall die the death; nay, this sin shall not only
destroy the Citizen, but the City too, Jer. 17. 27. set the gates on fire,
where the safety of the City lay: No Portcullis can secure that City where the
Sabbath is profaned; nay, God threatens Sabbath-prophanation with his
consuming fury, Ezekiel. 20. 13, 21. which can lay waste all which lies before it,
every thing is stubble to Gods wrath, no gate so strong to resist it, no Person
so potent to withstand it. Divine fury can as easily raze, as Divine Power can
create a world: And this fury God will pour out on those who profane his day.

God complains of Sabbath-prophanation most bitterly. When God was drawing up
his Endictments against the people of Israel now going into captivity; one of
his chiof charges was Sabbath-pollution; they defiled his day which he would
have kept spotless: and this did accent his complaints, and put an Emphasis
upon his grievous expostulations. Sabbata domini profanant homines, tum eorum
prophanationem vident, and non corripiunt, sed o^ulos suos avertunt, et
conniventes dissimulant, item cum ea non pie observant.
They despise my statutes, says God, Ezekiel. 20. 24. How does this appear? Why
says God, They pollute my Sabbaths; as if the contempt of Religion was wrapped
up in Sabbath-prophanation. And in another place, Ezekiel. 22. 8. They despise my
holy things, says God; but what is the evidence of it, why says the Lord,
they profane my Sabbaths; this goes to the heart of God, and nothing more
provokes his spirit. Nay, which is observable, God calls the profaning of his
Sabbath, the profaning of himself, Ezekiel. 22. 26. so the text; They have hid
their eyes from my Sabbaths, I am profaned among them. To pollute Gods day, is
to cast Coinquinabar Ezekiel. 22. 26. (i. e.) profane tractabar ab^ii^.
dirt in the very face of God himself; and when men make light of the Sabbath,
they lose the reverence they should bear to the sacred Majesty of God.
Sabbath-prophanation huddles all in confusion; as God complains, Ezekiel. 22. 26.
and makes men Atheists, so as to have no regard of the incomprehensible and
tremendous Jehovah, who, as the Apostle says, Heb. 12. 29. is a consuming
fire. And so God bitterly complains, Polluitur Sabbatum, cum cujus gratia
instituitur, a plerisque non curatur. Muscul.
Ezekiel. 23. 38. Moreover this they have done unto me, they have defiled my
sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths. What is done to Gods
day, he takes it as done to himself: When his day is polluted, and when his
Saints are persecuted, this is drawing against God himself. Acts 9. 4, 5.
In a word, the profaning of Gods Sabbath, makes him first pour out his
complaint, and then pour out his fury; the smothering of his complaint,
quickly breaks out into the flame of his indignation.

God punishes Sabbath-prophanation most severely: We have already discovered
the sharpness of Gods eye in the discerning the frowns of Gods brow in the
threatening, the totus dies dominicus ex toto animo, quantum ferat humana
necessi^as, et imbe^illitas rite et pie servandus est, etenim ejus
prophanationi et pollutioni maledictionem comminatur Deus. Exodus 31. 14. Lev.
26. 2, 14. Jer. 17. 27. et poenis gravissimis and morte ulciscitur utpote cujus
contemptus, est totius legis dei, et divini cultus repudiatio. Leid. Prof.
complaints of Gods mouth in his complaining against; and now we come to take
notice of the strokes of Gods hand in the revenging of the violations of his
blessed Sabbath. The Histories of all ages do afford many dreadful examples of
Vengeance executed upon those who have profaned this day. The Reverend Mr.
Walker tells us, That he could relate more then thirty examples of Gods heavy
vengeance upon Sabbath Breakers within the space of two years, some of which
were struck with sudden death by Gods immediate hand, others devoured in the
waters, some cut off by surfets, which they got by dancing and drinking on the
Lords day, some fired out of their houses in the midst of their quaffing and
jollity, and all their goods and substance consumed: And these Judgments have
befallen them in the very act of their abominations, when they were most busied
in their sports, in their worldly employments, or in their vain and frothy
pleasures.

But for the better discovery of divine justice in the pursuits of it upon
Sabbath Breakers;

1. I shall search the Scriptures of God.

2. I shall trace the Providence of God. And in both these glasses we may
easily discern the severities of the Almighty upon the violatours of his holy
day: Judgment has not slumbered, but has awakened and taken hold on them.

on sacred Writ, and we shall see God executing temporal judgments upon those
who have profaned his day. If a poor man gather but a few sticks upon the
Sabbath he must die for it, Numb. 15. 33, 34, 35, 36. he must be stoned into
his grave, stones must be his death, but not his tomb; and this not by a
sudden heat and passion of the people, but by an express command of God
himself.

rigor of the Law;

forgets not his judgments against Sabbath Breakers in the times of the
Gospel; Eutichus sleeps at a Sermon on a Lords day, and he dies for it, Acts
20. 9, 10. and it was a miracle he ever came to life again. Indeed much may be
said to extenuate his crime; He was a young Profanatio sabbati iram intulit,
non tantum in domum, sed in civitatem, immo in Israelem dei populum.
man, and a younger Christian, it was late in the night, the proper time of
sleep and rest: Paul had preached very long, and had extended his discourse to
an unusual enlargement; and though the spirit is willing, the flesh is weak,
Mat. 26. 41. yet notwithstanding all this Eutichus falls down dead. By this
example we may feel the heat of divine displeasure against the profanation of
Gods holy day. Both in the times of the Law, and of the Gospel, we may discern
the revenges of God against this sin. It is Sabbath-breaking can devour
Palaces, Places of honor, Jer. 17. 27. the beauty and the Neh. 13 17, 18, 19.
ornaments of the most flourishing City or Kingdom. Palaces they are the pride
of Architecture, the extrinsique glory of a Nation, they are the habitations of
the most Renowned Princes, the Court, and Council-house of Kings; and yet
Sabbath-breaking can turn all these into a flame: Nay, this sin can kindle a
fire in the Gates, places of Power, wherein the safety and strength of a City
does consist, Jer. 17. 27. the Gates where justice is done, the constant
bull-works of the place whereunto they are fastened, the chief guard of the
town. This sin of defiling Gods day can petar those gates, and not only open,
but consume them. But the Citizen will still have some relief, if the gates be
burnt, yet the shops are remaining; though safety be lost, yet trade continues;
therefore God says, he will lay waste Cities, Levit. 26. 2, 31. He will
destroy Gates and Shops and all: But the Professors replies, though our Cities
are consumed, our Sanctuaries still remain; and though we have lost our
Palaces, which are the glory of the Prince, and our Cities are waste, which
are the dwelling of the people; yet we have our sanctuaries, which are the
delight of the Saint, and we can yet drive a spiritual trade: No, says God,
Sabbath-pollution shall lay the Cities waste, and shall bring their sanctuaries
into desolation, Levit. 26. 2, 31. This sin shall destroy Cities, Shops as well
as Gates, Sanctuaries as well as Palaces, Necessaries as well as Accessories,
it shall lay all waste and depopulate.

same Holy Writ we meet with God executing spiritual judgments upon
Sabbath Breakers. In the 8th of Amos, verse. 5. we find the Jews weary of Gods
Sabbath; that was their disgust, which should have been their delight, Isa. 58.
13. and how does God chastise them for this transgression? We may read, Amos 8.
11, 12. He will send a famine of the Word among them. God will cure the surfeit
of his Sabbath with a famine of his precious Word: And of all judgments this
is the sorest. A famine of the Word, is the loss of the best food, the bread of
life; a starving of the best part, the soul of man: a loss which can never be
compensated, not with the treasures Job 23. 12.
of Gold and Silver; a loss which can never be terminated, it Israelitae in
Assyriorum potestatem erunt tradendi, inter quos cessare debuit quicquid ipsis
reliquum erat publici cultus externi, et illud merebantur quia nihil praeter
externam pompam retinuerunt. Rivet.
may and will be bemoaned to all eternity. Woe, woe, woe, says Luther, Where
there is a Church and no Preaching Minister, none to break the bread of life.
By such a judgment, Great Cities become like dark dens, and the most lovely
Goshen is turned into a brutish Egypt. Where there is a famine of the Word,
the Sun sets at noon day, and the most magnisicent Courts are transformed into
the most loathsome dungeons, Prove. 29. 18. Now when men cease from Sabbaths,
the holy and due observation of them, then it is just with the Almighty, that
Sabbaths should cease from men; men sinfully forget Gods Sabbaths, and God
judicially causes Sabbaths to be forgotten, Lam. 2. 6. And when the Sabbath of
God leaves a Nation, the God of the Sabbath goes a way too; And woe to that
Nation, when God departs from it, Hos. 9. 12. The sin of profaning Gods Day
can wear out the very prints of Christ, and write Lo-Ammi upon a Kingdom, Mal.
4. 2.
and Lo Ruhamah upon a City or a Family. The wise man Necessitas praedicationis
ver by, ex absentiae ejus incommodo arguitur, populi, scil. nuditate, quae
nuditas potest esse, ex indumentorum, aut armorum carentia, Cartw.
says, Where there is no vision, the people perish, Prove. 29. 18. And to this
perishing condition Sabbath-prophanation brings a people: It can chase Christ
out of a Family, City or Kingdom; and when the Sun leaves us we are all in the
dark. There goes a story of Nazianzene, that being about to leave a place,
where he preached for some time, a good man cries out, O Nazianzene will thou
go away, and carry the Holy Trinity with thee? Sure it is, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost forsake such as are violatours of his Holy Day; and what then is left to
the unhappy sinner? the absence of God strips the soul of its Ornaments, nay,
of its Ordinances, of its beauty, nay of its breasts, and carries away divine
truth, which is both its Guardian and its Nurse.

punishes the breaches of his Sabbath with eternal judgments. The great day
of Gods general judgment Erit tunc sine f^uctu poeni^^^tiae, dolor poenae,
inanis gloriatio, et ineffi^ax deprecatio. Cypr.
is now approaching, and hastening with a speedy flight; when as such who sin
against Gods sacred Sabbath, shall be condemned of the Almighty, and they who
regarded not the Lords Day, shall not be regarded in the day of the Lord, nor
of the Lord of this day, but shall be enforced to undergo unavoidable and
intolerable calamity. O how sweet would Mark 2. 28.
one Sabbath of Rest be from Hell torments in ten thousand years? But this drop
of water shall not be granted to the Luke 16. 24.
miscarrying sinner. This day indeed draws near, when all Hieron. Epist. de
scient. legis, Tom. 4.
men must appear bofore the judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. and then
answer for not attending on Gods holy day. O what shall we do, says Hierome,
In that day when the Lord shall come with trumpet sounding, fire flaming,
sinners fainting, stars falling, mountanes melting, poor creatures crying to
graves Christus Judex appropinquat, ut veniat ad judicium, ut suorum gaudium
complete, et inimicorum injurias vindicet, et puniat. Ansel.
to hold them, to hills to hide them? Let none then who abuse the Lords day
suppose this day is afar off, for behold says the Apostle, The Lord comes with
ten thousands of his holy ones to execute judgment, Jude verse. 14, 15. And the
coming of the Lord draws near, says another Apostle, James 5. 8. Nay, The day
of the Lord is at hand, said a third Apostle, Phil. 4. 5. Let all therefore who
trifle away Gods blessed Sabbath, fear and tremble, and not like wanton
Israelites, Amos 6. 3. put far from them the evil day. Rivet pronounces
Obstinatis autem in Sabbata peccatoribus aeternum mortem suisse denunciatam non
inficias imus. Rivet.
peremptorily, That to obstinate offenders, on Gods holy day eternal death and
damnation is denounced. Shortly there comes a day, when reckning must be made
for all our sleepy duties, cold affections, dead hearts, sensual meals, open
profaneness and secret hypocrisy, for all our wastes of time, and pleasing the
flesh on Gods most blessed day; I might add, that all our formal services on
that day, shall be weighed in the balance, and with Belshazzar, will be found
too light: And then, if Repentance and Faith in Christ has not crossed the
debt, we shall be discharging it in terrors and torments to all Everlasting.

CHAP. XLIX. Gods Tremendous Judgments executed upon those who have profaned
and violated his holy Day.
WE have already seen by Scripture light, frowns in the face of God, wrath in
the heart of God flaming in the eye of God, and a Sword in the hand of God
against those who dare pollute his holy Sabbath.

Let us now trace the methods of Providence, and still more wrath and vengeance
breaks out against the same Offenders; and indeed (a little to preface what is
subsequent) The sin of profaning of Gods day is no sin of surprisal, but it is
a deliberative offense, a sin carried on with consultation. Sometimes an Oath
is sworn unadvisedly, as that of Herod to Herodias her Daughter, Mark 6. 26.
which cost John the Baptist his life: an act of intemperance is hatched by the
warmth of a temptation; he is brutified, when reason on a sudden has left its
habitation: Nay, sometimes one wounds another, and it is only a lightning of
passion, as high Fevers soon run into a distraction. But now the violation of
the Sabbath is a premeditated act, and is the leisurely effect of a corrupt
heart; it is a sin accompanied with time to consider, and with an enlightened
mind to understand it. Recreations upon a Sabbath, they are no vain surprisal,
but studied wickedness; sleeping at Ordinances is a giving way to the flesh;
Riots and Surfeits on the Lords day, they are designed Exodus 20. 8, 9.
debauchery, nothing but a striking hands with Hell in cold blood; we consult
with our ease, when we trifle away the Sabbaths; we neglect not Ordinances on
the Lords day, and court our Bed, or our Belly, instead of the Sanctuary,
without Ezekiel. 22. 26.
advice and debate with our selves; nor can the fantastic piece of pride,
spend hours on Gods holy day, with the Glass Deuteronomy. 5. 12.
and the Dressing-box, nay, and it may be the Box of Patches, and the
Perfuming-pot, without concluding before hand they will appear to the worlds
eye in the most flattering dress. Sabbath-prophanation is a sin of knowledge
and deliberation, which puts it into a scarlet dye; surely it must needs be a
great sin to forget that, which God bids us remember; Exodus 20. 8.
to profane that, which God bids us to keep holy; to labor on that day,
when God bids us to rest; and to unhallow that day, which God has blessed:
what is this, but to throw down the Gantlet, and to challenge God himself? Isa
51. 6.
God indeed has punished this sin with the most stupendous revenges, I shall
marshal his dreadful executions into their several ranks, whereby we observing
the many examples 1 Samuel 3. 11.
of divine fury and indignation, we may carefully take the alarm, and so avoid
the stroke, (for God usually strikes Deuteronomy. 32. 42.
one, to awaken and warn another) and hearing these thunders, we may fly that
guilt, which is pursued with such Romans 12. 19.
Hue and Cries of divine displeasure, and may write upon our hearts, not our
phylacteries, that dreadful position of the Apostle, Heb. 10. 31. It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

with consuming the goods of the Offender. One who carried Corn into his Barn
upon the Lords day, had it all consumed with fire from heaven, together with
his house. A Miller likewise who lived at Wotton, was going forth to a Wake
upon the Lords day, and coming home at Levit. 10. 2.
Night found his house, his Mill, and all that he had, burnt down to the
ground. Thus the fire of Gods wrath has over-taken Heb. 12. 29.
this sin and great transgression.

To add one Example more; In the year 1635, a Miller at Churchdown near
Gloucester, would needs make a Whitson Ale, notwithstanding the private and
public admonitions of the Minister, and all christian friends; so, great
provision was made, and Music was set out as the Minister and people were
going to Church in the Afternoon, and when Sermon was done, the Drum beat up,
the Music played, and the people fell on dancing until the Evening, at which
time they all resorted to the Mill: But oh, the Justice of God! before they had
supped, at nine of the Clock, a sudden fire seized upon the house which was so
furious, that it burned down his house and Mill, and the most of all his other
provisions and housholdstuff: and most just it is, that if we commit
Sacrilege, and (...) the time of his day, he should act severely, and dispoy^
(...) fruits of our labor; sinners make waste of his glory, and most righteous
it is, God should make waste of their habitations and goods.

God for the prophanations of his Sabbath, draws a little nearer to Offendars,
and strikes their persons, as shall be seen in a few instances.

One serving a Writ of Subpoena upon another, coming from Church on the Lords
day, after some words of reproof for so doing, and a light answer thereunto,
the person who served the Writ, died in the place, without speaking any more
words: O the fearful and just judgment of the Lord! this profane person
himself was subpoenaed unexpectedly by a Writ he could not refuse, to appear
before Gods dreadful Tribunal.

A Grasiers Servant would needs drive his Cattle on the Lords day in the
Morning from the Inn where he lay on the Saturday Night, but he was not gone a
stones cast from the Town, but he fell down dead suddenly, when he was in
perfect health before: Thus the Lords day is written in dominical letters, in
the blood of Transgressors who profane it.

To add one dreadful example more; One Richard Bourn Servant to Gaspar Birch of
Ely, was so accustomed to travel on the Lords day, that he made no conscience
of it, s^ldom or never coming to the public Congregation, to hear Gods word on
that day, but went to St. Ives Market, where he stayed and spent the day; where
being drunk, he was overtaken by Divine Justice, for coming home fraught with
Commodities, he fell into the River and was drowned. And thus as his sins did
meet to provoke the Lord, viz. his Drunkenness and Sabbath-breaking, so the
stream did meet to destroy and overthrow him.

Sometimes God does not presently cut off those who profane his day, but he
puts a brand of infamy upon them, to make them a shame, and a terror to
themselves, that they may be hissed off from the Stage of the World, and with
self-confounding, and horror may go down unexpectedly to their Graves; this is
verified by this story.

There was an Husbandman who went to plough on the Lords day, and cleansing his
Plow with an Iron, the Iron stuck so fast in his hand for two years, that he
carried it about with him as a signal testimony of the Lords just displeasure
against him, and so he lived infamously in the world till he died, and made his
passage to another world; the Iron in his hand only discovering the Adamant in
his heart.

Sometimes God leaves those who profane his holy day to the commission of
prodigious evils; and so he punishes one fin with another, which is the sorest
punishment, and the ultimate effect of Divine Vengeance: for when God punishes
Isa. 6. 10.
sin with suffering, then he chastises with Rods, but when he punishes sin
with sin, then he scourges with Scorpions, as may be instanced in these
succeeding stories.

In Helvetia near Belessina, Three men were playing at Mr. Clarke his examples
of Divine justice*
Dice on the Lords day, and in their play, one called Vtricke Schraetorus
having hopes of a good Cast, having lost much money before, he now expected
fortune, or rather the Devil to succor him, and therefore he breaks out into
this horrid blasphemy, If Fortune deceive me now, I will thrust my Dagger into
the body of God, as far as I can; And so with a powerful force he throws it up
toward Heaven, which Dagger was never seen more, and immediately five drops of
blood fall before them all upon the Table, and as suddenly came the Devil among
them, and carries away this vile wretch, with such a terrible and hideous
noise, as the whole City was astonished at it: Those who remained, endeavored
to wipe off the blood, but to little purpose, for the more they rubbed, the
more perspicuous and visible the blood was: Report carries it over the City,
multitudes flockt to see this wonder, who find those who had thus profaned the
Sabbath, rubbing the blood to get it out. These two men who were Companions to
him who was carried away by the Devil, were by the Decree of the Senate bound
in Chains, and as they were leading to prison, one of them was suddenly struck
dead, and from his whole body, a wonderful number of worms and vermin was seen
to crawl. The City thus terrified with Gods judgments, and to the intent that
God might be glorified, and a future vengeance averted from the place, they
caused the third Offender, one of the gaming Companious to be forthwith put to
death; And they caused the Table with the drops of blood upon it, to be
preserved as a Monument of Gods wrath against this sin, thus this blasted Romans
11. 33.
Table like Lots wife, was a standing warning-piece, to cause all to take heed
of Sabbath-breaking, and ingratitude. Luke 17. 32.


At Simsbury in Dorsetshire, One rejoicing at the erecting of a Summer-Pole on
a Lords day, He said he would go see it, though he went through a quick-set
hedge; Going with wood in his arms, to cast into the Bonefire, profanely
uttered these words, Heaven and earth are full of thy glory O Lord; he was
immediately overtaken by the stroke of God, and in two or three hours died and
his wife also. And thus as God once punished Pharaoh with hail mixed with fire,
so he Exodus 9. 24.
has punished the profanation of his day with sin and judgment jointly, with
leaving the Offender to vile sins, overtaking the Offender with sore smarts,
that his burdens Exodus 5. 7.
like those of the Israelites in Egypt, might be doubled.

Sometimes God punishes the profanation of his Sabbath with executing
vengeance on great numbers: God has not decimated such sinners, but destroyed
them in the lump, as may be verified in these ensuing stories.

Fourteen youths adventuring to play at Football on the River Trent upon the
Lords day, when it was, as they Mr. Bernard on the Sabbath. Mr. London in Gods
Judgments on Sabbath Breakers. Jan. 13. 1583.
thought, very hard frozen, meeting at last together in a shove, the Ice brake,
and they were all drowned.

At the Bear-Garden in Southwark on a Sabbath Day in the Afternoon, many
persons pressing on the Scaffold to see the sport, forced it suddenly down,
with which fall, eight were killed, and many spoiled in their bodies, who died
soon after. Nullus die solis spectaculum praebeat, nec divinam venerationem,
consecta solennitate consundat. Valent. Great.
And by the way let me observe, This seeing of Shows upon the Lords day was
complained of above 1200 years ago, and Edicts set out against it by the
Emperors Valentinian and Gratian; the early zeal of the Primitive Christians
took notice of this detestable and prodigious practice.

God sometimes takes away Sabbath Breakers immediately by his own hand, as may
be seen in these instances:

A Fellow near Brinkley in Essex, usually coming home late from his sports on
the Lords day, his good Mistress reproving him for it; one Sabbath he goes to a
Chalk-pit to work with another man, and tells him, he used to vex his Mistress
for his sports on the Sabbath, but now he would vex her worse with his work,
which words were no sooner spoken, but Justice seizes upon him, for the earth
fell upon him, and he stirred no more, but presently died. Thus the Numb. 16.
32, 33.
Lord by his own hand cut off this Miscreant wretch, and threw him into Corah,
Dathan, and Abirams Grave. Let me add another dreadful example:

One Sabbath Day in the Afternoon, a Match at Football Doctor Twisse on the
Sabbath.
was made in Bedfordshire; as two of the company were tolling the Bell to call
the rest together, some that sat in the Church Porch heard a terrible noise,
as a clap of Thunder, and they saw a flash of Lightning coming through an
obscure Lane, which flashed in their faces to their terror and amazement, and
the Lightning passing on to those who were tolling, it trips up the heels of
the one, and leaves him stark dead, and so blasted the other, that he died
within a few days. Thus the swift Messengers of Divine wrath overtook those
incautelous sinners, and blasted them in the midst of their presumptuous
impieties. Lightning from heaven testifies against the deeds and facts of Hell.

At Dover the same day the Book of sports was read in St. James Parish, one
profanely went to play upon a Kit, which drew a multitude of people,
especially of the younger sort together: But oh the terror of the Lord, this
profane person was struck by a divine hand, and in two days died. Thus daring
sinners by an unexpected doom are folded up in their dust to awaken others,
that they may not adventure upon the same impieties.

A Vintner who was a great swearer and drunkard, as he Mr. Clarke his examples
of divine justice
was standing at his door upon the Lords day with a pot of wine in his hand to
invite his guests, was by the wonderful justice and power of God carried into
the Air with a whirlwinde, and never seen or heard of more. How soon can the
word of God make the creature, and how suddenly can the wind of God destroy
the sinner. Let us read and tremble.

Sometimes God revenges the profanation of his day mediately by the hand of
others; as may be verified in this ensuing story.

Not far from Dorcester lived one widow Jones, whose Son Richard upon the Lords
day (notwithstanding all the persuasions and admonitions of his good Mother)
did with his companions go to Stoake to play; where after he had done, and
drank freely with his company, they return home, and by the way fall out;
whereupon John Edwards one of the company stabbed this Richard Jones under the
left rib, whereof at seven of the clock the next night he died. Thus every
thing becomes a sword, even a companion to destroy a presumptuous
Sabbath-breaker.

One disposed to sin and debauchery would needs keep an Ale in the Church-house
on the Lords day: But O the severity and formidable justice of God! At night
his youngest Son was taken Prisoner for stealing of a purse out of another
pocket while he lay drunk in the said Church-house, and the week ensuing his
eldest Son was stabbed to death. Thus Sabbath-prophanation blasts families as
well as persons, and plucks down the house upon the sinners head.

Sometimes God leaves the sinner who prophanes his day to destroy himself: When
God in patience suspends the execution of his own hand, and in pity restrains
others, that they shall not destroy the Sabbath-breaker, then he himself
becomes his own murderer: And when he is not with Aarons Sons destroyed by God
himself, Levit. 10. 2. Nor is he with Senacherib slain by others, Isa. 37. 37,
38. Then with Saul in rage and despair he falls upon his own sword, 1 Samuel 31.
4.

One Richard Clark was drunk in company with one Henry Parram on the Lords day,
to whom he said, he would either hang or drown himself, desirous to know which
was best, but Parram replied, he hoped he would do neither. May 31. 1634.
But oh the judgment of the Lord! especially upon those who profane his day:
For on Monday morning he was seen going through the Town, as if he was going
about his masters business, and having got up into the midst of a tree without
the town, He did there hang himself. Thus Achitophels doom was this man's death,
and as disappointment sent the one, so Guilt, Sabbath guilt sent the other to
his place.

God for the profaning of his holy day takes away sinners in the very act of
their sin, as may be observed in these ensuing stories.

Some boys of St. Albans going into Verulams pond to swim upon the Lords day,
one of them was drowned, and another very narrowly escaped.

Two young men of St. Dunstans in the West London, going September. 1635.
to swim on the Lords day, were both drowned. Thus neither the tenderness of
youth, nor the sutableness of the recreation can apologize for the great sin of
Sabbath-breaking: God will be sanctified by, or upon all Christians for Levit.
10. 3.
their carriage or miscarriage upon his sacred Sabbath.

God executes vengeance upon the very Heathens for the abuse of his day.
Natures light might induce us to keep a solemn day for the worship of God, and
if that light be damped by profaneness, God observes, and will revenge that
sin.

It is recorded of Pompey, the great Roman, that he shrunk under the depression
of Gods sore displeasure for profaning Gods Sabbath and Sanctuary: And this
story is related by an Corn. Tacit.
Heathen too. Among the very Heathens there is a Veneration observable in Gods
holy Sabbath.

God executes his vengeance upon the greatest persons for the profanation of
his day.

The Centuriatours of Magdeburg tell us of one of the Kings of Denmark, who
when he contrary to the admonition of the Priests (who desired him to defer it)
would needs on a Lords day go to battle with his enemy, he was slain in the
Centur. Magdeburg. Histor. Cent. 12.
fight: Thus justice and revenge in its triumphs over this sin, can reach the
Scepter as well as the spade.

Nicanor a great Commander of Syria engaging against the Jews in battle upon
the Sabbath, supposing that was a time in which they would not fight, and so it
would facilitate his victory, he falls and dies in the battle, and his head
Macchab. 2. 28, 30.
was cut off, and his hand and his shoulder, and they are brought with joy to
Jerusalem, 2 Macchab. 15. 2, 28, 30. Valor cannot withstand Gods stroke, when
his Sabbath is contemned, and defied by presumptuous sinners; nor can the
blindness of paganism extenuate or apologize for the sin.

God punishes the profanation of his day with prodigious and monstrous
births, that his vengeance may be written in a fairer, and more legible
Character, as may be seen in this story.

A great man using every Lords day to hunt in Sermon time, had a child by his
wife, with a head like a dog, and it Theatr. Histor.
cried like a hound; and it had ears and chaps like the forementioned beast.
This monstrous sin is most justly punished with a monstrous birth, to make good
that of holy Job; John 4. 8.
Job 4. 8. Even as I have seen, they who plough iniquity and sow wickedness,
reap the same.

God sometimes punishes the profaning of his day in the posterity of the
offender, as may be seen in the ensuing stories.

On the Sabbath in the afternoon at Twickenham in Middlesex, the people being
much given to May-games, they May the 14. 1626.
assembled to take down the May Pole, and as they were taking it down, one of
the Churchwardens wives was with her young child in her arms, within her own
gate looking upon them. But whilst she was looking on, one of the greatest
ropes failed and broke, and the pole fell down upon the pale that parted the
gate and the street, and the upper end of the pole with the fall lapped over,
and struck the child on the head in it mothers arms and killed it. Thus little
children, who knew not the sin, yet must die for it. Let this story be annexed.

A vain and wanton maid hired on the Lords day a fellow to go to the next town
to fetch thence a minstrel, that she and others might dance and be merry, but
she committing lewdness that night with one of her companions, proved with
child, And at the time of its birth she murders it, and so was hanged for the
murder, confessing, and mournfully acknowledging at the time of her death,
That the occasion of her great misery, was her profanation of the Lords day.
Thus this crimson sin o^ Sabbath-breaking, can cut off root and branch, and
pursue with ruin and shame the actors of it, and all those who are entangled
in it.

God overtakes those who profane his blessed day oftentimes with sudden death,
and shoots no warning-pi^ces to summon them to prepare for their departure out
of this world, to his own d^eadful and tremendous Tribunal, as may be seen in
these following stories.

A Tailor of Buntingford being a nimble and active man, dwelling at the upper
end of the town, in a bravado would go to the other end to buy some meat before
morning prayer, but coming home with both his hands full, in the midst of the
street he fell down stark dead, Dr. Teate was an eyewitness of his fall and
burial: Oh what swift destruction pursues this cursed sin!

A townsman of Watford going to gather Cherries on the Lords day, fell from the
tree, and in the fall was battered and bruised insomuch that he never spoke
more, but lay groaning in his blood till the next day, and then he dyed.

A company of profane young men near Salisbury, upon the Lords day in the
morning went to Claringdon Park to cut down a May Pole, and having laden a
Cart with the tree, and themselves with the bitter fruits of sin, they are
severely punished by the hand of God, for entering into the Mr. Clarks examples.
City of Salisbury through a place called Milners Barnes, unawars the Cart
turns, and struck one of the Sabbath Breakers such a mortal blow, that his
brains flew out, and there dyed on the place. This story was attested by diverse
godly persons living in the City of Salisbury to a Reverend Minister who made
enquiry about it.

One at Ham nigh Kingelone going on the Lords day to visit his grounds, where
finding some cattle grazing which were not his own, and running to drive them
out, he fell down and dyed suddenly upon the place. Thus Gods angry eye is
seconded by his revenging hand, he sees and strikes together, and they who will
not keep a day, shall not live an hour.

God punishes the profanation of his Sabbath with painful and tormenting
death, as may be exemplified in these stories.

At Tidworth on the Lords day, many were met in the Churchyard to play at
football, where one of this wicked company had his leg broken, which by a
secret judgment of the Lord, so festered, that it turned into a gangrene in
despite of all means used, and so in pain and terror he gave up the Ghost and
dyed. For the sin of Sabbath-breaking God embitters his very executions; and
the offender must not only die, but he must die upon the rack.

One gathering fruit on the Lords day, fell from the tree, and was so hurt,
That he lay in anguish and dreadful dolor all the week till Sabbath day, and
then he ended his miserable life. Thus God puts Gall and Wormwood into the Cup
of those who profane his blessed day.

God sometimes stops those who profane his Sabbath in their carier and
proceeds of sin, as is seen in this following story.

One Mr. Ameredith, a Gentleman of Devonshire being recovered from a pain he
had in his feet; one of his friends said, he was glad to see him so nimble; the
Gentleman replies, he hoped he should not be frustrated of his expectation in
dancing about the May Pole the next Sunday: But behold the justice of God in
his just punishments of such vain and sinful resolutions; for the Lord
presently smote him with such feebleness and faintness of heart, ere he stirred
from the place where he was, and likewise with such a great and unusal
dizziness in the head, that he was forced to be led home, and from thence to
his last home, before the Lords day shone upon him. Thus the very intentions of
acting this sin, were dreadfully and strangely punished, God punished this sin
in the Embryo of it, while it lay only in the Womb of a resolution.

God punishes the most inconsiderable breaches of his holy day, as may be
observed in the ensuing story.

Two Brethren on the Lords day in the Forenoon, came to an Uncle they had to
dine with him, they living in a Market Town not far off; after Dinner they took
horse again, but had not gone far, but one of the horses fell down dead, and
these Brethren going back again to their Uncles house, put the other horse into
the Stable, and within an hour or two, that horse likewise died in the place.
Thus the insensible beast shall bear the burden of man's sin, and
Sabbath-prophanation Rom 8 22.
shall be branded upon the bruit creatures.

We have known, says Ludovicus Pius the German Emperor, Didicimus quesdam in
hoc die opera ruralia exercentes, fu^mine interemptos, quosdam artuum
contractione multatos, quosdam visibili igne obsumptos and sub^to in cinerem
resolutos o^cubuisse. Proinde necesse est, etc. Lud. P.
in one of his Declarations, Some busied in works of husbandry on the
Lord's Day, to have been slain with lightning, some punished with contraction of
Limbs, some consumed with visible fire, and on a sudden turned into ashes, and
so to have perished in a judicial way: wherefore it is a necessary duty that in
the first place Priests, then Kings, Princes, and all faithful persons do most
devoutly exhibit due observation and reverence unto this day.

We may observe in this Edict of this worthy Prince, not unfitly called Pius,
that the Crimes committed on this day, were only rustical works, which might
easily meet with an Apology, and lay a specious claim to a dispensation, yet
the judgments mentioned are fearful and tremendous: And the use this noble
Emperor makes of these doleful Providence, is most excellent and commendable,
becoming the Throne of Majesty, a fit Motto for Princes Courts, and Kings
Palaces, Luke 7. 25.
where holy zeal would be as genuine and proper as soft Raiment, and to live
piously as becoming, as to live delicate^y.

God for the profaning of his Sabbath, has poured forth wrath upon whole
Towns and Corporations; as may be abundantly testified by these ensuing
Instances.

G^^gorius Thronensis who lived a thousand years since and upward, in the end
of the fifth Century according to Greg. Turon.
Beliarmines Chronology, this learned man a verred, That for the dishonor done
to the Lords day, fire from Heaven burn^d ^oth men and houses in the Town of
Lim^ges in France.

But to come nearer home, at Tiverton in Devonshire, which was often admonished
of the profanation of the Lords day, which day was very much polluted by their
An. Dom. 1598.
keeping a Market the day following, and notwithstanding they would not reform;
presently after the Ministers death, upon the third of April, 1598, a su^den
fire from Heaven consumes the whole Town in less than half an hour, excepting
only the Church, Courthouse, and Almshouse; and in this fire was consumed
four hundred dwelling houses, and fifty persons were destroyed: The same Town
fourteen years after on the fifth of Augu^t 1612. for the same sin was wholly
consumed, excepting some thirty poor peoples houses, the School-house, and the
Almshouse. Thus God redoubled his wrath, as he did Pharaohs Dream, Genesis 41. 32.
to confirm this great Truth, viz That Sabbath profanation is a crying and
God-provoking sin, and shall be pursued with the severest extremity.

Stratford upon Avon was twice on fire, and both times on the Lords day,
whereby it was almost consumed, and chiefly for profaning that blessed day,
and contemning the These two Instances are cited by Bishop Baily.
word of God out of the mouth of his faithful Ministers. And is it not just,
that Market Towns should be laid waste, where the Souls Market Day is despised
and profaned? And it is no wonder, if we make Gods day the stage of sin, if he
make our houses the fuel of wrath.

God has brought ruin upon Churches for the sacrilegious abuse of his holy
Sabbath; the blow which was first given to the German-Churches was on the Lord
day, which was too carelessly observed among them; and on that day Prague Mr.
Sheph.
in Bohemia was lost, a fatal loss, which filled the Papists with fury and
rage, and caused the true Professors of Religion to roll in ashes. Thus
Sabbath-prophanation paved the way to their ensuing and intolerable miseries.

The profanation of Gods day has blasted whole Kingdoms, and populous
Nations. The Council of Matiscon imputed the irruption of the Goths into the
Empire, to the profanation of the Sabbath: Germany may now see, that one great
cause of their late trouble was, that the Sabbath wanted its rest in the days
of their quietness; and many moderate men have thought, that the abuse of the
Lords day was a principal procurer of Gods anger, since poured forth upon poor
England, in a long, tedious, and bloody War; and such observed that our Fights
of greatest importance were fought on the Lords day, As the Fight at Edgehill,
Newbury, etc. as pointing at our sin in the punishment, and Gods wrath was
written in Dominical letters: And it is remarkable, that Edgehill Fight which
was fought on the Sabbath Day, first brake the Peace, and made an
irreconcilable breach between the two contending Parties. Indeed God is very
jealous of his own blessed day, which when men dare to profane, it is not in
populous Towns to watch against, nor in City-Gates, to shut out, nor in mighty
Kingdoms to resist, or beat back his furious and severe indignation. Therefore
let all the premised Examples in their several varieties cause us to walk with
all due circumspection, and to keep Gods holy day with just solemnity and holy
devoti^n, and so we may secure our selves against these heavy strokes, which
have broken others Jer. 19 11.
like a Potters vessel.

CHAP. L. Some Remarkables relating to the dreadful Fire of LONDON, which began
on the Lords Day, Sept. 2. 1666.
THat God does threaten the fiering of Cities for the pollution of his holy
day, is clear and manifest from Scriptural attestation, and more especially
from that remarkable Text of Scripture, Jerem. 17. 27. the words of the Text
are these, But if you will not hearken unto me, to hallow the Sabbath Day, and
not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the
Sabbath Day, then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall
devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and shall not be quenched. In this solemn
Text, we have,

1. A specification of the judgment, that God will punish Sabbath-pollution
with, viz. Fire.

2. The specification of the Object, that this fire shall fall Si violatur
Sabbatum, vorabit ignis portas urbis (i. e) non extinguetur ignis donec
consumat totam urbem. Scimus tunc temporis babitos fuisse conventus in portis;
Duc suerunt loca celeberrima, incensum item fuit templum, and consumpta domus
fuerunt. Calv.
upon, viz. A City, not a Village, a place of meanness and poverty, but a City,
a place of stateliness and plenty, a City, a place of traffic and safety.

3. Here is the specification of the City, Not every City neither, but
Jerusalem, the best of Cities; not the subordinate, but the Metropolitan City:
It was not Tyberias a Maritime City, not Caesarea Stratonis, a Garrison City;
not Tire a merchandising City; nay, not Samaria the chief City of the Kingdom
of Israel, but Jerusalem the Metropolis of stately Judah, which only was
crowned with the honor of being called, the City of God, Psalm. 87. 3.
Jerusalem where Gods honor dwelt, Jerusalem where Gods Temple stood, Jerusalem
the general Rendezvous of Worshippers at set and solemn times; Jerusalem whose
fame was noised all the World over: yet God threatens this Jerusalem, with f^re
and flames for profaning his Sabbath; and did God only threaten it? No, He
fully executed his threats upon it, Jer. 39. 8. And the Chaldaeans burnt the
Kings house, and the houses of the people with fire, and brake down the walls
of Jerusalem. God did not only light and shake the Match in a threat, but shot
off the Piece in tremendous execution; he lays Jerusalem waste, which would not
hallow his holy Sabbath. And is not famous London the sad counterpane of
destroyed Jerusalem? Englands Metropolis lies in its rubbish; fire has taken
hold of it and turned it into ashes. What those Chaldaeans were who brought the
fire to consume our Jerusalem, it will not here be seasonable to enquire; but
it is most probable they came from Babylon, the Enemies of the Jews from the
literal, and our implacable Adversaries from the mystical Babylon. But did the
same sin which fier'd Jerusalem, fire London? It may be answered, most visibly,
or else why was London fired on the Lords day? The time shows the Trespass.
And surely one of Londons foulest scars, was the profanation of Gods holy day.
No sin, especially of later years, more generally and more impudently acted.



some thing divine and spiritual to exercise head and heart in? Zach. 8. 5. As
if the Lords day was a day of leisure, not of light; a day of fond recreation,
and not of heavenly instruction: And how contrary to Abraham have Parents in
London acted, which holy Patriarch would make his Children and Family to keep
the ways of the Lord? Genesis 18. 19.

charms of vain and frothy communication of old and young, men and women, upon
Gods holy day? as if their tongues were set on fire of Hell, Jam. 3. 6. Persons
Peccatum quod alter incurrit operando, tuum facis obloquendo.
not considering, that God has not only confined our hands, that we must not
work, but our tongues too, that we must not talk unprofitably on his own day,
Isa. 58. 13. But how have the Inhabitants of London left themselves to the
range of all manner of foolish and vain discourse, and their communication like
Noah's Ark has taken in the unclean with Genesis 7. 2.
the clean; and this chat must defile Gods day.

London remember the crowds in the fields upon the blessed Sabbath, which
throngs of people have been like the spires of Grass, or the leaves of the
Trees which they came to behold, and all this to flatter corrupt and want ^n
sense, and to waste the most precious time of the most precious Sabbath: What
Atheistical profaneness is this, to be feeding the Eye with a prospect, or
pleasing the Fancy Deus inambulat in anima tanquam in tabernaculo suo, cum ex
memoria in intellectum tra^sit, and inde in voluntatem, per actu^ fidei, spei,
and ch^ritatis; est enim anima sancta quasi templ^m, immo coel^m. Bernard.
with a walk, when the immortal Soul cries out, Improve this time for my
interest, or I perish to eternity? O! that laziness and sensuality should
confound all reason and religion; What time will thou have for the gaining of a
Christ, for the saving of a S^ul, if the Sabbath be trifled away? Is looking
after the invaluable Soul, such a despisable and inconsiderable work, as that
it may be so easily dispensed with? O Lord us vanity! This has fired the best
City in the World. And this idleness in the fields is not only before and after
the solemn worship of God, but in the very seasons of grace, as if sensua^
delight would bid defiance to spiritual duty, and Gods service must give way to
man's froth and vanity; Gospel truths must be laid aside for secular walks, and
heavenly Ordinances must be put off for empty recreations, which like the Tulip
have no sent in them, and like the walks they tr^^^, have no spirit or life in
them.

5. stain of London, that Ale-h^uses have been filled with vain and frivolous
Guests on Gods holy day; as if Bacchus had been the God they had only
worshipped, and the Cup of Intemperance did outvie Psalm. 146. 13.
the ^u^ ^f Salvation.

Stews have not been unfrequented on this holy Sabbath, and so Venus may be the
Goddess of these debauched sinners? We have had Libido mentem absorbet, and
corpus subjugat and corrumpit. Alap.
our Chambers, not of Image^y, Ezekiel. 8. 12. but of Adultery, Romans 13. 13. O the
wantonness of the people on this blessed day! many, nay, too many are upon the
merry pin, laughing, and jesting, and disporting themselves one with another,
as if the Sabbath was some jovial time set apart for some carnal triumph, and
not the set solemnity for soul concernments.

this day been spent with m^re s^n and profaneness then any other day? Other
days have been employed in honest labors, and in the sweat of the b^^ws; but
this blessed day in dishonest delights, and in the pleasing of ^ur lusts.

want of preparation for this holy day, the inhabitants of London toyling no
part of the week with so much eagerness as on the Saturday night, when they
should Mark 15 42. Luke 23 54.
be dressing themselves to meet with the Brid^goom of their souls on his own
day; in this falling below the Jews, who had their Parascheve, their
preparation-day.

London been of profuse furniture ^f the table upon Gods holy day, as if men
were determined to clog the sense T^nta mal^ non facit mare lonites suos
transgre^iens, quam^^m venture si ^^rp^a nostrum super^verit.
that they might chain the soul, and so impede and hinder its freedom in holy
duties, and make intemperance the mother of their devotion: Whence comes our
sleep and stupefaction in the worship of God on his own day, but from the
fullness of the cup, and the excess of the table, when the wanton pala^e shall
prevail more, then the inestimable and precious soul?

work has not been laid aside on Gods day, but many have wrought in their
callings as sedulously, though more privately then upon other days; and too
often the Artificer has swayed more then the Christian, and m^n under a
pretense to keep the eighth, have made bold with the fourth Commandment.

And therefore whatever hand was used in Londons fire, it was Sabbath-guilt
which threw the first fire-ball to turn it into flames. When Mount Sinai was on
fire and smoking, Exodus 19. 18.
God was there, and that was the cause of the combustion; but when dear London
was, on fire, guilt was there, nay, Sabbath-guilt, and this was the cause of
its devastation and retine.

Now ye have seen the dart, let us search the wound. And was not Londons fire
remarkable? Surely never any judgment was sharpened with more mournful
circumstances: The handwriting against the City, was like the handwriting of
the Dan. 5. 5.
Wall, mentioned in the beginning of the 5th of Daniel, we may see every finger
distinctly. But more especially let us glance at these more dreadful
remarkables, the several evidences of divine wrath and displeasure.

By Londons fire, the beauty and the splendor of England was defaced. How
deformed is the body without the head? And was not London the head of England,
as Damascus of A Jerusalem plaga dei incipit, tum quia illa cognoscens et
colens deum, plus caeteris gentibus peccavit, tum quia caeteris statuitur in
exemplum, ut ex ea suum quisque plagam metiatur, similemque expectet. Alap.
Syria? Isa. 7. 8. Nay, London was not only the head of England, but of the
three Nations, the two chief Cities of Scotland and Ireland easily yielding to
the Glory and Renown of London. What the face is to the body, that London was
to England, the beauty and the loveliness of it; Londons glory was the sweet
complexion of the Land, which made strangers and foreigners fall in love with
it. But now God has given a scar to Englands face, and that must needs be a
great blemish. Look upon England as Rich, and London was the Exchequer of it,
the Mine to feed that Exchequer. Look upon England as Potent, London was the
Arsenal of it; and the Tower was not so much an Honorable Prison, as a well
furnished Armoury for all military provisions. London was a City which could
raise an Army, and pay it when it had done: This Glorious City was the sword
and the sinnews of war, the very right hand of all public undertakings. But
now we are as Samson with his hair cut off, enfeebled for want of strength: Now
England is like the Sichemites, Genesis 34. 25. unfit for any invasion. Our
strength is fallen, Lam. 1. 14. The Head of England is made bald, both of
strength and ornament. London, the Crown of England has lost its Jewels of
wealth and beauty. Now London is rolling in its ashes, and we may write Ichabod
upon poor despicable England. If our Father spit in our face, says God to
Moses, ought we not to be ashamed seven days? Numb. 12. 14. Ah! God has spit
fire into the face of England: London, like Job lies on its dunghill, Job 2.
8. and with the afflicted Jews, Esth. 4. 3. makes its abode in its ashes. From
the Daughter of Zion beauty is departed, Lam. 1. 6. The honor of Renowned
England is laid in the dust.

In Londons fire is observable, the greatness of the wind at that time. The
Lord seemed to prepare bellows to blow this fire, that it might not go out till
it had accomplished its Execution. Winds they are the fan of Nature to cool and
purge the Air, to maturate and ripen the Corn; but here God brought the winds
out of his treasury to scatter the flames of his indignation; they served only
to speed our ruin, so that the helps of nature became the hurts of London. The
fire Psalm. 18: 10.
did ride upon the wings of the wind, that it might sooner Luke 8. 25.
come to its journeys end. The Apostle James speaks of Christus loquitur mari,
et ventis, quia majestas dei habet absolutum imperium in creaturas rationales,
et irrationales. Par.
fierce winds, Jam. 3. 6. And such were these to scatter the fire, and so make
the destruction Epidemical. He that commands the winds, now gave them a
Commission in wrath, for the purposes of his severe vengeance; the winds indeed
were high, and that raised the storm, which shipwrackt famous and renowned
London.

That the season should be so hot and dry at the time of this fire; God seemed
to make the houses of the City like tinder, before he struck fire, that it
might be sure to take: and that intemperate heat, as it fitted our dwellings
for sudden waste, so it dried up the springs, insomuch Vt s^lis venustas, and
gloria d^pingatur, solemn, Jovis oculum appellavit antiquitas.
that little water could be had, where usually there was the greatest plenty.
This parching season fought against London with a two-edged sword; it prepared
the houses for fuel, and it kept back the remedy, those needful streams which
should have grapled with this devouring fire. This is worthy Macrob.
our observation, In the time of our need we have a burning sun, instead of a
moistning shower. That Sun which rules the day, guilds the world, guides man,
and fructifies the earth, was an an open enemy to London; so that we may say,
that when London was on fire, it was not a pleasant Eccles. 11. 7.
thing to behold the sun. That glorious luminary, in which at other times we
see the glory of God, Psalm. 19. 4, at this time Psalm. 19. ^*
we might see the wrath of God.

Londons fire was, That the wa^e^-house which served much of the City with
water, was on^ of the first things which was set on fire. O tremendous wrath!
Our help was removed, that our hurt might be amplified. God betimes, in the
very first commencing of this O lachryma h^mi^is, ^^a est potentia, si sola
intres non r^libis va^u^, ^^ vincis invi^cibilem, et lig^s omnipoten^e^, et
filium v^ginis incli^as in misericordiam. Just.
judgment took away our relief: We had nothing to quench our flames, but our
tears, and if they before had been seasonably poured forth, happily the first
flames had been prevented. When God was highly incensed against Israel, he took
away their weapons, they must go down to the Philistines to shar^en ^ Coulter,
1 Samuel 13. 20. They had enemies to assault, but no swords to defend. And in
this judgment God took away our remedy, we had fire to devour, but no water
to quench; the Lord threw fire upon our houses, and he broke our Buckets. We
may read Gods heavy displeasure in the very preface of this judgment. The fire
licked up our 1 Kings 18. 38.
water, as in Elijahs sacrifice, but with this difference, that was a sign of
Gods favor, but this the token of his wrath. God strip^ us as soon as he
struck us, and took away our defense, that his judgment might fall with the
greater force.

The infatuation of the people in not being industrious to quench the fire was
most remarkable. When formerly fire seized upon the City, every one was an
instrument to suppress it, and every passenger an Engine to quench it; there
was labor in the hand, and meltings in the heart of every person, to put a
stop to the devouring flames. But in this tremendous fire, the question of the
Angel to the Disciples was very seasonable, Acts 1. 12. Why stand ye gazing?
The feebleness of a Samson when he had lost his hair, the distraction Judge 16.
19. Dan. 5. 6, 7. Acts 24. 25.
of a Belshazzar when he had lost his wits, and the trembling of a Foelix when
he had lost his design, seized upon the inhabitants of London; their frights
were great, but their help was small, and they knew better how to weep, then to
work. Magistrates themselves were wrapped up in confusion, and their Authority
did only accent their misery, that they should bear rule in Londons calamity.
And it is not to be overpassed, that every one was more industrious to save his
goods, then his City, his particular interest, then the public concernment, as
if every Cabin was not concerned in the whole ship. And it is worth our
nothing, that blowing up of houses that effectual means of preservation, was
either hid or gainsaid until it was too late, and then we found out the remedy,
when the disease had killed us.

Our flames were at the highest in the same month, when the Plague was at the
highest. viz. Doleful September. The Jews had their black days, Zach. 8. 19.
for the taking of their City, for the burning of their Temple, etc. And London
has its black month. In this we are more unhappy then the Jews, they had a
month to celebrate their delivery from Egyptian bondage, Exodus 12. 2. viz.
their joyful Nisan: We have our month too, but it is to bemoan the loss of
Englands glory, our sorrowful September. Surely there is some mystery in
Providence, that the Plague and the Nisan quod (...) est Xonticus, mensis
primus in festis Jud^icis est ordinatus, ^od per hunc Hebraeos ex Egypto ^^uxit
deus J^hovah, hic measis imtium ^^cebat (...) Aequino^i^^. Joseph*
Fire of London should meet in the same month. Is it because God would give
London but one full year for repentance? Or that the latter judgment falling in
the same month, should be a sharp remembrance of the former? Or was it, that
both the judgments falling in Sept. should prognosticate that England should be
in the fall of the leaf? However, the circumstance of time is a significant
ast^risk to point out Gods most critical wrath, and to alarm our seasonable and
spee^y repentance. O fatal Autumn (to use the Prophets words) when the spoiler
fell upon our fruitful vintage and inheritance, Jer. 48 32.

That this dreadful fire should fall out in the year 1666. is not to be
pretermitted. The year, according to the computation of most men, of the
Christians Jubilee; the expectations of many were then upon the wing, and not a
few were upon their watchtower, not only supplicating, but confidently H^b. 2.
1.
expecting some glorious thing to be brought to pass in the world. Some
Prophetic spirits did peremptorily foretell, either that the Turks half moon
should be in the eclipse, or else that the Popes triple crown should totter
and fall; they waited to hear that Mecha^ was subverted, or Rome destroyed, not
dreading, no not in a thought, that London should be burned: Most men seemed to
behold Providence in travel, and they looked for some glorious Birth. But in
this, Vox populi non fuit vox Dei, The voice of the people was not the voice of
God. Our storm fell, when most looked for a fair day; so that we may take up
the moan of the Prophet, Jer. 8. 15. We looked for peace, but no good came, and
for a time of health, and behold trouble. And with Jephtah his Daughter, Judge.
11. 37, 38. we may bewail, as she her Virginity, so we our Londons glory, now
sacrificed to the flames, and made a Burnt offering to appease the wrath (as
most say) of a Popish Conclave.

This tremendous fire fell not upon Sodom, but upon Jerusalem, where there
were many believing Abraham's, righteous Lots, patient Jobs, praying Daniels,
and weeping Ezraes. London was an Empory of Religion, as well as of
Merchandise; and there did Christ feed his flocks at noon, Cant. 1. 7. with his
warmest love, and his greatest light. Cant. 1. 7.
London was the Goshen of the Church, where the Gospel Sun shone in its
greatest vigor. Here were living Temples of God, surpassing the beauty of the
temple of the old Jerusalem, where Grace, not Art, was most visible and
observable. In London there was a Bourse of spiritual merchants; a City it was,
blessed with the best of Ministers, and the most refined Professors; and it was
the Center of holy Reformation: yet London was laid in ashes: Divine Providence
seemed to go out of its wonted course of sweetness and mercy, to pour wrath and
contempt upon this lovely Theater of Piety. Here were ten righteous persons,
nay thousands, nay (without doubt) ten thousands, yet the hand of the Lord was
stretched out to destroy London. In this judgment the Axe was laid to the root
of the tree, Mat. 3. 10. And God did shoot his sharpest arrows against the
green tree; and what will he do to the dry? Now judgment began at the house of
God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. This was the emphasis of Judgment; the Luke 23 31.
best City in the world for serious Christians, for practical godliness, was
buried in its rubbish. But may not Christ's moan be here mentioned, Mat. 23. 37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Jer. 10. 25.
which killest the Prophets, and stonest them who are sent unto thee, behold
your house is left unto you desolate. The first on the 24th. of August, and the
other on the 2d. of September.
There were too many chased away the Prophets, and then London became desolate.
Nay note, on a Sabbath the public liberty of the faithful Ministers of London
was terminated and came to an end; and on a Sabbath London was burned.

This fire of London was an unparalled judgment; no age has produced the
like conslagration; never so great a Jer. 19. 3.
a flame from so small a spark; the firing of an House proved the burning of a
City. Here were no sieges of an enraged One wave of wrath upon the neck of
another. Jer. 39. 8. Nebuchadnezzar subvertit domos vulgares, aut potius domos
vulgi, fuit etiam domus publica, in qua cele^rabantur publicae nuptiae,
convivia, jaculationes, etc. Adricom.
enemy, no throwing of Grenades, whose very noise proclaim death and ruin.
Jerusalem was set on fire, but it was first by the puissant hand of
Nebuchadnezzar, and afterward by the power of Titus the Roman. Rome was set on
fire, but it was by the hand of a Valiant, though barbarous Gensericus the
Vandal. Persepolis was set on fire, but it was by the hand of an infatuated
Alexander. But London is in flames by an invisible hand, whether from Heaven by
the hand of God, or from Hell by the hand of some cursed Jesuit, is not so
clearly discovered, but time may uncase the mystery, Sed adhuc sub judice lis
est. Most probable it is, there was never such a fire in the world, all
circumstances being considered.

upon the dispatch of this fire. Sometimes a whole street burnt within less
then an hour; nay, it is to be marked with a Selah of observation, that there
were burned within the walls of the City eighty one Parishes, besides diverse of
those sixteen remaining, mutilated and exceedingly maimed, a considerable part
of them being consumed; and then we may consider, that the raging flames were
not pent up within the walls, but brake forth into the Suburbs, and consumed
wholly St. Brides Parish, an ample and large parish without the walls, and
destroyed a great part of St. Sepulchers parish, which parish alone before the
fire, might equalize, if not exceed any one of diverse Cities in the Nation: So
that if now we shall compute divine wrath, we shall find that there was a whole
parish consumed for every hour the fire lasted, and more then 13000. houses
were destroyed in the whole. Thus speedy and severe were these inexorable
flames.

upon the fierceness of this fire: Stone was no Bulwark against it, and-Brick
was no rampart, every thing was combustible before it, and became fuel to
gratify its insatiable rage; nay, those pieces of Architecture which could
have endured the bullet, could not endure the flames. This fire being like
Time, which devoures all before it. Tempus edax rerum.


triumphs of this fire, it flamed maugre all opposition, and defied the
auxiliary help of hand or engine; Man's sweat and toil only made its way, could
not suppress its force; and houses when plucked down made the flame to stoop,
but not to expire.

destructiveness of this fire; Drugs could not heal it, nor spices sweeten it,
nor gold bribe it, nor toil quench it, nor the stateliness of any building
Court it, nor the usefulness of any structure stop or delay its mischievous
procedures. Silver melted by its heat, as well as inferior metals; and the
rubbish was a grave for gold, as well as for lumber, and the most pedantique
chattels.

duration of this fire: It lasted full four days, as if all the four Elements
met in its rage, or all the four Winds contributed to its violence, or as if
all the four quarters of the City should be equal and level in their loss and
impoverishment. And as Lazarus lay dead, John. 11. 17. So London lay dying four
days together.

Ages could run parallel with this If we consider the time when it begun: It
was first kindled, on the blessed day of God, and early in the morning too, as
Mark 16. 2, 6.
Christ rose from his grave. Our fear fell on the Sabbath day, Mat. 24. 20.
That day which should have been filled with joys, and praises, and heavenly
celebrations, was filled with tears, and tremblings, and unspeakable frights,
with Rev. 1. 10.
bedewed cheeks, amazed spirits, with fainting hearts, and fallen countenances.
This Sabbath was covered with black, and was a countermand to that sweet
prophecy, Psalm. 118. 24. here was no rejoicing of hearts, but wringing of
hands, the emblems of sorrow and confusion.

unparalled fire it was, If we consider the good things it consumed, beyond
all Arithmetic or Inventory: So great was the loss caused by this fire, that
many ages cannot recruit, what a few days subverted and destroyed.

of the waste and the spoil, that this fire made. In some places of this fired
City, we Opes instabiles and caducae sunt, and minimo vento, belli fl^mma, i^^u
naufragii, casu furti, and cujuslibet mutationis rerum humanarum statu pereunt
et difflantur.
might see the richest wines licked up, which now could neither refresh the
heart of the sorrowful, nor yet gratify the excesses of the intemperate. In
other parts of the City we might discern the oils swimming up and down the
streets, and that promise mentioned, Deuteronomy. 7. 13. fully inverted, The Lord now
cursed both our wine and our oil. Now the oils made not our medicine, but our
misery, not our faces to shine, but our eyes to weep. Our rich household stuff,
invaluable wares, rare apparel, stuffed coffers, crammed bags, were speedily
and unavoidably turned into ashes. How many Psalm 104. 15.
precious Drugs and Odoriferous spices, made London a burnt sacrifice, and went
up in flames as so much incense, but not to appease, but evidence Gods wrath.
How many wholesome Medicines, powerful Antidotes, rich Cordials, rare compounds
of the Apothecary served only the fury of this fire, not to heal, but to heat
it, and to turn it into a more violent flame. The riches of the warehouse, and
the braveries Sard mapalus victus in Regiam se recepit, et extracta, incensaque
pyra, et sa, et divitias suas in incendium mittit, hoc solo imit^tus virum.
Justin.
of the shop, the wealth of the coffer, and the beauty of the house, nay, the
accurateness of the structure did only supply these devouring flames. And as
Sardanapalus made up his pile, and so burnt up himself and the pile together;
so a great part of Londons wealth was consumed, as in one common pile and heap.
Here all foreign commodities met in the same waste; nor were the Spanish wines
too sweet, nor the French linnens too fine, nor the Flanders Arras too rich,
nor the Italian silks too soft, nor the Persian Carpets too noble to be burned
and consumed. This tremendous fire did not only spoil London, but rob the
creation. This noble City being the Mart where the riches of all Nations were
braught: But the losses of London in this fire, are fitter for tears then
description.

And what loss befell learning in this prodigious and destructive fire?
Learning it is the eye of the world, the sublimation Ars non habet inimicum,
praeter ignorantem.
of reason, the handmaid of grace, and knows no adversary but purblind
ignorance; and no wonder if Beauty be not caressed by a blind person. This
admired learning, the glory of the old Philosophers, the light and happiness of
later times, suffered an inexpressible loss in this stupendous fire. Now
learned Volumes which were brought forth by the acute pains and sharp travels
of the Authors, which cost so much expense of time, and so much waste of
strength, only gratified the rage of this mercyless Element of fire. The Libri
curae sunt etiam Paulo ipsi insignissimo Apostolo, et ideo afferri jubet, et
libros, et membranas, libros vetustiora volumina ab aliis conscripta,
membranas, co^ices recentio^^s a seipso conscriptos. Alap.
stores of the diligent Stationer, and the learned piles of the curious
student, were martyred in these flames. In this flaming conquest fell many rare
Authors in several Languages, in all Arts and sciences, many admirable Tracts
and Treatises of Theology, which is the soul of learning, and animates all
other literature. In this rout fell the Fathers, who led the Van, the Schoolmen
which were in the main body, and the Modern Divines, who brought up the Rear,
and all these were arrested by the flames, without bail or main-prize. The
Popes pretense to the temporal and spiritual Sword, could not rescue
Pontifician writers, nor the Protestant privilege of having truth on their
side, could not prevail for saving their useful and learned Tracts from
devouring burnings. One argument of fire answered all popish cavils and
Pr^^estant pleas. How many learned systems of Physic, Tamdiu discendum est
nobis, quamdiu vivendum. Solon.
Philosophy, Law, History, Mathematics, besides many precious Manuscripts
(till then preserved, like so many leaves of the Sybils) were bu^yed in the
ruin of London. The Polyglotte Bible, though speaking in so many languages,
yet could be understood in no^^, nor be heard to obtain quarter from this fie^y
slaughter. Quis ^aliafando temperet a lachrymis? Who can be called off from
pouring out water, as the Israelites at Mizpeh? Nay, the sacred Scriptures
escaped 1 Samuel 7. 6.
not this ruinous desolation: Bibles were burned, though Mat. 5. 18.
not an Iota of Gods word shall fall to the ground. Surely Jesuitical rage and
malice may be here easily discerned; though behind the curtain, and our bodies
and Bibles were principally aimed at in this diabolical shot; and not unlikely,
but he who plundered the Library at Heidelberg, envyed, and happily now has
martyred the Books at London. But Romans 2. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
these secrets shall be canvassed and judged in the day, when we shall all
appear before the tribunal of Jesus Christ. But might it not here be
expostulated, as once Abraham, Will Genesis 18. 23.
the Lord destroy the righteous with the wicked? If wanton Poems, idle
Romances, profane Comedies, lying Legends, heretical Treatises, scandalous and
pernicious Pamphlets, if these shall make a Bone-fire; yet must learned
Commentaries, practical Tracts, select Sermons, nay, blessed and heavenly
Bibles be exposed to the flames? Surely this was the emblem of the extremest
wrath: For what is the consequence of this Book martyrdom, but the putting out
of one of the eyes of Religion, and to taste of the severity of that threat,
the sword: says the Prophet, Zach. 11. 17. so we may say, The fire has been
upon our right eye. But in a word, we have lost many precious treasures in holy
and good books in this prodigious fire; we have now four left to study.

1. The Book of the Creatures.

2. The Book of Providence.

3. The Book of the Scriptures. Psalm. 1. 2.


4. The Book of our own hearts. And in these studies let us take up our
delight, and let them be our meditation day and night.

The firing of London was not confined to the City, but the sparks flew abroad,
and scorched the whole Nation. Who had any considerable interest in England,
and none in London? more or less? As all Rivers run into the Sea, and all the
lines of the circumference meet in the Center, so did the interests of the most
eminent persons in the whole Nation meet in London: who had not a share in this
great ship which is now blown up? If the Tenant lost his Goods, the Landlord
lost his House; and they who had no immediate or personal interest, yet had
they not relations, Parents, Brethren, Children, etc. engaged in the common
loss? The wound in the head makes the whole body sick, and this is most true in
our deplorable case; Nay, the interest of all Nations had some share in Londons
loss, the Factors suffered in the Merchants damage, and foreign correspondents
were not a little disadvantaged by the sufferings of their Traders and
Employees in this famous City; the interests of all varieties in England were
tied together, like the tails of Sampsons Foxes, and firebrands were put into
the midsts of these tails, to burn up the Judge. 15. 4.
fruits of Divine blessing, and the labors of our selves and Progenitors. This
stroke of Londons fire, was not only given to the head, but to the heart of
England, and put an eclipse upon the glory of all interests.

Nor must the season of this terrible fire be omitted, without a Selah, a note
of observation: It was when we had few Friends at home, and many Enemies
abroad; this fire was adding affliction to affliction: at the same time there
was Lam. 1. 2.
blood and slaughter abroad, when there was fire and flames at home. And no
doubt but flaming London filled the insultations Lam. 2. 13.
of the Enemy; they, like Nero, were playing upon their musical Instruments,
when poor London was posting Lam. 2. 2.
to ruin: London had too much pride before the fire, and too little pity after
it; she might complain in the Lam 2. 16, 25.
Churches language, Lam. 3. 14. She was a derision to the Inimici pleno oris,
and gutturis victu devorant, and deglutire ecclesiam volunt. Orig.
people, and their song all the day; and go on in her moans thus accented by
the Prophet, Dan. 9. 12. God has brought upon me a great evil, for under the
whole Heaven has not been done, as has been done upon Jerusalem. In this fire
God struck with both hands, with a foreign Sword, and a domestic flame: There
was fear on our Coasts, and fire in our Bowels; our Wound was open, and God
pours, not suppling Oil, or healing Balm, but corroding Vinegar into it; it was
a sign our Physician was angry.

And what vigorous intercessions were made for London, both before and in the
burning? What strong cries were put up, that God would save dear London from
Sword and fire? In the very heat of this Judgment, what wrestlings with God for
the abatement of it! and that in the midst of judgment, Psalm. 101. 1.
he would remember mercy! but God seemed here to take up his old resolve,
Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were Ezekiel. 14 14.
in the City, they should only deliver their own Souls by their Ezekiel. 14. 20.
righteousness; they should not quench a flame, or save in house. O tremendous
Judgment! Prayers could not divert the fire, nor Tears quench it: the flames
were above our attempts, and the Lord was against our entreaties, he was Psalm.
80 4.
now truly angry with our prayers, Psalm. 80. 4. When the Lord was ready to
strike Israel, prayers prevailed, and Moses held his hand, Exodus 32. 14. And
when the Angel was ready to strike Jerusalem, prayers prevailed, and God
repents of the stroke, 2 Samuel 24. 16, 17. But no intercession can screen London
from the consuming flames; but Divine vengeance rides triumphantly in the midst
of its spoils, and Victories. The lifting up of hands could not prevent the
falling down of houses, but the Incense of Prayer was a vain and insignificant
Oblation, Isa. 1. 13.

This dreadful fire blasted London in all its varieties, it seized upon its
Ornaments:

1. The Royal Exchange, which was matter of admiration to all, but especially
to strangers. How many Forraigners, when they beheld this noble Structure, were
struck with amazement, As the Disciples were in beholding the Temple, Mat. 24.
1, 2. In this famous Bourse persons met from all Exattempli fabrica, ab Herod,
non ita pr^dem, nuro opere, et maximis sumptibus exornata, et omnium oculos in
se c^nvertebat, et intuentium animos in adm rationem raptebat. Ger.
parts of the World; Spanish, French, Dutch, Portuguezes, nay, Turks, and
others from the most remote parts of the Universe; here was the general
Convention of Europe in their trafficking representatives: As London was the
glory of England, so the Exchange was the glory of London; Here were Factors
for the Worlds commerce, here was the conflux of Trade and Merchandise, and it
was full Sea every Noon: But this magnificent structure is fallen into rubbish,
and it is much to be suspected, that it was over-laden with pride and
fantasticalness in the upper part of it, with craft and covetousness in the
middle part of it, with fraud and deceitfulness in the lower part of it; and
therefore the Ensurance Office which was in it, could not ensure it from
devouring Constabat structura templi ex lapidibus candidis and fir^i^^^mi^
m^gnitudine 25 c^bitoru^^ et 8 in al^^^. ^. 12 in latitu^^^^m. Jos^phus.
flames; And how did this flourishing Structure vanish on a sudden, as if it
had been only a bright apparition?

2. Another Ornament of the City, (not to mention those which are inferior,
and so innumerable) was the Guild Hall; and this Structure fell in the common
ruin: this noble pile of building, so ancient, so useful, so majestic, so
unparalled, was founded about 360 years ago (as some compute it) and how was
it laid waste in one day! This magnificent Hall was a place of Judicature, the
honorable Nun^ s^g^s est ubi Trest suit. Virg.
reception of the Magistrates of the City, and no less than nine Courts sat in
it in their seasons; no Building did make London look more like it self, viz.
The Metropolis of three Nations, then this stately Nonesuch: It was our
English Capital; and that it could not be preserved, spoke our provocation
high, and Gods indignation hot. But our Londons Exchequer is wholly
impoverished of its beauty, and it is buried in its ruinous and silent ashes.

This dreadful fire seized upon the conveniences of the City. The Halls which
belonged to the several Companies, these were decent and convenient places for
the several Societies to meet in; here stocks were reserved for the poor of the
same Companies, and so seasonable, and comfortable succors were carefully
provided to supply the decays which were incident to each Society in their
several members. Many of these Halls were famous and eminent Structures, not to
be paralleled in any Nation: and here the several Societies Proprium est
charitatis efficere, ut in ex^^cendis offici is v^rtutum quatum cunque
voluntary, promte, et del^ctabiliter operemur. Aquin.
met to preserve Love and Amity among themselves; but this destructive fire
levelled these beauteous Buildings into rubbish and ashes; and so the Lord in
this Judgment, did not only blast the beauty, and eclipse the glory, but melt
the cement and solder of London, and so untwist our societies by destroying the
places of their Convention. Now our Companies are scattered, and know not the
places of their Courts or Festivals.

3. A rare convenience of this City was the famous Sion College, the eminent
receptacle of Divines, where the Students Charitas est vinculum, quod
constringit, and conjungit ^es et personas diversas inter se. Daven.
had their Chambers, the Scholars had their Books, and the poor had their
bread. This stately Edifice containing within the circuit of it, several
Almshouses for the poor of both Sexes, the privilege of a richly fraught
Library, was in a few hours buried in its ruins. Indeed this was a place of
such Renown, that many were pleased to call London, the third University of
England. Here the Muses, and the Graces dwelt together: and here Doctor White
the Two eminent Divines.
worthy Founder of, and Mr. Simpson a bountiful Benefactor to this lovely
Edifice, left their renowned Names to be venerated to Posterity. But this
inexorable fire had no pity upon the cries of the indigent Alms-folks, nor any
respect to the pleasing retirements of the industrious Student: Nor would it
spare that rich Cabinet of Learning, the beautiful Library; nay the Chains by
which the Books were fettered to the places, could not keep the multitudes of
them from running into ashes; but learned, and so precious leaves were blown
down to destruction.

Nay this devouring fire attached the necessaries of the City:

1. The several Prisons, which bound Malefactors to their good behavior, and
pinioned them from rapine and violence: Apud omnes gentes carceres horridi
longam mortem praeferebant, et apud Athenas Barathrum dicti fuerunt; et
usitatissime ergastulum nuncupati sunt, quia carcere vincti operari, et pensum
persolvere debebant. Alap. in Jer.
This fire made the Saint weep, and the Thief rejoice, expecting his Chains to
be loosned and taken off, not by the File, but the flame; These Cages of
unclean Birds were opened, not by the innocence of the Prisoner, but by the
indignation of the Almighty. We had taken our range in sin, and God seemed to
say, Let sin take its range: God in this fire seemed to pierce Doves, and leave
Vultures to the prey. Newgate, that colder Hell, was now opened; and Bridewel,
that lenitive of the heat of lust, was now broken up; the Debtors in Ludgate
now paid their Debts, not by composition, but by conflagration; the death of
London, not of themselves, paid their Debts. And the two Counters where the
Miscellany of vice used to meet, gave up their dead in a fright from an
approaching flame. Nay the Sessions House, that solemn Seat of Justice, and
unbyassed Righteousness, where sin and villainy received their just and due
sentence of condemnation, was turned into ashes; That God seemed to spit in the
face of our very Justice, as despising our Righteousness; Our disobedience to
himself making him neglect our severities to others: That God made a
Jail-delivery not in love, but in wrath.

This prodigious fire seized upon the Sanctuaries of the City. Those Reverend
Structures, wherein many fervent prayers Inter judaeos oppidatim synagogae
erant, in quibus Moses et Prophetae per singula sabbata perlegebantur. Acts 15.
21. Quin ergo in Ecclesia, omnia decenter fie^i, et secundum ordinem, idcirco
nec Christus hunc ordinem turbare voluit, sed doctrinam suam proposuit in
synagogis. Chemnit.
have been offered up to God, many religious assemblies have been convened for
holy worship, wherein many excellent and soul-converting Sermons have been
preached and delivered; these solemn places of the holy congregation are now
turned into a ruinous heap; so that now we may speak in the Psalmists language,
Psalm. 74. 8. This fire has burnt up almost all the Synagogues of God in the
City: And surely whatever scorn many cast upon these places called Churches,
the usual retirements of the Saints on Gods blessed day, to meet with their
beloved; these being folded up in ruin, put an emphasis upon divine
displeasure, the faithful Ministers of Christ never refusing those decent
conveniences to break the bread of life in: But our comely places for our
sacred assemblies are dropped into confusion, and now there is no difference
between the Pew and the Pulpit.

This dreadful fire seized upon the Nurseries of our City:

1. The Nurseries of Charity, our Hospitals: the Renowned Christ-Church fell at
this strok, the worthy benefaction of our English Josiah, the Excellent Edward
the sixth. Here Deus est herus noster, nos coloni ejus; pauperes ager dei sunt,
semen eleemosyna, quae fructificat usque ad Praemii messem. Alap.
the Children of indigent Parents had clothes for their backs, bread for their
bellies, learning for their minds, and careful Governors undertook, not only
a pious but a parental charge. Rare was the contrivance, and quick the spring
of this eminent and stupendous piece of charity. When poor Parents, which
labored under the affliction of dry breasts, could bring their Children to
Christ-Church Hospital, and then they were fully provided for, and lay not only
in the bosom of a careful Governor, but oftentimes they fell into the lap of
the Muses, and many of them in their seasons changed an Hospital for an
University: But this famous John 5 2.
Hospital for the most part is consumed; this pool of Bethesda is in a great
measure dried up; and this Jonah's guord is withered, which kept many from the
scorching of extreme poverty. Now we may take up that complaint of Jonah 4. 7.
our Savior, The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air have nests, Mat.
8. 20. but the poor Hospital boys have not where to lay their head, for their
usual nest is burnt.

2. The Nurseries of Learning fell in these flames. This fire Juli^nus Apostata
Templa Gentilium aperuit, and Scholas Christianorum clausit; et dec^evit ut
nulli Christianorum liceret, aut ad ^^tes et scien^^^^ se ap^licarent, aut
Scholas literarias intrarent. Pedr. de Mexia in Histor. Imperial.
of London, like the persecution of the Apostate Julian, shut up our School
doors; it destroyed the famous Merchant Taylours School, Paul's School, Mercers
Chapel, and the School in Christ Church, those Seminaries of earlier, and
rudimental learning. By this fire, there was a Cross went before our Alphabet.
Religion and Learning are as the Sun and the Moon, the light and brightness of
every place; but now the Cages are broken, and the young Birds are flown away:
The younger Scholars have lost their Schools, and the elder their Books.
Schools are the Gardens where the tender Plants grow; and from them, the most
profound Ministers who watch over our souls, the best read Lawyers who defend
our Estates, the ablest Physicians who consult the weal of our bodies, all
receive their first rudiments: The fairest Plants once grew in these Nurseries
of polite and profitable learning; and hence the deepest Scholars had their
praeliminary knowledge. But these useful Structures are now rolled up in
destruction; these Universities initial are laid in ashes; and now there is no
difference between the Masters desk and the Schoolars Form. The breasts of the
Muses which fed young and infantile Scholars, are now made dry by this
desolating judgment.

The fire seized upon the fences of the City. Now the gates of Zion mourn, Lam.
1. 4. And London feels the dint of Portae serviunt 1. Ad speciem, et decorem.
2. Ad munimen, unde erunt altae, et munitae. 3. Ad Senatum et Judicia. 4. Ad
omnem populi panegyrin et conventum.
Babylons threat, Jer. 51. 58. Her high places shall be burnt with fire. God in
this judgment spoiled the City, not only of its beauty and ornament, but of
its strength and security; we have not our Gates to keep him in, or to keep an
Enemy out. Thus God will not have us safe; but when we have made our selves
naked by our sin, he will keep us naked by his judgments; God has shattered
our Gates in pieces, which was the peculiar prerogative of a City; London now
in a great measure has lost its Name: God has fired the lock of our strength,
and London cannot shake her self as at other times. Judge. 16. 20.


That which accents this judgment is, the hand of the Lord was in it; Not only
man's head, but Gods hand; supposing the Jesuit and the Papist were in the
Conspiracy, Isa. 10. 5. Mali sunt virga furoris dei, quia deus iis non utitur,
nisi valde iratus, and eorum manu et opere indignationem suam assequitur, et
peccata iniquorum ulciscitur.
yet they were the Rod of Gods anger, or else who took away courage, spirit,
life and activity from the Citizens at that time? who melted their spirits like
water, that they were as a Dove without heart? Hos. 7. 11. Who caused the fire
to burn against, as well as with the wind? Nay, who determined the place where
the fire began, in the midst of Pitch, Tar, Oil, Hemp, Powder, and all
provocations of flames and ruin? Let us then take it for granted, some
perfidious Engineer of Rome hatched the plot, yet it could never have been
fledged, had not Gods indignation given wing unto it.

And besides all this, we must attribute to God the Sovereignty, and the
dominion over the fire, as well as other Elements and Creatures; and here let
us a little consider the influence God has over the fire.

God he kindles the fire, Job 15. 34. He blows up the first spark. As wicked
men are stubble to him, Isa. 5. 24. so the whole world is as thatch, and he can
when he pleases set it Genesis 7. 23.
all in a flame. He that drowned the world with water, he can easily consume
and destroy it by fire.

God inflames and increases the fire, Psalm. 18. 8. He creates the first spark,
and then blows it into a flame. If Nebuchadnezzar Ezekiel. 21. 31. Ezekiel. 30. 8.
Dan. 3 19. Ezekiel. 30 16.
can heat the furnace seven times hotter then it was before, how much more can
the great Jehovah enrage the conflagration, and turn the fire of a house or a
hamlet into the fire of a City?

God terminates the fire. And he who says to the proud waves, hitherto shall
ye go and no further, speaks the same Job 38. 11. Isa. 29. 6. Joel 1. 19.
language to the devouring flames; the most raging and triumphant fire shall
not exceed its limited Commission.

God divides the fire, Psalm. 29. 7. That it shall burn this way, and not
another; Gods pity can soften the beam, and his wrath can sear the rafter, that
the fire shall not catch the Psalm. 29. 7.
one, but seize upon the other; the fire only seizes upon those precincts
which God has designed to the flames.

God makes the fire destructive, Ezekiel. 15. 7. It shall burn and consume, and
there shall be no remedy; the passion and heat of the fire is from the anger of
the Lord. That the fire Ezekiel. 15 7.
is merciless, is because God is full of indignation.

And God can make the fire beneficial; that it shall not rage but relieve, and
that it shall warm and not destroy; he makes Exodus 13. 21* Dan. 3 25. Hos. 11.
8. Numb. 11. 33.
the fire to purge, and not to punish. Thus the Pillar of fire was Isreal's
guide, and the fiery furnace the three Childrens Arboret; his repentings can
kindle, as well as his wrath: and he can be a wall of fire about us for our
security, as well as send a judgment of fire among us for our calamity.

God amplifies the fire, and makes it not only a domestical, but a popular and
national judgment; the spreading of the Ezekiel. 30. 14. Amos 3. 6.
fire for general loss and epidemical ruin, is from, and only from the Lord;
the Village is set on fire, and the City by the same hand. Man in his most
extreme malice shoots with wet powder, if God counter-mand, but his anger makes
effectual every destructive design.

God permits the fire, Jer. 39. 8. He suffers an insolent Enemy, or a
perfidious misereant to turn Cities or Houses into flames. The Soldiers
firebrand, by which was fired the famous Temple of Jerusalem, was
commissionated by a divine command. And God restrained Popish cruelty which was
nourished and evidenced in the Gunpower Treason.

God can stop the fire, Dan. 3. 27. and alter the very nature of it. The flames
shall not be our scourg^, but our shelter, and become our walk, and not our woe.

God can make use of the fire, as his particular instrument to afflict a
sinful Nation or City, Amos 7. 4. And thus he did to London. Whatever
miscreant made the ball, God threw Zach. 1. 18.
the fire, and turned this famous, but sinful City, into ashes. This then is
the sharpness of this judgment; the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof,
Jer. 14. 8. has laid London waste, and to accent his wrath, he did it upon his
own blessed Ier. 14. 8.
day; and will you know the reason, it was suggested in the beginning of the
Chapter: We made light of his Sabbath by our vanity, looseness and profaneness,
and God has set a mark upon it, by firing on this day one of the best Cities
in the world: We forgot his Memento by which he prefaces and begins his
Commandment for the Sabbath; and therefore Exodus 20. 8.
we shall feel his Memorandum even unto future Generations.

CHAP. LI. A second Decad of Arguments, to reinforce the same persuasion, that
we would keep holy the Lords day.
IT was not without a mystery of Providence, that God should give the Decalogue
upon Mount Sinai in the Exodus 19. 18.
midst of fire and smoke, a terrible appearance; was it not to foretell the
severities of God, which he would execute upon those who should gainsay his ten
words by neglect, and disobedience? But he has corrected the violation of none
of them with more sharpness and indignation, then that which relates to the
Sabbath, as has been abundantly discovered. But now that I may leave nothing
unattempted to court the Reader to a due observation of Gods holy day, I shall
draw the line from another point of the circumference, meeting still in the
same Center. Other Arguments I shall use to press conscience to the obedience
of Christ in a holy 2 Cor. 10. 5.
keeping of his own blessed day.

Let us take notice that God has embroydered this holy day with the riches of
grace: Upon this day God has caused Reges nos fecit Christus, tum quia regni
sui adaptavit cohaeredes, tum quia efficit, ut per gratiam sp. peccatum mortem,
Satanam and hosts omnes vincamus, tum quia nos sua membra tandem coronabit.
Sacerdotes fecit, ut hostias spirituales offeramus deo, acceptas per ipsum,
quin and ipsos nos in vivam h^stiam gratitudinis deo consecremus. Par.
light to shine out of darkness, and brought many a dead Lazarus out of his
grave; and of stones has raised up Children to Abraham, Mat. 3. 9. Of Lions he
has made lambs to God, and out of sinful men has converted thousands to the
faith of Christ. Upon this day God has made the bland to see, the deaf to
hear, and dumb to speak, nay, and the lame to walk in the ways of his holy
Commandments. This is the day of Gods wonder-working, the sphere wherein his
free grace shines the brightest. Whereas the works of the first creation were
all done upon six days, and none upon the seventh, which was then the Sabbath
day; all the works the new creation are ordinarily done upon the Sabbath day,
rather then upon any of the six days. This has been the Birth day of many
spiritual Kings and Priests, Rev. 1. 6. The Psalmist says, Psalm. 87. 5. And of
Sion it shall be said, this and that man was born therein: And of the Lords day
it may be said, this and that man was born therein. O blessed day! Millions of
Saints in heaven are now blessing this day of God, and blessing God for this
day. I read of one who cursed the day of his natural birth, Job 3. 3. But I
never read of any who cursed the day of his new birth. This is the day of
rescuing the prey from the mighty, the day of opening the Prison door and
setting the captive free. This is a day much to be observed to the Lord, for
bringing Exodus 12. 42.
souls out of their spiritual Egypt, out of the house of sinful bondage. This
blessed day has been the wedding day of many souls, the day of their espousals
to Christ, when the knot has been so knit, that it has not been loosned to
eternity.

Thus God has magnified his own day, and shall not we sanctify it? Shall he
put a beauty, and shall we put a scar upon it? Shall he prosper, and shall we
profane it? His bounty invites our purity, all the badges of honor God puts
upon it, only bespeaks our holiness: It is a princely day, and we come to
Princes with reverence and Veneration. Gods wonderful works on this day, must
meet with our spiritual operations, and our serious devotions: For us to sport
jocularly to recreate our selves needlessly, or to demean our selves slightly on
that day wherein God acts gloriously; what is it, but in effect to say, we will
not have the Lord of the Sabbath Mark 2. 27.
to reign over us?

The good observation of the Lords day may influence the whole week: Usually
the tenor of the week follows the temper of the Sabbath. If we have been
conscientious on Gods day, we will be careful on the week day: But as Reverend
Calvin observes, If we are vain and frothy, loose and licentious Calvin upon
Deuter. Sermon. 5. p. 34.
on Gods holy day; it is no marvel if we become brutish and abominable all the
rest of the week. Let any man observe his own heart, and he shall find, that
the more he has let himself loose to carnal liberty on the Lords day, the more
loose his heart will be in all good duties the whole week following. Let men
neglect meditation, repetition of Sermons, holy conference, and other private
duties, betakeing themselves after the public worship is over, to vain and
worldly discourse, or vainer pleasures; they shall quickly find that the
public service is utterly lost, and become unprofitable. And on the contrary,
as Moses continued forty days with God on the Mount, had his face shining with
splendour and glory, Exodus 34. 30. So he who shall this day (...). Septuag.
of God, wholly converse with God, not only in public Ordinances, as Moses in
the tabernacle, but likewise in private duties, as Moses on the Mount, shall
find a sensible spiritual vigor, and an unexpected strength to carry him
through all the occasions of the whole week following, and a kind of glorious
luster arising from the increase of holiness put upon him, and this shall be
visible to the eye and hearts of others. Eccles. 3. 1.


He who keeps the Lords day with the most strict and and accurate observation,
shall find

1. Most blessing upon his labors.

2. Most holiness in heart and life.

3. Most comfort and joy in his own soul.

4. Most sweetness in death.

5. Most glory and rest in Heaven, when there remains that Populo dei superest
Sabbatismus (i. e.) requies d^i, ad quam quotidie sanctus vocatur. Par.
everlasting Sabbatism for all the people of God. It is a good observation of a
learned man, That when the spirit comes effectually to convince of sin,
usually one of the first sins which the eye of the enlightened conscience fixes
upon, is the neglect of the Lords day: and conviction usually ending in
conversion, one of the first duties which the soul comes seriously to close
withal, is the strict observation of the Lords day, and grace usually works
this way, and does exceedingly dispose to this duty. Young Converts will be
full of meltings on Gods holy day.

And truly, the holy observation of the Sabbath much speaks the temper of a
Christian. However the week fares as Judge. 12. 6.
the Sabbath does. Good Sabbaths usher in good weeks, and are the morning stars
of an approaching day: when we hear truth on the Sabbath, digesting it by
prayer and meditation, when we put up strong cries to God with fervor and
devotion, when we enjoy Ordinances, our spiritual meals on a Sabbath with
appetite and satisfaction; this will cast a chain upon our corrupt hearts, and
will be bellows to our future zeal, will supply us with holy meditations, which
will be as so many bright gleams, and will put a heat upon our affections, and
make us every way act the Saint all the ensuing week. As Queen Mary said when
she lost Callais, When I am dead, open me, and you shall find Callais written
upon my heart: So the Christian who has been very serious on Gods day, you
shall find Sabbath written upon his heart all the following week. The seent of
a conscientious Sabbath is not easily lost, nor is the warmth of it so speedily
chilled; souls drenched in Sabbath Ordinances like vessels seasoned with
excellent liquors, Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem, Testa diu.
they long retain the taste. The believer is disciplined upon a Sabbath, and we
do not easily forget our Education. A Sermon kindly entertained on the Lords
day, will be faithfully improved on the week day. Our best Christians were ever
strictest on the Sabbath. Those tastes of love we then sense and gust, will
abide, and not lightly wear off, these will lie upon the heart when the Sabbath
is over. Let us keep Sabbaths well, we shall be better in our shops, better in
our worldly affairs, better in our families, better in our discourses, better
in our converses, more righteous in our dealings, more exemplary in our
walkings, more vigorous in our duties all the week following. After a well
passed Sabbath, we shall more watch our hearts, more keep our ground, and
withstand temptations, and the deceipts of our Calling, which happily Quaestus
magnus est pietas, quia opes supernaturales secum affert, et amicitiam dei
obtinet, qui suis opes coelestes promittit and praeparat.
are quilted into the very nature of it, shall not so much tempt, as exasperate
and provoke us. The whole week must be spent holy to prepare us the better for
the Sabbath, and the Sabbath must be spent h^ly, the better to influence the
week; as the beginning with God on the morning of a Sabbath, may influence the
whole Sabbath; so the beginning with God in the morning of the week, viz. The
Lords day, may exceedingly influence and prosper the whole week. He 2 These. 2.
10.
who on the Sabbath has been much in the work of heaven, cannot easily be much
in the dross of earth, or the dregs of sin on the time of the week. Ordinances,
like clocks, when they have struck leave a sound and a noise for a considerable
time; nor can a Sermon carefully heard, be presently shaken out of the heart.
The word when received in the love thereof, is fire in the bones, Jer. 20. 9.
and not heat in the face; an inward warmth which is permanent, and not only a
color which is transient: The tastes, the impressions, the power and
spirituality of a well-observed Sabbath, cannot without much difficulty, strong
assaults of Satan, powerful workings of a corrupt heart be disanulled and
eradicated. Hearts steeped in holy Ordinances will not soon lose their perfume.
It is very true, our slight deportment in Ordinances makes them superficial,
and so soon slide off; and they who pass over the Sabbath loosly, will spend
the week profligately; they who spend it formally, will spend the week vainly:
But a serious composure of spirit on Gods holy day, will blow off the froth of
the ensuing week. Ignatius (as has been suggested) calls the Lords day, the
Queen of days; Regis ad exemplum totus componitur O^bis.
and according to the example of the Queen, inferior and subordinate days will
be composed. The endeavor of every Christian should be, that his practices in
secret, in his calling, in his company on the week day, should be answerable to
the great privileges he enjoyed, and to the rich grace he received on the
Lords day. One well observes, That Religion is just as the Sabbath, and it
decays or grows as the Sabbath is esteemed, it flourishes in a due Veneration
of the Sabbath, and it pines and consumes, when the Sabbath is under neglect or
contempt. And Dr. Twisse takes notice, That the conscionable observation of the
Sabbath ever was, and is a principal means to draw us to spiritual rest from
sin, and to fit us for an eternal rest in glory. In a word, the Sabbath and the
week are both embarked in the same ship, they both are safe or sink together;
if our souls thrive upon a Sabbath by our holy deportments upon it, and our
careful improvements of it, it will be seen in the week; but if by our careless
behavior we grow lean upon the Sabbath, like Pharaoh his lean Kine Genesis 41 20.
in his Dream, it prognosticates nothing less than a Famine of grace and
happiness.

We put on our best Attire upon a S^^b^th, and why should we not be in our best
spiritual Dress? Shall we deck our Bodies, and neglect our Souls? Shall we
stand before God on his own day, with Bodies dressed with all art and
curiosity, Ille Judaeus vere est, qui tal^^ est in absc^dito. Q^i fidem, and
^bed^entiam prae^at Christo, ^ h^bet cir^^^cisionem c^rdis, conv^rs^^ne cordis
ad Deum. Par.
but with Souls undressed, and unprepared, ruffled with worldly thoughts,
unwashed by repentance, all things h^nging careless and loose by formality,
only painted over, and dawbed with pretense and hypocrisy? The f^rma^ist on a
Sabbath might correct himself by his Ga^^, and the exactness of his Attire.
Surely it is an high blemish to Religion, to be curious in our fashion, and to
be careless in our devotion, and to spend more time on a Sabbath, to set the
D^^ss, ^^ curl the Hair, and to fit the Garment, than to inflame Devotion, to
compose the Heart, and to trim the Lamp, to meet with the Bridegroom of our
Souls: Shall not a piece of Eternity be as richly attired on the Lords day, as
a piece of dust and clay? Why should not the Soul wear the Ornaments of Grace,
put on the Jewels of Faith and Zeal, be 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4.
dressed up with holy thoughts, with heavenly desires, with spiritual aims,
with steady resolutions for further increases of grace and sanctity, as well as
the sinking dying body, a crumbling lump of earth, be adorned with all the
garish modes of art and bravery? Nothing more uncouth, that when the body is
only the plain case of a precious Soul, that it should be decked on a Sabbath,
with all the setting forth of costly and lovely Ornament; but the immortal Soul
should want its trimming, to make it look comely in the eyes of its Beloved:
when the Body is the fine cover of a deformed Soul, what is this, but to shovel
dung into a rich Coffer, or to put Pebbles into an Ebony Casket? A serious
Christian would more mind the trimming of the Lamp, than Mat. 25. 7.
the setting of the Dress; or else the setting of the Dress should more mind
him of the trimming of the Lamp.

Let us consider what a rare privilege it is, to enjoy the Sabbath of the
Lord: To keep a Sabbath is not our work, but our rest; not our service, but our
liberty; not our task, Psalm. 42. 4.
but our triumph. The Sanctuary is the Souls Paradise, and Psalm. 24. 4.
Ordinances are the Tree of life in this Garden of Eden; O Psalm. 84. 10.
then let us not turn this grace into wantonness. Kings do not spurn their
Crowns, nor use their Scepters to turn up Turffs in the field. The Mariner
makes not use of the Deck of his Ship to be a Stage to act on. Thus Antipodes
to reason and religion do profane persons act, when they slight over the
momentous Sabbath of God: shall God honor us with a Sabbath, and shall we
provoke him on a Sabbath? Great Estates amplify the prodigality of the Heir,
and make his sin more odious and shameful. Our Sabbaths are our seasons of
grace, our spiritual Mart, our Pisgah sight of Canaan, our Term-time to follow
our Suit for glory and eternity, and to profane and formalize away these
acceptable days of life and salvation; what is it, but to throw Jewels upon Cum
omnibus diebus h^mo sese occupet in negotiis suis ne^essariis, die sabbati
consentaneum est, ut se segreget, et quiescat propter Dei gloriam. Aben Ezra.
the Dunghill, and to disinherit the Soul of its primogeniture, as if its
concerns were not considerable, and of little importance? How can we do the
work of Earth or Hell upon this heavenly day! If we will be working, Let us
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. Our Sabbaths are
mercy, rich mercy, costly mercy, soul mercy, the finest of the Wheat: Let us
then solemnly observe them, and dexterously improve them, remembering that he who
had five talents, gained five more, Mat. 25. 20. The Viceroy whose trust is
great, and charge more honorable, he is more active Quamquam fidelis servus
minime gloriatur, tamen fidelitatem et diligentiam debitam Deo humiliter
commendat. Par. Exodus 20. 7, 8.
and vigilant, then every petty Officer whose Precincts are narrow and
inconsiderable. O that Christians would keep holy Gods blessed day: What is it,
O devout Souls, but a daybreak of eternal brightness? And let us not forget,
that as God will not hold him guiltless, who takes his Name in vain, so neither
him, who spends his day in vain: Those surely are foolish Children who play by
their Candle, and those frantic Christians, who frivolously pass over that
holy day, wherein they enter into the suburbs of the holy City, and begin that
work of praising, pleasing, and enjoying God, which shall be the Employment of
Eternity.

In the holy keeping of the Sabbath there is praemium in opere, a reward in the
work. What would the Lord have thee to do on a Sabbath, but only enjoy
himself? Our sweat on a Sabbath is spent only in hearing from God in the
preaching of the word, in flying to God in holy prayer and supplication, or
contemplating on God in devout meditation, or feasting with God at his own
Table; so that in the whole management of a Sabbath, there is more honor than
burden, more Opera sabbati sunt opera coeli.
profit than pain, more delight than disgust: The works of a Sabbath, are the
works of Heaven; and the Angels are not weary, nor the glorified Saints tired
with singing Hall^lujahs. On a Sabbath we feed on Manna, and the fat things In
nostra enim Do^ini^^ die semper pl^it domin^^ Ma^na de coelo: Coelestia namque
sunt eloquia illa verbum lectum et populo praedic^tum. Orig.
of the Sanctuary; we drink of the Brook in the way, and of Wine on the Lees
well refined, Isa. 25. 6. we carry Benjamins Sack with the Cup in the mouth of
it, Genesis 44. 2. we are spiritual Publicans, and take custom of Heaven. All
which aggravates Sabbath-prophanation; it would be strange to see a Lutanist,
who has a rare Lute, and who is dextrous in playing on the Instrument, to
spend his time in breaking the strings of his Lute: What less does the formal,
or profane person do, who enjoys the heavenly opportunity of a Sabbath, and
loses his good wind by sloth or neglect, and slights over those rare duties,
which like Sampsons Lion, Judge. 14. 18.
are sweet in the strong. Trace a Sabbath-work, and is it any thing else but
gaining knowledge, treasuring up truth, wrestling with God for pardon, grace,
and assurance, visiting our Beloved, and driving the great Bargain of Eternity?
And for which of these good works must the Sabbath be profaned, John 10. 33,
(...).
or thrown away? If Philosophers say of Virtue, It is its own reward; is it not
much more true, of holy worship, spiritual communion, converse with Heaven, and
those pleasing delights, which are the sweet employment of a Sabbath? Therefore
1 John 1. 3.
to pollute this day, or to trifle it away, what is it, but to Numb. 14. 8.
bring an evil report on Canaan, a Land flowing with milk and honey?

And it would be seriously considered, Sabbaths are upon the wing, and they
will not long continue to us: We cannot say of richest Sabbaths, as once Christ
said of poor persons, the Sabbaths ye have always with you, Mat. 26. 11. The
Lords day is a triumphant, but a transient mercy: Now we enjoy these blessed
Sabbaths and holy Ordinances; we know not how soon the Songs of Zion may be
turned into howling, Lam. 1. 4, 16. And Icha^od may be written upon our weekly
jubilies: We know not how soon Gods wrath, or John 12. 35.
our own death, may hide th^se things which belong to our Levit. 26. 43.
peace, from our eyes. O then let us improve our Sabbaths, Luc. 19. 42.
our sweet seasons, our Summertime, our divine Harvest; for Prove. 6. 6, 7.
if we do not gather grace on this day, what shall we have Jer. 8. 7.
to lay out on the weekday? Or what shall we have to spend Prove. 10. 5.
on a death-b^d, when we are stepping into another World? Psalm. 32. 6.
We know the Water-man must observe his wind and tide, Suus cuique constitutus
est dies certum tempus quo operari possit, quo elapso nihil amplius praestare
queat. Chemnit.
and when they serve, then he throws off his Doublet and bestirs himself, left
he should fall short of his Creek or Haven. It concerns us to mind Sabbaths,
and to sanctify them to the Lord; then the gases of the Spirit blow fair, then
the waters of the Sanctuary run right for the Port to which we are bound: but
if these heavenly Opportunities slide away without our serious improvement, we
must with Esau Psalm. 115. 17.
seek the Blessing carefully with tears, but it shall not accrue Heb. 12. 17.
unto us. The Musician plays his Lesson, while the Instrument is in tune: let
us ripen in grace while the Sabbath shines, and Sabbath -showers continue. Our
Savior bids us work while it is day, John 9. 4. Surely this principally points
at the Sabbath Day, which is the Souls day: It is but a few Sabbaths more, nay,
it may be, not one more, and we shall go down to our silent Graves. Our life is
uncertain, not a Sun, but a Vapor, Jam. 4. 14. and can our Sabbaths be sure
and steady? Our Sabbaths are our Tide for Heaven; and when the Tide is past,
there is no rowing to the Port. When the Traveller observes the Sun is
declining, and draws toward setting, then he spurs up his Beast, and speeds
his pace, lest the Night over-take him. Our Sabbaths are setting, and the
Gospel-Sun is low, is speeding to a disappearance; Let us then keep holy these
days, and carefully make the best advantage of them, let us neither stain their
beauty by our profaneness, nor detract from their bounty by our neglect and
formality, lest the shadows of death over-take us; and then who shall remember
God, or work for Psalm 115. 17.
his Soul in the Pit or the Grave, where we shall be lodged, and awake no more
till the Resurrection?

But though the Lords day be fleet and swift as to us, yet it is permanent in
its self, and in its duration calls for our devotion. We admire not a Candle so
much as we do the Sun, Genesis 2. 3.
and one reason is, because the Candle wastes, but the Sun endures: The light
of our Sabbath is not a transient blaze, but a constant light, which will
continue till the consummation of all things; and God has folded up all things
in change or dissolution. Now Permanency is a character of excellency; Gold is
only refined in the same fire where dress is consumed: The Priesthood of
Melchisedech was more excellent Melchisedec 400 annis sacerdotium Aaroni^u^
antec^ssit, et ejus sacerdotium Christi sacerdotium repraese^tat, quod usque ad
finem mundi duraturum est. Alap.
than that of Aaron, because it continued for ever, Heb. 7. 17. So the Sabbath
of Christians is more excellent than the Sabbath of the Jews, because that
found a grave, but this shall find none. To our Sabbath it may be said, in
comparison with all the Jews Sabbaths, They shall perish, but thou remainest;
they shall all wax old as does a Garment, as a Vesture shall thou roll them up,
and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.
To our Sabbath all the Powers of Earth and H^ll shall never put a period; it is
a durable, and therefore an honorable Ordinance: And shall God honor it, and
shall we deface it? Shall he promote it, and shall we profane it? Shall he
make it a lasting Ordinance, and set it up as a Marble Pillar in the Church?
and shall we write froth and vanity upon it, as if it was a Tombstone? Our
Sabbath is no flying Ceremony, or transient Rite, which has the worm of
Judaism at the root of it, which will eat it out in time, but it is a stable
institution which God will have sanctified with all exactness. The Persians
Laws E^^h. 1. 19.
were irrevocable, and therefore the more venerable; and the transgression of
but one of them, threw Daniel into the Lions Den, Dan. 6. 8, 12. So the Law of
our Sabbath, it is solemn and solid, not subject to decay, or of a perishing
nature, which earnestly presses the sanctification, and amplifies exceedingly
the pollution of it. It is not so great (...) to break a piece of glass, as to
break a piece of Gold; (...) ^^^eness is the blemish of every thing. Leases the
shorter (...) are, the more inconsiderable. The life of nature is no w^y to be
compared with the life of grace, not only in point of sweetness, but du^ation.
Sin upon the Lords day, is not like ^^rase upon a picture, which is a fading
paint, but like a flaw in a Jewel, it is a more durable blemish, and a more
praejudicial debasement. God h^th not only stamped his Name upon our Sabbath,
but something of his Nature; there is a kind of eternity engraven upon it; and
therefore the violation of it Rev. 1. 10.
by sin, neglect, or vanity, must needs be a reduplicate impiety.

Let us likewise take notice, that this precious institution of the Sabbath was
the firstborn of Ordinances; it drew its first Deus in prima creatione
sabbatum sanxit, et hau^ dubie in familiis Patrum sanctorum sedulo observatum
fuit. Par.
breath in Paradise, (as has been fully discovered already;) this was the
Reuben of Gods institutions, the morning star, and the rising Sun of Divine
appointments. Now the Sabbath being the firstborn Ordination which enriched the
world, it is the more pleasing and acceptable to the Lord, and the due
observation of it will assuredly be the more grateful to him. God remembers
the kindness of Isreal's youth, Jer. 2. 2. the initials of his obedience were
most pleasing. We put Sabbatum ab initio mundi, destinatum est ad cultum dei.
Luth.
buds into our bosoms. The Sabbath was from the infancy of the world, and
therefore our careful keeping of it, must needs delight the Father. The first
born was always to be dedicated to God; the first born of Man, and the first
born of Beasts, Exodus 13. 2. The first fruit of Corn, Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Nay, the
first of all the fruits of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 26. 2. Nay, God will not only have
the first born of man's person, but Sabbatum ab initio mundi observatum est.
Baldw.
the first fruits of his labors, Exodus 23. 16. And God is so pleased with the
first of every thing, that he ordains a feast of first fruits, Exodus 34. 22.
And a sacrifice of the first fruits, God calls a sweet savor unto himself,
Levit. 23. 17, 18. Sanctifi^atio omnium primogenit^rum, tam hominum, qua^
best^arum, e^^t eorum separatio ab aliis quae inservi^bant us^bus humanis ut
deo soli cederent; and in e^ nallum jus hom^n^s habe^^^t. Rivet.
Nay, so grateful were the first fruits to the Lord, that he would not only
have the first born of the Sons of Israel, and the firstlings of the Herds and
the Flocks, Nehem. 10. 36. The first fruits of the ground, nay, of the very
trees, Nehem. 10. 35. But likewise the first fruits of the very dough, Nehem.
10. 37. And Christ himself is called, the first fruits of them that sleep, 1
Cor. 15. 20, 23. And Israel his chosen people are called, the first fruits of
his increase, Jer. 2. 3. and converts, the best of men, are the first fruits of
his creatures, Jam. 1. 18. Surely then, the holy Sabbath, the first fruits of
Divine Ordinances, must needs be dear to God; and unholy practices on that day
must the more provoke him; and holy duties sincerely acted on that day; must
the more please him and holy hearts on this day must the more delight him; and
holy graces in their most vigorous exercise on this day must the more be
acceptable to him: the Sabbath was his primitive institution: nor must it be
forgotten, the Lords day, Our Christian Sabbath, is the first day of the week,
and was in time, the first day of the world, wherein the light received its
production, and the blessed heavens their being, Genesis 1. 1, 3. Now then, let
this emphasis which God has put upon the Sabbath, engage us to a stricter and
more wary behavior on it, least the order be inverted, as our Savior notes,
Mark 10. 31. And that Sabbath, which was the first in Gods institution, be the
last in our condemnation, and Mat. 19. 30.
this darling ordinance procure a damning sentence upon us in the general
assizes of the world.

The sanctification of the Sabbath will be profitable to our outward estate.
For the more conscionable we are in sanctifying the Sabbath, the greater
blessing we may exp^ct from Lev. 26. 9.
God; which divine blessing, the wise man tells us, Prove. 10. Jer. 17. 25.
22. makes rich. This piece of godliness gives us right and title to the
promises of this life, 1 Timothy 4. 4. He who has Benedictione* dei divitiae
parantur melius, et melius conservantur, et effi^aci res redduntur ad omnes
usus, ad quos adhibentur; Et Deus sua benedictione piis quasi somniantibus, and
de ea re parum cogitantibus bona suppeditat; exempla sint Abrahamus, Josephus,
etc. Cartw.
been with God upon the Sabbath day, God will be with him on the week day; and
he who has sanctified God in his heart, when he has been agitating the
affairs of heaven, God will assuredly bless the works of his hand, when he is
providing the things of earth. It is our Saviors own promise, If we first seek
the Kingdom of Heaven, I may add, if we begin the week with God, on the first
day thereof, all these outward things shall be added to us, Mat. 6. 33. as a
surplusage of divine love. The best way to get estates for our selves, is to
keep Sabbaths to God, and to enquire after the blessing where he has lodged
it, (viz.) in preserving his Sabbath pure and unblemished, Isa. 56. 2. It is
very observable, that when God had perfected the Creation, and put man into his
tenement of Paradise, he then ordains the Sabbath, to show, that all creature
comforts are only attendants on this Genesis 2. 3.
holy day; and if Adams sensual delight, had given way to his spiritual
communion, he had neither lost Paradise, nor his posterity. It must be granted,
that the smiles of Providence usually accompany the sincerity of obedience: And
Sabbath-holiness is the Jachin and the Boaz, the pillars of this obedience. 1
Kings 7. 2.
To keep that Arc in our house, to keep Christ 2 Samuel 6. 11, 12
in our heart, and to keep the Sabbath in our eye, so as devoutly Ephesians. 3. 17.
to observe it, makes all we have to prosper, and entails Isa. 56. 2.
a blessing upon our selves and families. Constantine the Great, Eusebius. de vita
Constant. lib. 4. cap. 18.
justly called so, in a Military, in a Civil, and in a religious sense, was as
flourishing an Emperor, as ever sat in the Throne of the Roman Empire, and
he took great care for the holy observation of the Lords day, and made a
statute to oblige both Himself and his Subjects so to do; and as some report,
Composed Prayers for every one of his Regiments to use upon that holy day. Thus
Sabbath-holiness made his Crown flourish, and his exemplary sanctification of
Gods blessed day, shall preserve his memory more honorably and more durably,
then the Walls or Structures of Constantinople, a City of his own Name and
Erection: However, most sure it is, that as the prophan^tion of Gods day is a
Lev. 26. 26, 31.
moth and a worm; so the holy observation of it brings a secret blessing to our
outward estates; and when we have been on the Mount with God on his own day,
the Lord will make his face to shine upon us, Numb. 6. 25. and will be gracious
Exodus 34. 35.
to us in showing mercy, and showring benedictions upon us on the week day.

How serious are we in observation of other days. If that storms of Providence
drive us to a day of Humiliation, we can with the Jews, Zach. 7. 5. fast and
mourn, and reach Ahab in his deepest sorrows, 1 Kings 21. 27. And if the smiles
of Providence call us to a day of Purim, Esth. 9. 26. a festival of joy, we can
keep that day with spiritual rejoicing and gladness of heart, Esth. 9. 22. And
we can delight our selves in the Lord. As Cambden reports of Queen Elizabeth,
when God delivered her and her Kingdom from the Ca^bd. Elizab.
Spanish Armado, her first work was to go to Paul's Church, and there hear a
Sermon of praise, rejoicing greatly in the God of her, and the Kingdoms
salvation. Now as one observes, The Lords day is the proper feast of
Christians, our spiritual jubilee, though moving in a swifter sphere, and Mr.
P. on the Romans.
shall days of the appointment of a state put us upon a more exact composure,
and find us more hearty in their observation, then that special and blessed
day, which is the appointment of a God? Or shall a passage of Providence, the
endurance of a loss, or the gaining of a Victory, or some other strok of Gods
hand, or smile of Gods face, find us more serious, (...) Athanas.
more solemn, more devout, then the Resurrection of a Christ, the new birth day
of the world, and the sole foundation of a Christians happiness? Shall the
deliverance from a Spanish Armado fill us with more spiritual delight in God,
then the deliverance from Heli and Destruction? Had not Christ broke the chains
of death, we had everlastingly been kept in chains of darkness. Our Lords day
then glories in a more excellent occasion, and why should it not be celebrated
with a more serious Cotenae tenebrarum sunt. 1 Conscientiae reatus. 2. Aeternum
puniendi decretum. 3. Miserrima reproborum desperatio.
devotion? One well observes, That the Jews thought reverently of, and acted
zealously on their solemn, though ceremonial festivals, those bright
appearances, which were chased away by the rising of the Sun of Righteousness:
therefore to use the Apostles words, a little inverted, seeing all those other
days of observation are and shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought
we to be in all holy conversation and godliness upon our unalterable Sabbath,
whose lease expires not till the 2 Pet. 3 11.
death of the Universe.

CHAP. LII. A third Decad of Arguments promoting the same design, (viz.) a due
sanctification of the Lords day.
THat every wind may fill our sails in pursuance of this great duty, I shall
now turn my Arguments to another point of the Compass.

Let us take notice of the relation which God has to the Sabbath. In the time
of the law, the Sabbath was called the Sabbath of the Lord, Lev. 23. 3. And
verily my Sabbath shall ye keep, Exodus 31. 13. And in the times of the Gospel,
our Christian Sabbath is called, the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. Now this happy
interest which God has in the Sabbath from the beginning of the world to this
day, is a cogent Argument for Mat. 22. 21.
our severer observation of it. We will keep safely the treasure Maluit deus
dicere sabbatum dei tui est, quam sabbatum tuum est. Hoc dicens significat
omnem ejus diei respectum ad nominis ipsius sanctificationem, a^ fidem esse
dirigen dum. Muscul.
of a friend, and why not keep devoutly the Sabbath of a God? If our Sabbath be
the Lords day, let us render to Christ, the things which are Christ's. Gerard
observes, That the Sabbath is the Lords Sabbath, to show us the manner of our
sanctification of it, (viz.) In the works of God, those works which are
required and prescribed by God. And Musculus adds very pertinently, God would
rather call it his Sabbath, then ours; to intimate to us, that all the respect
of that day must be directed to the hallowing of his Name, and to the acting of
faith and trust in him. It is very observable, how chary God is of his Sabbath,
he puts it into the heart of the Decalogue, that none might come at it to
affront it; and he stamps his Name upon it, that none should make it common. Do
ye think, we can play with the Crown of a King, or sport with the Scepter of a
Prince? Dominus ille, cujus est Sabbatum, est deus tuus; ergo in honorem, et
cultum ipsius sabbatum sanctificabis. Ger.
Greater boldness it is, to formalize away the Lords day, and to waste that
time which is his peculiar treasure. Our wildness often roves up and down the
common of the week; but if we break into the enclosure of the Sabbath, we shall
certainly be found trespassers, and hazard an immortal soul. We must take
heed, that we make bold only with what is our own, and not with Gods day, for
that is no more lawful for us, than for every common Israelite to enter into
the holy Hag. 2. 8.
of holies. There are two things God is very tender of; Lev. 23. 3.


1. His people, they are the Apple of his eye. Jer. 2. 3.


2. His Sabbath, which is the reserve of his time: And as those who shall
devour his people shall offend, so those who shall profane his day shall
commit sacrilege, a sin of the deepest tincture. The consideration then, that
our Sabbath is the Lords day, should compose our spirits, should flush our
services, and sublimate our performances on that blessed day.

Let us take notice of that tittle which God has put upon the Sabbath: It is
an holy Sabbath to the Lord, Exodus 16. Exodus 31. 15.
23. And here that answer to Peter, Acts 10. 15. is very Qui luxu deliciantes
voluptatibus se dedunt ad sanctificationem sabbati non sunt idonei, quia diem
sanctum domini suis comm^^ulant voluptatibus. Hieron.
pertinent, What God has called clean, we must not look upon as common. They
who profane the Sabbath would pick out the image and superscription of it,
which is a fruitless and destructive attempt. A stamp of holiness amplifies
every defilement. The spirit is a holy spirit, and therefore it must not be
grieved, Ephesians. 4. 30. The law is a holy law, Romans 7. 12. and therefore must not
be violated. Jesus Christ is the Holy one of God, Psalm. 16. 10. and therefore
he must not be wounded and crucified afresh, Heb. 6. 6. The Priests garments
were holy, Exodus 31. 10. and therefore not to be Sanctificatio dei est qua dies
septimus post sex dierum opera, statim ab i^itio, est deputatus and consecratu^
sanctificatio hominis est, diem septimum a deo quiet^ confe^ratu^. pro sancto
nabere, and religionis exercit^^^, ac fidei, sedulo incumbere. Muscul.
worn by another person. The vessels of the Sanctuary were holy, and therefore
not to be employed in another service. The title of holiness was always a
sufficient rampart and security against profaneness and audacious pollution;
and shall it not be so in the holy Sabbath? Shall this holy day be spent in
froth and idleness, or be spotted with sin or profaneness? Upon the forehead
of the Sabbath is written in a fair character, Holiness to the Lord. Musculus
observes, there is a double sanctification engraven upon the Sabbath.

1. There is Gods sanctification of it, which is nothing else, but his
consecration and setting apart the seventh part of every week to his worship
and service.

2. There is man's sanctification, which is nothing else, but man's careful and
sedulous spending this holy day in the exercises of piety and Religion: So that
the Sabbath is doubly fenced against the encroachments of sin.

Again let us trace the Sabbath from its infancy to this day, and we shall
still find a stamp of holiness upon it.

ab instituto, from the institution of it, Genesis 2. 3. God breathed holiness
into it, when he first gave life to it. The first ordination of it was set with
holiness, Genesis 2. 3.
as a rich Ring is set with Diamonds. The Original word signifies no less (...)
from the word (...) always signifying Holiness, aliquid a communi usu
separatum, something separated to God from common use: So then it may be said
of the Sabbath, as it was of Jeremy, Jer. 1. 5. It was sanctified from the womb.

a mandato, from the command, Exodus 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy. This command has the great seal of a Memento upon it, carrying its badge
and Character, singled out of all the rest, to have its Sabbatum dei est
sanctum otium. Leid. Prof.
Selah affixed to it. As if God should say, however other commands liable to
breaches, may have their plea's, or find their favors, the breach of this
command shall find none.

a promisso, from the promises annexed to the holy observation of it. To this
command of Die dominica Piae meditationes attentiori conatu instituantur et
soveantur. Riv.
Sabbath sanctification, we have not only the naked bond of a precept, but the
seal of a promise, Isa. 58. 13, 14. The keeping holy of this day is so prized
by God, that he bribes it, that he sets a price upon it, and courts it with
promises temporal and spiritual, with a Paradise of pleasure and delight.

a Titulo, from its denomination: It is twice called holy, Isa. 58. 13. Gods
holy day; nay, the Dominico ad nihil aliud vacandum est, nisi ad orationem,
etc. Patr. in Council. Fo. rojul.
holy of the Lord, which is not without an emphasis. God does to the Sabbath,
as once he did to Abraham, Genesis 17. 5. give it a new and more honorable name,
to restrain sinful and prurient man from the violation of it.

a Christi operatione, from the works of Christ upon this day, Luke 6. 6. He
that came from Heaven Die dominico convertendum est nobis cum deo propius.
Ephr. Sir. Lucubr.
does only the works of heaven upon this heavenly day. And in this, Christ is
our guide, not only our Legislator, but our Pattern, the Pole Star for us to
steer by.

ab Apostolorum observatione, from the manner of the Apostles observation. They
spent the Sabbath in preaching, in praying, in receiving the Sacrament, Acts
20. 7. and performing those duties which have a vein of holiness in them.

a Joannis visione, from the Vision of John, the beloved Disciple, Rev. 1. 10.
As if Christ Diem dominicum honoremus, celebrantes eum, non panegyrice, sed
divine; non mund^ne, sed spiritualiter; non instar gentilium, sed instar
Christianorum.
deferred this rare discovery which he made to his bosom Apostle to his own
day, to put the greater badge of honor, and stamp, the greater character of
purity upon it. Therefore to sum up all, as he is not far from true piety, who
makes conscience to keep this holy day; so his heart never yet felt, what
either the fear of God, or true Religion means, who can so far deface the
beauty, and contradict the holiness of this day, as to spend and unravel it in
vanity and profaneness. Dr. Denison notes upon Nebem. 13. 2. That where the
Sabbath is not sanctified, there is neither sound Religion, nor a Christian
conversation to be expected. And worthy Dr. Chetwind, That the profaning of
the holy Sabbath of God, is contrary to Gods moral precept, which still retains
it force and vigor. Thus savou^y and learned men always agreed in this, with
vigorous zeal to decry the prophaneing of Gods day, as being that, which was an
affront to the very name of an holy and honorable Sabbath.

Nay the great Jehovah has given us his own example for holy rest on the
Sabbath day. And what is more comely and Satis authenticum est homini pio
quicquid verbo dei praecipitur, vero et factum dei accedit quasi duplicato ad
ob o^iiendum vinculo constringitur. Muscul.
beautiful then to follow the example of God? When Christ would have us to love
our enemies, he urges the example of God, Luke 6. 35. When he would have us to
be merciful, he cites the example of God, Luke 6. 36. And when he would have us
to be perfect, he brings in his Father as a Pattern, Mat. 5. 48. And so in this
case; we must sanctify the Sabbath, because God himself rested on that day.
God does not only enjoin the strict observation of the Sabbath by his express
command, but in his own blessed example; he is pleased to rest for the
observance of it. And which deserves our most serious animadversion: God did
not only

1. Rest on that day, after the work of Creation was finished, Genesis 2. 3. when
that stupendous work was now accomplished,

But 2dly, God rested on that day in not raining down Manna, but twice so much
the day before, Exodus 16. 22, 25. there must not be so much as the disturbance
of a Qui verbo dei non obedit, immorigerum se et transgressorem ostendit: Qui
vero ne facto quidem dei ad imitatio nem exempli permovetur, non solum sese
inobedientem sed et degenerem, et alienum a spiritu illius sese demonstrat et
declarat. Muscul.
shower to call off the people from the solemnity of the Sabbath. So that we
might not err, God sets our Copy twice. It is a good saying of Musculus, He
who obeys not the word of God makes himself a transgressor, and shows himself
immorigerous; but he who will not follow the examples of God, shows himself not
only disobedient, but degenerous, and a stranger to the work of the spirit.
Indeed it is the property of a natural Son, not only to mind the word, but to
imitate the example of his good Father. Slaves must have commands, but Sons
study Patterns; as the ingenuous Scholar minds the Copy more, then the
passionate word or the Ferula of his Master. One of Gods rich promises carries
this treasure in it; I will guide thee by mine eye, Psalm. 32. 8. Thou shall
look on me, and so walk ho^ily before me. Not only Gods will, but his eye shall
be our conduct.

So then Gods example re-inforces our obligation for Sabbath-holiness. Cumque
deus ita quiescat die septimo, ut tamen non cesset ob omni opere, sed rerum
universitatem conservet, et gubernet: Ita quoque Sabbati sanctificatio, non
consistit in ignavo otio, s^d ut ea operemur, quae ad dei gloriam faciant. Ger.
In this affair we have all ties of obedience, not only the force of a
righteous command, but we may see our selves in the Crystal glass of divine
example. And it is well observed by Gerard, God (says he) did not so rest on
the Sabbath from all work, but still on that day he preserved and governed all
things: So our sanctification of the Sabbath does not consist in a slothful
idleness, but in working th^se things which make to the glory of God. So let us
thus imitate God on his own day. Indeed Gods patte^n is the Archetype, of all
our actions, the surest glass for us to dress our selves by; (...), He has
said it, is the rule of all truth; and (...), he has done it, is the rule of
all practice, wherein the blessed Jehovah is imitable. It was the Apostles
glory that he followed Christ and so far he would have all Christians Omnis
actio Dei, nobis pietatis and virtutis est regula. Basil.
follow him, 1 Cor. 11. 1. It is an excellent saying of Basil, Every action of
God, is to us a Rule of all virtue and piety. And if in all other things, so in
keeping the Sabbath in holy Rest. Philo the Jew could say, Follow (...), etc.
Phil. Jud.
God in resting on the Sabbath, you have his Example, you have his Prescript,
and therefore spend that day in holy contemplations. God in this momentous
concernment of the Sabbath, seems to speak, as in the Prophet Malachi, Mal. 1.
6. A son honcureth his father, and a servant his master; If I be a father,
where is my honor? if I be a master, where is my fear? And if I have rested
upon the Sabbath, why do you disturb it, by secular works, hy sensual delights,
by profane actions, or by unseemly carriages, so unbecoming a holy Sabbath? In
profaning Gods day we break through a double bar of precept and presidency,
and so dye our sin in a double dye.

The light of Nature leads us to a Sabbath, let the light of Scripture lead us
to a holy observation of it. The Law of Habet venerationem justam quicquid
excellit. Cicer. de Not. Deorum.
Nature instilleth this notion into us, That God paramount, who is Superlative
in all Excellencies and Perfections, is to be worshipped: That to the
performance of this worship, certain times are to be deputed, that none is so
fit to depute that time, as that Deity whose worship it is: And therefore to
keep this day which God has appointed, holy to the same Lord, to sanctify it
in holy Rest and spiritual worship, which Brerewood says, Is the Body and the
Soul of the Sabbath. All this is nothing but an obsequious following of the
guidance and conduct of Nature. Aquinas here gives us a good Rule, Seeing,
says he, that the moral Precepts Aquin 2da 2dae quaest. 122. Artic. 4.
are of those things which agree to humane reason, as they appertain to good
manners, the judgment whereof is derived some way from natural Reason, it must
needs Breerw. part. 2. page 67.
be that those things pertain to the Law of Nature. And is there any thing more
accommodate to right reason, more conducing to good manners, then to dedicate
some time to the honor of God, especially that time which is of his own
appointment: If we have Souls to look after, must there not be seasons for that
purpose? And who shall better Mark 2. 28. Aquin. 1mae adae quaest. 10. Artic.
1. 3.
appoint that season, than the Savior of the Soul? Again, the Sabbath was made
for man, Mark 2. 27. was it not for the better part of man, that piece of
Eternity which he carries in his bosom? And how can we better consult our Souls
good, than in duties of Divine worship? Thus the very dictates of natural
reason command the holy observation of the Sabbath: And therefore the
observation of the seventh day, which was the Sabbath, till the coming of
Christ, was no strange thing among those who know nothing above the light of
Nature. Homer an Heathen Poet (...). Clem. Alex.
tells us, That the seventh day is holy. Callimachus an Heathen Author informs
us, That the seventh day is the Birthday, chief, and perfect. And Eusebius
affirms, That almost all, as well Philosophers as Poets, know the seventh day
to be most sacred. And shall these Pagans, who had only glimpses of natural
light, smatch and relish, Quis Diem illum sanctissimum non honorat
unaquaquehebdomada recurrentem? Phil.
honor and venerate the day of the Sabbath; and shall we turn Heathens on that
day, or fall some degrees below them? I shall say with the Apostle, Romans 6. 2.
God forbid. The learned Andrews observes, That sufficient is found in the heart
of the Gentiles, to their condemnation, who shall dare to break the Law of the
fourth Commandment. The very light of Nature shall rise up in judgment Romans 6.
2.
against Sabbath Breakers; and it shall be more tolerable for Hesiod a Heathen
Poet, who pronounced the seventh (...). Hesiod.
day holy; and Alexander Severus a heathen Prince, who on that day frequented
the Temple, (as formerly has been hinted) then for this Generation. It was a
rare saying of Seneca, a sage Heathen, who reckoning the Sabbath a Festival for
Religion, condemned the then manner of observing of it, and says he, Let us
forbid the lighting of a Candle upon a Sabbath; for neither do the Gods want
light, and men themselves are not delighted with smoke: he worshippeth God who
knows him. This golden Quoniam rerum humanarum varii^, and malti^
occupationibus, and curis distracti praepedimur, ita ut non facile officia
pietatis praestemus,
saying how will it condemn many drossie Christians, who set fire on their
lusts on Gods holy Sabbath? It is a good Notion of Azorius, Man, says he, is
so hurried and distracted with the affairs of the world, that he is impeded in,
and unfit for the worship of God. But God therefore has appointed a set-time
for that purpose, that the hurries being over, man may sedately and composedly
apply himself to the solemn worship of God. And this is agreeing Certum ac
definitum tempus statutum est, quo ea commode ob^re possimus. Azor.
and consonant to natural reason. Doctor Field professes, That by the light of
Nature it is known, that one day in seven ought to be consecrated to Divine
service. How will this put Sabbath-prophanation into a scarlet, nay, into a
crimson dye, that we should sink below the light of Nature in the commission of
it? It is likewise very observable, that God himself couples and joins the
command for the Sabbath with natural commands, not only in the Decalogue, but
in the 26th Chapter of Leviticus, Ye shall make you no Idols, nor graven
Images. The first, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths: The second, showing us thus much,
that Nature is as much abased in the profaning of the Sabbath, as in the
violation of any natural command. And we may as well break the fifth or the
sixth, as the fourth Commandment; the force of Nature being engraven upon them
all.

Nay, the observation of the Sabbath is so grateful to God, and so necessary to
man, that the very ground had a Sabbath, Levit. 25. 2, 3, 4. the very Land was
to keep a Sabbath; the words of the Text are these, When you come into the
Exodus 23. 11.
Land which I give you, then shall the Land keep a Sabbath to the Lord, Levit.
25. 2. And shall the dead earth keep a Sabbath to the Lord, and not living
Christians? In this, one below Balaams Ass reproves us. God in condemning Number
22. 28.
Sabbath Breakers, may make his appeal, as sometimes he did, Jer. 6. 19. Jer.
22. 29. To the very earth. This surely must be a great sin, when the ground we
trample upon shall be a witness against us. Vt brutis ac hominibus concederetur
quies corporalis, Brutis quidem propter homines, hominibus autem propter cuhum
divinum. Ger.


Nay, the very Beasts had a Sabbath, Exodus 20. 10. The Cattle was to rest on
the Sabbath Day: Now shall a Beast rest, and man work on the blessed Sabbath?
Shall there be more obedience found in the Herds of the Stall, than in the
Professors of the Gospel? Shall the Stable have more submissive Proselytes than
the Sanctuary? It is a good observation of Gerard, That Rest was granted to man
and beast upon the Sabbath; to Beasts for Man's sake, and to Man for worship
sake, that he may apply himself on that day to the service of the Legislator.
There are three considerable Reasons, why God commanded the Beasts to rest upon
the Sabbath Day?

Because the Beast required rest as well as man, they could not live in
continual painfulness, they must have their altenate ease and refreshments, as
a learned man speaks. Their flesh is not brass, nor their bones iron, no more
than that of Job 6. 12.
man; tiresomness and languishing are incident to them, as well as to man.

Beasts cannot work of themselves, without the conduct and guidance of man. Now
the working of a Beast is not so considerable, as the keeping of a Sabbath,
which cannot be done, if men follow their Plows, or use their Beasts for labor
on that day; then that excuse would be reviled, man could not come to Christ
upon the Lords day, he must use five yoke of Oxen, and therefore pray have him
excused.

inure man to pity and clemency, that favoring his Beast, he might learn mercy
to man; the Beast Dum jumentis quies conceditur a Deo, nonne est ut homines
misericordiae assuefierent. Riv.
must not work, that God might put more bowels into man, and that man might
have more leisure for God.

Now the Psalmist says, Psalm. 32. 9. That we should not be like Horse or Mule
which have no understanding. But to disturb the Rest of a Sabbath by sinful or
secular works, is to be worse than the beast that perishes.

Nay, the very strangers among the Jews were to observe Advenae jubentur
septimo die ab operibus seriari: Ex eo patet, quod peregrini non suerunt coacti
ad religionem Is^^^liticum suscipiendum, tam^n ab ipsis requisitum fuit, ut in
externis divinae legi sese subjicerent, quod suo modo etiam Christiano
magistratui ad imitationem est propositum. Ger.
the Sabbath, Exodus 20. 10. Doctor Twiss observes, there was no burden imposed
upon strangers, besides the observation of the seven Precepts of Noah, and
therefore infers, that the observation of the Sabbath was comprehended under
one of them. But this is naturally deducible, none was to omit the observation
of the Sabbath, no not the heathen stranger: And shall only the Christian blot
the Sabbath by his sins, waste it by his sloth, or disturb it by his secular.
works; Only the Christian to whom are committed the Oracles of God? Gerard
takes occasion from this part of the fourth Commandment, to lay it as a charge
upon Christian Magistrates, to see that all observe the Sabbath: and he says,
That this clause in the Command is proposed for their imitation.

But how great will the condemnation of Sabbath Breakers be, when the Instinct
of Nature, the Rest of the ground, the Beasts of the field, nay, the very
stranger, shall all read them Lectures of Sabbath-sanctification?

Let us cast our eye upon the practice of Heathens; they thought it equitable,
that their consecrated days should be wholly and devoutly observed. Macrobius
brings in one Vetius thus resolving, We truly that we may both honor Macrob.
Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 7.
the holy days, and eschew also the slothful drousiness of Resting, and may
turn our leisure into employment, we come together to spend the whole day in
learning Fables to be conferred upon. Now their learning Fables was the best
they knew of devotion: and the same Author asserts, and says, That the sacred
things of the Romans are either Diurnal or Nocturnal; those which are Diurnal
are continued Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 16.
all along from the beginning of the Day, until the middle of the Night. And
the Priests of the Heathens affirmed, That their holy days were polluted, if
any work was done upon those solemn seasons, besides it was not lawful for the
King of the Sacrifices, and the Flamins (their Priests) to see a work done on
their holy days, and therefore by a Crier it was proclaimed. that no such thing
should be done, and he who neglected the Precept Vniversae gentes stativas
serias universo populo communes, and rebus sacris obeundis consecratas
habuerunt. Leid. Prof.
was fined. And Scaevola the Priest affirmed, That the wilful Offender shall
have no expiation. And Macrobius describes what works were lawful on their holy
days, viz. works of Piety and Charity: And now shall the Heathen make it an
inexpiable Crime to work upon one of their holy days; and shall it be venial
for us to follow our works, and pursue our lusts on Gods holy day? Shall Saturn
and Jupiter be honored with more solenmity, and served with Exodus 15. 6.
more care and sedulity than Christ or Jehovah? Sure this Exodus 15. 11.
must needs be the dregs of profaneness, to give our heavenly Father, and our
dear Redeemer, whom sometimes we call our Beloved, less veneration on his own
day, then Pagan Worshippers give their Idol Gods on their Festivals. How
strange is it, that we must go to Dagon to learn how to use the Ark, and must
repair to the Roman Flamins, or the 1 Samuel 5. 2.
Syrian Priests, to know how to keep a Sabbath? God sends the sluggard to the
Ant and the Pismire, to learn foresight and industry, Prove. 6. 6. And he may
send Sabbath Breakers to the Gentiles and Paynims to learn Sanctity and
Devotion: But let Christians say, the solemn Devotions of Pagans shall heat our
zeal, but not reproach our sl^th; they Psalm. 26. 6.
shall only serve us to take aim, how we may steer our Devotion with greater
fervor and dexterity.

Let us observe the zeal of holy men mentioned in Scripture, who have been
eminent for Sabbath-observation. The Apostle gives us a good rule, Heb. 6. 12.
Let us be followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the
promises. These Patterns of Piety may be our conduct and guide in this matter;
take them in what age you will, the Sabbath still lay near their hearts, and
was venerable in their practice.

1. Some before the Law were remarkable for Sabbath-holiness, they dreaded the
pollution of Gods day, before the terrors and smokes of Mount Sinai: And
though they were in a Wilderness; they had not so l^st themselves, but they
knew how to meet with God on his own day. And as Manasseh Ben-Israel well
observes, The Jews were forced Cogita in Aegypto ubi serviebas, etiam ipso
sabbato pe^ vim te coactum ad labores: Et sic sa^ientes inter Judaeos. Deuteronomy. 5.
15. unanimiter applicant. Manas. Ben. Israel.
to neglect the Sabbath in Egypt, by reason of the violence and cruelty of
their Taskmasters; but when God brought them out of that Land of bondage, one
of their first works was Sabbath-observation. Their Delivery is historically
related in the 14th Chapter of Exodus, and their observation of the Sabbath in
the 16th Chapter of the same Book: So Exodus 16. 30. So the people rested on the
seventh day, which must needs be meant of an holy Rest; for a naked b^re Rest,
is the loss, not the sanctification of a Sabbath: And if the people of Israel
had so rested, God soon would have taken notice of it, and have severely
threatened, if not sorely punished it: but no word of reproof, but only of
those, Quieverunt Israelitae, non solum illo die frustrati fuerunt spe sua
egrediendi, sed aliis diebus septimis consequentibus. Riv.
who went out on the Sabbath to gather Manna, some few straglers, Exodus 16. 27.
who instead of finding Manna, lost their way, and met with a reproof instead of
a meal. Now here we meet with Gods people keeping Gods day, before the fourth
Commandment was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet. Now shall the people of Israel
without the sanction of a law rest with God on his own day, and shall
Christians who have not only the force and obligation of the fourth
Commandment, but the alluring argument of Christ's Resurrection, to oblige to
the sanctification of the Sabbath, shall they be careless and negligent; vain
and frothy on Gods holy day? Surely the darkness of an Heathen, and the
twilight of an Israelite, wandering up and down in a wilderness, will bear
witness against such a generation.

2. Some holy men under the Law, I shall only select here, the rare Example of
good Nehemiah, an excellent pattern for Magistrates and People, how carefully
to observe Gods holy Sabbath; And his Zeal shall be comprised in four
particulars.

principal part of Reformation; therefore he reproves, threatens, and sets
watch, to observe the profanation of this holy Nehem. 13, 15, 16.
day. He bears his testimony vigorously against it, Nehem. 13. 15. And here
the courtesy and common civilities which are given to strangers bear no sway
with him, Nehem. 13. 16. He will not strain courtesy when the honor of God is
concerned; obedience is better then sacrifice, much 1 Samuel 15. 22.
more then civilities. The pollution of a Sabbath, that God provoking sin makes
this holy man wave all fair and debonaire carriages, and turns courtesy into
severity, and usual reception into just indignation.

Nehemiah thinks the cause of the Sabbath worth contending for, with the Nobles
themselves, Nehem. 13. 17. not only with inferior people, who are soon hushed
with his Authority, and tremble at the Magistrates sword; but with the Peers of
the Realm, who might enter the lists with him, or hatch some conspiracy against
him; but holy zeal is no Nehem. 13, 17.
respecter of persons; and in this, Nehem. like the three children, Dan. 3. 18,
19. Is not sollicitous to pore upon his own concerns or interest; duty, and not
safety guides him, a rare pattern for Magistrates.

Governor personates the Prophet, and gives in a narrative not only of those
judgments which had overtaken those who had profaned the Sabbath in former
times; but he fore-tells the same calamities to ensue upon Nehem. 13* 18.
the present Age, if Gods Sabbath be defiled, Nehem. 13. 18.

speech into action, (the true genius of piety,) for indeed councils and
threats are both abortive until enlivened by execution; therefore Nehemiah
scatters Nehem. 13. 21.
strangers by force, Nehem. 13. 21. and chases them away from Jerusalem, that
they should not come near it upon the Sabbath day, Neh. 13. 21. And he lays a
severe command on the Levits for Sabbath-sanctification; and in the discharge
of his duty, he recommends himself to the merciful and kind remembrances of
the Almighty, Neh. 13. 22. And here, as our Savior says, let us go and do so
likewise, Luke 10. 37. Let us imitate the zeal of this excellent man, whose
name for his love to, and care of Gods Sabbath, lives in the blessed
Scriptures, and there shall survive to all perpetuity. But shall Nehemiah not
permit a piece of ware to be sold on the Sabbath without the gates of the City;
and shall we commit a lust on Gods day within the walls of a house, of a Stews,
or an Alehouse? Shall he forbid all Merchandise, and shall we traffic with
Hell on the Sabbath day? Surely his Zeal will turn into our flame; and this
will fall in with other aggravations of our sin, we scribled after so fair a
copy.

3. Some after the Law have been eminent for Sabbath-holiness. Let us trace the
Apostolical practice, which in this case is our brightest beam for our conduct
and guidance. Acts 20. 7.
How indefatigable were they in their labors, powerful Acts: 8. 4.
in their reasonings, multifarious in their administrations, Acts 20. 10.
frugal of their time, copious in their preaching, and 1 Cor. 16. 2.
stupendous in their works upon Gods holy day. On this day, they discovered
their thirst after souls, their love to the Gospel; and as so many stars, they
scattered the light of glorious truth: They would preach on a Sabbath, although
it 2 Cor. 4. 4. Acts 13. 42. Acts 16. 13.
was in a proscribed Synagogue; and they would pray on a Sabbath, though it was
by a Rivers side, a place of more privacy then shelter. And shall these
Heavenly patterns put no animation and life in us to honor the Lords day with
duty and devotion? The Limner who has a beautiful person before him, and yet
draws an unseemly picture, deserves to have the pencil snatched out of his hand,
and to be discharged of his employment.

Let us take a prospect of the golden age of the Church, and observe the
carriage of the Primitive Christians upon the Lords day. O what a heavenly
spirit breathed in them on this Coimus ad caetum, et deum, quasi manu extensa
precationibus ambimus. Tertul. Christiani a media nocte caetum inch^averunt.
Hier.
blessed day! insomuch that Tertullian cries out in a kind of a rapture, On
this day we meet in our assemblies, and as with a stretched-out hand, we clasp
about God with our prayers. If ye will know when the Primi^ive Christians began
their Sabbath, Hierome tells us, about midnight, which likewise Basil affirms
to be the usual practice of those times, and tells us a story of himself in
relation to these midnight meetings. But that the Christians met before day
light on the Lords day, it was so generally known in the world, that Pliny, a
modest Epist. Plin. secund. ad Trajanum.
Heathen took notice of it, and makes mention of it in an Epistle to Trajan the
Roman Emperor, and spoke of it in commendation of the Christians, and urged
this practice, Tertul. de Coron. mil. and Apol cont. Gent. Cap. 2. (...), etc.
as an alleviating argument to soften the Emperor to more mildness toward
them, and so to slacken the present persecution. These meetings before day on
the Sabbath are likewise mentioned by Tertullian in a Tract of his. We see then
the early zeal of the Primitive Christians on the Lords day; Nor did they rise
so soon, but to spend the time to the highest advantage Justin Martyr gives us
a full account of the Christians deportment on the Lords day; Upon the day
called Sunday, says he, All that abide within the Cities, or about the fields,
do meet together in the same place, wherein the Records of the Apostles, and
the writings of the Prophets are read unto us; the Reader having done, the
President gives a word of exhortation, that we may imitate those good things
which are there repeated; and then standing up together, we send up our prayers
to the Lord, etc. And as Justin Martyr shows us, how those of his time acted
their duties; So Tertullian tells us, how the Primitive Christians acted their
Graces on the Lords day; On this day, says he, We feed our faith with holy
preaching, we lift up our hope, and we fasten our confidence upon Tertul.
God. Hierome speaking of some in his time, tells us, They designed the Lords
day wholly to prayer, and to the Hier. ad Eustoch.
reading of the holy Scriptures; and he highly commends them for that practice.
And that you may not think, that the Primitive Christians served God only in
public upon the Lords day: Ambrose lays it as a severe injunction upon Ambro.
Sermon. 33. tom. 3. page 259.
the people; That they be conversant all the day in prayer or reading, and if
any could not read, that he should labor to be fed with holy conference. And
Chrysostom presses the people, That presently upon their coming Chrysostom. in
Joan. homil. 3.
home from the public, they should take a Bible into their hands, and make
rehearsal with their wives and children of that which had been taught them out
of the word of God. Tertullian and Justin Martyr positively and fully inform
Just. Mart. Apol. cap 30. page 692.
from us, That when the Christians were departed out of the Congregation, they
did not run into the rout of swashbucklers, or into the company of ramblers,
such as did run (...). Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 22.
up and down hither and thither, but they had care of the like modesty and
chaste behavior out of the Church, as when they were in the Congregation. Nay,
Theodoret assures us, That the Primitive Christians did celebrate other
Festivals, much more the Lords day, their great Festival, and their Saviors
Resurrection day; with spiritual hymns, and religious sermons, and that the
people used to empty out their souls to God in fervent and affectionate Theod.
prayers, not without sighs and tears. No wonder then, if Basil say, We fill up
the Lords day with holy prayers. And (...). Basil.
Clemens Romanus definitively concludes, Neither on the Lords days, which are
days of joyfulness, do we grant any thing may be said or done besides
holiness. A holy speech of an excellent person; And therefore Augustine in his
sixth Book de Civitate Dei, Cap. 11. speaking of Seneca's scoffing of the Jews
Sabbath, for which he had too much cause. Notwithstanding, says he, Seneca
durst not speak of the Dies dominicus divinis conventibus sequestratus est
Isych.
Christians, even then most contrary to the Jews, least either he should praise
them, (viz.) the Christians, against the custom of his Country, or reprove
them perhaps against his own will. So that the Christians observation of the
Lords day in the primitive times, was above the snarling of a Heathen, and the
scomms and sarcasmes of a gentile Philosopher.

Thus we have the pattern of the primitive Church, and it is a good standard
for our practice. Their early rising should make us more frugal of the time of
a Sabbath, their fervent zeal should make us more spiritual in the Ordinances
of a Sabbath; and their devotion at home should make us more Romans 12. 11
conscientious in our families upon Gods holy day. Let us therefore bestrict
and exact in Sabbath-observation, having the golden age of the Church for our
ensample. And indeed pure Religion and undefiled which the Apostle speaks of,
Jam. 1. 27.
Jam. 1. 27. never looks so comely as upon a Sabbath day; the day inhances the
duty, as the lovely dress sets off the lovely person, Beauty taking advantage
from the attire.

The holy observation of the Sabbath is the support of Religion, and keeps it
from flights or falls: Every devout worshipper on the Lords day, is but a
lessar pillar to shore up godliness and piety in the world. While public
worship is seriously frequented, and private duties are frequently performed,
while the sacred word of God is diligently attended, the blessed Sacrament
devoutly received, while holy prayers with moystened eyes, and melting hearts,
are affectionately poured forth, and sent up to God on his own holy day, while
these things are in ure in a Nation; piety and Religion are above the fears of
decay. Religion sails or sinks with the Sabbath, when both are embarked in the
same Vessel, and where this Sancta diei dominicae exercitia labascentem
pietatem and religionem, sustinent.
holy day is constuprated by vanity and profaneness, profession is laid waste
and desolate; the sanctification of Gods day keeps up Gods fear in the Church,
but that being suspended, the gap is made, and the Church lies open to all
kinds of sinful incursions. A learned man tells us, that Guntheram, a pious
King of France, fighting against the Goths with unhappy success, did sedulously
enquire into the cause Guntheramus Francorum Rex pientissimus contra Gothos
infaelici successu se pugnasse observaverat, tanti mali font paulo altius
investigato, cui malo ut obviam iretur, statutum est diem dominicum religiose
custodiendum per universum, etc.
of it; and taking notice of the neglect of the Bishops instructing the people,
as likewise observing the profaneness of the people in dishonouring the Lord,
he presently concluded, this was the proper source and cause of his late
discomfiture and calamity; and therefore he immediately commanded, That the
Lords day should be carefully and solemnly observed throughout his whole
Dominions, as being the most proper remedy, and most likely Cure for those
distempers which had shaken the happiness both of Church and State; God usually
calculating his providence according to the observation of his day, smiling
upon those places where it is religiously observed, and evidencing his
displeasure where it is slighted or contemned.

The sanctification of the Sabbath is the discharge in a great measure of that
duty pressed by the Apostle, Phil. 3. 20. Let your conversation be in heaven.
All the duties of the Sabbath Nonne pudet te corpore coelum suspicere, and
mentem in terra repere, caput sursum, and cor deorsum habere? Bern.
are but transactions with Heaven: Our prayers are our approach and appeal to
Heaven; and therefore we are said, to lift up a prayer, Jer. 7. 16. Our hearing
the word is only hearing News from Heaven, Acts 20. 27. And our Sacramental
receipts are only the tasting of the fruit of the Vine, which we shall drink
new with Christ in his Fathers Kingdom, Mat. 26. 29. The Ordinances of a
Sabbath are heavenly Ordinances; the end of a Sabbath, is to bring us nearer to
heaven; and the Communion of Saints which we enjoy upon a Sabbath, is a sweet
resemblance of that Society the Saints shall enjoy in heaven. And though we
cannot pretend to 2 Cor. 12. 2.
Paul's rapture into the third heaven, or to John's ecstasies upon this holy day;
yet in a conscientious use of divine administrations, Rev. 1. 10.
we travel fairly on toward heaven and happiness. Secular works, which savor
of earth, are to be banished this day, Exodus 20. 10. Carnal hearts, which
relish earth, are unsuitable to this day, Rev. 1. 10. And pleasurous delights,
which are the liquorish froth of earth, are to be avoided on the Sabbath day,
Isa. 58. 13. Our Sabbath is the daybreak and twilight of heaven and glory,
which if we improve to work our spiritual works in, a little time will bring us
to a perfect noon.

Let us be exact on the Lords day in honor to Christ; it is his Resurrection
day: On this day the Sun rose which lightens Dies dominicus Christi
resurrectione declaratus est, et ex illo cae^it habere festivitatem suam, and
aeternam; non solum spiritus, sed et corporis requiem praefigurat. Aug de Civ.
dei.
every one which comes into a better world; on this day the Conqueror showed
himself when he had laid all his enemies in the grave, from whence he sprang:
This was the day of Mankinds restoration, of the worlds wonder, and of the
Believers joy: This day was the fresh spring of our happiness, the initials of
a Christians boast! On this day Mosaical rites and legal Ceremonies were fully
and totally routed, and so put to flight, and then dyed together the Synagogue
and the Sanedrim. Christ is the true Joseph, who on this day left his prison,
and was promoted to honor. Christ is the real Moses, who breaking through
death and dangers, Acts 13. 31, 32
saw Pharaoh and his host, Satan, Death, and Hell, and Heb. 1. 5.
all spiritual wickednesses drowned in the Sea. Christ is the Resurrexisti
domine quam ^^^ulate and celeriter, O fortunati lab^res! O gloriosa certamina!
quae talem finem sortiuntur. P^ssionem excepit Resurrectio, mortem
immortalitas, ignonimiam gloria, infirmitatem virtus, Tempestatem serenitas.
Bellar. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
true Mordecai, who foiling Haman and all his enemies, delivered the true
Israel from tyranny and oppression, and on this day kept his Purim. Christ is
the true Jonas, who being cast into the Sea in a tempest of frenzy and cruelty,
on the third day was cast on the shore, and survived to more gracious purposes.
In a word, glorious were the conflicts, happy the labors, blessed the rest,
and most triumphant the Resurrection of our dear Redeemer. Now as it is
reported of Caesar when he would cry Quirites, that word put new life into his
Soldiers in the sorest battles: So when we think our Sabbath is Christ's
Resurrection day, this should put new life into all our duties and devotions.
This was the day of wonders, when our blessed Samson carried away the gates of
Hell to lay our way open to the City of the New Jerusalem, the City not made
with hands eternal in the heavens.

CHAP. LIII. The Resurrection of Christ is not only a real ground for the
institution, but a cogent Argument for the holy observation of the Lords day.
WHen our hearts are dead and curdled into formality upon the Lords day, then
every one of us should thus bespeak his soul. O my soul, this day is the
triumph of thy Redeemer, when he trod upon the Serpents head, when Genesis 3. 15.
(...). Basil in Hexam.
he took from death its sting, from hell its standard; suppose my soul, thou
had stood by the Sepulcher, and seen the Sun of Righteousness covered with a
cloud before, now shining forth most gloriously on the morning of the
Resurrection day; how would this have raised and ravished thy heart! How glad
were the Disciples when they saw the Lord, they believed not for joy, John 20.
20. Luke 24. 41. The day of 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Christ's rising from the dead was a day of joy and gladness, Ille est primus
dies in quo deus tenebras ut materiam, cum mutasset mundum effecit, and quod in
codem die Jesus Christus conservator noster e mortuis excitatus est. Just. Mart.
Psalm. 118. 24. No day like this since the Creation, then our surety was
released, the Covenant and sure mercies of David fully ratified and confirmed;
our hope wonderfully revived, heaven and eternal life plenteously assured.
These thoughts of Christ's Resurrection might quicken our hearts, and make them
sparkle with life and affection: It may be we never took the crown of this day
into our hands to feel the weight of it, and that makes our services ^^ flat,
and our thoughts (to speak in Nazianzens phrase) so chained to the ground upon
this seraphical day. And therefore Clemens Romanus argues sharply and
pathetically, What shall excuse us with Die dominico qui est dies
resurrectionis, Templum adite, quid enim excusare poterit apud deum qui eo die
ad audiendum non convenit? etc. Clem. Romans
God, if we fill not up this blessed day, with bearing the word, with holy
prayer, with reading the Scriptures, with singing the praises of the Lord, and
other duties, seeing God makes all things by Christ, and sent him into the
world to die for sinners, and raised him again as on this day? Innocentius
calls Christ's Resurrection day, the first day of our joy, the bright luster of
heavens shine. And Ambrose says, The Lords day is a day ^f joys, in the
plural number, to show the Variety and the Increase of them. Joy is the
Shibboleth of this day, the (...).
Springtide, and the full Sea of this weekly Festival. And Tertullian
professes, That on this day we indulge our selves Plus gaudere debemus propter
resurrectionem gloriosam, quam dolere propter passionem ignominiosam. Bern.
with holy joy. The primitive Christians were wont, when they saw one another
to have this joyful salute, The Lord is risen, and the others ordinary answer
was, True, the Lord is risen indeed; we should not, says Bernard, so much
mourn at Christ's igneminious passion, as we should rejoice at his glorious
Resurrection. And this day is not only sweetened with joys, but enriched with
gain; the death of Christ Haec est illa dies quae sua magnitudine omnia
beneficia obscurat. Constable. Apost. l. 7. c. 37.
was the sowing of the Corn, the raising of Christ, was as the springing up of
the Corn; the benefits of Christ's death are reaped in his Resurrection. The
death of Christ was as the casting of Joseph into the pit, the selling him into
Egypt, and putting him into prison: But the raising of Christ was as the
preferring of Joseph, by which he comes into a capacity (...).
to save his Family, and so enrich all his Relations. Clemens Romanus tells us,
This day is such a day of love, such a day of gain, that the greatness of those
benefits we receive by this day, eclipse and obscure the show and appearance
of all other benefits. Athanasius calls the Resurrection day, The beginning of
the New Creation: And another learned tells us, That Christ's Resurrection was a
great and an excellent Miracle, and therefore it gave life and name to the
Lords day. Indeed Man's all is folded up in the triumphant success of this day:
Let us a little hearken to the good News that Christ's Resurrection brought to
the world; and these Cords of love should fasten us to Holy duties, and
becoming carriages on the Lords day.

The Resurrection of Christ was the completing of his work. Indeed many fair
lines were drawn before in the great work Josephus i^ tertium usque annum in
(...) dete^tus, s^^t, postea tamen libe^tus est, and Egypti constitutus est
dominus; Et salvator noster ad tertium usque diem detentus est in carcere
sepulchri, and tum resurrexit sanctorum dominus and dominus dominantium. Ger.
of Man's Redemption, every tear which dropped from Christ's eye, every drop of
bloody sweat which fell from his sacred body contributed to our salvation; but
when Christ rose again, then he put the last hand to the beautiful frame of
this glorious work: And therefore he is said then to be perfected, Luke 13. 32.
when Christ breathed out his last, he cried out, consummatum est, It is
finished, John 19. 30. But that had relation to his sufferings; but when he
rose again, he was perfected, in relation to his people; he then became a
perfect Redeemer: Christ on his resurrection-day folded up his bottom, and had
nothing left to do, but to ascend to his Father, and to take his place at his
right hand, and to give him an account, that the glorious work of man's
Redemption was now fully finished; Christ's dying-day was the perfection of his
love, but his rising-day was the perfection of his work: when he sprang from
the Grave, he threw off the cloths of his own mortality, and of our sin. Thus
the Sun works through the Cloud, and makes its own way, till it is freed from
that dark encumbrance, and appears to the World in its sweetest brightness: And
so our Savior after a short sleep in the tenacious dust, awakes and comes as a
Bridegroom out of his Chamber, to speak a few words to his Psalm. 19. 5.
Disciples, and to take witness of his resurrection, and so to go up to his
Father, ever to make intercession for us. And shall Christ complete his work
upon his resurrection-day, Heb. 7. 25.
our Christian Sabbath, and shall we be defective in ours? Shall he be
perfected on that day, and shall we be polluted? Surely when we trifle and sin
away our Sabbath, we never think, that on that day Christ put his last hand to
the blessed work of our Redemption. This will condemn careless Christians, when
they are so short, and Christ so full on his Resurrection-day, our blessed
Sabbath.

The Resurrection of Christ was the Conquest of his, and our Enemies. On this
day, the seed of the woman did bruise the Genesis 3. 15. Promeruit in cruce
Christus, sed postea peregit. Zanch.
Serpents head, and Christ did triumph in his own person over Sin, Death, and
Satan; Upon the account of which, the Apostle cries Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55.
On this day Christ spoiled principalities and powers, and openly triumphed over
them, Col. 2. 15. Christ merited Victory by his passion, Acts 10. 39, 40.
but he executed Victory by his rising from the Grave; he died a Sufferer, but
he rose a Conqueror; not only Mat. 28. 18.
arrayed with honor and immortality, but richly invested Phil. 2. 9.
with power and principality; and then were the Keys of Ephesians. 4. 8, 9.
Death and Hell resigned up to him, as the Trophies of his Revel. 1. 18.
triumphant Resurrection; Then was Christ proclaimed Lord of quick and dead,
Romans 14. 9. then Death gave its last groan, and then Satan fell like lightning:
the forces of 1 Cor. 15. 55.
Hell were scattered and discomfited, when Christ appeared Luke 10. 18.
in the Field after his detention in the Grave. Christ by rising brake both the
Chains of death and darkness together; Resurrectione Christi, et vita initium,
et mors recepit interitum.
and so far put the Law out of date, that it super-annuated its threats, that
they are insignificant to the Believer; Christ now had suffered whatever the
Law could demand upon the Sinner: And as his sufferings answered all the
clamours of the Law, so his Resurrection brake all the Chains of his
Resurrectio Christi plena fuit mortis abolitio, et vitae reductio. Alap.
sufferings. Indeed (through the Grace of God) we may read, inflamed love, Romans
5. 8. and eternal life, John 3. 15. in the death of Christ; but the hope and
assurance of both, is built upon his Resurrection: and therefore when the
Apostle would set the door of hope wide open to us, 1 Pet. 1. Col. 2. 14.
3, 4. he shows us an empty Sepulcher, and tells us, with the Angel, He is
risen, 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18, 19. The Promise is (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. 1 Cor.
9. 27. Col. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
the ground and Anchor-hold of our hope, and that is performed by our Lords
Resurrection; by which he brake the Serpents head, and scattered his power,
Acts 26. 6, 7, 8, 9. This day then is Christ's triumphal day, when all his
enemies were drawn at his Chariot-wheel.

And is not Christ in this our Ensample? Shall not we on this day trample Satan
under our feet, conquer lust, and get above the snares, nay thoughts of the
World and in holy and divine Ordinances pursue triumphant grace? Conquest is
our great work on the Sabbath Day, then are we to subjugate our passions, to
subdue our corruptions, to keep under the flesh, to fetter the Old man, and to
bring into obedience our whole man to Jesus Christ. The Sabbath properly is a
day of Victories; then light is to overcome our darkness, the word to overcome
our hearts, Christ to overruled and Conquer our affections, and then is the
season for the spirit to subdue, and to bring into Captivity every high thought
to the obedience of the Gospel. And shall we then on Christ's conquering-day, be
slaves to our fancy, to (...). Ignat.
spend our time in vanity and recreations, be Vassals to our lusts, to spend
our Sabbaths in riots and profaneness, be subjugated by the flesh, to spend
this golden season in sloth or formality? Is not this to pour contempt on
Christ's triumphal-day, and to cover the glory of it with thick darkness? As if
one should draw a Canvas Curtain before a curious Picture. It may truly be said
of those who profane the Lords day; they are the ecclipses of Christ's
Resurrectionday, spots in that Feast, and the foul blemishes of that lovely
season. Ignatius will tell us, It is but a Jewish trick, and a falling back and
recidivation to their sin and folly.

The Resurrection of Christ was the loosing of his fetters; then, and not
before, did our dear Jesus rest from the temptations of Satan, from the
persecutions of the Jewish and the Gentile World, from the flashes and
scorching of his Fathers wrath, and from the bonds of his own transient death:
His rising-day was his resting-day, and all his disturbance and discomposures
were scattered, as the Clouds Vos in die, quem dicunt solis solemn colitis,
sicut autem nos eundem diem dominicum vocamus; In eo non solemn sed
resurrectionem domini laete veneramur.
which have nestled together, are put to flight at the rise of the Sun. And
therefore it was the will of God, that the day of Christ's Resurrection should
be honored as holy, rather then any other day of his Incarnation, Birth,
Passion, Ascension; because his rising-day, was his resting or Sabbath Day, and
whereon his rest began. So the day of Gods rest from the work of Creation, and
the day of Christ's rest from the work of Redemption, are only fit, the one to
be the Churches Sabbath in the time of the Law, the other to be the Churches
Sabbath in the time of the Gospel. The Lord Aug. contr. Faust Manich. lib. 18.
cap. 5.
Christ in the day of his Birth did not enter into his rest, but rather made an
entrance into labor and sorrow, and then began his work of Humiliation: And so
likewise in the day of his Passion, he was then under the sorest part of his
labor, in the bitter Agonies in the Garden and on the Cross; and therefore
none of these could be consecrated to be our Sabbath: Nor could the day of his
Ascension be fit Gal. 4. 4, 5.
to be made our Sabbath, because although Christ then and thereby entered into
the third Heavens, his place of Rest, yet he did not then make his first
entrance into his estate of Rest, which was in the day of his Resurrection.
This day then was the first step of Christ's exaltation, the dawning of his
glory; Dies dominicus Christi resurrectione est sacratus, Aug.
when, as Elijah, he dropped the Mantle of all natural imperfections: Now
Christ was to bear no more bruises, to give his Cheek to no more Smiters, to
tread the Winepress of his Fathers wrath no more. This bright Sun was no more
to be masked with Clouds; this Morning Star was no more Isa. 53. 10.
to be veiled with shade or darkness; Christ's rising left his Isa. 50. 6.
Grave-cloaths behind him, to show us, that now no more Revel. 22. 16.
he was to taste any thing which savoured of sorrow or mortality. John 20. 5, 6.


And now how incongruous is it, that the day of Christ's freedom, should be the
day of our fetters; That when he threw off his bonds, we should bind them on us
the faster; That we should be fettered to any way of sin, or chained to our
sensual appetite, or wanton fancy on the Lords day, the weekly commemoration of
Christ's Resurrection? On Di^s dominicus die^ est, quam nobis salvatoris no^tri
resurrectio consecravit.
this day Christ threw off his Grave-cloaths, and so should we cast off
whatever savours of dust and earth. In a word, to be captivated to any way of
offense on this holy day, no way comports with the nature and freedom of
Christ's resurrection; then all his bonds were loosed, and then should we Le^
Epist. 93. cap. 4.
cast from us whatsoever may hinder us from running the ways of Gods
Commandments, all our sloth, frothiness of Spirit, carnal delights, cold
formality, and whatever may slacken our pace in our duties and spiritual
services.

The Resurrection of Christ is the very life of the Gospel; So the Apostle most
expressly, 1 Cor. 15. 14. If Christ be not risen, then is our preaching in vain,
and your says is also vain. Christ's death had been wholly ineffectual for the
remission of sins, if Christ had not conquered death, but still had been
Peccatum plene aboletur, quia ejus effectus, (i. e.) mors aboletur. Chrysostom.
detained in his dust: But Christ has abolished sin, because he has conquered
death, the effect of sin, by his glorious resurrection; as Chrysostom well
notes and observes, All the sufferings of Christ were animated by his
resurrection, that glorious Act put worth and value upon them. Had he not
risen, all our hopes had been buried in the same Grave with him; but he is
truly risen, and this is the comfort of our Souls, and the riches of his
sufferings. Christ's resurrection makes faith a saving grace, and therefore the
(rather) is put upon Christ's rising, not upon his death, Romans 8. 34. His
Resurrection makes the Gospel a lively and glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Totum
Evangelium esset vanum, et mera fabula, si Christus non resurrexisset. Par.
and Christ an all-sufficient Redeemer: When Christ rose, the Jews blasphemy
was execrated, Scripture-prophesies and types verified, the hearts of believers
revived, and the Gospel was made a Doctrine full of grace and truth, fit to be
preached for life and salvation. The Prophet Hosea tells us, Hos. 6. 2. After
two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight: which text Hos. 6. 2.
of Scripture Tertullian rightly accommodates to the Resurrection Quem locum
Tertullianus lib. adv. Judeos, cap. 13. ad Christi resurrectionem recte
accomodat. Ger.
of Christ, which was on the third day; then did our life spring with his, and
the Sun rising caused our light. The Resurrection of Christ is that pleasant
spring which the Law foresaw, the Gospel discovers, and the Christian rejoices
in. Had Christ been shut up in the Grave, and there kept as Natures Prisoner,
all the truths of the Word had been as fading leaves, and the believers faith
an empty notion, the Preachers pains unprofitable sweat, and the sinners soul
irrecoverably lost, and the professors of Christianity truly of all men most
miserable, as 1 Cor. 15. 19. And that cursed Quantas divitias comparavit nobis
ista fabula Christi. Leo. 10. Pap. Romans
speech of Pope Leo the tenth, (viz.) How much wealth has this Fable of Christ
brought to our Coffers, might have escaped a reproof.

And now shall the Resurrection of Christ put life into the Gospel, and none
into us upon our Sabbath, the commemoration of that glorious Act? Shall every
truth of the Gospel be confirmed by it, and shall not we be established in our
duties on this holy day? Christ rose, and our hopes sprang and budded with his
rising, and shall not this animate our services on the Lords day? Either let us
lay aside Faith in the Act, or be more conscientious in keeping the day of
Christ's blessed Resurrection.

The Resurrection of Christ was not only the breaking of his own chains, but
the breaking out and harbinger of our joys; For Christ, as a common person, is
become the first fruits of 1 Cor. 15. 20.
them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15. 20. which is an allusion to a rite and ceremony in
the Law. All the sheaves in a field being unholy in themselves, there was some
one sheaf in the name and room of all the rest, which was called the first
fruit, lifted up and waved before the Lord, and so all the sheaves abroad in
the field, by that act done to this one sheaf, were Christus opp^nitur omnibus
terroribus in die judicii, and quidem quadruplici ratione. 1. Christi morte qua
peccata expiavit. 2. Resurrectione qua j^stitiam peperit 3. Evectione ad
dextr^m dei, qua sp. sanctum effudit. 4. ^ntercessione qua meritum effi^aciter
applicat: Qu^tu^r ^is^e gradibus, totum Redemptionis opus a Christo peractum
est. Par.
consecrated unto God by virtue of that Law, Lev. 23. 10. Romans 11. 16. And thus
when we were all dead, Christ as the first fruits rises, and this in our name
and stead, and so we all rise with him, and in him; we are all vertually risen
in him, and this in as true a sense, as if we were personally risen. As on the
contrary hand we being personally alive, yet are reckoned dead in Adam, because
he was a common person, and had the sentence of death pronounced upon him, by
virtue of which, we must die, and this by the force of the same law, 1 Cor. 15.
21, 22. Adam was the first fruits of them who died, and Christ of them that
rise. Hence we are said to be risen with Christ, Ephesians. 2. 5. and which is yet
more, to sit together with him in heaven, Ephesians. 2. 6. Because Christ is a common
person representing us, and he sits there in our name, and in our stead. Now
let us a little canvass the equity of this law: If sentence of condemnation was
first passed upon Adam alone, yet considered as a common person for us, we were
condemned in him: therefore also this acquitting and justification, which was
passed upon Christ at his Resurrection, (for then he had fully suffered
whatever divine justice could demand for our sin) was passed upon him as a
common and public person for us; yea, in this his being justified, Christ must
much rather be considered as a common person representing us, then Adam was in
his condemnation: V^va ego, and quamvis mortem feram, resurgam, et vos quoque
vivetis, (i. e.) quia videbitis me, laetabimini, et quasi o^cisi revi^is^e^^^
in mea manifestatione. Theoph.
For Christ in his own person had no sin, so he had no need of justification
from sin, nor should ever have been condemned; and therefore this must be only
in respect to our sins imputed to him, and if so, then in our stead; and so
herein he was more purely to be considered, as a common person for us, then
ever Adam was in his being condemned; for Adam besides his standing as a common
person for us, was furthermore condemned in his own person; but Christ being
justified from sin, could only be considered as standing for others. Thus
Christ rose as a common person in our stead, and for our good, to be the object
of our faith, the incentive of our hope, and the forerunner of our glorious
resurrection.

By Christ's rising to life we receive,

A life of joy; His springing from the grave was the blossoming of our joy: The
retirement of our beloved into his tomb, was but transient, the delay of three
days, and then In diem solis laetitiae indulgemus. Tert.
he came from behind the hangings, and in this our joy is full: This dried up
Mary Magdalens tears, and swallowed up the Disciples griefs; and this inflames
the Christians triumphs; And as Christ says, John 16. 22. I shall see you
again, and then your heart shall rejoice. And as Theophylact observes, The
Disciples as it were rose from the dead, transported with joy.

A life of Righteousness. For as Christ died for our sins, so he arose for our
justification, Romans 4. 25. It was the rising of Martis Christ^ proprius finis
erat, peccatorum exp^^^^; sed resurrecti^nis, justitiae imputatio. P^r. Ideo
Christus promeretur nobis justitiam, et vitam spiritualem, quae consistit in
remissione peccatorum, et justitiae imputatione, per quam coramdeo justi
reputemur quia ex morte resurrexit. Ger.
Christ which made his death au^hentical and satisfactory. Paraeus observes,
The proper end of Christ's death was the expiation of our sins, and the proper
end of his resurrection was the imputation of his own righteousness. The
foundation of our comfort is laid in Christ's death, but we receive it in his
resurrection. Our peace and joy is sown in his death, but we reap it, and begin
to possess it in his resurrection. And though Christ's rising adds nothing to
the price which was paid in his death, yet it is a demonstration of the
sufficiency of it, and thereby a confirmation of our comfort by it: for if
Christ had not rose again, his death had done us no good, and all our comfort
had been a withered branch. If death had overcome him, wrath had overcome us.
Christ by rising has promerited a righteousness for us, Jer. 23. 6. our
wedding garment came from this Wardrobe; his breaking from the grave, made our
joys and his own merits full, which are applicable to us by faith.

A life of Grace: Christ by his resurrection has purchased the donation of the
spirit, which he sent down extraordinarily Ex plenitudine Christi gratiam pro
gratia accepimus, non tantum gratiam remissionis peccatorum, sed (...) vitam a
ternam quae credentibus ex gratia datur. Aug.
presently after it upon his holy Apostles, Acts 2. 2. and still in sweet and
suitable measures upon his people, John 1. 16. Now this True Vine, John 15. 1.
flourishes in glory, to which his resurrection was the first step, he drops
sap into his branches here below, John 15. 4. Christ after his resurrection
obtains the Holy Ghost for us, and bestows it upon us, and by this blessed
spirit engraffeth us into himself, regenerateth and quickneth us. An evidence
of this truth we have, John 7. 39. The words of which Text run thus: But this
be spoke of the spirit, which they who believed on him should receive, for the
Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not glorified. This royal
gift only waited the glory of his resurrection.

A Life of Glory: The Resurrection of Christ opened the gates of Heaven to
believers, and from that first ascent, he Christus coelum Ipsum ingr^ss^s est,
n^n t^m prose, et s^^ gloria; quam pro nobis and nostra gloria Christus
praecurrit, ut nob^^ v^am ster^eret, et pararet; ^tque praecurren^em brevi
subsequ^emur, qui enim a^teri prae^urrit, ut pertas aperi^^, et aper^^^ serv^t^
parv^ interv^ll^ qui sequitur intr^^b^t. Theoph. Null^ operatio in die dominico
agatur, nisi tantum Hymnis et Psalmis, et cantionibus spirita^libus dies ill
transignur. Linw.
went up to his Father to prepare a place for us, John 14. 2. Had Christ been
locked in the Grave, we had been locked out of Glory; but Christ rose to go to
his Father, and in this he is our forerunner, as the Apostle says expressly,
He is entered into Heaven for us, Heb. 6. 20. to take up our room, and prepare
our eternal Thrones. Theophylact has a pretty similitude, When one goes
before, says he, and opens a gate, it is but a little space, but those who are
to follow come and enter; so the Saints shall not be long before they shall
enter within the vail, whither our forerunner is gone before, and this
sublimates a Believers hope. Our Su^ety has taken our places for us, and after
a few breaths, a few flying moments, we shall come and take up our eternal
abode and residence.

And what is the issue of all this? Shall Christ's resurrection be the fountain
of our good, and not the incentive of our duty? Shall we rise with him, and not
live to him on his own holy day? Had the Resurrection only concerned himself,
and been the Emblem of his own personal glory, some Apology might have been
made; but when it is not an enclosure, but a Common for the Saints to live
upon, how should this influence us upon the Lords day, How should our hearts
rise in holy affections, how should our voice rise in praise and thanksgivings,
how should our thoughts rise in heavenly meditations! A couchant earthly frame
upon this day, no way accords with this beneficial, nay, beatificall
resurrection.

The Resurrection of Christ is the certain assurance of ours: The Head is
risen, and the body must follow; the Elder Ephesians 1. 21. 22. Hoc sperate mem^ra,
quod in capite praecess^^. Aug.
Brother is sprung out of the dust, and the Younger Brethren shall not always
lie there. The Vine is now planted in Heaven, and there the Branches must
receive their eternal flourish. Christ rose again, not as the Jews prisoner,
under a Dies vitae nostrae est dies Parasceves, succedit dies qutetis in
sepulchro, quem sequitur dies resurrectionis ad vitam. Ger.
sentence of condemnation, but as the Christians Harbinger, for their
unspeakable consolation. It is worthily observed of a learned man, The day of
our life is our Preparation day, then follows our Rest in the grave, to which
succeeds our Resurrection day to life and eternity: As Christ died to make the
purchase, so he rose again to see it made good to believers, and his
Resurrection is but the earnest of ours: This glorious act of Christ's rising,
gives us security for these ensuing particulars:

That Divine Justice is satisfied. When the Prisoner for Debt is freed, it is
presumed, the debt is discharged, and the Quia Christus resurrexit, ideo non
amplius sumus sub peccatis, quia praestita est plena pro iis satisfactio, etc.
Ger.
Creditor fully satisfied: Christ in his Resurrection opened the prison doors
of the grave, and showed himself to many witnesses free, and discharged from
all encumbrances which fully speaks, that divine Justice is paid to the utmost
farthing.

That God and Man are fully reconciled: For sin only commenced the
controversy, and kept up the difference, Isa. 59. 2. Now sin being removed by
a full acquittance and discharge, ^am Christus mortuus est, immo jam
resurrexit, ergo peccata nostra non amplius coram dei judicio nos condemnare
possunt.
viz. By the delivery and Rising of our Surety, the wound naturally closes,
and all is peace between God and believers: And so the Sun of Righteousness
arose with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 17.
If Christ had not risen, we had been still in our sin, which fully implies, he
rising again, our sins are taken away, and blotted out as a thick cloud, and
nothing remains to break the peace between God and believers.

That conscience may be serene and fully satisfied: For nothing stung
conscience, and wounded that tender part, nothing Christus resurrexit, ideo
pacatam and tranquillam consciemtiam habere possumus, scimus enim pro peccatis,
quae deum et nos dividebant per Christum fit satisfactio, nosque ideo deo
reconciliatos esse.
kept it raw, full of pain and anguish, but only sin, which being fully
satisfied for by Christ's death, and so clearly declared by his blessed
Resurrection, the burden removed gives ease to conscience; and so the poor
believer being sensible his peace is made, and he is reconciled to his angry
Father, he has Halcyon days in his bosom, and he lies down with comfort; and
says, his lot is fallen in a pleasant place, and God has given him a goodly
heritage, Psalm. 18. 6. And this the Apostle Peter compriseth in fewer words, 1
Pet. 3. 21. But the answer of a good conscience toward God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

That our Redemption will certainly follow: So says our blessed Savior
expressly, John 20. 17. I ascend unto my Per Christum quasi antesignanum et
mortis dominatorem in Orbem illata est Resurrectio mortuorum. Alap. Romans 8. 11.
Christus solis bonis est causa meritoria resurrectionis, sed efficiens omnibus:
Reprobi vero resurgunt, non ad vitam, sed ad damnationem, mortem potius quam
vitam. Thom.
Father, and to your Father, and unto my God, and your God. And if Christ
ascend unto our Father, shall not we likewise come to his house, John 14. 2.
Shall not we see his face, shall not we rise again to enjoy his glory? Yes
verily, God is a God of the living, and not of the dead; of triumphant Saints,
and not of putrid carkases, Mat. 22. 32. Let us further argue, if Christ be our
Head, and we his Members, then it is expedient for the glory of the Head, that
the Members be glorious: And it may be further considered, that as the first
Adam received blessings for himself and his posterity, and lost the same for
all: So Christ the second Adam received life, and all other gifts for himself
and others; and he rising gloriously, his Saints likewise shall be charioted to
glory by a glorious Resurrection: And so moreover, Christ being our Elder
Brother in his tenderness and affection will not leave us in the grave, there
always to sleep the sleep of death, and so much the rather, because he can
raise us with a Call, with the sold of a Trumpet, by the message of an
Archangel, 1 These. 4. 16. For he being dead raised himself, much more being
alive shall he be able to raise us up. And withal, we should consider our
Union with Christ by the Spirit, whose heavenly influence and divine virtue in
raising of our souls to spiritual life is most eminent and admirable; how much
more clearly may we conclude the necessity of our being raised from death to
fellowship with him in glory? And Virtutem resurrectionis Christi, non tantum
cognoscimus per fidem, sed et per experientiam ut Christi resurgentis potentiam
sentiamus.
shall not we know the power of Christ's Resurrection, to use the Apostles
words, Phil. 3. 10. in raising us on his own blessed day to
heavenly-mindedness, to get above the world, and to have our hearts taken up in
the divine services of it? We should remember when Christ rose, it was the seal
of our Resurrection; and can we think of a Resurrection, and sleep away
Sermons, trifle away Sabbaths, and formalize away Ordinances, which then must
come unto a severe account? shall we, who hope to rise to a Crown, be entombed
in sloth and idleness upon a Resurrection day? The very thoughts of our
Resurrection should strike an awe upon us, and bridle us from vanity and
lightness of spirit; knowing 2 Cor. 5. 10.
that our Sabbaths are not over when we have spent them, but they will meet us
at Gods tribunal, and at his tremendous Rev. 20 12.
Bar. Nothing can more acutely check the profane person, who pollutes Gods
day, and unravels that golden season in froth and formality, then the serious
thoughts of a certain Resurrection, whereof Christ's rising was an undoubted
pledge.

The Resurrection of Christ was an evidence of infinite power: And therefore
Dr. Twisse rightly fastens the Lords day on Christ's Resurrection day, because
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 4. Christ was declared mightily to be the Son
of God by the spirit of sanctification in his Resurrection from the dead.
Hereby Christ was manifested to be the Son of God, the very Lord of glory.
Christ's Resurrection was the manifestation of most glorious power; that the
tomb should not confine him, nor the dust hold him, nor the grave stone stop
him, but throwing off these clogs, as Samson did his withs, he shows himself a
while to his beloved Ones, and so takes his joyous ascent to the right hand of
his Father.

Love laid Christ in the grave, and Power raised him from the grave; love
rocked him asleep, and power awakened him again; love made him die as a
Malefactor, Luke 23. 33. and power raised him as a Savior, to give full
assurance that all was done which was required to procure life and salvation.
Indeed this did manifest wonderful power, when after three days being dead,
the Sepulcher sealed, the stone rolled to the mouth of the grave, a strong
watch placed; that Christ should break through all bars, beat down all
opposition, and 1 Cor. 15. 55.
spring forth out of his yielding dust as a triumphing Conqueror Heb. 2. 14.
over Death and Devils. The Jews cried out, Let him Plus erat de sepulchro
surgere, quam de cruce descendere, et plus mortem resurgendo destruere, quam
vitam descendendo servare. Greg.
come down from the Cross, and we will believe on him, Mat. 27. 42. But it is
more, says Gregory, to rise from the grave, then to descend from the Cross,
to destroy death by rising, then to preserve life by descending.

of his power, and not an argument for our piety upon his own blessed day,
which is the Commemoration of this glorious act? Surely he who could pierce the
grave, and shake off the chains of death for the good of believers, can exert
as great power for the destruction of sinners, especially those who profane
his day. Christ's love in dying should allure, and his power in rising should
enforce Sabbath-holiness; it is not safe nor providential to provoke the Lion
of the tribe of Judah, who trampled upon death and the grave, especially on the
day of his Resurrection, when his power was most illustrious.

The Resurrection of Christ was unparalled: Others indeed were raised from
the grave: So Lazarus, John 12. 1. So Dorcas, Acts 9. 40. And women received
their dead raised to life again, Heb. 11. 35. But all these retired to their
Christus post quam resurrexit, talem vitam amplius non vivit, immo mori amplius
non p^ssit. Alap.
graves again; their renewed life was only a short apparition which was quickly
smoothered, a little Candle set up after it had been put out, which burned for
a while, and spent it self till it went out again. But our Savior, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 6. 9. Being raised from the dead, dies no more: This Sun
being risen sets no more; nay, it is no more inveloped in a Cloud, but shines
in a higher sphere, in a more sublime Orb to eternity. Christ's Resurrection was
not damped with a revocation, nor did he fly back again to his empty tomb,
there to shelter himself till the general Resurrection. Nay, let us run a
little higher; the Resurrection of Christ was that glorious work above all
others, which the Scriptures mention to the Fathers honor, Romans Gal. 1. 1.
1. 4. Acts 2. 24, 32. Acts 3. 26. Acts 4. 10. Acts 10. 40. This work it was,
by which Jesus Christ is made* both Lord and Christ, and is exalted to sit at
the right hand of his Father. This act of Resurrection advanced him to the
throne, who before was stigmatized with the Cross, and changed him from a
prisoner, to be a Prince and Savior, Acts 3. 31. Acts 10. 41.
Nay to be the Prince of life, Acts 3. 15. And nothing but glory and honor are
the Attendants of his Throne. To Acts 2. 32.
publish this glorious act, Christ principally did choose his Disciples, Acts
10. 41. Acts 2. 32. Christ's Resurrection Acts 2. 25.
was the Motto of the Apostles embassy, and the emphasis of their Errand, the
grand argument by which they both 1 Cor. 15. 14.
made and comforted believers: For indeed, the receiving of 1 Pet. 1. 3.
our Christ again after the certainty of his death, and the solemnity of his
burial, is the spring of our joy, the fountain of 1 Pet. 3. 21.
our comfort, the stay of our hearts, and the assurance of our Hymnus Angelicus
ad nativitatem Christi accipiatur. 1. Tanquam gratulatio and gratiarum Actio.
z. Tanquam Angelorum votum quod Angeli optant hominibus. 3. Tanquam doctrina,
quae vera est pax, scil. in Christo solo. Theod. Mat. 4. 2.
justification. This blessed work of Christ's rising put the last hand to the
work of our Redemption, and so fastened it, that it cannot unravel. The Birth
of Christ was accompanied with the joy of Angels, Luke 2. 13. His life was
embroidered with wonders and miracles, for every word our Jesus spoke was not
less than a wonder, John 7. 46. His death was imbittered with sorrows and
perplexities, and sighs were the escutcheons about his Hearse, but his
Resurrection was the new Birth of the World, and the sparkling spirits of a
Believers consolation. The wisemen of the East rejoiced at his Star, Mat. 2.
10. when it did proclaim the Birth of Christ: But Believers rejoice at himself,
when he himself proclaims his Resurrection: The Star retires at the Suns rising.

And now shall the Resurrection of Christ be unparalled for glory; and shall
it not so far influence us, as to make us exemplary for sanctity upon its
weekly commemoration, the Lords day? Shall every thing concur to the honor of
Christ's resurrection; and shall only our looseness and vanity on the day of it,
cast a damp and put an eclipse upon it? When we profane the Sabbath, what do
we but draw a veil before the glory of Christ's resurrection, and practically
deny that he is sprung from the Grave? What loves can those Christians have to,
or what esteems for their dear Jesus, who, when his resurrection-day gave new
life to the world, fresh joy to the Disciples, and new wonders to Mankind, can
yet pollute and defile the Sabbath, its constant Memorial? Sabbath Breakers are
worse than Sadduces; they only deny Acts 23. 8.
our Resurrection, but these vertually deny Christ's; for if Christ be risen,
why do they not adore the rising Sun, by Ephesians. 5. 11.
walking in the light on his own blessed day? But why do they attempt to
eclipse this glorious day by their sins and deeds of darkness?

CHAP. LIVE. Some miscellanious prescriptions, for the better discharge of our
duty toward the LORDS DAY.
THe Concernments of the Soul can be never sufficiently pressed, because of the
weightiness of the affair; and Mat. 16. 26.
nothing more conduces to the advantage of the Soul, then the holy observation
of Gods blessed day. Soul-welfare In die dominico men's nostra in piis
exercitiis tota defigenda est. Cartw.
much depends upon a due and careful observance of it: Spiritual Sabbaths very
much draw the Soul to its center; formal Sabbaths do much retard the Soul in
its progress, and Sabbaths wasted in profaneness, do very much harden the Soul
in sin and vanity, and drop apace into the Vials of Gods wrath, jogging
Vengeance to awaken it, which seems to slumber. It may easily fall under our
observation, that one who is slight on the Sabbath, will be profuse on the
week; that sin which is hatched in the Sabbath, will be fledged in the week:
And therefore where there is so much danger to lose the way, it must needs be
safe to take good direction, and to set up more lights for our better guidance;
and this is the further design of what follows in this Chapter.

Let love be the spring of all our duties upon the Sabbathday. Prescript. 1.
Love is a sweet, but a forcible principle; it works not as a Sword, but as a
Sunbeam; it draws, but not drives; it Excessus mentis est intentio ad superna.
Ansel.
constrains, but not compels, and it wins by persuasion, and not coaction, 2
Cor. 5. 14. Fear storms the Town, but Love takes it by composition; a heart
full of love will run through the Datur sancta insania, quando mente excedimus
deo. Bern.
duties of a Sabbath, as the Sun through the several Signs of the Zodiac, with
swiftness and delight: Nor does it understand any toil or weariness. Our
Sabbath should not be our task, but our delight, Isa. 58. 13. and then we
should be on the wing, and fly to the Sanctuary, as the Doves to the Windows.
And indeed what is there in a Sabbath, which does not court our love?

The Lord of it; He is our Beloved, Mat. 2. 28. Our love, our dove, our
undefiled, Cant. 5. 2. Cant. 6. 9. He does, or ought to lie as a bundle of
myrrh between our breasts, Cant. 1. 13. The Son of man, who is the sum of our
desires, is the Lord of the Sabbath. Love of all principles has the greatest
force, and the love of Christ of all loves has the greatest power. The love of
Christ could make Martyrs and bring them to a stake in a time of persecution;
and shall not the Octaginta and sex annos servivi domino meo, etc. Polycarp.
love of Christ make Zelots, and bring them cheerfully to a duty on a
Sabbath Day? Let us be free and vigorous on the Lords day, it is the day of our
Beloved.

The occasion of it, which was Christ's resurrection, when he rose for our
justification, Romans 4. 25. That which started this day was the Rising Sun which
enlightened the World, In die dominico a mortuis resurrexit Christus. Orig.
overspread with the darkness of Gentilism, and the shades of Judaism: Let us
consider what put life into our Sabbath, let the same thing put life into us
upon this blessed Sabbath.

The duties of it, they are all strains of love.

1. The Sacrament is our love-feast, and in it we have a double communion; 1.
Communion with Christ, to remember Charitas Christi qua Christus homines
dilexit, nos urget, ut Christi exemplo and amore idem faciamus. Alap.
his love to us, in sacrificing himself for us, Luke 22. 19. 2. Communion with
the Saints, for the increase of love: At Christ's Table the Heirs of Salvation
come acquainted, before they meet in their Fathers Kingdom, and there those
spiritual Stars rally together in a Constellation.

2. Prayer is only the breathing forth of the Soul into the bosom of God, the
melting and the working of the heart (...).
toward God, Jam. 5. 16. In prayer, sighs are but the moans of love, and tears
are but the streams of love: And this duty is only the flight of the Soul to
its beloved: the Cant. 3. 1.
Spouse in prayer pours out her heart before him whom her Soul loves. Hearing
the word is nothing but the unbosoming Romans 5. 8.
of the Fathers heart to poor sinners, Acts 20. 27. that they may know his
will, and live: When we sit under the Heb. 1. 14.
Gospel, we only hear those things which have been upon the heart of God from
all eternity. Thus all the duties of a Sabbath are the Emblems of love, and
call for a principle of love.

The donation of the Sabbath to us is the fruit of love; and therefore the
Sabbath is called the gift of God, Ezekiel. 20. 12. Vide hic et obstupesce
immensitatem amoris Christi; Foedi eramus, insipientes, mendici, pu^idi, viles,
miseri, et miserabiles, sed Foedos Christus amavit ut pulchros efficeret,
inimicos amavit ut amicos faceret, etc.
and gifts are love tokens: It is great love we should have seasons of grace,
opportunities of life, and term-times for our precious Souls; days of converse
with the Almighty, constituted times for transacting the grand affairs of
Eternity. Now every thing in a Sabbath speaking love, let that genuine and
natural principle carry us out in Sabbath-duties with all freeness and delight.
Many persons are swayed by other principles, by a principle of credit,
interest, or the clamours of natural Conscience; nay some are staked down to a
Sabbath from the common usage and custom of the Country where they live: but
these men are like Puppets which are stirred and moved with Wires, they only
act a part, and the Sabbath is their Seen. But the heaven-born principle which
should carry us through all the severals of a Sabbath, Psalm. 27. 4.
is love to, and longing for our dear Jesus: Duties will never Psalm. 42. 2.
be music unless tuned by a heart full of love to God. It was love brought
Christ to a Cradle to be born for us; it was love brought Christ to a Cross to
die for us, John 10. Amoris vis corpus et animam liquefacit, et ultra se ad
videndum du^itur et ergo necesse est ut carneum hoc vinculum, qu^ far talenti
p^ndus non valemus infirmetur. Greg.
17, 18. And it is love to this Christ which can sweeten and succeed out duties
upon his own holy day. Love to Christ will make prayer the evidence of our
desire to be at home; and make hearing only our inquiry, which is the next way
to bring us home; and make Sacraments our Corn by the way to support us till we
do come home; and make all other duties the planks upon which we get to come to
shore, to our desired and longed for home.

Let all our services on a Sabbath be acted with a serious poise and
deliberation. Meat which is rasht up never tastes Praescrip. 2.
pleasantly: In holy duties we must carefully distinguish between holy delight,
and sinful precipitancy; the Wiseman Jer. 8. 6.
counsels us, to look to our foot when we go into the house Quatuor causae
afferunt^r ex Hebraeis, quare pecus separatum et comparatum, decimo die
asservabatur usque decimum quartum. 1. Ne Israelitae negotiis impediti illud
oblivi^ni traderent. 2. Vt melius observarent ne defectus aliquis sit in agno 3
Vt ex aspectu agni oxasionem haberent colloquendi de redemptione sua ex
Aegypto. 4. Vt sese in tempore ad bonum opus perficiendum accingerent, and
praepararent. Fag.
of God, Eccles. 5. 1. we must not leap into the Sanctuary, but we must pause
in our approaches. The Lamb for the Passover was taken up the tenth day of the
month, but not killed till the fourteenth, Exodus 12. 3. 6. to show us, how
considerately and advisedly we should converse with God in Ordinances. Before
we adventure upon any Sabbath-duty we should weigh and ponder these four things;

1. The infiniteness of that God with whom we have to do, Heb. 12. 29.

2. The nature of that duty, in which we are to engage, which is most solemn
and spiritual, Levit. 10. 2, 3.

3. The preciousness of that soul, which is highly concerned in all these
services.

4. The strictness of that account, which must be made for all our Sabbath
opportunities. Nothing more ripens and amplifies our spiritual advantage, then
a serious advisedness; and we are necessitated to it, not only because our
hearts are so slippery, and will easily beguile us in holy services; but
because Satan never makes greater On-sets, then when we are in Heavens road:
Therefore on a Sabbath, let us compose our selves for Divine Worship, and dress
our selves as the Spouse, to meet with the Bridegroom of our souls. Rash
duties leave cold hearts, and are nothing less then offering up strange fire,
Levit. 10. 1, 2. When Ahab seemingly pleased God in his humiliation, he walked
softly, 1 Kings 21. 27. And we must come to holy duties, as the wise men of
Mat. 25. 10.
the East came to Christ, with an observant distance and veneration. Mat. 2. 11.
Our inconsiderate adventures upon things sacred and divine, only lose the
taste of the duty, and trifle away the time of the Sabbath.

Let us labor to get high esteems of the Sabbath day: We Praescrip. 3.
keep those things most charily we prize most: We lock up Jewels, which we
value, but we leave out other things which we despise and contemn. One great
reason why men practice Sabbaths no more, is because they prize them no Apparet
in S^r^p^uris hunc diem esse solennem, ipse enim est primus dies seculi, etc.
Aug.
more: Sabbaths fall in their opinion, and therefore they sink in their
observation: They look upon the Sabbath as a common day, a day of leisure to
please themselves with carnal rest, or sensual delight: Only their sh^ps are
shut, and so they cannot follow the works of their Calling; but their hearts
are open to entertain any temptation; and so they mind the Magistrate, more
then Jehovah upon his own day. Dies dominicus est dies Regalis, in qu^
Imperator ascendit ab inferis. Chrysostom.
But serious and gracious persons have always spoken highly of Gods blessed
Sabbath: The Apostle John calls it, the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. which is the
Lord Christ his day: for this name (...) is derived of (...), which is
appropriate to our Savior Christ, both in regard of the dignity and excellency
of his person, and because of the greatness and largeness of Ne ipsam quidem
dominicam diem J^nctissimi festi ulla inreverentia habuere, etc. Athanas.
his dominion, as likewise in respect of his bounty toward the members of his
mystical body, Acts 4. 36. Joh. 20. 13, 28. Revel. 17. 14. Cap. 19. 16. Now
things and persons which are named the Lords, are sacred and venerable in an
high degree. So, The grace of our Lord, Romans 16. 24. The spirit of the Lord, 2
Cor. 3. 17. The beloved of the Lord, Romans 16. Is solus et unus revera est
proprius et dominicus dies, et melior est aliis innumerabilibus diebus, sive
qui communiter intelliguntur, sive qui a Mose, etc. Hier.
8. The glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The word of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6. 3. The
cup of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 27. Et sic, Convivium dominicum, the Lords banquet.
Tertul. lib. 2. ad Vxor. (...). Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 18. (...), The body of
the Lord. Athanas. ad Epict. (...), The Scripture of the Lord. Clem. Alexandr.
Ignatius the blessed Martyr of Christ, who lived in the Apostles age, and was
St. John's Disciple, makes the Lords day the Queen, the Princess, the Lady
Paramount of all days. Eusebius in the life of Constantine the Great, lib. 4.
cap. 18. styles the Lords day, (...), In truth, and in (...), etc. Ignat.
very deed, the principal and the first: Chrysostom calls it, a Royal day.
And Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 43. says it is, (...), Higher then the highest,
and with admiration wonderful above all other days. Basil calls it, (...),
The first fruits of days. Chrysologus Ser. 77. says, It is the primate among
days. And Hierome, in Marc. 16. The Lords day is better then other common
days, and then all the Festivals, New Moons, and Finitur septimus dies,
dominus est sepultus, reditur ad primum, dominus est resuscitatus: domini
resuscitatio promisit no bis aeternam diem, et consecravit diem dominicam. Aug.
Sabbaths of Moses his Law. The Lords day, (says Maximus Taurinensis) is
venerable, and a solemn day among Christians, because like the Sun rising and
dispelling infernal darkness, Christ the Sun of Righteousness shined forth unto
the world by the light of his Resurrection. And the incomparable Augustine
says, The Seventh day is ended, the Lord was buried, a return is made to the
first day, the Lord is raised; the Lords Resurrection promised us an eternal
day, and it did consecrate unto us the Lords day. Justin Martyr calls our
Sabbath Sunday, as many others after him, and not without very good reason.

Chiefest of days, as the Sun is the most glorious of all the Planets; and
therefore the Civil Law calls Cod. Justin. lib. 3. tit. 12.
our Sabbath, The venerable and much honored Sunday.

Sunday, to honor Christ, who is the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4. 2.
Enlightening every one who Nos jure optimo diem, quem Mathematici solis vocant,
domino ascripsimus, et illius cultui totum mancipavimus, quoniam nulla re magis
imaginari possumus praepotentis, et universim supereminentis Christi M^jestatem
quam per splendidissimum solis lumen Et Leo est solare animal. Cael. Rhodig.
comes into the world, and who by his triumphant Resurrection caused the
heavenly light of Truth and Grace to appear in full luster to them who sat in
darkness, and in the shadow of death. And Gaudentius Brixianus speaks fully to
this purpose; It behoved Christ, says he, the Sun of Righteousness, with the
fair and pleasant light of his Resurrection, to dispell the gross darkness of
the Jews, and melt the frozen cold of the Gentiles, and so reduce all things
that we reclouded with the black vail of confusion by the Prince of darkness,
into the state of prime tranquillity. And Ambrose concurs in his judgment; This
day is called Sunday, says he, because Christ the Sun of Righteousness arose
from death to life upon this day to enlighten the Children of this world.

Hierom tells us, It is called Sunday, because on that day Light rose in the
world, and the Sun of Righteousness appeared, in whose wings healing may be
found. So Christ made it Sunday, not only from his beams, but likewise from his
wings; for as there was light in the one, so there was Cypr. Epist. 33. Orig.
in Exo. Homil. 7. and contr. celsum.
cure in the other: and both together gave it this Name.

more speaks the glory of Christ then Light: and the Sun is the fountain of
light, and therefore our Sabbath is Tertul. de Coron. Mil.
called Sunday, as Coelius Rhodiginus observes. Nay, Christ himself is called
Light, John 3. 19. And the Gospel is named Light, Romans 13. 12. No wonder then
if that day on which Christ is worshipped, and the Gospel is preached, is
called Sunday.

But in all ages our blessed Sabbath flourished in an honorable Bellarm. Tem.
1 de cult. Sanctor. cap. 11. lib 3. Dominica dies primatum obtmet, et major est
inter alios, dies. Durand. Rational. lib. 7. de Festiv.
esteem. Bellarmine himself says, The Sabbath is a day above all other days to
be esteemed. And so Durand gives the Lords day all primacy, and assigns it a
majority for worth and honor above all days. And it is very observable, that
Easterday, so much cried up by some, was once the unhappy cause of much
contention in the Church: But the Lords day was always celebrated in the
Church with joy and unanimity, nor ever was the spring of controversy or
contention. This glorious day always shone bright in the Church, without the
eclipse of contempt or disuse.

And indeed our sweet and lovely Sabbath is a Jewel of inestimable worth, a
golden stream dissolving and running by us, for us to make use of, for our
passage to a glorious eternity. Man never forgets himself more, then when he
knows not his time, and falls below the brute Creatures, who understand their
seasons, Jer. 8. 7. How many observe not the time of Christ's coming to meet his
people upon his own Eccles. 9. 12.
blessed day. David was wont to say, One day in thy Courts is Psalm. 63. 2.
better then a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. And the same judgment Psalm. 42. 4.
must we pass upon the Lords day, before we shall come to a Jer. 8. 7.
due observation of it. Sabbaths are kept, as they are valued; And as is our
apprehension, so is our observation: We should look upon the Sabbath, as one of
the days of the Son of man, a season put into our hands for life and
salvation, Luke 17. 22. Luke 19. 42, 43. and this would steer our hearts to a
Amos 8. 11.
devout celebration of it. Did we prize the Sabbath, as our Rabbini docent
Judaeos Sabbatum suum ideo venerasse, ut illud (...) omnium dierum
good wind for our Port, our seasonable gale for our coast, our indulgent call
to our Rest, surely we should spend it with God; for we know not how soon the
things with the day, and the day with the things may be past and gone. It is
observed of the Jews, thy so much honored their Sabbath, that they Reginam
appellarunt.
were wont to call the whole week by the name of Sabbath, Luke 18. 12. And they
were used to say, the first, second, third or fourth day of, or after the
Sabbath; and this they (...).
did as learned men observe, not only,

1. To discriminate themselves, in calling the days of the week otherwise then
the Gentiles, who called them by the names of their Idols: But Mark 16. 2.


2. To demonstrate the dignity of the Sabbath day, and Luke 18. 12. Hier. ad
Head. quaest. 4. Theoph. in Luke 18.
that above all days, it was with them in greatest account. And ought not
Christians much more hold up an high and honorable esteem of the Gospel
Sabbath, which is a far more glorious day? Most assuredly our practice will
keep pace with our repute; and if we look not upon the Sabbath, as the Tremel.
in Syriac. Para phras.
day of God, we shall never keep it as the day of God. And strange it is, that
the Sabbath should not be precious in our eyes, when eternal life is but our
great Sabbath, our long Sabbath which has no evening, as Ambrose and Augustine
Ambros. in Psalm. 119.
observe. Nay, Epiphanius tells us, That Christ is but our more durable
Sabbath; and we rest in this Sabbath, when we August de Civ. dei.
repose our hearts and hopes in him. Nay, a good Conscience, as Augustine
says, is the bed of God, the Palace of Christ, the Epiphan. lib. 1. Here Is. 30.
Temple of the Holy Ghost, the Paradise of Delights, and the Sabbatum dei est
illud quo ab opere exteriori cessare dicimur, et sacramentum interioris
Sabbati, ubi men's sancta per bonam conscientiam a peccato quiescit. Hugo. Rev.
2. 10.
standing Sabbath of the Saints: Thus holy Augustine in his tenth Sermon to his
Brethren in the wildernoss. A good Conscience indeed is our continual Sabbath,
our constant feast and rest: And therefore in keeping Gods Sabbath, let us be
faithful unto death, and he will give us a never ceasing Sabbath, when we
shall wear a Crown of life. In the saddest and sorest times, when Kingdoms are
shaking, and Cities sinking, nay, all Gods Ordinances seem to be taking their
leave in a Land, yea, when all externals in the world are at the worst, yet
then there may be an internal Sabbath in the heart, and an eternal Sabbath in
the heavens, for all those who are here conscientious in keeping the external
Sabbath, (viz.) the Lords day, with all holiness and accurateness of
observation. Aquinas well observes, There is a Sabbath of Sabbatum est duplex,
Pectoris, and Temporis.
time, every first day of the week, and a Sabbath in the breast, inward rest
and quietation: Now the one leads to the other, Aquin. 1m^ 2dae quaest. 100.
Artic. 5.
when we are Critical in keeping the Sabbath of time, we may be confident in
the enjoyment of a Sabbath and Rest in our bosoms. Piety on a Sabbath will
assuredly end and conclude in a Paradise in the bosom, and when we have rested
with Christ on his day; he will certainly sup with us at night, and bring grace
and peace with him. Rev. 3. 20.


Let us keep every day as a Sabbath: A good week will forerun Praescrip. 4.
a good Sabbath; as the Sabbath should influence the whole week, so the whole
week should prepare for the Sabbath: And indeed the whole term of our life
should be a continued Sabbath in two respects:

In cessation from the service of sin: Sin must always be our corrosive, not
only on the Lords day, but on our day; we have no vacation for evil, sin is a
spot on the week, though a (...). Ignat.
deeper on the Sabbath; as Christ is always the Saints love, so sin is always
the Saints load: How bitterly does Paul complain of his inbred corruption, Romans
7. 17, 18, 21, 23, 24. And so Augustine condoles his condition by reason of
sin. Alas, says he, Sin follows, I fly and yet I fall; I fight, and yet I am
captive; I run from it, and yet I am drawn to it, I would rest, and yet I
cannot be quiet one day; nay, not an hour. Now thus to rest from sin is an
every Qui cessat ab operibus se^uli, and spiritualibus vacat, iste est qui diem
festum Sabbatorum agit; neque onera portat in via, onus est omne peccatum;
neque ignem accendit, etc. Et in loco suo sistit, neque recedit ab eo. Quis est
locus animae? Justitia est locus ejus, veritas, sapientia, and sanctificatio:
Etomnia, etc. Orig.
days Sabbath; there is no day, but sin prophanes it, sin is the blemish of the
shop, as well as the Sanctuary, and is a brand upon the week, as well as the
Sabbath. It is observable, there was no death stigmatized with a Curse, but the
death of the Cross; but on the contrary, there is no day but is stigmatized
with sin and iniquity. Every day must be a Sabbath to us in abstinence from
sin. It is rarely observed of Origin, In the times of the Law, says he, the
Jews were not to stir out of their places upon the Sabbath day, Exodus 16. 29.
Now what is the proper place of the soul, but Righteousness, Truth, Wisdom, and
Sanctification, and whatever speaks Christ; and from this place we Christians
must not stir upon the Lords day. In the times of the Law, the Jews were to
carry no burdens upon the Sabbath day, Jer. 17. 27. And what is this burden,
but all sin; and this burden, we Christians, must not carry on our Sabbath. In
the times of the Law, the Jews were not to kindle a fire throughout all their
Habitations upon the Sabbath, Exodus 35. 3. And what is this kindling of fire,
but the inflaming of lust; and no such fire must be kindled by Christians on
the Sabbath. Now what Origin cautionates us against on the Sabbath, is as much
to be avoided and shunned on the week day.

In a disposition to serve God: So we must keep every day a Sabbath, though we
are not always in a Sabbath days time, Verum quidem est, Sabbatum spirituale,
nobis perpetuo colendum esse, sub novo Testamento. Wall.
yet we should be always in a Sabbath days frame; in such a blessed bent of
heart, as to be fit for holy business and heavenly employment. And the Apostle
advises us, 1 These. 5. 17. To pray continually, viz. To be in a continual
frame of heart fit for holy prayer. And the Apostle James, Jam. 1. 19. commands
us to be swift to hear, viz. Always to have Spirituale Sabbatum est, quo vetus
homo noster, homo peccati cum singulis suis actionibus, otio quodam veluti
sepelitus est; ut novus homo, qui secundum deum creatus est, vires suas exerat,
and opera sua perficiat. Muscul.
an open ear ready to hearken to the sweet and sacred word of God. We find the
Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1. 5, 6. describing four living creatures, having four
faces, and four wings: Faces ready to mind, and wings ready to move into any
part upon the work the Lord should assign and appoint them. And thus Gods
people should be always in a prepared frame of spirit for holy service; we
should be as cautious of sin, and as propence to service, as if every day was a
Sabbath day. The week contains no day for sinful work, the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.
And iniquity, not iniquities, any one particular iniquity: And so likewise in
the week, our secular works must not indispose us for heavenly Dies e septem
unus externis salutis mediis dedicatus, Sabbatum interius and perpetuum, magis,
et magis promovet. Hier.
services, and holy duties, but we must have heavenly hearts in our earthly
labors. It is very observable, that in the time of the Law, the word Sabbath
signified a whole week, Lev. 23. 15. And so in the time of the Gospel, Luke 18.
12. And does it not point out this, That we should keep our whole week as a
Sabbath, and that Sabbath-holiness should make all our lifetime but one entire
holy day. Our spiritual Sabbath, as Musculus observes, Must be continual, Romans
11. 16.
we must be always crucifying the old man, and getting our 1 Cor. 5. 6.
corruptions to their rest, that they may not be working nor employed to fledge
temptation into actual sin; and we must be always employing the new man, to
excite its power in spiritual operations; and this must be our daily and
continual Sabbath. This resting from sin, and this working for God, is never
unseasonable; and these two are the integral parts of a Sabbath. And thus to
employ our selves in the week, does exceedingly fit us for the Sabbath: Many
have little of the Sabbath in the week, and therefore they have too much of the
week in the Sabbath, they are strangers Mandaverat quidem deus sub veteri
Testimento, ut in ipsa septimana, aliquae quoque horae divino cultui
consecrarentur, mane imprimis, and vespere, cum sacrificium juge in templo
offerreretur, and perpetuo sacrificaretur. Wall.
to Sabbath-work on the week days; and therefore they are enemies to
Sabbath-work on the Lords day. Christians should attempt to begin heaven here,
and there is a perpetual Sabbath; our life below should shadow out our life
above. It must be confessed, our indulging our selves too much in sin, and
bemiring our selves too much in the world on the week day, does very much
unqualifie and indispose us for heavenly rest on the Sabbath day: But when we
have set our selves against sin, and have been spiritually minded in the works
of our Calling, not omitting the heavenly duties of prayer, reading the word,
holy discourse, and heavenly meditations on the week days; we then with more
complacency lean upon our beloved, and with more delight meet him in his
^anquetting house, Cant. 2. 4. on the Lords day. Holy weeks make heavenly
Sabbaths, and the more strict we are in passing of the week, the more savoury
and serious we shall be in observing the Sabbath. Walaeus very well observes,
That in the time of the Law, God had his daily sacrifices, Psalm. 133. 2.
Numb. 28. 3. as well as his double sacrifices on the Sabbath day, Numb. 28. 9.
To intimate to us, There must be something of a Sabbath in every day; nor must
the oil of holiness only be poured out on the head of a Sabbath, but it must
run down to the skirts of the whole week; the performance of divine worship is
calculated for the week, though the solemnity of it be reserved for the
Sabbath. Well then, let something resembling a Sabbath be found in our own
days, let a happy vein of holy rest with God run through every day. The Jews
had their morning sacrifice when they entered upon their work, and their evening
sacrifice, when they wound up and ended their work; they gave God the first,
Job 23. 12.
and the last of every day in holy and solemn worship: He that was Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, had the Tres sunt diei parts inter Judaeos,
prima pars ad orationem, secunda ad legem, tertia ad opus seculare destinabatur.
Alpha and Omega of every day; nay, learned men observe, that the Jews divided
the day into three parts. The first, ad Tephilah to Prayer, the second, ad
Torah to the Law, the third, ad Malacha to their work. Thus God had his part of
every day among the poor Jews; nay, double worship for single work. And let not
a repudiated Jew be more franck in giving God his time, then the redeemed ones
of Jesus; shall they have so much of the Sabbath in the week, and we so much of
the week in our Sabbaths? As the Apostle says, Romans 6. 2. (...), God forbid.
It would be strange if the branch which is broken of, Romans 11. 16, 17. should
look greener, and sprout more, then that which is grassed in.

Let us be earnest with God for Ministers, that their success may be great; and
that they may see of the travel of their souls Praescrip. 5.
and be satisfied. The Ministers work upon a Sabbath may Interior vita and
vigor gratiae ad crescendum, and adolescendum in fide, charitate; et
Christianismo hoc solius dei est. Alap.
be painful from himself, but it is prosperous only from the Lord; the Minister
throws the net, it is God brings the draught; nay, he may cast the net, but God
directs it to the right side of the ship. The Apostle assures us, It is God
gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. That Gods work prospers in the hands of the
Ministers, and in the hearts of the people, is from Gods smile, not from the
Ministers sweat: The Minister may have skill to open the Text, but God only
has power to open the heart. Let this God therefore be sought to, that he
would fill the Ministers sail with a prosperous wind; and that every Sermon
they preach, and every Sabbath they celebrate, may be as the bow of Jonathan,
and the sword of Saul which returned not empty, 2 Samuel 1. 22. And we have a
rare and rich promise to build and bottom our prayers upon, which is mentioned,
Isa. 55. 10, 11. As the rain comes down, and showers from heaven, and return
not thither, but Isa. 55. 10, 11.
water the earth, making it bud, and bring forth seed to the sower, and bread
to the eater, so says God, shall my word be, that goes out of my mouth, it
shall not return to me void. Let us heartily sue out this blessed promise in
holy prayer to the Lord: Strong prayers are the readiest method to make
successful Sabbaths, Ministers might do great things upon the prayers of the
people, they might convince conscience they Acts 2. 37.
might prick to the heart, and fasten truth upon the soul, and go off in the
evening of a Sabbath crying victory ovor captivated Converts, and lead many
lost sheep home to the great shepherd of their souls; we have many still-born
Ordmances, because previous prayers did not put life into them. It is prayer
that can give a good Minister to a people, Philem. ver. 22. And it is prayer
can bless a good Minister to a people. How frequent and pathetical is the
Apostle Paul with Ingens est orationum virtus, and potentia, ut Paulus, talis,
tantusque vir illarum open and subsidio indi geat. Theopil.
those to whom he writes to beg and importune their prayers, so Romans 15. 30.
Now I beseech you Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for the
love of the spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your prayers to God for
me. We may see, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, though resplendent with such
rich gifts, enriched with such eminent grace, and conducted by the guidance of
an infallible spirit; yet he stood in need of the people prayers. Nay, this
blessed Apostle not only sollicits the prayers of the Church of the Romans, but
he addresses himself to other Churches, to that at Thessalonica, 2 These. 3. 1.
Finally Brethren pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have a free course,
and be glorified, even as it is with you. Thus Gospel victories are usually the
issue of wrestling with God. And thus again Paul importunes prayers, 1 These. 5.
25. Brethren pray for us. And again, Heb. 13. 18. Pray for us. This holy
Apostle rests not so much upon his own pains, as others prayers, knowing that
the gales of the spirit, by which we hoise up sail for heaven, are promised to
earnest and importunate prayer, Luke 11. 13. And indeed as the Minister must
row with one Oar by powerful and painful preaching to the people, so the
people must row with the other by frequent praying for the Minister;
Dispensator domus dei curam hobet, in ea omnia regit, omnia ordinat and
distribuit.
They must strive together as the Apostles phrase is, Romans 15. 30. In a word,
one piece of service which we owe to the Sabbath is, that we beg of God that
the Ministers who are stars, Rev. 1. 20. may fructiferously shine upon, who are
light, Mat. 5. 14. may be a safe conduct to, who are Salt, Mat. 5. 13. may
thoroughly season and preserve, who are Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1. may feed and
refresh the people of God on his own blessed day.

Let us be much in prayer, that Magistrates would take care Praescrip. 6.
of Gods holy Sabbath. Magistrates are called shields, Psalm. 47. 9. Let us
pray, that they defend the Sabbath from sin and Lev. 19. 17.
profanation. Magistrates are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6. Let us pray, that they
would remember their own title, and commend Gods day to a holy and strict
observation. And Qui non vetat peccare, cum potest, jubet. Senec.
surely as children for the most part, are as the Nurses are, so Sabbaths in
Nations and Kingdoms are as the Magistrates are, we may feel the pulse of the
Magistrate in the observation of the Sabbath.

pray for Magistrates, because the eye of the people is fixed more stedily on
the Magistrates Sword, then on the Scholars pen, or the Ministers tongue;
Magistratical severity more awes and influences, then Ministerial entreaties.
That weapon gives us the deepest wound which is sharpened by civil Authority.
When a Ministers zeal is insignificant, In Sabbati observatione non Ministros
verbi tantum sed et Patres familias, and i^primis Magistratus versari decet.
Wall.
the Magistrates heat will be effectual; a Magstrates frown shall operate more
thoroughly then a Ministers check: When Nehemiah threatened the strangers to lay
hands upon them, they came no more upon the Sabbath day, Nehem. 13. 21. The
soft bowels of a Minister may be abortive, when the sure force of a Magistrate
may put life into the reformation of the Sabbath.

fourth Commandment is retinaculum caeterorum, the bond of obedience both to
God and man in the duties Custodire Sabbatum, per Synechdochen accipiatur pro
observatione totius legis, praesertim primae tabulae, quae religionem and
cultum dei spectat. Alap.
of the first and the second table, this Commandment is the golden clasp which
joins both the Tables together, and therefore it is much to be observed, that
keeping the Sabbath from polluting it, and keeping the hands from doing any
evil, are both coupled and joined together, Isa. 56. 2. The pollution of the
Sabbath, is the usual introduction of all other sin.

let the reins loose, to connive at vanity and profaneness on the Lords day;
the Nation will be filled with evil subjects, the Church will be filled with
corrupt members, and private families will be filled with stubborn children,
and licentious Servants; and therefore we must spread our hands before God,
that he would give us Nehem. 13. 17
holy Nehemiahs to hedge up the Sabbath with thorns, that looseness and
profaneness may not break in upon it, and that 2 Chr. 34. 33.
the blessed Sabbath may be preserved pure from the rapes of prurient and
profane men.

Let us take advantage from the Jews mistaken zeal toward Praescrip. 7.
their Sabbath, to act a real zeal toward the Lords day. The Jews were exact
to superstition, let us be so to Religion, they to fancy, let us to piety:
Indeed what was equity in the command, was rigor in their observation, they
would not light a candle, unless for the sick on the Sabbath day, as
Lippomannus Quod de igne non succendendo hi^ praescribitur, restringendum est
ad eum, qui succenderet ad parandos cibos, aut coquendos, aut ad servilia
munia. Rivet.
observes, nor would they heat themselves in frost on that holy day, as
Gallasius observes, no not acquire the greatest gain if it was to be
accomplished on this blessed day, as Vatablus observes, nay, not to dress any
meat, as Rivet observes, and they would not go out of their place on the
Sabbath, and therefore if on a journey they were in a wilderness on a Sabbath
there they stayed, and would not apply themselves to any place or person for
necessary accommodations.

Their strange fire should stir up our sacred heat, and if they would not go
out of their place upon their Sabbath, Exodus 35. 3.
let us not go out of our sphere upon ours; they would not kindle a fire, but
we should blow up our holy zeal: Sometimes duty gets ground by an
Antiperistasis, wrinckled faces make us admire beauty, and others slips and
transgressions Israelitae non fuerunt tabernaculis inclusi tanquam in carcere,
sed ad caetus, et sanctorum societates, etc.
are our alarms and cautions: If the Jews strained so much and were over fond
of their humane traditions upon their Sabbath, we should act as high, and be as
tenacious of our spiritual devotions upon our Christian Sabbath. Their blind
zeal must not only be the object of our pity, but the incentive of our piety;
and we should deem it a discredit that they should go faster in a false, then
we in a true way, let their ceremony be out-vyed by our service.

Let us fasten it upon our hearts, that the present Sabbath Prescript. 8.
may be our farewell Sabbath! Profaneness is the usual Vbicumque sunt, sive in
Agro, sive in Dom^, sive in Musaeo, Audire videor Archangelum tuba sonantem,
and clamitantem, surgite mortui, and venite ad iudicium. Hieron.
birth of presumption; we pollute the present, because we reckon upon a future
Sabbath. It was Hieroms custom wherever he was, to be thinking that he heard
the Angel sounding the last Trumpet, and crying out, Arise ye dead and come to
judgment. The frame of this holy learned Father very well becomes a
Sabbath Day: Every Christian should think with himself, I now enjoy a season of
grace, which may be my last good wind for Eternity. My times, much more my
Sabbaths, the finest of the Wheat, are in Gods hand, Psalm. 31. 15. And it
cannot be any act of wisdom to rely much upon that which is in another hand.
He that would not grant the Fool in the Gospel the privilege to see the light
of another Sun, may deny him who trifles Luke 12. 20.
away Gods blessed day, the liberty to see the light of another Sabbath.
Candles which are played by, are soon put out. Eutichus died for a sleepy, and
why not the Formalist for a Acts 20. 9.
forfeited Sabbath?

Now did we look on the present, as that which may be the parting Sabbath; how
then would we nail our eyes to Heaven in holy meditation, raise a cloud of
sighs, nay wrestle with God by holy prayer, and as dying persons catch at life
and salvation, and use Ordinances with that affectionate heat, as those lovely
songs we shall hear no more. Our Ear Ezekiel. 33. 32.
would be chained to truth in hearing; our Knee would be staked to the ground
in praying; our Heart would be making out after Christ, as those who are making
their last sally for a Crown and a Kingdom.

There are three things which should take up our thoughts on a Sabbath Day.

1. the sweets of our Rest above, where we shall hear eternally the musciks of
the Bride-chamber, and see our Beloveds face in our Fathers house, and drink
our joys from the John 14 2. Heb. 12. 22, 23. Psalm. 16. 11.
Fountainhead, where Angels and Saints shall be our society, and Rivers of
pleasure shall be our satisfaction.

2. The concernments of our precious Souls; how we may beautify our Souls with
grace, how we may quicken our Souls with life, how we may fill and enrich our
Souls with the word, how we may interest our Souls in Christ, and how we may
crown our Souls with salvation. V^ta carnis tuae Anima est, vita animae tuae
Deus est, quomodo moritur caro amissa anima, sic moritur anima amisso Deo, qui
est ejus vita. August.


3. The probable disappointments of an uncertain life. Our lives are but as
Candles in the wind, and every blast may blow them out. Now though the thoughts
of death bring us not nearer to our Graves, yet they often bring us nearer to
our duty: he that sees he has but little day, will ride the faster. Dying
thoughts will carry on living services; and we should be more earnest to
embrace Christ in the word, if we supposed we should speedily meet Christ at
the Bar.

CHAP. LV. England bewailed for its great and general profanation of Gods holy
Sabbath.
I Must conclude this Treatise, as the Prophet Jeremy did his Writings, with
lamentations. One great sin which Agnoscendum est abiisse nunc moribus nostris
christianam libertatem, in nimiam and plus quam Ethnicam licentiam, ita ut die
dominico omnia fiunt opera, praeterquam Bona. Riv. in Decal.
captivated Israel was Sabbath-pollution, and the same sin seems to threaten
England with ruin and destruction. Now the Prophets tears, Jer. 9. 1. do well
become the Peoples dangers; and when they are sinking, faithful Ministers
should be weeping. And here the lamentations over England may be divided into
five Particulars, as Jeremy his Lamentations are divided into five Chapters.

1. We may bewail Englands open profaneness upon Gods holy Sabbath. The Jews
once made the due observation of the Sabbath, the character of a godly man,
John 9. 16. and if that be Englands Shibboleth, how far is our Nation banished
from the confines of Piety? The woeful declining of England both in matters of
doctrine and practice concerning the Sabbath, is never sufficiently to be
bemoaned. In former times no reformed Church was so famous, either for
soundness Dies festos ma^jestati altissimae dedicatos, nullis volumus
voluptatibus* occupari. Leo and Anthemius Imper. a Baldwino allegati.
in judgment, or wariness in practice, in reference to the Lords day: But our
Apostasy began to be too notorious, when sports were allowed on that day, which
are the births of fancy, and the Nurses of corruption. Nay even at this day,
notwithstanding all pretenses to reformation, how woefully is Gods Sabbath
neglected, and ecclipsed by all manner of abomination; so that we may say with
Bishop Babington, The people of Israel might not gather Manna upon the
Sabbath Day; and may we go to Fairs and Markets, to Wakes and wantonness, to
Dancings and Drinkings upon the Lords day? Are these works for the Sabbath? Is
O melior fides nationum in suam sect am, quae nullam christianorum solennitatem
sibi vendicat; non etiam diem dominicum, etiamsi cognossent nobis
communicarent, ne Christiani viderentur, and nos ne Ethnici pronunciaremur, non
veremur. Tertul. de Idol. cap. 14.
this to keep the holy day? Can this be answered to God? No surely, we shall
never be able to endure his wrath for these things one day. Thus this learned
and reverend Person. I may a little invert Tertullian, O the faith of the
Nations, better then ours toward their own Sect; as who challenge not to
themselves any Christian solemnity, no not that of the Lords day, had they
known it, they would not communicate with us, least they should seem
Christians; and we Christians fear not to be accounted Heathens. All the
Invectives of former times may justly be levelled against England upon this
account. What is the Sabbath among us, but our leisure day for sin and vanity?
The covetous person is employed in his works, and he follows his secular
affairs only more covertly; the Formalist is buried in his sloth; the Youth of
the Nation are frisking and pleasing themselves with sports and dalliances,
with carnal delights, and sensual pleasures, as if they offered Acts 14. 13.
at the Shrine of Venus, or calculated their Sacrifices for a Acts 19. 28.
wanton Jupiter: the carnal Gospellers are refreshing themselves in their
Recreations, and their walks; and how few on the Mount of God in sacred and
heavenly duties? (...) jovialiter vivere.
Surely Plutarch had an eye to England when he derived Sabbath a Sabbos, which
signifies to live riotously. Indeed the Sabbath of our Nation seems to have
some such derivation; Gods Sabbath cannot travel up and down England, but it
falls among Thieves who rob and wound it: some wound it by profane and loose
actions; others by sinful omissions; and the most by sloth and recreations. And
thus Luke 10. 30.
this blessed day lies bleeding, and where are any good Samaritans Abominanda
and christiano nomine indigna diei dominic^ v^olatio, quae s^nct^ssimum Dei
Omnipoten^is cultum im^iorum exponit, ludibrio, and hinc omnis miseriae, quae
obscuratum ecclesiae de^us evertit, and ^inc calamitatis effluxit inundatio.
to pour Oil in to its wounds? And have we not found it by experience, that
scarlet sins and crimson transgressions overflow the Nation, because the
Sabbath lies under disuse, and is covered with scorn and contempt? The holy
observation of the Sabbath is that which brings on all duties of godliness; and
the Sabbath being slighted and neglected, the Cataracts of profaneness break
in upon us, and we are lead to all methods of wickedness: And this is Englands
skar; Gods presence was never less discerned, and what is the reason, Gods day
was never more contemned. Our Palladium is gone, and what can be expected but
an entry of ruin and desolation? And this, as Ezekiel speaks, Ezekiel. 19. 14. Is
a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation. A learned man observes, That the
profaning of Gods day is sin unbecoming the name of a Christian, and is the
spring of all those calamities which overflow a Nation. And yet this is Lam.
1. 7. Quis talia fande temperet a la^h^ymis? Virg.
Englands Ichabod, and in this it has betrayed its trust, when the treasure of
Gods Sabbath was committed to it.

And this is Englands Apostasy from all the pious Proclamations Psalm. 74. 9.
of those noble Princes, who have sat in its Throne: How did many of the Royal
Princes, who have swayed the Scepter of this Nation, lay out their Authority
for the suppressing King Ina, a Went Saxon, K. Alured. K. Canutus. K Edw. the
sixth. Q. Elizabeth. King James. King Charles the first.
of profaneness, and promoting of godliness upon Gods holy day, which was
their glory, and the splendour of our Nation: But the profaneness of the
present age upon this sacred day, has plucked this Pearl out of their Crowns,
and has put an eclipse upon that glory of our Kingdom, wherein we much
out-vied the tendreyes of other Nations; England formerly in this branch of
holiness out-shining the most reformed Churches.

And this is the sin at this day, which is the troubler of our Israel, and
seems to be a Cloud bigger than a man's hand, 1 King. 18. 44.
which threatens a great deal of ruin, not of water, but of wrath, not showers
to drench the ground, but to drown the Inhabitant.

We may bewail the formal worship of Englands Sabbaths: this blessed day
suffers in this Nation, not only by open Enemies, Ceremonia crebro repetitae*
but by cold Suitors. This is the Error of England, on her Sabbaths, we more
mind the bending of the knee, than Deo nauseam pariunt, quia peccatores impuro
cord plen^que offensis illas offerunt. Alap. in Isaiam.
the bowing of the heart, our Decency hides our Beauty, our Ceremony drowneth
our Substance, and our Gesture swallows up our Godliness. In some places of
this Nation, the Organ is the most pleasing Oracle; and the cringing to an
Altar is the only Emblem of humility; and the pleasing of the Ear, stifles
the devotion of the Soul. And is this to keep a Sabbath? What do we more than
the Jews against whom God poured out his complaints? To tread Gods Courts, Isa.
1. 12. To cry up the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7. 4. And to celebrate a Sabbath
with a bare appearance before God, or the nimble activity of a geniculation; Is
not this to offer the Case instead of the Jewel, to give the bark of a service,
and the paring only of a solemnity? Ignatius could tell us in the very
Vnusquisque nostrum Sabbatizet spiritualiter meditatione legis gaudens, and non
in corporis refocillatione. Ignat. Epist. 6. ad Magn.
infancy of the Gospel, That we are to keep Gods day spiritually, in the
meditation of Gods Law, not in the refreshings of the outward man, etc. And
Chrysostom speaks much of (...), spiritual works and exercises on the Lords
day. Is not the turn of an eye, the action of the body, or the suppleness of
the knee, not the sweetness of the voice, or the exactness of the quaver, not
the dexterity of an Anthem, which is venerati^n proper to Gods holy day: But a
melting heart, an obedient mind, an attentive ear, the acting Luke 2. 25.
of grace, and the enquiries after the Beloved, a Soul raised to experimental
communion with God, suits more fairly and Jer. 31. 19.
genuinely to the right observation of Gods holy day. This Ezekiel. 21. 12.
extrinsical worship, only tongue deep, and knee deep, and which is not
animated by a devout Soul, is Englands stain, and should be Englands moan; and
we should do well to consider cold Devotion usually foreruns hot indignation:
and it is only in the bosom of the Almighty, how soon he will further revenge
the quarrel of his Sabbath, not only as bemired by open profaneness, but as
slightly passed over by a specious, cold, and formal observation.

We may bewail the sinful abridgments which England puts up upon Gods holy day.
In former times, and so now in these later years, two or three hours signify a
Sabbath among us; Dominicis diebus tantum divino cultui
a little time in public is our Sacrifice upon the Lords day: the Lord may
here put the expostulation, Mal. 3. 8. Do ye servi^^dum est, sicut Antiquis
praeceptum erat de Sabbato, dominicum diem religi^sa solennitate celebremus.
Aug.
say, wherein have you robbed me? It may be answered, not in tithes, but in
time; not in the Priests allowance, but in the Lords day. If the people come to
divine service, and to the pittance of a Sermon in public, they have then
liberty to sport it in the helds, or to frisk ^t in a Maurisk dance; to be
social in an Alehouse, to be frolic in a Tavern without the control of an
Officer, or the stroke of a Magistrate. This is Englands sin, and this sin was
formerly punished by a Civil, and has lately been pursued by a foreign War.

But we may truly say with our Savior, Mat. 19. 8. Improperandum est contra
eos, qui unam, aut du^s horas ex integro die deo deputant, and ad Orationem
veniunt vel in transitu, and verbum audiunt, quasi festi^anter, praecipuam vero
curam, erg^ sollicitudinem seculi, et ^ent^is expendunt. Orig. Homil. 2. in
Numer. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 30.
From the beginning it was not so. Augustine tells us, Upon the Lords day, we
are to be wholly taken up in divine worship; nor are we to abridge the Lords
day, more then the Jews did their Sabbath, which was wholly kept to the Lord.
And this worthy and learned man was run into a kind of passion against those
who would spend some time only of this day in divine worship, and the rest in
sensual pleasures. Origin was very invective against those, Who would depute
two or three hours to prayer, or to hear the Word in transitu, by the by, but
their chief care was to consult the World or their belly, and to spend their
time in profits or delights. Chrysostom tells us, his opinion was fully, That
one day in seven was to be consecrated wh^lly to the worship of the Common
(...) of all, and to his service. And Irenaeus, who trod upon the heels of the
Apostolical times, freely acknowledges, That we are to persevere in divine
worship upon Gods holy day. Nay, the Fathers, gathered in a Die dominico ad
nihil aliud vacandum, nisi a^ Orationem, et alia pietatis munia.
full assembly, declar^ their judgment; That we being sequestered from all
servile w^rk, must persevere in the praise of God, and in holy thanksgivings ^n
the Lords day. And so the Fathers in the Council of ^^i^li, We must (say they)
be vacant for nothing upon a Lords day, but holy Prayer, and other duties
^^ncil. Ferojul. Can. 13. A. D. 791.
of piety. And the fiftieth Canon of the Council of Paris is very remarkable,
We must meet (say they) upon the Lords day, wherein the Lord our life arose
from the dead, and granted us hope of our Resur^ection, and wholly abstain from
our own delights, or secular empl^yments, and only be filled with spiritual
joys, and heavenly praises, and this with all endeavor of heart, and this is
our vacation on that day. Chrysostom in one of his Homilies upon Genesis,
seems to order our very gestures A veshertino ingressu ad altar in Sabbato
Judaico, usque ad sequentem vesperem in die dominico in officiis sacris
peragendis perseverandum est. Council.
on the Lords day, and says, our eyes and our hands, all this day must be lift
up, and stretched out to God. And a venerable Council gives us this direction;
from the evening of the Jewish Sabbath, to the evening of the Lords day, we
must persevere in holy duties.

But Englands practice has been a contradiction to these golden rules, and to
these golden times. When our evening service has been done, we have laid aside
the privacies of divine worship, and some to the Green to bowls, some to the
Trall. Can. 90.
Ring to dances, some to the street to Cudgels, and to other sports, which feed
the corrupt heart of an inconsiderate multitude. But in this, while our Country
is a Baalim, our Closets Judge. 3. 7.
should be a Bochim; and others wantonness should be our wound, and whilst
their hearts are a spring of vanity, Jer. 9. 1.
our heads should be a fountain of tears.

We may bewail the unpunished liberty which is used in England, upon Gods holy
day. Sabbaths are profaned, and the Jer. 5. 31.
people love to have it so, and the Magistrates love to leave it so; this is an
Evil to be deplored among us: The things which are Caesar's, are given to
Caesar; (and good reason too, when we have a divine Command for it, Mat. 22.
21.) But the things which are Gods, are not given to God. Gods day suffers, and
none suffer for his day. We have not only the Nehem. 13. 21.
merchandise of wares, but the merchandise of hell upon the Lords day; but
where are the Nehemiahs to restrain them? This is Englands sin, and this calls
for Englands moan; the Heads of our Tribes are not Zealous for the Lord of
Hosts. The day of God is torn by the Oaths of the Miscreant, it is stained by
the excesses of the intemperate, it is painted over by the cold worship of the
hypocrite, it is curtailed by the short services O quam redarguendi sunt
Judaei, qui sep timam vitae partem, otio, et voluptatibus impendunt? Senec.
of the formalist; Taverns and Alehouses, if not Stews and Brothel-Houses are
frequented and filled on this sacred day, and all these debaucheries acted with
impunity: And men do on Gods day what is right in their own eyes, not because
there is no King, but because there is no awe of God in Israel. Surely if when
there was almost a Tribe cut off in Israel, there was nothing but moans and
lamentations, how much more when a Sabbath, the day of God and our souls, is
Jud. 15. 6.
almost lost in a Nation; for this; let tears be our drink, and Jud. 21. 2.
ashes our meat day and night. And when the Magistrates Psalm. 42. 3.
become Gallioes for the things of God, let the people become Jeremies for the
day of God: Sabbath decays will soon make a bankrupt Nation.

Nay lastly, we may bewail the punished purity of Englands Sabbaths. The people
of God cannot be so good as they will, on Gods holy day. How often are the
Saints in the midst of Lew Sabbati opera humana, non divina prohibuit. Tertul.
their weeping eyes, bended knees, melting hearts, mounting minds, when
congregated in secret to seek Gods face, and to meet with Christ their beloved?
How often, I say, are they interrupted, surprised, haled away by Officers, and
the Sanctuary leads them to a Prison, their Piety is uncharitably called
treachery, and their devotion is unreasonably interpreted Sedition. This is
Englands misery and unhappiness; the Prisons are filled with spiritual
worshippers, and the Nation is filled with carnal Gospellers: Profaneness is
uncontrouled, but the most resined service of God is liable to poenalties,
Tertullianus de Cor. Mil. and Plin. Sec. in Epist. ad Trajanum Imper. De
Amelucanis coetibus Christianorum in die dominigo mentionem faciunt.
and pursued with force and violence; not because it is unsuitable to Gods
will, but it is inconformable to man's law. Now as the Primitive Christians, we
must have our caetus antelucanos, our early, because unknown, meetings on Gods
holy day, but surely it must needs be a great evil, to rout the stars when
gathered in a constellation, to hush away the Doves when they stock to the
windows; and strange it is, that man's wrath should be there where Gods presence
is, in the assembly of the Saints. But that the people of God, meeting on the
day of God, in the name of God, for fuller communion Mat. 18. 20.
with, and enjoyment of God, in obedience to the command Dan. 12. 3.
of God should meet with frowns and disgusts, should feel the sharpness of a
Law, or undergo the keenness of Mat. 13. 43.
the Magistrates sword; and all this in a Protestant Nation, Isa. 60. 8.
whose usual Motto was Mildness; This is a lamentation, and Psalm. 89. 7.
shall be for a lamentation. Isa. 4. 5. Ezekiel. 19. 14.


FINIS.
The TABLE.
A
SEnsual Actions to be forborne on the Sabbath day. 20. and so sinful. 22 There
shall be no Affliction in our Sabbath above. 218 The Lords day is of Divine
Authority. 569 An answer to the Apostles preaching in the Synagogues on their
Sabbath day. 570 The Lords day instituted by Divine Authority. 585 Not by
Ecclesiastical. ibid. Arguments to urge Sabbath-holiness. 668. 718. 732.
B
The Bounty of God in giving us his Sabbath. 186 Our outward Behavior must be
exact in Public Ordinances on the Sabbath. 277 The Sabbath instituted from the
Beginning. 526
C
God is admirable in the works of Creation 147. 191 Conscience is chiefly to be
dealt withal in Gospel Administrations. 259 The benefit of Chatechizing. 334
Some necessary Cautions to prevent Sabbath pollution. 407 Several Cases to
satisfy conscience in Sabbath Observation. 440 The fourth Commandment cannot
be Ceremonial. 489. 544 The work of Creation compared with the work of
Redemption; wherein the last exceeds the first. 642
D
Duties shall not want their reward. p. 3 The Sabbath must be spent in holy
Delight. 53 The Emptiness of worldly Delights. 58 Duration speaks the value of
every good thing. 209 The sweetness of Holy Duties. 229 Holy Discourse does
well become the Sabbath. 320 Several Directions for the better observance of
the Lords day. 353 The evil of Spiritual Doubts. 382 All days are not eqaally
holy in the times of the Gospel. 496 The observation of one Day in seven to
God, has its great advantages. 499 The wildness of that opinion, which makes
every Day a Sabbath day. 505 A seventh Day, not the seventh day, is commanded
in the fourth Commandment. 582
E
To rise Early well becomes the morning of a Sabbath. 85 Several incentives to
this practice. 86, 87, etc. The several Ends of the Sabbath. 191 Diverse Evils
to be avoided in the time of public Ordinances. 297 Several Examples of Divine
Justice breaking out upon Sabbath Breakers. 683 England bemoaned for
Sabbath-prophanation. 781
F
Holy Fruitfulness becomes the Sabbath. 56 Many Faculties and parts to be acted
on a Sabbath. 95 The Excellency of Faith. 422 The sore judgment of a Famine of
the Word. 680 The influence God has upon the Fire. 716
G
Many Graces to be acted on a Sabbath. 95 God is most Glorious in his Nature
and Essence. 128 The works of Grace deserve our sweetest meditation. 178 The
works of Glory to be meditated on. 185 Active Graces become holy Ordinances.
316 How to procure Gods presence in ordinances. 385 There are three Glasses to
see our hearts in. 445
H
We must look on the Sabbath as Honorable. 54 God most glorious in his
Holiness. 135 How we are to deal with our Hearts on the morning of a Sabbath.
263 Holiness is engraven upon the Sabbath. 733
I
Holy Joy becomes a Sabbath 267 How our Inward man is to be ordered in public
Ordinances. 300 How we must spend the Interval between the Morning and Evening
worship of a Sabbath. 319 The Lords day is a day of Rest, not Idleness. 427 The
great evils of Idleness. 435 Idleness on the Lords day a very great evil. 436
The Jews sometimes very exemplary in Sabbath-observation. 514 We Christians
are to out-vy the Jews in Sabbath-observation. 634 The dreadful Judgments
which pursue Sabbath Breakers. 676
L
The Laborers plea for recreations upon the Sabbath, answered. 33 Impertinent
Language unbecoming the Sabbath day. 49 God is incomprehensible in his Love.
143 Nothing in a Saint can make a change in Gods Love. 145 The Lords day
confirmed by all Laws. 619 What Christian Liberty is. 645 Some remarkables
concerning Londons fire, which began on the Lords day. 696
M
Secret duties befitting the Morning of a Sabbath. 89 The benefit of Morning
duties on Gods holy day. 104 The excellency of Meditation. 106, 124. Its
Nature. 107. How it is distinguished from some things very like to it. 109. How
much, and how long we must Meditate. 112. The chiefest seasons for Meditation.
115. The rich advantages of Meditation. 119. Meditation proper to every
Ordinance. 121, 122. It feeds our Graces. ibid. And amplifies our Comforts.
123. Its necessity. 125 The Morality of the fourth Commandment. 552 How the
Sabbath was made for Man. 648
O
Outward enjoyments are the reward of Sabbath obedience. 59 God is most
glorious in his Omnisciency. 134 The excellency of Gospel Ordinances. 285. 423,
424. 443 The first Original of the Sabbath. 522 And most probably it was
ordained in Paradise. 524
P
The Poor man's Plea for working on a Sabbath, Answered. 7 Rich Promises made to
a due observation of the Sabbath. 57, 63 Profanation of the Sabbath the
greatest Prodigality. 67 Preparation for the Sabbath very necessary, and
several incentives to it. 71 What those Preparatory duties are, which must
precede the Sabbath. 77 Public duties become the Sabbath. 93 Many Persons to
converse with on a Sabbath. 96 God is most adorable in his Power. 133 God to be
exceedingly admired in the works of his Providence. 156 Gods Presence must be
meditated on, on the Sabbath day. 188 Prayer well becomes the morning of a
Sabbath 239 How our Prayers must be qualified. 243 The necessity of the spirits
assistance in all our Prayers. 246 What we must Pray for on the morning of the
Sabbath. 249 Practice is the best use of Ordinances. 161 The sweetness and
excellency of the Promises. 269 Singing of Psalms a sweet, and an excellent
duty. 339 The efficacy of Prayer. 425 The advantages of Praying alone. 454
Miscellanious Prescriptions for the better discharge of conscience in
Sabbath-observation. 765
R
Recreations unlawful on a Sabbath. 23 Reverence becomes the Sabbath. 54 God
is wonderful in the most glorious work of Man's Redemption. 167 All the
attributes of God shone gloriously in the work of Man's Redemption. 174 The
benefit of Repeating Sermons. 327 Why the word Remember is prefaced to the
fourth Commandment. 660 The Resurrection of Christ a forcible argument to
Sabbath-holiness. 750
S
What a Sabbath days journey is. 6 The whole Sabbath is to be spent with God.
35 The worth of the Soul. 38 The Saints must meet together on a Sabbath day. 97
The Jewish Sabbath compared with the Christian. 201 The Christians Sabbath here
compared with his Sabbath above. 210 Some eminent types of our Sabbath above.
234 The excellency of the Scriptures. 272. 326. 456. Reading of the Scriptures
useful in the morning of a Sabbath. 273 Public Assemblies most pleasing on a
Sabbath. 274 The mischiefs of Sleeping in Ordinances. 280 We must be Spiritual
in our duties, when we come to Public Ordinances. 312 What it is to be in the
Spirit on the Lords day. 387 The rare effects of the Spirit. 393 466 How to
keep Solitary Sabbaths. 451, 453
T
Gods Truth is a glorious attribute. 139 Vain Thoughts must be avoided in holy
ordinances. 305 Two days in a week cannot be observed as Sabbaths. 569
V
The Beatifical Vision somewhat opened and explicated. 214 Unbelief a
destructive sin. 421 Variety of Sabbath duties delightful. 465
W
Secular Works unlawful on the Sabbath. 4. By Scripture. 5. By Authority Civil.
10. Ecclesiastical. 11. By Reason. 13. Works of necessity may be done on a
Sabbath day. 17 God is infinite in wisdom, far surpassing man's. 136 To Work
upon the Sabbath day, very sinful. 215 Holy Watchfulness becomes a Sabbath.
401 How to keep a Whole Sabbath to God spiritually and sweetly. 466
FINIS.

