ELEAVEN CHOICE SERMONS: As they were Delivered, By that late reverend Divine,
THOMAS WESTFEILD.

DR. in Divinity.

BISHOP of BRISTOLL.

2 CORINTHIANS. 10. 11. Now all these things happen unto them for ensamples, and
they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

HSAL, 43. 1. Blessed is he that consideresh the poor: The LORD will consider
him in the time of trouble.

LONDON.

Printed for J. D. and part of the impression to be vended for the use of,
Thomas Gibbes, Gent. 1655.

I have perused these Sermons upon PSALM 106. 19, 20, etc. and judging them to
be pious and profitable, I allow them to be printed and published.

John Downame.

To the READERS.
Friends,
MAn is very prone to evil, having a spring of natural corruption in him;
which being (as it were) pumped out by example, the stream runs more violently.
All the Kings of Israel (for ought I read) were bad enough: but many of them
are notoriously branded for this especially, their imitation of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat.

It has been said, that this our Nation is very prone to imitate others; and
it is to be feared, that, together with their exotic fooleries, we are guilty
of many of their gross enormities. However, it will certainly hold between
Israel and England, (as will appear, in the ensuing Discourse.) Our mercies
have not been inferior to theirs: Our sins have, if not out-vied, yet, at
the least, run parallel with theirs. And for our miseries, sad experience is
more then a silent testimony.

The former subject of this Book, though it be, for the most part, sad;
treating of Sins, and Judgments; yet the wisdom, and sweetness of the
reverend Author has brought honey out of the Lion.

For the latter part, Concerning communicating to the necessity of the Saints,
the practice of this worthy man was a pattern, even to admiration.

The most of these Sermons were preached at High-gate; which, indeed, was
highly exalted by the painful preaching of this Minister of Christ. And I wish
that our Saviors prediction of Capernaum, and David's wish to the Mountains of
Gilboa, may be ever spiritually, and literally far from it.

And thou, WEST-smith-FIELD, that were watered so long a space with the heavenly
drops of this worthy VVESTFIELD, as formerly, by the blood of so many
courageous Martyrs, who weekly suffered in thee, having been thus honored,
become not like the beasts (in thee) that perish.

And, if there be any that had relalation to him, who, like wanton children,
trifled out the time, while this resplendent taper was burning and shining; let
them, at least, make use of this inch of light: which, with Gods blessing, may
purchase them commodities for eternity.

In honor of his memorial, and for the furtherance of all that will make use
of this help, I have erected this his own pillar upon his grave: By which, and
the like advantages, that both you and I may be edified, is the desire of

T. S.

PSALM. 106. 19, 20. etc. They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten
Image.

Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an Ox, etc.


YOu have in this Psalm many sins of this people set down. In the three
former verses there is the mutiny of Corah and Abiram against Moses, and of two
hundred and fifty men with Corah; they envied Aaron the saint of God.

In these verses you have another sin of this people, a fearful one, the
sin of Idolatry.

There be some sins of an high nature, such we reckon the sins that be
directly against God; as, Atheism, Profaneness, Idolatry, etc.

There be some sins directly against nature; as, Sodomy, bestiality,
incestuous pollution, etc.

Some are directly against humane society; as, rapes, murder, oppression,
effusion of innocent blood, etc. Now, Idolatry is of the first kind, and of
the worst. Tertullian, excellently, me thinks, says, that Idolatry contains
under it omnes species peccati, all kinds of sin. There is treason in
Idolatry; the Idolater sets up a new God, as the Traitor sets up a new King.
There is falsehood, and lying in Idolatry: for an Idol is the doctor and
teacher of lies, Habak. 2. 18. There is theft in it: for what greater robbery
then to rob God of his glory? There is whoredom in it, it is often in Scripture
called by that name; it is spiritual whoredom. How often have I read that
phrase of men going a whoring after another God? Well, mark the Text; observe
three things here:

First, the Idol after which they went a whoring: It is called in the first
verse of my Text, a Calfe. In the second verse, an Ox. A young Ox, a young
bullock, a young heifer of three years old, I have observed in the Scripture
to be called by the name of a calfe. And, it was not a living young calfe, or,
a living young bullock: but, in the former verse, it is called, the molten
Image of a calfe. In the second verse, the similitude of an ox. That was their
Idol.

Secondly, consider the work of this people about that Idol; their sin, in
three things:

First, they made it, They made a calfe in Horeb.
Secondly, they worshipped it, They worshipped the molten Image.
Thirdly, They changed their glory into the similitude of it.
Then mark further, the cause of this sin, the root from whence it did
spring. It sprung from a forgetfulness of God, that God that was their Savior.
They forgot God their Savior. And then from a forgetfulness of those works of
God; and those were,

First magna, great works.

Then mirabilia, wondrous works.

And then terribilia, terrible works.

They forgot God their Savior, that had done great works for them in the land
of Egypt, wondrous works in the land of Ham, terrible works by the red sea.
This is the sum of the whole Text; I may not think to go over all these at
one time, it is a point that would not easily be passed over. There are a
generation of men that will compass sea and land to win us to Idolatry, it
were good our hearts were stablished against it. I will go as far as the
time will give leave.

I begin first with the Idol, it was a calfe, or, a young bullock.

God forbids any Image to be made to the use of Religion, of any thing in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth. God
specifieth all those places, because there is none of those places, neither
heaven above, nor the earth beneath, nor the waters under the earth, but this
foolish vain heart of man has found out something to deifie, to make a god of.

Some have worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Host of heaven; glorious
creatures, but yet such creatures as God made to serve man, and not man to
serve them. Some of the Gentiles did worship men like themselves. Some
four-footed beasts. Some creeping things of the earth. That same Dagon, that
you read of in the Scripture, had the head of a man, but the lower parts of it
were like a fish: Not to tire you with reckoning up particular vanities in this
kind, hear what the Apostle says of the Gentiles, Because when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God, but were unthankful, their foolish heart being
filled with darkness; when they professed themselves wise men, they became
fools. Fools! how? They turned (and mark that phrase, it is the same that is
here) the glory of the incorruptible God, to the Image, and similitude of
corruptible man, and of birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and
changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the creature
more than the Creator (says the Apostle) who is blessed for ever, Romans 1. 21.

A Question may be made here, why this people, since they will needs worship
God under a form, would choose this form? why a calfe? why a young bullock?

It is agreed upon by all hands, old, and new Writers, that they all learned
this kind of service in Egypt: Egypt was the mother of Idolatry, so Jeremie
calls it; Though all people under heaven had corrupted their ways, yet no
people had more corrupted their ways in this kind then Egypt: quis nescit
qualia demens Aegyptus? who knows not what base abominations, what dunghill
gods the Egyptians worship? They worshipped a deity under the form of a
Crocodile. Another deity under the form of Ichneumon, a rat of Nilus. Another
under the form of Ibis: and they had more dunghill gods then these, their
onions, and leeks in their gardens. O sanctus, etc. The heathen could scoff at
this foolery, that they should have deities growing in their gardens. But, of
all the gods they worshipped, the greatest, their great god, was Apis, or
Serapis; they worshipped him under the similitude or form of a young Bullock,
pyed Bull, a pyed Ox; black, with such and such white spots upon him.

Would you know from whence? Let me trouble you a while. Apis, a King of
another country, in a famine relieved Egypt, Alexandria especially: when he
was dead, they made him a god, and decreed divine honor to be given him: then
they must worship him under a form. They think of the benefit they had by
Apis; they had their corn by the tillage of the ground, by the labor of the
Ox, and they will worship this great god of theirs under the form of a pyed
Ox, a young pyed Bullock.

This people had seen this Idolatrous service in Egypt; and now they did not
more long after Egyptian food, then after this Egyptian god.

I pray mark what Saint Stephen says of this people, Acts 7. 39. In their
hearts (quoth he) they turned again into Egypt: Saying, Make us a calfe, make
us gods to go before us. In their hearts they turned into Egypt, when they
required of Aaron such a worship as this. The thing I observe from it, is this;

It is an easy matter for men to be drawn to the practice of that Idolatry,
that they have been accustomed to see practiced in those places that they have
a long time lived in.

He that would take heed of Idolatry, let him take heed of Egypt: the very
air of Egypt (as I may so say) is infectious in this kind. See here, they had
seen the worship of a young bullock in Egypt, and they must have a bullock. I
pray remember Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin: How did
he make them sin? He set up two calves, they set up one; he set up two,
one at Dan, another at Bethel. Where did he learn that? had he been in Egypt
too? yes, he lived in Egypt some space, he fled thither for fear of Solomon:
For when he perceived that Solomon sought his life, he went and dwelt with
Shishak King of Egypt, and was with him (says the Text) till the death of
Solomon, 1 Kings 11. 40. I say, he that would take heed of Idolatry, let him
take heed how he lives in Egypt.

The local seat of Antichrist (and what seat can that be but Rome?) is called
in the Revelations by three names: It is called Egypt, Rev. 11. 8. It is called
Sodom in the same verse. It is called Babylon, in many places of the
Revelations. It is called Babylon in regard of her cruelty. It is called
Sodom, in regard of her filthiness: and Egypt in regard of her Idolatry.

It is a hard matter for a man to live in Egypt, and not to taste, and savor
somewhat of the Idolatry of Egypt. We had sometime, in England, a proverb
about going to Rome: They said, A man that went the first time to Rome, he went
to see a wicked man there; He that went the second time to Rome, went to be
acquainted with that wicked man there; He that went the third time, brought
him home with him. How many have we seen (and it is pity to see so many) of
our Nobility and Gentry to go to those Egyptian parts, and return home
again: but few of them bring home the same manners, the same Religion, nor the
same souls they carried out with them.

Isaac had bestowed the blessing upon Jacob, his younger son; you know the
story, Genesis 27. But, when Isaac sent his son Jacob to Padan-Aram, though he
had blessed him before, the Scripture says, he blessed him again, Genesis 28.
If ever Parents had need to bless their children, they had need to bless
them, and bless them again, when they send them to travel to those foreign
parts. Can a man be in a mill where much corn is ground, and have no badge of
it upon his clothes? Can liquor be tunned up in a mustie vessel, and not taste
of the cask? Can a man live in Ethiopia, and his face not be discolored?
Mark, in verse 35. of this Psalm I have now in hand; It is said there, The
people were mingled among the heathen; and what came of it? They learned their
works. It is a hard matter for a man to be much conversant with Idolaters, and
not learn Idolatry. It is a hard matter for a man to be much conversant with
common drunkards, and not learn to drink. It is a hard matter for a man to be a
common companion with them that fit in the seat of the scornful, and not to
learn to scoff. It is a hard matter for a man to live among blasphemers and
swearers, and not learn to swear. O, Woe is me (says David) that I am
constrained to dwell at Meshek. Brethren, if by any means, by prayer, or all
holy endeavors, you can keep your selves from the woe of living at Meshek among
Idolaters, labor to do it: it is a miserable condition to live among
idolatrous or wicked persons.

But if divine providence shall necessarily cast you upon Meshek, and Egypt; if
it stand with the good will and pleasure of God, and there be no remedy, but
the cords of your tabernacles must be fastened among the tents of Kedar, among
Idolaters; then learn, and remember how Noah lived in the old world: he
walked with God, when all the world walked from him. Remember how Lot lived in
Sodom; how Joseph lived in the Court of Pharaoh, and Obadiah in the Court of
Ahab, and Daniel in the Court of Babylon. Remember how the Saints lived in
Nero's household, Phil. 4. 22. Remember a Church that held the Name of God, and
denied not the Faith, that lived in such a place where Satan's throne was. The
fish keeps the fresh taste, though it live in salt water. A Myrtle loses not
the nature; it is a Myrtle still, though it grow in the midst of netles.

It is a foul shame to live among good men, in good places, and not be good:
but it is an high commendation to live among evil men, in evil places, and
not be ill. Thus much shall suffice concerning the Idol: It was a calfe, and
they learned to make it in Egypt.

I come now to their work, the making of it. They made a calfe in Horeb. There
are three circumstances in that making of it.

First, who were they that made it? They made it.
Secondly, where did they make it? In Horeb.
Thirdly, of what did they make it? That my Text speaks not of here, but we
must take it out of the story. It was of the golden eare-rings that Aaron took
out of the ears of the men and women, of their sons, and daughters; and of
that they made a calfe. They made a calfe in Horeb.

For the first, the persons that made it: They made it. The Hebrews, the
Jews, would very feign put this from themselves; they say that there were some
Egyptians that were mingled among them; and indeed, we read that there came
out a great multitude, a mixed confused company came out of Egypt: but they
were not these only that made the calf, the Israelites themselves made it too;
They made it. Yet, I do not think that all of them had a hand in making of
it: I make no question, but some of them hated this calfe with a perfect
hatred, and them that made it, and them that worshipped it: they were but some
of the people that made it. Hark what the Apostle says, Let us not be
Idolaters, as some of them were Idolaters, 1 Corinthians. 10. 7. But some of them
were Idolaters; yea, a great company of them were Idolaters. They made the
calfe.

But how can it be said they made it? for, if you look in the story, we shall
find that Aaron made it? Aaron threw their gold into the furnace. Aaron
polished the calfe. Aaron set up an Altar. Aaron proclaimed an holy day: To
morrow shall be an holy day unto the Lord. It was Aaron that made it; why is it
not said, that Aaron made the calfe in Horeb, but, They made the calfe?

Mark those words, where this story is set down, Exodus 3^. verse ult. It is
said there, that God plagued the people for their sin, in making the calfe
that Aaron made. Mark, God plagued the people for their sin in making the
calfe that Aaron made. So the people, and Aaron both made it: the people first;
They made it. Take these rules:

A man may have a hand, he may have fellowship in the unfruitful works of
darkness, many ways: four especially.

It is the usual phrase of Scripture: 1. A man is said to do that that he
does not himself, but another man, if he command it; that is one. So David slew
Uriah the Hittite with the sword, because he commanded him to be set in the
Army where he might be slain with the sword of the Children of Ammon.

Secondly, a man may be said to do that that another man does, if he do
counsel, and persuade to it, and entice, and solicit to it. Thus the
Highpriests, and the Scribes, and Pharisees, are said with their wicked hands
to take Christ, and to crucify him, and to hang him on a tree. They with their
wicked hands did not do it, but they persuaded Pilate to do it with much
importunity: therefore they did it.

Thirdly, a man may be said to do that that another man does, if he occasion
the doing of it. It is said of Judas, that he purchased a field, Acts 1. ver.
18. This man purchased a field. Judas did not purchase it; but Judas, by
returning the money to the treasury again for which he sold Christ, gave them
occasion to purchase it: therefore this man purchased the field.

Fourthly, a man may be said to do that that another man does, if he do not
hinder the doing of it, if he ought, and might hinder it. The men of Tyrus came
upon the Sabbath day, and sold wares in Jerusalem: Nehemiah, that good
governor, he goes to the Rulers of the people, and says; What is this that
you do, and break the Sabbath? Nehem 13. They brake it, because they should
have hindered the breaking of it, and did it not.

We have sins enough, and too many of our own to answer for; we need not
answer for the sins of others: yet, we shall answer for the sins of others
too, for all those sins that other men have committed, if either we Command
them. Counsel them. Occasion them. Or not hinder them.


Aaron made the calfe: but yet they made it, because they would have him make
it.

Aaron made it. It is a thing to be considered a little. Whether did Aaron
sin in making this calfe, or no? Did Aaron well in yielding to the people in
making this calfe? Tantum Sacerdotem condemnare non audemus, etc. says S.
Ambrose, We dare not condemn so great an High Priest; and we cannot tell how
to justify, and excuse him: yet some, in former time, and one of late days,
in our time (but a Papist) has written a book, Munsius, de AARONE purgato, of
Aaron purged: He will free Aaron from all manner of sin in making of this
calfe; but it will not be: Should he purge him with Nitre, and with Fullers
soap seven times over, he could not do it. I see the Fathers are wondrous
careful in extenuating this sin; and we may do that, excuse it we cannot: we
must needs acknowledge it a very great sin in this High Priest.

First of all, say they, the people would have him do it, he would not have
done it else.

Well, be it so: he was now a Governor left under Moses; he should have been
more vigilant and have looked better to his government. The permission of an
evil, is as great an evil as the commission of it. Woe to that people that
are humoured in their sins, either by the Ministers, or by the Magistrates; the
one should check them, the other should punish them: but, woe to the people
that are humoured in them.

But then you will say, This people was set upon a mischief, they would have
it, there would be no remedy: Indeed Aaron told Moses so.

It is true, they were so: Be they so; Aaron should have been more vigilant,
more courageous, more resolute in his government to withstand them.

But they were importunate, and clamorous; they would never give Aaron over
till he had done it.

Be it so: yet, this importunity of theirs, though it may extenuate the fault,
cannot excuse it. Or, if you will say, it may excuse it: it may excuse it a
tanto, but not a toto; it may qualify it somewhat, but it cannot justify it.

But, say they, it is likely the people would have stoned him if he had not
done it.

It is like enough so; they were ready enough to take up stones; they did it to
Moses: but grant it, Aaron should have chosen rather to have died a thousand
deaths, then to suffer God almighty to be so dishonored. We know what some
said afterward in the like case; Know, O King, that our God is able to deliver
us from the fiery furnace; if not, we will not worship thine Image.

There is no question, Aaron cannot be excused in this sin. You may truly say
thus far for Aaron, that that he did, he did it out of fear, and out of
weakness, and out of Pusillanimity; he durst not displease the people; he did
it out of fear, and frailty. But take the sin in it self, O it is a
fearful sin in it is own nature. Look in Deuteronomy. 9. 20. and you shall find
what Moses says concerning it, that GOD was angry with Aaron for this sin:
nay, he was very angry with him for this sin; yea, so angry, and very angry,
that he would have destroyed him: had not Moses made intercession for him, he
had destroyed him. Now the anger of God is not wont to come like fire, to flame
out against his servants, but upon mighty provocations. Surely God was
provoked mightily against Aaron, that he would have destroyed him, had not
Moses made intercession. There is no excuse of it.

But then (This is a point of some use, let me not pass from it thus) Why did
not God so stablish this servant of his, that he might not fall into such a
sin as this? The Apostle says, God is faithful, and he is able to stablish
you, and to deliver you from all evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. The Apostle assures
himself, God will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me to
his heavenly kingdom: and many such like places. God was able to establish
Aaron, so that he should not have condescended out of weakness to this
request of theirs.

It is true: but it pleased God to leave Aaron to himself, he would suffer
him to fall; and you may think that God has some good ends in it. God, being
a good God, would not suffer evil to be in the world, but that he knows how
to order that evil to some superior event that is good. Surely, there was
some special end why God suffered Aaron to fall into such a fearful sin as
this. I will tell you what I conceive.

The first was this, to show that the Leviticall Priesthood of the old Law was
imperfect. How could the Priest of the old Law perfectly reconcile a poor
sinner to God, since he was a sinner himself? Look in Heb. 7. and you shall
see there, the Apostle shows the difference between our Lord Jesus Christ, the
High Priest of the New Testament, and the Priests of the Old Testament. Verse
27. The Priest of the Old Testament stood in need to offer for his own sins
first, and then for the sins of the people. The Priest of the old Law was not
only to offer for the sins of the people, but for his own sins; yea, first
for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. Now, how shall one
sinner reconcile another sinner to God? It cannot be: therefore, says our
Apostle there, verse 26. It became our High Priest to be another manner of
High Priest, to be holy, and harmless, separated from sinners, and made higher
then the heavens. That is one reason, to show that the Priesthood of the old
Law could not perfectly reconcile men to God.

A second reason why God permitted him to fall, was, that in so great dignity
as Aaron was now assigned to, in so great a place as the high-Priest-hood,
Aaron might learn to walk humbly with his God. There is nothing that will beat
down a child of God more in the sight of his own eyes, then the sight of his
own corruptions, and the conscience of his own unworthiness. Solomon tells
us, that All the afflictions that God sends a man under the sun, are to humble
him: And all that is too little. God is feign sometimes to let corruptions
loose in his children, to suffer his own children many times to have many a
fearful conflict, and combat, and Messenger of Satan to buffet them, a
prick in the flesh to molest them; he suffers them to have many fearful
trials in the flesh, to the intent that, there being such a Jebusite in the
land, such an enemy in our own bowels, such a thorn in our eyes, such pricks
in our sides, the proud heart may never find time to sit, and bless it self
in any gift or grace, wherewith God has honored it.

Nay, here is not all, God does not only suffer corruptions to grow and to rule
in his children, that he may humble them: But, God sometime permitts his
children to fall into some great sin, that they may not fall into Pride,
says Saint Austine. I am bold to speak it: I think it profitable for the
children of God sometimes to sin, to keep them from falling into Pride. As a
Physician, when he would cure a Convulsion, he does what he can to procure
an Ague: so God, to cure Pride (that dangerous sin in his children) many times
suffers them to fall into other sins, though they be fearful in themselves,
that they may not fall into Pride.

When men grow proud of any gift or grace that God has honored them with, A
man (as Gregory speaks) makes a sore of a salve: Therefore God suffers them
to fall into other sins, that so he may make a salve of a sore; that, when a
man has been wounded by his own virtues, he may be healed by his own vices:
That is the second reason.

Thirdly, God suffered him to fall, I conceive for this; to teach Aaron to
look compassionately, being a Priest, upon poor sinners, considering
himself. Remember the Apostles precept, Galat. 6. Brethren, if any of you be
overtaken with a fault, you that are spiritual (yea, they especially, whose
Function and Ministry is spiritual) you that are spiritual, restore such a
man with the spirit of meekness, restore him again; the Greek word is, set
him in joint again: Do you see him out of joint? handle him gently, as you
do a bone that is out, set him in joint again with the spirit of meekness:
Why? Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. That good Father, that
heard tell of the fall of his brother, he cried out, Alas! he fell to day,
and I may fall to morrow. O Consider thy self, either thou art tempted, or
have been tempted, or may be tempted, as that man was. The Lord would have
Aaron to fall, that he might look with an eye of compassion upon sinners.

Then, lastly, It pleased God to suffer him to fall thus, that he might be a
warning to us: Quomodo tener Agnus, etc. Alas! how shall the tender Lamb do,
when the Bell-wether of the flock is thus endangered? If Aaron the saint of the
Lord (as he is called in this Psalm) a man so familiarly acquainted with God,
and divine visions, and a man that had been so powerful with Moses in working
miracles; a man that approached so near to God, a man so long conversant with
God, a man that had gone of so many errands of God, as he did with Moses to
Pharaoh: If so holy, and so great a man as he, fell into so great a sin as
this; then let us learn to work out our salvation with fear and trembling.
Howl Firr-tree (says the Prophet) when the Cedar falls. Be not high-minded,
but fear. It is the use we are to make of it. So much for the first
circumstance.

The second circumstance is, Where they made this calfe. In Horeb. There ran
all along in Arabia, a ridge of mountains; it was but one mountain, but there
were two great tops of it; Sinai was one, and Horeb was the other; and you
shall find them sometime called by the one name, and sometimes by the other:
sometimes the whole mountain is called by the name of Sinai, sometimes all the
mountain is called by the name of Horeb; sometime by the one top, sometime by
the other. Now, this is a thing to be observed; they were not gone yet from
Horeb, the law was given in Sinai but a little before, where the Lord charged
them out of the fire, Thou shall not make an Image to me; they were but at the
foot of the hill, and had not tarried there much above a month after the law
was given: they saw mount Sinai before them, that was the higher top, and they
could not but remember how mount Sinai was all on a smoking fire and flame,
and with what earnestness God had charged them, Thou shall not make any
similitude of me: they were not yet gone altogether from the mountain, they
were yet in Horeb; and yet, you see, as it is ver. 13. They made haste, and
forgot God, and fell to this sin: so says God to Moses, Go, get the down;
this people are quickly gone out of the way, Exodus 32. 7. You may see it in
this. I stand not upon that point.

The third circumstance is, Whereof did they make this calfe? They made it of
their golden eare-rings, Pull off the golden earrings (says he) from your
wives, and your sons, and your Daughters, and give them to me. No doubt of
it, but the servant of God, Aaron, would feign by this have diverted them from
making them a calfe: He would feign have turned them from it, if he could:
He knew that all those people in those Eastern parts were much delighted in
ornaments, in eare-rings: they say, they wear them usually there to this day.
And suppose he could persuade the men to be content to part with their
ornaments out of their ears; yet he thought it impossible to get the women to
part with theirs. What? for a woman to part with her jewels, and ornaments!
This seems a thing impossible: You see they are so desirous of them, they will,
many of them, pinch their bellies, that they may lay somewhat more upon their
backs: We know there are many that had rather their bellies should want
sufficient sustenance, then their backs a superfluous ornament. You see what a
hard matter it is to get women to leave an idle instrument, or a bag of
vanity that they carry about with them; but, to leave their jewels, to part
with their ornaments, he never thought they would do it, though the men might
part from theirs: yet they all do, both men and women. We may observe how
easily men and women will part with any thing to maintain Idolatry.

I cannot tell, whether it be (as that Father imagined) the pride of our
hearts, that we are in love with the works of our own hands, with the
devices of our own brain, with the invention of our own spirits; that because
they are our own, we like them: Or, whether it be the vigilance of the devil,
that roaring lion, that goes about seeking whom he may devour; or what else is
the cause, I know not: but this I know, men are more willing to part with any
thing to an Idol, to a superstitious worship, then to the true worship and
service of God.

And for this cause, Idolatry may fitly be compared to whoredom: You see, a
whore-monger will be pinching and sparing enough to his wife and children at
home, but he cares not how expensive, and excessive, and lavish he be upon his
whores abroad: Thus it is in spiritual whoredom; men are never so niggardly
as in the worship of God, but they are content to part with any thing for the
maintaining of Idolatry. This forwardness of this people, even to pull their
very eare-rings out of their ears, to bestow upon an Idol, it will rise up
and condemn us, that are not willing to pull any thing out of our purses, to
the worship and service of God.

Many men, in this liberal age we live in, are content, with the Wise men, to
take a great journey to see Christ: peradventure they are content to fall down
and worship him; but they are not willing, with those Wisemen, to open their
treasures. Speak to them of opening their treasures, whether for works of
piety to God, or of charity to men, then they stand at it, as Naaman the
Assyrian, Nay the Lord be merciful to me for that. Brethren, I could speak a
great deal more to this purpose, but I am loath to trouble you.

Then, besides, I know how unnecessary this is in this place. I have had many a
time here, twice especially, a plentiful experience of your forwardness. I
have seen how your hearts have been enlarged in bounty toward the enlarging
of this place; toward the maintenance of the Ministry, and service of God in
this place. I need not speak of that now.

But yet I will exhort you now to a work of charity. Do you remember the
Brief that was read even now, for that poor town of Cambridge? Me thought
your hearts did even yearne within you with pity and compassion, to hear of
almost 3000. poor distressed souls, brought into this extreme misery,
through the The great plague in Cambridge. Aug. 1630.
hand of * God. Brethren, I need say no more; I beseech you give us, that are
your servants in ordinary, (here in the work of the Ministry, both of the one
side, and of the other; we are all brought up in the Universities) I pray give
us leave to repair to your houses, and, If there be any consolation of Christ,
any comfort of love, any fellowship of the Spirit; any communion of Saints, any
bowels, any mercy, fulfill our joy in this. I beseech you bestow such a
blessing upon that poor Town, and the poor Inhabitants, that they may be
occasioned, and we for them, to bless you again, and pray to God, to restore
that which you shall give, in the riches of grace here, and of glory hereafter.

FINIS.
PSALM. 106. 19, 20. They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten
Image, etc.
I Began to handle these words the last Lords day. There are three things in
them.

First, the Idol, a calfe, or young Ox, or Bullock.
Secondly, their sin in this calfe, in three things:
First, in making of it.
Then, in worshipping of it.
And then, in changing their glory into the similitude of it.
They made a calfe in Horeb,
They worshipped the molten Image.
They changed their glory, etc.
The third thing is the root of this sin, the cause of it, whence it grew; it
grew from forgetfulness of God and his works.

The God they forgot was their Savior.

The works they forgot were, First, great works. Secondly, wonderful works.
Thirdly, terrible works.


They forgot God their Savior, that had done great things for them in Egypt,
wondrous things in the land of Ham, terrible things by the Red sea.

Of the Idol I have spoken; and of their first work in making of it; wherein I
considred three circumstances,

First, who made it.
Secondly, where they made it.
Thirdly, of what they made it.
I now go on to the second thing.
They worshipped the molten Image.
This was the end for which they would have it made, and so consequently, they
turned the glory of God into this similitude: Here was their sin; which was not
so much in making of it, they might have made it without sin; but to make it,
to that end, to worship it, this was abominable.

Now, because these are dangerous days wherein we live, and there are a
generation of men, that will compass Sea and Land to make a proselyte. Out of
my desire to stablish your hearts in the true and sincere worship of God, I
shall, besides my custom, fall upon a matter of Controversy, and discuss the
question, between the Church of Rome and us, about worshipping of Images.
There is a great dispute between them and us, about this peoples Idolatry in
worshipping this calfe. We do believe the sin was sinful above measure: but
yet they would make it somewhat worse then it was; because they would not be
thought to be Idolaters, as these were.

The thing will ask a little time to discuss it, more then I have to day; I
shall but make an entrance into it. I shall tell you what order I will take in
the handling of it.

First, I will show you, That the making of an Image is not simply forbidden,
except it be, in way of Religion, to worship, and to serve God by it. That is
the first. They made it, and, they worshipped it.

A second thing I will show is this, That all application of divine honor to
any Image whatsoever, is Idolatry.

I will show you thirdly, That all Idolaters do change their God; they change
their glory into the similitude of that they worship.

I will show you fourthly, That the Church of Rome does commit as grievous
Idolatry in worshipping their Images, as this people did in worshipping of this
Calfe.

Lastly, I will show what use we are to make of the whole. I say, I cannot do
all to day, I shall but begin it; but have patience till I can end it: And if,
in the handling of these things, I allege either Fathers, or Councels, or
Traditions of the Church, or History, more then I use, or more then I think is
fit in popular Sermons; I pray bear with me, and consider whom I deal with,
with unreasonable men, such as will not be satisfied with the mere authority
of holy Scripture.

For the first point; The making of an Image is no act of Idolatry, except it
be, by way of Religion, to worship God by it: that is my first proposition. God
does never in the Scripture simply forbid the making of an Image. He says in
the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image: It
is true, but you must know, that that is a Commandment of the first Table: Now
the first Table concerns the worship of God; so you must understand it by way
of relation to the worship of God; Thou shall not make an Image. If you will
hear God expounding his own Law that it is thus, look in Levit. 26. 1. Ye
shall make you no Idols, nor graven Image, neither shall ye set up any Image of
stone in your land, to bow down unto it. So, it is not the making of the Image
that is forbidden, but the bowing down to the Image we have made; or the
making it to that end to bow down, that is Idolatry.

If the making of an Image were simply and absolutely evil, then surely the
same Art, and skill, and cunning that some men have in carving and graving of
Images, should never be attributed to the Spirit of God as the author of it.
Now you shall find what God says, I have filled Bezaleel and Aholiab with the
spirit of wisdom, and understanding, and knowledge, to work all such rare
curious inventions, whereof some were Images, as you shall hear anon.

God allows the making of Images to four uses, which I shall name unto you.

First, he allows us to make an Image for the distinction of coins. The first
coins almost that I can find in all the Scriptures mentioned, they were
stamped with a Lamb upon them, and were called for that cause Lambs. You read
in Genesis 33. 19. that Jacob did purchase a field, a parcel of ground, of Hamor
the son of Shechem; and he purchased it for an hundred pieces of silver, a
hundred pieces of money; so it is called there: but the Hebrew phrase is, with
an hundred Lambs. He bought it with money, so Stephen says. But why does he
say with an hundred Lambs? It was money stamped with a Lamb. So in Job ult.
every one of Jobs friends brought to him a piece of money, our Translation
reads it so; but the Hebrew phrase is a Lamb; a piece of money so stamped. As
we call that piece of gold that is stamped with an Angel, an Angel; so the
Scripture called that piece of money that was stamped with a Lamb, a Lamb. This
was the ancient coin I find.

Then that same shekell that we read often of in Scripture, it had two figures
upon it; it had the likeness of the pot of Manna on the one side, and the
likeness of Aarons Rod on the other side. Our Lord said to the Herodians, Show
me a penny: Whose Image has it? Caesar's. Our Lord disliked not to have Caesar's
Image upon a penny; but, says he, Give to Caesar that which belongs to
Caesar, and to God that which is Gods. God allows us Images for distinction of
coins, that is one.

Secondly, God allows Images for ornament. Solomon made a throne of Ivory that
had six steps to it, and on both sides of the steps, on the right hand, and on
the left, were Lions made; there were 12. Lions: It was for ornament, an
ornament of Glory; There was not such a throne in any Kingdom, says the
Scripture. Nay, farther: here you see the people made a similitude of an Ox
that eats grass; Solomon he made twelve such similitudes of Oxen. Look in 2 Chronicles. 4. 3, 4. you shall find, that the molten Sea stood on 12. Oxen that
Solomon had made. This people made the similitude of an Ox that eats grass;
Solomon made twelve similitudes, or likenesses of Oxen that eat grass:
Solomon was never reproved for this; this people was plagued for theirs. There
is the difference then; they made it for one end, and Solomon for another: they
made it for worship, and Solomon for ornament. God allows us Images for
ornament.

Nay, of what shape the Cherubims were that you read of often in Scripture, that
were made in the Temple, it is hard to say: Josephus says, it cannot be
affirmed, or conjectured. We usually think the face of a Cherubim was like the
face of a man; but you shall find there is a difference between them, Ezekiel.
10. 4. Every beast had four faces; one face like the face of a Cherubim,
another like the face of a Man; the third like the face of a Lion, and the
fourth like the face of an Eagle. These were all different faces; the face of a
Cherubim, and the face of a Man then are different faces: But, of what shape
soever they are, God commanded Cherubims to be made in his Tabernacle: yea, and
Solomon made Cherubims; not only those two Cherubims in the Sanctum Sanctorum,
the most holy place; but he made Cherubims all along the walls of the Temple,
and all upon the vailes of the Temple, and upon the brims of the vessels, and
upon diverse utensils in the house and service of God Solomon made Cherubims.

And, together with them, he made the Images of Lions, and Bulls, and Flowers,
and Palme-trees, and of Pomegranates: All these were for ornament.

I conclude then, It is lawful for us to adorn and beautify our houses: yea,
it is lawful to adorn and beautify the house of God, the walls, the windows
with such Images, as

First, may not hinder the people in their devotion.

Secondly, such as are in no danger to be abused to Idolatry or superstition.
That is my second.

Thirdly, it is lawful to make Images for monument. You know how the Brazen
Serpent was made at Gods command in the wilderness, and that though it were
the similitude of a Serpent; yet, notwithstanding, this was preserved afterward
as a monument for the space of 700. years, no fewer; for, as long as it was a
monument, it was preserved: but when it came to be abused to Idolatry, as you
shall hear anon, then it was broken in pieces. Those same Statues, those
Images of our Kings, and Queens, and Nobles, and great personages, in
Westminster or Paul's, that are set on their Tombs, to what end serve they, but
to be monuments? The Father may set up a monument, a statue, upon the grave of
his deceased child, or the child upon the grave of his Father. This God has
allowed us; Christian Religion never forbade it, and the Christian Church has
always practiced it; for Monument.

Fourthly, it is lawful to have an Image for History; there is an historical
use of Images. The Natural History of beasts, birds, and plants may be set
down by Imagerie: they cannot well be made known without the figures of these
beasts, and these birds. How profitable the figures of plants and herbs are in
Herbals, I think there is no man but he does know, that knows the use of an
Herball, or Natural Histories.

Then secondly, the Ecclesiastical histories of the Church, the martyrdomes of
the Saints, the sacred histories of the Bible, the history of Adam and Eve,
seduced by the Serpent, or the history of Abel slain by Cain, or the history
of Abraham sacrificing Isaac, or of David killing Goliath, or of Solomon judging
and giving the Child to the right mother; yea, and the history of the Passion
of Christ, the history of it, I say; this has been approved of in the Church
of God. We read anciently in Gregory Nyssen, of the history of the Passion of
Christ: The historical use of Images we condemn not, God and the Church never
disallowed it. So then, now I go over all; God allows us to make an Image for
the distinction of coin, he allows it for ornament, he allows it for
monument: he allows the historical use of Images, in Natural history, in
Sacred history, and in Ecclesiastical history.

But yet, let me give some cautions and proviso's about these Images.

First, no Image is to be made of the Trinity, to any use whatsoever, though it
be not to a Religious use. God forbids this Deuteronomy. 4. Thou heardest a voice, but
thou saw no likeness; therefore thou shall make no likeness of me. So in
Esaias 40. 18. To what will ye liken me? To make a visible Image of an invisible
God, it is no less unlawful, then impossible to make an Image of the Trinity,
says Damascene; who, though he was but an Image-monger, a worshipper of
Images; yet, he abhorred this, to make an Image of the Deity: there is no less
folly then impiety in it.

Yet, notwithstanding, you shall find some such Images in the books of
Papists: in some of their Service-books, you shall find the Trinity with three
faces; in some of their books, you shall find God the Father as an old man,
and Christ his Son between his legs, and the Dove between them both: These are
abominable, such as Christian eyes should not look on without horror and
detestation. No Image of the Trinity whatsoever is to be made.

Secondly, no false Image, no false representation: I could name many in
Popery. To paint the Virgin Mary now in glory in heaven, with Christ a little
Babe in her arms, is a false, lying, blasphemous representation; no way
answering the person and quality of them that are represented. The like I might
say of Saint Dunstan and the Devil; and of Garnets face in the straw, as it is
public at Madrill in Spain. Such like false representations God condemns,
and we abhor.

Thirdly, take heed of wanton lascivious pictures, obscene filthy pictures;
those are to be abhorred too. If evil words corrupt good manners; surely, lewd
and obscene pictures will do it more. Those provocations to lust that get into
the heart at the eye, do a great deal more move the heart to uncleanness,
then those provocations that get in at the ear; Segnius irritant animos, etc.
He that would have an eye to his heart, must have an eye to his eye.

Fourthly, take heed of all wanton excess in a love of pictures. There are
many men among us, that have spent even their estates in a dotage about these
rarities, and excellent workmanship. These rules observed, it is lawful for us
to make an Image; not in the way of Religion, to worship God by it.

Enough of that first point; let me come to a second. I will but touch it. The
second is this:

All Religious worship, given or bestowed on an Image, is Idolatry.

The application of Divine, Religious worship to an Image, is Idolatry.

First, Brethren, know the difference between Images, and Idols; for this they
charge us with: when we tell them of the second Commandment, Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image; Say they, you do us wrong to call it so: It
should be thus, Thou shall not make a graven Idol. There is a great deal of
difference, say they, between an Image, and an Idol. There is a difference
indeed in Ecclesiastical custom of speech, (and custom must prevail in that
kind.) And know how this difference is; Imago in the Latin, Image, and Idolon
in the Greek; they are all one originally: But we must speak with common
people. I say, Ecclesiastical custom of speech makes a difference between an
Idol, and an Image. And what is that? I will tell you: Every representation of
any creature in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under
the earth, that is an Image: but if this be to the use of Religion, then it is
an Idol, or else it is not. Omnis consecratio Idololatria, etc. The
consecration of an Image makes it an Idol, says Tertullian. An Image is an
Image, and no more; but if it be set up by way of Religion, to serve God by it,
then it is an Idol.

Let me give it in an example I showed even now: The brazen Serpent was set up
at first, at Gods appointment: Then there were miracles done by the sight of
the brazen Serpent; as many as were stung, and looked on that, were cured: Then
the brazen Serpent was a type of Christ; As it was lifted up, so should the Son
of man be lifted up upon the Cross: and it was preserved, as you heard before,
700. years. As long as it was a monument, there was no hurt in it; but when
once the people began to burn Incense to it, which belonged to the worship and
service of God; then Hezekiah, that good King, out of his zeal to Gods glory,
could not endure it longer, but brake it in pieces. Though it were set up by
Gods appointment, and miracles had been done by it: though it were a type of
Christ, and had been reserved 700. years; yet he would not spare it, but
breaks it in pieces, and calls it Nehushtan, a piece of brass: it was no more,
when Divine Religious worship was given to it.

Divine Religious worship is twofold: Inward. Outward.


Divine inward Religious worship is the worship of the heart and affections.
God requires the whole heart; My son, give me thy heart. He requires all the
affections of the heart; our love, our fear, our joy, our confidence, our
obedience, and subjection. Now, whatsoever thing it is that withdraws these
affections from God to it self, that is an Idol: There is the inward worship.
For this cause (not to give you other examples) the Apostle calls a covetous
man, an Idolater, Ephesians. 5. 3. He calls covetousness Idolatry, Colos. 3. 5.
The covetous man is an Idolater: Why? Because gold and silver withdraw the
heart and affections from God. You shall see how. Look upon his affections;
What is his love? He loves more the picture of his Prince upon his coin, then
the Image of God in his brother. Then go to his fear: he fears more the loss
of his estate, then he fears hell; he fears more to be damnified, then to be
damned. Go to his joy; he joys more at the assurance of his money, then he
joys in the assurance of Gods favor to him in Christ. Go to his confidence;
if any danger arise, what flies he to? To God? No; Solomon says, The rich man's
riches are his strong City; and whither should a man flee, but to his strong
City? He flees to his riches, he hopes that they will bear him out. He trusts
more in uncertain riches, then in the living God. He says to his gold, Thou
art my hope; and to the wedge of gold, Thou art my confidence.

Then look to his obedience, you shall see all goes that way. God bids him
give; Mammon bids him take, and he takes, God bids him scatter and disperse
abroad, and give to the poor; Mammon bids him gather, and he gathers. God bids
him relieve; Mammon bids him extort, and he extorts. God bids him lend freely,
looking for nothing again; Mammon bids him let his money for thus much in the
hundred, and he lets it. See now, Mammon is the god; Mammon has withdrawn the
heart and affections, and withdrawn the obedience from God to it self. That
which the Psalmist says of the Heathen men, Their Idols are silver and gold:
turn but the words, and you may say of covetous men, Their silver and gold are
their Idols: He is an Idolater. This is the inward worship. To outward worship
pertain prayer and thanksgiving, vows and oaths, erection of Churches and
Oratories, bowing of the body, all outward observances, the dedication of our
selves, or whatsoever we have, to the honor of that that we worship. This is
outward worship. Look, to what prayers are made, thanksgiving is rendered, vows
are nuncupated, Oratories are built, Altars are dedicated, Holy Days are
instituted: Look whatsoever is honored, with any part of this Religious
worship, that is made an Idol.

I shall show, when I come to that point, that the Papists, in all these
things, bestow Gods glory on an Image.

Now, Religious worship appertains to God, and to God alone: Ipsius est, etc.
It is his, and none but his: God will not suffer any part of that to be given
to any creature in heaven, or earth; if we do, it is Idolatry.

What say you to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, glorious creatures, may we not
worship them?

O, no; they are glorious creatures indeed; but yet they are such as God has
made to serve us, he made not us to serve them.

But, what say you to Angels? we are lower somewhat then Angels; may we not
worship them?

Mark what the Angel says to John, Rev. 19. See thou do it not, I am thy
fellow servant, worship God. We are not servants to them, they and we are
fellow servants to one and the same God, See thou do it not, worship God.

O, but what say you to the Virgin Mary? Is it not lawful to worship her?

I will answer in the words of the old Church, Mariam, etc. Let no man worship
the Virgin Mary: Let the Virgin Mary be had in honor, say they, and let her be
called blessed in all generations; but let God the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost be worshipped. Let no man worship the Virgin Mary.

Nay, I go further yet, The very humane nature of Christ, the manhood of
Christ, is not to be worshipped any otherwise then as it is united to the
person of the Son of God. I will tell you the confession of the primitive
Fathers; Confitemur, etc. We confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ is to be
worshipped in the flesh, in the manhood, but not according to the manhood.

Nestorius, that blasphemous Heretic, divided the person of Christ, (we
believe there is but one person, God, and Man) and made two persons in Christ:
He made one the son of God, that was not the son of Mary; and another the son
of Mary, that was not the son of God; and yet he believed that that same son of
Mary was to be adored, that was not the son of God. The Fathers in the Church
of God have abhorred this, and condemned this doctrine of Nestorius for
Idolatry: Damnamus idololatriam, etc. We condemn the Idolatry of Nestorius.
Where mark, I pray: If the very manhood of Christ may not be adored and
worshipped with Religious worship, but as it is united to the person of the
Son of God; if the manhood of Christ when it is worshipped, be an Idol (for
the word Idolatry implies so much:) if it be an Idol, not being united to the
person of the Son of God: then surely the Images of Christ must needs be Idols,
seeing they are no way united, neither to the Godhead of Christ, nor yet to his
manhood. I should have said more of this point if I had had time: I shall go
on, by Gods grace, the next Sabbath.

FINIS.
PSALM. 106. 19, 20. They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten
Image, etc.
OUt of my desire to stablish your hearts in the true, sincere worship of God,
I thought good to discuss the question between the Church of Rome and us,
about the worshipping of Images. This order I have propounded to my self.

First to show that the making of all kind of Images is not forbidden.

Secondly, that the worshipping of Images is Idolatry.

Thirdly, that the Idolater in worshipping an Image, turns his glory to the
likeness of that Image.

Fourthly, that the worshipping of Images, as it is taught and practiced in the
Church of Rome, is flat Idolatry.

Fifthly, I promised to show you the use of all these.

The two first points I have handled. Now I come to my third proposition, and
that is this; that

The Idolater, in worshipping an Image, changes his glory into that Image.

Mark the words of the Text; They worshipped the molten Image; and, in doing
that, they changed their glory. But I must tell you, I find the words read
two ways; sometimes, his glory, and sometimes, their glory: They changed their
glory. The Greek Septuagint reads it the first way, his glory. If you take it
so, his glory, that is, the glory of God, then we must distinguish of the
glory of God: Now, the glory of God is twofold; There is an Absolute glory of
God. There is an Relative glory of God.


The absolute glory of God, is that same incomprehensible, ineffable majesty of
the Deity, dwelling in light that no man can attain to. This glory it pleased
God, in some measure, to communicate to the Creatures, to Angels, and to Men,
in such a wise omnipotent manner, as is convenient and possible for them to be
made partakers of: This is the absolute glory of God; this cannot be changed,
no more then God himself can.

But now there is a relative glory of God; that is, that glory that men give to
God in worshipping of him, that glory may be changed: and thus the Gentiles
changed it, as the Apostle says; They changed the glory of the incorruptible
God, to the similitude of corruptible man, Romans 1. 23. And thus the Israelites
here changed his glory. If you read the words so as the Septuagint does; They
changed his glory: But I like not that reading, the other is better.

They changed their glory; their own glory: What was that? By their glory, is
meant God himself: They changed their glory; that is, they changed their God.
You shall have a place of Scripture, that will make this plain to you, Jerem.
2. 11. Will any Nation change their God? (says God by his Prophet) yet my
people have changed their glory (that is, they have changed me that am their
glory) for that that will not profit. Let me observe somewhat out of the very
words: me thinks it is observable; God may be called the glory of his people
two ways.

First, as he is the Author of their glory.
And then, as he is the Matter of their glory.
Thus old Simeon, when he had Christ in his arms, he called him, the glory
of the people Israel, Luke 2. 32. The Lord is my glory (says David) and the
lifter up of my head, Psalm. 3. 4. Among many Prerogatives that belonged to the
people of the Jews, the Apostle names one, and that was this; To them
pertained the glory, Romans 9. 4. What glory was that?

We may take it, as some do, for the glory of the Covenant; God was their
glory by Covenant.

Or else you may take it for the glory of Miracles, by which God brought them
out of the land of Egypt.

Or else you may take it for the glory of Divine vision and revelation, that
God vouchsafed to them.

Or (which I take especially,) by the glory you may mean the Arc, which was
the sign of Gods presence. And therefore (by the way) Phineas his Daughter
in-law, when she heard that the Ark of God was taken, Now (quoth she) the
glory is departed from Israel: and she named her son, that was borne at that
time, Ichabod; that is, Where is glory? For she said it again, The glory is
departed from Israel: for the Ark of the Lord is taken.

We may talk what we will of other glories; but the glory of any Nation
consists in this, to have God to be their God. The gracious, and glorious
presence of God, in all his holy, and blessed Ordinances, according to his
Word; that is the glory of any Nation under heaven.

It is our happiness, we have this glory yet among us. The Prophet Ezekiel,
in his 9th, 10th, and 11th. Chapters, shows how the glory of God departed from
Jerusalem. It did not depart all at once, but by degrees it went away.

First the glory of the Lord (in that vision of his) removed from between the
Cherubims where it was, and removed to the door of the house; and there it
stayed a while, to see if the people would turn unto him by true repentance:
It stayed a while upon the door of the house, and then the glory of the Lord
removed thence: Afterward it removed to the Eastgate of the entrance to Gods
house, the Eastgate was the furthest gate of the house, it removed thither,
and there it stayed a while: Then it removed again to the midst of the City:
and then from the midst of the City, it removed to the mountain upon the East
side of the City; that was Mount Olivet: clean out of the City it was now
departed.

We have the glory of God yet in our Land; and may it be the good pleasure of
God to continue this glory among us, till Jesus Christ come in glory with all
his Saints. But, brethren, does not this glory of God seem to remove? does it
not seem to fleet a little? O, should God withdraw his word from us, and the
profession of it: Should God remove the candlestick out of his place, should
God withdraw this gracious presence of his in all his Ordinances; then I tell
you, Mothers, what you should name your children that are borne next, Ichabod,
Where is glory? when God is gone from you.

I read of some foolish Nations that were wont to fetter, and chain their
gods, that they might not depart from them: Surely, our God cannot be chained,
nor fettered; but yet there is a way to hold him still, when he seems to be
departing: I gat hold on him (says the Church) and would not let him go,
Cant. 3. 4. I will not let thee go till thou bless me (says Jacob, Genes.
32. v. 26. When our blessed Lord seemed to the two men that were traveling to
Emaus, that he would leave them, the Scripture says, They constrained him to
stay with them. We may constrain our God; there is a holy violence we may
offer to our God, by repentant tears, and importunate prayers, by which we
may stay our God with us still: and this is, as Tertullian calls it, A holy
violence, pleasing and acceptable to God. But I stand no more upon the words:
now I come to the thing.

They changed their glory; that is, their God. How may a people change their
God? They may change their God two ways:

First, when they forsake him, and set up, and worship some other God in his
stead; as the people forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth, Judges 2.
13. This is the grossest kind of Idolatry: This is a breach of the first
Commandment.

Or secondly, a people may change their God, when they change the truth of God
into a lie, when they represent and worship God in an Image, when they
represent God in a corporeal, a visible, a finite, a circumscribed Majesty;
this is to change a God: this is against the second Commandment. And you must
know, that thus the people changed their God here at this time; for, we do
not think, that they made this calfe to be their god. Their sin was bad
enough, let not us make it worse then it was. They had cast off now all
Religion, and the fear of God, let not us think they had cast off sense and
reason with it. Can we imagine, that this people were such calves, as to
think, that the calf that they themselves had made yesterday, was the very God
that brought them out of Egyt three months before the calfe was made? Never
imagine that; they took not this calfe to be their god. What then? They took
it to be a figurative sign of their god. I know they call it their god; These
are the gods that brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Or, as it is in
Nehemiah, chap. 9. verse 18. This is thy God, O Israel, that brought thee out
of the land of Egypt. But, as this Image is called a calfe in my Text, They
made a calfe in Horeb; though it was no calfe, but the Image of a calfe: So
they called it their god; but they did not think it to be their god; they
took it as an Image of their god, as a figurative sign of their god:
therefore Aaron proclaims, To morrow is an holy day to Jehovah; not to the
calfe, but to Jehovah, whom they worshipped in the calfe.

I pray mark this rule that I shall give you: The truth of God is turned to a
lie, and God is changed to the Image that is worshipped; though God himself,
and none but he, be worshipped in that Image, I say, God is changed into that
Image that is worshipped for him, though the true God, and none but he, be
worshipped in that Image.

Here is the reason of it: The rule of Divine worship is not the will of the
worshipper, but it is the will of him that is worshipped: Now, it was never
Gods will to be worshipped in an Image. Take a similitude: Suppose a subject, a
vassal, should devise an honor of his own brain to his Sovereign, to his
King; and he should set up a toad, and he will have it in a glass, and come
every morning, and bow to that toad; and being asked why he did so, he should
say; O, I do it not to the toad, but to the honor of my Sovereign and
Prince: do you think this Prince will like well to be resembled by a toad?

I tell you, brethren, there is a thousand times a greater disproportion
between Almighty God, and an Image set up for him, then there is between a
Prince, and a toad. Not to speak of that infinite inequality and distance that
is between God, and a mortal man; there is a great distance even between a
toad, and an Idol, a great difference: For,

The toad is the workmanship of God; an Idol, as is an Idol, it is the
workmanship of man.

A toad, it is a living creature, it has sense and motion; the Image is a
senseless block, it has neither life nor motion.

Therefore hear how it pleases the Spirit of God, in Scripture, to call
consecrated Images; he calls them sometimes lies, sometimes vanities,
sometimes (nay often) abominations, sometime Dung-hill-gods, sometimes Devils;
You worshipped devils: What devils? Idols, the work of their own hands,
Revel. 9. 20. I pray, hear, how the Spirit of God in Scripture shows his
detestation of all Images in his service. Hearken how he thunders in the
second Commandment; Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image; thou
shall not bow down and worship it. Hearken what the Prophet Esaias says:
Confounded be all they that worship Images. Hearken what the Apostle says in
the New Testament; Babes, take heed of Idols, 1 John c. ult. v. ult.

I pray look over the Bible, and see if ever you find any of Gods children
(except at such times as they had corrupted their ways) worshipping of Images.
Enough out of Scripture against Images.

Now, because we are in this controversy to deal with such men whom the
authority of Scripture does not satisfy, such unreasonable men as are not
content with the authority of Scripture; and because they say this stands upon
tradition, the worshipping of Images in the Church: I pray give me leave a
little, besides my custom, to show you the testimony of the Fathers, the
determination of Councels, and the long tradition of the Church against Images.
Of every one a word, and some few of many. There is no point that a man may be
so copious in as in this.

First, for Fathers: Fieri non potest, etc. so Origin. It is not possible that
a man should know God, and be a suppliant to an Image. There is no doubt (says
Lactantius) but there is no Religion, where there is a worshipping of Images.
It is a most indigne thing (says Tertullian) that the Image of a dead man
should be worshipped by man, that is the Image of the living God. We make no
figure, or representation of the Saints (says Anthelopius Bishop of Hiponium.
We have no need of them (says Ambrose:) God will not be worshipped by a
stone. We worship no Image (says Austine) but that Image that is the same that
God himself is; he means Christ, the substantial Image of the Father. I
could go on: but this is enough.

Come then to Councels: The Council of Illeberos in Spain; for, at that time,
by the negligence of the Bishops, Images were crept into the Church: then that
Council decreed, there should be no pictures in the Church. The Constantinople
Council condemned all Images in the Church of God: and so did the Council at
Frankfort under Charles the Great.

For the Tradition of the Church: For three hundred years after Christ, it is
confessed by some of our Adversaries themselves, that there were no Images in
the Churches of God. Three hundred years after that, six hundred years after
Christ, then began Images in the Churches; then the people began to yield some
worship to them. Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, condemned the worshipping
of them: He allowed them, and he did ill to allow them to be in the Church,
to be provocations to Idolatry; yet, he condemned the worshipping of them.
Thus it continued six hundred years after Christ. Between six and eight
hundred years, there came a marvelous stir in the Church of God, between the
Eastern and the Western Churches, about the worshipping of Images. The
Bishops of the West, under Rome, were all for Images: The good Emperor of the
East was against it; a bloody war there was about it, and thus it continued for
above an hundred years: Then Minera, the Empress, in the minority of her
Son, a cruel Idolatrous woman (and mark when you will, Idolatry is cruel)
she caused the second Nycene Council to be called; and there was first
decreed the worshipping of Images in the Church of God, in the year of our
Lord 788. Till then, Images were never appointed publicly to be worshipped in
the Church: yea, after that time, the worshipping of Images got not a peaceable
quiet profession in the Church of God. Charles the Great, Emperor in the West,
mightily opposed it: he called his Bishops together at Franckford; they
mightily opposed the worshipping of Images.

Yea, I pray mark, that duty that concerns us in our Kingdom: Charles the
Great, he sent that Act of that second idolatrous Nycene Council to our
Bishops in England, to know how they liked it: They said, Alas for woe! we
find in those Acts many things against Christian Religion, especially this,
that the worshipping of Images is decreed, which the Church of God curses.
Mark, our Bishops Forefathers in England, about eight hundred years since,
held that a doctrine, which the Church of God curses; yea, and that, against
all the Tables of Gods Law, against the preaching of the Prophets, against the
institution of the Apostles, against the custom of the old Church, against the
practice of the primitive Church, against the clear testimonies of the
Fathers, against the determination of Councels, against a continued Tradition
for almost eight hundred years together. The beauty of the Church (as one
complains) in defiance of God and Man, is now polluted with the very filth of
Paganism; and Christian Churches are pestred, as much as ever the heathen
Temples were, with Idols.

I come now to the proof of that; that is the fourth point: viz. That,

The worshipping of Images, as it is taught, and practiced in the Church of
Rome, is plain Paganism and Idolatry.

The Paganish and Popish Idolatry is all one. I say, the worshipping of Images,
as it is taught and practiced in the Church of Rome, is plain heathenish
Idolatry.

How is it taught? and how is it practiced? For the doctrine of their Church it
is hard for a man to set it down. The determination of the Council of Trent
about it, is a very nose of wax; you may turn it any way. They tell us of our
divisions among our selves: It is a wonder to see how they interferre, and
strike one on another in the point of worshipping of Images: It is hard to say
what they teach. But I will tell you thus much; Isolius the Jesuit says, This
is the constant opinion of the Divines of our Church, that Images are to be
worshipped with the same worship that is due to him whose Image it is. This was
the doctrine of Thomas of Aquine, whom they make a Saint. This was the doctrine
of all his followers. This was the doctrine of Nauclantus, a Bishop in Italy,
upon Romans 1. We do not (says he) worship before an Image, as some men
are wont casually to speak: but we worship the Image it self, and that with
the same worship that is due to him whose Image it is. Peter Precavaria, a
great professor of Divinity in Spain, says, This doctrine is the only true,
and pious doctrine, agreeable to the decrees of the Christian faith. He
alleges nineteen of the special Schoolmen that all were of this opinion
besides himself. We take this then to be the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that Images are to be worshipped with the same worship that is due to him whose
Image it is.

They that have traveled into foreigne parts have found, that the practice of
that Church is as bad as these Theorems. Confessed by some of the modest sort
of them, that their people were grown to a kind of piety, that did not differ
much from impiety: You will say it, if you consider,

First, the Image it self.

Then the worship that is given to that Image.

And then the rites and ceremonies, in the performance of that worship.

Consider first the Images themselves: What difference can you find in the
Images, between the Popish Images, and the Images of the Gentiles?

Look to the matter of them; they are the very same. The matter of the Gentiles
Images was, silver, and gold, and brass, and wood, and stone; this is the
matter of Popish Images.

Look to the outward form of their Images; they are the very same. The
Gentiles Images were the work of men's hands, they had eyes, and could not see;
they had ears, and could not hear; they had mouths, and could not speak;
they had hands, and could not work; they had feet, and could not walk. Popish
Images, they see no more, they hear no more, they speak no more, they do no
more, they walk no further then the heathens Images. Thus much for the Image
it self.

Then come secondly to the acts of devotion performed to these Images. The
Gentiles were wont to bow to them, so do the Papists. The Gentiles were wont
to pray to them, so do the Papists. The Gentiles were wont to render thanks to
them, so do the Papists. The Gentiles were wont to dedicate themselves, and
all that they had to their Idols, so do the Papists. The Gentiles nuncupated
vows to them, so do the Papists. The Gentiles were wont to swear by them, so
do the Papists. The Gentiles were wont to set up Candles to them, so do the
Papists. The Gentiles were wont to burn incense to them, so do the Papists.
They yield the same acts of devotion to their Images, that the Gentiles did to
theirs.

Then come to their rites and ceremonies in yielding these acts. I pray read
at your leisure the sixth Chapter of Baruch; you will say it is an Apocryphal
book, and I confess it is so; but yet with them it is Canonical, and so is
good Scripture against them. The author of that Chapter, shows what the
people shall see when they come to Babylon; says he, there you shall see an
Image of gold, or of silver, or of wood, or brass, or stone: you shall see it
clad in purple, with a scepter in it is hand; or, peradventure, trimmed up
garishly, as a virgin that loves to go gay. You shall see such an Image
carried upon men's shoulders in a solemn procession, and a number of people
before, and behind it, adoring and worshipping it: You shall see the Priests
with their shaven heads and beards taking off those offerings that are offered
to those Images, and bestowing them upon common harlots. You shall see (says
he) candles lighted to them, you shall see perfume burned to them, you shall
hear vows nuncupated to them, you shall see oblations and offerings given to
them: and all this to such an Image as is no better (says he) then a
scarecrow in a garden of Cucumbers.

Now those that have ever seen the processions that are in Paris, or the Lady
of Heige at Iquiers in Flanders, or have ever seen the worship in Italy, or
Spain; they can bear witness that they have seen all these things done, and
a number of fooleries more besides these.

We may think they have somewhat to say for themselves; and, in a word or
two, you shall hear it.

First, they say, they worship not the Image, but they worship him in that
Image whose Image it is.

Mark, first they have no excuse for the worshipping of Images, but the same
that the heathens had; their worship is heathenish, and so is their excuse:
For, when the Fathers, in the first years of the Church, challenged the
heathen for the worshipping of Images: What (say they) do you think us such
blocks, as to worship these blocks? They have the same.

Again, it is not true that they say; for, as I said before, they conclude
they worship the Image. Bellarmine proves, that the worship properly belongs to
the Image.

Again, suppose they intended not to worship the Image, but God in it: Know,
that the rule of divine worship is not man's intention, but Gods will. Mark it
in the example I gave before, of a man honoring his Prince in a toad. We
inquire not of the will of the worshipper, but of him that is worshipped. Let
them show that it is Gods will to be worshipped in an Image, and we will not
charge them with Idolatry.

But, say they, do not we do reverence to the chair of state, in honor to
the King, when the King is not there?

We do indeed a civil reverence to it; but who appointed an Image to be the
chair of state to the King of heaven? The reverence we do to the chair of
state, is according to the will of the Prince; it is his will it should be
done: But where can they tell us it is the will of God that we should
reverence and worship him in a base inglorious abomination?

Yea, but say they, Images in the Church of God, have been accounted Lay-means
books.

It is true, they have called them so; but I say that again, they are books
prohibited, they are not books that come forth Cum Privilegio: God does not
allow such books as these. When the Bishops in their Churches were painful in
their places, and taught the people out of the Word; the people needed not
these books: but when Teachers came to be Idols, then Idols came to be
Teachers.

Yea, but say they, the worship that we give to Images, we give it not
properly; it is improperly, it is analogice, repraesentative, reductive: these
are Bellarmine's words, and many more such distinctions.

O, Brethren, these are the men that know how to rob God of his glory, and yet
they know how to deceive, and delude the world with distinctions; there is no
place so plain, but they can elude it with distinctions. But in the mean time,
what wrong is it to Gods people to bring them to horrible gross Idolatry, and
then to seek to work and wind them out with such new distinctions, as the
poor people understand not, nor, peradventure, they themselves?

If any man desire to be better satisfied about the point of worshipping of
Images, I desire him to read the third Homily in our Church, set forth by the
Church against the peril of Idolatry, and he shall find abundant
satisfaction.

There is yet one point to be handled, it is the use that we are to make of
this, and of the whole history: but the time is past, I must leave it for the
next day.

FINIS.
PSALM. 106. 19, 20, 21, 22. They made a calfe in Horeb: and worshipped the
molten Image.

Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eats grass.

They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt:

Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the Red Sea.


THere remains now but one thing more concerning this worshipping of Images,
that is, the use that you are to make of all this that you have heard
concerning it. It is this, by way of exhortation: Let me exhort you to hate,
and abhor, and detest all Idolatry if it be Image Worship, whether
heathenish, or popish.

Holy David, in Psalm 119. brings many arguments to prove his love to God, and
to his Word; and one argument above all other (for he repeates it often) is
this, his hatred of false ways; he means false doctrine, all falsehood in
doctrine, and falsehood in life: In verse 113. I hate all inventions; but thy
Law do I love. Ver. 163. I hate and abhor all falsehood, but thy Law do I
love. And thus he goes on in many places more. Now then, if our hatred of
falsehood, be an argument of our love to the truth; if such as is our hatred to
error, is our love to true Religion; then surely, brethren, we are fallen
from our first love, because we are fallen from our first hatred of Popery and
Superstition. We are grown now to have a better opinion of Image Worship then
we had before. We are grown almost to a very neutrality in Religion.

The desire of my soul is, to preserve your hearts upright in the holy,
sincere worship of God: therefore, I pray, let me commend four caveats to you,
with which I will conclude this point.

The first is this, it is that of Saint John, 1 John Chap. ult. Ver. ult.
Babes, (says the Apostle) keep your selves from Idols. Mark, he says not
your selves from Idolatry, but from Idols; not ab officio, as Tertullian
speaks, but ab effigy: not from the service of Idols, but from Idols; from
such Images as may be abused to Idolatry.

God in the old Law forbad his people to desire the gold of an Image: they may
not desire so much as the gold of an Image; For it will be as a snare to thee,
says God, Deuteronomy. 7. 25. David, he met with the Philistines Images; it is
likely they were of gold, or silver, or the like: and what does he with them?
He burns them every one, 2 Samuel 5. 20.

The brazen serpent, though it were set up at the first (as you heard) by Gods
own command; though there were miracles wrought by the sight of it; though it
were kept seven hundred years, as an excellent monument of Gods mercy; though
it were a type and figure of Christ; Even as the brazen serpent was lifted up
in the wilderness, so shall the Son of man be lifted up: yet good Hezekiah,
when he saw incense burned to it, would not forbid the burning of incense, but
he takes the serpent, and breaks it, and stamps it in pieces, and calls it
Nehushtan, it was a piece of brass, and no more.

What did Moses in this history, when he saw the calf? Though it were made of
gold, and there might have been some use of gold among the poor people, it
might have done good to a number of them; yet he would not keep the gold, he
burns it in the fire, he stampes it to powder, he beats it as small as
dust, Deuter. 9. ver. 21. And he is not yet revenged enough of this Image; he
casts the dust into the brook that ran out of Horeb, and made the people
drink of that water: he would not have the lest memorial of this Image left.

Let me tell you but one history more out of the Church history: Epiphanius,
that good Bishop, he came to a Church, and found a veil in the Church,
wherein there was an Image of Christ, or of some Saint: For, quoth he, I
remember not whose it was, but I took it, and tore it, and wrote to John,
Bishop of Jerusalem, under whose charge that Church was, that he should not
suffer such vailes in the Church, against Christian Religion.

These are good patterns fo Magistrates in Church, or Commonwealth; but these
are no presidents for private men in public places, out of a pretense of
zeal, in a tumultuous manner, to enterprise any such public Reformation. Men
may do, as Jacob, at home; every man reform his own household, bury his own
Images, at home: but private men must learn that golden rule of Saint Austine,
To correct what they can within the compass of their own calling, and what
they cannot, to mourn for; to mourn and to cry to God, that he would please
to send his Son, to take whatsoever offends out of his Kingdom. This is the
first caveat, Take heed of Images: To take heed of sin, is to Take heed of
the occasions of sin.

My second caveat is, take heed of familiar conversation with these
Image-worshippers. All society with them is not unlawful; there may be a
lawful society even with Idolaters, quoad publicam conversationem, in regard
of a public conversation: but take heed of society with them in regard of
inward acquaintance with them; it is dangerous. Let a good man be joined with
an evil man, you seldom see the evil bettered by the good; but the good is
easily corrupted, and spoiled by the evil. A whole lump of dough will not
sweeten a little leaven, but a little leaven will sour a whole lump of dough.
If any man that is called a brother be an Idolater (says Paul,) with such a
man eat not, 1 Cor. 5. 11.

The Pharasees in old time were so careful of their carriage among the
Gentiles and Samaritanes, that they would not so much as eat of a Samaritanes
bread, nor drink of a Samaritanes cup, nor warm themselves at a Samaritanes
fire; they would not wear a Samaritanes garment, nor read a Samaritanes
book. It is said of John the Evangelist, that he refused to wash himself in
that bath wherein Cerinthus the heretic had washed. Polycarpus could not be
gotten to salute Marcion the heretic. Eusebius Versalensis would not receive
meat in prison from the hands of the Arrians. You know what Saint John says;
Whosoever says, God speed to them, is partaker with them in their sin, 2 John
10.

It is a childish thing I shall tell you of, but you may perceive by that how
children were trained up in the detestation of heresy. Theodoret tells of it:
At Samosatum, the children playing with a ball, refused to play with it after
the ball by chance had touched Lucius the heretical Bishop, or the ass that
he rode on; they cast the ball into the fire, and would play no more with it.
We have a story of Thosmos, that being about to be thrown, when he was dead,
into the grave of an heretical Bishop, a voice was heard in the grave, Touch
me not heretic. I avouch not this for truth, but I told you what the Apostle
says; If any man be called a brother, and be an Idolater, with such an one
eat not.

Surely, brethren, we are grown a little too familiar with them, we are too
bold a little with these Image-mongers; we match with them, we consult with
them, we confer with them, we converse with them; nay, peradventure, we
find such delight in their company, as that we cannot be merry, except they
be in our company; we cannot eat our meat, except they carve it; we cannot
sleep, except they rock the cradle: no wonder, brethren, if we be drawn
away.

But let me give you a third caveat: Take heed of beholding Idoll-service out
of the curiosity of the eye. Many men will go to mass, or Idoll-service; they
say they mean not to adore, they will not worship, they go but to see; and,
may they not go see it?

I tell you, that sight is very dangerous, that curiosity of the eye is a
branch of the concupiscence of the eye, which, if it be not mortified, may be
the occasion of many sins. Idolatry is called in Scripture by the name of
whoredom. Lust gets into the heart by the eye. It is a hard matter for the
body to be kept clean, if the eye be full of adultery. Job made a covenant
with his eyes to abridge them of liberty in matters of indifferency.

Let me tell you a story that Saint Austine has in the sixth book of his
Confessions, c. 8. He tells us of Allipius his dear friend, who went to Rome
to study the Law. At Rome there were usually those gladiatory sports, bloody,
sword-killing sports; they killed men in sport: He could not be persuaded by
his companions to see those sports; they desired him, but by no means he
would go: at last (says Saint Austine) by a familiar violence they drew him
once to go, and see those bloody sports. Well, says he, I will go, but I
will be absent while I am there, I will not look on it. He went, and when he
came, he sat there among the rest, but he shut his eyes, and would not see
any of those sports, till at length there was a man wounded, and then the
people shouted: He had shut his eyes, but he had not stopped his ears; he
heard the shout, and would see what was the matter; he looked about, and,
seeing the wounded man, he then desired to see a little more. Thus (says Saint
Austine) he grew at the last not to be the same man he was when he came
thither, but to be as one of the company to which he came; and, after that
time, he desired to see it a second, and a third time; and, at last, he came
to be, not only a companion of those that went thither, but would be a guide to
them; yet he would go, not tanquam unus ex illis, he would be one of the
forwardest. And thus he continued a while, till it pleased God, by a mighty
hand, to deliver him from this vanity.

The eyes are the windows of the body, and if we shut them not up against
allurements, we may happily be forced to cry out, as they did Jerem. 9. 21.
Death is entered in at the windows. Lord (says David) turn away mine eyes,
that they behold not vanity. Idols are called vanities often in Scripture.
Surely, we shoud make a covenant with our eyes, that they be not the occasion
of our falling. I said it the other day; I conclude with it now, He that would
have an eye to his heart, must have an heart to his eye.

My fourth caveat that I give, is this, Take heed how you do allow your selves
to live in any known sin without repentance; for, this is the way for which
God gives men over to this sin of Idolatry. Unrepented of errors in life,
breed errors in judgment. Those 2 These. 3. v. 10, 11.
that will not embrace the love of the truth, that they may be saved (says the
Apostle,) those men shall have strong delusions to believe lies. I conclude all
with what the Apostle (speaking of the heathen) says, Romans 1. 25. They knew
God. The heathen had some knowledge of God, but, they were not careful to
glorify him as God, but were unthankful. What punishment came upon them for
it? This, their foolish heart grew full of darkness, and when they professed
themselves wise men, they became fools. Fools! Why? How did they play the
fools? Says the Apostle (which is the very phrase that is here) Because, when
they knew God, they did not care to glorify him as God, but were unthankful;
therefore God gave them over to this blindness, to turn the glory of the
incorruptible God, to the Image of corruptible man, and of foure-footed beasts,
and they served and worshipped the creature, more then the Creator, that is God
over all, who is blessed for ever. Thus, beloved, I have now done with that
great point, concerning the worshipping of Images.

Now I come to the last thing in my Text, that is the root of this sin, whence
this sin of theirs did spring; it was from forgetfulness of God, and of his
works.

They forgot God their Savior, etc.

The words are many, and many things may be observed out of them. I will run
them first over with a brief paraphrase, and then speak of that sin that
was the cause of this Idolatry; the forgetfulness of God.

[They forgot God.] There was one of the Tribes that was called the Tribe of
Manasses; Manasses had this name, of forgetfulness. When I look over this
Psalm, me thinks this people should be all of that Tribe, they were so
forgetful. In ver. 7. They remembered not the multitude of his mercies. There
the Spirit of God speaks of their forgetfulness. Then, in ver. 13. they soon
forgot his works. They made haste, and forgot them, as the words are. And now
here again, They forgot God their Savior. Three times the Spirit of God in
this Scripture speaks of their forgetfulness of God.

It was but three months ago, since God brought them out of the land of Egypt:
It was little more then one month ago, since God appeared to them in a
fearful manner upon Mount Sinai, with thunder, and lightning, and
earthquakes; and yet see, they have already forgot God.

[God their Savior.] Savior: The word is sometime taken strictly in the
Scripture, in a narrow sense; and sometime it is taken in a larger sense.

Take it in the narrow sense, and then a Savior is such an one as saves from
sin, from the punishment of sin, from Gods wrath, from hell, and eternal
damnation: Thus our Lord is called a Savior. You know what the Angel said to
the Shepherds; This day is borne to you in the City of David a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord. And his very name shows him to be thus; Jesus, it
signifies a Savior: and the reason is given by the Angel; because he shall
save the people from their sins. He saves them,

First, from the guilt of sin.

Then he saves them from the punishment of sin.

Then he saves them from the power of sin: Thus the word Savior is taken,
when you take it strictly.

But you may take it more largely, and then a Savior is such an one as is a
deliverer, a preserver, either from wrong, from afflictions, from oppressions,
from dangers, from temporal death. A Savior, that is, as if he should say, a
Preserver. In this sense the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 1. 10. that God is the
Savior of all men; that is, the preserver of all men: but, especially, of them
that believe. In this sense take the word here: God was their Savior, that is,
their Preserver; And do but consider,

First the evils from which he preserved them, and those were many.

Then consider the means whereby he preserved them, and those were mighty.

Then consider the end to which he preserved them, and that was glorious, that
they should be a holy people, a peculiar treasure to himself. Consider, I say,
the means by which, the ill from which, and the end to which they were saved;
and then no people may more appropriate God to be their Savior, then this
people could: Yet, behold, They forgot God their Savior.

Yea, and they forgot his works. The works of God are set down here to be of
three sorts: Great works. Wonderful works. Terrible works.


Great works in Egypt: Wondrous works in the land of Ham (the land of Ham, and
Egypt are all one.) Then, Terrible works by the Red Sea.

[Great works.] The works of God, are either, works of Nature. works of Grace.


The works of Nature, are either works of Creation; or they are works of
Actual providence, in the preserving that that is created.

The works of Grace those are many. The principal work whereupon all others
depend, is the Incarnation of the Son of God, that great mystery of godliness,
God manifest in our flesh; that was the great work of grace.

Then redemption of mankind by his blood. The electing of some to salvation,
before the foundations of the world were laid. The vocation of them in Gods
good time. The justification of them in the blood of our crucified Jesus. The
sanctification of them by Gods blessed Spirit, the resurrection of their
bodies, and the glorification of them. All these are works of grace.

Now all the works of God, whether they be works of nature, or of grace, they
are all great works. There is not a work of Creation, but it is a great
work. The Pis-mire is a little creature, yet it is a great work: the making
of a Pis-mire is as great a work, as the creation of an Elephant. It is all
one with God; he can as easily make an Elephant, as a Pis-mire; nay, Deus
maximus in minimis, a man may truly say it; God is greatest in the least
creatures. If you mark it, you may see how great God is in every little
creature.

The less the Watch is that you carry about you, to know the time of the day,
the greater is the skill of the workman: And, surely, in every little work,
it appears how great God is. There is never a work so little, but it is a
great work, if it be well considered. Works of Creation are great works.

But there are some works greater then other: Those works wherein the Divine
attributes are most manifested; such works wherein appears the great wisdom
of God, or the great goodness of God, or the great power of God, or the great
truth of God, or the great mercy of God, or the great justice of God. Those
works wherein these attributes of Divine majesty are most apparent, those are
called great works: Therefore the works of redemption, are greater works
then the works of creation: The works of grace, are greater works then the
works of nature. But now this people had seen great works in both kinds;

Great works of Nature.

Great works of Grace.

There were works of nature; let me name but one or two of them: The
multiplication of them in Egypt. When they came to Egypt at first, there were
but seventy souls of them, seventy souls that came out of the loins of Jacob,
no more. They were in Egypt but two hundred and fifteen years, no longer: A
great part of this time they lived under oppression, laden with burdens,
laden with blows, laden with injuries; yet see how they multiplied: this
same bleeding vine bare abundance of fruit, this Camomile that was thus trodden
down, it prospered exceedingly. They grew in two hundred and fifteen years
to be so many, that, at their coming out of Egypt, there were numbered six
hundred thousand men, from twenty years old and upward, besides women and
children. This multiplication was a great work of God; a work of Nature.

Then consider their preservation there, how wonderfully they were preserved in
the despite of their enemies; and how all things were preserved that were
theirs: As the land of Goshen preserved from those same swarms of flies, with
which all the rest of Egypt was pestred. Their cattle in the land of Goshen
preserved from that murraine, of which the cattle, through the land of Egypt,
died. The land of Goshen was light, when all Egypt besides was darkness. This
wonderful preservation of that that they had, and the preservation of their
firstborn, when all the firstborn died in the land of Egypt. This
preservation of them was a great work.

There is another work, which I know not whether it be the greater; their
eduction and bringing out of Egypt. Their preservation was great, their
bringing out was as great; they came out in despite of Pharaoh and his
servants; and they came out with vigor of body, their veins full of blood, and
their bones full of marrow; There was not one feeble person among their Tribes.
Here were great Works; but all these were works of nature, either of
multiplication, or preservation.

Then will you hear the great works of Grace? The adoption of this people to
be Gods firstborn: the separation of this people from all the people of the
earth, to be to God a holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood, his peculiar treasure.
The revealing of his promises, especially that great promise, that out of their
loins should come that blessed seed, that blessed Lord, in whom all the
Nations of the earth were to be blessed. The promulgation of the Law; no Nation
had it but they: God had not dealt so with other Nations; the heathens had not
the knowledge of his Laws.

Here were great works of Nature, great works of Grace; yet this was the
unthankfulness of this people, they forgot God their Savior that had done
these great things for them in Egypt.

Then Wonderful things too, Mirabilia. There be four sorts of Mirabilia, of
wonderful things: There be mirabilia naturae, wondrous works of nature: secret
wondrous works of nature; That the lodestone should draw Iron to it; That this
power of the lodestone should be restrained, if the Adamant be near it. That
the Adamant cannot be broken upon an anvile with an hammer, that is easily
broken if it be anointed with goats blood. That the flesh of a dead Peacocke
should not putrefie: Saint Austine says, he observed it himself, he took an
experiment of it in an whole twelvemonth, he tried it, that it putrefied not.
That a fountain in Lybia should send forth water so cold in the day, that none
could drink it; and so hot in the night, that none can touch it: These, and a
thousand more, are mirabilia naturae, wonderful things in nature; no man is
able to give the reason of it: yet it is God that did these wonderful things
in nature.

Then again, there be mirabilia artis, wonderful things in art. There were
seven buildings that were wont to be called the Wonders of the world: one of
them was in Egypt, the Pyramides: another of them, above all other was a
wonder, me thinks, above all wonders: a wonder of Art. It were too long to tell
you what a wonder it was. It was nothing but a prodigal monument of
prodigality and vainglory; prodigality and vainglory, that was the sin of
them that built it; but the skill in making it, that came from God.

Thirdly, there be mirabilia Satanae, there be wonderful things of Satan,
wondrous works that Satan and his instruments, Magicians and Sorcerers, can
do. God did not punish the apostate Angels at the first (as the Schoolmen
say) in their natural skill and power; that is as great now to do a
mischief, as the skill and power of good Angels is to do that that is good.
The Devil, he can do wonderful things; he can compass the whole earth in
a little time; you find, in the book of Job, that he can raise tempests, he
can bring down fire, he can hurrie a body, and remove it; as he did the body
of our Lord from the wilderness to the pinnacle of the Temple, and thence to
the mountain. He can speak in Images; it was the devil that spoke in some
Images of the Gentiles. And if popish Images have now and then spoken too, as
they say they have, (Been de me scripsisti, said he of Thomas Aquinas, Thou
have written well of me Thomas) I make no question, but the devil spoke in
them.

The devil can do more then that; the devil knows the secret and hidden
virtues in things; their sympathies and antipathies, their qualities and
properties. The devils can do wonderful things: Though they cannot do
miraculous things, they can do wonderful things. Thus the sorcerers in Egypt,
they did many wonderful things; mira, but not true miracles.

Now fourthly, there are mirabilia Dei, the wonderful things of God. Indeed,
there is never a work of God but it is wonderful, what work soever it be.
The very Heathen man could say, in every natural thing, there is something in
it that is wonderful. But there are some works of God above all other that
are truly miracles; not mira, but miracula. What works are those?

Such as exceed the faculty and possibility of nature, they are properly and
theologically miracles. The devil can do many things by the concurrence of
natural causes, but he cannot work a miracle: that which is properly and
theologically called a miracle, the devil cannot work it.

Now God had wrought many miracles for this people. The turning of the dust of
the earth into lice, this was a miracle: the Magicians, by the help of the
devil, attempted to do this; but they could not do it: the art of the
Magicians failed them in such a thing as this, they could not turn the dust
into lice. Then he turned the water of the river into blood; he turned the
red sea into dry land; he turned three days into three dark nights; he
turned light into palpable darkness, that no man saw one another, nor stirred
from the place where he was for three days. These are wonderful things,
truly miracles; yet, this people forgot God their Savior, that had done such
great things for them in Egypt, and wondrous things in the land of Ham.

Yea, and lastly, Terrible things in the Red Sea; yea, God did terrible things
for them before they came to the red sea: He did terrible things for them in
Egypt, if you mark them; he plagued the Egyptians in all things.

First in their souls, with hardness of heart; he plagued them in their
bodies with botches, and blaines; he plagued them in their corn with hail;
he plagued them in their beasts with murraine; he plagued them in their
houses with froggs; he plagued them in their families with the death of their
firstborn: Here were terrible things when they were in Egypt; but, the most
terrible thing of all was that at the red sea, when he drowned Pharaoh, and
all his host, that there was not one of them left. In the ninth verse of this
Psalm, you may observe a work of power; in the tenth verse, a work of mercy;
and, in the eleventh verse, a work of judgment. The work of mercy was a
great work, the work of power was a wonderful work, and the work of
judgment was a terrible work.

Yet, for all this, see the unthankfulness of this people. They forgot all
these.

But, is it possible (you will say) that they forgot, in so little a time, all
these works; that they did not remember them?

There is a twofold forgetfulness; there is a forgetfulness of the mind,
and a forgetfulness in affection, and action. A man may have God in his mind,
yea, in his words, in his mouth, and yet forget him while he thinks of him,
while he speaks of him.

I will show it you in examples: Ask the Idoll-monger, Why do thou make this
Idol? He will say, To remember God by it. It is the usual word of the
Papists; Why have you these Images? Why? To remember God by them. But this is
no way to remember God, this is to forget him: because, when his Commandment
is forgotten, he is forgotten; his Commandment is, that thou shall not make
an Image. They made this calfe to have a visible representation of God before
their eyes, to remember him. O, they forgot him now.

A blasphemer, a swearer, will have the Name of God in his mouth: there are not
three periods, but he will have the Name of God in his mouth. Will you say,
that this man remembers God that talks and speaks of him, and swears by him
at every word? Does he remember him, think you? This is to forget God: For,
if he remembered the Name of God, that it is a good name, he would love it: If
he remembered that it were a great name, he would fear it: If he remembered
it were a glorious name, he would reverence it. But he neither knows it to
be a good name, he forgets that it is a good name, and a great name, and a
glorious name, and that makes him to forget God, even when he remembers him,
and speaks of him.

To conclude, let me only make a little application. I think, if any Nation
may call God their Savior next this people; surely, I think, we may do it.
Consider how God saved us in 88. Was not that a great work? Remember how God
saved us in the Gunpowder treason: Was not that a wonderful work? Remember
how God saved our lives from death five years since, in that same great and
heavy plague: Was not that plague a terrible work?

Yet surely, brethren, have not we forgotten God? have not we forgotten these
works of his? Our falling from our first love, our sliding back again to
Egypt, our neutrality in Religion, our little hatred of Idolatry, and
Superstition: such is our pride, such is our wanton excess, such is our
oppression, such our false weights, and such our false oaths, and such our
false faces: Our ways that we walk in are so unworthy of the Gospel of
Christ, that, I am afraid, God may charge us as truly as he charged this
people, We have forgot God our Savior, that has done so great things, so
wondrous things, and so terrible things for us.

FINIS.
PSALM. 106. 23. Wherefore he said, that he would destroy them, had not Moses
his chosen stood before him in the breach, etc.
I Have done with that same fearful sin of this people. I am now, in the
verse that I have read, to show you the fearful punishment of God upon them
for this sin. He said, he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest be should destroy
them. In these words you have two things:

The s^ntence that God pronounces against this people for this sin; He said,
he would destroy them.

You have secondly, the revocation of this sentence; the means whereby God was
kept from the execution of this judgment: you shall see how Gods hand was held
from destroying of them; Moses his chosen stood in the breach, and turned away
the wrath of God, that he should not destroy them.

First, be said he would destroy them. The judgment that God threatens for
this sin, is not famine, nor captivity, nor bondage, nor pestilence, nor the
sword of an enemy; but it is a total subversion, a total destruction of the
whole Nation. The words of God used to Moses, Deuteronomy. 9. 14. Moses, let me
alone, let me destroy this people, that I may blot out their name from under
heaven. Here was the sentence, he would blot out their name from under heaven.
I will never be troubled again with such an unthankful people as this; I will
blot out their name; there shall not be such a people upon the earth as this,
that have used me thus unthankfully for such mercies as I have showed them.
He does not now threaten to lopp off a bough or two from the tree, but to stub
up the whole tree; he will not leave root or branch, head nor tail of this
people; he will have them all buried and entombed together in one grave of
destruction; I will destroy them all.

He said he would destroy them.

I will set down one general Proposition: Great sins, such as are sins of
an high nature, when they come once to be committed with an high hand, that is,
with delight, with outrage, with impudency, and impenitency; they are able to
bring the judgments of God to the utter destruction of a whole people, of a
whole country.

Sins of an high nature. I told you, when I began to handle this Scripture,
what sins are sins of an high nature; that is, such sins as are directly
against God: As, Atheism. As, Blasphemy. As, Idolatry.


Or, such as are directly against nature: As, Sodomy. As, Bestiality. As, All
incestuous, and unnatural pollution.


Or, thirdly, such sins as are directly against humane society: As, Murder.
As, Robbery. As, Rapine. As, The effusion, and shedding of innocent blood.


Such sins as these, that are directly against God, against nature, against
humane society, when they are thus committed with an high hand, they are able
to bring destruction, utter destruction, not only upon whole houses, as they
did upon the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, upon the house of Basha, upon
the house of Ahab (which houses God swept with the beesome of destruction, as
the Prophet speaks) but they are able to bring the judgment of God, to utter
destruction, upon a whole people, upon a whole country: they are able to lay
the honor of the greatest Kingdom, of the greatest Monarch in the dust, in a
little space, in a little time. I need not stand long to prove this; only two
or three examples.

Some of these sins of this nature brought an utter destruction upon the
whole world; there were but eight persons left in it: when it was over-flowne
with these sins, it came then to be over-flowne with water.

For some of these sins God brought such a fearful destruction upon Sodom,
and Gomorrah, that he made all that country a proverb of reproach: When God is
pleased to threaten utter destruction, he says, he will destroy it as he
did Sodom and Gomorrah.

For this sin of Idolatry, 2 King. 21. 3. God threatens that he will wipe
Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, and turns it upside down, when he has
wiped it. In Ezekiel. 21. 27. he threatens Jerusalem, that he will overturne it,
and overturne it, and overturne it; three times: and three times you may say
that Jerusalem was overturned.

It was overturned once by the Babylonian army, under Nebuchadnezar.

It was overturned a second time by the Roman army, under Titus Vespasian.

And then the very ruins of it afterward were so overturned by Elius Adrian
the Emperor, the very carcass of that City; for Titus left it but like a
carcass, it was so torn and tortured. The carcass of Jezabell was eaten so
with dogs, that men could not say, This is Jezabell; so the carcass of this
City was so torn, that, had it not been for a turret or two, and a piece of a
wall that they would have stand, a man could not have said, This was Jerusalem.

Idolatry was first established in the Eastern parts of the world: I pray
look what miserable destruction God brought upon those Eastern parts. Where
are now those golden Churches of Asia? Where are those learned Churches of
Greece? As Pius Secundus once said, A man may look for Greece in Greece now,
and not find it: they are all drowned in Turcisme and infidelity, for this
sin of Idolatry. I will go no further in examples.

In Levit 18. God reckons up the sins of the people that lived in the land of
Canaan before he brought his people to it; and he reckons all those sins that I
named to you now: some directly against God, some directly against nature, some
directly against humane society. Then he warnes his people v. 25. and 28. to
take heed; Take heed that you defile not your selves, and the land, with those
sins wherewith the Gentiles did defile it: mark the reason, lest (quoth he)
the land spue you out, as it did the inhabitants before you. A homely phrase,
you will say: It is so; yet, it is a phrase observable. As it is with a man
that has his stomach overcharged with some meat that he has eaten, he never
is at rest and quiet till he have cast up that meat that offends his stomach:
so is it with a land that is overcharged with sins of this nature, it is
never at rest; it is still working, and working; as a man's stomach is never at
rest, till it have eased it self by vomiting, and have cast out those
inhabitants that have defiled it.

It pleases the Spirit of God to use the same phrase in Rev. ^. 16. says God
to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; Thou art neither hot nor cold, but
lukewarm, I will spue thee out of my mouth. I will cast thee out with
loathing and indignation.

God is a merciful God, and his mercy is over all his works; but when sin
once grows to be horrible, God can no more forget that he is just, then he
can forget that he is merciful: he must needs pay it, and pay it home in the
end with vengeance. God may be provoked too far, and patience, when it is too
far abused, will turn to fury.

When I consider the manifold sins, under the burden where of this Land
groans, and I name that first which I named last; our luke-warmnesse, our
neutrality in Religion, our halting between God and Baal, together with our
unmercifull oppressions, and our over-mercifull connivance at the vile
dishonor to the Name of God: I do not wonder, brethren, that God has denied
to us, this year, his accustomed plentiful blessing in our corne-fields. I
do not wonder that he has sent to us diverse times such unseasonable seasons.
I wonder not at the murraine of cattle in many places of this Kingdom. I
wonder not that the arrows of pestilence flee abroad to so many corners of the
Kingdom, that the venom of them drinks up the spirits of so many hundreds in
several places. I wonder not at our mutual Jealousies and discontents
(peradventure, forerunners of heavier judgments) I wonder at the mercy of
God, considering what a sinful Nation we be, a Nation laden with sins; a
Nation that walk, most unworthy of those high favors that God has vouchsafed
us; I wonder, I say, at Gods mercy, that has spared us thus long: It is his
mercy, that we are not all consumed. It is his mercy, that God blots not out
our names from under heaven. Pradventure, there be some Moseses in the land,
some chosen servants of God, some that have stood in the gap to keep this
judgment from us. That is the first point.

I come now to the second; He said, he would destroy them (says the text;)
then Moses his chosen stood in the breach, and kept away his fierce wrath, that
he should not destroy them.

Here are three things observable:

First, that a sentence of extirpation, pronounced against a people, is
revoked; God said that he would destroy them, yet he does it not.

A second thing, that one man, Moses, (indeed a chosen man) Moses whom he had
chosen, procures this revocation of this sentence against this whole people.

A third thing is, the means by which Moses came to get this sentence revoked,
and that was this, he stood in the breach. God, like an enemy, had made a
breach in the wall, and Moses he runs to that breach, and there stays God,
that he should not destroy them.

I am afraid time will not give me leave to go through all these, I will go
as far as I can, and leave the rest till the next day; they are not things
that are to be hastily passed over.

The first is, that the sentence is revoked;

He said that he would destroy them.

[Hee said it.] If a man had said it, I should not then have wondered, that it
should have been revoked. A man may say a thing and never mean it; Man is
deceitful upon the weight, lighter then vanity it self.

Or, secondly, a man may say a thing, and mean it, and yet not be able to make
it good: as Senacherib used great and big words against Jerusalem, what he
would do; and he meant it, surely, for he came with a mighty army against
it: but God put a hook in his nostrils, and a bridle into his lips, and
brought him back again that same way that he came; he was not able to shoot
an arrow against it.

Thirdly, a man may say a thing, and mean it, and have power in his hand to
do it; but his mind may be altered, he may repent of what he has said: as
you see of David, he said he would not leave a man alive in Nabals house, to
make water against the wall: surely, he meant it too, and had power in his
hand to do it; but, by the wisdom of Abigail, he was persuaded to turn, and
alter his mind; he did not do it. If a man had said this, I say, I should not
have wondered: But that God, that is the prime truth, the prime essential
truth, upon whom all truth depends; He that is light, in whom is no darkness
at all; he that is truth, in whom there is no falsehood at all: none actually,
he cannot deceive us; none passively, he cannot be deceived himself, that
he should say, and should not do it when he has said it: for, as that
Wizard Balaam, said truly, God is not as man, that he should lie; or as the
son of man, that he should repent. Has God said it, and shall he not do it,
says he? Has the word come out of Gods mouth, and shall he not make it good?
I will urge the objection no further.

But I answer it, and with the words of Gregory; Deus mutare sententiam, etc.
God knows how to change a sentence pronounced against a people, but God knows
not how to change his counsel. The counsel of God; that is, what God in his
secret counsel has decreed and determined from all eternity, that shall be
fulfilled in the season, in the substance, yea, in every circumstance. God
knows not how to change his counsel; the counsel of God is as immutable as
God himself: There is no variableness, with God, (says S. James) nor shadow
of change c. 1. 18. Mutability, is a kind of mortality: It is as possible for
God to be mortal, as to be mutable. The counsel of God is immutable, God
knows not how to change that, but God knows how to change a sentence
pronounced. You shall see it in many examples: God tells Abimelech in a dream;
Surely thou art a dead man, for this woman that thou have in thine house; yet,
no sooner had Abimelech restored the woman, but Gods sentence was changed, his
life spared. In Judge. 10. the people were oppressed by the Philistines, and by
the Ammonites; they come to God for help: God tells them, No (says he) I have
delivered you heretofore; when you cried to me I delivered you, but you have
gone and served other gods: go, get you to those gods, let them deliver you;
as for me, I will deliver you no more. A fearful sentence; yet, presently
upon their repentance, God delivered them, and many times afterward.

Ezechiah was sick to death, and God sends him a message by Isaiah, Set thine
house in order, for thou shall die. Ezechiah turns his face to the wall, and
weeps; God revokes his sentence, and he adds fifteen years more to his
days. God sends a fearful message by the mouth of Jonah to the Ninevites,
Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed; yet, for all that forty, and
forty, and almost forty more, not days, but years, passed over the heads of
the Ninevites, before that City of theirs was lodged in blood.

Why, but will some say, how can this stand, though with the constancy and
unchangeablenesse of Gods nature, yet with his truth, thus to change, and
revoke his sentence?

Not to trouble you with the opinions of some men: let me only hold to this,
That these same comminations, and threatenings of God, are not absolute, but
they are conditional; they are upon a condition: Now a condition (as the
Schoolmen say) a conditional threatening, a conditional commination, it does
turn it self upon the condition this way, or that way, as the door does upon
the hinges.

Let me make it a little plainer if I can; When God does threaten that he will
root out a people, as he did here now; or to bring such and such judgments
upon a people, he does it usually upon a twofold condition. When God does so
threaten a people, he requires two things from that people:

The first is at the hands of wicked men, that is, that they shall all turn
away from their sins, repent of their sins; and then the sentence is changed.
Look Jerem. 18. ver. 6, 7, 8. If I shall speak to a Nation, to pluck it up,
and to root it out, to destroy it; if that Kingdom, and that Nation shall
turn from their evil ways, and repent; then (says God) I will repent of
that evil that I threatened to do against them. The sentence is absolute, to
the end it may strike a further fear and terror. The sentence is propounded
absolutely, but intended conditionally. Though God does not change his will,
yet God does will a change. If we know how to change our lives, God knows how
to change his sentence. That is the first thing that he requires.

The second thing that God looks for at the hands of his children, is, an
earnest, and vehement intercession to God by prayer for pardon. That was the
condition he looked for here at this time: He said, he would destroy this
people; but it was with this condition, he would not destroy them, if Moses
made intercession for them.

Yea, and he would encourage Moses; he did as much as tell Moses, that this
was the means whereby he might be stayed. And he would encourage Moses to
make intercession, by his words; Moses (says he) let me alone, and let me
destroy this people. Why does he say, let me alone? What is that, but because
he would have him be bold? O Moses, you see what power you have with me, I
cannot strike this people if you make intercession (he knew Moses his love to
this people) therefore, let me alone, that I may destroy them.

I must conclude with the time, and with an application.

There is a fatal period set to all the Kingdoms of the earth, sooner or
later, according as the sins of that Kingdom and people come to their full
ripeness and maturity. Both Philosophers, and Divines have observed, by long
experience, diverse prognostic signs of the approach of the ruin of a
people: If God should seem, by any of these prognostic signs, to threaten
our ruin and destruction at this time; if God does seem to any to do this,
let them know, it may be that this threatening of God now is but conditional.
There are two ways by which we may get God to revoke, and call back his word.
One is, by true repentance from wicked men; and, the other is an earnest
intercession made by Gods children. O, brethren, that we did but know, in this
our day, what belongs now to our peace. O, that we could do, as the Ninevites
did, every one humble himself before God, and turn from the wickedness of
his ways! And, O, that Moses would run to the breach, and now with strong
cries and tears, beg pardon! for who does know whether the Lord will not yet
be merciful to us, and turn his fierce wrath from us, that we perish not? I
have gone through the first thing, the revocation of the sentence: Who caused
it? Moses; And by what means? By standing in the breach. I must leave till next
time.

FINIS.
PSALM. 106. 23. Wherefore he said, he would destroy them, had not Moses his
chosen stood in the breach, etc.
I Spoke the last day of the revocation of this sentence. I come now to the
next thing, Who caused the revocation of this sentence: but one man, Moses; but
he was a chosen man.

[Moses whom he had chosen.]

Mark, I pray, among Gods elect in every generation, in every age, there have
been some men that have been select. Such a man I name Enoch in the old world,
that God took away hence, that he should not see death: And such a man I
reckon Noah to be, a man gracious in the eyes of God, when all the world
perished. And such a man I reckon Abraham to be, whom God is pleased to honor
with the name of his Friend, Abraham my Friend: And such a man was Moses, whom
God was wont to talk with, as familiarly as one man talks with another, as the
Scripture says: And such men I reckon Eliah, and Elisha to be, the very
Chariots and Horsemen of Israel in their days: And such a man was Daniel, a
man of Gods affection, a man that God did wondrously love, and set by; and many
more. These are as dear to God, as the apple of his own eye, as the signet
upon his right hand: these I call the Favorites of heaven.

Kings upon earth have their Favorites; the King of Kings has his. These are
the Favorites of heaven; these are those principal men: Micah 5. v. 5. The
Princes of men. The hebrew bears it, Principal men. These are those Excellent
ones upon earth, that David speaks of, Psalm. 16. My delight is upon the
Excellent ones that are upon the earth. There is not one of these but are worth
a thousand others, and have more power with God, then many thousands of others:
And, as the people said of David, when he would go to battle against
Absalom; No, thou shall not go, lest the light of Israel be quenched: for thou
art worth ten thousand of us. I may say the same of such as these: One Moses in
the day of Gods hot wrath and vengeance; one such a man as Phineas was in the
time of a plague; One such a man as Eliah was in the time of a drought; One
such a man as Paul in the company when men are in a shipwreck, is able to do
more good then a thousand others.

Gods children, they are not always mighty men according to the flesh; Not many
mighty, says the Apostle, not many mighty ones according to the flesh, 1 Cor.
1. 6. But, though they be not always mighty according to the flesh; yet, in
regard of their spirit and grace, and their state with God, they may be mighty
men. Saint John Baptist, a contemptible man according to the flesh; but the
Angel foretold of him, that he should be great in the sight of the Lord.

You have some men that have prided themselves in the surname of Great;
Antiochus the Great, and Alexander the Great, and Herod the Great, and Pompey
the Great, and diverse others. There be many of Gods children poor,
contemptible things, Ignobilia mundi, the contemptible things of the world;
that are greater men with God, and have done greater acts, then the greatest of
these great ones.

Which of all those great ones was able to command the sun to stand still?
Josuah did it; Sun, stand thou still in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of
Ajalon. Which of all those great ones was able to command the thunder? Samuel
did it in the time of wheat-harvest. Which of all those great ones was able to
command the rain? Eliah did it: As the Lord God of Israel lives, there shall
be no rain, but according to my word, 1 King. 17. verse 1. Which of all those
great ones was able to stand in the breach against the great God of heaven and
earth, when he came to execute his fierce wrath upon his people? you see Moses
did it. If one Moses may cause a revocation of a fearful sentence against a
whole Nation, what may a multitude of Gods chosen ones do, uniting their
forces, and soliciting heaven for mercy?

I know, beloved brethren, what opinion the world has of Gods children, of
Gods chosen ones: they do not only think them to be contemptible things,
(...), as the Apostle speaks, the very filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things unto this day: Men of no name, as Job says; Nay,
men of no being: Those things that are not, says the Apostle. They may have a
being in nature; but they have no being in the esteem and account of men,
those things that are not.

And they not only think them thus, but (besides) the only troublesome,
dangerous men in a state. Ahab took Eliah to be the man that troubled all
Israel. The men of Thessalonica took Jason, and the brethren in his house, to
be the men that turned the world upside down, as they speak Acts 17. ver. 5.
Tertullus accuses Paul to be a pestilent fellow; nay, it is somewhat worse in
the Greek, it is (...) in the abstract, the pestilence it self, a plague, one
that moved sedition through the world where he came, Acts 24.

In the first ages of the Church, if either Tyber at any time did flow above
the accustomed height, or Nilus did not flow to the accustomed height; if
either there were famine, or pestilence in the land, or any calamity, they laid
all the fault upon the Christians: the Christians were in the fault, away with
the Christians, to the lions with them; as though they were men not worthy to
live in the world. Yet hearken, I pray, what the Apostle says for all that, in
Hebrew. 11. ver. 38. The world was not worthy of them. He speaks of some men
that wandered up and down in sheepskins, and goat skins, destitute, afflicted,
tormented; yet the world was not worthy of them. Why not worthy? These men
bring blessings to the places where they come, they bring blessings to the
world; the world is not worthy of these blessings, therefore not worthy of the
men that procured them.

And what blessings (will you say) do Gods children bring to a place?

I tell you, they bring a blessing with their very presence, their very
presence is a blessing. The presence of Jacob was a blessing in the house of
Laban. The very presence of Joseph was a blessing in the house of Potiphar. And
what a blessing was in the widow of Zarephath's house, when Eliah was there?

Then they procure a blessing with their prayers where they come: The prayer of
a faithful Jam. 5. 16.
man prevails much with God. God promised this to Abimelech as a great favor;
My servant Abraham Genesis 20. 5.
shall pray for thee. And the like favor is promised to the three friends of
Job; Go, (says God, to those three men, Job's friends,) go every one of you
offer a burnt offering, seven bullockes, and seven lambs for a burnt offering,
and my servant Job shall pray for you, Job ult. 8.

Thirdly, they procure blessings by their good example of life, because they
shine as stars among a wicked and froward generation.

Yea, and they procure this blessing, not only to private houses, as Jacob did
to the house of Laban, and Joseph to the house of Potiphar; but to the whole
society, to all that are in the company. There were in the ship with Paul two
hundred seventy and six souls in a mighty shipwreck: not one of those men
perished, not a hair fell from the head of any one of them; and all for Paul's
sake. They bring a blessing to the whole company that is with them.

Nay, further, they bring a blessing to a whole City where they be: Run to
and fro (says the Lord to the Prophet) in the streets of Jerusalem, and see if
you can find a man that will execute judgment, and speak the truth, and I
will spare the City for his sake, Jer. 5. 1. If there had been but ten men in
Sodom righteous, it had not been destroyed: there was but one righteous man
found there, and God could do nothing to Sodom till he was out of it; Get
thee gone (says the Angel to Lot) I can do nothing till thou be gone.

Nay, further, they do good to the whole country wherein they live. We are
not in a continent here, we live in an Island: And hearken what Eliphaz the
Temanite says, according to our former translation (our new somewhat varies,
but the words will bear as well the one as the other) The righteous shall
deliver the Island, and it shall be delivered through the uprightness of his
hands, Job 22. ult.

Nay, I will go further, The children of God are not the men that turn the
world upside down, they are the men that keep it upright. Were it not for the
Elect in the world, God would soon turn it upside down. It is for the Elects
sake that he keeps it up: as soon as the Elect are gathered together, the
world will be at an end.

Let me make use of it, and I have done. Does God for the righteous sake show
favor to the wicked; me thinks, the wicked for their own sakes should show
favor to the righteous. If Moses were gone, and the wrath of God begin to
burn like fire against us, who should run to the gap, and to the breach?

If Aaron were gone, and the plague should wax hot among us, who should run
with his censer, and stand between the living and the dead, and make atonement
for us?

If war should be in the land, and if the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel were
gone, who should fight for us?

A fearful presage of an utter destruction, (and was ever held so) is the
untimely end of many eminent persons in the Church or Commonwealth; a fearful
presage. Methuselah, if you mark the story, did live to the very six hundredth
year of Noah's life, and in the second month of that six hundredth year the
Flood came: Methuselah was but new dead, and, as soon as Methuselah was dead,
God sent the Flood. As soon as Josiah, that good King, was slain, then came
that miserable captivity. Esaias chap. 57. ver. 1. The righteous perishes, and
no man lays it to heart, and good men are taken away. Why? from the evil
that is to come. Mark that, from the evil that is to come. God takes those
away, those would hinder him, those would run to the breach, those would stay
divine justice from proceeding further; he takes them away. Let me conclude
this point: You have had here one work of Moses; let me tell you of another
in another history. In the 17th. of Exodus, there was war between Israel and
Amalek; Moses he gate up on the hill, and held his hands to God in prayer: As
long as Moses his hands were held up, Israel prevailed; when Moses his hands
grew faint, come Aaron and Hur, one on the one hand, and the other on the
other, and hold up his hands, and prop them up, that they might not be weary.
Brethren, we should all be holding up our hands to God for mercy. If thou, out
of conscience of thine own unworthiness, think surely that God will not
regard the holding up of thine hands; he will never have an eye to thine hands
when thou hold them up; yet do as Aaron and Hur, hold up the hands of them,
whose hands thou think God will respect. If thou can not act Moses his
part, act Aarons and Hurs.

Alas! the hands of Gods children are faint, they are discouraged, their knees
are feeble with prayer: O, encourage them, lift up their hands, it may be God
will yet hear their prayers, and show mercy to them. Thus much shall serve for
the first point: It was Moses that got the sentence revoked.

I come to the other, the means by which he got it revoked, he stands in the
breach; had not Moses his chosen stood in the breach.

A military phrase, a phrase taken from the wars. If a City be besieged, and if
the enemy without, by a ram, or any other warlike Engine, has made a breach in
the wall; all that are men of courage and valor run to the wall, run to
the breach, and strive by all means possible to keep the enemy from entering
in at that breach that he has made.

This fearful sin of the people had made a breach, by which divine justice
might have entered, and have brought an utter destruction upon them all: Moses
runs to the breach, and sets himself between God and the people, that God
should not proceed further to their destruction.

Now, you must note, he stood in the breach two ways:

First, by a due execution of justice.

And then by an earnest, importunate intercession for mercy.

First, I say, by the execution of justice. Does the wrath of God at any time
burn like fire against a sinful people? There are two things whereby it may
be quenched; A man may quench the wrath of God in regard of any temporal
calamity, the fire of Gods wrath, with two things, two liquors: The one is
blood. The other is tears.


The blood I mean, is the blood of malefactors, principal malefactors, that
shall be shed with the sword of justice.

The tears I speak of, are such tears as are shed by principal men, by the
Favorites of heaven in their prayers for mercy. Moses does both; he pleads
Gods cause here against the people, and he pleads the peoples again with God.

First, Causam Dei apud populum gladio, he pleads Gods cause against the people
with a sword of justice; he pleads the peoples cause against God with tears,
and prayers: in both he shows himself a zealous Magistrate; and I cannot
tell whether he show himself more zealous to the glory of God in the one, or
more zealous of the peoples good in the other.

For the first, his execution of justice. There is a way to stand in the
breach. Moses is said to be the mildest man that was upon the earth; but, I
pray, mark what this mild man did, when he saw the glory of God bestowed upon
a base, filthy, inglorious abomination. First he comes from the Mount, and
brings the Tables of God in his hand, and casts down the Tables, and breaks
them; I do not think he did it through impotency of passion: Mark his words,
Deuteronom. 9. ver. 17. me thinks, he did it advisedly; but with some secret
warrant from God. He saw the people had broken the Covenant, and he, before
their eyes, breaks the Tables of the Covenant, the most precious monument that
ever the world had. This was the first thing he did.

He stays not here, he goes to the Calfe, the sin that they had made (as
he calls it) he takes it, and breaks it to pieces, stampes it to powder, he
beats it as small as dust, and casts it into the brook, and makes them drink
the water of it; these are the Gods that shall go before them. Let them look
their god in their urine.

He is not yet content, but cries, Who is on the Lords side? And the Tribe of
Levi come, and gird their swords on their sides, and run from one side of the
camp to the other, and slay every man his brother, and every man his Father,
and every man his companion. They slew at that time three thousand, and with
the blood of these three thousand he slacked the wrath of God. The sons of
Levi never offered a sacrifice of the flesh of beasts, that was a sacrifice of
so sweet a smelling savor in the nostrils of God, as this sacrifice of their
brethren.

When a sin is committed, wherewith earth is annoyed, and heaven provoked,
the justice of God sets out presently against that sin; but goes on slowly,
very slowly: he will see whether man's justice will follow after it, or no; if
man's justice overtake it, Gods justice pursues it no further, there is an end.

There may be easily an unmercifull cruelty in the shedding of blood, and there
may be an over-cruell mercy in the sparing of it. Jonah was no sooner cast out
of the ship, but the sea was quiet. Achan, and his family were no sooner stoned
to death, and burned with fire, but Israel prevailed. The sons of Saul were
no sooner hanged, but the famine ceased. Phineas stood up, and executed
judgment, and the plague was stayed, in verse 30. of this Psalm. As soon as
this blood of three thousand men, that were principal offenders in this
Idolatry, as soon as that was shed, as soon as that blood was thrown upon
the fire of Gods wrath, the fire slacked presently.

But yet it was not quenched till his prayer came. There is the second way, his
prayer; The prayer of a righteous man prevails much, if it be Jam. 5. 16.
fervent. Can you find a more fervent prayer then this that Moses made for
this people? Mark the prayer, you shall find it Exodus 32. where this story is
set down.

First he puts God in mind of his propriety in this people, It was thy people,
O God, etc. God before called them Moses his people, as you may perceive, when
God bids him go down; Go down, for thy people that thou have brought out of
Egypt, etc. Moses disclaimes them, as if he should say, Lord, they are none of
my people, they are thy people: Will thou lose any thing that is thine? There
is his first argument.

His second argument is from Gods great works; Lord, thou have brought them
out of Egypt with a mighty hand. We love not to lose our former benefits; our
former benefits are lost, if they be not seconded with new: Lord, will thou
lose thy former favors done to this people?

The third argument is, he puts God in mind of his glory; Lord, what will the
Egyptians say? Thou have brought them forth with a mighty hand, and an
outstretched arm. Why is it? To kill them in the mountains? To consume them
from the earth? Lord, how will thy glory be eclipsed?

Then, fourthly, he puts him in mind of their progenitors, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob: Lord, these be the children of those Fathers; Did thou love the tree,
and will thou cast away the fruit? Did thou love the Fathers, and will thou
cast away the children?

Then another is from the promise of God, confirmed with oaths: thou swarest
to them that thou would give them the Land; shall not thy promise hold? Not
thy promise confirmed with oaths? Here is his pleading for the people: as
before you heard how he pleaded Gods cause with the sword, yea, how earnestly
he pleaded Gods cause, in that very day that he brake the Calfe. Yet,
notwithstanding all this, the good man feared: though God might repent of the
evil; yet, it may be, he will not be thoroughly reconciled to the people, there
will not be a through reconciliation; therefore he goes to God again, Lord
(quoth he) If thou will pardon this people! It was a vehement pathos; If thou will pardon it! he says no more: but, if thou will not, put me out of the
book of life. So desirous was he of Gods glory, together with the salvation
of the people, that he was careless of the salvation of his own soul; Lord,
either forgive them, or blot me out of the book of life. Here is a vehement
prayer, and with this he slacks the wrath of God, and quenches it. It was
slacked with the blood that he cast on it, it was quenched with the tears.

We read of many more in Scripture that stood in the breach; Samuel; God is
wont by Jeremy to join him and Moses together, If Moses and Samuel stood
before me. Then Ezekiel stood in the breach another time: Josiah, another
time. And, not to heap other examples, God complains, Ezekiel. 13. 5. that the
Prophets would not stand in the breach, the false Prophets. But there is an
excellent place, worth your observation, in Ezekiel. 22. ver. 30. God had spoken
of the sins of the people through that Chapter, and showed how those sins had
made way for Divine justice to break in among them: Then, in verse 30. mark
what he says; I sought for a man among them that would make up the hedge, and
stand in the gap before me for the land, that it should not be destroyed: I
found none: see, I sought for a man.

When our sins have opened such a gap, whereby divine justice may come in to
the destruction of a whole land; then God looks for a man, he looks about to
see if he can find a man that will come and stand in the gap, to keep him that
he might not destroy them. Brethren, he that does not see what a wide gap,
what a wide breach the manifold sins of this land have made, whereby divine
justice may break in, and has begun to break in already; he that sees not
this gap, this breach, sees nothing. I pray you, brethren, do but remembet,
Did not God, a few years ago, make us turn our backs twice or thrice upon
our enemies? Did he not make us a very derision, and scorn to them that are
round about us? Does not God come in now among us, as the Prophet Habakuk
shows his manner of coming, when he comes to judgment; to wit, with the
pestilence before him, and burning coals going forth at his feet? Hab. 3.
verse 5. Do you not see, beloved brethren, what a number of new upstart
heresies there be in the world? It bodes no good, surely; new heresies broached
every day, and old heresies renewed. Do you not see what miserable rents and
schisms there be in the Church, while some hold of Paul, some of Apollo, some
of Cephas, some of all of them, and some of none of them? Do you not see the
aspect one upon another, is like the aspect of malignant planets? Is not Christ
divided? Then do you not see what jealousies and discontents there are in the
secular state? Brethren, surely God is looking for a man to come to the breach.

Help, men, fathers, and brethren, come to this breach; help, Magistrates: it
is not enough for you to look upon our miseries, though with tears in your
eyes, unless your hands be put to the redress of it. Are there no houses of
correction for these vagrant persons that live under no Magistracy, under no
Ministry? Have you no carts for bauds? No whips for harlots? No pecuniarie
mulcts for others? No punishments for transgressors?

It is for us too, that are Ministers, to run to this breach. If ever we did
preach with power, and evidence, and demonstration, not of nature, or art, but
of grace, and of the spirit, it is time for us now to preach, and to preach
again, in season, and out of season. O, that we could be Boanerges, sons of
thunder, and cry down those sins that cry for vengeance. And hearken,
Masters, Fathers, and Governors of families, run to the breach. In cleansing
of the City, if every man sweep before his own door, the streets will be kept
clean. Why do you suffer revelling, and swearing, and quarrelling, and
drinking in your families? Your houses should be Churches for God. Where be
your old exercises of Religion in your households? Where be your prayers, and
your reading of Scriptures, and your singing of Psalms? Where is your
catechizing? I say no more, but, high and low, rich and poor, let us all run
to the breach, by earnest intercession to God privately, by continual tears of
repentance. I conclude now as I did the last day, Who knows yet whether the
Lord will have mercy on us, and turn from his fierce wrath, that we perish
not?

FINIS.
PSALM. 106. 24, 25, etc. Yea, they despised the pleasant land; they believed
not his Word:

But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD, etc.


WE have two things in the Text: The sins of the people. And their
punishment. The sins of the people are set down in the two former verses. And
the punishment in the two later.

Their sins are four:

The first is, their unthankfulness, in despising the pleasant land; They
despised the pleasant land.

The second is, their infidelity, that was the cause of that same unthankful
despising of the land; They did not believe his Word.

The third sin was their accustomed sin of murmuring; They murmured in their
tents.

The fourth sin was their rebellion and disobedience; They hearkened not to the
voice of the Lord. They despised the pleasant land; they believed not his Word;
they murmured in their tents; they hearkened not to the voice of the Lord.

You see their sin, see their punishment. The Lord threatens that he will
punish them for this; you heard before my Text, The Lord said, he would
destroy them: Now, he swears it, He lift up his hand against them. The
lifting up of the hand was a ceremony among them, used in swearing; and God is
said to do it, to lift up his hand when he swears. He swore against them now.

And what did he swear? He swore he would punish them. Punish them in their
own persons; he would punish them thus, He would overthrow them in the
wilderness: And he would punish them in their seed; He would overthrow their
seed among the Nations, and scatter them in the land: Therefore he lift up his
hand against them. There was his swearing, that he would overthrow them in the
wilderness, and overthrow their seed also among the Nations, and scatter them
in the land. Now you see the whole Text what it contains.

But I cannot give you a perfect understanding of this, nor gather such
doctrines out of it, as the words will naturally afford to us, except I first
make known to you the history at large that is here epitomized. This is the
Epitomy of an history; the history is set out at large, and I must declare that
to you. I pray hear an historical narration first, to make way to the Text.
This history, here epitomized, is set down at large in Numbers 13. and 14. I
pray, at home, read over those two Chapters, and compare with them, when you
read them, the first Chapter of the book of Deuteronomy, beginning at ver.
19. and so to the end of that Chapter; you shall find many observable
circumstances of this history, that you shall not find out of the book of
Numbers. Give me leave to tell you all the whole history, how it is out of all
these places together: It was thus; Let me show you first, that, three months
after the people of Israel came out of Egypt, they came to Mount Horeb, or
Mount Sinai; for it was called sometime by the one name, and sometime by the
other: It was the same mountain in the root, it had two tops, as I showed you.
They came there the third month after their coming out of the land of Egypt;
there they continued for the space almost of one whole year, for they went
away from thence again upon the twentieth day of the second month of the second
year. Almost a whole twelvemonth they were at Mount Horeb: at Mount Sinai, as
soon as they came there, God called Moses to him, Moses goes up to the Mount,
there God gives the Law in fearful manner. Moses abode with God in the Mount
forty days: In that time the children of Israel committed that Idolatry which
you heard of; they made a golden calfe, and worshipped the Image. For that, God
said he would destroy them: Moses stood in the breach, in the gap, and turns
away Gods wrath, that he should not destroy them. Then Moses goes up again to
the Mount, and tarries forty days, and forty nights longer; he comes down
again, and gives them the Ceremonial Law, and the Judicial; framed the
Tabernacle, and all the vessels appertaining to it; sets the people in their
march, shows them how they should march in the wilderness toward the land of
Promise. This was all done in that year. And let me observe this to you: In
every place where they came, you shall find some extraordinary example of Gods
judgments on them. Before they came to Mount Horeb, before the Law was given,
God bare with them much; but after he had given them the Law, he would not
bear with them. They removed from Horeb, and came to Taberah: there some of
them fall a murmuring; they were burned. Then they removed to another place, to
Kebroth-Hattana, the grave of lust, that was the place where they fell a
lusting for quails, for flesh: there God destroyed the wealthiest, the best of
them, with the very meat in their mouths. Then they removed to Hazeron, there
Miriam was smitten with leprosy for her ill tongue against Moses. Thence they
removed to Cadesh-Barnea; now Cadesh-Barnea was upon the very borders of the
land of Promise that God would give them; they were now upon the very entrance
of the land, inasmuch as Moses tells the people, that now you are come to the
land that God has sworn to give to your Fathers, now go your ways in, and
possess the land.

The people would seem to be a little wiser, and more circumspect then Moses
was; they would have Moses go send spies, first to the land, to see the
goodness thereof. The thing pleased Moses well; Moses says so, Deuteronomy. 1. The
thing pleased me well to do this. He goes and acquaints God with it, and he
permits it. Well, he sends the spies into the land; the spies were twelve
chosen (commonly when we choose spies to send to a country, we choose men of
mean condition) Moses did not so, he would have them choice men, that the
eminency of their place, might give credit to their testimony of the land. Out
of the twelve Tribes he chose twelve men; a principal man out of every Tribe,
to view the land. Of these twelve, Caleb, the son of Jephunneh was one; he was
forty years old then, he went for the Tribe of Judah: and Josuah the son of
Nan, Moses his servant, was another; and went as a principal man of the house
of Ephraim: you shall find the names of all the rest; these two I name, the
cause you shall hear anon. These twelve spies were sent to go and see what
the land was, and what the people of the land were; they were to give them
these instructions:

First, from the land, they must see whether it were good or bad, whether it
were a wholesome or an unwholesome land.

Then they must see again whether it were a fat or a lean land, a fertile or
a barren land.

And then whether it bare trees or no: there were no trees in the desert where
they were, and this was near it; they must see if it bare trees. This for the
land.

Then for the people of the land, they were to give them these instructions;
they must see whether they were many or few, whether they were strong or weak:
then, whether they dwelt in tents, or in cities, and towns. And then, if they
dwelt in cities, whether their cities were walled or no, what fortifications
they had: these things pleased Moses well. And, in very deed, prudent policy is
allowed us in the execution of that that God gives us in charge, so as it be
not mixed with unbelief. I believe, that this policy of theirs was mixed with
a great deal of cowardice and unbelief.

Thus the men go, they view the land, they were forty days in viewing it,
they return again, they bring with them such a branch of a vine as has not
been heard of, such a cluster of grapes, that two men were feign to bring it
upon a staff, upon a bar between them; such a mighty cluster of grapes this
was. They bring with them also pomegranats and figs, that they might see the
fruit of the land. Well, they come, they make an account of this journey of
theirs. They all agree in this, the land was a wondrous good land, a marvelous
pleasant land, as my text calls it here, a wondrous pleasant land; they all
agree in that. And Caleb and Josua, those two, they encourage them, and say it
is no more, but, arise, come, let us possess it. They were full of faith;
Caleb, his name signifies hearty, a hearty man full of courage: Come (quoth
he) let us go up, and possess it. the land is worth our labor. The other
ten spies (white liver'd men) they tell another tale: they begin with a
commendation of the land; It could not be denied, it was a good land, a land
that flowed with milk and honey, as God told them; that was very true. But
commonly when a man will deprave, when he will calumniate, he begins his
calumniation with a commendation, and he comes in with a But: As when we
commend a man, O, he is a good man, a very good man, a good neighbor; but --
and then he goes on: Like as we read of Naaman the Assyrian, a great man, an
honorable man, a mighty man at arms, one. that had done great acts; but, he
was a leper. Even as the Papists, they commend the Scripture, O, it is an
excellent book, the book of Scripture; It was written by the Spirit of God,
holy Penmen, of holy matters, in a holy style, to an holy end; O, it is a good
book; but, it is a hard book, it is difficult, there are great mysteries in
it, it is impossible for Laymen to attain to it, it is good to keep them from
it; Ignorance is the mother of devotion. Even thus do the spies: It is a good
land, O, a very good land, it flows with milk and honey, there wants nothing
you can desire, you see the fruit of it; but, it is hard coming to it, there is
great difficulty, I tell you, it is impossible to come to it. Why, what was the
matter? First of all, the men we found in the land were the sons of Anak,
Giants, men of mighty stature; their height was as the height of Cedars, and
their strength as the strength of Oaks, as the Prophet speaks of the
Amorites; A mighty people, they are Giants, we are but like grasshoppers in
their sight; they took us as grasshoppers, they may tread us down at their
pleasure.

And then again, these men dwell in cities, and these cities are walled; yea,
and to make it the more terrible, they are walled up to heaven: thus they say
in Deuteronomy, chap. 1. Their Cities are walled up to heaven: there is no
scaling of them.

Then besides, say they, it is such a land as devoures the Inhabitants of it;
it eats out the Inhabitants. How is that? It is hard to say their meaning;
Some think thus, there were pestilentiall vapors there, that caused the
pestilence among them, that they died upon heaps.

Some think they were at civil wars one among another.

Or, peradventure, it will eat out the heart of the husbandman in the tillage
of it: with strong labor they must toil, and work hard if they will have
their living. Somewhat it was; but they bring an ill name, an ill report upon
the land, as the Scripture says. Never seek to get this land, it is
impossible, the men are so great, and the walls are so high, and it is such a
land as eats out the Inhabitants.

The people they hear this, and first they fall to their old weeping, as they
did before, for meat, for flesh: they fell a weeping all that night; there was
nothing but weeping to hear this. Well, the next day they fall to murmuring in
their tents. If they had wept for their sin of infidelity, it had been well;
but, in their mourning, they fall a murmuring:

First, against God; for, when God promised to give them this land out of his
love: Because I loved your Fathers, therefore I gave you the land; the people
turn it the other way; No, God did it out of his hatred: thus they say in
Deuteronomy. God hated us, therefore he brought us out of Egypt, to kill us here.

Then they fall a murmuring against Moses; What, were it not better to have
died in Egypt? Were there no graves in Egypt? Were it not better to die in the
wilderness, then to go in and die there? They wish to die for fear of death,
they wish themselves dead for fear they should die.

Then they go a little further, they will (forsooth) choose a new Captain, and
go back into Egypt; they will not go into the pleasant land; they will chose
an Elect one, and back they will go, and they will not go in there. Moses and
Aaron fall upon their faces and entreat them, and Caleb and Josua encourage
them; this land may be gotten, the Lord delivered us from the Amalekites, and
he will deliver us from the Amorites; the Lord has slain the Egyptians, and
cannot he slay the Anakims? No, by no means; they took up stones, and would
have stoned Caleb and Josua: had not the glory of God appeared upon the
Tabernacle, God knows what they would have done. Upon that they stayed, then
they knew Gods displeasure; then God swears, of all these people that came out
of the land of Egypt (and there were six hundred thousand men, that were twenty
years old and upward) not one man of them should enter into the land of
Promise; they shall all of them, since they wish they might die in the
wilderness, they shall die every one of them; and he commands them to go
back again, he carries them to the red sea, he makes them wander thirty
eight years and an half more in the wilderness: and, in that time, all that
generation was worn out. He gave it to their seed, but not one man of them
did come into the land of Promise, but those two, Caleb and Josua. Now you may
see what the meaning of my Text is; They despised the pleasant land. When they
heard they could not have it without some bloodshed, they will none of it:
They despised the pleasant land, and would not believe his Word. The spies told
them one thing, that they could not get it; and God said they should have it:
they took man's word rather then Gods: They would not believe his word. Then
mark how my Text goes on, then they murmured in their tents. First they
murmured against God; It is out of his hatred that he does it. Then against
Moses; Why have you brought us to die here?

Then, last of all, they utterly refuse to go to this land. But, as it is in
the story, when they saw that God had sworn, that not a man of them should come
in, then all in haste they would go: God bids them go, and then they say, No.
Then he says, See you go not: for, if you do, surely, you shall be made a
spoil to them; yet, for all that, they would go; and they were made a spoil
to their enemies, a number of them fell by the sword.

Now, I have told you this whole history, you shall the better observe out of
these words such points as they shall naturally afford to us.

I begin first with the first sin, their despising of the pleasant land.

They contemptuously despised, so the word signifies; they contemptuously
despised the pleasant land. This same sin of theirs, in despising of the land,
will appear yet to be more grievous, a more great and fearful sin, if you
shall but consider two things with me:

First, that the land was a pleasant land; that is the thing that I shall
especially stand upon to day. To despise any land that God was pleased in mercy
to bring them to, out of such an house of bondage as he brought them, it should
not have been; but, to despise a pleasant land, that is a sin, sinful above
measure. The Hebrew phrase is, a land of desire: It was such a land, as, if a
man would desire a land, he could not desire a more delightful land, then
that land of Promise.

We hear much of this land in Scripture; you see how it is called here a land
of desire. I pray, let me trouble you now a little further, to show you the
pleasantness of this land; and then make some use of it, as the time will
permit.

First, the situation of the land was pleasant: It is said usually in Scripture
to stand in the midst of the land. It had Asia upon the East, it had Europe
upon the West, it had Africa and Lybia upon the South, it had Scythia and
Armenia and Persia upon the North. That same that you read of in Psalm. 74. 12.
The Lord is my King of old, he has wrought salvation in the midst of the
earth; It is Allegorically, I confess, mystically, but sweetly, by the Fathers
applied to that great work of salvation, that our crucified Jesus wrought for
us at Jerusalem in the midst of the earth, in medio terrae. This is Jerusalem
(says God) that I have set in the midst of all Lands and Nations about it,
Ezekiel. c. 5. God says of the people of this land, that they dwell in the very
navell of the earth: It is Gods word in Ezekiel. 38. A people that dwell in the
navell, in the very midst of the earth.

Indeed, look in our maps, and if it do not fall out exactly, that India is
in the midst of the then known habitable world; yet, our Cosmographers agree
in this, that there is no Country from which there is such an expedite
convenient passage to all the parts of the world, as from India; the situation
was pleasant.

Then secondly, the air was pleasant. The climate, I know, was more hot then
ours is by far; being distant some thirty two, or thirty three degrees from the
line; a hotter climate then ours: yet, a sweet, temperate climate, free, (as it
is confessed by all) from ill vapors: they were not infested with any
pestilentiall, epidemicall diseases.

Yea, but for the water of it; What water was in it? I confess, I find not
any great navigable rivers in it; but it so abounded with waterbrooks, and
springs, and fountains, both in hills and valleys, that it is called by God,
in Deuter. 8. ver. 8. a land of brooks, and springs, and fountains.

Yea, but what corn bare it? That was one of their questions; they would know
whether it was a fat land, or no. You shall find in that place again, Deuter.
8. It was a land of wheat, a land of barley. What abundance of corn grew in
that Country, you may imagine by this: It was in the whole length of it, from
Dan to Beer-sheba, but one hundred and fifty miles; the length of it: the
breadth of that land, between fifty and sixty miles at the broadest: What a
number of people could this land nourish? Mark but in the days of David, he
numbered the people, and yet he numbered not all; for he numbered not Benjamin,
nor the Tribe of Levi: yet, in the other Tribes, he numbered thirteen, hundred
thousand fighting men. What a number were there then, besides these, in
proportion of women and children, old and young? Where should they have bread
to sustain such a multitude? Surely, it was, as it is called in Scripture; a
very fat land, Nahum chap. 3. ver. 5.

O, but what trees grow there in it? That is another question they would know.
Excellent Vines. The wine of Zarephath was famous, even among the Gentiles.
Besides their Vines, they had Fig Trees, Pomegranats, Almonds, and Dates, and
Olives in abundance: therefore God calls it, a land of Oyle-olive: Yea, and,
which is a remarkable thing; whereas there are some fruits that will not grow
but in cold countries, and some fruits that will not grow but in hot countries,
and some that will not grow but in temperate countries; about the lake of
Genesareth, the soil was of such an admirable nature, that all kind of fruits
would prosper there with the like felicity.

I might go on, and tell you what Mines they had; God told them the stones of
that land were Iron, and out of their mountains they might dig Brass. I
might tell you of the Medicines of Herbs about Engedi: the best Balsome in the
world was there. I might tell you of their Fishes in their lakes, and many
commodities more. Let me tell you this, that God says, Deuteronomy. 8. It was a land
that lacked nothing in it. There was one City in the land, that was Laish, it
was afterward called Dan, after that, Cesarea-Philippi; you read of it in the
Gospel: the Scripture says, that that lacked nothing that was upon the earth,
Judges 18. 10. Not to trouble you more with the commendation of this land,
hearken what Ezekiel says of it; It was the glory of all lands, Ezekiel. 20. 6.

But, let me ask now, What is become of the glory of this land? If there be
any land upon the earth that ever was anathemated, smitten with a curse from
God, it is this land. It is now under the Turks: It is inhabited, where it is
inhabited (but that is but in a few places of it; but, where it is, it is
inhabited) by barbarous Turks in the valleys, and by wild Arabs in the
mountains. The most part of the land, at this day, lies unpeopled, and
unhusbanded, and uninhabited. It is reported by a Gentleman of good worth, that
did lately see it, that in that same goodly valley, (the eye of man has
seldom seen a goodlier) he found grass growing to the waste, waste-high,
that so perished unmowen and uneaten; it came to no better end, then the grass
upon the housetop. All those same goodly places, that you find mentioned in
the Scripture, as fruitful as any places under heaven, are now made nothing
but habitations for lions, and wolves, and wild bores, and leopards. Here is
that that the Psalmist tells us, that God brings a fruitful land to
barrenness, for the wickedness of the people that dwell in it.

Brethren, we live in a pleasant land too: it were too long to reckon up the
commodities of this land; you know it your selves, Your lot is fallen in a good
ground, and you have a goodly heritage.

Let us first be thankful to this good God, for this good land that he has
given us: And, let us take heed, that the pleasures of this land make us not
forget him. I pray, mark; When ever God shows to his people the commodities
of this pleasant land of Canaan that he would give them, as in Deuter. c. 8.
he gives them this charge; When thou art come into that good land, and find
it a land of springs and fountains, of wheat and barley, of pomegranats and
vines and fig trees; a land, the stones whereof are Iron, and out of whose
mountains thou may dig brass. When thou have eaten, and art full, then
take heed, that thou forgettest not the Lord thy God that gave thee that good
land.

It is an easy matter to forget God in abundance; Nimia bonorum copia, ingens
malorum occasio, too too great plenty of good, is too too great an occasion of
ill. That same abundance of good things, that should make us remember our good
God, makes us forget him.

Then take another lesson with you, and I have done with it; that is, Take heed
that we defile not this good land. Were a land never so pleasant; were it a
more pleasant land then this land of Judea; were it the very Eden, the garden
of God: if it once come to be defiled with sins of an high nature, Gods soul
can take no pleasure in it. I conclude this point with that exhortation that
David, a little before his death, gave to the Overseers of the people
assembled together: And now (quoth he) here, before the Congregation of
Israel, and in the Audience of your God, I give you this charge; That you seek
the Commandments of God, and keep them, that you may enjoy the good things of
this land, and continue them to inherit to your children, and to your
childrens children for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28. 8. This is the first thing, the sin
of theirs in despising this land: it was a fearful sin, in regard the land
was a pleasant land.

The sin was yet a little more fearful, (I can but touch this point) if you
consider how they despised this land, in regard of the house of bondage whence
they came. They knew their usage in Egypt well enough; they knew how they were
laden there with burdens, and blows, and injuries: so laden, that their
very lives were bitter to them, as the Scripture says, all the while they were
in Egypt; yet, forsooth, they will forsake this pleasant land, to go back
again to the house of bondage.

If they had despised this pleasant land, in regard of something that had been
better, it had been well done. If a man despise the fair beautiful wife that
lies in his bosom, out of love to Christ and the Gospel, from the which that
wife would seek to draw him; he should do well to despise her. Hearken what
our Lord says: He that forsakes not father and mother, and wife and children,
and all for my sake and the Gospels, he is not worthy of me; he cannot be my
disciple, Luke 14. 26. But, if a man despise this fair beautiful wife, out of
love to a foul baggagely strumpet; this is a sin, an untolerable abominable
sin.

If this people had despised this good land, this pleasant land, in regard of
heaven, of an heavenly country, O, they had done well in that; their fathers
are commended for doing that, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: the Apostle says of
them, They regarded not that good land of Canaan: they took themselves there
to be like pilgrims and strangers; they regarded not that, They sought for a
better country, the heavenly one, Hebrews 11. ver. 16. If I say they had
despised this pleasant land, in regard of heaven, they had done well in it; but
to despise it, in regard of Egypt, though it was a fruitful land (we deny it
not) though it was a plentiful land; yet, in regard it was the land of their
servitude and bondage, wherein they had been so ill used, and out of which God
brought them with such a mighty hand and outstretched arm; to despise this
pleasant land, in regard of this: O, that we had died in Egypt! this was a
thing that made God lift up his hand, that for this they should never come to
the land of Promise. This was the sin of them.

And, brethren, is it not our sin too? You heard how the people despised the
good land God promised them, and you think this was a great sin of them to do
it; and you will say more when you hear the words following. But are not we
guilty of the same sin too? Has not God promised us a country, a better
country then this? That same better country that the Apostle speaks of, when
he says, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob sought a better country. Has not God
promised us a Canaan; not a terrestrial, but a celestial Canaan, a Kingdom
of heaven? And we say of the fruits of the land; O, they are glorious fruits!
O, what a blessed country is that! O, how happy are they that are in heaven!
We all say, it is a goodly country. If some of these countries upon earth are
such Paradises, O, what a Paradise is that in heaven! What a country is that!
Yet, though God has promised us that country, when we are told it is hard
coming by it, and we must fight for this country before we come to it; and
that not with flesh and blood, those sons of Anak, those mighty men; but with
Principalities and powers, with the devil, with the world, with the flesh;
that we must forsake our selves, and forsake all that stands in the way, father
and mother, and wife and children, and through many afflictions come to it: O,
then we despise this good land; nay, we despise it in regard of the earth.
Shall I (says the worldling) look after an uncertainty in heaven, and lose my
certainty here upon earth? Must I forsake such a sin that brings me in profit?
Must I forsake such sins as bring me pleasure upon earth? No, let others seek
heaven, if they will; let me have earth. Thus they cry for earth, and thus
they prefer the spiritual Egypt of this world, before the celestial Canaan,
the Kingdom of heaven. Thus we prefer a mess of pottage before our
birthright; and our swine, with the Gergasens, before Christ; and these vain
transitory joys, before the joys of the Kingdom of heaven, that cannot be
conceived, and shall never be ended. To which eternal joys, the Lord, for his
mercies sake, and for his Christ's sake, bring us.

FINIS.
PSALM. 106. 24, 25. Yea, they despised the pleasant land; they believed not his
Word:

But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD, etc.


YOU have in these verses four sins of this people. We have done with the
first of them, which was this; They despised the pleasant land.

I now go on to the next sin, which is, their Unbelief; They believed not
his Word.

That word was a word of promise; that promise was a particular promise of the
land; they did not believe that. God told them that he would give them the
land; he had sworn he would give it them. The spies come and tell them it was
impossible that they should possess the land; they believe the spies, but they
would not believe God: Here was their sin.

I will first show the hainousness of this sin in this people.

And then show what use we are to make of it: both, as briefly as I can.

The hainousness of this peoples sin appears in this; They would not believe
God: It was infidelity. There is a question, among Divines, what was the first
sin that was in the world, (we do not speak of the sin of apostate Angels,
but among men.) Some say it was disobedience, some say it was pride, some make
it an inordinate desire of superfluous knowledge, some one thing, some another;
but, if you mark the story well, you will find that the first sin was
Unbelief: God had told them, that, in the day that they eat of that tree,
they should die. Moriendo moriemini; Dying, ye shall die; that is, As sure as
you live, you shall die, if you eat. The devil comes and tells them, they
shall not die, but live in a better condition then they did before. Our first
Parents believed Satan, but not God; Infidelity then was the first sin: that
ushered in Pride, Pride brought in an inordinate desire of superfluous
knowledge, that brought in disobedience, and that brought in the judgment of
God upon them and all their posterity. As unbelief was the first sin, so
unbelief is a sin that is exceeding odious to God: God cannot endure to be
distrusted, that he may not be believed. Man is deceitful upon the weights,
and lighter then vanity it self; yet man loves not to be distrusted, but sibi
quisque credi vult, etc. as he says; Every man willingly would be credited.
If man, I say, love not to be distrusted; surely, God loves it not, who is not
only true, but truth it self; that same Prime, Original Truth, whereupon all
truth has its dependence. He is light, in him is no darkness at all: He is
truth, in him there is no falsehood at all: There is none actively, he cannot
deceive; God is not as man, that he should lie, says Balaam, Numbers 23. 17.
God cannot lie, says the Apostle, Titus 1. 2. It is not possible that God
should lie, Heb. 6. ver. 8. Now, if that man, that is a liar, (every man is so,
for, every man is a liar,) If, I say, that man, being a liar, does not love to
be accounted a liar: if that man think it a great dishonor to put up a lie;
if a man will present death upon the point of a sword to that man that shall
give him the lie: if a lying man cannot endure to be accounted a liar; what,
can God endure it? Will God brook it? Hearken what the Apostle says, 1 John 5.
10. He that believes not God, makes him a liar.

The sin of the people was yet greater, because God had not only promised to
give them the land, and had given his word for it, though that had been enough,
but he had given his oath for it; he had sworn that they should have the
land. This Moses tells them in Deuteronomy. 1. that God had lift up his hand, and had
sworn that he would give them the land.

An oath among men, is, as the Heathen man calls it, the greatest bond of
assurance that can be between man and man; there is reason for it. There are
certain principles, as these: That there is a God, that this God is present in
every place, that he is acquainted with every secret, that he is a Patron of
truth, that he is a revenger of falsehood, that he is a just God, and
therefore will; and an omnipotent God, and therefore is able to plague every
one that swears falsely. There are these principles in the heart of every
child of man: Though the conclusions that may be drawn from thence, may be,
and sometimes are, in some men obliterated and blotted out; yet the principles
remain in man: therefore it is presumed, because there are these principles in
our hearts, that no man dares take that God to be his witness, and call upon
him to be a witness and a Judge in that that he knows is false. Hence it
comes, that an oath (as the Apostle says) is set for the confirmation of all
truth. An oath among men is the greatest bond of assurance that can be given:
Abimelech required no other assurance of Abraham for his covenant, but his
oath; Swear to me, says he, Genes. 21. 23. Jacob, when he had purchased
the birthright of Esau, requires no other assurance for the birthright, but
his oath; though Esau were a profane man: Swear to me that I shall have it,
Genes. 25. ver. 33. Rahab required no other assurance of the spies for her
safety, and her fathers house; Swear to me, to confirm it.

Now, if there be such a bond of assurance in an oath, between man and man; if
an oath be the greatest bond of assurance, that can be between man and man; and
we dare believe upon an oath: may we not believe God upon his oath? God
(says the Apostle) to show the immutability of his counsel to them that
should be heirs of promise, bound himself by an oath; that by two immutable
things (by those two immutable things, he means his word and his oath)
wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong comfort,
Hebrews 6. ver. 18. Now here was the sin of that people, they would not
believe God upon his oath. Happy people! happy they might have been, for whose
sake God was content to bind himself by an oath for the performance of his
promise: But, O wretched men, that will not believe God, no not upon his oath!
They believed not his word.

Nay, yet further, their sin is yet greater then thus; they did not believe God
upon experience. For what was it they were afraid of? The Anakims, great men,
men that might tread them down, as we do Grasshoppers under our feet. But
they had experience of Gods mercy: there was never people that had better
experience of Gods power and mercy; it was never magnified as it was toward
this people: therefore God, you well perceive, is never so offended when he is
distrusted, as when he is distrusted upon experience.

You may see, in Psalm 78. 20. The people there were in want of bread; Indeed,
say they, He stroke the rock, and the water gushed out, and the streams
over-flowed: But, can he give bread? Can he furnish a Table in the
wilderness? See, they had great and wonderful experience of Gods power. They
wanted water, God sent them water miraculously out of the rock, and easily; he
did but smite the rock, and abundance of water gushed out, and the streams
over-flowed: yet, they come and ask out of unbelief; yea, But can he give
bread? He that gave us water, can he give us bread too? How did God take this
question? Look in the next verse, The Lord heard it, and his wrath was kindled
against Jacob, and the fire burned against Israel, because they believed not
the word of the Lord.

What, will not men believe upon experience? Experience breeds hope. Among
men, if I had experience of a man's goodness, if I have bought and sold with
him, and have ever found him a just, and an honest man, that never brake his
day with me; Dare not I trust this man upon experience? May a man be trusted
upon experience? a good man? and shall not God take it ill that he cannot be
trusted upon experience? You see the sin of this people.

Let me now come and make use of it. Let me tell you, It was not only their
sin, it is our sin too, It is the sin of us all. The best of Gods children have
need to mourn every day over their unbelief. They that do not find this
unbelief in themselves, surely, are strangers to themselves. If a man were not
a stranger to himself, he would find such a deal of unbelief, as would
make him mourn continually under it, and strive against it.

It is a wondrous hard thing (brethren) to believe Gods word, to believe a
promise. Let me give you but an instance in one promise, Hebrews 13. 5. Let
your conversation (says the Apostle) be without coveteousnes: Be content with
those things that you have. Why? For he has said it, (this is the promise)
he has said, I will not fail thee, I will not forsake thee. He has said it.
Who is that has said it? Pythagoras his scholars were wont to attribute so
much to their Master, that when in their Disputes it came to Ipse dixit, He
said it, there was no more talking of it, all was well, they believed it.
Behold, a greater then Pythagoras is here; Ipse dixit, He has said it: and, I
think, he never said a thing more earnestly, then he said that. There are in
the Greek five negatives in that sentence: I do not remember the like in all
the Scripture besides. The Grecians, when they are wont to deny a thing
earnestly, double the negative: The Spirit of God here is pleased, not only to
double it, but also to treble it; (...) a thing cannot be spoken with more
earnestnes. We know not how to express it in our English, but we translate
it thus; I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. It is well so: It is, as if
he should say, Believe me upon my word, I will never leave thee; no, no, no,
I will not leave thee. It is so earnest, God never promised a thing with more
earnestnes then that.

And, besides, we have found in experience the truth of this promise many a
time. We are here some of us twenty years old, and some of us forty, and
some sixty, and some above; and, in all this time, we have found how true this
was: upon twenty, or forty, or sixty years experience, we may say, God never
left us yet, he never forsook us. We have been sometimes in sickness, and
sometimes in danger, and sometimes in want; God never left us yet, he never
forsook us: yet, notwithstanding all this, we dare not believe that same word,
we dare not believe it.

Do not tell me that thou do, certainly thou do not believe it. Even as
Saul would needs justify himself to Samuel, when he reserved the best of the
cattle, contrary to Gods command; I have kept Gods commandment (quoth he) O
thou blessed of the Lord. Have thou so, says Samuel? Then what means the
bleating of these sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of these oxen? Me
thinks, I might say so: thou say thou beleevest the promise of God, that
he will not leave thee, nor forsake thee; Do thou so? Do thou believe
it? Then what mean those false weights, those false measures, and those false
oaths? And what means that cunning overreaching of thy neighbor in
bargaining, and that secret undermining of him in his estate? And what means
thine inordinate carking, and caring? That same losing of many a sweet sleep,
and losing many a sweet Sermon for the things of this life? Surely, if thou
did believe that God would not leave thee, nor forsake thee, thou would,
indeed, use those means whereby the providence of God might be served; thou
would never be thus worldly, thou would never be thus covetous, thou
would never use this sharking, nor these dishonest tricks if thou did
believe: As sure as the Lord lives, thou beleevest not that promise, I will
not leave thee, nor forsake thee.

I could show the like in many other promises. Good Lord, how slow of heart are
we to believe any promise that God has made to us, either concerning this
life, or concerning a better, considering with me these things that I tell you!

First, considering how much seed of unbelief there is in the nature of every
man upon the earth, even in the best of Gods children; and considering what a
deep root this seed takes in all our hearts. Then considering that the time
that God has set for the performance of promises; is,

First, uncertain.

And many times long before a promise be performed.

Then consider again, that same wonderful working of God, when his works go
against his promise, as many times it seems. God promises many times a
blessing, and he seems to go against his word.

Then considering how busy and subtle the devil is, laboring still, as he
did with Eve, to discredit the truth of Gods promise.

Then considering how ready we are to listen, as Eve, to the whisperings, and
suggestions of that subtle serpent. Certainly, brethren, we should never
please our selves in any measure of faith: but labor still for a greater
measure thereof, and never think we can lay hold fast enough upon the promises
of God. O, that is a safe course that Mr Luther gave; In all temptations, and
conflicts, and combats, and agonies, still urge the promise: whatsoever the
devil can object against it, still hold the promise. That that we would hiss
at in schools, in disputes among men, is a good course in disputing with Satan:
When we cannot answer the Premises, deny the Conclusion; hold to the promise.
The Covenant of day and night may be altered, that there may be neither day nor
night any more in their season: but there is never a promise in the Covenant of
grace but it shall stand for ever: Lord, I believe it, help mine unbelief. So
much shall suffice concerning the second sin, They believed not his word. I
come to the third, They murmured in their tents.

There is a threefold murmuring;

There is murmur displicentiae, a murmur of displeasure, of dislike and
discontent that is against God, when things go with us otherwise then we
would have them.

Then there is murmur inobedientiae, a murmur of disobedience against our
Superiors, when we think that they command us something that we conceive to
be unreasonable.

Then there is murmur invidentiae, a murmur of envy against our neighbors;
when we think they are in a better condition then we are, we dislike it. The
Grecians murmured against the Jews, because their women were neglected, Acts
6. 1. Cain murmured, because Abels sacrifice was accepted, and his was not.
Judas murmured at the box of Spicknard that was bestowed upon our Lord. The
elder brother of the prodigal child murmured that the fat calf should be
killed for his riotous brother, that had spent his fathers goods among harlots.
This people murmured thus against Moses, and Aaron; They envied Aaron the Saint
of the Lord, and murmured against Moses in their tents. This we speak not of
now; this was no^ (...) or envy.

What murmur was it then?

The other two:

First, a murmuring of displeasure, and discontent against God.

And then a murmur of disobedience, both against God, and against the
Magistrate.

First, I say, it was a murmur of discontent against God, and a fearful
murmur; you shall seldom hear of the like. I pray, mark this; When God
promised them the land at any time, he usually promises it to them out of his
love; Because God loved the fathers, therefore he chose the seed, Deuter. c.
4. ver. 37. In another place, Deuter. 7. ver. 8. The Lord set his love upon
you, not because you were many; for you were the fewest of all people; but
because be loved you, therefore he brought you out of the land of Egypt. I
think, there was never Nation had so many sensible demonstrations of Gods
love, as this people had: Do you think that God would have brought them out of
the land of bondage, with such a mighty outstretched arm, if he had not loved
them? Do you think he would have made a way for them in the sea, and afterward
have fed them with bread from heaven, and given them water out of the rock, and
have guided them with a pillar of fire in the night, and a pillar of a cloud in
the day, if he had not loved them? Do you think he would have appeared to
them in fire, and have spoken to them in an audible voice out of Mount Sinai,
and have chosen them there to be a peculiar people to him of all the people in
the earth, if he had not loved them?

You will say, Who doubted of this love? O, I pray you, hear this people,
hearken to this people; out of their impatience (and impatiency is ever full of
misconstructions) they impute all this that God had done, to the very hatred of
them. Would you think it? Look in Deuteronomy. c. 1. ver. 27. Because God hated us,
therefore he brought us out of Egypt to destroy us with the Amorites. O
sinful Nation, worthy to be hated indeed, not worthy to be loved, that takes
Gods love thus for hatred. This was the murmur of impatiency.

The murmur of disobedience against God and the Magistrate was in these words;
O, that we had died in the wilderness! O, that we were dead! They were but
afraid of death, and they might have lived, if they had believed; they were
but afraid of death, and, for fear they should die, they wish, O, that we
were dead! The like murmuring you shall find often times of this people: Forty
years long was God grieved, and vexed with their continual murmuring. One
while they murmured for want of water; after they had water, then they murmur
at the bitterness of the water. One while they murmur for want of bread;
another time they had bread, and the bread of Angels, the bread of heaven; then
they murmur because they had nothing but bread. One while they murmur at the
government of Moses and Aaron; God punished them for that murmuring: then they
murmur again because God punished them. They murmur at the tediousness of the
way from Egypt to Cadesh-Barnea; now they murmur, because they may not go from
Cadesh-Barnea to Egypt again. Thus they were like swine: For, as the swine,
whether full or empty, waking or sleeping, is ever grunting: so this people
were still murmuring.

The Apostle, 1 Corinthians. chap. 10. ver. 10. says, that this is written for our
example, that we should not murmur as they murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer. Brethren, beware of this sin of murmuring. I will not speak of the
murmuring of envy; you have in this Psalm v. 16. They murmured one against
another. I do not speak of that; but I begin,

First, beware of that murmuring of disobedience. Children, take heed how you
murmur against your Parents. Servants, take heed how you murmur against your
Masters. Subjects, take heed how you murmur against your Sovereign. Let
nothing (says the Apostle) be done with murmuring, and reasoning. Do all
things without murmurings, and disputings, Phil. chap. 2. ver. 14. (...), as
Chrysostom on that place excellently: It is a grievous sin that same
murmuring. It is better (says he there) for a man not to have his work done,
then done with murmuring. The voice of murmuring is but a low voice, it is not
loud; it is rather muttered, then uttered; it is but a low voice: It may be the
man hears thee not against whom thou murmurest: But it is said, The Lord heard
the voice of this peoples murmuring, Deuteronomy chap. 1. And the Author of the
book of Wisdom, excellently; There is (quoth he) auris zeli, an ear of
jealousy (he speaks of divine jealousy; and that is a jealousy as hot as
fire) and there is an ear of a Jealous God, and the voice of murmuring (says
he) shall not be hid: therefore, (says he) in the next verse, Beware of
murmuring. There is not such a secret thought, that shall go for naught. If
we must give an account to God for every idle word, surely, we shall give an
account to God for words of desperate murmuring. That is for the one, Beware of
that murmuring of disobedience.

Then of the other, Beware, above all, of that murmuring of impatience. There
are a generation of men that cannot be troubled with any thing that they would
not be troubled with, nor can they want any thing that they would have; they
must not be crossed with wet nor dry, with wind nor rain, with foul nor fair
weather; but their mouths are presently set against heaven, and they will not
stick to charge God foolishly, (as the people did) that God hates them.

I pray, let me only give you a few remedies against this impatient murmuring.

The first is this; Consider, that that same Discipline of God, at which we
murmur, is from God; Affliction comes not out of the dust, as Eliphaz speaks.
There is nothing befalls thee in thine estate, but it comes from a Divine
power, and is guided by a most wise providence; and will thou murmur at it?

The very savage beast, that is ready to flee at the throat of a stranger, will
endure it self to be stricken and beaten by his keeper. Surely, thou art worse
then a beast, if thou will not suffer God thy Father, and thy Maker, and thy
Keeper to strike thee.

Then, secondly, again consider, God is righteous in all his ways, and holy
in all his works. Discat non murmurare qui malum patitur, Let not a man that
suffers ill murmur; though he know not for what ill he suffers, he can but
suffer justly. There is nothing but it comes with due desert, because God is
just, and it shall have a due profit. The judgments of God, some of them are
secret, some of them open, they are all righteous; never murmur. We desire that
God would not enter into judgment with us: Shall we enter into judgment with
God? we do so, if we murmur.

Thirdly, consider, that this same Discipline that thou murmurest at, it may be
it is not so much penal, as medicinal. Thou murmurest, peradventure that thou
art poor; if thou were rich, peradventure, thou would be proud of it. Thou
murmurest because thou art kept low, Thou art a hewer of wood, and a drawer of
water to the host; peradventure, if thou were higher, thou would be more
licentious. Thou murmurest, peradventure, because thou have a weak sickly body;
if thou were more healthy, it may be, thou would be more intemperate: God
knows what is better for thee, then thou do for thy self: Therefore, as
there was a law among the Persians, that if any man had been beaten at the
Kings command, he should have been so far from murmuring against the King,
that he was bound by that law to come and give the King thanks, as though it
was a favor from the King; he must come and give the King thanks, that he
was pleased to remember him. Surely, when God beats us with any affliction,
with poverty, or abasement, or whatsoever, we should be so far from
murmuring, that we should come and give God thanks that he is pleased to
remember us, and to make us again to remember him, that otherwise might have
forgotten him days without number.

Fourthly, and lastly, consider the fearful judgment of God that falls upon
murmurers. I could have showed many examples, but remember this heavy
judgment of God that at last fell upon this people for murmuring: the Lord
bare with it a while: they murmured at Marah, he bare with it; and at
Rephidim, and he bare with it; and at Taberah, and he punished them a little;
and at Kebroth-Hattanah, and then he punished them a little: But at length he
would bear no more, but swear; he lift up his hand, that they should never
enter into the land of Promise; they entered not into that land. And, let me
conclude with that speech of Gregory; Nullus qui murmurat, etc. there are none
that murmur that enter into the Kingdom of heaven; nor shall any but the sons
of peace, ever participate of that peace and tranquillity the Saints shall
there enjoy. Let us therefore take heed of murmuring.

FINIS.
Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.
OF this Sickness, this grievous Sickness that now rages and reigns, and
spreads it self more and more among us, as we are not busy to seek a reason
of it in natural causes; so we are not especially to seek the remedy of it by
natural means. It is no hand but that of God that smites us; and there is no
hand but that of God can heal us. It is no hand but that of God that gave the
wound; and it is no hand but Gods that must bind up again. Therefore it was an
usual custom, both among the Jews and among the Gentiles, when as the Plague
began to break out at any time among them, the first thing they did, was, they
did seek to appease the wrath of God by sacrifice: The Jews did it by the
light of grace, and the Gentiles by the light of nature. The Sickness being
now broken out, and that a long time, our course must be still to appease Gods
wrath by sacrifice.

Sacrifices in the old Law were many; in the new Testament there is but one
true, real, external, propitiatory sacrifice, that our blessed Lord offered
on the Altar of the Cross; a sacrifice of a sweet savor to God.

But though there be none of that kind, yet there be sacrifices of other kind
a great number, by which we must seek to appease Gods wrath. There be
spiritual sacrifices, says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 5. And what are those?

There be these five especially:

First Prayer, that is a sacrifice; Let my prayer ascend as incense, and the
lifting up of my hands as an evening sacrifice, Psalm. 141. 2.

The second sacrifice whereby we should appease Gods wrath, is a contrite
heart, that David speaks of, The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit; a
broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51. 17. That is
the second.

A third is a mortified body; I beseech you brethren (says the Apostle) by the
mercies of God, offer up your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to
God Romans 12. 1.

A fourth sacrifice is in the Verse before my Text, a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving: The Apostle calls it there, The fruit of the lips; but Hos^a,
from whom the Apostle has it, calls it, The calves of the lips. Calves were
wont to be offered in sacrifice; and these calves of the lips ought to be
offered to God, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

That God may be pleased in mercy to give us occasion to offer this sacrifice,
for our deliverance from this infectious and venomous disease, when his good
will and pleasure is, I have in the mean time now thought good to speak of a
fifth sacrifice, of Almes-giving; To do good, and to communicate, forget not;
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

I need not to divide the Text, it breaks it self into two parts; 1. An
Exhortation; And 2. The Reason of it.


To do good, and to communicate, forget not; there is the Exhortation.

With such sacrifices God is well pleased; there is the Reason of it.

Concerning the Exhortation, I shall handle none but that to day, by Gods
grace; consider there,

The matter, the thing we are exhorted to;

And the manner, how the Exhortation is framed.

The thing we are exhorted to is double, twofold, Well-doing, and
Communicating; To do good, and communicate.


These are the things we are exhorted to.

For the manner how the Exhortation is framed, it is not thus, Do good and
communicate; but, Do not forget to do good; it is a thing of great necessity:
whatever thing you forget beside, forget not this; it is a thing you may
easily forget: to do good, and to communicate, forget not. And of these, with
Gods assistance, with all brevity and plainness I can. I have many matters to
go through, and I would be brief.

Mark, I beseech you, first, the two things we are exhorted to; they are
Substantives in the Greek; how they differ, or whether there be difference
between them, Writers do differ. Some think they are both one and the same
thing, in two words. Others do think the latter word is of somewhat larger
extent then the former, The first word does signify an almes-deed, or such
relief as we give the poor; that is, Well-doing. The second word
[Communicate] contains under it all mutual offices of love and kindness,
that pass between man and man.

For the better knowing of that communicating, what it is to communicate, let
me first tell you, that as several Countries have their several commodities,
as you know, one Country abounds with good corn, another Country has good
wine, another has good fruit, another Country has good breed of cattle:
Solomon had his oaks from Bashan, but his cedars from Lebanon, his fur from
Shebar, his Almug-trees and gold from Ophir, his spices and sweet odours from
Arabia, his fine linen and horses were brought out of Egypt; his ivory, apes,
and peacocks, were brought out of Selvesia by his navy and fleet of Tharshish.
As several Countries have their several commodities, so several men have
several gifts or blessings, which they are to communicate to others; as every
Country by Merchants communicate the commodities that abound in them to other
Countries, and they from other Countries receive in other commodities they want.

God would have one Country to stand in need of another, for some commodity or
other: So it is among men, God has so disposed of his blessings, as that there
is no man but stands in need one of another. There is a necessity of receiving
and communicating. Solomon (Eccles. 5. 9.) tells us, The King is served by the
tillage of the field; the very King stands in need of husbandry. The Citizens
sometime stand in need of the Country man, and the Country man another time
has as much need of the Citizen. The poor man cannot stand in so much need of
the rich man at one time, but the rich man at another time stands in as much
need of the poor. There is never a member of the body can say to another, I
have no need of thee, as the Apostle tells us, The eye cannot say to the hand,
I have no need of thee; nor the head cannot say to the foot, I have no need of
you. Nay, quoth the Apostle, those members that are feeble, are necessary.
Those poor men that peradventure are contemptible in the sight of the world,
are necessary. God has so disposed of his gifts, and dispensed them with such
wisdom, as that he would still have an intercourse of kindness between man
and man. There is a necessity of receiving, a necessity of communicating of
gifts.

Some men can tell how to receive, but they know not how to communicate: Nabal
and his servants received a great deal of kindness at the hands of David and
his servants, they confessed it; David's servants was a wall about them by day
and by night, they protected and defended them from all dangers, all the while
they were in the wilderness; but when David sent to Nabal for some relief, in
the day of Nabals sheep-shearing, What? quoth the Churl, Shall I take my
bread; see how he appropriates things still, My bread, and my water, and my
flesh, that I have prepared for my shearers, and give them to men that I know
not whence they come? 2 Samuel 25. 11. He knew how to receive kindnesses, but he
knew not how to communicate.

As God has established a distinction of proprieties among men, while every
man governes his own house, and rules his own servants, and tills his own
land, and feeds his own cattle, and mannageth his own affairs; I say, while
God does thus, every man finds sweet experience of Gods particular providence.
As God has established thus a distinction of propriety, of house, and goods,
and land among men; so God on the other side has established a Communion of
Saints, and Communion of Saints does not abolish the distinction of Propriety,
nor the distinction of Propriety does not abolish the Communion of Saints; they
may both stand together, a distinction of the Propriety and the Communion of
Saints, God will have us, in regard of possession, to have things private and
several that are our own; but God would have us make these things common, in
regard of use, upon several occasions: and then a man does good, when he
communicates that good that God has given him, to the good of others.

Every man must consider with himself, wherein has God enabled me to do the
greatest good? (as Sampson knew wherein his strength lay) and then to his
uttermost power to do good, and communicate to others of that which God has
given him: Forget not to do this, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

This same doing of good and communicating, may be done many ways, and mark
them, because there is no body may be exempted from this precept of the
Apostle, it concerns every man, and every man may do good and communicate
some way or other. We are forbid to call our brother, Racha; which in the
Syriack signifies empty, vacuous: A man empty! says St. Jerome upon that word,
how can a man be said to be bare and empty, whom the Spirit of God has filled
and replenished with some gift or other, that he may communicate, and in so
doing do good?

There are many ways of doing good: First, a man may do good to the Public,
or he may do good to the Private; he may do good to the Church and
Commonwealth in general, or a man may do good to some special persons in
the Church or Commonwealth in particular. And to distribute and do good, both
to the one and to the other, forget not.

For the first, to the Public, a man may do good many ways; These ways
especially come to my mind.

First, a man may do good to the Public, by the building, or enlarging, or
adorning Churches and Chapels, and Oratories for the service of God. A man may
do good to the Public, by erecting and endowing of Schools and Colleges for
the education of youth. A man may do good to the Public, by making
Highways, and Causies, and Bridges for the Travelers. A man may do good to
the Public, by the conveyance of water, that may be useful either to City or
Country, and many other things. There are many ways more that a man may do
good to the Public in, and to do good to the Public, forget not; for with
such sacrifice God is pleased. For some such works as I have named, the memory
of some good men is blessed to this day, and will be hereafter, from generation
to generation, for such public works.

Then secondly, a man may do good to some special person in Church and
Commonwealth; and that two ways:

1. A man may do good to the body; or, 2. To the soul:
The good that a man communicates, may be either a Corporal, or Spiritual
good.

Then does a man good to the body, to the outward estate I mean, when he
communicates such a thing as is a means of his comfortable being in the state
of Nature. But a man does good to the soul, when he does communicate such a
thing as may be a means of a wel-being here in the state of grace, and of his
eternal wel-being hereafter in the state of glory. Now, to do good both to
the soul and body of thy brother, forget not; for with such sacrifice, etc.

I begin with the soul first, that is the principal part. Do thou see thy
brother ignorant of some truth that he should know, that is necessary to
salvation? Thou can not do him a greater good then to instruct him. Do
thou see him doubtful what to do? Why then do him good to direct him. Do
thou see them over-taken with some infirmity? Why then restore them again, as
the Apostle says, Brethren, if any of you be over-taken with infirmity, you
that are spiritual, restore such a man. The Greek word is, put him in joint
again; he is out of joint, set him right, put him in joint with the spirit of
meekness and gentleness. Do thou see thy brother unruly, and rush into
sin, as the horse into the battle? Thou may do a great deal of good,
to admonish and reprove him, to pluck him (as Jude says in his Epistle) out of
the fire, that he perish not. Do thou see thy poor brother feeble and
weak-hearted? Thou shall do a great deal of good then to encourage him. Do
thou see him dejected and cast down, and almost swallowed up of despair? Thou
can not do a greater good then comfort him. These things you may do. And if
thou see thy brother past all help from men, then thou can not do a greater
good then to pray and beg help for him at Gods hand. And in very deed, that
sweet Communion of Saints that we believe in the Creed, I believe the Communion
of Saints, that Communion of Saints, appears in nothing more then the doing of
good thus to the soul one man of another; to edify and build up one another
in our holy faith, to exhort one another to holiness of life, to provoke one
another to love and good works, to comfort one another in sickness, to mourn
one over another for your corruptions: This they may do when they are
together. And then, pray one for another: and that they may do when they are a
thousand miles asunder. This is the Communion of Saints. Thus we may do good
to the souls of our brethren; and to do this good to the souls of your
brethren, forget not; with this sacrifice God is well pleased.

To the body we may do good, in the outward estate, many ways; I will think
of these three especially.

First, we may do them good, defendendo, by defending of our brother; by
defending his person from violence, by defending his goods from ruin, by
defending his name from reproach and dishonor. Pro. 24. 11. Deliver him that
is appointed to die, if it be in thy power. Deliverance it is a thing that holy
Job, among other works of his, he speaks of this, I delivered the poor when
he cried, and helped him that was fatherless; I brake the jaws of the wicked
in pieces, and took the prey out of his teeth. If thou can do it by thy
calling, if thy calling will allow thee to do it, thou art bound to do it, to
do that good; to right them when they suffer wrong, either in their person, or
goods, or good name; if it be in thy power to right thy brother, do good that
way, defend him. That is one way.

Secondly, thou may do good, accommodando, by lending; and indeed,
sometimes a man may do as much good by lending, as by giving. And this is a
work of mercy that God requires of his people; mark that place, Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8.
Thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother; But
thou shall open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient
for his need, in that which he wants. Thou shall help and help him wide, so
the word is, Thou shall open wide to thy brethren; and shall surely lend to
them: The Original word doubles it, in lending thou shall lend; that is, thou
shall surely lend, and lend sufficiently, according to his need. So the Old
Testament. And Christ in the New Testament says, Lend, looking for nothing
again, Luke 6. 35. And it is the commendation given to the righteous man, A
righteous man is merciful and lends, Psalm. 112. 5. but then mark the words
that follow after too, he guides his affairs with discretion. That is the
second way.

Thirdly, a man may do good, donando, by free giving: Of what? That which is
according to the necessity of our brother. If he be hungry, then we shall do
good to feed him, to give him bread; if he be thirsty, we must give him drink;
if he be naked, we must give him clothes; if he be sick, if it be in our
power, we are to give him remedy; if he be dead, then to give him burial,
decent burial; and among the works of charity, and works of mercy, you shall
ever find reckoned in Scripture, the burial of the dead. When the Traitor
Judas grudged at the box of Spikenard that was bestowed upon our blessed
Savior, says he, Let her alone, she has done a good work toward my
burial. And, The Lord show mercy, says David, to the men of Iabesh-Gilead,
because they showed mercy to his Master Saul. What mercy? Many they buried his
bones: It is a work of mercy. Thus you see how many ways there be of doing
good and communicating: A man may do good you see to the Public many ways.
And then to the Private, a man may do good to the soul, to the body: To the
soul by instructing, by directing, by admonishing, by reproving, by
encouraging, by comforting, by praying for them. A man may do good to the
body, by defending them from wrong, by lending that which is necessary, by
giving according to their necessity that ask. And thus to do good to the
Public, to Private, to the souls and bodies of our brethren, when it is in
our power, forget not, it is a sacrifice with which God is pleased.

Seeing there are so many ways of doing good thus, I will set down two
Correllaries and Consectaries; two things follow on it.

The first is this, Since there are so many ways of doing good, certainly as
long as we live here in this life, we can never want opportunity of doing
good, some way or other. That is the first. We cannot want oportunities of
doing good, there be so many ways to do it; either a man shall find some
ignorant poor body that he may instruct, as David did, Come ye children,
hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Or a man may find
some person wronged, whom he may help and succor, as Job did. Or a man may
sit in his tent door, and find some stranger pass by that he may entertain,
as Abraham did. Or a man may find some fatherless children that he may bring
up, as Pharaohs daughter brought up Moses. Or a man may find some naked person
that he may clothe, as Dorcas did. Or a man may find some wounded person,
which if he have the gift and skill of healing, he may heal; as the good
Samaritane did. I might go further: It is impossible while thou art here but
thou shall meet with oportunities of gooddoing; we cannot want them.

Let none excuse themselves with this, that they have no opportunity of doing
good; they may have daily, either to do good to the souls, or the bodies of
some; or perhaps both to soul and body. I must work, says our Lord, while it
is day; the night comes when no man can work. The day is the time of life, we
must follow our Lord in this work while it is day; while you have now time,
here is the time to work good: The night comes, when death comes there is no
more time then to do good. Eccles. 9. 10. whatsoever thine hand shall find to
do, says Solomon there, that is, whatsoever God has enabled thee to do,
whatsoever good, do it with all thy power; Why? there is neither working, nor
judgment, nor knowledge, nor invention in the grave, whither thou go.

Think of that; you are going now to your grave, you know not how long or how
short a time it may be before you come there; therefore whatsoever thy hand
shall find to do, whatever good God has enabled thee to do, do it with thy
power; for there is no doing of good in the grave, whither thou art going.

Titus the Roman Emperor is commended by St. Jerome, and he deserved
commendations indeed, and Jerome propounds his example and saying to others, as
commendable; Titus the Roman Emperor would every night call himself to
account what good he had done that day; and if he found that all the day long
there had been no good done he, would cry out to his friend, Friend, I have
lost a day. A great loss it seemed to him; but to us Christians a greater
loss, that know we must make account to God for every day of our life, what
good we have done in it.

And surely, considering in our selves how much good God requires at our hands,
first in our general calling as we are Christians; and then in our particular
calling, according to the places we hold in Church and Commonwealth, and in
our private families, it were not good to lose a day, every day to do
somewhat, as that Painter that would never have a day pass over his head
without some line drawing; we should not soffer one day to pass over our
heads without some good work done, some good work every day. Since there are
so many oportunities of doing good every day, never suffer a day to go over
our heads without some good.

The Scripture says of the devil, he be stirs himself, and the reason is,
because he knowith that his time is short. How much more should we bestirre
our selves then to do good, knowing that our time is shorter then his. While
we have time, says the Apostle, let us do good to all. The word is not in
the Greek; but while we have opportunity, so we read it in the new
Translation, While we have opportunity to do good, Gal. 6. 10. Now as long as
we live here, a charitable heart will never want opportunity of doing good, we
shall still have opportunity to do good; but when we are gone there is no
opportunity of doing good, there is no doing good after; but then we are to
receive for that we have done already, whether good or evil.

Excellently Origin, (with which I will conclude this point) says he, The six
ages of our life are as the six days of the week, they are days to gather
Manna in; but the day of death, that is our Sabbath, there is no Manna then to
be gathered, it is no day to gather Manna when we are dead; but then we shall
eat that we have gathered before. There is no doing good when we are dead, but
we then come to receive for the good we have done before, if we have done
it; therefore, To do good, and to communicate, forget not. That is the first
Correllary.

The second is this, that, Since there are so many ways of doing good, there
is no man exempted from doing good, there is no man but may do good some way
or other, Indeed, rich men must be rich in good works; they that have a great
deal of goods, must do a great deal of good. But there is no man so poor
that may challenge freedom from this doing good, because he is poor; Hark
what the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more; but
let him labor with his hands, working that which is good, that he may
communicate to them that need. See, the poor laboring man, that labors with
his hands, he must not be free from doing good. John Baptist, when he was
asked of the people, What shall we do? Marry, says he, He that has two
coats, let him impart to him that has none; and he that has meat, let him
do likewise, Luke 3. 11. Let him that has two coats, he says not, Let him
that has ten coats, a number of coats; but him that has two coats, let him
part to him that has none.

Our blessed Lord did live upon that which good women gave him; that you shall
see if you look Luke 8. 3. there it is said, that Mary Magdalene, out of whom
he had cast seven devils, and Ioanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and
Susanna, and other women ministered unto him of their substance. Christ lived
upon that that good persons gave unto him, yet out of that that was given him,
he was wont to give alms; you may perceive that by that speech of the
Apostles, when our Lord had bidden Judas, That he did, do quickly, they did
not know what he meant, but did think that he would have them provide
somewhat, or to give somewhat to the poor, Ioh. 13. 29. To give some what to
the poor. Our Lord himself lived upon that which was given him, yet he
himself, out of that which was given him, gave to the poor.

The Macedonians are commended by St. Paul for their great liberality, that
whereas they were poor, I, deeply poor, it was deep poverty, so the word is,
profound poverty, deep poverty, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 8. 2. it was
poverty; deeply poverty; yet they abounded in liberality for all that. You know
the woman in the Gospel cast in but two mytes into the Treasury, but it was all
that ever she had; it was but a little money, but it was great charity, a
great work of charity, all that ever she had.

When the Creple asked an alms of Peter and John coming to the Temple, say
they, Silver and gold we have none; but such as we have, give we thee. If
thou have no silver and gold to give, that thou can not give that, yet give
such things as thou have.

The widow of Sarepta had no gold nor silver to give the Prophet, she gave him
a cake; she lost nothing by it; you know the story. Our blessed Lord says,
Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water to a Prophet, in the name of a
Prophet, shall not lose a Prophets reward. If thou can not do good with thy
era, thy money, that thou have none to give, do it ora, thou may do good
that way. Thou shall find some ignorant persons, instruct them. Thou shall find
some doubtful, that know not what to do, direct them. Thou shall find some
poor comfortless creatures, speak comfort to them, speak kindly to them,
speak to their heart. Solomon tells us, Pro. 24. 16. Fair words are an
honey-combe, sweetness to the soul, health to the bones. If thou can not
do what good thou would, why yet be willing to do what good thou can;
do that thou art able to perform, and God will accept thy willing heart, man,
as he did the willing heart of Abraham to offer his son, though he did not
offer him; and the willing heart of David to build him an house and Temple,
though he built it not.

In a word, (to draw to a conclusion) every man must give according to his
ability, as God has enabled him; and God looks not for small things from rich
men. In the sacrifices of the old Law, in the voluntary free will offerings,
the Jews had this Canon, that if a poor man brought a rich man's offering, God
accepted of it: As, a pair of turtle doves and two young pigeons was a poor
man's offering, and another offering for rich men. If the poor man brought a
rich man's offering it was accepted; but if the rich man brought in a poor man's
offering, if a rich man came with a pair of turtles or two young pigeons, this
was not accepted; every man must give according to his ability.

We are not lords of that we possess, but stewards and bayliffes; and the
greater bayliwick, the greater account: To whom God has given but one talent,
he shall make account but for one; but to whom God has given two, he shall
make account for two; and to whom five, he shall make account for five. Thus
as our gifts increase, so our account increases; according to the cost that
God bestows on the ground, he looks for fruit: of some ground it is enough
if it bring forth thirty-fold; but of some ground God looks for sixty, and of
some an hundredfold. And they that have a great deal of goods, if they do
not a great deal of good with it, they must look for a great deal of
punishment. And how little goods soever we have, we must do good with it.

You shall hear many say; If I had so much as such a man has, I would do a
great deal of good.

I marry, a great deal of good: But first, Why should God trust thee with a
greater estate, when thou will not do good with that thou have? Why should thy
father put into thy hands a greater stock, when thou will not employ that
little? Be faithful in little, and then God will increase that, as the widows
oil, and thou shall have the blessing. To do good, forget not. You have heard
the thing exhorted unto; Now the manner.

Forget not to do it.

In a word, I will not stand upon it, It seems that we are easily apt to forget
to do good, if we be not called upon. Therefore our Apostle (for I take St.
Paul to be the Author of this Epistle) when he writes to Ti^us the Minister of
the Church, says he, Put them in remembrance, put them in mind to do good:
It is one of his charges he gives, Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to the good. It
is a part of our duty to God, to put you in mind to do good, that you may not
forget it. In Gal. 2. 8, 9. you shall find there, that the Apostles Peter, and
(...), and John, the pillars among the Apostles, those three gave the hand of
fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, that they should preach to the Gentiles, and
the other to the Jews; and there was nothing agreed upon but only this among
them, that they should remember the poor wheresoever they came: whether it
were Peter, James, and John, that preached to the Jews, or Paul and Barnabas
to the Gentiles, this was covenanted and agreed on among them, to remember the
poor, still to mind them.

Therefore people must not take it ill at the Ministers hands, if that
Ministers be still calling up on them for doing good and communicating; it is
part of our duty to call on you, that you forget not to do good. And I could
use many Arguments to persuade you still to remember to do good; but thus much
only, you must know this, (I will speak of this one thing, and then I have
done;)

That, That God that forbids to do ill, has commanded us also to do good* It
is not enough for a man not to do ill, but he must do good too. Innocence is
a good thing, to do no hurt, but innocence is not enough to salvation; It is
not though for us that we do no hurt, we must do good too. That God that
forbids us to vex the stranger, commands us in another place, to entertain
strangers: That God that in one place forbids us to grieve the widow and
fatherless children, he commands us in another place to relieve them: That
God that forbids us to take the clothing of a poor man for a pledge, commands
us in another place, to cloathe poor naked men: That God that forbids us to
do ill to any man, commands us to do good to any man. That fearful sentence,
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, it shall not be only for doing ill, but
it shall be for not doing good; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc. and because you did not to one of
those little ones, you did it not to me.

All the trees planted in the house of God, are called trees of righteousness,
Isai. 61. they must bring forth fruit; their leaves must be for medicine, and
their fruit for food; there must be good. God cannot endure that we should grow
unprofitable, let every man take heed how he grows unprofitable, that there
come no good of that he does: Take heed of unprofitablenesse, the unprofitable
servant is bound hand and foot; the unprofitable chafe is scattered with the
wind; the unprofitable fig tree is hewn down; the unprofitable salt is cast on
the dunghill; God cannot endure unprofitablenesse. I will conclude with that
place, Ezekiel. 15. 2. The Lord asks Ezekiel, Son of man, what is the vine tree
good for? The vine brings fruit, it is good and comfortable for God and man, in
Iothams parable. But God means the unprofitable vine tree, if it bear no
grapes, what is it then good for? can you make a hook or nail of it, to hang a
vessel on? You may do it with other trees, if they grow unprofitable: the
fig tree, or the apple (...) others, when they are unprofitable and bear no
fruit, you may make a pin of them to hang a vessel on; but the vine, what is
it good for? surely it is good for nothing but the fire; from one end to the
other of it, you cannot make a pin to hang a vessel on. So either there must
be grapes, there must be fruit, or woe and eternal perdition. To distribute,
and to do good, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

Heb. 13. 16. To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.
HEre is an Exhortation, and the Reason to enforce it: That Exhortation is. To
do good, and to communicate. And then do we do good, when we do
communicate that good that God has given us, to the good of others.

We have done with the Exhortation; We come to the Reason that the Apostle
uses to enforce the Exhortation with all;

For with such sacrifices God is well pleased.

He says not, With such works God is well pleased; but with such sacrifices.
There are spiritual sacrifices; Prayer is one, and Thanksgiving another, and
Repentance another, and Beneficence another. But the thing that is offered to
God in all these spiritual sacrifices, is the heart: A devout heart in Prayer,
a broken heart in Repentance, a grateful heart in Thanksgiving, and a tender
compassionate heart in Beneficence. And it is the tenderness, and
compassionatenesse, and the charitablenesse of the heart that makes it a
sacrifice to God, and well-pleasing to him, and accepted of him.

Again, he does not say, This is such a sacrifice as God requires, (though
he do require it too) but, This is such a sacrifice as God is well pleased
with. It is motive enough to persuade a good child to do this or that, if it
be a thing that will please his father: It is motive enough to persuade a
faithful honest-hearted servant to do a thing, to tell him, This will please
your Master: It is enough to persuade any good subject to do this or that, to
assure him the thing will please his Sovereign: It is motive enough to a
Christian heart; to persuade him to do good and communicate, to assure him,
that this is a thing that God is well pleased with.

But yet it is not every work done, not every thing that is in it of the
substance of a good work, that is pleasing to God; there is more required then
so, to make a sacrifice acceptable to God.

There is something required in the doer; and, There is somewhat required in
the thing done.

There is somewhat required in the doer: First, he must be in Christ, that
will offer a sacrifice acceptable to God. Take these Rules:

First, If the person of a man please not God, his works can never please him.
God accepted Abel, and his sacrifice: Abel first, and then his sacrifice. God
never accepts a man's offering, till first he accept of his person. Now God
accepts of no man's person, but in Christ; this is he, in whom I am well
pleased. The Apostle calls Christ, the Son of Gods love; and there are none
that ever God loves, but he loves them in his Son, the Son of his love,
Col. 1. 13. That is one ground.

Another is, Though a work be good as it comes from the Spirit of God, the
Author of all goodness, yet it cannot come through our fingers, but we soil
it: All our righteousnesses are as menstruous clothes. If God should be
extreme to mark what is done amiss, in our best works, who were able to abide
it? Even as the offering of the children of Israel, it was called a holy
offering; yet as holy as it was, there was some iniquity in that holy offering;
but that was laid on Aaron; and when he bare the iniquity of all the other,
the men and their works were accepted. So it is here, the works of a
Christian man may be good works, good in substance, because they are works
that God requires at his hands. Then they may be good in the fountain, when
they spring from the Author of all goodness. And good in the end, because they
are done to the glory of God, and the good of our brethren. But yet as there
was some iniquity did cleave to the holy offering of the children of Israel,
(as holy as it was) so there is some iniquity cleaves to our good work, how
good soever it be: when that iniquity that cleaves to our works is laid upon
Christ, who in his own body on the tree, bare the iniquity of us all, then our
persons and works are graciously accepted, and all the iniquity that cleaves
to our works mercifully pardoned. This is the first thing; What is required in
the doer, to make his beneficence acceptable to God.

But here is not all, there is something required in the thing done; and that I
shall show you in the remainder of the time, by Gods grace: And I shall lay it
down in four Rules.

The first is about the end. And you must not wonder that I begin at the end;
for howsoever the end is the thing last attained, yet it is the thing first
intended; it is the first thing in a man's intention. And besides, God regards
not so much quid, as propter quid; not so much what we do, as for what we
do. A man may do good works for ill ends, and then he must not look that God
should accept them. It is the end that commends the action. Now there are three
ill ends of doing good works.

One end that some propound to themselves in doing good works is, to make
satisfaction to divine justice, for the sins they have committed. The Apostle
would have us do good works for necessary uses; but God never appointed this
use of good works. Our good works may be tokens of our secret predestination,
they may be fore tokens of our future happiness; but to think that by doing
good we can make recompense and satisfaction to divine justice, and appease
the infinite wrath of God for sin, before the which the very Angels
themselves are not able to stand, it is a senseless and graceless fancy;
tending much to the dishonor of Christ, and that all-sufficient satisfaction
that he has made for the sins of the world, when he offered up his flesh a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. That is one ill end.

Secondly, some propound another end, that is, to merit eternal bliss by it:
And our English men, Rhemists, Romish, English men by birth, and Rhemists by
education, and Romish by profession, often times stand to it, to prove that good
works are truly and properly meritorious, ex condigno, even of very condignity:
In so much, say they, in their Comment upon Heb. 6. Good works are so far
meritorious, that God were unjust if he should not give heaven to our good
works; he were unjust, if he should not yield heaven to our good works. This
is the only place wherein they can find the name of merit; only because the
vulgar Latin has it; and they do in this place stand to prove the Doctrine
of Merit, upon that word merit.

Give me leave a little to show you, that good works cannot be meritorious: I
will give you these reasons.

One principal condition in a meritorious work is this, It must be done by a
man's self: How can a man be said to merit any thing by a work that himself
does not, but another does it by him, or in him? Now, you know, there is no
good work that we do of our selves, God works all our good works in us. Hark
how the faithful pray in the Prophet, Lord, thou have wrought all our works in
us, Isai. 26. 12. Our new translation reads, in us, our old, for us: The word
in the Original will bear either the one or the other; take it as you will,
in us, or for us, God has wrought the work; Lord, thou have wrought all our
works in us, and for us.

First of all, it is from Gods grace that we are enabled to do good works,
what works soever they be, it is grace that enableth us to do them. And then,
when we are enabled, it is from grace that we are willing to do them; both
our ability, and our willingness to do good, are from God. Look how the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 8. says he there, I would have you know the grace that
is bestowed on the Church of Macedonia. The grace that was bestowed on them,
what grace was that? You may see in the two next Verses; nothing else but their
willing bounty, even above their power, to do good; For, says the Apostle,
Verse. 3. to their power, I bear them record, yea (quoth he) above their
power: There was the grace that was bestowed on them, they were willing to do
good.

So then, have we ability to do good, it is of grace: have we willing hearts
to do good, it is of grace. Do we then any good, we must shout as the
people, Zech. 4. 2. and cry, Grace, grace, unto it. Double the word, Grace,
Grace. Grace in enabling us, and grace in making us willing too: All is of God.
So if a man do a good work, he is more indebted to God for it; God is not
indebted to him, but he to God in making him able; and he is indebted to
grace, for making him willing; he can merit nothing.

Then mark a second Reason, how good works cannot be meritorious; Merit is Opus
indebitum, it is above a man's desert; it is a work that is not due, that a man
is not bound to do; for a man can merit nothing by doing that that he is
bound to do already: he should transgress, if he did not do it; but he
merits nothing by doing that that he stands bound in many bonds to do
already. Does the Master thank his servant for doing that that is commanded,
Luke 17. 9. Even so, (says he) when you have done all you can, say, We are
unprofitable servants. If we will merit any thing at Gods hands, we must do
somewhat that we are not bound to do. I, but how far short come we in the
things we do, of that that we are bound to do? we are so far from doing
more, that when we have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants. How
much more unprofitable, says Jerome, when we come short of that which God
has commanded?

Thirdly, good works cannot be meritorious; I prove it thus: There must be some
proportion between the work that is done, and the reward that is given of
condignity. Now, I pray, consider but what that reward is that God has
promised; not according to the worthiness of our works, you must not think so;
but of faith, of free mercy he has promised a reward: And what is it? Look in
2 Cor. 4. 17. see what it is, the Apostle calls it there, a far more
exceeding, eternal weight of glory. These light, momentany afflictions, says
he, procure to us a far more exceeding, eternal weight of glory. Mark;
First, it is glory that God has promised for a reward. Secondly, it is more
then so, it is a weight of glory. Nay yet more then so, it is an eternal
weight of glory. Nay yet further, an exceeding, eternal weight of glory. So
far our English can carry it; but our English cannot carry it so far as the
Greek, for there it is, an exceeding exceeding. The Apostle could not tell what
to make of it, it was so much: He made as much as he could, A glory, a weight
of glory, an eternal, an exceeding eternal weight of glory, an exceeding
exceeding weight of glory. Now I would ask, I pray, what proportion can be
between a little poor temporal service that we do, and such an eternal,
exceeding, exceeding eternal weight of glory? I will say no more concerning
this point of merit.

Let us never talk of merits, they were all lost in the first Adam, we lost all
merit in him: Let grace alone reign in Christ. Let us say with Bernard, My
merit is the Lords mercy. Let me have no merit, that will exclude grace: and,
says he, there is no place for grace to enter in, when merit has taken up
all the room before it comes. Therefore that is no right end.

Thirdly, there is a third end that some propound of doing good; that is, glory
from men Vain men seek vainglory. Thus did the Pharisees, they would do a
great deal of good, but they would do it so that they might be seen of men to
do it. And indeed, it is lawful for men to be seen to do good, and our Lord
would have us so to do good, that we may be seen of men to do it, to let our
light so shine before men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our
Father which is in heaven. If you be afraid of Spectators, you shall have no
Imitators. If there be none to see you, there will be none to follow you. It is
lawful for a man to be seen to do good, but men must not do good to be seen;
for then they shall have their reward of men, they shall have none of their
Father, God.

There belong two things to every good work: There is the Glory of the work.
There is the Reward of the work.


The reward, God is pleased out of his free mercy to us in Christ to allow us
that; he allows us the reward, but not the glory of the work; that must be
his own, and he will not give that to another, as he says. If we deprive
God of the one, we must look that God should keep us from the other: If we
keep from him the glory of the work, God will keep us from the reward of it.
These are ill ends of good works. We must not do them to satisfy the justice
of God for sin, or with opinion of meriting eternal bliss, or to be seen of
men to do them.

What is the end then of good works?

Briefly, in one word, The end of all good works is the glory of God, in the
good of our brethren.

And Gods glory is such a thing, as we are born to that end, to set forth the
glory of God. As the Grace of God is our Alpha, so the Glory of God must be our
Omega. As the Grace of God is the beginning from whence all things come, so the
Glory of God must be the end, to which all things must be referred: Of him, and
through him, are all things; to him be glory for ever and ever. And we cannot
bring greater glory to God, and his holy Truth and Religion that we profess,
then by doing good works. When men see our good works, and see how pitiful and
tenderhearted we be, what bowels of compassion we have to our poor afflicted
brethren, they cannot choose but glorify God, and acknowledge and say, Surely
this is the seed that God has blessed, Isai. 61. 9. So much concerning the
first Rule that I give you. Would you make your beneficence and good works that
you do toward your poor visited brethren, pleasing and acceptable to God? do
them to a right end, to Gods glory, and your brethrens good.

I come to a second Rule; the former was about the End, the second is about the
Fountain, from whence our good works must flow. And what is that? Compassion.
If we will make our good works pleasing and acceptable to God, they must flow
out of a pitiful heart. If you instruct an ignorant man, which is a good work,
it must be out of pity of his ignorance; if you feed a hungry man, it must be
out of pity of his misery. The distribution of our goods to the poor, is
accounted a work of charity, and so it is a great work of charity; if a man
should do as Zacheus made an offer, give half his goods to the poor, and if
I have wronged any man, I will restore it fourfold, you would account that a
great work of charity; but suppose a man should give all his goods to the
poor, you would say that were a transcendent work of charity; and it is true
indeed: Yet see, a man may do even this transcendent work of charity, and have
no charity. For, mark the Apostles speech, 1 Cor. 13. 3. If (says the Apostle)
I should give all my goods to the poor, and have no charity: See, a man may
give all that ever he has to the poor, and yet have no charity; because that
which he gives comes not from a charitable, compassionate heart. Holy Job does
not only tell of his works of charity, but he tells out of what ground he did
those works of charity, out of what fountain those works of charity flowed;
and what was that? His compassion: Did not I weep for them that were in misery?
was not my soul grieved for the poor? Job 30. 25. The works that a man does,
if he will make them a pleasing and acceptable sacrifice to God, they must
come out of a fellow-feeling of his brethrens necessities.

It is said of our blessed Savior in the Scriptures, He went about doing good.
It is true, he did; his whole life was nothing else but a going about, doing
good. And be pleased to mark what you read again in the Gospel, you shall find
that some of our Lords works that he did, were works of charity; and that he
did, he did it out of compassion; and the Scripture notes it to us, that it was
out of compassion he did it. Let me show some for example.

Our blessed Lord cleansed Lepers, and it was out of very compassion to them
that he cleansed them, the Scripture observes it so, Jesus had compassion on
them, and said, I will, be thou clean, Mark. 1. 41. In another place we find,
they brought many sick to Christ, and our Lord laid his hands on them, and
healed them all; and it was out of compassion that he healed them, He had
compassion on them, and healed their sick, Mat. 14. 14. In another place, you
know the miracle that our Lord wrought, he fed four thousand men, besides
women and children, and with a few barley leaves and fishes; yet it was out of
compassion, so he tells his Disciples, I have compassion on the multitude,
they have been with me three days fasting, Mat. 15. 32. Again, in another
place, our blessed Savior touched the eyes of the two blind men, and they
received their sight, and followed him: and it was out of very compassion that
he touched them, himself was touched with compassion, before he touched their
eyes; So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes, Mat. 20. ult. I
will allege no more places but one: You find that our blessed Savior raised a
young man at Naim, that was dead, and carrying to burial; he touched the
coffin, and raised him again to life; and it was out of compassion; not to the
young man, for it may be his estate was happy; but to his mother: the Scripture
gives the reason, she was a widow; and the name Widow, is a name of
compassion; therefore out of compassion he says, Weep not: and he touched
the coffin, and restored her son to life, Luke 7. 13. I could allege many
places more, but these shall suffice. Mark, I pray, only a phrase of Scripture
you shall find Isai. 58. 10. If (says the Prophet there) thou shall draw out
thy soul to the hungry; he says not, If thou shall draw out thy purse, though
that be somewhat, or draw thy meat out of thy cupboard, or thy garments out of
thy press, and give to a poor wretch; but, If thou shall draw out thy soul.
The soul must be drawn out first; and if a man can once draw out his soul to
a poor wretch, it will make him draw out his purse, if he have it; he cannot
but draw out his purse, if he have drawn out his soul. Therefore says John,
1 Ioh. 3. 17. If a man (says he) has this worlds goods, and shall shut up
the bowels of compassion upon men; he does not say, If he shut his purse;
but, if he shut up the bowels of compassion upon them, how dwells the love
of God in him?

And while I name the bowels of compassion, let me tell you, that word where it
is said that Christ was moved with compassion, the Greek is, (...), we cannot
express it in English; it is a name from bowels, he was moved in his bowels:
That compassion in Christ, and that that he would have us to show to our
brethren, it is from the bowels. Therefore Mr. Beza translates the word, (he
knows not how to express it in one word, it must be an inward motion) I think
we call it, the yerning of the bowels; the bowels must yerne in us. When we
see poor miserable wretches, we must not only relieve them, but this relief
must be done out of pity and compassion, and tenderness of heart to their
misery. If we would have our sacrifice of beneficence acceptable and pleasing
to God, there are two things in beneficence, in doing good, the inward
affection of the heart, and the outward act of the hand; they should not be
parted, they should go together: Not only the inward affection of the heart,
but the outward act of the hand; nor only the outward act of the hand, but it
must proceed from the inward affection of the heart.

But thus much, I can tell you one case, wherein God accepts the inward
affection, without the outward act of the hand: Sometimes God enables not a man
to give a gift, then he accepts of the good affection, and a pitiful heart to
our brethren. Where God does not find an ability to perform, there he accepts
of a willing, loving, tender, charitable heart to our brethren; he accepts of
the inward affection to our brethren. I can tell you, I say, this case, wherein
God accepts of the inward affection, without the outward action; but I cannot
tell you any case, wherein God ever accepts of the outward action, without the
inward affection. The outward act of the hand, it may be, may be more
acceptable to the man that stands in need, and receives; but the inward
affection is that that makes it a sacrifice pleasing and acceptable to God.
That is my second Rule.

I come to the third and fourth; I will but touch them briefly. The third Rule
is about the matter and substance of good works; Good works must be done with
that which is our own: It is a sacrifice we find here, and we must not offer
in sacrifice to God, that which is not ours. In 1 Chronicles. 21. 24. David comes to
Araunah the Iebusite, to buy the threshing-floore, to make an Altar there to
God, and Araunah bountifully offers him, Nay, my lord, you shall not buy it of
me, I will give my lord this, and my bullocks for a burnt-offering, and I will
give my threshing instruments to burn the offering with, and I will give wheat
for a meat offering; I will give all, I will give, says he. No, says David,
I will take nothing of gift, I will not offer to God any thing that cost me
nothing; nay, if it cost me nothing, I will not offer it to God; but I will buy
it at a price, and then I will offer it to God. We may not offer to God that
that cost us nothing, but that that cost us labor, and industry, and the sweat
of our brows; that that we have gotten by hard labor and pains in our
calling, let that come, and it is welcome to God. God cannot be pleased with a
mocking sacrifice. I pray, who would be contented to be mocked? The son of
Syrach, Ecclus. 34. 18. he tells us, that he that offers an unrighteous
sacrifice, of unrighteous goods, he offers a mocking sacrifice to God: It is a
mocking sacrifice, and will God be pleased to be mocked? why, our selves would
not, says Gregory. Whatsoever in our sacrifice that we offer to God is ill
gotten, it is so far from appeasing the wrath of God, that it provokes him
much more.

It is a thing somewhat observable, that in the Scripture our almsdeeds are
called righteousness, our beneficence is called righteousness in many places
in Scripture; The good man is merciful and lends, etc. He scatters abroad,
and gives to the poor; his righteousness endures for ever: that is, his
almsdeeds. Psalm. 112. 9. And the Apostle prays for the Corinthians, that God
would please to increase the fruits of their righteousness, 2 Cor. 9. 10. that
is, their beneficence; beneficence is called righteousness. And that which we
read in Mat. 6. 1. Take heed that you do not your alms before men, the vulgar
Latin reads at, Take heed that you do not do your righteousness before men.
Master Beza reads it so too; and he says with all, that in two of the
ancientest Greek copies that he has, it is so. The Syriack Interpreter reads
it so too, Take heed that you do not your righteousness before men. Nay, I
shall tell you more, that Christ he looked in on them that put or cast money
in the Treasury: Now what was that? It was a chest at the door, (as your poor
men's box) in which they were wont to cast money, as they passed by out of the
Temple: And this the Hebrews called, The chest of righteousness; not the
chest of mercy, or of charity, but of righteousness.

Why should our almsdeeds be called righteousness?

I could give you many reasons, but let this suffice now at this time, Because
God would have that to be righteously brought in, that is charitably laid out:
we must lay nothing charitably out, but that which is first righteously brought
in: that must be laid out to good uses, that is gotten by good means; let it
be righteously gotten, and then it will be a sacrifice pleasing and acceptable
to God. That is my third Rule: It must be our own that we give.

The fourth and last Rule, that I will but name to you, is this, about the
manner, that it must be done cheerfully. The first Rule was about the End, It
must be done to a good end. The second Rule was about the Fountain whence it
must flow, A pitiful heart. The third Rule was about the Matter or Substance,
It must be our own. The last Rule is about the Manner, It must be done with
alacrity and cheerfulness.

And this cheerfulness must appear, first, in the countenance: A man must not
give with an angry, unwilling countenance.

Then it must appear in the words of a man; for a man may peradventure undo a
good work, with ill words; he may bring a blemish on a good work, with ill
words. Fair words are as an honeycomb, sweetness to the soul, and health to
the bones. As there must be compassion and bowels, so there must be grace and
favor in the lips. A good word sometimes may do more good then a good deed,
to cheer and comfort a poor soul, and revive it.

Thirdly our cheerfulness must be shevved by our speedy giving; he gives
twice, that gives quickly; and a man blemisheth his good work, that delays
it. There is so much taken from the vvorth of every work, by how much it
sticks longer in the fingers of him that does it.

Now you see, brethren, how you may make good works pleasing and acceptable
to God: Your persons must be first in Christ. Then, you must have a good End;
you must not propound to your selves, to make satisfaction to divine justice,
or to merit eternal bliss, or to think thereby to be seen of men, for
vainglory and popularity; but your end must be Gods glory, and your brethrens
good. And then, this must flow out of a pitiful heart, Pro. 14. 21. He that
has pity on the poor, blessed is he. He says not, He that gives to the
poor; yet he would not have it a barren, fruitless pity; but the meaning is
this, He that pities the poor, and gives out of pity, blessed is he. Then
again, it must be your own that you give; it must not be a burnt-offering of
goods gotten by rapine, and by ill means.

Then lastly, it must be done with cheerfulness; cheerfulness showed in the
countenance, in words, in speediness and readiness to give. If it be thus,
then it is a sacrifice acceptable to God.

Nay, I will go further, God will reward such a sacrifice as this; you shall
be sure of a reward at the hand of God: Though not for the merit of the work,
(away with merit, talk not of that) yet you shall have a reward, through the
free mercy of God in Christ.

That is lost, you say, that is bestowed on an unthankful person; but, as
Luther says, if a man will not do good unless he can find a thankful man,
let him look another world to do it in, this is not a world for him; if one of
ten give thanks, it is enough: it was so with Christ, one Leper comes of ten;
but yet though men prove unthankful, they will not seem to requite; though
men forget, yet our good God will not forget. Hark what says the Prophet, Mal.
3. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in
mine house; meat for the relief of the Levites, and so for the poor; for
there went part that way too; that there may be meat in mine house, and try me
now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing from thence. Try me: Beloved brethren, you
have tried many men, and you have made ventures, some perhaps to the furthest
parts of the world; some have made ventures in this Kingdom; and you dare
trust this man and that man with your estates and goods, and it may be some
have cozened you of a great deal; this may be lost, Man is deceitful on the
weights, lighter then vanity it self; but trust God with somewhat, venture
somewhat to heaven: you venture in giving to the poor, you make it a hazard;
but you never make so safe a return of any commodity in the world, as that that
you give to your brethren.

Riches we call the muck of the world, I would we did account it so as we call
it, the muck of the world. May I give you a simile from your selves; A heap of
muck as it lies in the yard it does no good, but carry it abroad into your
pasture fields, and spread it, and you find the benefit of it: Thus it is, as
long as your money and your goods lie heaped with you, it does no good; carry
it abroad and disperse it, as the Scripture says, He has dispersed and given
to the poor, Psalm. 112. it is taken from dung spread in the field; lay it out
upon your poor brethren, and look for an increase; if you have it not in this
life, assure your selves you shall have it in the life to come; if you have it
not in outward blessings, you shall be enriched in grace here, and in glory
hereafter. To which the Lord bring you, for his sake that has dearly purchased
it for you, Jesus Christ the righteous. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's, Novem. 14th. Anno Dom. 1641.
2 CORINTHIANS. 6. 8. By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as
deceivers and yet true.
THe words do refer to the 4th. verse, wherein the blessed Vessel of
election, St. Paul, begins to show, how he and Timothy, and other faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ, did approve themselves to be so, by exercise of
patience, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the
holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the Word of truth, by the power of God, by
the armor of righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left; and all this,
when (as it is in the Text) they passed through honor and dishonor, evil
report and good report, accounted to be deceivers when they were true.

In the handling of the words (wherein are three Antitheta's) I propound this
course; I will first handle the Antitheta's themselves severally.

In the second place, I will show how it is the lot of the best of Gods
children to pass through every one of them.

And, in the third place, I shall show that we shall then approve ourselves to
be true Ministers of Jesus Christ (as Saint Paul does here) when, as passing
through honor and dishonor, evil report and good report, held to be
deceivers when we are yet true, we do notwithstanding keep the faith, hold
our own, fulfill our Ministry.

Honor, in Greek (...), is nothing else but Honor, and Dishonor.
a good opinion and estimation, which a man finds among such as are wise, and
virtuous, and religious; upon the acknowledgement either of some good graces,
wherewith God has honored him, or of some good virtuous actions, wherewith
he has honored God: And this honor is made known abroad, Honor, in
Scripturis non tantum in salutationibus and officiis deferendis, quantum in
eleemosynis ac munerum oblatione sentitur. Hieron. in caput 15. Matthaei.
not only by salutations and greetings in the Marketplace, which was a piece
of Honor wherewith the Pharisee was well pleased; nor only in Titles to be
called Rabbi, Rabbi, which they also affected, but in the performance of God
offices, and all due observances, together with rewards and presents, which are
therefore called Honoraria, as given by way of honor. Thus the Queen of Sheba
honored Solomon with a present of an hundred and twenty talents of gold,
beside precious stones, and spices in great abundance, 1 King. 10. 10. Thus the
men of Judah honored Jehosophat with so many presents, that he had riches and
honor in abundance, 2 Chro. 17. 5. So the Wisemen, that came from the East,
did their honor to Christ, not only by falling down and worshipping him, but
by opening their treasures, and presenting their gifts, Gold, Frankincense, and
Myrrh, Matt. 2. 11. Our Saint Paul had honor, and much honor, (...). so
says Saint Luke, Acts 28. ver. 10. They honored us with many honors, and
laded us with such things as were necessary for our journey.

And, to say no more, What is that double honor which the Elders are worthy of
that rule well, 1 Timoth. 5. 17. but Reverence and Maintenance? If maintenance
be taken away, reverence is soon lost; who will give honor to the Minister,
what ever worth be in his person, if ability and outward means be wanting?
Solomon tells us, that the wisdom of a poor man is despised, and his words
are not heard, Ecclesiast. c. 9. ver. 16.

This honor, in what thing soever it is shown, must be acknowledged a blessing
of God bestowed upon his children, as a reward of former good services, and an
encouragement to future. Thus was Abraham, though a stranger, honored among
the Hittites, as a Prince of God; and had a choice given him of a Sepulcher,
amongst the choycest of their Sepulchers, Genesis 23. Jehoida, that reverend
High Priest, lived in honor, and dyed as full of honor as of days, having
been matched in Marriage with the Sister of the King, and buried in the City of
David among the Kings: and this was because he had done good in Israel toward
God, and toward his house, 2 Chronicles. 24. ver. 16. But what do I speak of such
eminent Persons? Saint John Baptist in his Eremiticall retired course of life,
wanted not his honor, not only among the people, who held a common constant
opinion of him, that he was a Prophet, but even with Herod the King, who both
feared him, and observed him, (...), because he was a just, and an holy man.
Goodness may command honor, when greatness must beg it. It is this honor
which nourishes Arts: Learning would soon decay, if this honor were taken
from it: This encourages to virtuous actions, Virtutis Valerius Maximus.
uberrimum nutrimentum honos. It is this that puts a man upon the greatest
services: David durst adventure to fight with the Philistine, after he had
heard how the man should be honored that slew him. There is no noble or
generous spirit, but does value honor at the highest rate: Interesse honoris
est majus omni alio Interesse. We read of many, in Gentile Stories, as Ajax,
Brutus, Antony, Cato Uticensis, and others, which have willingly rid themselves
of life, to rid themselves of some dishonor: Did not Saul the like in holy
Scripture, when he fell upon his own sword? Did not Sampson the like, when
he pulled the house upon his own head, and upon the heads of the Philistines,
that had so dishonored him? It troubled not Abimelech to think that he
should die, it troubled him (when, wretched man! he should have thought of
something else) to think that he should die so dishonourably, by the hand of a
woman, Judge. 9. ver. 54. What has caused so many duells, and mortal quarrels
between noble and generous spirits, as that same too quick and sensible
apprehension of some wrong done unto them in honor? Do but look upon
examples of Gods children in Scriptures. You shall find Elisha never so
provoked, or so unable to dissemble his provocation, as when he was
dishonored, though it were by wanton and waggish children. Holy Job
complains of nothing more than of that derision and scorn which he suffered
from them, whose fathers he would have disdained to have set with the dogs of
his flock; they were men of no Name, viler than the earth, and yet these men
abhorred him, and spared not to spit in his face, Job 30. Miserrimum est fuisse
foelicem: he tells in the former Chapter, in what honor he had lived; it
went nearer therefore his heart, to be thus dishonored. We never read that
good Nehemiah did use any imprecation against those sworn enemies of his,
Sanballat and Tobijah the Ammonite, but only upon their contumelious
reproaches: Hear us, says he, for we are despised, O our God: Turn their
reproaches upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the Land of
captivity, Nehem. 4. ver. 4. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, cry the people. And
again, Have mercy upon us: Why? what ail they? We are exceedingly, say they,
filled with contempt; our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorn of those
that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123. 3, 4. What
need I, by more examples, show you how Gods children do complain of
dishonours? One of the bitterest ingredients in that Cup, which our crucified
Lord did drink for us, was shame and dishonor; which did wring from him that
complaint in the midst of his sufferings; Vermis ego and non homo, I am a worm
and no man, a scorn of men, and the outcast of the people, Psalm. 22. ver. 6.
And, indeed, in that kind of death on the Cross, it is a question whether the
pain or shame is greater: but that glorious Author and finisher of our Faith,
both endured the pain of the Cross, and despised the shame, and is now set
down at the right hand of the throne of God, Hebr. 12. 4. and, if we desire
to reign with him, we must be content to suffer with him, and learn to
contemn that contempt that the world shall cast upon us in his cause: he was
thus vile for us, and how vile soever we are for him, we are still to resolve
with David, that we will be yet more vile than so.

THe two next Antitheta are, good report, and Good report and Evil report.
evil report, (...), and (...). Bona fama, and Infamia. (...) is first: but
how irksome and odious that is to us, will best appear, when I have first
showed unto you how precious and comfortable a good report is. But let me tell
you first three things: First, we must not look for it from all men; Woe unto
you, says our Lord, when all men speak well of you, Luke 6. ver. 26 It is
enough if we be well-reported of by the most; yea, it is enough, if, though
we be not of the most, it be by the best. Secondly, we must not look for it
always from the mouths of men. We commend our selves, says S. Paul, to
every man's conscience, in the sight of God, 2 Corinthians. 4. 2. Our persons and
actions may, peradventure, receive a good approbation from the consciences of
men, when we cannot get a good word from their lips. Thirdly, we must not look
for it at all times: it is not always a blessing, it may sometimes do us
hurt; an ill use sometimes may be made of a good report, if the proud heart of
the man sit and bless it self in that, for which he is well reported; and a
good use may be made of an ill report, when a man by it is made either cautior,
or humilior; either more humble for what is past, or more wary for afterward:
but a good report from the mouth of good men, and from the conscience of evil
men, at such time as it may bring honor to God, or good to us, is to be
reckoned amongst one of the greatest blessings of this life; though it be no
virtue, yet it has the original from virtue: therefore, says the Apostle, Si
qua Virtus, si qua Laus; Virtus first, and then Laus, Phil. 1. 8. First, it is
bonum utile, accounted a second Patrimony, Honesta fama alterum patrimonium.
rather to be chosen then great riches, says Solomon, Proverb. 22. ver. 1.
then a thousand great treasures of Gold, says the son of Syrach, Ecclus. 41.
12. Ast Plautus, in Mostellaria.
ego si bonam famam servasso, sat ero dives, says one in the Comedy, if I
shall keep my credit, I am rich enough. Secondly, bonum jucundum: A good Name
is better then a precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. There is mentioned by Saint
Basil (...), a certain Art of drawing of pigeons to their dove-houses, in
those Countries, by anointing the wings of one of them with a sweet ointment,
and, it being sent abroad, does, by the fragrancy of that ointment, invite and
allure others to that house, where it self is a domestic. Thy Name (says the
Church to Christ) is an ointment poured forth, Cantic. 1. ver. 3. Because of
the savor of thy good ointments, therefore the Virgins love thee: And then, in
the next verse, Draw me, says she, and we will run after thee. A Preacher,
well reported of, shall not want hearers. A Physician of a good report, wants
not patients. The Lawyer that has a good report, wants not chents, nor the
Schoolmaster scholars, nor the Tradesman customers, nor the Poor man
friends. Thirdly, and especially, bonum honestum. Amongst those things that are
honest, and just, and pure, which are to be thought on, there are reckoned also
(...), those things that are of good report, in that fourth of the Philip. ver.
8. A good man if he be not so good as he is reported, he cannot but strive
to be so good, because he is so reported: on the other side, he is a dissolute
man that cares not what is reported of him. The child of God must not only
look to his conscience, whereby he provideth for himself in the sight of
God; but also to his good name, providing things honest in the sight of all
men, Romans 12. 17. There are two things commended in the Lilly, whiteness, and
sweetness; there are these two in a child of God, says Saint Bernard, Candor
conscientiae, and odor bonae Ber. Sermon. 71. in Cant.
famae; the candor of a good conscience, and the fragrancy of a good name: Nec
candor sine odore, nec odor sine candore, says he: My conscience is for my
self, my good name for others. God would have none near to him, but such as
are well reported of. The Widow that is to be maintained at the charge of the
Church, not to be received in, unless well reported of for good, 1 Timothy 5. 10.
The first Deacons that were chosen, were to be men of an honest report, Acts 6.
3. The Bishop (take the word in the largest sense) must be a man that has a
good report of them that are without, 1 Timoth. 3. 7. The nearer we are to
God, the more careful ought we to be of our credit; an evil report of one in
that sacred Function, brings up an evil report upon the Function it self;
an evil name of a Professor, brings a discredit upon the profession: and it
were better that a millstone were hanged about our necks, and we thrown into
the sea, then we should live, and, by our evil life, bring an evil name upon
the Gospel, and so make the glorious Name of our God to be evil spoken of. I
need add no more; only, because these days are days of evil report,
wherein we do nothing else, but, as those Philosophers in Lucian, cast (...),
whole cart-loads of evil speakings, even in the faces of one another; let me,
in a word, show what good uses may be made of those evil reports.

First, Let us examine our consciences, whether they be true or no: if they be
false, altogether false, then we may comfort our selves in the testimony of a
good conscience; and if our adversaries should write a book against us (and
there be books enough written of that Argument, and cried every day up and
down our streets) we might, with holy Job, take it upon our shoulders, and
bind it as a crown to our heads, Job 31. v. 35, 36. But if the reports be in
any part true, then it is fit that we should lie down in our shame, give God
the glory of his justice, beg mercy, bear the punishment with patience, and
give God thanks for it. Iram Domini portabo, quoniam peccavi ei: I will bear
the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Micha 7. 9. If the
reports be not altogether true, then let us search the wound a little deeper,
and see whether we have not given a just occasion to such a report: It was
said of that Vestall Virgin, that she was

-- Ovidius, Fast. lib. 4.
Casta quidem, sed non est credita, -- that she was chaste indeed, but not
thought to be so; because she was more wantonly attired then became such a
Virgin. It may be, though we are not so ill as we are reported, yet, upon
examination, we may find that we are not so good as we ought to be, in shunning
the occasions and appearances of evil, which ought to be unto us a sufficient
matter of humiliation. If we be free from giving occasions, yet we should do
well to search yet a little deeper, and try whether we have not entertained
some morose cogitations, and thoughts of that sin wherewith we stand charged
upon report. It may be that that wickedness has been sweet in our mouth, and
we have rolled it under our Job 20. ver. 12.
tongue; though we have not swallowed it down, yet, peradventure, we have not
spit it out; and then, though Digest. li. 48. Tit. 19. de Poenis.
cogitationis poenam nemo patitur, by the law of man; yet, it is a righteous
thing with God, the Searcher of hearts, by false reports to punish that sin
which has found so kind an entertainment, or some other sin wherein we have
lain without repentance.

But, Lastly, it may, peradventure, please God in mercy, that such a false
report should be charged upon us at this time unjustly, that we may be the more
careful of our ways, and watchful over our hearts, with an holy jealousy
against that sin, lest we be justly charged with it another day: Good God,
Teach us to make this good use of evil reports. And so I have done with evil
reports in general, and come now to one evil report in particular, which
cannot but much trouble a true servant of God, to be counted a Deceiver, when
he is True.

AS Deceivers, says the Apostle, and yet True. Ut Seductores, and tamen
Veraces.
There is no liar that would willingly be accounted a liar; we see how ready
some are, while they are lying, to present death upon the point of a sword to
the man that shall give them the lie: There are no false Prophets, not Zedekiah
whilst he opposed Michaiah, nor Hananiah whilst he opposed Jeremiah, or any
other of them, who would be accounted a false Prophet: they would be accounted
as true, and yet were deceivers; as Paul and Timothy here were accounted
deceivers, and yet were true. One especial reason given by good Authors, why
Jonah should be so angry, and so very angry, that Nineveh was spared, was his
own credit, that he might not be thought a false Prophet, as a deceiver,
being true. Jeremiah also, when the Princes would have put him to death, as a
false Prophet, regarded not his life, but stood in defense of that truth, which
he had spoken: I am in your hand, says he, do with me as seems good and
meet unto you. But know ye for certain, that if you put me to death, ye shall
surely bring innocent blood upon your selves, and upon this City, and upon the
inhabitants thereof; For, of a truth, the Lord has sent me unto you, to
speak all these words in your ears, Jer. 26. 14, 15. So our Saint Paul
oftentimes vindicates his credit, and stands upon his sincerity in preaching
the Gospel; We are not, quoth he, as many men are, which corrupt the Word of
God, (...), seeking to vent their adulterate deceitful wares, or, as Vintners
do mix their wines, But as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God, speak
we in Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 17. And so in another place of this Epistle, Not
walking in craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. And this is it which every faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ should especially stand upon, (For cursed is he that does the work
of the Lord deceitfully, Jerem. 48. 10.) that his words be the words of truth
and soberness. Let the world judge as it will of the manner of our preaching;
sometimes, they say, we are too hot, sometimes too cold; sometimes too learned
for them, sometimes too unlearned; sometimes too high, sometimes too plain;
sometimes too sharp, sometimes too pleasing: Let the world say what it will, if
we speak the truth in Christ, our consciences bearing us witness in the holy
Ghost, the Guide of our consciences, that we lie not, keeping back nothing
that is profitable to the people, but declaring unto them the whole Counsel of
God; we may then find joy and comfort to our souls, when all the comforts
shall fail us that the world can yield us. And thus have I showed you what a
Minister of Jesus Christ may pass through; I shall now come to the second
point, and show you that it is the lot of many a dear servant of God to pass
through them all.

ANd where should I rather begin to give 2. Point.
an Instance, then in our Crucified Lord? one day honored, when he rode into
Jerusalem, bough's and garments spread in the way, with a joyful shout of
Hosanna; Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
highest: and, the fifth day after, most shamefully dishonored, with a
continuing cry of Crucify him, Crucify him. In which kind of death, there may
be doubted, as I said before, whether there were more pain, or shame; but
pain enough to satisfy for our pleasure, and shame enough to satisfy for our
pride. There Is for honor and dishonor. Now for his good report and evil
report: Let me tell you how sometimes he was reported to be a Prophet, a great
Prophet, a Teacher come from God; that he was true, and taught the way of God
in truth, and cared for no man, and regarded not the person of men, and lastly,
that he did all things Mark 7. ver. 37.
well. At other times, you shall find him reported to be a Blasphemer, an
Enemy to Caesar, a Seducer of the people, a Gluttonous person, and a
Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and sinners, a Samaritane, and One that had
a devil, and One that wrought by Beelzebub the Prince of devils: It were a
wonder if they should not call him a Deceiver too: Yes, they did so; For whilst
they murmured against him, some saying, He was a good man, others said, Nay,
but he deceives the people, Joh. 7. ver. 12. And the chief Priests and
Pharisees, in plain words to Pilate, call him a Deceiver, (...), Mat. 27. 63.
We remember this Deceiver said; and yet, though he was held as a Deceiver, he
showed himself true in that; for praedixit and revixit, he foresaid it, and
did it in his due time.

Let me give you another instance in our St. Paul: You have heard how, at
Malta, he was honored with much honor, and laden with necessaries: You shall
read, at Philippi, Acts 16. 23. how much he was dishonored, and laden with
many stripes; (...), in the place before, now here, (...). But, you will say,
these were at two several places; Look Act. 14. and you shall find him
honored at Lystra, more then was fit for a man to be honored. He and
Barnabas had much ado to keep the people from sacrificing to him, as to a
god, and, presently after, (it is generally believed the same day) they stoned
him with stones, even to death, as they supposed, (for they supposed him to be
dead) and dragged him, like a dead dog, out of the gates of the City. Oh the
inconstancy of humane favor! I cannot but think how the Athenians, in
Plutarch, used Demetrius Phalereus: they set up two hundred statues to his
honor, and took them every one down again, while Demetrius was yet living,
to his dishonor; and that before either Cum nullam earum aut aerugo attigerat,
aut pulvis sordidaverat, Plut. Apophth.
rust had spoiled them, or dust had soiled them. But what do I allege out of
these Histories? Examples of the vulgars inconstancy, dishonouring where they
have honored one day, and honoring where they have dishonored another?
Nothing formerly has been more honorable at home, or admirable abroad, then
the English Clergy: nothing grown now more despicable. (...). Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy c. 1. hom. 2.
S. Chrysostom complained of the like in his time, that all things were turned
upside-down, and brought to confusion; that the Church Governors were not
honored, no reverence, no fear yielded to them, (...). But, good God, how
much worth, how much learning, zeal, piety, religion, in some Governors of
the Church, have we seen shamefully trampled on, under the dirty feet of some
Sectaries in their scurrilous libels and pamphlets? I know none, I speak it in
the presence of God, that have done better services to the Reformed Churches
against Popery, by their Writings and Preachings, then some Reverend Fathers in
our Church have done I mean (beside those Martyr-Bishops, Cranmer, Ridley,
etc. in Q. Mary's days) such Bishops as have bin in the Church of England and
Ireland, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign: as, namely, Archbish.
Parker, to whose are we are beholding for most of our ancient Histories.
Bishop Bale, Ossoriensis Episcopus, for his many Volumes. Bishop Jewel, for
his Works. Archb. Saundys, for his Sermons. B. Bilson, for his Book,
entitled, The Difference between Christian Subjection and unchristian
Rebellion etc. B Andr. for his Polem. B. Buckridge, for his Book, De potestate
Papae in re^us Temporalibus, etc. B. Abbot, of Sarisbury, for his Book in
Defense of Master ^^^^ins. B^^ing^^^, for his Works. Bishop cake, for his
learned Sermons. Bishop Davenant, for his Praelectiones de duobus in Theologia
controversis Capitibus, etc. and other Tracts. Bishop White, for his Book
against Fisher. Bishop Carleton, for his Book against Arminianisme. The Lord
Primate of Armagh, never to be mentioned without honor, for his unparalled
Works: and many others.
; whereof some are fallen asleep, and some remain to this day, and long may
they live, to the performances of the like services. Who has so plainly
discovered unto us See Bishop M^rton his Book of that Argument.
THE GRAND IMPOSTURE OF THE (now) CHURCH OF ROME? Who has so openly laid
before us See his Institution of the Sacrament.
the superstitious, sacrilegious, and idolatrous abominations of the Romish
Mass? Who has so fully manifested See his Catholic Appeal, with many other
of his accurate and learned Treatises against the Romanists.
the Antiquity of our Religion, and satisfied all scrupulous Objections, which
have been urged against us? Who has so evidently demonstrated See Bish.
Downham his Diatribe de Antichristo, and Bish. Abbot of the same Argument.
the Pope to be The Antichrist? Who has so fully cleared that high point of
See Bish. Downham his Treatises of Justification.
Justification, and overthrown the Popish Doctrine of Merits? Who has so
clearly set down See Bish. usher his Historica Explicatio of that subject.
the beginning, progress, and increase of the mystery of Iniquity, from the
birth of Antichrist, to his full age, out of manifold Records of Antiquity? Who
has given us so wholesome a See Bish. Hall of the old Religion.
Preservative against all Popish Insinuations? In a word, who have more
approved themselves the worthiest Champions, most willing, most ready, most
able, to oppose all Popish, Antichristian, Arminian, Pelagian, Doctrine, then
some of These, who have been styled in the late pamphlets Popish,
Antichristian, Arminian, Pelagian Bishops? It is no open enemy that has done
this wrong, but the men of this Land, and children, as they would be thought to
be, of this Church, that have dishonored these Worthies, that have been an
Honor to this Church and Land. As for us Ministers of the Gospel, of inferior
rank, who have always preached the same divine Truth (some of us in the days
of Queen Elizabeth) and have received that mercy from God, to be faithful in
holding the same profession, without wavering or warping, unto this day; how
are we at this time (only because we walk in the way of the Church, and study
the peace of it, desirous to yield obedience to God and our Superiors) how are
we, I say, (...), brought upon the Stage? Heb. 10. 33. traduced as Baals
Priests, derided, contumeliously used, reproached in our streets, our Churches,
our Pulpits, accounted (...), the filth of the world, and the offscouring of
all things, a spectacle to Angels and men?

But, holy Brethren, to come to my third point, wherein I shall make the use of
all this: We may approve our selves to be the true Ministers of Jesus Christ,
if that neither honor puffs us up, nor dishonor disheartneth us; if neither
a good report does make us proud, nor an evil report faint-hearted, but can
pass through all these, honor and dishonor, evil report and good report,
counting nothing in life, nor life it self dear to us, so as we may finish our
course with joy, and the Ministration which we have received of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

To that end let me tender these things briefly to our consideration:

First, that this vicissitude of honor and dishonor, evil report and good
report, is from the Lord, who must be allowed to do what seems good in his
eyes. The time was, we do confess with thankfulness, that the people did
esteem us as the Ministers of Jesus Christ; that they knew us, and did
acknowledge us worthy, and accordingly had us in exceeding great love, (...),
for our works sake, that they might show that they could have pulled their eyes
out of their head to have done us good, that they honored us with much honor,
and laded us with necessaries, and plentiful provision for our encouragement
to the work of the Ministry. Have we received so much good at the hand of
God, and may we not now with patience receive some evil? There is no evil
done in the City in this kind, but the Lord has done it, Amos 3. 6. God has
bidden them to curse us, and revile us, and traduce us, and load us with all
these contumelies and reproaches; and it may be these things being sanctified
to us, God may do us good for all our reproaches this day: we should consider
that as it comes not without due desert, seeing God is just; so it shall not
pass away without due profit, seeing God is good.

Consider again, That there is nothing can come from the hand of this God to
his servants, but it comes in the nature of a mercy: while we were honored,
it was in mercy to encourage us; and now we are dishonored, and our souls
filled with contempt, it is done in mercy to admonish us to walk both more
humbly with God, and more warily with men.

Again, It is but the pride of our hearts that makes us so impatient of every
light dishonor; for it we were as we should be, vile in our own eyes, it
were nothing, nothing to be vile in the eyes of others. Besides, hear what our
Lord says to his Disciples, Blessed are you when men shall say all manner of
evil of you, falsely for my sake: Rejoice and be glad, -- For so persecuted
they the Prophets that were before you, Matt. 5. 11, 12. The Prophets, before
the Apostles, were thus persecuted; the Apostles, and all the Worthies, since
the Apostles days, have bin so persecuted in their several Generations; and
our blessed Lord, the Head both of Prophets and Apostles, has been, as you
heard before, persecuted in like manner.

Now, the disciple must not look to be above his Master, nor the servant above
his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the
servant as his Lord. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of his household? Mat. 10. 24, 25.

Lastly, Behold there is a crown in the right hand of Christ, and the word upon
it is, (...), to him that overcomes. Brethren, let us hold fast that which we
have, and let no man take away our crown; let us hold on still, (...), to
divide the Word of God aright, and (...), to walk with a right foot in the
profession of it: Et innocenter agere, and scienter praedicare; not studying so
much to have our gifts commended, as to have God glorified, the consciences of
people edified, their lives reformed, and their souls saved: And then, if we
find favor in Gods sight, God may bring us again into favor with men; but,
if he thus say, I have no delight in you, nor in your services; behold, here
are we, let him do to us as he pleases.

He that, passing through honor and dishonor, as St. Paul did, can say, as
St. Paul said, I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith; (...), I have kept it, may assure himself of a crown of
Righteousness laid up for him; which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give
him that day, and to all them that love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:
To whom, with the Father, and the blessed Spirit, Three Persons, one True,
Immortal, Invisible, only Wise God, be given all Honor, Glory, Dominion and
Power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

