THE OFFICE AND DUTY OF EXECVTORS.

OR A TREATISE OF WILLS AND EXECUTORS, DIRECTED TO Testators in the choice of
their Executors and Contrivance of their Wills. With direction for Executors in
the execution of their Office, according to the Law, and for Creditors in the
recovery of their debts. Expressing the Duty, Right, Interest, Power and
Authority of Executors, and how they may behave themselves in the office of
Executorship. With diverse other particulars very useful, profitable, and
behovefull for all persons, be they either Executors, Creditors or Debtors.

Compiled out of the Body of the Common Law, with mention of such Statutes as
are incident hereunto.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Andrew Crook, Laurence Chapman, William Cook,
and Richard Best. 1641.

The Preface.
AMidst the Readers of these Discourses; some not yet unfriendly may ask,
perperhaps, Quorsum haec, or Quorsum sic: why have we a tractate and discourse
legal; or why in English and not rather in the Law language? To whom, yea,
also to others, perhaps less inquisitive, it will be, as I think, a thing not
unpleasing to hear some reason rendered, why I have set my head and hands to
this work so little in use with those of our profession; why also in English
rather than in the language wherein our volumes of Law are for the most part,
and well-nigh wholly written.

First, for the matter, viz. my thus comm^nting or making a tractate upon a
legal theme.

I have long and strongly conceived that the more Nobles, Gentlemen and others;
shall be acquainted with the Law of the Land, and the justness, equity,
prudence and providence thereof, the more they will love it and affect it;
Igno^i nulla cupido, the want of knowledge of it causes the leanness of love
to it. Therefore to bring Nobles and Gentlemen into acquaintance with the Law,
is a mean as well ^o advance it in their estimation, as to advantage them by
it.

Spartam quam nactus es, hane exorna, has been said of old, and should be
assayed anew.

Britton, Glanvill, Bracton, besides not printed, Fleta and Ingham, did lead
the way; so since Master Littleton, and more lately Sir Germin Perkins,
Fitzherbert, Stanford, Crompton, Lambert, Kitchen, Sir Henry Finch, Dalton,
have trodden this path; so as it cannot be taxed with novelty or singularity. I
mention not relaters or reporters of Judgments and resolutions, nor mere
abridgers, nor Authors of Books of Entries, expressing forms of Declarations
and Pleadings, etc. because these have trodden another, though for the Students
and professors of the Law, a very profitable path.

The tax and increpation of our late learned King lames in his Preface to to
his Book against Tobacco.
as being wholly in effect addicted to our own private gain and advantage,
with neglect of the public, had some strong operation upon me, howsoever upon
others, setting for diverse years past my pen on work, specially in Summer
vacations upon diverse particular subjects, whereof this is one and the first
borne.

To this I may add the Crowns expectation Law. There is one such in force at
this present, and another long has been in remainder and expectancie to take
effect upon the expiration thereof.

Sic to haec, viz. the reason of my English writing to that of my writing upon
a law theme. First receive the said late Kings judgment touching both,
expressed in one of his speeches printed. March 1609.
Thus. I wish, says he, the Law written in our vulgar language; For now it is
in an old mixed and corrupt language, only understood by Lawyers, Note.
whereas every subject ought to understand the Law under which he lives, etc.

Andrew Horn, one sometime of our profession, In his Mirror of Justice.
agrees with the said late King, saying, Abusio est que l^s leges ovesque lour
ench^sons, ne soient s^^us and conus del touts: It is an abuse* says he, that
the laws with their grounds be not known by all. Ergo, to be in a tongue
understood by all.

St. German, sing in consort with our said late scientious King. Lib. 1. cap.
24.
For he first brings in the Doctor of Divinity, saying, that henceforth he
will take more pain than before he had done, to know the Laws of England; for
that knowledge is Multum necessaria and clericis and laicis, imo omnibus in hoc
regno commorantibus, etiam in foro conscientiae. And this being in his first
book written in Latin: After writing his second book in English, he
expresses that he so did for this reason, viz. To the end that it might be
under stood by all.

Which of us has not heard it objected, are neglected by the most. Thirdly,
though care has been in Parliament in Edward the third his time, 36. Ed. 3.
c. 15.
that Lawyers should plead, that is, argue and debate causes in English, which
was often desired by the Nobles and Commons, till at last assented and enacted;
2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 6. in fine.
and in Queen Mary's time care was taken that the Commissions of Purveyors
should be in English, to the end that all subjects from or of whom they would
take, might both see them to be persons authorized, and so also in what manner
they are directed to use their authority, according to the Princes pious and
princely care that his subjects should not be abused by his Officers: Yet for
this affair, of having all the Law-volumes speak English, I have not heard nor
read of any desire or endeavor in Parliament. Fourthly, If the Annals and
Reports were in English, they are so replete with debates about forms of
Writs, Returns, Pleadings, Essoignes, Imparlances, Protections, Vouchers,
Aydpriers and Counterplees of both, and the like, as would easily distaste and
discourage any not intending to profess and practice the law, from versing
much in them, or passing through them. This therefore, as I think, would not
much effect the expressed desire.

The thing in my judgment fit and fruitful to produce that good effect, would
be to have extracts of materials of the Law; and that not without some good
choice and selection, composed in way of discourse, or tractate expository, and
that in English.

I cannot well see or comprehend how any Forma pauperis that may not be a
testator, or will maker, to the guidance of whom even in the choice of his
executors, and contrivance of his will, it cannot but be material to know the
office and duty, the right and interest, the power and authority of executors,
yea, of each one executor where there be diverse; yea, to know who may be made
an executor, who not; who can make one, who not; how he may be fashioned,
generally or specially; what shall come to him, what cannot be given from him;
yea, what goods or chatels shall go from him, though not given from him.
Besides the knowledge for those others necessary of the safest wards or locks
for executors. Their Scilla and Charibdis, and the best advantage for
creditors, etc. toward or against them. To me considering what parts of law
were most behovefull to be communicated to all willing Readers, none appeared
which could challenge of this the precedence, and therefore I gave it the first
and leading place. Thus my own thoughts. But how far this discourse may be
profitable to any, and to how many, aliorum sit judicium. How many know no more
of these, than of the way of a ship upon the Sea?

learned of our profession, who have drawn or can draw out of the same
fountain which I did, and so need not my help; but for their sakes who are
not professors of the Law: yet so as if any young Students may in any part
receive fruit by my labor, I shall not grudge or repine at their so doing.
Bonum quo communius, eo melius.

The first Table.
Chapter I. The being of Executors; and therein
1 OF the relation betwixt a will and an executor, whether one may be without
the other, Fol. 2. 2 Of the several kinds of Wills, 7 3 What will amount to
the making of an executor, and what words requisite thereunto, 10 4 How an
execut^r or his executorship may be limited or qualified in special manner
differing from the general, 12 5 Who may make an executor, 17 6 Who may be
made executors, 21 7 What one may give or bequeath by his will, ib. 8 Of the
revocation and countermand of wills and new publication, showing how a will or
executor once made may be unmade, and what shall amount to a revocation total
or partial, and what to a new publication, 25 9 Of new publications, 30
Chap. II. The having of executors, showing the state of things instantly upon
the testators death, before any Will proved.
1 WHat is wrought by the gift of a thing certain and known, as the white
Horse, the red Cow, etc. 33 2 Of a bequest to an executor, 34 3 Of a discharge
or release by will to a debtor, 36 4 Of making the debtor executor, 37 5 Of
making the creditor executor, 39 6 What may be done by or to an executor before
proving of the will, 42 7 Of refusal to prove the will, and therein of
administration forecluding refusal, 45 8 What shall be said, such a meddling
and administering by an executor, that he cannot refuse after, 47 9 Of the force
and effect of refusal, 51
Chap. III. Of proving Wills.
1 HOw, and where, and before whom wills ought to be proved, 53 2 Bona
notabilia, what they be, 55 3 Which may entitle the Metropolitan, 56 4 Of the
validity and invalidity of right or erroneous probates, 58 5 Of the relation of
probate and refusal, 60
Chap. IV. Of fees payable for probates.
1 OF copies of wills or inventories, and what fees due per stat. 21 Hen. 8.
cap. 5. 61
Chap. V. Of goods and chattels.
1 WHat things shall come unto executors, and said to be assets in their hands,
and what not, 63 2 Of chattels real possessory, 64 3 Some cases doubtful or
less clear touching chattels real, 66 4 Of chattels personal, 68 5 Cases
more doubtful touching chattels personal, 70
Chap. VI. Of things not actually in the testator, yet accruing to the
executor, 1. by action or suit, 2 by condition or covenant, 3 by remainder or
increase.
1 OF things in action, 79 2 Chattels come to executors from the testator, yet
not assets, 88 3 Assets which be no chattels, 90 4 Four things personal in
action changed into things real, and e contra, 92 5 A case of equity opposing
law, 93 6 Of things accruing by condition, ib. 7 Of things accruing by covenant
or assumption, 101 8 Of things accruing by remainder or increase, 102
Chap. VII. Of the interest which the executor has in the testators goods.
1 OF his interest in general, and how different from the interest in their
own proper goods, 106 2 Of the alteration of property in the executors hands,
so as some become his own which were the testators, 110
Chap. VIII: Cases between the heir and executor,
Wherein diverse questions are resolved concerning their distinct rites, 112
Chap. IX. Of suits by or against executors, and of the relation amongst
executors.
1 All at but one represent the testators person, and must join and be joined
in suit etc contra, A. 115 2 Where one alone must answer suit, and how, B. 117
3 When they differ in plea, the best shall be taken, but one may confess
alone, C. 121, 122 4 One as well as all may give or release the whole, D. 121,
122 5 One cannot give nor release his executorship to a coexecutor or any other
E. 121, 122 6 The possession of one executor is the possession of all the rest,
F. the folio here is wrong, 121 7 If the surviving executor dye intestate, the
testator is intestate though the other executors left executors. G. 121 8 The
exec. so represents the person of the testator, as that the word assignee only
makes him capable, H. 122 9 What change by death of the testator in a
proceeding in suit, I. 123 10 Proceeding to or in execution, where without a
Scire facias, K. 123 11 Where the executor stands in his own quality, where in
his testators, M. 124* 125 12 Where one executor alone may sue, N. 127 13 Where
some executors will not join with the rest in suit, the rest may sue alone, O.
127 14 Where by the death of one executor, plaintiff, or defendant, the writ is
abated, P. 128
Chap. X. Of the possession of executors, or their actual having.
1 What shall be said so to come to their hands as to charge them, 1 in things
real, 130 2 in things personal, 132 2 What shall be said, such a losing or
going from them as to excuse them, 137
Chap. XI. Of an executor having assets, how far and where he is chargeable and
liable to action.
1 PAyment of debts by specialty or record, 141 2 Of debts or duties by simple
contract without specialty, 145 3 Of debts without either contract or
specialty, 149 4 Of covenants charging executors by deed or specialty, 150 5 Of
wrongs done by testators, and how far the executors are liable to make amends,
155
THE OFFICE OF EXECVTORS.
THe things considerable touching Executors, Introduction
may all in effect be reduced to these three Heads, viz.

1. Their Being. 2. Their Having. 3. Their Doing.
By the first, I intend their creation, or constitution with, the incidents
thereto. By the second, their Interest, Fruition, or Possession. By the third,
their Managing and execution of their Office. This last was, and is the thing
principally in my intention, and the chief aim of these Discourses; but
necessarily it must have some Ingredients, some Concomitants, and some
Consequents; as he that travelleth from London to York to speak with I. S.
must needs pass by and through other Towns and Villages, and speak with
diverse other persons in his journey and return. To come first to the first;
therein we will consider these six things.

1. Whether an Executor and a Will be such Relatives, that one cannot be
without the other; and therein of the several kinds of Wills.

2. How, and by what words an Executor may be made and created.

3. How he may be in special manner (different from the general) fashioned,
limited or qualified.

4. Who may make, or be made an Executor, and who not.

5. What one may give or bequeath by Will, what not.

6. How a will or Executor once made, may be unmade, and what shall amount
thereunto, viz. To a revocation total or partial, what to new Publication.

Of the relation between a Will and an Executor.
AS to the first, the very name of Executor purporteth in the general, one
that is to execute somewhat, or to whom the execution of somewhat is committed,
or recommended. In our particular therefore, an Executor of a Will must needs
be such an one to whom the execution and performance of another man's Will after
his death is commended, or committed: Or who is constituted and authorized by
the Testator, or Will-maker, to do him that friendly office. Hence it follows
necessarily, that a Will is the only bed wherein an Executor can be begotten
or conceived, for where no Will is, there can be no Executor. And this is so
conspicuous, and evident to every low capacity, that it needs no proof nor
illustration. On the other side, though much be written in name of a Will, many
Legacies bequeathed, and many things appointed to be done: Plowd. eom. 1851 a.
in Wood^. and Darcies Cases, so expressly faid.
Yet if no Executor be named, here is no Will; for these two be so relative,
and reciprocal, as that one cannot be without the other; if no Will, no
Executor; if no Executor no Will. Yet here two Cautions are to be affixed.
Testamentum quasi testatio mentis.
1. That a man's mind, will, and intent, touching the disposition of his goods,
being declared, although for want of naming an Executor he die intestate, so as
Administration is to be committed: Yet for that here is not only an inchoation
or inception of a Testament, but so far a progression therein, as Testatio
mentis, that is, the manifestation of the pa^ty deceased and owner of goods;
therefore this mind and intention of the Intestate being notified and made
known to the Judge, who is to commit Administration, is usually annexed (as I
take it) to the Letters of Administration, and meet so to be, as a direction,
for, and to the Administrator; as well as the Will fully, and perfectly made,
but refused to be proved by the Executor, which is usual. Another Caution is,
That where a man seized of Land in Fee-simple, disposes the same, or part
thereof by his Will in writing, this stands good for the whole or part,
according to the difference of Tenure, although no Executor be named; so as the
party dies Intestate, and Administration is to be committed as touching his
goods, and yet has a Will as touching his Lands. This may seem strange, that
the reason thereof is an Act of Parliament, inabling to dispose of Land by Will
in writing. And for that Land, is not properly Testamentary, neither has the
Executor (if any be) anything to do or intermeddle therewith; and therefore is
the making or not making of an Executor, nothing pertinent to the validity or
invalidity of this devise or disposition of Land by Will. So, as though where
there is not Testatio mentis, there is not Testamentum; yet may there be the
first without the later.

Having seen that bequests of Legacies without making of Executors, does not
amount to a Will. Let us now consider, whether the sole making of Executors in
the name of a Will, without giving any Legacy, or appointing any thing to be
done by his Executors? Whether I say, this be, or amount unto a Will or not?
Since hereupon the matter nothing is willed, and consequently nothing rests to
be executed by the Executors, whose Office, as has been said, is to execute
the Will, Mind, and Intent of their Testator, and Vbi non est Testatio mentis,
Sum. Silv. fo. 32. b.
non est Testamentum, says the Cannonist. For answer hereunto, confessing that
indeed to be the Office of an Executor; I yet conceive confidently, that in
the Case above put, there is a good Will and as a Will, it is to be proved and
approved, for these Reasons. First, for that the maine and principal part of
an Executors Office, and that which most concerns the soul of the Testator
(as our Books speak) is the payments of his debts. Now, who knows not, but
that the very making of an Executor, is the constituting of such a person, who
is to pay all debts; and for that cause and end, principally is to have, and
enjoy all the goods and chattels of the Testator, and all sums of money to
him owing, as the naming of A. and B. Executors is by implication a gift, or
donation to them of all the goods, chattells, credits, and personal estate of
the Testator, and the laying upon them an Oligation to pay all his debts, and
making them subject to every man's suit and Action for the same. And if the Law
speak thus much sense; Quod necessario subintelligitur non deest; What need
then the party express it in his Will? If he had willed more than this, as to
have given this or that in way of Legacy, it had been needful for him, so to
have set down in his Will, but there is no mere necessity that every man
should give Legacies: the estates of many will not do more than pay their
debts, nor oft-times so much, so as if they should give any Legacy, it must
be a dead and void gift. And suppose a man have much more, and intends all
to his wife, brother, or sister, or other friend, his debts being by such
person, paid since the very making of that party Executor, without any more,
amounts to thus much, and effects this; what needs then more words?
Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora; as we often speak
touching legal passages; It is needless to write four lines where two be
sufficient. Nor is Testatio mentis here wanting; since the Testator has made
known who should have the Administration of his goods for payment of his
debts, and it is to be presumed he had no more special Will; since he did not
declare more, but left his Executor further to have and do, Prout lex
postulat: And who can say here is nothing to execute? Is the suing for, and
collecting of debts due to the Testator, and the payment of debts owing by him
nothing? Nay, it is rather in hoc negotio, the Vnum necessarium. Besides, the
making of an Executor is a designment, of a person to be the Testators assign
to whom, and by whom diverse, things may be feasible by virtue of covenants,
bonds, or other assurances, as after where we come to show how the Executor
represents the person of the Testator will appear. Also of one, who, as our
Books often speak, is to dispose the Testators goods for the best advantage
of his soul, but insteede of that (since as the tree falls so it will lie or
rest) I will say, as is most for the honor and reputation of the Testator.

Of the kinds of Wills.
NOw Wills are of two kinds, or may be two ways made, viz. either by writing,
or Nuncupative; that is, by words not put in writing, 4. H. 6. 1. 10. 8. 4. 1.
during the Testators life: for after the Testators death, If it be written and
brought to, and approved by the Testator in his life, it is a Will in writing.
this Verbal Will must be reduced to writing, and have the seal of the
Ordinary, or Judge spiritual thereto affixed; and then is it as effectual,
and of as good validity as if it had been in writing in the Testators life
time; 14. H. 6. 5. vide 5. H. 5. 1. M. 15. and 16. Eliz.
and so does the Common Law allow and approve thereof. But I advise all to make
Wills by writing, and not to leave them to the doubtful fidelity, or slippery
Memory of witnesses: for, as of Leases Parroll has been said, that they be
Leases perjured, or of perjury:

So of Wills Parroll may be feared. Besides, many times a man does speak and
declare this or that, as part of his Will, which his wife, child, or friend
dissuading, he lets that purpose and part of Will to fall, and departs from
it: Yet witnesses wishing it to stand, will perhaps affirm it as part of the
Will. As for a Will, gift, and disposition of Land of inheritance, if it be not
fully written before the death of the Testator or Doner, so far (at least) as
concerns the disposition of Land, it cannot be for that part made good, by
reducing it to writing after his death, as for goods and chattels it may. Yet
if it be written before the death of the Testator, though it never be brought
to him, or read to him, after the writing thereof, it is good enough: and that
not only for Land, (...) Die. 72*
as the Case in King Ed. 6. his time was, but also for goods and chattels, so
as there be an Executor named. But whether shall we say, that this is a Will
Nuncupative or in writing? And surely I think, that this is a Will in writing,
and not verbal only, though it want subscribing; for we know, that many
cannot write their names, but only marks, and what is that? Nay, suppose one
want hands, and cannot write so much as his name; yet doubtless this man may
make a Will in writing, that being written by his direction, as his Will which
he dictated: nor is the subscribing of the name of the maker, any essential
part of a Deed, much less of a Will, which needs not sealing as a Deed
does. Now put we the case on the other side, that many Bequests or Legacies be
named in a Will, and many things expressed to be done, but no Executor is named
in the writing, only by word of mouth, A. and B. be named Executors. This I
think confidently is no Will in writing, but Nuncupative only; for that one
essential part of the Will, viz. the making of Executors, is wanting in the
writing. Nay, the appointing of him Executor, who is named in a note, left with
A. B. is no sufficient making of an Executor, says the Summist. Tit. de Testim
Sum. Silv. fo. 443. b.
And of such Nuncupative Will, Master Perkins reasonably says, that it
properly has place, So if he survive and live long time, not causing it to be
a written, or attested by witnesses; me thinks it should not stand as his Will.
when one suddenly taken with sickness violent, dares not stay the writing of
his Will, for fear of prevention by death; and therefore prays his Curate and
others, to witness what his Will is. To this Will not written, there must be
seven witnesses, and such as come not by chance; but are especially called for
that purpose, Idem supra fol. 444. b.
says the Summest.

What shall amount to a making one Executor, or what words requisite thereunto.
HAving before made it to appear, that the being of an Executor, is an
essential part of a Will, and so de esse, and not been esse, only of a Will
or Testament. Let us now see, First, by what words an Executor may be made.
Secondly, De modo, In what manner it may be done. How the power and authority
of Executors may be limited or divided. As to the first, though one do not
expressly by Will, name or appoint any to be Executor: Yet if by any words or
circumlocution, he recommend or commit to one or more, the charge and office
which pertaines to an Executor, it amounts to as much as the ordaining or
constituting of him or them to be Executors. As if he declare by his Will, that
A. B. shall have his goods after his death to pay his debts, If A be made
Executor, and to him and D. some goods be divi^ed to dispose for his soul, D.
is by this an Executor for these.
and otherwise to dispose at his pleasure, or to that effect. By this is A. B.
made Executor, as was conceived by the Judges, in the late Queens time. And
long before that, 39. H. 6. 27. b. ^8. M. 15. and 16. Eli. 21, H. 6. 6. 7.
was it held, that if one do only Will that A. B. shall have the
Administration of his goods, he is thereby made Executor. Yea, in the said late
Queens time, one giving diverse Legacies, and then appointing that his debts;
and Legacies being paid, his wife should have the residue of his goods; so
that she put in security for the performance of his Will. By this without more,
was she an Executor, as was held by three Just. viz. Manwood, Harper, and
Mounson, in the Lord Dyers absence. And so also where an Infant was made
Executor, and A. and B. Overseers, with this, that they should have the rule
and disposition of his goods and payment, and receipt of debts, until the full
age of the Infant; by this were they held to be Executors in the mean time.
And if A. be made Executor, and the Testator after in his Will, expresses that
B. shall Administer also with him, and in aid of him: Here B. is an Executor
as well as A. and if A. refuse, B. alone may prove the Will as Executor;
notwithstanding it be only said, that he shall Administer with A. and in aid
of him. Thus many ways, and by diverse words of implication, and may be made
Executor, although not expressly so named by the Will. But if A. be made
Executor, and B. a Coadjutor, without more, He is not by this an Executor with
A. as in King H. 6. his time was held, nor has such Coadjutor, 21. H. 5. 6. 7.
or an Overseer any power to Administer, or intermeddle otherwise, 21. H 6. 6.
than to counsel, 34. Ed. 3. F. Exe. 121. 29. Ed. 3. 39
persuade, and advise; yet I think he may, and in conscience should so do;
and if that will not prevail to rectify negligences, or miscarriages in
Executors, he shall well perform the trust reposed in him, if he complain in
the Spiritual Court, or Court of Conscience; and it is reason, as I think,
that so doing upon just cause, his charges be borne out of the Testators state,
or the Executors purse, who otherwise would not be reformed.

How an Executor, or his Executorship may be limited or qualified in special
manner, different from the general.
NOw let us see how this making of an Executor may be specially qualified. And
first the time may be limited, when he shall begin to be Executor, and that,
either certainly, or with some reference to contingencie. Secondly, the
creation may be conditional. Thirdly, it may be partial, or dividedly, and
not entirely.

As to the first, Vide Gresbroke and Fox Plowd.
one may appoint lo. At. to be his Executor a year or more time after his
death, A. and B. made Exec. but ought not to meddle during the life of A. and
good. 32 H. 8^ (...). 115.
and this is good. So also, if A. appoint B. his son to be his Executor when
he shall come to his full age; and in the mean time he dies Intestate.
Again, one may make and appoint the Executors of A. to he be his Executors;
and then if he die before, A. is Intestate, until A. die. This creation may
also be conditional, and the condition may either be precedent or subsequent.
In the time of King H. 6. one named A. and B. his Executors; 3. H. 6. fo. 6.
and if they would not take it upon them, then C. and D. should be his
Executors: and then there A and B. refused; and the question was, whether in
suit against the debtors of the Testator, A. and B. should join with C. and D.
as where four Executors being named, and two refuse, and the other two prove
the Will, yet all four must be named in suits against the Testators debtors,
as was there admitted. But in the principal case it was resolved that the suit
should be only in the name of C. and D. for that the appointing of them to be
Executors, if A. and B. refused did imply, that then they only should be
Executors. And here all four were never made, nor intended to be Executors,
but A. and B. upon a condition subsequent that they should not refuse: and C.
and D. upon a condition precedent, viz. if A. and B. did refuse. It is usual
to make one or more Executors, conditionally, that they put in security to pay
Legacies, or in general to perform the Will; nor was it ever doubted, as I
think, but that this was good: yet I should advise, that such condition be
plainly thus expressed, viz. either thus; that if I. S. do put in security,
etc. by such a day, that then he shall be Executor, else not: or thus, viz. to
make him Executor conditionally; that before he do Administer (Funeral
perhaps excepted) he shall put in such security; else perhaps he being
Executor till the Condition broken, in that mean time may have disposed of
all, or most part of the Testators estate. In the late Queens time, there was
a Case remarkable to this purpose: One Willed, P. 33, Eli. Alce Francis her
case.
that if his wife suffered I. S. to enjoy Blackeacre (being belike part of her
Jointure) for three years, then she should be his Executor, or else A. B.
should; and the question was in the Common Plees, whether presently before
the end of the three years, she were Executor, or not till she suffered the
Land to be enjoyed three years: and it was held by all the Judges, but the
Lord Anderson, that she was presently Executor, until she should disturb I.
S. etc. for upon that done; it was agreed, that the Executorship, would, by
virtue of the Condition be transferred from the wife to A. B. But now during
these three years might she have disposed of all the goods of her husband;
yea, within one of these three years, and less time, and then have broken the
Condition, and have left to A. B. a dry Executorship.

Now to the third Point, one may divide his Executors power three ways, 19. H.
8. 3^*
viz. Really, Locally, 19. H. 8. Dye^. 4. Hill. 33. Eliz. in Com. b.
or Temporally: Really thus. He may make A. his Executor for his plate and
housholdstuffe: B. for his sheep, and cattle, C. for his Leases and states by
extent, D. for his debts due to him, and so divide the power and Administration
of his Executors at his pleasure. 32. H. 8. Br^ 115
He may divide them also, or their power Locally, viz. A. for his goods in Com.
Buck. B. for those in Com. Oxon. and C. for those in Com. Berk. He may also
divide them in time; viz. his wife, or any other person to be Executor during
her life, or during the minority of his son, or so long as she continues
widow, and after his son to be Executor. So of like limitations, or
divisions, either for time, place, or things, wherewith they shall intermedle.
Nay, doubtless one may be made Executor for one particular thing only, as
touching such a Statute, or Bond, and no more; and thereof good use may be
made, as I think, thus. Many have Bonds, Statutes, and Recognizances, for
warranty or enjoying of Land, or freeing, or saving harmless from
encumbrances in general or particular: Now he which has these, selling the
Land, may by Letter of Attorney lawfully assign the^ to the party who buyeth
the Land or Lease; but this notwithstanding, the interest remains in him who
sells, and by his outlawry, they may be forfeited or by him released any Bond
to the contrary notwithstanding; and if he dye, the interest in Law will be in,
and go to his Executors, and in their names; only Suit or Execution may be
had and maintained. Qu^e. If not Assets in Law when obtained.


Now then, if the Vendor, besides assignement make as to this Statute,
Recognizance, or Obligation, only the Vendee Executor; By this, the interest,
after death of the party, will be in him actually and really to his more
safety, since none but he can release or discharge, nor any other name need
to be used to sue, or take benefit thereof. But Quaest. If the Vendee, his
Heirs and Assigns may be made Executors, so as that security, shall go to
them one after another without renewed, making of Executors. Thus if the party
make no other Executor, he dies Intestate, as to the rest of his estate, and
as to this specialty only, shall have an Executor, and must have a Will
proved: and incase he do make another Will for his state residue; there must
be two Wills proved. But in the other case where by one only Will, one is
Executor for one part of the estate, and another for another; there being but
one Will to be proved, one proving of it suffices. And though in the premises
of a Will two be made Executors jointly and equally; yet there may be a
Proviso, 32. H. 8. Br^. Exec. 155.
that one shall not meddle during the others life, so as they shall be Executors
successively, and not jointly; and thus also to other purposes aforesaid, a
subsequent cause or Proviso, may make the partition and division of authority.
But if the Proviso or clause subsequent, be merely contrary to the Premises,
it will be void; as where two were made Executors, 19. H. 8, Die. 3. ^.
with a Proviso, or cause, that one of them should not Administer his goods.
This was held void for repugnancy by Brudnell and Englefield Justices. But
Fitzherbert Justice was of mind, that it was not void, nor utterly repugnant.
For the other might join in suits, though not Administer; and Justice Shelley
was of a third opinion different from all the rest, viz. that here was a
repugnancy; but the last clause should control the Premises, and so this one
only should be Executor.

Who may make an Executor.
SOme persons may be unable to make Wills, and consequently Executors; for that
is all one: whosoever may make a Will, may make an Executor, and he that may
make an Executor may make a Will. There be nineteen several kinds of persons
unable, as the Canonests say, to make Wills, but with many of them we will not
intermeddle, because we find no mention of them in our Law. The persons
principally, and most usefully to be considered of by us, are either the
defective in understanding, as Infants, Idiots, Lunatickes, and the like, or
defective in power or interest, as women covert or married; persons outlawed,
attainted, convict, or excommunicate. Some touch we will give of others, as
Aliens, Corporations, Villens, Monks and Friars. As for Infants and women
covert, because much is to be said of each of them and their Administrations,
we will forbear to treat of them in this place; but after will do it of
each severally.

To begin with an Idiot, naturally he is not able to make a Will, ^. Eli. ^.
203. 204.
as was resolved in the Spiritual Court, because he wants the use of Reason to
conceive what it is fit for him to Will; nor does the Common Law oppose this as
I think.

A Lunaticke having Lucida intervalla, that is, some seasons of enjoying his
right mind and freedom from his Lunacy, may in those times of his right mind
make a Will, and Executors, else not, for even one by age or sickness become
of non sanae memoria, is unable to dispose of Lands or goods.

One deaf and dumb borne may make a Grant, Vide plat la Perk. 5. 6. 33. H. 8.
Die. 55. 56. Vide 26. Ed. 3. 63. lib. (...). 396.
says Master Perk. if he have understanding, which is hard, as he confesses,
consequently much more a Will: but in the time of K. Hen. 8. it is left a
demurrer, 18. Ed. 3. 53. 26. Ed. 3. 63. So in effect. 44. Ass. p. 36. P. 31,
Eli. Pascatia de Fountains Case.
whether a Deed by such, be good or not. If but mute, he may wage his Law, and
atturne by signs, and so perhaps by signs declare his Will. 44. Ass. p. 36.

An Alien may make, or be an Executor, so as he be not an Alien enemy, for such
cannot sue; as in the late Queens time was held; but there the doubt was,
whether a subject of Spain were at that time to be held an enemy, no war
being proclaimed between the Kindomes, though hostility exercised.

As for persons Attainted, Convicted, or Outlawed, it will be said, that these
can have no goods of their own, and consequently, they can make no Wills nor
Executors; and it is not to be denied, that we find it pleaded sometimes by
Executors, that their Testators stood outlawed. But first it is clear, that
all and every of these, may have goods as Executors to others, which neither
are forfeited by Attainder or outlawry, nor divested by marriage, or Villenage.
Therefore as touching them, they may make Testaments. And that all these sorts
of persons may be Executors, is also evident. So also touching Villens, Monks
and Friars, who can have no goods to their own uses. And that one attainted of
felony may have an Executor, 33 Eliz. in Ba^eg.
appears by the Case in the late Queens time, wherein it was long debated,
whether such an Executor might maintain a writ of Error, or not to reverse the
attainder of the Testator: And as for other Out-lawries, the Plea thereof by
the Executors, that their Testator was, and died outlawed, proves not a
nullity of the Will, or Executorship: for then they might have pleaded, that
they were never Executors. But it tends to this, that no goods did, or could
come to them for satisfaction of the debts by reason of out-lawry; yet it has
been delivered, not of old only in many Books, but by some of late, that
debts upon contract, where the defendant may wage his Law, 2^. Ass. P. 63. 49
Ed. 3. 5. 50. Ass. P. 15.
are not forfeit by out-lawry, 33. H. 6. 27. 9. Eliz. D. 262. Contra. Co. lib.
4. fol. 95.
nor uncertain damages for trespass in battery, or false imprisonment, etc.
Quaer. Of breach of Covenant. But goods taken away by a trespasser, 19. H. 6
47. 30. Ed. 3. 4. 16. Ed. 4. 7. 5. Ed. 3. 53. 6. H. 7.
may yet be forfeited by the Attainder or out-lawrie of him from whom they were
taken, for that the property in right still appertained to him, and he might
have taken them again, wheresoever he found them, therefore the action for
this shall not come to his Executor, but for the other, not forfeited it may.

Whether an Excommunicated person be able to make a Will or not, (...). H. 7.
for. 7
may be some doubt since Keble denies him ability to present to a Church,
Sum. Silvest. tit. Testam.
and in the very Point anciently the opinion of Canonists has been Negative,
but more lately grew Affirmative.

Who may be Executors; 42. E. 31. ^.
more,
AN Excommunicate person cannot Sue, that is, proceed in Suit as Executor till
he be absolved, there being danger of Excommunication to all that converse with
him; but this makes not a nullity of his Executorship, nor over throws the
Suit, but stays it only from proceeding until absolution. 21. H. 6. 30. A
Clarke attaint may be an Executor by Past. Just.
As for persons attainted or outlawed, we have before spoken Affirmatively in
way of proof, that they may make Executors for continuation of the
Executorship, Pascati^ de Fountain. But an Alien enemy cannot sue as Executor.
P. 31. Eli. 3. Iac. cap. 5.
So of Aliens, and others before. Recusants convicted at the time of the death
of any Testator are disabled to be his Executors.

Whether Corporations, Compound, or consisting of diverse persons may be made
Executors or not; I doubt. First, because they cannot be Feoffees in trust to
others use; secondly, they are a body framed for a special purpose; thirdly
they cannot come to prove a Will, or at least to take an oath as others do.

What a man may give or dispose by his Will.
HAving considered of the makers of executors by Will, and of them so made. Let
us now consider what by this Will may be disposed, given, Bransby. Verse.
Grantham. Ple^. Com. f. 5 25.
or bequeathed. And first, he, who himself is an Executor, cannot by his
Will, give, or bequeath to any other the goods, chattels, or credits, he has
as Executor, the property not being altered, for that he has not them properly
as his own, or to his own use: only he may make a continuation of the
Executorship, and his Executor shall have them as Executor to the first
Testator, as was resolved by the Judges of both Benches, Hill. 20. Eliz.
in the late Queens time. And if he be Administrator, the bequest is then also
void, nor then will they go to his Executor, but to a new Administrator; but
on his deathbed he may give them by Word or Deed, At any time in his life he
may alter the property.
though not by Will. Next if a man have debts owing to him, as many have much,
it is considerable, whether by way of bequest in his Will, he can give away
these to any from his Executors. So 48. E. 3. f. 14. 15.
And doubtless he cannot effectually in Law, Where the bequest was to one of
the Executors, it was held that the other Executor might ^elease it.
they being not subject to assignement unto any except the King. So as, if he
give such a debt to A. and such to B. yet must the suit for them be in the name
of the Executor, and so also the Release or Acquittance for them: and not in
their names to whom the bequests is. But when they be received, if there be no
debts to pay, If sufficient otherwise to pay all one, a^ if (...).
the Executor ought to deliver them to the party, to whom the bequest is, 48.
E. 3. p. 14. 15. 11. Ed. 3. Fitz. tit. Cond. 9.
and therefore may be compelled in Court of Conscience, or in the Spiritual
Court. Therefore the Case of the bequeathing money payable upon a Morgage, is
in this manner, to be understood to be good, and not otherwise as I take it.
Where both stated jointly by one Grant.
He that is jointly with any other estated in Lands or goods, Differences
betweent joyn-tenants and Tenants in Common, holding by several Grants.
can give no part by his Will, but all will survive, but by Act in his life he
may dispose of his part, and the Assignee may dispose of his moiety by Will;
Another kind of Tenants in Common.
yea though it be half an Horse or Ox, that cannot be divided. So of a Lease
of Lands, or Tithes, or Grant of goods to two, habendu^, one moiety to the one,
and the other moiety to the other; each may give his moiety by Will. But if one
be possessed, or estated for years by Lease, Wardship, or Extent, etc. in the
right of his wife, or have the next avoidance of a Church in her right, he
cannot by Will give or bequeath any of these; but notwithstanding they will
remain unto his wife upon his death; but yet his Gift, or Grant of them,
taking effect in his life time, would bind his wife, and carry away the
interest from her. If one be Tenant for the lives of one or more; others, as
often times men take Leases for lives of younger persons than themselves, this
cannot be by Will disposed of, for that it is no chattell, nor is it within the
Statutes of Wills, for that it is no state of inheritance. Therefore let the
party look to convey it in his life time, lest it go to an Occupant, viz. him
who first shall enter: If it be a State in Land, he must either make Livery,
have a bargain and sale enrolled or covenanted to stand seized to the use of
his wife, or some of his blood, or make a Lease for years, determinable upon
those lives: Good it be by bargain and sale for years, if the thing be in
Lease, that so without Inrolement or Atturnement the Rent may pass, else a
bargain and sale may be made for a month, or such like time; and then a
Release or Grant of the reversion, in stead of Levery and Seisin. But if a man
have a Lease for never so many years, determinable upon life, or lives; that
is, if such or such live so long (which unskilled persons call a Lease for
lives) this State may well enough be given, and disposed by Will, because it is
but a chattell. If a man seized in Fee, or in Tail of Land having Corn
growing upon it, and by his Will do give the Corn, and die before severance;
this is a good bequest, because the Corn should have gone to the Executor. So
it is also of a Parson touching his Glebe, and a man seized in the right of his
wife, or his own right, but for life. Stat. Mert^n. cap. 2. vidua possint
Lega^e tam de dotibus quam de aliis, etc.
But as for trees growing upon the ground; these can no otherwise be given by
Will, then as the Land it self upon which they grow, Qu^. If the trees may be
devised by the Statute of Wills, without giving the Land it self.
may be given of, which matter, as not pertaining to the Office of Executors,
viz. How, and in what manner Lands may be given by Will, I entend not to treat
in these discourses.

Of the Revocation and Countermand of Wills and new Publication.
HAving considered of the making of Wills and Executors. Let us before we come
to the Probat, consider of Revocation, for that may take away the force of a
Will rightly made. Omne testamentum morte consuramatur.
A Will therefore having two parts, viz. Inception, which is the making, and
Consummation which is the death of the Testator or maker of the Will, See the
pleading of it by making a later Will. lib. Intra fo. 323. b. and 641* a.
there is power in him at any time before death, to revoke or alter his Will at
his pleasure. Consider we therefore of Revocations, and also of new
Publications, or Reaffirmance of Wills in whole or in part. As therefore a Will
may be made by Word. So also may a Will made in Writing be by Word revoked or
disanulled: for since every making of a later Will is a Countermand, and
suppression of the former Will, and since a Will may be made Nuncupatively or
by Word, and so by making a verbal Will, one may revoke a Written Will. It
will thereupon follow that one by Word may express the alteration of his
mind, thus far that the Will by him formerly made, shall not stand, but be
revoked and annulled; and this will stand and be effectual, so as if he after
dye without making any new Will, or new Publication, or Reaffirmance of the
former, he dies intestate or without will. As a Will may be wholly revoked,
so also in part: Hereabout a good resolution was in a Kentish Case, where one
Ryete by his Will in writing did give some Gavel-kinde Land, to one Harrison,
and five days before his death, said in the presence of witnesses, that this
gift should not stand, and that he would alter it when he came home, desiring
them to bear witness of his Revocation. Now before he came home he was killed
by the said Harrison, who caused the Will in writing to be proved, and after he
was attainted and hanged for the murder, and his Son by the Custom of Kent,
(viz. the Father to the bough, and the Son to the plough) entered into the
Land, ^. 4. Eliz. Die. 310 b.
and this manner of Revocation, by word only was held sufficient, although the
Will in writing were not cancelled nor defaced. M. 28. and 29. Eliz. Co, lib.
4, f. 60.
And the like resolution for verbal Revocations is employed in the Case of
Forse and Hembling, where it being resolved that a Feme Covert, or married
woman, by word Countermanding and Revoking her Will formerly made, when she was
a sole or unmarryed Woman: this was not effectual, nor of force, by reason of
her Coverture, taking away the freedom of her Will, hereby it is employed that
another who has freedom of Will may by Word sufficiently revoke a Will in
writing; and so was it since also admitted in the Case between Sir Edward
Mountague and Ieoffryes, 7. H. 6. fol. 13. M. 38. 39. Eliz.
touching the Will of Sir Io. Ieoffryes, but there a difference was conceived
betwixt saying, I will revoke my Will, which only expressed a purpose or
intent, and therefore was no present Revocation; and saying I do revoke it, or
it shall not stand, or my heir shall have my Land, which crossed the gift of
it by the Will. And as Wills may be wholly or in part revoked so may also the
executorship of one or more of the Executors, and yet the Will may stand in all
the other parts, so as there be any one Executor or more unrevoked: but if all
be revoked, then the whole Will is revoked, because no Will can stand without
Executors: and this Revocation may be by Word only, without being expressed in
the Will or any other writing. But I would wish all to express such revocation
in the foot of the Will, or that the name or names of the Executor or
Executors so revoked be expunged or blotted out of the Will, and that this be
done in the presence of some witnesses to testify the act and intent of the
Testator.

Again, Revocations may be by act in Law as well as in fact, or by direct and
express terms, as in the said Case of Mountague and Ieoffryes, where Land
being devised by Will, and the Devisor after making a feoffement, though there
were some defect in the Livery, Vide 6. F. 6. Die. 74* and 3, and 47. and Ma.
43, a.
to make it effectual, or if he made a bargain and sale, that was never
enrolled or granted the reversion, but no atturnement had, so as the Land
passed not, yet in all these Cases the Will or gift of Land stood revoked: But
in Case he had only Covenanted that he would have made such an estate, and not
done it, this was held to be no Revocation. And so by some, in case he do but
make a Lease, leaving the Fee simple, as it was, but of this Quare; And if a
difference may not be betwixt making a Lease for years, and a Lease for life,
which alters the Freehold. If a Lease for twenty years be bequeathed to I.
S. and after the Testator, makes a Lease for fifteen years, reserving a
Rent, I take this to be no Revocation of the bequest; but if the Testator after
this Will made, take a new Lease for a longer term, so as the former Lease is
surrendered in fact or in Law, this must needs be a Revocation of the bequest,
or at least an adnullation thereof. and that although the bequest: were
generally of his Lease, not mentioning the number of years; for this which he
now has, is another Lease, and not that which he had at the time of the making
of the Will. So, if one give his black gelding by Will, and after, before his
death, he sells or gives away that Horse, and buyeth another black one,
this new gotten Horse shall not pass by the Will, because it was not the
Testators, at the time of making his Will. So also, if the Crop in the Barn be
bequeathed in October, and the party lives till that time twelve month, having
sold that Crop and Inned a new, this later Crop shall not pass by the Will,
and the former cannot.

Again, as revocation may be by alteration of the State of the Devisor, in the
Land Devised; so may it also be by alteration, in some case of the state or
quality of the person of the Devisor. As if a woman sole make a Will, and after
take a Husband, this without any more, as is resolved in the said case of
Forse, and Hembling, does work a Revocation, or adnullation of the Will, for
that else it should be irrevocable, since she having lost the freedom of her
Will, cannot actually and directly make a Revocation, as we before have showed.
But notwithstanding her Will be revoked, yet in case her Husband before or
after marriage, with her were bound or Covenanted, to perform this woman's
Will, if he so do not, by payment of the legacies therein bequeathed, his Bond
or Covenant stand good, and be suitable against him, M. 25. 26. Eliz.
as was adjudged touching the Will of Elizabeth Smaleman, married after her
Will made to one Wood. Who first was bound to perform it: yet another case
there is of Alteration in the state of the Testators person, which makes no
Revocation of his Will. As if he being of sound mind and ability, make a Will,
and after becomes frantic. In this case this is no Revoction. So as his
Will stands till his death irrevocable, if he recover not. Now of a Will
Revoked, there may be a reviver by a new Publication, and thereof now.

Of new Publications.
HAving showed how a Will may be revoked, and so lose its force; let us now see
how without making a new Will, that so revoked may be revived, M. 38. 39, Eliz.
in ba. reg*
and set on foot again. And that is diverse ways: as, First, by a Codicell
annexed after thereunto, as was resolved between Betford, and Barnecot, in the
Kings Bench. Secondly, by adding any thing to the Will, or making a new
Executor, etc. Thirdly, by express speech or word, that it should stand or be
his Will; as I conceive, to have been the better opinion in the said case of
Mountague and Ieoffryes, wherein yet was much difference of opinion, both
touching Revocation and new Publication. If a man having made a former Will,
44. Ass. p. 36*
do make a latter which is more than a bare Revocation; yet if afterward lying
upon his deathbed, and speechless, both these Wills be delivered into his
hand, and he required to deliver to one of his friends about him, that Will
which he would have to stand, and to keep in his hands the other; he thereupon
delivers to the Minister or other his neighbors, the first made Will,
retaining in his hands the latter, as was done in the time of Edward the third.
Here the former Will, 44, Ed. 3. ^ols 33.
though made void many years before, by the latter, is revived, and shall
stand as the Parties Will. But now put the case that a Bequest at the first is
void, yet by Publication after, it may be made good, as if one give to Sar.
his wife, a piece of Plate or other thing, and has no such Wife at the time,
but after marryeth one of that name, and then publishes his Will again; now
this shall be a good Bequest. So if one Devise Lands or Goods, which one has
not; If he after do purchase the same, and then say that his Will before made
shall stand, or be his Will. It shall be a good Will and Bequest, for this is
in effect a new making. 3. and. 4. P. M. Die. 143.
And though most of the precedent cases, be of Revocation of particular parts
of the Will, and not of the total: Yet first, be it considered that, that part
so revoked was in effect the substance of the Will: Next, it is easily
discerned that if one part be revocable, so is another also; And thus
Revocation may spread it self over the whole; nay, doubtless the whole, Vno
flatu, may be revoked, as well as by parts, even as a faggot may be put wholly
into the fire, as well as stick by stick. And as the Velleities or disposing
parts of the Will, are revocable and revivable by new Publication as aforesaid,
so is also the constitution of Executors. As if one of the Executors names be
stricken out, and afterward a stet. be written over his head by the Testator,
or by his appointment, now is he a revived Executor. So if the Testator
express by word, in the presence of Witnesses that the party put out shall yet
be Executor; but now I mean, where the Executors name is not so blotted out,
but that it may be read and discerned; for else the stet is upon nothing, and
if the Verbal reaffirmance should renew his Executorship, then must the Will
be partly in writing, and partly Nuncupative, his name not being to be found in
the written Will.

Of the State of things instantly upon the Testators Death, before any Will
proved.
Here we will consider these several things.
1. What is wrought by a gift of a thing certain and known, as the White
Horse, the Red Cow, etc. 2. What by a Bequest to an Executor. 3. What wrought
by a Release in the Will, to a Debtor. 4. What by making a Debtor, or Creditor,
an Executor.
AS touching the first, viz. the bequest of a Chattell real, or personal,
which the Testator had in possession, notwithstanding that, if the said
Testator had by his Deed or writing, or but by word in his deathbed, or
before given these his goods, 1 and 2. P. and Ma. Die. 110. a. and 139. b. vide
Co. ^. f. 95, and 96.
and dyed before they had been taken, he to whom they so were given, might
have taken them; yet in this case of gift by Will, neither can the Legatee,
viz. he to whom they are bequeathed, either take them, or recover them from the
Executor, or a stranger taking them; by any Suite at the Law for that he has
no property in them; Of the second. See Co. 10. f. 47. 65 ^.
yea if the Bequest be to himself, So resolved pas. T^^. 37. Eli in b. a. M.
only ^aw. ^^ntr. Portman. pl. and Simes de^^.
who is made Executor, be it of Lease, Plate, Cattle, etc. They shall not vest
nor settle in him as Legate, but as Executor, until express, or employed
election, See more of this Tit. Legacy: and of the assent of one Executor only.
but made to have and take the same by way of Legacy. And the reason in both
case is this, viz. That the Law preferres, debts, and the satisfaction of them
before Legacies, and ties Executors also to that rule, and therefore will
transfer nothing from or out of the Executor, till he having considered of
the State of the debts to be paid, and goods out of which the same are to be
paid, shall find that safely this or that legacy may take effect without
making any defect in payment of debts, or drawing upon him and his own goods
any damage or loss as a waster: and thereupon shall assent to such Legacy.
Thus now is the Law taken; but heretofore some opinion has run otherwise,
viz. That he to whom any Bequest was made of a thing known and certain, 27.
H. 6. 8.
might take it without any assent of the Executor: Of late perhaps some single
or sudden opinions may also have run that way, but in Portmans case the
point was diverse ^unes argued, and then adjudged as before.
and that when to the Executor himself any good or Chattell moveable or
immovable was bequeathed. In case there were otherwise sufficient goods, for
satisfaction of debts, the same should instantly upon the Testators death,
without any act or election, by the Executor be transferred into, and unto him
in his own right, as a Legacy, and not remain in him as Executor. As for
sums of money bequeathed, To be bought.
or so much in Plate, or Ringes, it is evident that they must be had by the
delivery of the Executor: Yet has the Legate such an interest before delivery,
as that dying before payment it will go to his Executors. But as I take it, no
such to whom any thing certain is given by Will, can make any gift or grant of
it, before the Executor have assented to his having thereof; Quae. of this see
more after Tit. Legacy, thereabout.
Nor perhaps will the Executors assent, after the grant have such relation, as
to make good the grant precedent; why so, yet? more then an atturnement of a
Leassee, which is alike assent to the grant of another? And Quere if by the
out-lawry of the Legatee, before the Executors assent, this thing bequeathed be
forfeited.

If without just cause an Executor will refuse to assent he is compellable by
Law Spiritual or Court of Conscience, yet if Spiritual Court press to do
where is just cause to stay, a Prohibit. lies, ut Credo, for since executors
stand liable to recovery of debts against them by Common Law. It is reason that
Law enable them to keep wherewith to pay. And here yet note some seeming
opposition in Law for where before great difference was showed between a
Devise or Bequest, and a gift or alienation executed in ones life time; Yet the
Lord Deyar reports it to be resolved, that where a Lease for years was made
upon condition, that the Lessee should not Aliene in his life time, that yet a
Bequest of this Lease by his Will, was a breach of the Condition as being an
alienation in his life time.

3. Of a discharge by Will to a debtor some question may be whether to perfect
and make good this, so as the debtor may plead it in Bar, there be not
requisite, as in the former, an assent of the Executor. On the one side, since
this giving is a forgiving, for he to whom it is bequeathed, cannot otherwise
have it, then by way of retainer, it may probably be said, that here needs no
such assent of the Executors, as in the case where any thing is to be
transferred; for here is rather an extinguishment, and an exoneration then a
passage of a Chattell by way of Donation: On the other side it is probable that
it being but a Bequest, and so a Legacy, since debts are in Law and Conscience,
to be satisfied before any Legacyes, that therefore the Executor having not
sufficient otherwise to satisfy his Testators debts, may sue for this debt,
and refuse to suffer it to pass away as a Legacy. And to this opinion do I
incline, as best for Creditors; and satisfaction of debts is by Law respected
as an act greatly concerning the Testators soul. But some will perhaps make a
contrary doubt, that although there be an assent of the Executors to this
discharge, yet it will not amount to a legal release, for that a debt, at
least, Not de esse, but de been esse.
if it be by speciallty, cannot be released but by Deed, and a Will is no
Deed, for a Seal is not necessary thereunto, though it be fit and convenient;
whereto I give this answer, that a Will though it be not properly and legally a
Deed, for it may be good enough without a Seal, which is an essential part
of a Deed, yet has it the force and effect of a Deed: for as a Release
cannot be made but by Deed, so neither can an Estate or Interest though but
for years in Tithes, Advowsons, Commons, Faires, and like things be granted or
assigned otherwise then by Deed, yet it is clear, that such a state for
years in any of these may be given by Will, as well as a Lease of Land, which
proves a will to have the force and effect of a Deed.

Of making a Debtor or Creditor, Executor, and first of the Debtor made
Executor.
SUppose we then that A. and B. being made Executors, the Testator was indebted
to A. twenty pounds, and B. was indebted to the Testator twenty pounds, how do
things stand presently upon death. 21. H. 7. 31. Plow. Com. 185. cont. Danby
and Choke. 8. E. 4. 3. And may be granted that he should account before the
Ordinary for it.
First, it is clear, that the debt of B. to the Testator stands in Law
extinct, this making of him Executor, being a Release in Law. Therefore let
Debtees, take heed of making their debtors Executors: And yet doubtless me
thinks suh a debtor made Executor should hold himself restrained in
Conscience, from taking benefit thereof, Yea it seems Plowd. 186. a. the Law
was taken to be as supra. 8. E. 4.
if (the debt remitted) there shall want to satisfy either debt or Legacy of
the Testator: and I doubt whether a Court of Conscience may not justly so
order; the Testator, being perhaps ignorant of this point in Law, that this
debt should be released by making the Debtor Executor. Though he never
administer. 21. E. 4. 3. 81. 11 H. 6. 38.
And what is spoken of making the debtor Executor, generally the same is to be
understood of making any one of the debtors Executor, 2. R. 3^ 20. par Starkey
and 22. per Vavaser.
where there be many joint debtors: and so also where many Executors be made,
and but one of them is debtor to the Testator, for they cannot sue without
making him who is the debtor, also a plaintiff, 9. H. 5. 13. Left a demurrer
in trespass by all, against the Executor, who was trespassor.
which he cannot do against himself. The like Law touching Actions of
trespass or account: Yet of old, where one made his Bayley one of his
Executors, together with A. and B. who brought an action of Account against the
Bayley, in their two names only; Justice Herle held the action well brought:
3. E. 3. 23.
This was in the beginning of King Edward the third his time; but the contrary
has been since resolved, 6. N. 4. 3. 8. E. 4. 3. Choke.
some also have held, that though in the life of this Executor, who was a
debtor, 21. H. 7. 31. 20. E. 4. 17.
he could not be Sued, yet after his death, the surviving Executors might sue
his Executor: 21. E. 4. 3. 61. Plowd. com. 36*
but that cannot be, as I take it, for that the debt was utterly extinct, by
the making of him Executor; as if the Testator had released it to him, Plowd.
com. 185.
yea, though this Executor dyed before he did ever Administer or prove the
Will. And like extinguishment of the debt, 11. H. 4. f. 83. 84.
if the Creditor marry with one of the Executors of the debtor, yet was there
an Action of debt maintained temp. Edward 3. By the Husband and Wife, 31. E, 3.
Fitz. Ex. 82*
against the Husband, and other Executors upon an Obligation by the Testator to
the Wife, before her marriage. But if a debtor take Administration of the goods
of his Creditor, this me thinks should not discharge him, but that his debt
should stand as assetts in his hand because the intestate did no act to free
him from the debt.

The Debtor or Creditor made Executor.
THis making of the Debtee Executor, and so the party who both should pay and
be paid, the debt gives him clearly power to pay himself before any other,
if his debt be by Specialty or upon Record. Plow. co^. 185. By all the Judges,
but Break Chief Just. Plowd. 185. b. Where the goods be of more value, which
shall be so altered?
Nay, some have held that so much of the goods of the Testator shall be altered
in property out of the Executor, as Executor, into him as Creditor, but how
that can be, I cannot see: For whether shall it be satisfied out of the Lease
and Chattells real, or personal, whether out of the Corn in the Barnes, See
Plow. com. 544. the like of a Legacy of twenty pound given to the Executor.
Cattle in the Fields, Plate or Housholdstuffe; this till some election made
by this Debtee Executor, cannot be known, nor shall be effected by any
operation of Law, preventing the Executors election, in taking his
satisfaction, where and how he will. For certainly, as an Executor has
election to pay, which Creditor he will first, so has he election to pay and
satisfy himself, Or if the goods amount in all to no more then this debt,
by what part of the Testators goods he will, yet perhaps if there be ready
money in the Executors hands, there shall be an alteration of the property of
so much thereof as was owing by the Testator to the Executor. And if there come
not to the hands of such Executor, See Plow. com. 185. 13. H. 8. 15. 11. H. 4.
83. 12. H. 4. 21. 20. E. 4. 17. 21. E. 4. 3.
sufficient to pay himself, he may have an Action of debt against the other
Executor, or the Heir, as by some has been conceived: yet let it be well
advised of, whether, if he do Administer at all, and specially, if he pay
himself any part, he have not thereby barred or disabled his Suite for the
Residue. But if he refuse to Administer at all, Plowd* 184. b. and 185. b. He
is barred for he cannot appo^^^ on his debt.
it were very unreasonable that he should not be able to sue the other
Executors, for so a Debtor might by subtilty make his Creditor an Executor with
others, and take a course that his goods should come only into the hands of
those others, so as the Debtor could not pay himself; and consequently, if he
could not sue the other Executors, he should thus be stripped of his debt by a
slight. Quaere, if he may bring the action in the name of the other Executors,
only the Will being proved in his name, as well as in the names of the rest,
or whether the Action shall be brought in his name also, and then he be severed
at his own prayer. But against the Heir there is none to join with him, 12.
H. 4, 21. He may sue the Heir if the Heir bound, and he have not sufficient
goods as Executor.
and him may he sue, if he have not Administered as Executor; this admitted,
that the Bond extend to the Heir, which without express words it does not,
though for the Executor it be otherwise.

Thus having considered of the State of things before and without any Will
proved or other act done by Executors: we should now come to the point of
proof, but two things, pertinent to it, are in Order precedent.

1. What may be done by or to an Executor before proving of the Will. 2. Of
Refusal, and the things incident thereunto.
Before probate, what may be done by or to Executors.
AS to this it is clear, that before proving of a Will by the Executor, he may
seize and take into his hands any of the goods of the Testator, yea enter into
the house of the Heir if not locked so to do, and to take the specialties of
debts and generally he may do all things, 9. E. 4. f. 33. 47. 7. H. 4. 18.
which to the Office of an Executor pertains (except only bringing of
Actions and Prosecution of Suites.) They cannot sue till they have the Will
under the seal of the Ordinary.
He may pay debts receive debts, make acquittances and Releases of debts due to
the Testator, and take Leases or acquittances of debts owing by the Testator:
Yea, if before such proving, the day incur for payment, upon bond made by or
to the Testator, payment must be made to or by this Executor, though no Will be
proved upon like pain of forfeiture, as if the Will were proved. Also an
Executor may before Probate, sell or give away any of the goods or Chattells of
the Testator. And whereas the assent of an Executor, is necessary to the
settling and Execution of a Legacy, as before has been showed. So as if one
give me his white Horse, or black Cow, by Will, or any other well known
thing, I cannot after his death take it, Wr^y. 23. Eliz.
though I come where it is, but am punishable by action of trespass, at the
Executors suite, if he do not assent; yet an Executor before the Will proved,
may give this assent, and it will stand good. Yea, although he dye after any of
these acts done, the Will being never proved by him, yet do these Acts so
done, stand firm and good, as I take it. Yet (as I find) an Executor, making
his Will, and dying before he had proved the Will of his Testator: his Executor
may not prove both the Wills, and so become Executor to both the Testators. 22*
and 23. Eliz. Die. 372.
But in case the goods were, after debts paid, bequeathed to the Executor, his
Executor may take Administration of the first Testators goods, with the Will
annexed, as by Doctor Drury, was in the late Queens time declared to be the
Law and course of the Court Spiritual, to which credit was given by the Judges
of our Law, and the Court of Star Chamber: for though the Book do not mention
it to have been in Star Chamber, it is elsewhere so reported: Yea an Executor,
for goods of the Testator taken from him, Die. in Plow com. 281. Case of
Gr^^^brooke and Fox.
or a trespass done upon the Lease Land, or a Distrayning, or Impounding of
goods or Cattle, may mainetaine before the Will be proved, Actions of
Trespass, or replevin or de^^nue, for these Actions arise upon the Executors
own possession. But before the proving of a Will, an Executor cannot
m^inetaine a suite or action of debt or the like. And the reason is, for that
therein he must show forth the Will proved, under the seal of the Ordinary.
And so, as I take it, must it be, if he bring any Action for trespass done, or
goods taken in the Testators life time, so as the Testator himself was
entitled to the Action, and it grows not upon the Executors possession. 34. P.
and Ma. Die* 135. a.
I find that an Executor granting the next avoydance of a Church which to him
came from the Testator; the Grantee mainetained a Quare impedit, without
showing forth the Will: Die. in Plow. com. 281. a.
But the Executor himself might so have done, as of his own possession before
the Will proved, and so without showing it under the seal of the Spiritual
Court, as well as Actions of Trespass, or Replevin, for goods taken after the
death of the Testator: yet in the Principal case of Greysbrooke and Fox,
which was an Action of Detinue by the Executor, for goods taken or detained
after the Testators death, Plow. com. 275. b.
the Plaintiff did show forth the Will proved. But that proves not any
necessity thereof, or that if the Will had not been proved, it could be no
hurt to show it forth, so upon his own contract for the Testators goods as if
the Executor sell Cattle or other goods of the Testator, before the Will
proved, he may for the money payable, mainetaine an action of debt, before he
have proved any Will: and in this and the action of Trespass, there is no
necessity of naming him Executor. Also on the other side, an Executor may well
enough be sued for debts of the Testator, before the Will be proved; for he may
not by his own Act of delaying the Probate of the Will, keep off Suites,
except he will refuse in due manner, that so Administration being granted,
there may be some body Suable by the Testators Creditors, for debts by him
oweing. And the usual plea of the Defendant, to estrange himself from the
Testament, is to say that he neither is Executor, nor has Administered as
Executor. So as if he either be Executor De jure, or De facto, by his own act
of Administering it suffices.

Of refusal to prove the Will, and therein of Administration, forecluding
refusal.
NOw touching this other point, fit to be thought of, before we meddle with
the Probate, viz, Refusal to prove, we will thereabout consider these several
parts, viz. First how, and in what manner refusal may or must be. Secondly, in
what Cases, or in respect of what acts one named Executor has lost or
determined his election of refusal or acceptance. Thirdly, of what effect and
operation the refusal is, what difference, where all the Executors refuse, and
where but some or one of them. Fourthly, what relation it has.

Now touching the first; 3. He. 7. 14.
the Ordinary, before committing Administration where a Will is made, and
Executors named, if he know of it, 9. Ed. 4. 47.
must send out Process against the Executors, 3. He. 7. 14.
to come in and prove it, and if they do not come, Plow. com. 281.
they are to be excommunicate; but if they do come, if they nor any of them
will prove, by reason of such refusal, the Ordinary may commit Administration;
perhaps also they may be appointed Executors at a time future, and not
presently. Now refusal cannot be verbally, or by word, but it must be by some
act entered or recorded in the Spiritual Court, 9. Ed. 4. 33. See Plow. 184. a.
I^ Dettee made Executor, sue the Ordinary for the debt; this amounts to a
refusal of the Executorship.
and therefore must be done before some Judge Spiritual, and not before
Neighbors in the Country; for that is not effectual. Yet Sir Ralph Rowlett;
making the Lord Keeper Bacon, Catlin, Chief Justice, and the Master of the
Rolls, Executors, they wrote a Letter to the Ordinary, that they could not
attend the Executorship, and therefore wished him to commit Administration, who
did so; making every of their Refusal, and this was held good: So as a Lease
being by that will bequeathed to Catlin, and he after this refusal entering and
assigning it to one, and the Administrator, assigning it to another, it came in
question between them whether had best right, M. 28 and 29. Eli. Inter Brooker
and Carter. in Ba. com.
and Judgment was given for the assignee of the Administrator against Catlins
assignee, whereas, if the Refusal had been void, Catlin had continued
Executor, and so his title had been better. First, in case the Ordinary
himself, 9. Ed. 4. 33. The Book calls him Cardinal of Canterbury.
be made Executor, there says the Book he may refuse before his Commissary,
and so was it there pleaded for the Archbishop of Canterbury, who was made
Executor to Sir William Oldhalle.

What shall be such a meddling or Administering by an Executor that he cannot
refuse after.
AS to the second, 9. Ed. 4. 47. Selling Land as Executor is Admin.
where an Executor has Administered, he cannot* afterward refuse, Dye^ in Case
of Greisbrooke and Fox. Plow. com. 280. b.
because he has already accepted of the Executorship, and so determined his
election: at least the Ordinary ought not to accept of such refusal, but
should compel him to take upon him the Executorship, as the Law was taken both
in the time of Ed. 4. and of Queen Elizabeth: Pas. 7. Eliz*
Yet if the Ordinary do admit one to refuse, notwithstanding that he have
Administered: this stands good, as it seems, conceived by the Judges in the
time of Hen. 6. 36. H^n. 6. f. 7. 8.
for there the Executor commanded one to take goods of the Testator, out of the
hands of I. S. who did accordingly; and afterward the Executor refused before
the Ordinary, and Administration was committed to the said I. S. who brought an
action of trespass against the party so taking the goods from him, and there
the refusal and committing administration were admitted to be good: so perhaps
Factum Valet quod fieri non debuit. And it well may be that the Ordinary did
not know of the Executors, such intermedling at the time when he did admit of
his refusal. After Refusal and Administration committed, the Executor cannot
go back to prove the Will, and assume the Executorship: but if only upon the
Executors making default to come in upon Process, to prove the Will, the
Administration be committed, here the Executor may yet at any time after come
and prove the Will, Mic^. 27. 28. Eliz*
and so undo the Administration: as was in the late Queens time resolved,
between Bale and Baxter.

But what if after refusal, it shall appear to the Ordinary, that the
Executor had administered before his refusal, so as had it been then known,
the Ordinary should not have admitted him to refuse. Whether now may he revoke
his administration, (for it is revokeable) and enforce the Executor to proceed
to proving of the Will. And surely me thinks he may, for that the Executor by
Administering, (...) Case, in com* (...) A. being Executor did admin^ster, and
yet would not prove the Will. B. took Administration, and being sued for debt,
did plead the matter supra, and held a good plea; and was found for him before
^ust. (...) ad Ox^n* in aestat. 1. Car^l. reg.
had determined his election, and accepted the office of Executorship; now he
cannot both except and refuse. Besides, we know that Creditors may maintain
their Suits against him, having once Administered, the Common Plea to free
himself, and show that he is not the party suable for the Testators debt,
being that he neither is Executor, nor ever did Administer as Executor,
wherefore he having administered, it will be found against him. Now it is not
congruous, that in the Spiritual Court there should be no Executor, and yet in
the Courts of Westminster there should be an Executor. But since this Point of
Administering is so material to the Point of being admitted, or not admitted to
refuse; we will here consider in this place, briefly, what shall be said to be
an Administration by an Executor, 36. Hen. 6. 7.
determining his election, and disabling his refusal, and what not. 1. Some
will perhaps conceive, that the act of the Executor in the forementioned Case,
where he only commanded I. S. to take goods of the Testators out of a
strangers hands, was no Administration: and it is true, that in that Book it
is passed in silence, and not expressly said to be an Administration.

But the Lord Dyer in the Case of Gr^isbrooke, and Fox, speaking of that Case,
says expressly, that the Ordinary might there have rejected the Executors
refusal; for says he, when the Executor had once intermedled; he should not
have been suffered to refuse; so as he does clearly admit that to have been
an Administration. 20 (...) 4* 17. and 21. ^. 4* 5.
And else where it is held, that if an Executor take goods of the Testator, and
convert them to his own use; this is an Administrati^n; yea, if he do but
take them into his hands, say some, without converting of them: If the wife
take more apparel of her own than is necessary, 21. Ed. 4. 5.
this is an Administration, 21. H. 6. 19. 20.
as the Book admits; but if by the assent, 33. H. 6. 31. 8.
or delivery of the Executor, it is not. More clearly, If one do either pay
debts of the Testator, 1. Eliz. Die. 166.
or receive debts, 13. Ed. 3. Ex^c. 91.
or make acquittances for them, 3. 4. Ma. Die. 135*
or demand the Testators debts as Executor; 26. H. 8. 7. 8.
or give away goods which were the Testators, 20. H. 7. Kelw. 63.
or deliver money of the Testators for Fees about proving the Will: all these
be full and clear Administrations as Executor. 21. Ed. 4. 5.
But says F^tzherb. if he only lay out his own money for Fees, 20. H* 7* f.
5. a.
this is no Administration, so says Fr^wicke, if he pay debts with his own
money; and if he do it about the Funerals. But some difference may be
between Acts done by one, named Executor, and by a stranger, viz. to make him
an Executor of his own wrong, whereof we shall speak after, not in this
place. 9. Ed. 4. 12. 13.
If one being sued as Executor, 33. H. 6. 31. 4.
take it upon him, and plead in Bar as an Executor, this is an Administration.

Of the force and effect of refusal.
AS to the third Point, viz. the force or effect of Refusal. First, it is
clear, that if there be but one Executor, and he do refuse, or being many, if
they do all refuse, then is the party dead Intestate, and Administration is to
be committed with the Will annexed, as is before said; nor can any after meddle
as Executors. But in case there be diverse Executors, viz. A. B and C. and A.
only refuses, and the Will is proved by the others, there A. continues an
Executor, notwithstanding his refusal, Cook, lib* 5. f. 2^.
so as he still may release debts of the Testator; Cont. 18. E. 2. Bre. 8^7.
and debts owing by the Testator may be released to him; yea if Suit be to be
had, 22. Ed. 3. 19.
by, or against the Executors, 15. Ed. 3. Exec. 8.
it shall not be in the name of B. and C. only; 41. Ed. 3. fol. (...).
but A. also must be named as a Plaintiff, 21. Ed. 4. f^l. 24.
or Defendant, else the Action may be overthrown. For the Will being proved,
all the Executors therein named, stand and continue Executors; notwithstanding
any of their refusal, as it was resolved in the later end of the late Queens
time, according to diverse former resolutions. And therefore this Executor which
has refused, may afterward Administer at his pleasure, and intermeddle with
the goods, 42. Eliz. Co. 9. f. 36* 37.
as well as the others: yet says Brook Chief Justice, after the death of his
Companion, he cannot so do, but then the Executor of him who proved, 4 and 5.
(...). and Ma. Die. ^ 69^ (...) 2^. ^. ^. 4. 23. 24.
is only to Administer, Quod non est L^x. There may be some difference
between Suits by Executors, and Suits against Executors; for when themselves
sue, they being privy to the Will, and having the Custody of it, must bring
their Action in the name of all the Executors according to the Will; but he
that is to bring an Action against them need not perhaps take notice of more
Executors, than those that have proved the Will, or otherwise do Admi^ister:
for it is no good plea for themselves in an Action against them, to say there
is another Executor, without saying also that he has Administered, as it
seems by diverse Books. Nay one Book in the time of Henry 8. goes further,
viz. that if Suit be brought against all, yet one of them not intermedling with
the proving of the Will, may plead that he was never Executor, nor Administered
as Executor. By this it should seem, 33. Hen* 6. 38. a. (...). 9. 37. 6.
that Executors refusing (I mean all of them, 32. Hen. ^. ^25.
so as no Will is proved) they in an Action against them, 27. Hen. 8. 11. (...)
cur^am.
may say, that they were never Executors; but me thinks they should not so
plead, but show the special matter, as was done in the time of Edward the
Fourth.

As for Relation, 9. Ed. 4. 33. Co. 9. fol. 36.
I will forbear to speak, till I come to proving, for that Probate, and
Refusal stand in the same state, as touching Relation.

Of proving Wills.
NOw let us see touching the Probate of Wills, what is considerable; and
therein of these three or four parts; 1. Where, and before whom, and how the
proof must be. 2. What shall be Bona notabilia, to entitle to Probate. 3. What
force or validity, either a right, or erroneous Probate has. 4. What relation
either Probate or Re^usall has.


As touching the first Point, viz. How, and where, and before whom Wills are to
be proved, briefly thus;

The proving is in the Spiritual Court: yet in some Manors by Prescription,
Wills are to be proved before the Steward, though no Lands thereby pass, as
appears by diverse Books: and in the Manor of Maunsfield is this Prescription;
2. R. 3. Fitzh. 4. Co. lib. 9. fol. 43.
and in others whereof Tremaile, was Steward in King Richard the third his
time, as he declared, and the like. I may tell of my own knowledge, touching
the Manors of Cowl^y and Cave^sham in the County of Oxford, where I have kept
the Courts for the Lord Vicount Wallingford, and found it in present and
frequent use. 11. H. 7. 12.
And it is said by the Judges, in the time of King Henry 7. that this proving
of Wills in the Court Spiritual, is not ancient but of later time. Yea it is
acknowledged by Linwood the Deane of the Arches, that it pertaines not to the
Spiritual Court of Common right; nor is so in use in other Kingdoms. Flow.
Co^. 279.
The reason why the Law of England has herein given way to the Ordinary, and
Court Spiritual, is said by Walsh in Greisbrooke and Foxes Case, to be the
piety and integrity which is presumed to be in those of that Function, having
charge of souls. Indeed they are, as it seems to me, Executors of the New
Testament; or last Will and Testament of Jesus Christ; whereby great Legacies
and Gifts are given to men, and by Pastors to be dispensed and distributed: of
which distributers, it is required, as S. Paul says, That they be found
faithful. 1 Cor. 4. 2.
And happy are they who with him can plead, Acts 20. 27.
Plene Administavit, viz. that they have fully Administered, as he did; much
depending thereupon, viz. Gods honor, the blessing, prosperity, and safety of
the Country, the Piety, Justice, Conscience, Contentation and Salvation of
men. As for Wills proved in London, and Oxford, before the Major, that is only
in respect of the Burgages within those places devisable, but they were to be
proved also before the Ordinaries, in respect of the goods, and there only
where no Lands bequeathed.

The proving then is to be before the Ordinary General, particular, or
special. By General, I mean the Metropolitan or Archb^shop, Vide ^ol.
proxim. If Bona Notab^^^ both in Canterb. and York.
before whom it is to be proved; in case the Testator have goods valuable,
called Bona notabilia in diverse Diocesses, whereof he is Superior.

Of Bona Notabilia.
What shall be said to be Bona Notabilia is considerable, for there about has
been much diversity of opinion: Some holding, that they must be of forty
shillings value; some five pound, some ten pound; yea some, that the value of
a penny suffices to draw it to the Archbishop, from the particular Bishop. But
that difference of opinion I conceive to be now cleared, Canon 92, 93.
by a Canon made in the first year of his Majesty's Reign, at a Convocation
then held, whereby it is established, that five pound shall be the sum, or
value of Bona Notabilia; yet therein is this Prov^so, that where by Composition
or Custom in any Diocesses, Bona Notabilia are rated at any greater sum; the
same shall continue not altered. It is likewise thereby provided, that if any
man die in Itinere* viz. in his journey or travel, the goods which he then
has about him, shall not cause that Administration shall be committed, or the
Will proved before the Metropolitan.

Having considered of the value: now another Point observable, is, what things
shall be said, to be Bona Notabilia. And as to that debts owing to the
Testator, are Bona Notabilia, as well as goods in possession; their value being
answerable; yet I think, if the Penal sum of the Bond be but five pound for
payment of a less sum, although the Bond be forfeited; yet in the Spiritual
Court, where respect to Conscience, suppresseth the favoring of Executors;
this will not be taken to be Bona Notabilia, viz. of five pound value, although
in Law, the whole penal sum be a duty. But if the debt be five pound or
more, though it be desperate or due from the King, against whom no Suit can be,
but only by petition; yet will this stand for, and as Bona Notabilia, as I take
it in the Court Spiritual, though thereabout I can but co^jecture since the
Rules of our Law determine it not. And this Point touching the Kings being
debtor, ^1 Eliz.
I find debated in the late Queens time, but not resolved, so far as I
find, but there Popham at the bar urged, that no debt should be Bona
Notabilia; and if it should, yet not such, for which no remedy by Suit, as in
that Case, the Queen being debtor. Yet a further Question Local, is touching
these debts, or things in Actio^, Goods considerable or (...).
in what place or Diocese, they shall be said to be, as Bona Notab. viz.
whether in the place where the debtors be, or where the Obligation, or other
specialties be. And as to this, the Law has bin taken, that because the
persons of the debtors be moveable, passant, and transitory; therefore these
debts shall be said to be, and to make Bona Notabilia, where the Bonds, or
other Specialties be, and not where the debtors inhabit and dwell: and so was
it not long since conceived by Justice Walmesly, Hill. 37. Eliz. M. Com^. Da.
Vide 13. and 14. Eliz. Die. 305.
and Justice Beaumont in one Pretimans Case, no other contradicting it. Herein
therefore many are mistaken, who only in respect that the persons of the
debtors do dwell in foreign Diocesses, other then the places of the death of
the Testator, or where his other goods were, do take Administration in the
prerogative Court, though the Specialties remained, where the party died, or
his goods residue, were. But in case the debts be only by Contract without
Specialtie, then indeed they are to be esteemed Bona Notabilia, there, and in
that place, where the debtor is as the said Judges well ceived the difference.
But in case Land be given to Executors, for payment of Debts or Legacies, this
shall not be Bona Notabilia, as I take it, though it be Assets.

Of the validity, and invalid^ty of Probates.
AS to the third Point, we will first see of what validity an erroneous proof
is, and thereabout we shall find this difference: admitting that one has not
Bona Notabilia in diverse Diocesses, so as of right, the proving of the Will,
appertains not to the Metropolitan, and yet the Will is proved before him;
this is not merely void, but stands in force, till it be reversed by some
sentence upon appeal, 22. Eliz.
as was resolved between Veare and Ieoffries, in the late Queens time. But on
the other side, in Case one have Bona Notabilia in diverse Diocesses, or a
Peculiar, and a Diocese, and yet the Will is proved before the Particular
Bishop, within whose Diocese part of the goods are; this is merely and
utterly void, without any reversall. So also of proving in some Peculiar. And
in Case one have Bona Notabilia, both in the Diocese of Canterbury, and in the
Diocese of York; the Will must be proved, either before both Metropol^ta^es,
if within each of their jurisdictions, there be Bona Notabilia in diverse
Diocesses; or else, as I take it, if there so be not in any of the places, then
before the particular Bishops in those several Diocesses, where the goods are.
Or if within the one jurisdiction Metropolitan, the Testator had goods in
diverse Diocesses; and in the other, but in one Diocese; then in the one place
is the Will to be proved before the Archbishop, and in the other place before
the Particular Bishop, as I conceive. And so also of peculiar jurisdictions.
And in some places Archdeacons have peculiar or jurisdiction ordinary and power
to take Probates of Wills and Grant Administrations. But where any like error
or misproving is in these respects, it is cause of reversall or of nullity,
according to the former difference; so also, if there be falsehood in the
proof, were it Co^muni forma, that is, without witnesses, or by examination of
witnesses, yet may it in the Spiritual Court be undone; if either dis-proofe
can be made, or proof of revocation of that Will once made, or of the making
of a later.

Now, yet admitting the Will true and right, and also rightly proved; let us
yet see the force and strength of the Proof, or Will so proved. It being under
the Seal of the Ordinary, cannot be denied, says one Book, to wit, whether
this showed forth, be a Will proved or not, no, though the proof be but
indorsed on the back, 9. Ed. 4. 47: 22. Ed. 4. 50. 22. H. 6. 52.
viz. that it is so proved, says the Book: but notwithstanding the Defendant
so sued, may deny that the Plaintiff is Executor, as not being concluded nor
estopped by the Probate, so to say. And the reason is, because the Seal of the
Ordinary is but matter in Fact, and not matter of Record; Plow. Com. 282. 44.
Ed. 3. 32. 19. Ass. p. 2.
nor are the sentences of divorce, and the like, in the Spiritual Court,
Judgments, or matters of Record, as has been oftenheld.

Of the Relation of Probate and Refusal.
AS for this last Point, both the Proving, and the Refusal shall have Relation
to the death of the Testator, as I take it to diverse purposes. So as to the
Proving, says the Lord Dyer expressly, Plow. Com. 281. a. 283.
and confidently in Greisbrooke, and Foxes Case, and the resolution also of the
Case proves it. For there Administration being committed be fore any Will
proved or notified to the Ordinary, as it should seem the Administrator sold
some of the goods to I. S. and after the Executors proving the Will, brought an
Action of Detinue, for those goods against I. S. who pleaded this
Administration and sale, and thereupon the Executor demurred, and Judgment was
given for him, as having by the proving of the Will, disproved the
Administration ab initio, but it is true, that judgment was given only by two
Judges; one being absent; and the other dissenting in opinion; yet I think it
was right, and according to Law; and that Refusal shall have the like
relation; else could not the Administration relate to the death of the
Intestate, 18. H. 6. 22. 2. 9. E. 4. 33. 47.
as it does to some purposes, expressed in diverse Books, Not to make good a
Release made before Co. lib. 5. 28.
viz. to have an Action of Trespass for goods taken before Administration
committed, 36. H. 6. 8. 2. Ma. Die. 110.
and to have a rent growing payable in that mean time, etc.

What Fees to be paid upon Probate, or for Copyes of Wills, or Inventories.
Per Stat. 21. Hen. 8. Cap. 5.
1. Where the goods amount not above five pound. only six pence to the Scribe.
2. Where they be above five pound, but under forty pound. two s. six d. to
the B. B. twelve d. to the Scribe.
3. Where above forty pound to be taken, but two s. six d. to the B. B two s.
6. d. to the Scribe; or, r^ d. for each ten lines of ten inches long at the
Scribes choice.

THese Sums are to satisfy, both for Proving, Registring, Sealing, Writing,
Praising, making of Inventories, giving Acquittances, Fines, and all other
things concerning the same.

Where Lands is given to be sold, neither the money raised, nor the profits
thereof shall be accounted as any of the Test ators goods, or chattells, says
the Statute.

Note, that the Will is to be brought with wax thereunto ready to be sealed,
and proof to be made of the Will, according to common Custom.

For making the Inventory, the Executor is to take, or call to him two
Creditors or Legatees of the Testator, and do it in their presence, or in
their absence or refusal, two honest persons being the next of his kin, or
in their default, two other honest persons.

The Inventory is to be indented, and one part left with the Ordinary, and the
other to remain with the Executor.

The Executor is to make oath for the truth of it.

For a Copy desired by any either of a Will or Inventory, no more is to be
paid than before is allowed for the Registring, with the like election to the
Scribe, or Register, as is abovesaid.

Master Swinborne says, that an Executor is to swear, and, if it should be
thought fit, to be bound to make a true account when he shall be^ thereunto
lawfully called by the^ Ordinary: See also 31. E. 3. cap. 11.
Of this account, see him, page 274. and of accounting some Books of the
Common Law make mention, An Administr. shall account as an Executor; Fitzh. Ex.
91. and 837. viz. 18. E. 2. tit. Brief.
as 13. of Edward the third, Fitzh. Exec. 91. Where True faith, that of a thing
in action, no account shall be before the Ordinary; 48. E. 3. 14. 15.
but Parn. seems of a contrary opinion. Of a duty resting in account, it is
said, the Legatee shall have remedy by account, in the Spirit. Court. 81. Ed.
4. f. 3. Moyle.
And else where it is said, that where a debtor is made Executor to the Debtee,
he shall yet account before the Ordinary, for this debt: yea as of money in
possession, says one, which others denied.

An Executor by wrong, 4. H. 7. 15. per Wood.
shall be drawn to account before the Ordinary, 9. Ed. 4. 47.
says Moyle Justice. Do. and Stu. 78. b 21. Ed 4. 22.
But says S. German, he may not force any to account against the Order of the
Common Law; Plow. Com. 544. 4. H. 7. 15.
not showing what that is. Kelw. r^p. 64. a.
And ^emp. Edw. the 4. it is said, at least by the Reporter, that after the
will proved, the Ordinary has no more to do, quod non credo.

Also of the oath of an Executor, diverse Books tell, but not to such purpose
as Swinb. but truly to perform the Will.

What things shall come unto Executo^s, and be Assets in their hands, and what
not.
THe things which shall come to Executors, are of great multiplicity, and would
make a large and confused heap, if tied together in one bundle or lump. I
will therefore divide and sort them out in parts, after the best manner I can.
First, we will divide the^ into things possessary, or actually in the Testator,
and things in action, or not actually in the Testator. Secondly, the possessary
into chattells, real and personal, or (as some less properly express it)
moveable, and immovable.

Of Chattells real possessary.
THese may be divided into two kinds, viz. living, and not living; the living
are not many and various. 1. The wardship of the body of another, be it by
reason of a tenure of the present owner, or by Assignment from the King, or
other Lord of whom the tenure was, is a Chattell real, not personal, though
it be an interest in the person of another, but it is in respect of a tenure of
Land, or other hereditament, and is for years viz. during the minority, or
till marriage had, and so is real. Next, a Villen for years as by Grant for a
term from him that had the Inheritance is a Chattell real. As for an
Apprentice, for years, it is by Custom, as I take it, that he goes, or is
derived to Executors: but for reason after showed; I think this Interest be
not in the realtie, but in the personaltie rather. So of a debtor in Execution
for debt, the interest in him or perhaps more properly in his liberty is not as
I conceive (for reasons which after I shall express) a real, but a personal
Chattell. The like Law of a Prisoner taken in the Wars. As for Fishes in a
Pond, Conies in a Warren, Dear in a Park, Pigeons in a Dove-house, where the
Testator had the Inheritance, or but for life, in the Pond, Warren, Park, and
Dove-house, they are not Chattells at all, nor to go to the Executors, but to
the Heir with the Inheritance. If the Testator were but a Termer, they are to
go to the Executor, but as accessory Chattells, following the state of their
principal, viz. the Warren, Park, Dovehouse, Pond, etc.

The real Chattells, not living, are either in Houses or Lands most usually,
and that three ways. First, by Lease for years. Secondly, by Wardship of
Lands held by Knights-Service. Thirdly, by extent upon Judgments, Statutes, or
Recognizances; Or in things issuing out of Houses or Lands, as Rents, Commons,
Estovers, or such like. But where an Inheritor reserves a Rent upon a Lease for
years, this shall not go to the Executor, but to the Heir, with the
Reversion other than Arrerages behind, at the death of the Testator. Also
Commons, Corodies for years, Advowsons, Tithes, Faires, Markets, Profits of
Leetes, and such like, which the Testator had for years, all which may accrue
any of these ways, as the first are Chattell and Real. Yea, one simple
presentation to a Church, upon the next avoydance, is a Real and not Personal
Chattel, before it come to be void, and what then it is, we shall after show.
And the title accrued to the Crown, upon attainder of felony, where the party
held not of the King, viz. The Annum diem and Vastum, that is, Temp. E. 1.
Assise (...).
power not only to take the profits for a year, but to waste and demolish
Houses, and to extirpate and eradicate Trees, and Woods, is but a Chattell,
and therefore though granted to one and his Heirs, by the King; yet shall go
to the Executor, and not to the Heir*

Some doubtful, or less dear Cases, touching Chattels Real.
FIrst, where we spoke of Wardship, it is not to be understood of Wardship, by
reason of Soccage tenure, for that goes not to the Executor, but he shall be
next Guardian, who now after the death of the first Guardian, shall be next of
Kin, if the Ward continue under fourteen years old, else he is out of
Wardship. Secondly, if one have a ^ease for three lives to him and his
Assigns, this is no Chattell, nor shall go to the Executor, nor to the Heir,
but to him who first enters and claims it as an Occupante, if no assignment be
in the life of the Lessee made: Contrarily, of a Lease for many years, if
three, or more, or less, 37. Ass p. (...).
so long live; this is a Chattell, and shall go to the Executor. So an extent
upon a Statute, yet it is delivered to the party as a Freehold, viz. Vt liberum
tenementum, but that only makes it to be quasi liberum tenemen^^^ as to the
maintaining of an Assise, if wrongfully put out. Where one is seized in the
right of his Wife, of Land, or other Hereditament, and is attainted of treason
or felony, the profit thereof accrued unto the Crown, is but a Chattell, 4. E.
3. Ass. 166. Br^. Cha^. 15.
and though the King grant it to one and his Heirs, yet it shall go to his
Executors. And if one, having a Lease for many years, viz. a 100. 500. or more
or less, and do devise and bequeath the same to A. and the Heirs males of
his body, and for want of such issue to B. and the Heirs males of his body,
and dies, having issue a Son, the term shall not go to his Son, but to
his Executor or Administrator, for it cannot be made a matter of Inheritance;
so if A. had dyed without issue male, the term should not have gone or
remained to B. but to the Executor or Administrator of A. as was lately
adjudged in the Exchequor, between Sir Rober^ Lew^nor, and Mistress Hamond. So
of an advowson, or any other hereditament, granted or devised to one and his
Heirs for a 100. years; or if such a termer grant a Rent out of the Land to
A. and his Heirs, ^9. E. 3. 37.
or the Heirs, or Heirs males of his body, So Manwood, if granted for life it
is but a chattell, Plow. co^. 524.
yet shall the same go to the Executor, and not to any Heir; for it being
derived out of a Chattell cannot be any Freehold or Inheritance, but it self,
a mere Chattell. Partus sequitur ventrem.

Of Chattels Personal.
Personal Chattells, or Goods moveable, are also in like manner to be divided
into quick, or dead. The quick are Cattle of all kinds, as Sheep, Horses,
Kine, Bullockes, Swine, Goats, Geese, Duckes, Poultry, etc. There may be also
in living Creatures reasonable an Interest, as in a Chattell personal, as in
the person of a man taken in execution for debt. And this I hold to be in
nature, not a Real, but a Personal Chattell (as before was touched) for that
debt is the root of it, and the body is but a pledge or gage, dischargeable
instantly upon payment, release, or other discharge of the debt. Like Law of a
Prisoner taken in the Wars, (...) 88. Reg. orig. f. 102. There is mentione!
that the prisoner was to have a 190. l. for his ransom,
for thereof and therein, as in a Chattell, has the party a legal interest,
as appears by a Writ of Trespass in the Register, for taking away a Prisoner.
viz. Quare quendam Scotum prisonarium suum cepit. etc. And note lately, viz. In
the time of King Henry the 8. the King himself, Bro. no. ca. 295. and it is.
Property 38,
upon the winning of Bullen bought diverse Prisoners of his Subjects. And by a
Statute in the beginning of Henry the 6. his time, this Interest in a Prisoner
is mentioned as valuable, and coming from one King unto another; 1. H. 6. cap:
5.
therefore doubtless shall go from Testator to Executor by death, and not be
infranchised or freed thereby. The interest which one has in an Apprentice, I
take to be rather Personal than Real, though for years, because not
springing cut of any Real root, as Wardship, and Villenage do; but out of a
mere contract. As for a Servant whose Master is dead, doubtless he is legally
discharged, and is not Servant either to Heir or Executor; but meet and
honest it is, that one of them continue him in service till a fit time of
providing him a new Master, and fit for him, not to depart suddenly. Now for
things personal without life; These are evident, viz. all Householdstuffe,
Implements, and Vtensills, Money, Plate, Jewels, Corn, Pulse, Hay, Wood
felled, and severed from the ground, Wares, Merchandise, Carts, Plowes,
Coaches, Saddles, and such like moveable things.

More doubtful Cases touching things personal.
FIrst touching things living: 10. E. 4. 14. 15. Come of wild ones. 22. H. 7.
Relw. rep. f. 88. 118. co. lib. 11. fo. 50. 18. H. 8. 2.
If the Testator had any tame Pigeons, or Dear, or Conies, or Fesants, or
Partridges, these all as well as Chickens shall go to the Executors; so though
not tame, if they were taken and kept alive in any Room, Cage, or like
Receptacle, as Fesants and Partridges often be, so fish in a Trunk, 10 E. 4.
14. 15. and 18. E. 4. 8. So of young Hawks in the nest. It is felony to steal
these, Ergo. they be goods.
as also young Pigeons, though not tame, being in the Dovehouse, not able to
fly out; yet their Dammes the old ones shall go to the Heir with the
Dovehouse. And if the Testator had any reclaimed Hawks, they also as Chattells
Personal shall go to the Executor, because they are things commonly vendible.
And whereas Hounds, Greyhounds, and Spaniells, be not so commonly bought and
sold, nor so anciently have been, yet are they now grown to be a Merchandise,
and why not? for although they be for the most part but things of pleasure,
that hinders not but they may be valuable, as well as Instruments of Music,
So an Hunters horn, a Falkoners lewer.
both tending to delight and exhilarate the spirits. A cry of Hounds has to my
sense more spirit and vivacity than any other Music. Add hereto that there
may be some profit, and advantage gotten by them, both quoad adeptionem boni,
and ademptionem mali, Hares, Dear, Fesants, Partridges, wild Duckes, etc. are
good ^eate.
the getting of some good food, and the preserving of others, as Lambs,
Conies, Fish, Pultry, by killing Foxes, wild Cats, and others, which destroy
them. And we know that money is recoverable in damages for taking away such,
or a Mastiffe, serving to keep an house. So of Ferrets to catch Conies, etc.
Therefore they are valuable. But it may perhaps be objected that none of these
above are Cattle, and therefore not replevisable, consequently no property in
them, for when more then one living Chattell is distrained, the replevin is to
be by the name of Averia signifying Cattle. For answer, not to insist that one
may have property in diverse things, whereof no Replevin lies, as Corn or Hay,
not in Sackes nor Carts, money not shut in bag, nor box, etc. I further say
that even the word Averia may be applied to these, for so I find it to Hens and
Capons in the Book of Entries, Fo. 142.
viz. in the writ of Curia Claudenda, where the Plaintiff complains of the
Defendants, not making his Mounds per quod averiaipsius. A. viz. Capones,
galinae and alia Averia ipsius. A. that is whereby his Cattle, viz. Capons and
Hens and other his Cattels came into the Plaintiffes House and Garden to his
damage, Hen. 8. fol. 3.
etc. And both Newport, and Newdigate hold that a writ of replevin lies of
such things, though Brudenell were of contrary opinion, yet he also held an
action of Trespass maintainable for taking of them, and therefore admitted a
valuable property in them. Now come we to things without life, and first to
those abroad in the Fields. Put the case that a man dies in July (before
Harvest I mean) seized for life, or in Fee, or Tail, in his own right or his
Wives, or estated for years, of Land, in the right of his Wife, being sown
with Corn or any manner of Grain, the common saying is, Quicquid plantatur
solo, solo cedit, yet this shall go to the Executor of the Husband, and not to
the Wife or Heir, who shall have the Land: but Hay growing, viz. Grass ready
to be cut, Apples, Pears, and other fruit upon the Trees shall go to the
Wife, as also if they had been upon a man's own Land of Inheritance, they
should go to the Heir, though the Corn should go to the Executor. The
reason of difference is, because this later comes not merely from the soil,
without the industry and manurance of man as the other do: Roots of Carrots,
Parsnips, Land sold wher^n is ripe Corn
and I take Hoppes though not sown, if planted, and Saffron, and Hemp,
because sown to pertain as Corn to the Executor. All those yet shall pass
to one, to whom the Land is sold or conveyed, if not excepted, though never so
near reaping, felling, or gathering. But what if the Wife had the Lease for
years as Executor to some former Husband or other friend, For he was Tenant
for life in effect.
and the Husband after sowing dies, who then shall have the Corn? Certainly
the Corn shall go to the Executor of the last Husband, at least so much as is
more then the years value of the Land, or the making it up by addition of
other things; The Wife also shall have convenient apparel 33. H. 6. 31.
for the value is to be assetts for payment of debts and Legacies. Put the case
again that the Husband and Wife were joynt-tenants of the Land, and then the
very Corn growing shall survive to her, together with the Land, and though the
Husband sowed it, 2. Eliz. Die.
yet shall it not go to his Executor. Being in consideration of things growing
on the ground, let us not forget to think of Trees sold by I. S. seized of the
Inheritance of the Land to I. D. who dies before felling, this Interest is a
Chattell which shall go to the Executor, and not to the Heir of I. D. but
some color may be that these, because fixed to the soil and Freehold, are
real Chattells, as the Interest in Land is, and not personal: So also of
Trees Excepted by him who sells the Inheritance of the Land; but in both
cases I conceive this interest to be personal, and not real; for that, as it
is a propriety of Chattell in the Vendee or Vendor with exception, it stands in
consideration severed, and abstracted from the soil, or ground where the Trees
grow, though the Trees be not actually severed by the Axe from their mother
Earth. But if the Lessor for years or life except the Trees, Co lib. 11. f 48.
these continue parcel of the Freehold and Inheritance. And after Corn
reaped, and before the Tithe set out, the Inheritor of the Tithe dying, I
think the Executor, and not the Heir, shall have the Tithe after set out.

Now Let us come home to the Testators house, Of Houses, or things about the
House.
and see in and about it, some doubts, what pertaines to the Heir, and what to
the Executor. Question has been both of old and of late, touching Coppers,
Leads, Furnaces, 42. E. 3. 6.
Fats for Dyers, or Brewers, Pales, Rayles Glass in Windows, Tables Dormants,
Wainscotes, Doors, Locks, Keys and such like, to whom these should go?
whether to the Heir or Executors? ^1. H. 7. f. 26.
And in the latter end of Henry the 7. his time, an Executor taking a Furnace
which was set in the middle of a house and not fixed to any Wall, the Heir
brought an action of trespass against him for so doing, and it was adjudged
for the Heir, viz. that this was to go as part of the Freehold, and
Inheritance to the Heir; and long before in Edward the third his time, 42. F.
3. f 6.
it was debated whether it were waste in a Lessee to remove or take away a
Furnace or not* but I find no opinion delivered by the Judges: But in the late
Queens time, Justice walinesly said that the Lord Dyers opinion was, that
where the Furnace is not fixed to the Wall, the Lessee might within his
termetake it away. H. 37. Fliz. Austins case.
Contrarily, if it were fixed to the Wall, for then it strengthens the house.
And yet notwithstanding it might be in the one case so removed by the Lessee,
yet is it not there, as he said, a Chattell personal or moveable, so as it is
attachable; and there the case being that a Clothier being a Termer of an house
had fixed a Copper to the Wall with Loomes and pricks necessary for his
Occupation, a Judgment being had against him, the Sheriff delivered the
Copper in execution as a Chattell, and after the Lessee took it up, and it was
taken from him by virtue of the Execution; whereupon he brought an action of
Trespass, and by all the Judges, the action was mainetainable. And whereas it
was found by the Jury, that by the Custom of Kent, the Lessee might remove
such a Copper; Justice Beaumond, said that without any Custom a Lessee might
so do at any time during his term. But it is to be noted in the said case,
that the Furnace was by it self delivered as a moveable Chattell, and not as
part of the house, for that was not meddled withal, nor at all delivered in
extent (as in the case between Miles and Prat, where both house and Copper
were delivered upon a Statute) the house belike being held upon such a rackt
rent, as that the party did not desire to have it, for he might have had the
whole being a Chattell, and so have used the Copper during the term. And as
touching all other fixed things, the Law was taken in the said case in Henry
the 7. his time, to be all one, as in the case of the Furnace, viz. that they
should go to the Heir, save only that for glass in the Windows, Pollard
said it was otherwise, viz. that that should go to the Executors, which none
there denied. But since, in the late Queens time it was otherwise resolved
touching glass, (...) lib. 4. f. 63. 64*
that it should not go to the Executors, and the like was there said, touching
Wainscotes, and so also by the Lord Ander, in the said case of Austin. And
touching Posts fixed, for that they be parcel of the Freehold, so also of
Millstones, Anvills, Doors, Keys, Windows, none of these be Chattells, but
parcel of the Freehold, or thereto pertaining, therefore, not the Executors.

Now to come to Gardens also: Whereas, I before laid down a difference betwixt
things sowed, Things in Ga^dens.
or not arising from the Earth, without manuring, and such as grow of
themselves; It will thence be concluded that the roots of Carrets, Parsneps,
Turnips, Skerrits, and such like, coming and arising from yearly sowing, must
go to the Executor, and not to the Heir; the case being so, that the Gardner
and Sower had the Inheritance of the Garden, or Soil, now though in most
places this can rarely be a question of value, yet about London, and some great
Towns it may, and therefore not unworthy of a line or two, a thought, or two,
the rather for that the reason of this case may give light touching right in
other Cases. And in my opinion these, notwithstanding, there is a sowing and
manurance to generate them, and cause their being, shall go to the Heir and
not to the Executor: my reason is for that the thing of profit is the root
which is hidden in the ground, and I hold it no reason, nor agreeable to Law,
that the Executor should dig and break the soil and ground to search for
her entrails; he is to content himself with that which is above ground, as
millions of all kinds, and the like whose fruit is above the ground; but as
for Artichoks, though the fruit be above the ground, yet I think they have no
such yearly setting, or manurance as should sever them in interest from the
soil, therefore they shall go with it to the Heir.

Let us now consider of things, though not fixed to, yet usually kept in
houses, viz. writings, and evidences, whereabout generally, no doubt can be,
but that they follow the interest of the Land, so as if they touch inheritance,
they pertain to the Heir, if but Terms Goods, Chattells, or Debts, they
pertain to the Executor, yea so do Statutes, and Bonds in Law (howsoever
otherwise in equity) though they concern the assurance and enjoying of
inheritance purchased. What if A. morgage the inheritance of Lands to B. upon
Condition of redemption by payment of 500. pound to B. his Heir, or Executor,
and B. dies, the Deeds being delivered into his hands; now the Heir, not the
Executor, shall have them; for though the money may be paid to the Executor,
yet mean time the Land descends to the Heir, nor is there any debt to the
Executor, for A. may choose to pay, or not. Put it on the other side, that the
Land had been sold for 500. pound, not paid to A. but a Condition that if not
paid to him, his Heir, or Executor, by such a day, then to re-enter; and A.
dies, here is a debt to the Executor, and no Land descended to the Heir of A.
yet shall the Heir have the Deeds, for that a Condition is descended to him.
Question has been touching Boxes and Chests, wherein the Evidences concerning
inheritance are; and although the better opinion in our Books, does pitch upon
this difference, that where they are sealed up, (...) 2. 36. H. 6. 2^. 18. E.
3. 4. ^. H. 7. 15.
they shall pertain to the Heir, otherwise, where not sealed; I cannot
conceive that difference to be grounded on good reason; but rather think that
Boxes, which have their very creation to be the houses or habitations of Deeds
should, as appurtenant to them, go to the Heir, whether sealed or not. On the
other side Chests made for other use, viz. the keeping of Napery, or Apparel,
shall not, as I conceive be taken as appurtenant to Evidences, because some be
in them, Quae. If sole use that way make a difference or not.
for so may other things also be: Nor as touching them can sealing be of any
effect, but rather locking, and not locking must make the difference touching
them, if any difference by enclosure.

Of things not actually in the Testator, but accruing to the Executors, by or
after the Testators death.
These be of diverse sorts, the first and chief whereof are things gotten and
acquired by Action or Suite. Secondly by Condition or Covenant without Suite.
Thirdly, by Remainder.

Of things in Action.
TO speak first of the first, it is clear that debts due to the Testator, be
it by Bond, Statute, or Judgment, or for Arrerages of Rent, are not assets to
charge the Executor, until receipt of them, and it is as clear that the
Actions to recover these do pertain to the Executor, See Stat. (...). H. 8.
cap. 17. Remedy for Rents of Inheritance, or for life.
and that the debt and damages recovered shall be assetts to charge the
Executor. So also of Actions of Detinue, and of covenant for any thing
personal or any Chattell Real, A Church of the Testators Inher, become void
in his life, comes to the Executor as a thing in action but is not Assets, for
not vendible.
Lease, Wardship, or the like. But perhaps some will doubt of Covenant touching
Inheritance, viz. the assurance of Lands or enjoying thereof, free from this or
that encumbrance or the like: Yet even in those cases, if the Covenant were
broken in the Testators life time; I think clearly the Action is accrued to
the Executor, for that his Testator was to recover damages in the Action of
Covenant for that breach, and he being entitled to these damages as
principal, and not any accessory thing in that action, the Law has cast that
action upon the Executor. And that is the cause why, if waste be committed in
the life of the Lessor by his Lessee, and then the Lessor dies, his Heir can
have no Action for this waste. viz. because he cannot recover the treble
damage, as neither can the Executor have it, for that he cannot recover locum
vastatum, the place wasted, the Inheritance whereof is in the Heir. 11. H. 4.
32. 45. E. 3. 3. (...). na. br. 59.


That an Executor at the Common Law could not maintain an Action of trespass
for goods of his Testator, taken away in his life time seems to be employed by
the Statute^ in the time of King Edward the third. 4. E. ^ c. 7. And the like
given to Executors of Executors p^r. (...). 25. E. 3. c. 5.
Which gives such action: Yet it seems that a Replevin was mainetaineable by
the Executor, at lest in some cases for goods taken or distrayned in the
Testators life time: But in case the distress were for Rent, Service, it is
said a little after the making of that Statute, 17. E. 3. Fit. 106*
that the Lord may not now avow for his Rent, or Service, because his Tenant is
dead, but must set forth the matter, and thereupon justify to excuse himself
from answering damages, and the Executor shall by this Action recover the
Cattle or Goods, and that by the Common Law, cap. 21. meant (...).
says the Book, though the Statute of Marlebridge had never been made, for
that the property remained in the Testator. Note it speaks not at all of the
said Statute of 4. Edward the 3. 21. H. 6. 1. but (...). contra*
But Newton in the time of King Henry. the 6. would have it that the Executor
in that case should not have a Replevin but an Action of Trespass grounded
upon the said Statute, viz. 4. Ed. 3. Which me thinks cannot be by any means,
by reason of the Statute of Marlebridge. cap. 3. Non ideo puniatur dominus,
etc. for the Executor, as well as his Testator, is thereby restrained, as I
think, from the Action of Trespass against the Lord. 21. H 8. cap 19. 4 E. 3.
As for that no Avowry can be made upon the Tenant, that is now remedyed by a
late Statute: The other Statute has been taken to extend to other things then
Goods moveable, for where a Church becoming void, The B. of Co^^nt. and ^. and
Safes case M. 32. and 33, Eliz. in com. ba.
a stranger presented thereunto wrongfully, and the Patron dyed, it was
resolved in the late Queens time, So of Ravishment. Dl. guard. 7. H. 4. ^. and
7. H. 4. 6. Erect. (...). and Tild. Do ^lauso fracto merely it lies not. 11.
H. ^. 3.
that the Executor might by the equity of the said Statute, mainetaine a Quare
impedit. But whether an Action of Trespass lies for an Executor, against him
who spoiled the Testators Corn, Grass, or Wood, growing, has been
questioned, but no where resolved to my knowledge. I think it may lie with
some difference: First, for that the Statute of 4. Edward the 3. does not only
speak of Goods carried away, as limiting the Law to that trespass soly and
particularly, This T^ria^. Just, did very judici^^^sly urge in S^les case supra.
but speaks generally of Trespass done to Testators; and then brings in that
particular of goods, as one Instance. Now there be many cases of instances or
ensamples given in acts of Parliament, which yet do not restrain the remedy
or purven to that particular, or from extending to other cases, of like nature.
Thirdly, the Statute speaks of Trespasses remaining unpunished, which it meant
to redress: But it should still leave many unpunished, if it should have no
larger extent, than to that one singular trespass, of Goods taken away, viz.
movables. Again, the Testator was clearly entitled to a recovery of
damages for this other trespass, which if he had recovered, should have come
to his Executor: Yea the things themselves, all if felled in the Testators
life, and part though not felled, should have come to the Executor, therefore
also the damages recoverable in liew thereof, out of which recovered, the
debts and Legacies of the Testator are to be satisfied. Besides, this Action of
Trespass is a thing severed from the state of the Land, so as if the owner
thereof had, after this trespass done, aliened the Land, yet had this Action
remained to him, as I take it, clearly. And why not as well as where a
Trespass is done upon the Land of the Lessee, and then the term expires, this
doubtless does not take away his Action, nor his Executors. But me thinks
here may be some differences probably taken, as first between a Trespass in
destroying or taking away Come growing, and a trespass in Grass, or Wood
growing: for the first being of that nature, as that, though the Owner had a
state of Inheritance in the Land whereon it grows, and should have dyed before
severance and felling, Yet it should have gone to the Executor, and not with
the Land to the Heir, therefore doubtless does the Action for destroying or
taking away thereof, accrue by the operation of Law to the Executor, in liew of
the thing taken or destroyed. Otherwise, perhaps of Wood or Grass, Which by
the Owners death should have gone to the Heir, and not to the Executor. And
yet here again another difference me thinks may be betwixt Grass and Grass,
viz. betwixt that in Pasture and that in Meddow, yearly mowed and turned into
Hay, not lest to be consumed by the mouths of beasts, as that growing in
Pasture. For as the Law distinguishes between these Soyles, gives precedence
to Meddow, and makes it waste for a Lessee to Plough it up, not so for Pasture,
Yea Tithe is paid of Hay, but not of Grass growing in Pastures, so the Meddow
Grass being in the Owners purpose and intention, as a thing severed from the
soil, should me thinks so be also in the eye, and estimation of the Law, and
therefore stand in a different state, and account from Pasture Grass. A third
difference may be in the manner of the Trespass, viz. Where the Meddow Grass
is eaten up with Cattle by a Trespasser, and where by him mowed and carried
away as Hay, for in this latter case an Action of Trover and Conversion for so
many loades of Hay, is doubtless maintainable by the Executor, though it
should be admitted that in the other case of consumption by the mouths of
beasts without severance, no action should be maintainable by the Executor,
which yet I admit not, but think the contrary probable. For when Meddow
ground, which yearly conceives (Sol sine homine generat herbam) shall be
ready to be delivered of her burden, if a stranger putting in an head of
Cattle, which swallow up, and tread down this fruit of her womb, before the
Mower with his sith, come as a Midwife to help her delivery, if then by the
hasty death of the Owner, before Action brought, At least me thinks; Action
upon the case here and before should be maintaineable.
this great Trespass should be dispunishable, it were contrary, as me thinks,
to the purpose of the said Statute, and a great defect in the Law. Yet here
perhaps touching this, a fourth difference may be, or arise out of the time of
the death of the Owner, viz. where he dies before time of Mowing, and where
not; for Dato that in the former case, because, if such destruction or
consumption had not been; yet the Owner dying before severance, this should
not have come to the Executor, but have gone with the soil to the Heir, that
therefore the Executor, who is not damnified should recover no damages. Yet in
the other case, the Owner living till after Hay time clearly passed, viz. till
the end of August, me thinks now since this fruit of the Meddowes womb
should have been a Chattell severed, had not this Trespasser made unlawful
prevention; Therefore the Executor, to whom the same should have come, toward
the performance of the Will, should have out of the said Statute, an Action,
and remedy, reached unto him to recover recompense in damages for this wrong
done in retardationem Executionis Testamenti. A fifth and last difference may
perhaps be in the state of the Owner, for Posito, that where the Land is his
Freehold, or Copyhold Inheritance, no Action should be given to his Executor,
for Wood, or Grass taken or destroyed in his life time; yet where he is but
Tenant for years, Guardian, or Tenant by extent, so as the very state in the
Land was to come, and is come to the Executor (together with Quicquid plantatur
solo) me thinks the Executor should have, together with the state in the
soil, the Action to punish the Robber of, or Trespasser upon the soil. Thus
having scanned and sifted, to the best of my ability, all differences and
circumstances of this point, how far I am wide, and wherein right, Aliorum
sit judicium, or rather, Altioris esto judicii. But this is clear, that
wheresoever Executors do recover any damages for trespass or other wrong, 3.
H. 6. 3. Litleton fo. 42. a.
done to their Testator, the money recovered (at least, if Execution be had, or
money received) will be Assets, So held in Sales case of damages in Qua. impe.
recovered conte of the presentment.
in their hands, as well as debts recovered upon Bonds or Bills, or Lands, by
them taken in Extent, upon Statutes, Recognizances, or Judgments. Releasing.
Yea without ever having these moneys, Executors may make them assets in their
hands, viz. by making Releases, 13. Ed. 3. (...) 9^.
or Acquittances, or acknowledgement of Satisfaction, for this amounts to a
Receipt, and charge the Executors toward the Creditors, with the whole
penal sum, though happly they receive but part, as the principal, or some
like proportion. Therefore, there is great caution to be used by Executors in
this kind, that unless they be sure they have Goods sufficient to pay all
Debts, and Legacyes, they make no Release, Acquittance, or Acknowledgement of
Satisfaction, for more then they do receive, be it debt or damages. And the
like caution to be used by them, touching submission of debts or damages, to
arbitrament whereby discharges of the same may grow, for the submission to the
Arbitrament, being their voluntary act, although the Arbitrators by their
judgment do discharge the debt or damage in part, or in whole, yet shall the
Creditors have like remedy thereupon, against the Executors, as if they had
released, Error 1^. H. 4. 65. 46. E. 23.
or, which is more, received the same. Yet upon a verdict in Qua. imp. the
Wife* not the Executor of Husband did seize. 9. H. 6. c. 4.


Other Actions there be of discharge, which as the Testator himself in his
life time might have had, so may his Executor after his death, viz. Writs of
Error, Attaint, Disceyt, Avdita Querela, Identitate nominis. But this last is
given by Statute. Whatsoever is regained by any of these ways, as unduely lost
by the Testator, shall also be Assets.

Special cases pertinent to the Premises.
1. Chattells come to Executors from the Testators, yet not Assets. 2. Assets
which be no Chattells. 3. Things in Action, and in the personal^y turned into
Chattells Real, and e contra.
AS to the first, I exemplify thus, A. makes B, his Executor, and dies, B.
makes C. his Executor, and dies. The Goods left by A. to B. as Executor, far
exceedes his Debts, and Legacyes, or let us suppose no debts nor Legacyes of A.
and that B. dies much in debt, above the Goods he leaves, and did make no
alteration of the property of the goods of A. but merely left them to C. his
Executor. Now shall not the Goods which came to B. as Executor of A. and so
from B. to C. be liable in Law, to pay the debts of B, yet in Conscience me
thinks they should, and that C. should not receive them to his own use, as in
Law he may, where A. left no debts. But if A. making B. Executor, did also by
his Will give him all his Goods, and he in his life time made election to have
them as Legatee; or by his Will, did so dispose of them, or appoint them to
go, as the goods he had as Executor, could not be given or disposed: Now by
this election they were altered in property from being his as Executor, and so
as his own goods should be liable to his debts. But things in action could not
be so given, or disposed, viz. Debts, etc. yet if D. were indebted to A. one
hundred pound, and B. his Executor, took new bond of him, or another for it,
giving up the old Bond, now was it become his own duty, and so shall stand in
his Executor.

Another instance of this, thus; If A. patron of the Church of D. grant to B.
the next avoydance, Or if a strange, usurp in his life, and he dying, his
Executor recovers in a Qua. imp. as by Sale, was done infra. Mich. 32. and 33.
Eliz.
the Church becommes void, B. dies before he presents, his Executor presents,
and has the benefit of preferring his son or friend, yet shall this make no
Assets in his hands for payment of debts, for that he could not lawfully take
money to present. So held in Sales Case, in com. ba.
But if B. had dyed before the Church had become void; Then because the
Executor might lawfully have sold it, Vende^ (...) p^test emerat ipse prius.
the value should be Assets, in his hands, as I conceive, except perhaps the
incumbent had died so hastily after B. that the Executor had not time
convenient to find out a chapman, and to sell it.

If in the other Case, a stranger had presented and got his Clarke admitted,
and the Executors of B. had in a Qua. Imp. recovered damages, the money so
recovered, should have been Assets* Thus much of the first, viz. that some
things of the nature of Chattells, may come to Executors, and yet not be Assets.

Touching the second, viz. that some things may be Assets in the hands of
Executors, which yet are no chattells; I shall give but two Instances. 22. H.
8. (...). Villenage 46.
First, where a man leaves a Villen for years to his Executors, and the
Villen purchases Land in Fee-simple, If he dye, how shall this be Assets in
the heir.
and the Executor enters into the Land; now has he Fee simple therein; and
this Land is Assets for payment of the Testators debts. 3. H. 63. and so 2.
Hen. 4. 21.
So, if a man by his Will, If by Feoffment per Markam, cap. I^st. contr.
Rick^ill.
give Lands in Fee to his Executors to be sold for performance of his Will.
These (before the money thereby raised) are Assets, both for payment of debts,
and of Legacies: But if the Lands had been given to be sold only for payment
of debts, they should only be Assets for that purpose, and not for payment of
Legacies: and so, if it were expressed to be for payment of Legacies
singularly, this should not be Assets for debts, as I take it. For since these
are not Assets of their own nature, See 9. El. Die. 264*
but so made by the Will and disposition of the Testator; me thinks they
cannot be otherwise, nor farther Assets than as the Testator has willed, and
disposed; but though Lands thus given were Assets before the Stat. 21. Hen. 8.
cap. 5. Yet how can it be so, since for the very words of the Statute be that
if one will by his Testament or last Will, any Lands, etc. to be sold, neither
the money thereof coming, nor the profits taken, shall be accounted as any of
the goods or chattells of the Testator, which I conceive to be all one, as to
say, that they should not be Assets; for when an Executor denies himself to
have Assets, the form of his plea is, Quod nulla habet, bona nec ^atalla, etc.
Yet, since that Satute, 9. H. D. 264.
viz. in the late Queens time, 14. H. D. 31^*
the Law was twice admitted, or conceived still to be according to the third of
Hen. 6. viz. that the Land devised to be sold, or the money thereof coming
should be Assets. Indeed, in neither of those Books, is there any mention of
the clause in the said Statute; and it is possible that it might be forgotten,
as in other Cases sometime has happened. But casting about how to reconcile
those Books, with the said Statute, and not to suppose the same forgotten at
both times, both at the Bar, and Bench (though being but a short clause in
the middle of a large Statute to other purpose, it might well so have been) at
the last, though not hastily I grew to conceive, that the said clause being in
an Act which limitteth the Fees of Ordinaries, and their Scribes, according to
the value of the goods of the deceased, and then brings in this clause, that
the Lands willed to be sold, shall not be accounted as any of the goods, etc.
The Parliament meant thereby only to exclude them to this purpose, that they
should not be accounted as part of the goods in the valuation, according to
which the said Fees were to be rated; and though the words be general, that
they shall not be accounted as any of the goods, etc. yet is it the more
probable, that the Parliament meant no further then as aforesaid, because that
clause after the Fees limited in answerablenesse to the values, is brought in
by a Proviso, viz. provided always, that if the deceased Willed any Lands to
be sold, the money nor profits shall not, etc. And thus perhaps it was
understood and construed in the said late Queens time, though no mention be of
any remembrance of that clause or provision in either of those Cases reported
by the Lord Dyer.

As for the third, viz. the changing of things out of the personalty, into the
realtie, and e contra, I show it thus: If a debt were due to the Executor, as
Executor by Statute, Recognisance, or judgment, and he sue Execution, and have
Land of the debtors in extent: now is the personal duty turned into a chattel
real. On the other side, if such an estate by extent, or a Lease for years
mortgaged come to an Executor, and the debtor, or mortgager pays the money
due; now are these real chattells turned into Assets personal.

Another special Case of Equity opposing Law.
IF A. be bound to B. by Bond, Statute, or Recognizance for assurance of Land,
B. dies, and the Land descends to his heir; or be it that B. sold the Land to
C. and assigned to him the Bond, Statute, etc. yet must the Suit, or taking out
of Execution, be in the name of the Executor of B. and neither of the heir,
nor Assignee. And that which is recovered, or gotten in extent, will be Assets
in Law to charge the Executor, as I take it, yet in equity it pertaines to the
Heir or Assignee Quaere If the Executor meddle not, but only suffer his name
to be used.

Of things come to Executors by Condition.
First, we will consider of Conditions bringing back to Executors goods, or
chattells granted away by their Testators. Touching which, there is no doubt,
but if the Condition be any other than for payment of money, or other things
valuable by the Testator, Note Diff.
or his Executor, the chattell returning to the Executors is Assets in his
hands: as put the Case a Lease for years, Horses, Sheep, Plate, or other
Chattell, were granted by the Testator to A. upon condition, that if A. did not
pay such a sum of money, or do such other Act as the Testator appoints,
and this condition is not performed after the Testators death, now is the
chattell come back to the Executor, and is Assets. But the question has been
(and perhaps may be) where the condition is, that the Testator or his
Executors, shall pay the money to make void the Grantee, and accordingly, the
Executor after the Testators death pays the sum out of his own purse, not
having any money of the Testators in his hands: in this Case coming in
question, ^1. Hen. 7.
tempore, Hen. 7. It was resolved at the last, that this redeemed chattell
should not be Assets, but be to the Executor as his own proper goods, though
at the first, three Judges were of contrary opinion, viz. that the goods
redeemed should be in the Executor, as goods of the Testator. And truly I must
confess, that I cannot yet find good satisfaction in that Books resolution,
except we shall take the Case there to be such as that which is put and
reported by the Lord Dyer, tempore Hen. 8. viz. that the money paid for
redemption, was as much as the full value of the goods, pledged, or mortgaged,
or else shall admit the Case to be, that this redemption was not by payment at
the day conditioned. As to the first, it were rare, that any should lend money
upon a mortgage, where the thing mortgaged, is not of better value than the
money lent: rare also, that an Executor should take care to redeem with his
own money, that which should yield no benefit or advantage to him, or his
Testator. Let us therefore scanne and examine the Point, since the same may
come frequently in use; and this we may the more decently do, because the Lord
Dyer in the Margent of the Case by him reported, as aforesaid, says expressly,
that the said other temp. Hen. 7. was not at all adjudged, himself having
viewed the Roll, which he there sets down, and the names of the parties. We
will therefore put the Case thus. A. posessed of a Lease for sixty years, of
one hundred pound Land, mortgageth it for five hundred pound; or be it that the
mortgage or pledge be of a Jewel, or piece of Plate for half the value, and
that before the day limited for payment, and redemption A. having made B. his
Executor dies, and B. at the time and place makes payment, as was
conditioned. Now the question is, whether this Lease, Plate, or Jewel, being
worth much more than the sum for which it was mortgaged, shall be in him
wholly in his own right, and to his own use or partly, if not wholly as
Executor to A. so as to be subject to the payment of debts and Legacies. Here
it must be clearly admitted, that B. was enabled to this redemption only, and
merely by the Condition annexed to the mortgage, or pledging. It must also be
admitted, that this Condition, and the power or interest to take benefit
thereof to him; came, and was derived only as Executor of A. This being
premised, it must needs follow, as to me it seems, that the Condition working,
and having his operation in the redemption to destroy the Grant, mortgage, or
pledging, it must needs make these again the Testators goods, in statu quod
prius, and so to be in B. as Executor; since in that right only, he was
entitled to take benefit of the Condition. For what is it which hindered before
this, from being the Testators goods; nothing certainly, but only the force
and strength of the mortgage or pledge: Now by the redemption, that is become
void, and has it losts its force; therefore the property of these things must
needs now be; as if no such mortgage or pledge had been; or as if it had at
the first been void, and of no force: Thus must the Condition work for him,
who made it, viz. A. the Testator, and those of the contrary opinion in the
time of King Hen. 7. do yet say, That by this redemption, the Testator is so
much in debted to the Executor, as he disbursed for the redemption; which could
stand with no reason, unless by it the property and interest should be reduced
to the Testators behoof. That thus it is, is also proved; as to me it seems
by the Case of mortgage of Inheritance, upon which the heir making payment,
according to the condition, is not now in as a new purchasor, but as heir, so
as he shall have his age, and be in Ward, even for this Land: Yea, it shall be
Assets in his hands for satisfaction of his Fathers, or other Ancestors debts,
which in some respect is a harder Case than that of the Executor; for he has
means to satisfy himself of the money disbursed, either out of the thing
redeemed, or other goods of his Testator, but the heir has no such means.
Yet it will be asked, how the Executor can be free from mischief, for if this
thing redeemed be entire, as the Cup or the Lease, the whole will be taken in
execution for the Testators debt. To admit this, yet here is one clear way of
remedy, viz. the Executor may before such Execution, sell the thing, and so pay
himself, and retain the surplusage to the Testators use, and the like of this
is frequent in use, viz. for Executors to pay of the Testators debt, with their
own money, and to make themselves satisfaction out of the Testators goods.
Besides, it not impossible, that this redeemed thing should be thus in interest
parted, that answerably and proportionably to the sum disbursed for
redemption, with reference to the value of the thing redeemed, a moyetie or
third part, or three parts thereof should be to the Executor in his own right,
as his own proper goods, and the rest in him as Executor. As posito, that A.
and B. were Tenants in Common of such an entire Chattell* A. makes B. his
Executor and dies. Now has B. one moiety as Executor, and another as his own
proper, and upon a Judgment against him as Executor, that moiety only which
he has as Executor, must be taken in execution; and here may be remembered how
in execution of a Judgment, or levying of an Amerciament out of an entire
Chattell of more value than the sum to be levied, the whole is to be sold,
and the surplusage above the debt or Amerciament is to be delivered back to
the owner. For in all this debate, we must presume the thing redeemed by the
Executor, to be of better value than the sum paid, else we may easily admit
the whole to the Executor. Again, the Lease for years, is not so entire a
thing; I mean the Land let, but that thereof partition may be made; yea
enforced by Action between joint tenants, and Tenants in Common: But here will
be objected, the Case of redemption by the daughter and heir; who though she
have a brother borne after; so as now she is no longer heir, yet she shall, as
the Book says, retain the Land redeemed from the heir as a Perquisite or
Purchase. As for this (which I will not oppose) the Law so frames to the
favor of the daughter, because of great mischief to her, if being stripped of
the rest of the Inheritance by the birth of a brother, she should also lose
that which her money had redeemed, without having any remedy to have her money
again, or any recompense for it; but in the other Case, there is no such
mischief for that the Executor may pay himself as has been showed.

Now on the other side, if the Case shall be understood, that the redemption
was by payment after the day, then will I easily admit that the property or
interest, is in the Executor to his own use; or that the Condition, now having
no power to reduce it back, or to operate any thing: It is rather a
re-emption, than a redemption, since it was at the Will of the Mortgagee, to
dispose it at his pleasure, and any stranger, as well as the Executor might
thus have redeemed, viz. repurchased it, therefore only Equity and not Law in
that Case can make any part of the value Assets in his hands: And so also I
think if we should admit in the other Case of payment, at the day that the
property of the chattell is to the Executor as his own, and not his Testators
goods, no part of surplusage of value, can in Law be Assets, howsoever in
Equity.

Lastly, if the Executor redeem by payment at the day with the Testators own
money or goods, none will doubt, but that the thing redeemed is in him as
Executor, and the money by him paid for redemption is well Administered, the
goods redeemed being of better value. But this way it makes no difference,
whether the whole value of the goods redeemed, shall be held Assets; and the
money paid for redemption stand drowned therein, or that that sum be still
adjudged in the hands of the Executor, as Assets, and only the surplusage of
the thing redeemed over and above the sum paid for redemption.

Things accrued by Covenant or Assumption.
IF A. Covenant with B. to make him a Lease of such or such Land, by such a
day; and B. dies before the day, and before any Lease made; now must A. make
the Lease to the Executor of B. and the Lease so made to him, shall be in him
as Executor, and consequently as Assets. This is proved by the Judgment, in
the Case between Chapman and Dalton in the late Queens time. Plowd. Com.
Yet I confess, that it is not expressed in the resolution of this Case, that
this Lease should be Assets, but that the Executors should have the Term as
Executors, which implies as much in my understanding; and the declaration,
whereupon the Defendant demurreth, sets forth the breach of that Covenant to be
in retardatione executio^is testament. so as the damages thereupon recovered,
viz. 300 and 30. pound were Assets, and consequent^y also, should the term
have been in ^ew and recompense whereof these damages were given. The like
Law, if A. assume upon good consideration to deliver in to B. by such a day
twenty quarters of Malt, or so many loades of Coals or Wood, or any other
Wares or Merchandise; and this is not performed in the life of B. but after to
his Executor, it shall be to him as Executor, and shall be Assets in his hands,
as well as the money recovered in damages for not performing should have been.

Of things accrued by remainder, or increase.
IF a Lease be made to one for life, the remainder to his Executors for years,
and he dies, this will be Assets in the hands of his Executors, though it were
never in the Testator, as was in the later end of the late Queens time,
resolved by three Justices, the Lord Anderson only being of a contrary
opinion; and there it was said, that Cranmers Case, wherein the contrary in
effect was resolved, was of little authority; for that there were first two
Judges against two, till after, Mounson changed his opinion, upon a conceit,
that there the estate was by way of use, which could make no difference; like
law where a Lease for years is by Will bequeathed to A. for life, and after to
B. who dies before A. Although B. never had this term in him, so as that he
could grant or dispose it, yet shall it rest in his Executor, as his goods and
be Assets. As for a remainder for years, so in the Testator, that he might
grant or dispose it at his pleasure, no doubt can be thereof, though the same
fell not in possession to the Testator in his life time, yet no scruple nor
doubt can be, but that this is Assets to the Executor, even whilst it continues
a remainder, and before it falls into possession, because it is presently
valuable and vendible. Nor much of other nature, to these are the Cases, 11. H.
6* 35. per Babington.
where the Executor Marchandizing with the goods of his Testator, makes gain
thereof. So if the Sheep, or other Cattle of the Testator do breed, viz.
bear Lambs, Calves, Colts, etc. after the Testators death, even these which
were never in the Testator shall yet be Assets, and so the Wool growing upon
the Sheep after the Testators death. But there is one Case worth the
consideration and worthy of some doubt, as I think, and that is this. One
leaves to his Executor a Lease for years of Land, worth twenty pound by
year, and the Executor keeping this in his own hands, one year after the
Testators death, does make thereof thirty pound in clear gain above all
charges, now whether, as to a Creditor, this whole thirty pound shall be
Assets, or only twenty pound, and the Case simply thus put, shall be
understood of an occupying, and manuring without any stock of the Testators;
and then if the Executor did stock it with his own Sheep, or other Cattle,
as he must have borne the loss by rot or death; so is it reason, that if the
manurants prove gainefull, he reap the fruits thereof in recompense of his
adventure, and of his industry, skill, and good husbandry. But if the Testators
stock of Sheep and Cattle were (as of necessity, or for the better
advantage of the Testators estate) continued upon the Lease Land, then is it
reason, that the gain or loss whethersoever of them God sends, do redound
to the Testators estate. Like Law, as I think, if an Executor finding, that he
cannot instantly, after the Testators death, let the Lease Land near the
value, shall therefore buy seede-Corne, and hire the plowing, etc. But it may
be said, that the Lease has one entire valuation at the first, upon the
appraisement. To this I answer, first, that the value upon the appraisement is
not binding, nor much respected at the Common Law, if it be too high, it shall
not prejudice the Executor; if too low, shall not advantage him; but the very
value found by Jury, when it comes in question, whether the Executor have fully
administered, or have Assets or not, is that which is binding. Next I say, that
if a long Lease come to Executors, of Land worth an hundred pound by year, and
no sale is made thereof by the space of a year or more, now the term
continuing of the like value, as at first, it is no reason but this hundred
pound raised the first year, should go toward the payment of debts and
Legacies rather then any of them should be unpaid. This thing, I mean the
knowledge of them are useful two ways, viz. First to give light to Executors,
to discern what unto them of right pertaines: Next to show unto Creditors and
Legatees, what and how far things shall be Assets, that is to say, goods to
enable, charge, and bind Executors to pay debts and Legacies. For whatsoever
any of these ways comes to the Executors from their Testator, or is
recovered by any of these Actions, shall be in their hands Assetts, the Cost
and charges of recovering deducted.

CHAP. VII.
What manner of Interest an Executor has in his Testators Goods and Chattels,
and how different from the common Interest they or others have in their own
proper goods.
THe Interest which an Executor has as Executor in the Goods of his Testator
is much different from the absolute, proper, and ordinary Interest, which every
one has in his own prope: Goods, as may well appear in and by these points,
1. Although if a stranger take away these Goods, the Action of Trespass for
the Executor, is of general form, 24. E. 3. f. 35.
Quare bona sua cepit, calling them his Goods, whereas a man Outlawed in Debt,
etc. or convict or attainted of felony or treason, 32. H. 6. 34.
forfeiteth all his own Goods, yet these which he has as Executor, shall not
be forfeited. If a Villen be made Executor, his Lord cannot take these goods,
though he may take all the Villens own Goods: ^itl. tit. villenage. 41. 42.
and for taking such Goods, or for a debt due to the Testator, a Villen may sue
his Lord. Nay, if the Executor grant all his Goods, some good opinion has
been, 10. E. 4. fo. 1.
that these which he has as Executor should not pass, Yet 39 H. 6. f. 15
yea the Lord Dyer so held in the late Queens time, A release of all actions,
by an Executor, extincts actions as Executor.
with this difference, viz. Where the Grantor is named Executor in the Grantee,
there the Goods which he has as Executor should pass, but otherwise if he be
not named Executor in the Grantee, But Frowicke i^ against it in 20. H. 7. K^l.
64.
and that this opinion is probable, will further appear by that which
follows.

Secondly, the Executor cannot by Will give or bequeath the Goods he has as
Executor, and if he dye intestate, and Administration of all his Goods is
committed to I. D. yet has he nothing to do with the Goods which the
Intestate had, as Executor to his Testator: Thus all his Goods, reaches not to
his Goods as Executor.

Thirdly, whereas a man's Goods stand liable to the payment of his debts, both
in his life time and after. See these so resolved in Plow. com. 525. into
R^ansby and Grantham. P. 20. Eliz.
The goods which a man has as Executor, are not to be taken in execution for
his own debts either upon a Recognizance Statute, or Judgment had against
him. And if such a one dye indebted, leaving to his Executor much Goods, which
he had as Executor; these are not Assets in his hands, liable to the payment of
his debts, but only for the payment of the first Testators debts or Legacies.
Therefore a Quo min. brought by an Executor, showing that he was not able to
pay the Kings debt, because the Defendant detained from him an 100. pound,
which he owed him as Executor to I. S. was overthrown, for that it could not
be intended, says the Book, that the Kings debt could be satisfied with that
which the Plaintiff should recover, and receive as Executor. Whereas a Woman
being possessed of any Chattells personal, viz. moveable Goods, all be
divested out of her into her Husband by her marriage, so as if he dye, and she
overlive, they be not hers again, but her Husbands Executors, or
Administrators, and if she dye, all be the Husbands, without being Executor to
his Wife. It is not so of the Goods which she has as Executor, these still
remain in and to her, if her Husband dye, and if she her self dye, for that
she has them as it were in another right, viz. as she represents the person of
her Testator, her Husband shall not have them, if he be not his Wives Executor,
and so Executor to her Testator.

Lastly, This may be in his name only out of whose possession the goods were
taken.
whereas the Writ of Trespass seems to make no difference between ones own
Goods, and those he has as Executor, that being a possessory Action or suite
grounded upon the possession; yet come to an Action of debt, which more tastes
and participates of the right, and there are they differenced: for where for my
own debt, when I sue, the Writ says Debet and detinet. viz. that the
Defendant owes me, and detaines from me that sum. Yet when I sue as Executor,
the Writ says not, Co. lib. 5. fo. 32.
debet, he does owe me, but detinet only, he detaines from me, as admitting
that he is not the Debtor to me, though he should pay me; and so where I am
sued as Executor, the Writ makes me not a Debtor, but a detainer; Otherwise,
where in my own right, I owe and am sued for a debt. Accordingly, where
Judgment in an Action of debt is given against one as Executor, it is not
generally that the Plaintiff shall recover against him, but he shall recover
of the Goods of the Testator, and therefore upon this judgment no Capias lies
against him, to enforce him to pay by Arrest of his body, because he is not
properly debtor, but if after it be returned that he has wasted the Testators
Goods, out of which the said debt shall be satisfied; Then he having made
himself a Debtor, a Capias ad satisfaciendum, shall be awarded, against him, and
then he shall be taken in Execution. So also in some cases of false plea
pleaded, for where the Judgment is de bonis propriis, the Plaintiff may have
a Capias ad satisfaciendum, 34. H. 6. 43.
and that Judgment is in diverse cases for the damages, although not in many
for the principal. As for the Capias before Judgment, in the mean process
against an Executor, that is, because of his Contumacy in not appearing upon
the former process.

The reason of this different interest between an Executor and another, or
between the same man's having goods as Executor, and others in his own right;
as also of the different manner of ones being indebted as Executor, and
otherwise in his own right, is well expressed by the Lord Cook, in Pinchons
case, viz. First, Co. lib. 9. 88. b.
that the goods which one has as Executor, See this also Plo^. com. 520. a.
he has not in his own right, but in auter droit, that is, in the right of
another, meaning his Testator. Secondly, that Executors are but the Ministers,
and Dispensors, or Distributors of their Testators Goods.

Of alteration of property in the Executors hands, so as some goods become his
own, which he had as Executor.
TO this head or Chapter, treating of the difference between the Interest in
Goods, as Executor, and others had merely in ones own right, and to his own
use, it is not impertinent, to consider how that which one has at the first as
Executor, may be changed in property, and become the Executors own to his own
use, as other his goods, which he had not as Executor. Here let us first
consider of ready money left by the Testator: for since pieces of money, viz.
shillings, groates, pieces and half pieces of gold, cannot be known one from
the other, it must needs follow that these coming to an Executor from the
Testator must in some sort be altered in property, so as though the Executor
shall be said to have so much in money or value, yet can it not be discerned
which money in his house was his Testators, and which his own. Consequently
the Sheriff upon the fieri facias, for a Creditor, who has recovered against
the Executor to pay debt owing by the Testator, cannot hold.

CHAP. VIII.
Of some cases and questions between the Executor and the Heir.
THE Executor may in convenient time after the Testators death, enter into the
house descended to the Heir, 21. Hen. 6. 30.
for the removing and taking away of the Goods, If other goods taken among them
he is excused 21. H. 7. 25 Vide lib. Intr. 640 It is so pleaded.
so as the door be open; or at least the key be in the door: and this I
understand of the door of each room: for although the door of entrance into
Hall and Parlor be open, the Executor cannot by that justify the breaking open
of the door of any Chamber to take goods there, but only may take those in
the rooms which be open; and this is proved, 43. E. 3. 24. Br^. 145. Makes a
quae. if it be locked.
as to me it seems by the case of the chest with evidences, which, says the
Book, the Executor may take and put out the Deeds, delivering them to the
Heir, viz. the chest being unlocked, as I understand it. Now a Chamber or
other room within a house, locked is an enclosure of better respect then a
chest. Plow. com. 280.
But if the goods be not removed within convenient time, the heir may
distraine them as damage fesante.

Where the Testator recovered Land and damages, 43 Ed 3. 2.
or a Deed and damages, he dying before execution, 10. Ed. 4 5. 6.
the Heir shall have execution for the Land or Deed, Of the Deed execution
first.
and the Executor for the damages, but temp. Edward the 4. it is said that
until the Heir sue a Scir. sac. the Executor cannot sue execution for the
damages.

If a Creditor be made Executor by his Debtor, and pay himself part out of the
Goods, he cannot sue the Heir for the rest, 12. H. 4.
because the debt cannot be apportioned, but otherwise, he may, says the Book:
yet Quae. if he do take upon him the Executorship, and have goods sufficient
to pay all.

If a debt be recovered against one who dies before execution sued, 7. Hen. 4.
f. 31.
leaving goods sufficient to satisfy; See Bro. Exe. ^ 24
now shall not the Land descended to the Heir, be charged therewith, nor by
like reason, any land conveyed after Judgment.

See a good difference where land is conveyed, Co. l. 3. f. 90. 91.
upon condition of payment to the Vend or his Heirs or assigns, To like
purpose see more, Litl. f. 77. b. 2. Eliz. Die. 281. Plow. com. 291.
and he dies before the time, and where it is to be paid to the Vendee his
Heirs or Assigns, and he dies; in the first case, payment shall be to the
Executors, but not in the other.

What things pertain to the Heir, and what to the Executor is before showed.
21. Hen. 7. 4.
As for Frowickes opinion, that where goods be mortgaged upon condition, that
if the Heir or Executor pay, etc. here if the Heir make payment, he should
have the Goods: I see not how that can be.

A Directory for the following Chapter.
A. All as but one represent the Testators person, and must join and be joined
in suite, and e contra. B. Where one alone must answer suite; and how. C. When
they differ in Plea, the best shall be taken, but one may confess alone. D.
One as well as all, has, may give assent or release the whole. E. One cannot
give nor release to another, nor divide F. The possession of one is the
possession of all, to what purpose. G. If the surviver dye Intestate, the
Testator is intestate, though some other Exec. left an Executor. H. Included in
the person of the Testator, and represents it. Is his Assignee; all one, and e
contra. I. What change by death of the Testator, touching proceeding in suite.
K. Proceed to or in Execution, where without Scire fac. M. Whether the Executor
stand in his own quality or his Testators. N. Where one alone may sue. O. In
suite for them such as will not join shall be severed, and the other may sue
and prosecute alone: consequents inde. P. Death of one Executor, Plaintiff or
Defendant; where abates Writ.
CHAP. IX.
How Executors stand between themselves, and in representation of, or relation
to the Testator, As his Assignee or Deputy, or as the same person with him, and
where and to what purpose, as other persons.
FIrst, A
all of them do represent the person of the Testator, Are as one person;
therefore cannot plead several pleas (...) abatement. 3^, H. 6. 17. 9* H. 6.
f. 44. 38. E. 3. 9*
and therefore must they all join in suite against others, and in suite by
others they must be all made defendants, or at least so many of them as do
Administer: Bro. Ex. 13.
for though the Executors themselves must take notice by the Will, Br^. Ex. 20,
21.
how many Executors be, and must frame their suite accordingly; Therefore one
Executor sued, i^ he plead that there is another Executor not sued, must plead
that he did administer, 9. H. 6.
Creditors and strangers need not take notice of any more then do Administer,
and Execute the Office of Executors. 44. Bro. 13. 33. H. 6. 38. ^. ^. 20.
For this reason, as I take it, in the time of King Edward the 3. where two
Executors were of a term, 32. E. 3. quid jur. (...). 5.
and the reversion was granted by Fine, mentioning but one termor, and
thereupon a Quid juris clamat, accordingly brought against that one Executor,
this was held good enough, though the other Executor was not named in the
Suite; belike, because that one (who indeed was the Testators Wife) did only
occupy the Land, and take the profits thereof; for else since all the Executors
do represent the Testators person, all must have been named. Therefore did
the Judges resolve in the time of Henry. ^3. H. 4 Aid. ^86
the 4. that where a Lessee for years made two Executors, and one of them was
distrayned by the Lord for Rent, who avowed upon the Lessor, that Executor
should have aid of his fellow Executor, A
to the end that both might have aid of the Lessor, which one alone could not.
And upon this reason, viz. that the Executors represent the person of their
Testator, 9. Ed 3. cap. 3.
as one person (for so speaks the Parliament) It was enacted in time of Edward
the 3. that the Executors, though never so many, shall have but one essoyne,
neither before appearance nor after, A
because their Testator whose person they represent, could have had no more.

It is further also enacted by the said Statute, that where two or three
Executors or more be, they being sued in an action of debt, though all do not
appear; yet such one of them or more as do, B
or does appear at the Graunde distress, But not if he appear at the summons
1. E. 4. 1. 14. H. 4. f. 11.
shall answer alone without his companions. And this Statute has been taken
by equity in three respects. But the Plaintiff must declare against all. He
need not but he may admit another to appear, and plead after. 7. H. 4. 12.


First, touching the persons: that it shall extend, not to Executors only, but
also to Executors of Executors, yea to Administrators also, But Process must be
continued against all. 7. H. 6. 35.
though the Statute speak only of Executors.

Secondly, Executors of Executors by equity. 39. H. 6. 45. Bro. Exec. 99*
touching the actions; whereas the Statute speaks only of the Action of debt,
it is taken by equity to extend to other actions, 28. H. 6. f. 4.
as the Writ de rationabili par^e bonorum, and detinue, 14. H. 4. 23, 24. So
negatively.
yet perhaps, this latter action will be said not to be maintaineable against
Executors, 21. H. 6. f. 1.
for their Testators act, 28 H. 6. f. 4.
but for their own only; 3. H. 6. 351.
But we yet are not come so far as to determine what is maintaineable; 39. E.
3. 5. There it is not merely as Executors, it is out of the stat* 11. H. 4. ^
3. As if in deb. and de^.
but whether before all the Executors do appear, he or they which have
appeared, shall be put to answer; B
and so to bring it to decision; whether the action be maintaineable, Conte.
47. E. 3. 22*
or not. I think also that in the action of covenant, So 7. E. 4. 20, 21*
and all other actions against Executors, 3. H. 4. 20 Ins^^. fac. upon a pardon
by defenda^* ^utlawed at their suit.
as Executors, he which appears, must answer without his companions, 47. E.
3. 22.
though the greater opinion in the Quadragesimes were contrary touching the
action of Covenant. Only (...) in the Affirmative.
But as for the sub paena against Executors, which is to make them to answer to
a suite in equity; 8. E. 4. 5.
that has been temp. E. 4. taken to be out of the reach and intent of the
Statute. So also of the Latitat in the Kings bench, as was held in the same
Kings time, 9. E. 4. 12. 13.
except all the Executors, making up the whole representative body of the
Testator, be in the custody of the Marshall, B
one or more of them who are there shall not be enforced to answer; 20. vel.
21. Jac regi^.
and so was it also lately held in the Kings Bench, where Master Justice
Houghton gave an excellent reason, this case is out of the said Statute, viz.
for that this Writ does not mention any debt, nor name the Defendants Executors.

Thirdly, and lastly, that Statute is extended by equity to other Writs or
Process; for where the Statute speaks only of the Grand distress, B
and the Executors appearing thereupon; It has been many times ruled, that
when he or they appear upon the Attatchment, 1. E. 4. 1.
Capias, or Exigent, 40. E. ^. 1.
answer must be, though the rest appear not; for so the word Distress is
taken for all compulsary means or enforcement of appearance. But where the
Statute reaches not, viz. when the Process is determined against one or more,
as by Outlawry, etc. there the rest must answer by the rules of the Common Law;
B
except it be in the case of Husband and Wife Executor, for there the Wife
cannot answer without her Husband, nor doubtless can he without her, where she
and not he is Executor; 11. H. 4. 63.
but where both be Executors, C
there he may answer without her, Or if but one appear. 28. H. 6. f. 364.
judgment against all.
but not she without him. When Executors as Defendants have appeared, if any
one of them will confess the Action, See 9. E, 4. 12, 13, 14. where B. who is
not Executor is jointly sued with A, and B. confesses. 2^ H. 7. 25. Yet 7. E.
4. 8. They may severe in pleas not dilatory C 7. H. 6. f. 6. per Cottesi^^e.
this binds and concludes the rest; but if one will plead one plea, and the
other another, that say some, shall be received which is best for the Testators
state; so where they sue, such as will not prosecute, shall be severed, and the
rest without them may proceed; and in like manner where they pray to be
received to defend their term, If they recover and one of them prays a cap.
ad sat. and the other a Fires. fac. the first as best shall be granted 3. H. 4.
10. Bro. 44, So where the defendant Outlawed at the suit of two Executors, and
upon the Se^. fac. after his pardon but one appears. 21. H. 7. 25. D 9. E. 4.
12. 14.
and one of them after makes default; it shall not be the default of all, but
the rest, or he, if it be but one who appears shall be received to uphold the
defense of the term,

Thirdly, so where they plead a release to the Testator or themselves, one
after making default, this shall not be, nor make a total default in the
Executors, to induce a judgment or condemnation against them. Yet in truth
each Executor has the whole of the Testators Goods and Chattells, 21. E. 3. 13.
be they Real or Personal, 27. H. 8. 21. 22.
and each may sell or give the whole. One of them cannot give nor release to
the other his Interest, D E
and if he do, it is void, and he who releaseth shall still have as much
interest, as he to whom he released, because each had the whole before, upon
this reason long since, where one of the two Executors released but his part of
a debt, C
it was held that the whole was discharged: and so if one Executor grant his
part of the Testators Goods, all passes, and nothing is left to the other, for
that each has the whole, If an horse come to four Executors, each has an
horse, and yet all four have but one.
and there be no parts or moyeties, between Executors. Therefore, also though
a lease for a thousand years, of a thousand acres of Land come to two
Executors or more, 27. H. 8. 21. 22.
no partition or division can be made between them, E
because it is not between them, as between joint Lessees of Land where each
has but a moiety in interest though possession of or through the whole. Amidst
Executors, each has the whole, D
and therefore if he grant his part he graunts the whole. But one Executor may
demise or grant the moiety of the Land for the whole term, and so may the
other do, and this way they may settle in friends or others trusted for them,
a moiety for each; either in several or undivided; E
but one of them cannot make a lease to the other of any part, for he had the
whole, nor can one sue the other as Executor, yet if the Testator devise to one
of his Executors, all his goods after such debts and Lega^ves satisfied, ^. H.
7. 5.
there after those satisfied, that Executor may take the Goods and maintain an
action of Trespass against the other Executor, if he take them from him, and
consequently an Action of Detinue, for keeping or detaining them: but this is
as Legatee, his own assent perfecting the Legacy.

The possession of one Executor, F
is the possession of all the rest; so, as if one appearing to a Suit, and the
other making default, in whose hands all the goods be which are not
administered, if, I say, here he that appears, pleades that he has nothing in
his hands, this shall be found against him; for whatsoever any of the
co-executors has, 14. H. 4. 12. Bro. 12.
he also has, F
and is in his possession, and so shall the Creditor recover, and have
judgment to be satisfied out of the Testators goods, as in his hands. All must
sae. 19 H, 6. 65. conte.
And therefore if goods be taken from one, 24. E. 3. 40. and 42. E. 3. 26. It
may be in his name only from whom taken; nor need he be named Executor Bro. Ex.
31. 39. H. 6. 4^.
all may maintain an Action of Trespass thereupon; for the possession of one
is the possession of all. But the possession of one shall not be, so the
possession of all, as to charge the others own goods whereof more elsewhere. F


Where two Executors be made, G
the one making a Will and executors, and dying; if the other die after
intestate; now shall not the Executor of him who first dyed be Executor to the
first Testator, 32. H. 8. Bro. (...) 149.
but he is dead intestate, 39 H. 6. 45.
because the surviving Executor is so dead; and in him the Executorship was
wholly, and soly settled by the death of his fellow before him: So
Administration, de b^nis non admin. shall be committed.

The Executors, or Executor, if but one so represents the person of his
Testator, Co. lib. 5. ^. 97.
that he is in Law his Assignee by the very making of him Executor; H
so as if one covenant to make a Lease to I. S. and his Assigns by such a
time, Chapman and Dalton^ case. Plo^.
and I. S. dies before that time, and before the Lease made; now must the
Lease be made to his Executors as his Assign, representing his person; so also
in a condition to pay to the Feoffor or his Assignee, yet a Lease to A. and his
Assigns during the life of B. shall not go to the Executors of A. Sir Edward
Phitt^^t case, Co lib. ^. f, 80.
So where in a general pardon by Parliament, there is an exception of persons
outlawed after judgment, A
unto the person so outlawed, So where the stat. of W. 1. gives time for
proof to him whose goods were wrested. His Executors may do it, if he dye
before the time. Co. l. 5. 107. b.
shall satisfy the Creditor, who has out lawed him. If the Outlaw die before
this done, his Executor as representing his person, may make satisfaction, and
so make the benefit of the pardon to extend to his Testator, for saving his
goods, as if himself had satisfied his Creditor, Co. lib. 6. f. 80.
though he left him unsatisfied, when he left the world, Also Executors shall
have restitution of stolen goods, and a Writ of Error; yet the Statute speaks
but of the party.
and d. em obiit extremum. Yet where A. sold Land to B. upon Proviso, that if
he paid ^o B. his heirs, or assigns, etc. B. died, A. paid at the day to
his Executor, and it was doubted that it was not good, H
for the word Assignee could not reach to him being no Assignee of the Land: 2*
(...). Die. 1^0.
and where the Executor brought an action of account upon a receipt by the
hands of the Testator; Conte. where to pay to A. the Feoffer his heir or
assign. Co. lib. 5. f. 97.
the Defendant could not be admitted to wage his Law; 2 Eli. Die. 18^.
for that this was held a receipt, per autermains; yet it is clear, that if
one by Bond or Covenant tie himself to pay such a sum* at such a day, not
mentioning his Executor at all; yet is the Executor bound, as included in the
name or person of the Testator. And where the Statute 23. 3. Eliz. Die. 201.
of Henry the eight, gives the Writ of attaint (in the course there mentioned)
against the party that had judgment, it lies against his Executors if he be
dead; H
but thereof another reason is given. 27. H. 8. 16.
where a man was bound, that he would not sue upon such a Bond, and he dyed,
and his Executor sued; this was held to be no forfeiture of the Bond. So where
one was bound to pay ten pound within a month after request made to him, M.
15, and 16. El.
and he died before request; I
it sufficed not to make it to the Executor, 34. El. vel circite Titherley and
Le^cor Walsh. in ba. reg.
as Manwood said. It was likewise held that the warrant of Attorney put in for
the Plaintiff in debt, I
suffices not for his Executor to bring a Scir^ Fac. upon the judgment. And
if Executors sue execution upon a Statute in the name of a Conusee, 36. H* 8.
Bro. stat. Merchant. 43.
as if he were alive, K
this is void, 2. R. 3. 8.
and they may sue out new extent, and this they may do without any Scire
facias, H I
as well as the Conusee might, if he had been alive. 15. H. 7. 14.
But by Hussy Justice, F
if the Conusor in a Statute staple be returned dead by the Sheriff upon the
extent; 15. E. 3^ Respond. 1. conte, upon a Stat. Merchant.
a Scire fac. must be sued out before extent proceed; and upon a judgment had,
if the recoverer dye before execution, his Executor cannot as himself might, K
sue out execution without a Sci. fac. as is there said. ^^nte No^^^^. 207.
upon a Recogniz.
Yet if after a Capias ad sat. awarded, I.
the Plaintiff dye before it be executed, the Sheriff may proceed to the
taking of the party, and is not subject to any action of false imprisonment,
nay, if he suffer him to escape he is chargeable, H
as temp. Elizabeth it was resolved upon the motion of Anderson; ^0. Eliz. tot.
31. in ba. reg.
but withal it was held that relief might be by Audita querela. Like
resolution was in the Kings Bench, After some doubt by Wray, and the other
Judges, where the Defendant dyed after a Fieri fac. awarded, and before it was
executed, that the Sheriff might proceed upon the Goods in the hands of the
Executors.

But if the Defendant in an action of debt, upon a bond plead a tender at the
time and place of payment, I.
and tenders the money in Court, where it rests and then he dies; now shall not
the Plaintiff, have this money, because the property thereof is changed, and
become the Executors, as was held in the Common pleas, P
but he is put to a new suite against the Executor. 32. Eliz. vel circite.
Yet where judgment is once given in a Writ of Partition, I
for a termer, or in a Writ of Account, if the Plaintiff dye before the second
judgment needful in both cases, Pas. 28. Eliz.
the Executor is not put to a new suite, but may proceed by Sci. Fac. upon the
former judgment, as the Lord Anderson held upon the motion of Fenner Sergeant.
Though before we found the Executor not in points penal, H
all one with the Testator, yet in points beneficial, the Testator includes
him in some cases, as where an Abbot granted to his Lessee to take Estovers in
another ground, it was held that his Executor though not named should enjoy
this, during the term as well as himself should have done. And whereas the
Stat. 23. of H. the 8. gives costs to a Defendant against a Plaintiff, suing
for a wrong, or breach of promise, or the like, done to the Plaintiff against
whom it passes by verdict or nonsuit; Tri^. 36. Eliz. in ba. r^g.
it has been resolved that an Executor suing upon such wrong o^ breach, H M
of contract to his Testator made should not pay costs because he is another
person then the Testator; and so is it usual in experience. But if in such
suite, the Attorney of the Executor mis-behave himself toward him, Pa. 41.
Eli. in com. ba^
and for this the Executor sueth him, here if it pass against him in manne^r
as aforesaid, he shall pay costs, because this was a suite for a wrong done to
himself.

If A. recover a debt as Executor of I. S. and makes B. his Executor, I
and dye before execution sued, B. is not put to new suite, but may have
execution upon that Judgment: But if A. or B. dyed Intestate, (...) 2^* H. ^.
now could none as Administrator to either of them, nor as Administrator of I.
S. have execution of this Judgment; for the former has no interest in any
thing partaining to I. S. and the latter comes to title above the judgment,
viz. as immediate administrator to I. S. who is now dead intestate: and derives
no title from the Executor, who recovered.

If a Conusee have a Certificate into the^ Chancery, 2. El^ Die. 180.
upon a Statute, and then dies, before extent taken out, I
his Executor is put to a new Certificate, and for obtaining of it, must make
Affidavit, that no extent has yet been taken out.

If an Alien join with his Wife, M
who is Executor in a suite for debt, and it comes to Issue, he shall not
have trial per medietatem alienig. or Linguae as should be if he otherwise
were party to a trial, as was held in the case of Doctor Iulio. Yet if a noble
man sue as Executor to another, not noble, he shall for his nonsuite be amerced
five pound, as if he sued in his own right, as was conceived 21. E. 4. 77. By
the same rule and reason doubtless a Noble man sued as Executor, shall not be
arrested, nor shall any Capias be awarded against him for not appearing. And if
any trial shall be of any issue, there shall be two Knights of the Jury, as in
other cases where a peer is party. Likewise where the Wife is to have her
convenient apparel, whereof the Executor must not bereave her; If she be a
noble woman, it shall be answerable to her degree

If one Executor or only sell goods of the Testator, A
he alone may mainetaine an Action of debt for the money. 38. E. 3. f 9.
So if goods be taken out of the possession of one Executor, N
he alone may mainetaine an action, and that without naming himself Executor.

Some touch has been before of Summons, P
and severance, whereabout be this added. O 3. H. 7. 1. and 5. E. 2. Fitz. bre.
802 Conte, 38 E. ^13. and 20. E. 3. tit. acco^nt. 78.
If one Executor will not, or cannot join in suite with the other, so as he is
summoned and severed, now by his death, after the suite is not abated, 16. Ed.
2. Fitzh. 111. yet if he live till judgment, he may sue execution, say other
Books, 13. Ed. 3. Fi^zh. Exec. 9. 11. R. 2. Privilege 2. yet Que. of that for
he cannot acknowledge satisfaction, as has been since resolved. Mich. 14. and
15. Eliz. Die. 319. And the reason thereof being because he is no party to the
judgment, by the same reason can he not sue exe^cution upon it, for how can he
have execution for whom there is no judgment given, now the recovery is only
in the name of the other Executor, yea, by the said last Book, it seems that
after judgment had, he cannot release the debt, because it is now altered in
nature, and turned in rem judicatam, though at any time before judgment he
might have released it as both that last book says, and the two precedent
temp. Ed. 3. Rich. 2. yea in an action of account, after judgment had, that
the Defendant shall account, the release of him severed, is a good discharge to
the Defendant, as was resolved 48. Ed. 3. 14, 15. but this is not a plenary
judgment, for nothing is recovered thereby but another judgment is to be had
after the account, which may be against the Plaintiff, so as this release came
before any debt or duty adjudged. What if the Defendant be had in execution at
the suite of the Executor, who prosecutes it, and escapes; whether may the
severed Executor discharge the Sheriff or Jailer by a Release, I think he may
not.

By that above it is plain, (...)
that if any one of the Executors Plaintiffes dye, the Writ is abated, only
where he so dying was before severed; ^. H. 4. f. 14.
opinions have been different, as above appears. So also is it, if one of the
Defendants Execntors dye. Yea, if the Plaintiff Creditor sue A. B. and C. as
Execu^ors, where only A, and B. are Executors, there by the death of C. the
Writ abates, or falls to the ground, P
yet A. and B. as I think might have pleaded in abatement, 9. E. 4. 1^. Bro.
34.
that they only were executors, traversing that C. was not Executor, but the
Book does not so resolve. See 46. E 3 f. 9. 10.

As A. and B. above might admit that Writ against them and C. A
So if the Writ or sui^e had been against A. only, and he so admit it not
pleading in abatement, the recovery against him alone is good 9. E. 4. 12.

One that is Outlawed or attainted in his own person, 21. H* 6. 30*
may yet sue as Executor, M
because this suite is in another right, 21. E. 4. 49. 69.
viz. the Testators: 42. E. 3. 13.
But he that is excommunicate cannot proceed in suite as Executor, 14. H. 6.
14, 15.
because none can converse with him without being excommunicate, 3. H. 6. 40.
Lit^^. 44. Co. lib. 81. 69. 11. R. 2. Excom. 25.
as a Book says. Yet does not this excommunication pleaded, abate or
overthrow the suite, but make that the Defendant may stay from answering his
suite, until the Plaintiff be absolved and discharged from his
excommunication.

CHAP. X.
Of the Possession of Executors, or their actual Having.
1. What shall be said, so to come to their hands, as to charge them. 2. What
shall be such a getting, or going from them, as to excuse them.
WE have before considered what things shall come to Executors, and being come
shall be Assets in their hands. Now for that it is said in Reeds Case, that an
Executor shall not be charged with, Co. lib. 5.
or in respect of any other goods than those which come to his hands after his
taking upon him the charge of the Executorship. Let us now examine what shall
be said, and accounted such a full and complete coming to the hands of
Executors, as shall make them within the reach and charge of Creditors, and
Legatees, viz. For the payment of debts and Legacies. As touching debts due to
the Testator, it has before been showed, that until Judgment and execution
had; they be not Assets in the Executors hands. Now then, as touching other
goods or chattels possessory, which are of two kinds, viz. real, and
personal: Let us put the Case thus. The Testator at the time of his death has
a flock of sheep in Comberland, Corn in the Barnes in Cornwall, Bullockes
in Wales; fat Oxen in Buck^sh^re; Money, Household-stuffe, and Plate in London,
a Lease for years in Norfolk, and his Executor dwelt at Coventry, viz. far
from all these places, what kind of possession shall the Law judge this
Executor to have in every of these, instantly upon the Testators death, and
before he come where any of the things be, either to see or seize upon them In
all the particulars above mentioned the Law is all one, except the Case of the
Lease for years, which if it be of Land (as is most usual) then because it is
a settled and immovable thing; the Law does not reach to it the foot of the
Executor, P^^k. C. b.
to put him in actual possession, for Possessio est quasi pedi^ positio)
until himself, or some for him do actually enter thereupon. Nor indeed need
the Law help o^ supply the want of actual possession in this Case, as in the
case of movables; since Land cannot be carried away as goods may, and
therefore is not subject to purloyning or imbesilment as movables are. But if
the Lease for years, were of Tithes, the Executor, though in never so remote a
place from them, shall be instantly upon the se^ting out thereon in actual
possession of them, 45. ^ ^. ^7.
so as he may mainetaine an action of Trespass against any stranger which
shall take the Tithes set ou^, 21. H. 6. 43.
though he, nor any for him did ever before p^ssesse any of the said Tithes, or
came near unto them. But if the case were of a Lease for years of a Rect^ry
consisting not only of Tithes, but also of Gleabe Lands, into which entry may
be made, as also Livery of season in it, then it may perhaps be some question,
whether such an actual possession in Tithes, shall be given by the Law to an
Executor, neglecting to enter or not entrying into the Gleabe Land. And so I
leave the consideration of Chattells Real,

Touching things Personal, in which the Executor has such an actual
possession, ^. E. 4. 50.
presently upon the Testators death, ^low. com. 281.
as that he may mainetaine an action of Trespass against any stranger taking
them away or spoiling them, 3^. H. 6. 13.
though he nor any for him ever came near them: 14. H. 8. (...).
whether yet this shall be such a possession in the Executors, and such a
coming of these Goods to their hands, as to charge them with payment of debts
and Legacies, yea to make their own Goods liable instead of these, is a point
worthy of consideration.

And doubtless, this thoroughly sifted, will prove a case mischievous, whether
way soever the Law be taken, for first it must be admitted that without the
Executors laying his hands actually and particularly upon the Goods in the
House or Fields of the Testator, whether the Executor has resorted, he shall
be said so in possession, as to stand liable unto the Creditors, so far as
they extend in value, though after, others purloyne or imbesill them. Now then
if distance of place shall make difference, where shall be the bound and limit
of that distance, and if the Executor may come at a strangers taking or
possessing of the Goods, it is mischievous to Creditors.

On the other side, if it shall be said upon the Executors to answer for all
the Goods whereof the Testator dyed possessed, it will be mischievous for them
and deter them from taking Executorship upon them, fince much purloyning, may
be even of money, Jewels, and Goods by Servants and others, about the
Testator, or where these things be. I think therefore, that if without any
fraud, collusion, or voluntary conniving on the part of the Executors, they be
prevented by others, of laying hold on the Testators Goods, so as that they may
dispose of them; especially, if it cannot be known by whom they are so
purloyned, and imbesilled, or if they be persons fled, or insolvent, that then
they shall not stand upon their score, as Goods come to their hands, in respect
whereof, Creditors or Legatees shall draw so much from them, even out of their
own Goods, as in other cases where they have, no such excuse shall be.

And of this mind I the rather am, 33. H. 6. c p. 1.
because I find the whole Realm in Parliament, taking notice of such
prevention of Executors, coming to the Goods of their Testator, by the
wrongful act and imbesilment of others, without any default in themselves. And
in this Case the Parliament has given special remedy, viz. that Writs shall
be directed to Sheriffs, to make open Proclamation for the appearance of the
parties delinquent in the Kings Bench, at the day limited, and in default
thereof they shall be attainted there of felony, the Writ being returned
executed, viz. Proclamation made. But note that this Proclamation is to be
made two Market days, within twelve days next after the Delivery of the Writ,
and the last Proclamation must be fifteen days before the day of appearance.
And these Proclamations must be made in such Cities, Burrowes, or Places (says
the Statute) not expressing what is meant by the word such, and therefore,
meaning doubtless those in which the act or offense is committed. So that if
the fact be not committed within the limits of some City, Burrow, or Market
Town, no remedy is to be had by the Statute; for that the Proclamation is to
be made upon Market days, in the place where, etc. Now besides other Places,
even some Burrowes, viz. Towns, sending Burgesses to the Parliament, have no
Markets, and so are no Places within the Act. Also two Executors must require
this Writ, therefore where there is but one Executor, no relief is given by
this Law, for it is penal, making felony, and therefore shall not be extended
by equity beyond the Words. Lastly, it extends but to the Executors of Lords
and Persons of good degree, and only to the Trespassing servants of such
Persons, not to other strangers, purloyning the Goods. But now who shall be
said to be Persons of good degree, not being Lords, I will not much labor to
decide, the rather because I have not heard, nor read, to my remembrance, of
any Action brought upon this Statute, but I think that good degree must stay
either at a Knight, being the lowest dignity, or at a Gentleman, being a degree
of Worship, as elsewhere is showed, and not stoop any lower.

And the said Statute seems in some sort to imply an opinion this way, which I
incline, in that it expresses this purloyning to be an impediment of the
execution of the Will, whereas if the Executors shall answer and make good to
Creditors and Legatees, out of their own state and Goods, for these
imbesilled, the execution of the Will is not hindered, but the Executors are
damnifyed in their own private va^ue, yet it may be said on the other side,
that some things given in specie by the Will, such a piece of Plate, such a
Furniture of a bed or Chamber, such a Jewel may be purloyned, so that the
Legatees can never have them, and consequently the execution of the Will be
hindered, though some recompense be made by the Executors, but how these
Legatees shall recover recompense in such cases; for that Legacies are not to
be recovered by Suite at the Common Law, I must leave to the Professors of the
Common or Civil Law to inform. But if the Executor be of secret assent to
this imbesilment, whereof even the forbearance to sue for the recovery of the
things, or the value of them in damages, if known where they, or the
imbesillers be, is a shrewd evidence, or proof, Then shall the Executor be
adjudged an haver of them, and so stand charged as having them, for
Propossessore habetur qui dolo desi^t possidere. And if in any Case the taker
by prevention from the Executor before his knowledge perhaps, of the Testators
death, or at least, before his possibility of repair to the place, where the
goods were, to put them in sure Custody; if I say, such actor keep these goods
from falling upon the shoulders of the Executor, they shall surely fall upon
himself, and make him chargeable at the Creditors suite, as an Executor of his
own wrong.

Of Goods lost by or (But put we the case) gotten from Executors (for thereunto
shall be our next step) that Goods come fully into Executors possession and
hands, but be again lost or gotten from them without any default in them;
Shall they yet stand answerable out of their own Estates for them? Surely
hereabout two distinctions mustbe made as I take it.

The first whereof I derive from our learning touching escapes of persons taken
in Execution, and imprisoned, if such be rescued by Alien enemies, 33. H. 6. 1.
the Sheriff or Jailer shall not answer out of his own Goods for this debt,
16. E. 4. 2. 3.
otherwise if it be done by Subjects, 7. Eliz. Die. 24^.
against whom remedy is to be had by the course of Justice: and so should I
think it to be touching Executors, viz. that if enemies landing (as near the
Sea Coast may easily, and often happen) shall take away Cattle, or Goods from
an Executor, hereby he shall be excused, contrariwise ordinarily, if the
ereption or direption, be by subjects known and actionable. Another difference
I shall think may probably be taken from the rules of our learning touching
Bailement. If A. deliver Goods to B, to keep as his own, or genererally, viz.
without any special undertaking by B. to keep them safely, and without any
money or other valuable consideration, given for the safe custody; Vide ^9. As.
p. 28. 8. E. 2. Fitz.
Here if B. be robbed of them, he shall not make satisfaction to A. for them;
(...). 59. 9. E. 4. 90. 13. H. 7. 4.
and so if they be stolen from a Servant, Co. lib. 4. f. 83, 84
or Factor. But if they be taken away by a known Trespasser, not feloniously,
some opinion has been, that the Keeper shall make recompense, because he has
remedy for recompense, or satisfaction from the trespasser, yet of this latter
I should doubt, because A. himself as well as B. may have this Action for
damages against the Trespasser. Now an Executor is of the nature of such one
having the custody of another man's Goods, and I have seen in a manuscript
entire, the Writ of Trespasser by the Executor, (...).
expressing goods of the Testator in the Custody of the Executor to be taken
from him; therefore me thinks he should no otherwise be charged then B. to
whom Goods were as above is said delivered to be kept. For the Executor happily
shall have no benefit nor advantage by the Executorship, all the Goods not
sufficing perhaps to pay debts, and Legacies, which is the state we most think
of, viz. where Goods want to pay debts, and Legacies, for where there wants
not, the question need not be made. Yet a servant or Factor, who has wages for
his service, is not thereby made liable to satisfy for things in his custody
stolen, because he has not for this particular custody, any compensation, so
of an Executor, if perhaps benefit might accrue to him by the Executorship, as
happily the discharge of a debt owing by himself, etc. Other Cases there be,
wherein the Executor will stand more clearly discharged. As if the Testator
left a Lease for years, state by extent, wardship, or other Goods whereto he
had but a defesible title, and they be evicted after his death. So if he left a
Ship at the Sea with much Goods and Merchandises, which are drowned in the
return, never arriving in safety.

So also if he left a flock of sheep, tainted with the rot, which dye shortly
after him, in none of these three Cases doubtless shall the loss fall upon
the Executor. But to put a Case of more doubt, what if a Lease for years come
to an Executor, subject to a Condition for payment of Rent, or a sum in
gross, and the Executor fails in payment, whether shall this loss fall upon
the Executor, to be made good to Creditors, or Legatees out of his own
substance, or not? To this I must answer by this distinction, viz. If the
Executor had taken the profits of this Land so long as to furnish him with
money for this payment, or if he had other Goods of his Testators in his hands
to supply the payment, then is it his default that the money is not paid, and
he must bear the smart thereof: otherwise not, for he is not bound to make
payment out of his own Goods, (...).
yet is he a sullen and unkind Executor who will not so do, when as he may
repay and satisfy himself by the profits thereof after. Like Law if the
Executor suffer a bond of a hundred pound to be forfeite, for not paying of
fifty pound, having sufficient in his hands. So also of a Recognizance,
Statute, or Judgment, defeazansed upon payment of a less Sum; yea, a less
doubt of all these Cases, then of the forfeiture of the Lease for years, for
happily the Executor had time to have sold the Lease, and made money thereof,
toward the payment of Debts, the omission and neglect whereof may be imputed
unto him as a default justly occasioning recompense to be by the Law required
from him. But perhaps he may excuse himself that he could not find a Chapman
who would give him to the value thereof: hereunto yet reason can easily reply,
that it had been much better to have sold it under the value, then to have
lost the whole value, by exposing or abandoning it to a total forfeiture.

CHAP. XI.
How far, and where an Executor having Assets is chargeable or liable to
Action.
HAving considered what things shall come to Executors and be Assets in their
hands, for the performance of the Will. Let us now consider what thing the
Executor is bound to pay, satisfy, or perform, and what not, where he is
chargeable, and where not, this being admitted, that he has Assets, viz.
sufficient wherewith to perform.

Here we will consider of these parts.
1. Of Debts by Specialty or Record. 2. Debts or duties by Contract without
Specialty. 3. Debts without either Contract or Specialty. 4. Covenants by Deed
or Specialty. 5. Wrongs done by the Testators.
TOuching Debts by Specialty, which are the most usual and common obligements,
it will not be impertinent to give a little light touching the validity of a
Specialty, and the extent of it to Executors. The most doubt will arise upon
Bills, and such Writings, Obligatory made, not by Scriveners, nor Clerks, in
common form, but by others, otherwise for haste, or through simplicity. Thus
long since we find a Writing made by A. to B. Memorand. 21. E. 4. 22.
that I have received of B. ten pound, which I promise to pay, etc. This being
sealed and delivered, was held a good Obligation by Brian and Catesby. So if
the words had been only, I shall pay to B. ten pound, and whether such words
or the like, as Covenant, or Grant to pay, 29. R. 2. F. D^t. 166.
be in the form of a Bill or Bond, or in an Indenture or Articles, it is a
sufficient ground for an Action of debt. 9. H. 6, 7. 2. H. 4. 8. 23. Eli. M. 5.
And though it should be miswritten Wigint. for vigint. or fi^teene for
fifteen, yet shall it be favorably construed, and held a good specialty of
debt, as has been resolved in these and like cases; and so also
notwithstanding, false Latin in the Obligation, 9. H. 7. 16.
or the plural number for the singular number, 2. H. 4. 8.
or words of repugnancy or nonsense, yet if there be words whereby it appears
that A. 28. H. 8. Dyer. 22
is a debtor to B. and it be sealed and delivered, it is a good writing
Obligatory; yea though it want the words of conclusion, 28. H. 8. Die. 19. and
22.
viz. in witness whereof as the Lord Dyer reports, to have been resolved,
although the contrary were held in four several Kings times before as our
Books show. 40. E. 3. 1. 7. H. 7. 14. 8. H. 6. 36.
Now any such Writing Obligatory does determine or drown any duty by Contract,
22. H. 6. 15.
because Specialty is of a higher nature, 21, E. 4. 81.
So as if A. and B. do bargain with C. to pay him a hundred pouud for Corn
or other thing, 3. H. 4. 17.
and after C. take some such Writing Obligatory, 11. H. 4. 7^.
as aforesaid of A. now by this is B. discharged of the debt, because he stood
charged only by the Contract, which is extinguished by the said Specialty.

As for the extent and operation of these Specialties, So reservation of rent,
grant of annuity.
to, and upon Executors, we must know that an Executor does so represent the
person of the Testator, 28. H. 8. Die. 14. and 22.
and is so included in him, as that every Bond or Covenant by the Testator made
for payment of money, or the like, reaches to the Executor, although he be not
named, viz. that he does not Covenant for, 47. E. 3. 22.
nor bind him and his Executors by express words (and yet the Heir not named
is not bound, 32. H. 6. 32, 10, H. 7. 18.
though there be never so great Assets, or Land descend unto him.)

Now touching debts upon Record, much need not to be said, No mention of
Executor in the judgment, yet he charged.
(except of those by Statute Merchant) for to debts and damages already
recovered against the Testator, and to debts by Recognizance the Executors
liablenesse, is somewhat clear and conspicuous. Yet other inferior debts upon
Record, may fitly be thought of, as Issues forfeited, Fines imposed by
Justices, at Westmin. or at Assizes, Quarter Sessions, Commissions of Sewers of
Bankrupts, By Stewards in Leetes, or the like, for all these are debts of
Record, which Executors stand charged withal. So also if the Testator were
before Auditors found in Arrerages of Account, 9. H. 6. f. 11.
being a Bailey, 11. H. 4. 64. 92.
or receiver: For these Auditors are by Statute Judges of Record, Otherwise of
a Garden in Soccage, he is out of the stat. w. 2. cap. 11 ut (...). C^. lib.
10. 103.
but if the Account were made only before the party to whom the Arrerages
pertained, or but before one Auditor only, it is out of the Statute, which
speaks of Accounts before Auditors in the plural number. Therefore the
Executor not chargeable, because the Testator might wage his Law in those
cases, not in the former.

And whereas exception was before made of a debt by Statute Merchant, it was by
reason that the Lord Bro. tells us that if the conusor in that case be returned
dead no remedy appears for the Conusee to have execution of the Goods of the
Conusor, 36. H. ^. (...).
but only of his Lands. (...). Man. 43
If this should be thus, it were a very mischievous case: for many bound in
Statutes have no Lands but Leases and goods of great value, and if by their
death, their Goods and Chattells should be set free from this Statute, and the
Creditor without remedy, the Law were very defective: and it were so much the
more strange in this Case, because the Statutes of Acto^, Burnell, and
Mercatoribus, seem to pitch principally upon Goods, and to tend unto assurance
between Merchants, who usually are not Landed men. But that the Law does give
remedy in such Case, as well against the Goods as Lands of the deceased Conusor
appears by the resolution of late, made in what Order, and Precedence,
Statutes are to be satisfied by Executors, as after we shall see.

Of Debts by Contract without Deed, as Leases Paroll, etc.
COntracts are of diverse kinds, and we will begin with those in the realty,
as most worthy. If therefore one be Lessee for years, or for life, without any
Indenture or Deed, (as he may be) and his Rent being behind, 21. H. 6. 1.
he dies, 44. E. 342.
now is the Executor liable to the payment of this Rent, without any Specialty,
for that his Testator, if he had been sued in his life time, 44. E. 3. 5.
could not have waged his Law. But if the Less^e for years, 7. E. 3. 11.
in his life time, sell or grant away his term or Lease, 14. H 7 4. pe^ Keble
vide 8. E. Die. 247.
although he still lie at the stake for the Rent, to grow due after, until the
^essor accept the Assignee for his Tenant, Yet if the Lessee dye, his Executor
shall not be charged for any Rent due, M. 32. and 3^.
after the death of his Testator. But what if the Lessee do not Alien or
assign his term, Eliz. in com. ^a.
but dye thereof possessed, and the Executor perceiving the Land not to be
worth the Rent, Waiveth the same. Yet the Lessor will not enter thereinto, nor
intermedle therewith, whether may he yet charge the Executor with the Rent,
(...). and S^n. ^22.
during the term? I answer that if he have assets, that is sufficient for
payment of this and other debts, he cannot Waive this Lease, but shall be tied
to answer this rent, though much more then the Land is worth, for the taking of
the Lease is much of the nature of an Obligation to pay money; Yet because it
is yearly Executory, the Executor may Waive it, in case his Testators estate
will not supply and bear that loss. But what if there be assets to bear this
yearly loss for some years, but not during the whole term? I think in this
case the Executor must pay the Rent, so long as this Assets will hold out, and
then must Waive the possession, giving notice to the Reversioner; and this I
think he may do well enough notwithstanding his Occupation of the Land diverse
years after the Testators death, because that was not voluntary, but as of
necessity; yet this I leave as a Quaere, to be well advised of with good
counsel.

Of contracts personal.
Where the Testator might wage his Law there the Action lies not against the
Executor; 41. E. 3. 13.
as has been touched, 15 E. 4. 25.
and therefore he is not chargeable in an action of debt upon a simple
contract, Except by a ^^^minus in the Exchequer, for the Kings debtor. Co. lib.
9. f. 98. So of accounts except for the King.
as by reason of this or that to his Testator; yea though it were the
Inheritance of Land, which was sold so as the sale were without Deed, or though
by Deed, yet if no counterpart were under the hand of him to whom the sale was
made. And the custom of London, M. 33. and 3^. El. in com, ba. By three
Judges, and 37. Eliz. By all, as I find in my report, but Co. lib. 5. f. 82.
b. it is contrarily reported.
to the contrary, viz. that an Action of debt should be maintained against
Executors upon a contract was held void at least no Good plea against other
Creditors that such a debt was recovered against the Executor, or paid by him,
as was toward the latter end of the late Queens time resolved, 3. Eliz. Die.
196. Demu^^er.
though in the beginning of her time it was a demurrer. 9. E. 4. 51. 10. H. 7.
8. 15. E. 4. 16.
Yea, though such a debt grew for the most necessary thing, 22. H. 6. 13.
viz. meat and drink, 3^. H. 6. 186.
which binds even an Infant to payment, There though a common hostle: or
victualle^, trust his guest, he loses his debt by his death. Co. 9. f. 87. b.
yet will it not charge the Executor of a man of full age, but this is meant
where the contract was only by Word, for where the Testator puts his Seal
to any Deed or Writing made upon such sale, this is more then a simple
Contract, and takes from the Vendee his wager of Law, and so charge the
Executor. 12. H. 4. 21.
But if the Testator seal but unto a tail or tally, But if the sum be also
written on it, they are bound as by a Dee^. 8, li. 8. Die. 23. ^.
with scotches, expressing a de^t, this is no such Specialty as shall change
Executors. Yet in some Cases without any seal at all, the Executor is
chargeable. But although no Action of debt lies against the Executor upon such
a simple contract, yet may the Creditor, Slades Case, (...). lib. 4.
in that case, maintain an Action upon the Case grounded, Co. l 9. 87. (...)
Case.
upon the assumption employed, though not expressed, as now stands resolved by
all the Judges of all Courts at Westminster, though heretofore there has been
much difference of opinion thereabout: And indeed thus the Executor is charged,
in matter for a simple contract, though not in manner of a Debt; but as for
breach of promise, making recompense in damages, instead of the debt. And the
chief reason, for it is because the Testator could not have waged his Law in
this action upon the case against himself, (...).
though in debt he might. Where the Testator retains servants in Husbandry,
or otherwise, and dies, there being wages due to these so retained, the
Executor is liable to an action of debt for the same, by reason that the
parties were compellable by Statute, 4. H. 6. 16
thus to serve, and therefore the Testator could not have waged his Law; but in
case of Servants not compellable, as Wayters or Servingmen, as we call them,
no action of debt lies against the Executor, 11. H. 6. 48. (...)
for their wages, 2. H, 4. s. 14. Servitors in the war by contract.
though against the Testator himself it does: for the Contract is sufficient
to charge him who made it. See of account after.

Where Executors shall be charged without either Contract or Special^y.
Where a Prisoner owes money to a Jailer, 27. H. 6. 4.
or Keeper of Prison for his diet, 1^ E. 4. 16. Co. lib. 9. f. 87. b.
or victuals, and dies, his Executor shall be chargeable for this debt,
because it is for the Common wealth to have Prisoners kept, which cannot be
without affording them victuals: Ne. n. br. 12 ^. a.
Also, He must have a liberate also.
where one has a Pattent, or Tally of the Exchequer, to receive money of some
Customer, Receiver, or other Officer of the Crown, 27. H. 6. 4 b.
and delivers it to him, he then having money of the Kings in his hands, 1.
H. 7. 17.
if he pay not the same, 2 H. 7 8. 9.
but dye, Cla^ke of the Hamper.
his Executor shall stand chargeable with the payment thereof. 10. H. 6. 24. 25.
So for Arrerages of Account before Auditors, if more then one, but this is
debt of Record in Law.

So if any Lord of free Tenants, does levy aid of them for the marriage of his
eldest Daughter, N^. na br. 82 83.
and he dye before she be married, Westmin. (...)
she may recover this money by an action of debt against his Executor, but this
is by virtue of a Statute. There is a president in the Book of Entries of an
Action of debt against the Executor of an Heir, Lib I^^r. 172. b.
by which it seems that a man binding himself and his Heirs, and leaving
Assets, the Heir taking the profit, becomes so a debtor, that his Executor
shall be charged. P^g. ^rig. 141. a.
And in the Register there is a Writ against the Executors of the Guardian of
the Spiritualties of the Archbishop of York, for the debt of B. who dyed
Intestate, and whose Goods came to the hands of the said Guardian, viz. the
Deane of York. In allowance whereof there is a note added of the like Writ,
^^. ^. 2. 16. E. 2.
brought in K. R. 2. his time, and that then a president was alleged of such a
Writ in King Ed. 2. his time, against the Executors of an Ordinary, and that
they were enforced to answer unto it. So is the opinion of True, 11. ^. 3.
Fi^z. ^x. 77.
in the time of Edward the third. But Ald. opposes him. S^c Co. lib. Intr.
564. Such an action in Yerke shire,
Also the Rationabile part bonorum by custom in some places is maintaineable
for the Wife and Children, against the Executor. But no action of account lies
against Executors, except for the King. More hereof, tit. wrong.

Of Covenants charging Executors.
WE have already touched upon Covenants in part, viz. where they be expressly
for payment of money, showing them to be in Law bonds, that is, Writings
Obligatory, whereupon an action of debt may be brought, circitr. Andrews and
Els^rigge (...) 33. Eliz.
as well as an Action of Covenant, though the words of the Deed bear the sound
and phrase of a Covenant. Yet in some Cases no action of debt lies upon a
Covenant to pay money: as if A. Covenant, that his Executor shall within a
year, or such a time after his death, pay ten pound to B. now for that no
action of debt was maintaineable against A. himself, it lies not against his
Executor, but only an action of Covenant, as was held in the late Queens
time. Pas. 33. Eliz. inter Bo^. and Austin in com. ba. Quare, if both be to be
done by the covenanter viz. ten pound if not five such a day. So in (...) Case.
So if the Covenant be conditional, as thus, that if C. do not pay to B. ten
pound, then A. will pay it, and so also perhaps, if the Covenant be in the
distinctive, viz. to do such an act or to pay ten pound, now if the act be not
done, yet no action of debt lies for the money, but only an action of
Covenant. But now let us come to the Cases of mere Covenants, But where the
Lessor did Covenant to pay the quit-rent, Diverse Iustice^ thought the Executor,
not named was not bound. 1. and 2. P. and. M. D. 1^^
and see which of them will charge an Executor, and which not. If a Lessee for
years covenants to repair the buildings, or to pay the Quit-rents, issuing
out of the Land let, there is little doubt, but the Executor to whom the term
comes, must as well as his Testator, perform that Covenant, although he did
not covenant for him and his Executors, and yet of these cases doubt has
been, and touching the latter, viz. of paying Quit-rents, Note the Case is
(...) supra in marg.
diverse Justices in Queen Mary's time were of opinion that it was a thing so
personal that it dyed with the person and did not charge the Executors; Nor is
there any contrary opinion expressed in the Book. And since that time, Pas.
38. Eliz. in ba. reg.
viz. toward the end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, in the Action of Covenant
between the Deane and Canons of Windsor, and Hide, touching reparations, at
the first, much opinion was, that only the person Covenanting was tied to this
performance, but after it was resolved, that that Covenant did run with the
estate, Co. lib. 5. f. 24.
and so both Executor and Assignee bound to performance; but in that case it
was said by Popham Chief Justice, Resolved P. 39. Eliz. But not adjudged till
M. 43. and 44. Eliz.
that if the Covenant had been to do a Collatterall act, neither the Executor
nor the Assignee had been tied thereby, and therefore where a Lessee for
years covenants within such a time to build a new house upon the Land, and
dies before that time expired, I doubt whether the Executor be bound to
perform this, or not; although it do concern the Land let, so as perhaps the
Rent or Fine was the less, in respect of this charge of new structure or
building, which is a great reason that the Executor, though not named should be
tied to the performance: But if the Covenant had been to build a house
elsewhere then upon the Land let, or to do any other collateral thing, not
pertinent to the Land let, it is clear the Executors were named to perform
it: and yet in those cases, if there were a breach, or nonperformance in the
Te^stators life time, as that the time of performance were expired before his
death, then it is clear the Executors were bound to yield recompense by way of
damages recoverable, H. 8. (...) There the house was to be buil^ upon the Land
leased and yet (...) seemed of a (...) opinion
in an action of Covenant, as both Shelley and F^tzherbert agreed, and so also
did the Lord Popham agree in the said case of Hide, as I find in my own report
of that Case, though in the Lord Cook reporting only the point in question
that be not mentioned; Now let us consider of the case, where there is no
express Covenant at al, so much as for the Lessor himself, but only a
Covenant employed, or Covenant in Law, as we call it. As if Lessee for life,
make a Lease for years, and dye within the term, so as the Lessee is evicted
by him in reversion, (...).
or remainder. In this case it was resolved in the late Queens time, by three
Justices viz. Walsh, Brown, and Dyer, that by this Covenant in Law, the
Executors were not chargeable, and in the same case the Lord Dyer sets down
another resolution after, to the same effect, but Master Sergeant Bendloes
reporting this latter case to be of a Lease made by Tenant in tail, viz.
before the Statute of 32. Henry 8. or not warrantable by it, sets down the
opinion contrarily, T^. 22. Fl^^t 459. inter and B^^deridge W^ndsor.
viz. that the action was mainetaineable against the Executor. This may serve
for instance, the like being in any other case, where the Lessor has not a
good, and a firm title, but perhaps subject to a Condition or other eviction,
so as the Lessee cannot enjoy the Land according to his Lease. But this must be
so understood, that no eviction, or breach of Covenant, is in the life of the
Testator himself, for if that be, there is no question, but the Executor
stands chargeable; and therefore if one make a Lease of Land by Deed, wherein
he has nothing; this Covenant is perhaps presently broken, and though the
Lessor dye before an action of Covenant brought, it will be mainetaineable
against his Executor, though no express Covenant. This is useful to be
known, though in these days there be few Leases so made, without express
Covenant, and the Executors also named. And where there is a special Covenant
in express words, Noke and Anders case.
it does qualify the Covenant employed, so as although Words of demise and
grant tie the Lessor to a general Warranty of the title, against all men, yet
it being after covenanted, that the Lessee shall enjoy against the Lessor and
his Heirs, or against all claiming under him or his Ancestors; Now no eviction
by or under any other title, gives cause of Action, or binds the Lessor or
his Executor, to make recompense.

Of wrongs done by Testators, and whether Execut^rs be liable to amends.
ALthough Executors do represent the persons of their Testators, yet if the
Testator commit any trespass upon the Goods of another, or upon his person, of
Lands no action lies for this, against the Executor, for Actio personalis
moritur cum persona; 41. Ass. p. 15.
So if a Sheriff, 40. E. 3. Fitzh Ex. 74. Co. lib. 9. f. 87. ^.
Jailer, or keeper of Prison, suffer one in execution for debt or damages to
escape, though hereby the party, at whose suite the Execution was, be entitled
to an action, viz. an action upon the case, against such Officer, by the Common
Law, and by Statute an action of debt; yet if he so suffering dye, for that
such sufferance was a wrong of the nature of a trespass, no action lies
against his Executor for the same. And upon the same reason, as I presume, if
one carry away his Corn, and Hay, without setting out the Tenth; although the
treble value be recoverable against him in an action of debt, yet if he dye
before such recovery, the action is gone, and lies not against his Executor;
No not although the Testator were a Lessee for years, so as his state came to
his Executor.

Like Law in other penal Statutes, as for arresting one at the suite of I. S.
without his privity or assent; Or, for not appearing as a Witness, being
served with a s^b poena, and having charges tendered and many like; yea, if a
Lessee for years commit waste and dye, no action lies against the Executor
for this waste; for all these cases are within the rule of actio personalis
moritur cum persona, and many other like Cases might be put, but these may
suffice. Yet if a Parson, Vicar, or other spiritual, or Ecclesiastical person
do suffer a ruin or decay of the houses or buildings upon his such spiritual
Benefice or promotion and dies, his Executors are liable, by the spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Law, to the successors Suite for amends to the repairing of
such spoil or decay. And because some used fraudul^ntly to grant away their
Goods, so as nothing shall be left to their Executors, it was enacted temp.
Elizabeth, (...) Cap. 10.
that such Grauntees of Goods should be liable to the successors suite, for
these dilapidations, as if they were Executors.

As for one other case of this nature, viz. where an Executor wastes the Goods
of his Testator, or an Administrator the Goods of his Intestate, and dies.
Whether his Executor be subject to Action for this or not. I adjorne the reader
to that place where I shall treat of such wasting, or devastation by Executors.

Unto this head, not unfitly may be referred, what before is said of Actions
against the Executors of the Debtors Heir, Fitzh. Ex. 77.
and the Executors of the Ordinary, for the Specialty, binding to payment
reaches not to any of these; but because their Testators should have paid
these debts with the Goods or Profits of the Lands of the Debtor, and did not,
but retained them to themselves* I conceive no difference between this and the
other cases, sup^a.
therefore for this as a wrong, are they suable; as I take it. So also by the
same reason are the Executors of an Administrator chargeable, where he did
neither pay the debts, 2. H 4 13. He may by (...). Co lib. 11. f. 88. 3. H. 6.
35.
nor leave the goods to the next Administrator, Co^. for arre^ages of an
account before auditors, 11. H 4. 64. 91. 92. 9. H. 6, 11.
but otherwise disposed of them. Yet an Executor is not chargeable in an action
of Det^nue, nor of account (except to the King) for the Testators detaining,
and not paying or answering things received, or under his charge.

And the reason why, after account made before Auditors, and the Bailey, or
receiver be found in Arrerages and dye, that in this Case his Executor is
chargeable, is, because the auditors are made Judges by the Statute, West. 2.
cap. 11. and so this Arrerage which they have judged, 13. Ed. 1
is a debt by Record.

But if the case be put on the other side, viz. that the Bailey, or Receiver,
have found in surplussage upon his Account, viz. that he has laid out more in
his Lords or Masters business, then his receipts amounted unto, and then his
Lord or Master dies, C^. lib. 9. f. 87. a.
now shall not he have any action against the Executors, for the surplussage,
because it is out of the purview of the said Statute.

THE SECOND TABLE.
Chap. XII. Directing the Order and Method to be used by Executors in payment
of the Testators debts.
1 OF disbursements about the testators funeral, 1 2 About proving of his
Will, 2 3 Payment of the testators debts upon record, 3 4 And first debts to
the King or Crown, 4 5 Debts by judgment or recovery in some court of record,
8 6 Debts by Recognizance and Statutes, 11 7 Debts by specialty, by Bonds,
Bills, etc. 14 8 Debts by Rent reserved upon Leases of grounds, farmed by the
testator, 18 9 Duties by the testators assumpsit or promise, or upon simple
contract made by him, 29
Chap. XIII. Of Devastation or Wasting.
1 WHat shall be said to be a wasting or devasting, and how many ways that may
be done, 32 2 Who shall by this Act of devastation be charged to yield
recompense, and make satisfaction, 36 3 Who shall reap the benefit, or take
advantage of this devastation. 38 4 How far the executor thus wasting, shall
incur damage, or make his own goods liable, 40 5 By what way or means shall
relief be had upon this point of wasting. 41
Chap. XIV. Of an Executor of his own wrong.
1 WHat acts or intermedlings of such an one not being executor nor
administrator by right, shall make him to become an executor by wrong, 49 2 In
what manner, and by what name such shall be sued, especially when another then
is executor or administrator, or himself after such act becomes administrator,
55 3 How far an executor of his own wrong becomes liable and obnoxious to
suits, 57 4 What acts done to him, or by him, who is executor of his own
wrong, shall stand firm and good, as done by or to the right executor, 58 5 Of
addition and alteration by Statute: 43. Eliz. c. 8. 60
Chap. XV. Of Pleas by Executors, and which be best, which most prejudicial to
them.
1 TO plead he was never executor, nor ever administered as Executor. 62. 67 2
To plead fully administered, 64
Chap. XVI.
OF judgment against executors own goods, though no plea of the defendant,
nor devastation do so occasion, and of the several manners of judgments in
several cases. 73.
Chap. XVII. Of married women and Infants Executors. 76.
1 WHether they may make Wills with or without their husbands assent, and how,
where, and in what cases, 77 2 Whether they may be made executors without their
husbands assent, or how far their husbands may hinder it, 84 3 Touching
administration, viz. what acts in execution of the executorship they may do
without their husbands, or their husbands without them, 89 4 Touching Infants,
and their making or being made executors, wherein the several ages of females,
92 The several ages of males. 93
Chap. XVIII. Of Legacies.
1 WHether any Legacy in certain, and lying in Prender, may be taken or had
without the executors assent by the Legatee, or him to whom it is bequeathed.
106 2 When an executor can, or safely may pay, deliver, or assent to a legacy.
108 3 Whether one executor alone may do it, where there be many; or what if
the executor be an infant, or a married woman, ibid. 4 What shall amount to an
assent of the executor, and what to a disassent, or a disability of assent, 109
How a lease or chattell real may be given to one for a time, with remainder to
another, how not. 113 6 Where an assent to the first, or one part of the
bequest, shall amount to an assent for the residue, 121 7 Of the manner of
Assents, and therein of Assents conditional, 123 8 What manner of interest the
Legatee in the remainder of a Lease, after the death of another, has during
the life of that other, and whether he may dispose of it during that time, and
how? 125 9 Whether this remainder can be defeated by any act of the Devis^^ for
life, or by the death of him in Remainder first? 126 10 By what acts or
accidents a legacy may be forfeited, lost, or revoked, as by revocation, death
of the Legatee before, etc. 127 11 Whether the executors assent shall have
relation to the testators death, and shall make good a grant before made by the
Legatee? 135
Chap. XIX.
Diverse cases of bequests considered, and expounded. 139
Chap. XX.
OF the executor of an executor. 146
Chap. XXI.
TOuching Administrators. 148
Chap. XXII.
COnsiderations in conscience touching payments of debts, Legacies, and the
preferring or respect of persons* 149
Chap. XII.
Of the Order and method to be used by Executors in payment of Debts, and
Legacies, so as to escape a devastation or charging of their own goods.
WE have gone through and dispatched the two first proposed parts, viz. 1.
Touching the being of Executors, and the manner of their being. 2. Their
having, and the manner of their having. We come now to the third part, viz.
their doing or disposing of the testators estate.

Now this consists principally in the issuing of money, though partly also in
delivering or assenting to the execution of Legacies, not being money, but other
goods or chattels bequeathed.

Money is to be issued by executors, four ways ordinarily.

About the funeral of the testator.

About proving his Will.

In paying of debts.

In paying and satisfying of legacies pecuniary.

As for the first, burials be as of necessity for two respects, viz. 1. Of
charity to the dead, that he may be Christianly and seemly interred. 2. To
prevent and avoid annoyance to the living, who by the very view of dead
carkases, would both be affrighted, and within a few days distasted at the
nose. We know that under the Law, the touching of a dead carkase made a man
unclean and to need purifying: nor can we easily forget what the sisters of
Lazarus said to our Savior touching their brother, when he had been dead two
or three days: viz. that the taking of him then out of his grave must needs
bring a noisome savor. Hereabout therefore some expense is necessary, and that
not only for fees to be paid, which in London amounts to a considerable sum,
specially for such as are to be buried within the Church, but also otherwise,
viz. for the Pall or Hearse-cloath, the ringing, etc. As for feasting, and
banqueting, it seems not to me congruent to the sadness and dolefulness of
the action in hand. But howsoever that be yet where the testator leaves not
sufficient goods to pay his debts, festival expense is to be forborne, except
the Executor will out of kindness bear it with his own purse; for dead
debtors must not feast to make their living creditors fast. I mentioned a
co^siderable amount of funeral fees payable in London, and surely (to let my
thoughts fall back upon it a little) it is worth consideration, whether in that
kind, and especially for those who dying there, are yet carried into their
countries to be buried, the exaction be not either unjust altogether, or too
onerously excessive, so also for much ringing contrary to the Canon made at the
Convocation in the first year of King James.

The next thing mentioned to justify and occasion expense, is the proving of
the Will: But this way a greater disbursement (except for riding charges, or by
reason of opposition by a caveat put in or the like) will not stand allowable
then is prescribed by the Statute made in the time of Hen. 8. whereby the fees
of Ordinaries, 21. Hen. 8. cap. 5.
and their Scribes, Registers, and Officers be limited. And it is strange that
these bounds have been so much and so frequently broken and transgressed, the
rather, for that long before in the time of King Edward the third, 1^. Ed. 3.
cap. 4.
by an Act of Parliament, it is provided that the Kings Justices should as well
at the Kings suit, as at the parties grieved, enquire after such oppressions,
or extortions, for so they be called; yea S. Germ. Do. and S^u. li. ^. cap. 10.
who was no stranger to the civil and canon law, as appears by his book,
says that the Ordinary ought to take nothing for the probate, if the goods
suffice not for funeral and debts; but he means only that conscience is
against it.

Now we come to the third occasion of disbursment, viz. payment of debts, which
is the maine part of our business. We have before seen what debts lie upon
executors, having assets to pay them; we are now to see in what order they must
pay them, as well Vt sint fidi dispensatores* as for their own indemnity, ne
quid res sua capiat detrimenti. To put our selves into the better order or
method of handling these things, we will sort out debts into their several
kinds thus.

They are of these three sorts, viz. either,

Debts of or upon record.

Or debts by specialty.

Or debts without specialty.

The debts upon record may be again divided into four sorts or kinds, viz.

Debts to the King or the Crown.

Debts by judgment or recovery in some court of record.

Debts by recognizance.

Debts by statute staple, or statute merchant.

Amidst these, the debts to the Crown are to have the first place or
precedence, so as if there be not come to the executor goods of greater value
then will suffice for the satisfaction of these, he is not to pay any debt to a
subject, and if he be sued for any such, M. 33. and 34. Eliz. the Lady
Walsingh^ms case in com. ba. and Tr. 39. Eliz.
he may plead in Bar of this suit that his testator died thus much indebted
to the King, showing how, etc. and that he has not goods surmounting the value
of that debt. Or if the subjects pursuit be not so by way of action, as that
the executor has day in Court to plead, but be by way of suing execution, as
upon statute merchant, or staple, then is the executor put to his audita
querela wherein he must set forth this matter. And there is great reason why
the Kings debts should thus be preferred before any subjects, viz. for that the
treasure Royal is not only for sustentation* and maintaining of the Kings
household, but also for public services, as the wars, etc* as appears by
the statute, 10. Rich. 2. cap. 1. And therefore it is as I conceive, that
Bracton says of the treasures or revenues Royal, Lib. 1.
Roborant coronam they do strengthen or uphold the Crown. And for the like
reason as I think, did God inact touching the possessions of the Crown, that if
they were given to any other then the Kings own Children, they should revert
and come back to the Crown the next Jubilee, which was once in fifty years,
sed de hoc satis. But this priority of payment of the Kings debt before the
debt of any subject, 21. E. 4 21, 22.
is to be understood only of debts by or upon record due to the King, So must
it be pleaded, M. 33. and 34. Eliz.
and not of other debts. If any ask how the King should have any debts which
shall not be of record, since by the statute 33. of King Hen. 8. cap. 39. it is
inacted that all Obligations and specialties taken to the use of the King shall
be of the same nature as a statute staple: To this I answer, that there may be
sums of money due to the King upon wood sales or sales of Tin, or other his
minerals, for which no specialty is given; so also of amersements in his Courts
Baron, or Courts of his Honors, which be not Courts of record: The like of
fines for coppyhold states there. So of the money for which straies within the
Kings Manors or liberties are sold. Also as the law has lately been taken
and ruled in the Exchequer, even debts by contract due to any subject, are by
his outlawry or attainder forfeitable to the Crown. Yet neither these nor
those due to such person outlawed or attainted by bond, bill, or for arrerage
of rent upon lease is or can be any debt of record until office thereupon
found; for although the outlawry or attainder be upon record, yet does it not
appear by any record before office found that any such debt was due to the
person outlawed or attainted. Thus are not these debts to the Crown to have
priority of payment before the subjects debts, though the Kings debts of record
are so to have; so that if a subject to whom the testator was indebted by
specialty sue for this debt, the executor must plead that the testator dyed
indebted thus much to the King by record, And must plead the record in certain
as was held in the case of the Lady Walsingham, M. 33. and 34. Eliz. but it
suffices to say, by a record of the Exchequer as was held Tr. 39. Eliz. in b.
reg.
more then which he left not goods to satisfy; if the truth of the case so be,
for if there be sufficient to satisfy both, then the subject creditor is not
to stay for his debt till the Kings debt be levied. And if the subject creditor
sue execution upon a statute, so that the executor has no day in Court to
plead this debt to the King, then is the executor put to an audita querela,
wherein he must set forth that matter, and so provide for his own indemnity.
But what shall we say of arrerages of rent due to the King? surely where it is
a feefarme, rent, or other rent of inheritance, I see not how it can come under
the title of debt, since for it no action of debt is maintainable so long as
the state continues in him to whom it grew due, and I find that the Lo. Dyar,
M. 14. Eliz. said that the King could but only distraine for his rents, and
not otherwise levy them of lands or goods; and that the King by his
Prerogative may distraine in any other lands of his tenant our books tell us,
but no more. Yet I know it has been otherwise done of late in the Exchequer,
which if it have been the ancient and frequent use of the Exchequer, it will
stand as law though unknown to the Lo. Dyar. Now rent upon a lease for years
differs from the other, since for the arrerages thereof an action of debt
lies, but how can either of these be debts of record, when the not payment may
be either in the Court of Exchequer, or to the receiver general or particular?
and how then can there be any certain record of the not payment, so as to make
any certain debt upon record? We know statutes have been made to make the
lands of receivers subject to sale for satisfaction to the Crown; and besides
that some ancient Patents direct the payment of Fee-farmes into the hands of
Sheriffs, the statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 19. provides remedy for the King
against Sheriffs not answering the debts of the Crown by them received: so as
the Kings Farmer or debtor may have paid his rent or other debt, and the Crown
have not yet received it. Of Fines and amercements in the Kings Courts of
Record, there is no doubt but they are debts of record.

Come we now to the debts of subjects, and first those of record; touching
which, I shall not be able to hold so good a method, and so well to handle
things by parts as I would, for that the parts so stand in competition one with
another for precedencie, as that they must of necessity thereabout conflict and
interplead one with the other, and contest one against the other: yet for the
Readers better ease and ability to find out that which may concern him in his
particular case, I will in the best sort I can single out these things into
several parts, and place them in several rooms or stations. First,
considering how it shall stand between one judgment and another had either
against the executor or testator. Secondly, how between judgments and
statutes, or recognizances. Thirdly, how between recognizances and statutes.
Fourthly, how between one recognizance and another. Fifthly, how between one
statute and another, adding to each some observations incident.

Now next to the debts of the Crown are judgments or debts recovered against
the testator, to have priority or precedencie in payment, as being of an higher
nature, or more dignity than any other, for that statutes and recognizances,
though they make debts upon record, yet are they begotten but by voluntary
consent of parties, whereas in every judgment there has been a course and
work of Justice against the will of the defendant, as is presumed; and this in
a court of justice, and the records of such judgments are entered in public
rolls, not kept or carried in pockets or boxes as statutes, Co. lib. 5. f. 28.
and until inrolment recognizances are. Therefore executors must take heed
that judgments against their testators before debts any other way, So Wray and
Gaudy inter Bond and Bales 28. Eliz. vel circiter.
if they have not sufficient for both, be first satisfied: lest they draw the
burden of this debt upon their own backs. Yea though a writ of Error by the
executor to reverse the judgment yet suffering a statute to be executed, must
p^y of his own.
Now their way to help themselves being sued, or pursued for other debts, is
the same before delivered touching debts upon record to the Crown, viz. by
plea, where they may plead, as in S^ire facias, upon a recognizance or suit
upon band, and by A^dita querela, where they cannot plead, Read and Bear-blocks
c^se. P. 43. Eliz. Ba. ^e.
as when execution is sued upon a statute. And if they had no warning in the
Scire facias, So held in Reads case sup^a. vide 12. H. 7. K^lw 24* 25. to like
purpose.
but upon nihil returned the judgment passed, there also the executor may be
releeved by audita querela, because there was no default in him that he did
not plead or set forth the judgment upon the suit in the Scire facias. Nor
will it be any plea for the creditor by statute to say that his statute was
acknowledged before the judgment, Co. lib. 4. f. 59.
and so is more ancient, So Pe^iam in com. ba. inter Charnock and Worsley. 34.
El^z. vel circiter.
for a latter or more puisne judgment is to be preferred before a statute in
time precedent. But if this judgment be satisfied, and it only kept on foot to
wrong other creditors, Co. lib. 5. f. 28.
or if there be any defeasance of the judgment yet in force, Co. li. 8. f. 132.
then the judgment will not avail to keep off other creditors from their
debts: And thus much touching debts by judgment* viz. how they stand in
priority before other debts by statute or recognizance. Now to see how they
stand among themselves, let this be observed, viz. that between one judgment
and another had against the testator, So held in 15. and 16. Eliz.
precedencie or priority of time is not material, So in the Scire fac. by bond
against Bales it was held.
but he which first sueth execution must be preferred, and before any execution
sued, it is at the election of the executor to pay whom he will first; yea, if
each bring a Scire facias upon his judgment, the executor may yet confess the
action, of which he will first, notwithstanding the Scire facias was brought by
the one before the other. In this Scire facias the defendant may plead
generally that he has fully administered before the Scire facias brought
without showing that he did administer in payment of debts of as high nature;
yet that must be proved upon the evidence, else the trial will fall out
against the executor. Thus have I delivered the most material things in my
apprehension touching debts by judgment; yet thereabout I will add for the
better information of the Reader, not studied in the Law, these few things.
First, that what has been said is only to be understood of judgments against
the testator, and not of any against the executor himself, for of those being
but debts by specialty at the time of the testators death we shall speak after.
Secondly, what is said of the testator in case of an executor immediate, is
likewise to be understood of the testators testator in case of the executor of
an executor, for where A. makes B. executor, and B. makes C. executor, there
the goods which came from, or were left by A. be not in the hands of C. liable
to judgments had against B. Nor on the otherside, are the goods of B. in the
hands of C. subject to the judgments had against A. And the like is to be
understood of statutes, recognizances and bonds, as el^ewhere is somewhat
touched. 9. El. 4. 14. 15.
Thirdly, Recoveries or judgments by mere confession, without defense, are
yet of the same nature, and to have the same respect as other recoveries upon
trial or otherwise; for although they may seem to be but of the nature of
recognizances which be debita recognita, Quae. of arrerages of account before
auditors without suit, for the executors are charged by judgment of the
Auditors, by (...) W. ^. judge. of record. 10. H. 6. 24. 25. Brde^^. 183.
yet do they differ from them, in that here a debt is demanded by a
declaration which is intended true, and that therefore the defendant cannot
deny it, but in case of a recognizance it is not so, for there usually no
action is entered, nor debt demanded. Fourthly, the foreshewed respect to debts
by judgment, is not to be enclosed within Westminster Hall-and be restrained
to the four Courts there, but may and must extend it self to judgments in
other Courts of Record, viz. in Cities and Towns Corporate, having power by
Charter, or prescriptio^ to hold plea of debt above forty shillings, as in
London, Oxford, etc. For although there execution cannot be had of any other
goods than such as be within the jurisdiction of that Court, yet if the Record
be removed into the Chancery by Certiorari, and thence by Mittimus into one of
the Benches, so execution may be had upon any goods in any County of England.
Fifthly, in case where the testator was bound in a recognizance and a Sci. fac.
brought against him, and thereupon judgment given; Although this judgment be
not quod recuperet; Quae. of judgment in a writ of Annuity for arrerages after.
as in case of actions of debt, but quod habent exeti^nem, yet since execution
is the life, fruit, and effect of all judgments* this may now well stand for a
debt by judgment, as I take it.

Of Recognizances and Statutes.
NExt unto debts by judgment, are those by statute or recognizance to be
regarded by the executor. And because I find no difference of priority or
precedencie between these two, I therefore rank them together; yet one reason
of preferment given to judgments before statutes in Harisons case, viz. that
the one remains a record upon the roll in the Kings court, whereas the other
being carried in the pocket of the counisee is more private. This, I say,
should give priority also to recognizances before statutes, as also another
reason, for that statutes are not properly records, but obligations recorded;
yet do I not find that this makes a difference for priority of payment. And
indeed the statute is the more expedite remedy, since thereupon execution may
be taken out without any Scire facias, or other suit, which cannot be in the
case of a recognisance; for there if a year be past after the acknowledgement,
no execution can be sued out against the party himself acknowledging it,
without a Scire facias first sued out against him: And if he be dead, then
though the year be not past, yet must a Scire facias be sued, and thereupon
the executor defendant may plead some plea to hold off the execution for a
time. But this notwithstanding, the executor may satisfy the recognizance
before the statute, Before S^i. fac. not after voluntarily, but if levied by
writ of Extend. sa. good.
at least if he do it before execution sued thereupon; for they standing in
equal degree, it is at his election to give precedencie and preferment to
whether he will. Neither is it material which of them were first or more
ancient; nor between one statute and another does the time or antiquity give
any advantage as touching the goods, though as touching the lands of the
conusor it does; but as for his goods in the hands of his executor, whosoever
first gets hold of them by his execution shall have the preferment. And
before suing of execution, the executor may give precedence or preferment to
whom he will. But now some may object that there is no course nor writ of
execution for any such counisee against the executor, and if so, then statutes
merchant, and of the staple, are in vain spoken of, and it is true that Master
Brook after Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in his new Cases professes,
B^^. N* ^. ^^* and Stat. Mar. 43
that he knew not any remedy for the creditor out of the goods of the conusor
after his death. But if this should be so, the Law were very defective, since
the substance of many, especially of merchants, for and among whom the statute
merchant was provided, consists usually more in goods then lands; besides the
plea of Harrison, administrator of the goods of Sidney in bar of Greenes
action of debt upon an obligation, Co. l. 5. f 28. b. H. 40. Eliz. ^ot, 119.
viz. that the intestate stood bound in a statute staple to I. S. and Greenes
reply thereunto, that there were Indentures of defeasance, no covenant whereof
was broken, and the resolution of the Judges that the said matter in the
replication was good to avoid the defendants plea. All this, I say, and the
resolution of the Judges of the Common Pleas in that case, P. 32. Eliz. ^ot.
235. in cont. ba.
and in the case between Pemberton and Barram, as also in the Kings Bench by
Popham and the rest of the Judges, that executors must satisfy judgments
before statutes, and statutes before obligations, had been idle and savouring
of gross ignorance, if no execution at all could be had against the executors
of him bound in a statute and then should Green have demurred upon the plea of
Harrison and needed not to have pleaded that other matter, See Co. lib. 5. 91.
execution against an Exec. upon a statute. Semaines case.
but none of the Judges or Sergeants ever conceited any such matter: that which
there was replied, viz. that the statute was not forfeited, is here to be
remembered, Co. lib. 5. f. 28.
as good matter both against statutes and recognizances, So if satisfied,
though not discharged.
and that whether the recognizance have a defeasance or a condition not broken,
so that the recognizance is not forfeited. In none of these cases is the
executor hindered from payment of debts by specialty, nor can he be justified or
excused if by colourt hereof he refuse so to do; and indeed else might
creditors be exceedingly defrauded by recognizances for the peace and of good
behavior, etc. and so by statutes for performing covenants touching the
enjoying of lands, if these should keep off the payment of debts, and yet
themselves perhaps never be forfeited, nor the sums become payable.

Of Debts by specialty.
NOw come we to debts due by specialty, viz. bond or bill (of which nature the
greatest number of debts are) let us then see what course the executor must or
may hold for satisfaction of these, admitting that the testator stood not
indebted by any record, or that no forfeiture is of any such debt, or that
there be goods in the executors hands above the amount of such debts by record.
This I say dato, then according to the rule proximus quisque sibi, the executor
may first satisfy himself of such debts, as the testator by specialty owed
him: for such debts are not released by the creditors taking upon him to be
executor to the debtor; though on the other side if the creditor make his
debtor executor, this is a release of the debt. Although it be given out or
commonly spoken in the general, that an executor may first pay himself, yet
is it to be understood with this caution or condition, viz. that the debt to
him be of equal height or dignity with the debts to others according to the
rule inaequali jure melior est conditio possidentis, for if his testator were
indebted to other men by any statute, judgment, or recognizance, and to him
whom he makes executor only by bond, or other specialty, then may he not first
pay himself, that is, by paying of himself leave them unpaid whose debts are
of a higher nature; but if there be sufficient for satisfaction both to them
and himself, then is it not material which be first paid. Now touching the
debts to other men the executor has power to give preferment in payment to
whom he will; so that if the testator left but an hundred pounds, being
indebted to A an hundred pounds, and to B an hundred pounds by several
obligations, the executor has power to pay B. 28. H. 8. Die. 32. Doct. and St.
ca. 10. p. 78.
his whole debt, and to leave A altogether unpaid any part of his debt, so as
he have not commensed any suit before payment to B. But yet herein this
difference is to be taken and observed by executors, that if the time of
payment upon the bond of B were not come at the time of the testators death,
then may not the executors before the money to B become payable pay him and
leave A unpaid whose money was presently due. Yet if A forbear to demand or
sue for his debt till the debt of B become also payable, then is it at the will
of the executor to pay whether of them he will, so as the other may lose his
whole debt if the goods will not suffice to pay both. What if A have only by
word demanded his debt, and not by suit before the debt to B become payable,
whether does that hinder that the executor may not now when the money to B is
also payable, pay him and leave A unpaid. And hereunto S. Germ. answers
negatively, making this verbal demand to be idle and of no value: yea, he
adds that if A have commenced suit before the debt to B become payable, Do.
and St. p. 78.
yet if the executor can delay the suit till the debt of B become payable, so
that A can get no judgment before that time, and before B has commenced suit
upon his band, Quae. If then he may not plead this judgment post ult.
contin. against A. as he may plead it against other suits after co^menced. Co.
li. intr. 148. 269. 149. a.
then may the executor confess his action, and so pay his debt leaving A
unpaid. But of this I make some doubt, for that I find in 9 of King Ed. the 4.
some admittance, that if A having a Tallie, patent, or other warrant from the
King for receipt of money, of or from a customer or receiver where others had
like warrants before him, but A makes the first demand, now must the officer
first pay him or else himself shall become debtor to him if he first pay
others whose demands were after made, though they had warrants before A.
Likewise there is as to me it seems, some admittance in the same book, that
the very demand made by a creditor of his debt from an executor, who has then
assets in his hands does entitle the creditor, to recover damages against the
Executor out of his own goods; which if it so be, then does even that verb^ll
demand lay some tie or obligation upon the executor for payment. But hereabout,
I lay down nothing peremptorily. We partly may discern by the premises how
the executor is to guide himself in case, where there be diverse debts by
specialty all due, and payable at the testators death: before any suit
commensed for any of them, for in that case clearly the first verbal demand
gives not any precedence, all being due, and so standing in equal degree; And
this is employed in many Books making the commencement of the suit only that
which intitles to priority of payment, 4^. E. 3. Fitzh. Ex. 68. 6. and 7. El.
die. 232. vide 21. H. 7. Kelw. 74.
or at least restraines the election of the executor. Yet admit that one
creditor first does begin suit, if others also after sue before he be paid,
or have judgment; now cannot the executor pay him first who first commensed
suit, but he who first has judgment must first be satisfied. 5. Hen. 7. 27.
So Walmsley inst. P. 39. Eliz. in Error. al. S^riants Inn.
And the executor may herein yield help to one before the other, viz. by
essoignes emplances or dilatory pleas to the one, and by quick confession of
the others action; Co. lib. Intr. 269. such a recovery by confession is pleaded
against another* and admitted good and fo. 148. 149. Do. and S. p. 78. b.
for he is not bound against his will to stand out in suit, and expend costs
where the debt is clear, nor is this covi^e but lawful discretion, which
conscience will also approve some good consideration inducing. Nay after suit
commensed, yet until the executor have notice thereof, he may pay any other
creditor, and then plead that he has fully administered before notice. Nor is
the Sherifes return of summons or distres sufficient cause of notice, for the
summons might perhaps be upon his land: but if it were to his person, it is
notice sufficient, and then to save himself, he must say that he was not
summoned till such a day before which he had fully administered; yet doubtless
the executor may be arrested at the creditors suit in some sort, which yet
shall be no sufficient notice of this debt. As for the purpose, if he be
sued by Latitat out of the Kings bench, this supposing a trespass gives no
notice of a debt, so also of a Subpaena out of the Exchequer; but the original
returnable in the common plees expresses the debt, and so in some sort do the
process thereupon. And therefore it seems by some books, So also was it ^ayd
Tr. 29. Eliz.
that if it be laid in the same County, where the executor dwells, he must take
notice of it at his own peril. But this I take not to be Law, nor is there
any great opinion that way: and although to make it more clear, the executor
in King Henry the fourth his time, estranging himself from notice of the suit
before payment to others, did allege that the action was laid in a foreign
Country; that is no great proof that if his abode had been in the County,
where the action was brought, he must have taken notice; but thus it was
cleerer, and a little surplusage hurts not. Now between a debt by obligation,
and a debt for rent or damages upon a Covenant broken, I conceave no
difference nor any priority or precedence, but it is as the executors
discretion to pay first which he will, as if all were by bond. So also of rents
behind and unpaid as I conceave, but touching them principally intending rents
upon leases for years diverse considerations are to be had, and some
distinctions to be made, as first, between rent behind at the time of the
testators death, of which that before said is to be understood, and that which
grows behind after next between suit for the rent by action of debt, and by
distres and avoury. As to the first difference, if the rent grew due since the
testators death, then is it not accounted in Law the testators debt, for only
so much is in Law accounted assets to the executor as the proffits of the lease
amounted to over and above the rent, so as for that rent so behind the executor
himself stands debtor, as has been resolved, and therefore he is suable in
the debet, and detinet, whereas for rent behind in the testators life, and all
other the debts of his testator he must be sued in the detinet only. Hence
it must follow as it seems, that an executor sued for debt upon bond, or bill,
cannot (except in some special cases) plead a payment or recovery of rent
grown due since his testators death; though of rent behind at the time of his
death it be otherwise. And yet here again another difference or distinction
is to be taken, viz. where the proffits of the lease exceed the rent, and
where the rent is greater then the yearly value of the proffits, for even
there as else where is showed, the executor if he have assets, is tied to the
holding of the lease, and payment of the rent, and consequently does so much of
that rent as exceedes the yearly profit, stand in equal degree, the testators
debt with other debts by specialty; and yet again to reconsider this point,
what if the debts of the testator by specialtie payable presently at his death,
or before the time that any rent can grow due upon this Lease, shall amount to
the full value of the testators goods; may not then the Executor though he do
not pay those debts before the rent day (for that would make the case clear)
waive the term; for if he may, then happily i^ he do not so, but shall by
payment of any of this rent want goods to pay any part of the debts by
specialtie, it may lie upon himself, and his own goods, as happening by his
own default. But on the one side it may be said that he could not waive it
so long as he had assets, because thereby he stood equally liable to pay
that debt being once due, as the other debts by specialty. On the other side it
may be said that though the debts for rent, and upon bond, shall be admitted
to be in nature equal, yet the case being put of rent not due at the time of
the testators death, it was not then a debt nor duty, whereas a Bond makes a
present debt, and duty, though not presently payable, the day of payment being
not yet come, so as this latter is discharged by a release of debts, or duties,
and so is not the former. So to leave that point unresolved, let us next see
whether in some case, though the rent exceed not the yearly value of the
Land, yet even that payable after the death of the testator may not stand in
most part, if not wholly, upon the testators score as his debt, as well as if
it had been payable before his death. Posito then that the whole or half
years rent is payable at the annunciation of our Lady, and that the testator
dies two or three days or some like short time before that feast, now
certainly should the Law be unreasonable if it should lay this debt upon the
executors shoulders in respect of those few winter days proffits which he
took. But surely since the taking of the proffits induces the Law to lay the
rent upon the Executor as his own debt; therefore as where the Executor had
the proffits for the whole year or half year, except some few days incurred
in the testators life time: those few days will be unregarded according to
the rule, De minimis non curat lex, and the whole rent shall lie upon the
Executor as his own debt. So on the contrary part, where the whole year or
half years proffit except some few days incurred after the testators death,
the rent becoming payable so instantly after the testators death must in
reason lie wholly upon the testators estate, as to me it seems. What if to this
I add that the testators cattle wherewith the ground was stocked do
depasture, and devour the proffits all the time after the testators death.
till the day of payment of the rents? Nay if the rent were payable at Mich. and
the An^unc. and the testator dies a few days after Mich. the rent being of or
near the value of the Land, it will then be hand that the Executor shall for
this winter proffit pay the rent out of his own purse, especially if the
whole years rent be payable at that one day as in some cases it is; or if the
whole years proffits were taken in the summer as in case of a lease of tithes,
it is so also of meadow grounds usually drowned in the winter. So if the lease
be then to end not having a summer half year to succeed, and make amends
for the winter: or if the winter half year be the latter half, the lease
beginning at Lady day, so that there is but a summer for each winter following,
and not any for the winter passed. Of like consideration with these is the case
of a lease of woods for a rent, which being fellable but once in eight or nine
years; now if the lessee, having made the last sale and felling before his
death, the Law should cast the rent upon the Executors own estate for the time
future, it should lay loss upon him, which is against reason, and contrary to
the nature, and disposition of the Law even in this particular. As appears by
this, that she enables an Executor to pay himself before any debt of equal
nature, so as she more tenders an Executors indemnity then any other
Creditors; therefore I think that with, and upon the differences above showed,
even rent grown due after the testators death may in some cases be the
testators debt payable equally with debts by bond. But here I conceive that if
the executor were in such case of destitution of assets as might justify his
waiving of a lease over-rented, he then may waive these terms residue,
because for the future the profits will come short of answering the rent,
though at the first, and so in the total, the profits did exceed the rent. And
if for want of waiving, where he might, this rent fall upon him, the payment
thereof would be no excuse against another creditor, nor as to him be a good
administration, for Ignorantia juris non excusat. This is pertinent to our
present consideration, which debt may with safety be paid, leaving another
unpaid; and the hazard of executors, by ignorance of the Law has been a
principal motive to my writing these Discourses in English. Hitherto we have
only considered, as I think, of rents, as they be recoverable by action of
debt. Now let us see if there may not be somewhat different considerations
touching distraining for rent, and so coming to recover it by avowrie. Put we
then the case that an executor has fully administered in payment of debts by
bond, and after the lessor or revertioner comes and distraineth for arrerages
of rent due in the testators life; can the executor in bar of the avowrie plead
fully administered, as he might have done if an action of debt had been brought
for these arrerages? doubtless I think no, nothing shall hinder the levying of
the rent upon the land so long as it is enjoyed under the title of the lease,
except the land come to the King, upon whose possession no distress can be
taken: I think therefore that the executor who paid out of his own purse to the
value of this lease (for to I intend the case, and else could he not have fully
administered, as in the case was put) he should, I say, have abated in the price
and valuation of the lease, as well the arrerages of rent, as the rent futurely
payable, both being equally leviable upon the land, and if he so have done, he
is no loser by payment of this arrerage: but if trusting to the power of an
executor, and to the plea of fully administered he did not so, but disbursed in
respect of the lease to the full value without such abatement, he must bear
the loss of his own ignorance. He might also another way have helped
himself, viz. by payment of that arrerage, leaving other debts by specialty
unpaid. And what if suits were presently commensed upon the testators death
before he could make payment of the rent behind, whether might the executor
then plead this debt for rent, as he might a debt by judgment or statute, and
surely me thinks it probable that he might, because it is a debt from which
he cannot be freed by payment of the other debts sued for by specialtie. If
the revertioner would* also commence suit before judgment had for the creditor
by specialty, then might the executor help himself by confessing his action
first; but this perhaps the revertioner would not conceive safe for him, since
that way the others might get judgment before him, and so he might lose both
his suit and his debt, whereas holding himself to the course of distres, the
lease continuing, he has land at the stake, for his debt. What if he distraine
and avow? may not now (...) executor pay him, or at least confess his ^^tion
or avowry, so as he first having judgment, may first be satisfied. Surely
after suite commenced, I see not how the creditors by bond can so be prevented,
at least without judgment had for the rent; yea, though such a judgment be
had, yet because the judgment in that case is not that he shall recover the
sum due for rent, but only that he shall have a return to the pound of the
cattle distrained for the rent, it is questionable whether the payment
thereupon of the rent shall prevent the judgments after had in the suits upon
bonds. But I think it shall, because although it be not an express recovery
of the rent, yet is it such a judgment compulsary for the same, as makes the
payment inevitable and of necessity. And where before we have made the
question only between the said rent-debt, and the debt by obligation: let us
now put the case between the rent-debt and the debt by statute or judgment. If
then the lessor after death of the lessee distraine for the rent behind part of
the testators cattle, and after there comes a writ of execution upon a
judgment or statute of the testators; whether shall these beasts in the pound
for rent be delivered in execution or not, admitting that without them there be
not goods sufficient for satisfaction of the judgment or statute. And surely I
think they cannot be delivered in execution: See ^3. R. 2. Bro. Pledges 31.
Attainder of the party distraind shall not take away the distres.
First, for that they are in the custody of the law, as in String-fellowes
case, though there the Kings preroga-time overtopped that point; yea, so I
think, though they be replevied, for that they are to be returned to the
pound, Vide Dye^.
if judgment pass for the avowant, to which purpose security is given, so as
they are but in the case of a prisoner bailed, who still is in some sort in
custody. Secondly, for that this rent incident to, and descendible with the
reversion, breeds a debt of a real nature, and so of more dignity and worth
than debts personal. Thirdly, for that the land let (as in a sort debtor)
stands chargeable with this distres from the very time of making the lease, as
either by a contract real of quid pro quo, or rather by an operation of law or
legal constitution, or ancient custom of the Realm, without any contract of
persons. Lastly, for that the lessor does not distraine the cattle therefore,
or in that respect for that they are or were the goods of the testator, but for
that he found them levant and couchant upon the land, which must afford his
rent, or a distr^sse for it if behind, so as if they had been any under
tenants or strangers Cattle, they might have been distrained. Some may
perhaps object this reason why these impounded cattle should be delivered in
execution, viz. for that where otherwise the creditor by statute or judgment
should lose all or part of his debt, yet by this relief done to him shall not
the lessor lose his rent, for that he may at any time after distraine any goods
or cattle found upon the ground at any time during the continuance of the
lease. But here besides the point of delay and stay for this rent, which to
many is the sole means of maintaining their households and families; this
further is considerable, that perhaps the lease may be near expiring, perhaps
so highly racked and rented, even to or above the value, as that the executor
having his testators stock taken from it and him by execution will not stock it
any more, and so the land lying fresh, if the lessor shall lose the benefit of
his former distres, he shall be perhaps without remedy for his arrerages of
rent. And if the case were of a distres for rent behind after the testators
death, I conceive though not so strongly, for most of the reasons abovesaid,
that the law would be all one as in the other case; for though in this case
respect shall not be had to the executors loss upon whose goods the law casts
this debt, though not the other, yet here the point of loss must fall either
upon the lessor losing his distress, or upon the other creditor by specialiy
or record losing wholly or in part his debt. And in respect of this local tie
upon this land for payment of the rent whereto even the fealty of the lessee
and tenure of the land binds him, and it I think no act that the lessee can
do by entering into bonds or statutes, or having judgments against him can
hinder the lessor or reversioner from taking his remedy upon this leased land
for the rent therefore due, but rather any other creditor shall be a loser in
his debt. Doubtless i^ in bar to the avowrie for this rent due either before
or since the testators death, the executor will plead that the testator was
indebted a thousand pounds, by statute, recognizance, or judgment, which is
more then all his goods amounted unto, it will be no good plea, but may be
demurred upon. Vid. Bro. Pledge. 31.
What if he plead so much debt of record to the Crown? surely I doubt whether
this plea will be allowed in any other Court then the Exchequer; yet if these
arrerages of rent shall be levied upon the land, so as either the executor must
pay it or lose the cattle distrained by a return irreplevisable, and then
shall not have sufficient to satisfy the debt to the Crown, I see not how he
shall well escape, when pursued in the Exchequer to make up this Crown debt
out of his own purse, which is hard. For this we may pitch upon as a Maxim
and principle, that an executor where no default is in him, shall not be bound
to pay more for his testator then his goods amount unto. Again, it is a rule,
that where nothing is to be had, viz. justly to be had, the King loses his
right: and our books tell us that the Kings Prerogative must not do wrong,
Potestas ejus juris est, So Bracton.
non injuriae: nam potestas injuriae non est Dei, sed diaboli. On the other
side it may be said, that if land leased come to the King by grant, outlawry,
or otherwise, the rent reserved cannot be distrained for, and therefore is it
not very unreasonable nor incongruent that the Kings interest for his debt
should make the distres of a subject to stand by and give place. This therefore
among other of the premises do I leave as a quaere: nor is it altogether
unprofitable either for an executor or creditor to know what ways and
passages, what cases and contingents be doubtful and hazardous. And if in
these unbeaten paths where our books and relations have held me forth no
light, express, or particular, I have erred in mis-resolving, or missing to
resolve, Not resolving.
I hope I shall without difficulty obtain pardon.

Now let us consider of assumptions or promises made by the testator upon good
consideration, the performance whereof or making recompense and satisfaction
for not performing, does lie upon an executor as before is showed. These
therefore are to come behind and give place unto all the former, so as an
executor this way or for these sued may plead debts by specialty, rent, etc.
amounting to the whole goods. And yet these debts by contract or assumption
express are to be satisfied before legacies be to be had. Co. lib. 9. fo. 88*
b. Doct. and Stu. lib. 2. cap. 10. and 11.
First, because by the common law of the land those are recoverable, and so are
not legacies: next because as our books speak, it concerns the soul of the
testator to have aes alienum, all duties and debts to other men satisfied
before the debtors voluntary gifts or bequests. Also these debts by assumption
or simple contract, are to be satisfied before the reasonable part of the wife
or children, to which by custom in some Counties they are entitled, see 21.
Ed. 4. 21. and 2 Ed. 4. 13. and 2. Hen. 6. 16. And note that in such an action
upon the case it is not of necessity to lay or set forth in the declaration
that the defendant has assets to pay all debts by specialty, Co. l. 9. fo. 90.
b. Pinchons case and fo. 94. Banes case.
and this also; but if there want, the defendant must allege that in his
excuse, for else it shall be presumed that he has assets. So also in an action
upon the case grounded upon the executors own assumption to pay his testators
debt, and yet as the L. Cook conceives, and upon good reason as to me it
seems, if the executors so promising had not assets sufficient in his hands to
pay this debt promised, he pleading non assumpsit may give that in evidence,
for then the consideration fails, as also if there were no such debt due,
since the plaintiff could not have recovered if he had sued, and so his
forbearance to sue was no valuable consideration.

Chap. XIII.
Of Devastation or Wasting.
THat which S. Paul of dispensers spiritual who are as it were the executors
of the last will and testament of our Savior Christ does say or enjoyne, viz.
that they must be found faithful; The same is required of these less or
inferior dispensers, the executors of men's Wills, and hereof they are to be
regardfull, not only in respect of escaping damage to their own estates, but
more especially in respect of an oath which diverse of our books mention to be
taken by executors. And in one of the books of relations of cases in the
twentieth year of Hen* 7. his time, there is an expression of three things
whereto the office of an executor tyeth him. 1. To do truly, and thereto are
they sworn, says this book. 2. To be diligent, viz. with sedulity to attend
the discharge of the trust. 3. To do lawfully; nor well can this latter be
without knowledge what is lawful or required by the law. Now what is formerly
said of the right method and order of payment of debts, discovers in much
part how and by what ways an executor may waste and mispend his testators
goods and consequently incur a devastation, and so make his own goods
liable, but of that more fully and particularly by it self, and herein we will
consider of these parts.

1. What shall be said to be a wasting or devasting, and how many ways that
may be done.

2. Who shall by this act be charged to yield recompense.

3. Who shall take the benefit or advantage of it.

4. How far or in what measure the advantage shall be taken.

5. What way or by what means it shall be had.

As to the first, this wasting is done diverse ways. 1. by the executor his
plain, palpable, and direct giving, selling, spending, or consuming the
testators goods after his own Will leaving debts unpaid. 2* By paying what is
not to be paid, which yet is to be understood where there are debts payable and
unpaid. 3. By the way formerly discoursed of, viz. the not observing the right
method and order of payment. 4. By assenting to a legatees having a thing
bequeathed, debts being unpaid. 5. By selling goods of the testators at an
under value, for be the appraisement what it will, and let him sell for what he
will, he must stand charged to the best and utmost value toward the creditors.
Yet if upon a judgment against the testator or the executor, the Sheriff sell
some of the testators goods at an undervalue, this is no vastation of the
executor, for this difference Hody chief Baron makes. But since an executor
may happily prevent this act of the Sheriff by paying the due sum upon sale of
the testators goods at the best value or otherwise, he is to be blamed to leave
it to the conscience of the Sheriff or Undersheriffe rather. 6. And lastly
this may be done to the executors smart by undue, viz. not legal discharging
of any debt or duty pertaining to the testator, and that diverse ways requiring
heedfulnesse. As if an executor upon a bond of two hundred pounds forfeited for
payment of a hundred pounds accept the principal, or perhaps also some use,
costs, or damage, and give a release or acquitall of the whole forfeited bond,
or of all actions or upon record acknowledge satisfaction upon judgment had.
13. E. 3. Fitz. 91*
This is a wasting of so much as the penal sum is more then is received,
Ye^^on the other side, if an execut. by payment of an 110 pounds, get in a
f^rfeited bond of* 200 pounds, it shall be an administrat. but of 110. pounds,
27. H* 8. 6. p. Fitz. i^st.
and so far his own goods stand liable to creditors not satisfied; and so
doubtless is it if he do but give up the bond having no judgment upon it,
though he neither make release nor acknowledge satisfaction. But his verbal
agreement to require or sue for no more, or his giving a note, of receipt for
so much as he has received, or delivering of the bond into a friends hands, or
into a Court of equity in way of security to the debtor that he shall not be
sued for more, is no devastation, since still the rest in law remains due and
sueable. So this sets no more upon the executors score then he received. But
let him take heed of releasing except he be sure there be no other debts
demandable. Nor only is there danger in releasing of debts, but of trespasses
or other causes of action also. As if one take away goods from the testator or
from his executor; If the executor make him a release, this is a devastation,
and makes his own goods liable to the whole value of the goods released, as
appears by Russels case, where the release of an Infant executor to one who
had taken and committed to his use Jewels and goods of the testator being
pleaded, the release was therefore held void in respect of nonage, for that if
it should have stood good, it had amounted to a Devastavit, and made the
executors own goods liable, which his infancy considered had been hard.
Another way of discharging, dangerous to executors, is submitting matters of
debt or duty, or touching goods taken away to arbitrament. For if by the award
of the arbitrators the debtors or wrong doers be discharged or acquitted
without making full recompense, the rest of the value will as to other
creditors sit upon the executors skirts, because it was their voluntary act
thus to submit it to arbitrators. Thus may executors fall under prejudice, not
only by wilful wasting or unfaithful miscarriage, wherein they are not to
be pitied, but through incogitancy and unskilfulnesse also. Nay, I may say
truly that it is very hard for executors in some cases to walk safely: For
besides that to find out all judgments and recognizances by or against their
testators, is of some difficulty more then for statutes, whereof by search in
an Office descry may be had; yet with this difference, that statutes merchant,
and statutes staple may be and stand effectual against executors, though not
enrolled, albeit against purchasers of the conusors land they be not of force,
if neglect be of inrolement within three months. But where statutes or
recognizances lie for performance of covenants upon sale or lease of lands,
marriage, agreements or otherwise; how hard is it for executors to know whether
any covenant be broken or not; how hard to be sure they find out all bonds,
bills, covenants, and articles in writing made and kept by others, whereby any
money is due and payable before debts by contract or legacies: as also all
promises or debts by contract payable before legacies: For the law has
prescribed no time for their claim and demand, and whether some such thing or
mean of publication were not fit to be enacted, let the judicious consider. To
attain to this knowledge of the testators debts, I remember that it is by the
Lord Brook reported, that in King Henry the 8th his time, Sir Edmund Knightley
being executor to Sir William Spencer, made Proclamation in certain Market
Towns that the creditors should come by a certain day and claim and prove
their debts, but he for this was committed to the Fleet and fined. For that
none may make proclamation says the book, without warrant or authority from
the King, except Majors and such like Governors of Towns, who by privilege
or custom may so do. But the dangers are only where there is not sufficient
of the testators goods and chatels to satisfy both debts and legacies. For
where there is so, the executor is not in any such hazard as aforesaid. This
descry of danger may breed caution, and Qui timent cavent and vitant.

As to the second we shall have in consideration two sorts of persons,
videli^et, 1. His executors, there being many times diverse executors, and the
waste or devastation done but by one. Next his own heirs, executors, and
administrators, videlicet, whether he dying, this act shall fix upon them,
like charge and burden for satisfaction, as upon himself should have lain in
case he had lived.

Touching his companions though altogether make but one Executor, yet the
misdoing of one shall not charge the rest, nor make their goods liable to
recompense: as both appears by the Book of entries, Lib. Intra. sol. 327.
and was also held in the time of Henry the seventh, K^lw. rep* ^ol. 23.
Anno 12. of his reign. So. 11. H. 6. ^8. a. 4. El. Die. 210 a. the writ so
issued against the waster only P. 4. H. 8. rot. 303.
Yea, of the same opinion were the judges twice in the late Queens time, viz.
first in a case between Walter and Sutton, in the common place, and shortly
after in the Kings Bench in a case between Hankeford and Metford; though these
two cases be not reported in Print. Tr. 34. Eliz.
And surely this stands with rules of reason or justice, Pas. 36. Eliz.
that each should bear his own burden; If it were otherwise, many would
decline, and abandon executorships as very dangerous to the most honest, and
faithful, in case they were subject to wracking by the miscariage of their
Colleagues.

As for the Executors, or Administrators, of the wasting Executor dying before
he have born the burden of his mis-doing; I have found contrary opinions even
in the late Queens time. For first in the Exchequor it was conceaved to be as
a trespass dying with the person, as coming within the rule, Mich. 31. ^* 32.
Eliz.
Actio personalis moritur cum persona. But in the said case of Walter and
Sutton, Tr. 34. Eliz.
the court of common plees was of contrary opinion, viz. that this was not
escaped by the death of this misdoer, but the law would pursue his Executors or
administrators, and lay upon their backs the burden of recompense or
satisfaction; for that the testator or intestate doing this wrong had made
himself to be debtor in the first testators stead, and therefore they who
represent his person must with his goods make amends, and supply; And this
later opinion was something in time after the former. Tr. 34. Eliz.
Also between these two times was there an opinion in the said Court of common
plees agre^ing in part with this latter: For there a judgment being had
against an Executor, Mich. 32. and 33. Eliz.
and the Shriefe upon the Fieri facias, returning that there were no goods, of
the Testator in the Executors hands, and then this Executor dying; A Scire fac.
upon a suggestion of devastation by the said Executor deceased was awarded
against his Executor, and that upon good debate, and show of a President left,
and reported by M. I^^our in King Henry the eight his time. And it was then
said to have been clear, that if a devastation had been returned in the life
time of the said Wastfull Executor, his Executor then should have been
charged. All the doubt was for that here that was not done in his life time,
yet at last affirmatively (as above is showed) the resolution was.

Touching the third point, viz. to whom the advantage of wasting shall accrue
or who by reason thereof shall charge this wasting Executor. Put we the Case
that the Testator stood indebted to A. by Statute, and to B. C. and D. by
specialty, not of record, as Bond, Bill, etc. and the Executor having no more
in asse^s then only that hundred pound, and this all being due to D. he pays
him the whole hundred pound not having any thing left to satisfy any of the
rest of the Creditors: hereby wrong is done to none but A. who was a Creditor
by Statute, and therefore he only shall make this Executor to pay the like
sum out of his own goods, since as to him only this is a devastation, for
that it was his election, to pay of the other Creditors; which he would, no suit
being commensed by any of them; consequently no wrong was done to B. nor C. And
if no such debt had been by Statute but all had been Creditors by specialty,
and A. only had commensed suit, and that known to the Executor, now if after
he paid all to D. he stands only as to A. liable in his own goods, and not
to B. nor C. But if the Executor had only paid a legacy or debt by contract
leaving nothing for satisfaction of the debts by specialty, then had he stood
equally liable to each of the other Creditors, If upon fully administered
pleaded to one vel aliter, he have the advantage of this vastation, taking up
the whole ^umme wasted, quae* how the Executor shall relieve himself against
another.
Capiat qui capere potest, viz. he who first could recover, or by the
voluntary act of the Executor, could obtain payment, must be preferred: if
the sum would reach no further. For it shall by this mis-payment, or
misconversion stand with the Executor, as if he had not paid it nor departed
from it at all upon the matter, and therefore I doubt not but it is free for
him to give the advantage of this his error, to which Creditor by specialty he
will, so as he shall stand free from all the rest, no sur^^^usage remaining,
nor any Creditor of record being. For if there be any debt upon record, the
Executor sued by a Creditor upon Bond may notwithstanding this his wasting
plead in Bar of this suit; that there is such a record of a debt not
satisfied, and that he has no more then that debt amounts unto, and so admit
so much still in his hands as he has misadministred, though in kind it be
not in his hands, but misspent, or unduly paid, as aforesaid. And what is
before showed of the Statutes precedence before Bonds, in taking the advantage
against an Executor for devasting or wasting; the same is to be understood of
precedence of judgments before Statutes, and debts to the King before
judgments, etc.

As touching the ^ourth point, viz. how far the Executor thus wasting shall
incur damage or make his own goods liable: Doubtless no further then the
value of the Testators goods wasted or mis-administred. Therefore if one have
advantage thereof to the full sum, no other after shall, for he is no
further a trespasser or wrong doer, nor is the Testators estate any further, or
d^epelier damnified. And as damages for trespass are to be proportioned to the
value of the wrong done, and loss sustained: So also in this case the Executor
by his misdoing, does not draw upon himself his Testators whole debts, but so
much only as the goods amounted to, which he did mis-administer, and which
should have gone to the payment of the Testators debt, if he had not so
misguided himself in the office of executorship, which default he must
repair or make good. 41. E. 3. 31* b.
And this proportion seems to me prooved by the Case in King Edward the third,
where the value or quantity is found, specially of the goods administered
wrongfully; though there by a wrongful person, and in Suttons case it was
expressly held that each Executor should answer for so much as he wasted.

Now for the fifth, and last point, viz. how and in what manner relief shall
be had upon this point of wasting, for him to whom it pertaines, first this is
to be observed that in case where the verdit passes directly against the
plaintiff, no devastation can come in question, for that no judgment being for
the plaintiff, no writ of execution can issue, and therefore if upon the issue
of fully administered it shall appear that there has been a devastation which
causes assets to fail, Pas. 36. Eliz. in 6. reg.
then must the Jury find that the defendant has assets, and not find a
devastation, as was resolved in the Kings Bench in the late Queens time
between Hankeford and Metford, for there the jury finding a devastation, viz.
a surrender of a lease for years, left by the Testator, it was held void, and
nugatory, and was not regarded by the Court, which said that must come in by
the Sherifes return, viz. upon the Fieri fac. Thus assets being found in the
Executors hands, judgment is given for the plaintiff to recover his debt, and
to have it levied of these assets; nor is this finding of them by a jury
against truth, though they be wasted, and so not to be had in kind: for the
Executor has them in right, since he has not rightfully parted from them
according to the rule, Propossessore habetur qui dolo (or injuria) desiit
possidere. As in the case first put, this wasting cannot come in question for
want of a judgment for the plaintiff, so also where the judgment it self
extends to the Executors own goods by reason of some false plea whereof we
shall after consider, for since that the consequence, and effect of a vastation
is but to make the Executors own proper goods liable to the debt of the
Creditor, this is altogether needless where the judgment it self has laid
hold on his goods. But now in case where the judgment extends only to the
Testators goods in the Executors hands, let us find the way to relieve the
Creditor, in case the Testators goods be wasted by misadministring or
otherwise, for hereabout the right way has often been missed, and again
easily may be. In the latter end of the late Queens time this course was
taken, 45. Eliz. Pettifers case.
viz. the Sheriff returning generally that the Executor had no goods, Co. lib.
5. fo. 32
a surmise was entered that the Executor had converted to his own use the
Testators goods, whereupon a writ was awarded to the Sheriff to enquire
thereof by jury or enquest, which he did, and returned that it was found that
the executor had wasted the goods; and thereupon a Scire facias was awarded
against the executor, to show cause why execution should not be of his own
goods, and upon two nihils returned, execution was so awarded, but a writ of
error was hereupon brought. And although it were said for defense of that
course that it was usual in the Common Pleas, and more favorable than the
other course, where the Sheriff only returns the wasting, or is sole judge
thereof, whereas here it was found by an inquest of Jurors, and thereupon a
Scire facias awarded; yet did the Court resolve the contrary, and reverse this
execution as erroneous: For it was said that upon the Sheriffs return of
nulla bona, viz. that there were no goods of the testator to be found, the
plaintiff should have a special writ of Fieri facias, So 9. H. 6. f. 9.
willing the Sheriff to levy the sum recovered, See Paston 1^* H. 6. 16.
36. upon surmise that A has wasted, A. Fieri facias may issue against his
goods only. If so, etc.
either of the goods of the testator, or if it could appear that the executor
had wasted the testators, then to levy it of his own goods; and this way, as
was said, the executor has good remedy by action against the Sheriff, if
without just cause he levy it of his goods; So lib. Intra. f. 11.
but the other way, viz. when inquest is thereupon taken, the remedy fails,
since neither sheriff doing according to the inquest, can be punished, nor the
jurors finding falsely are subject to any attaint, it being no verdict upon
issue joined, but an inquest of office, which excludes also all challenge of
jurors. And whereas that book mentions the Sheriffs subjection to action
only in case of his mis-feasance or doing wrong, I conceive that he is
likewise suable for omission or nonfeasance in this case, viz. for not levying
the debt upon the executors own goods where proof is made of his wasting. And
where the book mentions this Fieri facias to be in this manner upon the
Sheriffs return in a Scire facias, Co. lib. 5. 32.
doubtless the book therein is misprinted, and should be a Fieri facias, for
in a Sciri facias the Sheriff can return nothing but that he has warned the
party, or that he has nothing where by he may be warned. This then is the
course there prescribed, that first a general Fieri facias go out, and that
thereupon the Sheriff return generally that the defendant has no goods of
the testators, and that thereupon the said special writ is to issue; yet in
the beginning of the late Queens time the verdict passing for the plaintiff
upon the issue of fully administered, 2. El. Die. 185. Woodw. and Chichesters
case.
the Sheriff was not permitted to make such a general return of no goods to
be found of the testators, but was enforced by the Court upon good advisement,
either to leavy the debt, or to return a Devastavit; and so was done at last
by the Sheriffs of London much against their minds; and thereupon went out a
writ to leavy the debt of the executors own goods, first into London, and
after into Devonshire, upon a Testatum that the executor had goods there: And
it was there said, that if no goods could be there found, then the plaintiff
might have a Capias to take the executors body in execution, or an Elegit for
the moiety of his lands. But certainly I cannot find (except with a difference)
how this course of enforcing the Sheriff to do one of these two can be just;
as neither could Justice Fulthorp, 11. H. 6. f. 38.
in the time of King Henry the sixth, approve it. For a Jury of one County may
find assets in another County, as was resolved in the time of King Henry the
eight, 28 H. 8. Die. 3. Yea, Co. lib. 6. f. 47. 46. Assets in Ireland, or
elsewhere beyond the sea, may be found by the Jury where the action is laid.
which yet was understood of goods moveable, and not of lands. This then thus
being, if a Jury of Kent find assets which be in London or Essex, how can the
Sheriff of Kent, where the action was laid, leavy the debt recovered by or out
of these goods; or since he cannot, why should he be compelled to make a false
return of a wasting, For the pl. may if he will suggest, the being of assets
in a foreign County, and this is usually done.
when the goods remain unspent and unwasted in another County? Why rather
should he not be suffered to return according to truth, that there is
nothing within his County or Bayliwicke whereof the debt may be levied, See
lib. Intr. 11. a. Action upon the case for a false return of Devast. contra
sacram. sui debitum. 28. H. 8.
since even his oath tieth him to make a true return, nor is this contrary to
the verdict, finding assets generally, and this so returned upon a Testatum,
the process may be directed into the right County. But in the said case it was
replied to the plea of fully administered that there were assets in Essex, the
action being laid in Middlesex, and yet as it seems by the book, the trial
was to be by a Jury of Middlesex, which, says the book, may find the assets
in Essex; but there the plea was demurred upon, and held a good plea, which
proves that although the transitorinesse of the assets make them subject to the
notice of a foreign Jury, yet is it not like an act transitory and not local,
for that must be pleaded to be done in the place where the action is laid,
though in truth not so. But had issue been joined upon the point, me thinks it
should be tried in Essex, where the assets be laid, the rather for that perhaps
they may be real chattels, 2. Ma. Bro. Attaint. 104. and 10. Eliz. Dyer. 271.
viz. lands leased to the testator, or other lands of him appointed to be sold
for payment of debts, Because local and fixed, otherwise held, 3. Jac. in com.
b. Co. lib. 6. f. 46. 47.
which as heretofore has been held, a Jury of another County cannot find.
Besides, although such a foreign jury may find other moveable assets, yet is at
their election, they are not thereto compellable, 22. E. 4. 9. and 2. Ma. Bro.
At. 104.
as elsewhere is holden. Here then may be the difference, viz. that if the
assets be found to be in the County where the trial is, 18. H. 7. Kelw. rep.
51. a.
there the Sheriff of that County cannot return Nulla bona, So held. P. 31.
El. in scaccar. So if the process for execution go into another County, than
where the verdict. found, as the diff. was held in Scaccar. 31. El.
without adding that the executor has wasted: but if there be no verdict at
all touching assets, judgment passing against the executor upon a demurrer,
confession, Nihil dicit, or the like; there may the Sheriff make such a
return of Nulla bona testatoris, without returning any devastation: and so
also where the verdict either finds assets generally not finding in what
place they be, 28. H ^. Die. 30. b.
or expressly finds them to be in another County, as a little before we
found, may be done by a jury of London, of assets in Essex.

In King Henry the eight his time, Pas. 4. H. 8, rot. 303 4. El. Die. 210.
as a little after the said case of Chichester, is by the Lord Dier reported,
the Sheriff returning upon the Fieri facias, that the Executors had no goods of
the Testators, did ad in the same return that one of the two Executors had
wasted, But 2. H. 6. 12. without any Sci. fac: upon the devast. returned, A
capias was awarded by the court; and see 9. H. 57. Bro. Ex. 57. and lib. Intr.
323. A Fieri fac. absolutely, and without condition. So. 9. H. 649. 50. A
manu-script report.
and thereupon a Scire facias was awarded against him, and upon Scire feci
returned, and default made, execution was adjudged, and awarded against his
goods only, and this course of Scire facias both the Lord Dier (as elsewhere I
find it reported) and Prisot temp. Hen. 6. approved. But I am perplexed with
doubt what plea the Executor coming in upon the Scire facias, could plead, for
except his denial of wasting might be pleaded contrary to the Sheriffs
return, 36. H. 6. f. 3. and Mordant 12. H. 7. Kelw. rep. 24. but vavasor.
just. and all the other serjea^ts ^ contra.
and put in issue so as to cause a new trial after a former perhaps preceding
judgment, which I think would not be admitted, then his coming in is to
little purpose for ought I can conceive. Here again it must be observed that
in the case of Chichester, 2. El. D. 185.
the judgment was had upon trial of fully administered, but in the other case
temp. Hen. 8. it was upon confession, which is all one as I take it, with
condemnation upon Demurrer or non sum informatus, or trial upon non est factum
the Bond or a release to the Testator or the like. Now between all these, and
that of Chichester there is a broad difference, for there the defendant being
convinced by verdit to have assets, which if they continue not in his hands, in
kind, must be answered out of his own goods as wasted, therefore the Fieri
facias to leavy the debt of the Testators goods, if any found or in default
thereof out of his own goods is very agreeable, and pursuant, but in none of
the other casess is there any such trial or conviction of the defendants having
assets, so as it rests aeque dubium, whether they have assets or not, and
therefore it may seem somewhat hard, and harsh to send out such a writ in that
case, Co. lib. 5. f. 32. Mich. 41. El. rot. 2441.
and so should I have thought if I had only seen the report of Pettifers
case; Co. lib. Intr. 269. b. A recovery of debt precedent was pleaded: Pl.
replied null tiell record, and def. would not maintain his plea. Ideo condemp.
But looking into the record, and finding the condemnation there to be by
Nihil dicit, in effect I cannot uphold any distinction of course in respect of
the said difference of cases. Nor indeed does that course there directed
presume that the Executor either has assets, or has wasted them, but commands
that if assets, etc. then the leavying shall be one way; If neither, he must
so return and do nothing.
if wasting, then another way, so if neither Nihil fiend.

CAP. XIIII.
Of an Executor of his own wrong.
TO begin with some definition, or description of this man; He is such as
takes upon him the office of an Executor by intrusion, not being so
constituted by the Testator or deceased; nor for want of such constitution
substituted by the ordinary to administer. Touching whom we will consider in
these parts, and with this method, viz.

1. What acts or intermedlings of such an one not being executor nor
administrator by right, shall make him to become an executor by wrong. vide 5.
more perstat. 43. E. cap. 8.

2. In what manner, and by what name such shall be sued, specially when
another then is executor or administrator or himself after such act becomes
administrator.

3. What acts done by him shall stand firm, as if he had been an executor by
right.

How far he becomes liable to creditors, and how, and to whom. 5. See a late
stat. 43. El. cap 8. hereabout.

As to the first, 1. And 2. P. and M. sod. Die. 105. b.
it was in the time of Queen Mary doubted, and not resolved whether the only
seizing, and taking into ones hands the goods of the deceased did make one
executor of his own wrong without any further act. 1. Eli. Die. 166. and 167.
So also Bal^^. 50. Ed. 8. 9.
And in the b^ginning of the last Queens time the Lord Diar said that the post
slion, and occupation of or meddling with the goods is that which gives notice
to Creditors, whom they are to sue as executor. But doubtless Creditors must
look further before suit, for else can they not know whether he so
intermedling be executor or administrator, nor consequently how to found their
suit rightly, and safely for good success, since a suit against an executor as
administrator, or against an administrator as executor, will prove ruinous, and
fall to the ground. Yea where an administrator sued as executor did not plead
that administration was committed unto him, but generally denied that he was
executor or administered as executor, 13. and 14. Eliz. Die. 305. 306.
the Lord Diar held that it must be found for him, yet left it doubtful: but
the clear and safe way had been to have pleaded the administration, etc. And
in the former case the Lord Dyer said, 1. Eliz. Die. 166 and 167. see lib.
Intra. f. 322. b.
that one intermedling only about the funeral, and laying out money therefore;
an overseer or conductor, or he who has Letters of the ordinary ad colligend.
viz. to get and keep the goods in safety, and one who intermedleth by virtue
of a will truly made, but controlled by a latter will after found and proved,
may free himself from being an executor of his own wrong by special pleading
how or in what right he intermedled, and traversing his administering in other
manner, and that this traverse need not, nay may not be; 21. H. 6. 28. 10. H.
7. 28.
was held in the time of King Henry the 6th. and 7th. for that such acts amount
not to any administering at all: Yet lib. Intra. 322. b. where he confessed
about funeral he traversed aliter.
and where no administering at all is confessed; such a traverse of not
administering in other manner is dissonant, and not legal. But let us look
back upon these several points exempted by the Lord Dyar, Lib. Intra. 312.
where by letter ad collig. He traversed; Absq. hoc. quod and Exec.
and we shall see some cautions necessary touching them, and their safe
entertaynement, first as touching the point of burying the dead, it must be
understood to be with some expense of the deceaseds goods, and so is it
expressed in the said Book of Henry the 6th. his time: else for a man out of
charity, 21. H. 6. 28.
to lay out of his own money (not intermedling with the goods of the deceased)
to bury a friend, has little color to involve him so doing in an executorship
by wrong: taking the case then that such person lays out or expends of the
deceaseds goods or money upon his funeral, heed must be taken touching the
measure*, and proportion whereabout, though I can give no particular, and
distinct lymit, yet doubtless either mere necessity, viz. Church du^ies, etc.
or at least decent sutablenesse to his quality must be the bounds. And herein
to speak as I think, this latter must either be utterly excluded, or held
within very narrow compass, for what reason that a Knight or man of higher
quality leaving (though perhaps entayled Lands of good value) yet goods not
sufficient to pay his debts, should have a hundred pounds or more of that which
should satisfy Creditors spent in pompous interring of him for his worship,
Lib. Intr. 322.
and reputation? next overseers may only be excused for seeking to preserve,
and keep the Testators goods not in case they expend or dispose thereof. 8 and
9. Eliz. Dier. 255 256. He sold blended corn, but there he pleaded not the
special matter.
So also for him who is autorized by the Ordinary to collect, for if he sell
or dispose of any (though goods otherwise subject to perishing) it makes him an
executor by wrong, as was resolved in the late Queens time notwithstanding
that by the Ordinaries Letters, he was expressly directed or warranted so to
do, for it was said the ordinary himself could not so do. As for him who
administered by virtue of a will after disproved or controlled by a latter, He
must not doubtless stand free, for the goods before administered, but either as
rightful or wrongful executor stand liable to the Creditors. 1 And 2. P. and
Ma. Dyer. 105.
Nor does every such intermedling by one out of all these excuses, and
evasions, as would be an administration, make one an executor by wrong. If one
do but take an horse of the deceased, and tie him in his House or Stable, this
makes him not an executor, says Paston a justice; So of like acts or
intermedlings, 21 H. 6. 28.
as he that delivers to the wife of the deceased her apparel, at least if it
be no more then is convenient to her degree. But if she take, or another
deliver more then such to her, 33 H. 6. 31. 1 Eliz. Die. 166
she or he becomes an executor by wrong: But now let us come to a difference,
where there is a rightful executor, and a will by him proved, or
administration committed, for there such light acts or intermedlings shall not
make one an executor by wrong, Tr. 37. Eliz. by F^nner Just. If one do any
such act as pulls the property out of the executor, he is become an executor by
wrong If the goods be aliened by fraud, he who takes them after the executors
death is an executor by wrong. Tr. 37. Eliz.
as where there is no other of right to be sued. As if one take goods
wrongfully from such a right executor or administrator; This (though he convert
them to his own use) makes him not an executor by wrong, but a trespassor to
the rightful executor or administrator, who even for these goods once Assets
in his hands stands liable to suits of creditors, they being neither lawfully
evicted nor rightly administered: But in case there had been no executor at
that time, or no Will proved nor administration committed, then such taking of
the deceaseds goods into a strange hand had made an executorship by wrong. L.
5. E. 472 a. Tr. 2. Jac. in com. b.
And thus was the difference lately resolved, Co. lib. 5. 33 and 34.
as is reported by the Lord Cook in the case between Read and Carter in the
Common Place.

Yet this further difference was there held, viz. that although there be an
executor or administrator by right, yet if a stranger take upon him to receive
debts and make acquittances, or to pay debts claiming to be an executor, he is
sueable as an executor by this act: and so also in the late Queens time was
held by 6. Just. 1 El. D. 166. b.
as touching the receipt of debts and making acquittances, but the book
mentions not whether any other executor then were, or not. But in the point of
bare payment of debts Frowick makes another difference, H. 20. 7. 5.
viz. If a stranger do with his own money pay the debts of a friend deceased,
and not with the debtors: This is but an act of charity, and makes him not an
executor by wrong, otherwise, if with the debtors money. Yet to this another
difference must be added, viz. that if he thus paying with his own money, have
taken into his own hands goods of the deceased; then is his payment presumed
as by or out of the value of these goods, and so makes him an executor by
wrong. Contrarily, if he have no such goods in his hands. And in the point of
intermedling with and disposing of the testators goods where another executor
is; this further difference is to be added or understood, viz. That where the
goods so taken never came actually to the executors hands, but were in a remote
place, there this taker becomes executor. For as it were mischievous to the
executor if he should by a possession in law cast upon him stand chargeable
with these goods in remote places purloyned as assets in his hands; so were it
as mischievous to creditors, if neither executor by right, nor this stranger as
an executor by wrong should stand liable to creditors for them. It is true that
the right executor may sue and recover damages for them, and that so recovered
shall be Assets; but the creditor has no means at the Common law to enforce
him to sue, and perhaps it may be a cold suit. And with these additions I think
that late resolved difference may stand firm and sound. Yet in former times
without such difference the taking only and possession of the goods of the
deceased, was held to create an executorship by wrong, as Belknap said in the
time of King Edw. 3. 50. Ed. 3. fo. 9.
and especially if the act were such as removed the property out of the right
executor, Tr. 3. Eliz.
as Just. Fennar in the late Queens time said, Test meipso.

How and by what name suit shall be against such, and the like.
TOuching the second point, viz. in what manner suit shall be against such: 2.
Point.
First in general, this usurping executor is not in suit to be distinguished
by name from the right executor, L. 5. E. 4. 72. Co. lib. 5. 30. 31. and 33. b.
21 H. 6. 8.
but to be sued generally by the name of executor, of the last Will and
Testament of the defunct, and then if he will deny himself so to be, he must
plead, that he neither is executor, Co. lib. Intra. 144. but 145. a. i^ the
verdict. he is called Exec. De njuria sua propria.
nor has administ^ed as executor: Then the plaintiff must prove that he has
administered in some such or the like sort as aforesaid. And it has been
diverse times held, 39 H. 6. 45. 46.
that where there is a right executor, and yet another does administer by
wrong, 21. H. 6. 8. 19.
it is at the election of Creditors either to sue them jointly together, 9. E
4. 14, 15.
or one or both of them severally and by himself. 1 and 2. P. and M. Die. 165.
33. H. 6. 38.
But if where administration is committed, another also administers by wrong,
these cannot be sued together as administrators; 35. H. 6. 31.
for though one may be an executor by usurpation or wrong, yet none can come to
be an administrator by wrong, since no other but such as receives that power
from the Ordinary can so be; therefore in that case there is a necessity of
suing him apart and by himself (who so usurpeth administration) by the name of
an executor. So if A administer the goods of B. not being executor nor
administrator, and after his such doing and disposing of the goods he obtains
administration of the goods of B. but the goods left or coming to his hands
since the administration committed suffice not without the other debts received
or released, or goods sold before, to satisfy creditors. Now if any sue A by
the name of administrator, ^ R. 3. 20.
he shall have no further relief then according to the value or extent of the
goods left in or come into his hands since the administration committed, and if
those be fully administered, he shall get nothing. If they remain
unadministred, but amount not fully to his debt, he must want so much of
satisfaction. And if he will be releeved or satisfied out of the goods before
disposed of, he must sue A as executor of B: 21. H. 6. 8. If the administration
were committed before the suit began, the writ shall abate* else not, as was of
old conceived.
and so was it ruled and resolved by Gaudy and Suit, Justices in the Kings
Bench in the late Queens time, viz. Tr. 30. Eliz. And if this now
administrator will plead in abatement of this action, that administration was
committed to him, and demand judgment if suit shall be against him as
executor. Then the plaintiff must in this replication as I take it, set forth
the special matter, viz. how the defendant did administer before
administration to him committed. But if one to whom administration is committed
do devast, and this administration is by suit repealed because he was not the
next of kin, and administration is committed to another; now a creditor who
would be relieved out of the goods wasted, must sue that first as administrator
and not as executor of his own wrong, said Popham Chief Justice, for he did
rightfully administer for that time.

As for the third, 3 Point.
viz. how far this executor of his own wrong, How far liable to creditors.
becomes liable and obnoxious to suite; consider we these things; first he
becomes subject both to the action of the executor who has right to the goods
wrongfully intermedled withal by him though it were before proving of the
will, and also to the action of the creditor who has right to the satisfaction
of his debt. Secondly, Yet he must look to his plea, else by it he may draw
al sued for, upon himself, as if he deny his being executor or administrator.
as touching the measure how far he is engaged, doubtless he is not by his
wrongful administering become chargeable with the whole account of the
testators debts, but only so far, and with so much thereof, as the goods
which he so wrongfully administered amount unto, and this seems to me proved by
the case in the time of Edward the third, Co. lib. Intr. 144. 145. Plu^ de ^oc.
where the inquest found not only the administering or intermedling by the
executor wrongfully, but found also by direction of the Court (as it seems)
what the value was of the goods so wrongfully administered, which had not been
material, if the administering of a penny had made one as far chargeable as the
administering of a pound. Besides, if it be so that a rightful executor wasting
goods of the testator to the value of twenty pounds, shall be no further
charged than that value; then doubtless so shall it be also in this case, for
both be wrongful administrations: only this difference there is between them,
that in one case the administration is by a wrong person, and in the other case
in a wrong manner. 1. El. Die. 167. cap. 12.
Nay, the Lord Dyer does not stick to call him, who administreth wrongfully,
or in undue manner, expressly an executor by wrong, in the case of Stokes
against Porter, though he were rightfully executor, because he did dispose or
execute wrongfully.

As to the fourth, 4 Point.
viz. what acts done to him or by him who is an executor of his own wrong,
What acts of his of force.
shall stand firm and good, as done by or to the right executor. Suppose,
first, that the deceased were indebted to him twenty pounds who thus usurpeth
executorship, whether may he pay himself or not? And this point was in debate
in the Kings Bench between Coulter and one Ireland, M. 40. 41. Eliz. Co. lib.
5. f. 30.
executor of Hunt, where it was strongly objected, that notwithstanding the
rightful executor or administrator might punish him, and recover against him
for the goods which he administreth; yet another creditor suing him as
executor generally, and so affirming him to be (for there is no special form
of writ or declaration to distinguish an executor by wrong from a rightful
executor) he stands as against him in the state of a rightful executor, and
therefore may first pay himself before he pay others; and of that mind at the
first were Fenner and Gaudy, Justices, yet did they admit that this payment
should not stand good, as against the rightful executor or administrator. And
Popham and Clinche held strongly that neither should it stand good against
other creditors, for then every man would rush upon the testators goods and be
his own carver in payment: And whereas it was said at the bar, that the Lord
Anderson upon an evidence at Guild Hall had ruled it otherwise, Popham at
another day of debate of the said case, related that the L. Anderson did deny
that he ever so ruled, or was of that opinion; and further informed that both
he and Justice Walmesly, Periam and Clarke, Barons, did agree with Popham and
Clinche in opinion. After which, Justice Gaudy, as also Fenner, if I mistake
not, changing their opinions, and concurring with the rest, judgment was given
accordingly. In the debate of this case, question was made, if such an executor
by wrong pay a debt to another creditor by specialtie, whether this shall not
stand firm and good, since he stands liable to creditors so far as the
goods by him administered do amount, and it was agreed by the better opinion at
least that this should stand firm and good, so as if the payment were out of
his own goods, he might retain to himself in liew thereof so much of the
goods of the testator, for here he does not, as in the other case, advantage
himself by his own wrong. Yet that opinion allowing this payment to creditors
must, as I think, be understood with this difference, viz. that this payment
shall stand as against other creditors, but not as against the right executor
or administrator, for then any stranger might usurp the office of executor,
and take from him that liberty and election to prefer which creditor he will
in first payment; yea, might take from the executor power to pay himself
before other in case there were a debt due to him, which were very unreasonable.

Of addition and alteration by the statute 43. Eliz cap. 8.
We having considered what the Common law is, 5 Point.
and wills in the premises: Let us now see what alteration or addition a late
statute has made. In the last Parliament of the late Queen Elizabeth,
consideration being had of subtle getting into men's hands goods of an
intestate by deed of gift, or letter of attorney from one of small or no
ability to whom such subtle contriver has procured administration to be
committed, and so himself would stand free from the suit of Creditors, the
administrator himself either not being to be found, or not being of any value
to satisfy Creditors. It was therefore enacted that every person, receaving or
having any goods or debts of any intestate, or any release or discharge of any
debt or duty belonging to him upon any fraud as aforesaid, or without
consideration of or near the value (except in satisfaction of some just, and
principal debt to the value of the goods or debts due from the intestate)
shall be charged as Executor of his own wrong so far as the value of those
goods, and debts amount; deducting all principal just debt to him due, and all
payments by him made, which a lawful Executor ought to have paid. Here have
we a touch of all the parts precedent, or at least three of them.

1. We have first a new Executor by wrong though intermedling under the title
of an administrator.

2. We have a limit of the charge by him incurred suitable to our former
expression.

3. Lastly, we have to him an allowa^ce of debts owing to himself or duly paid
to others, which is more then we have conceaved allowable to another Executor
by wrong.

CAP. XV.
Of pleas by Executors, and which be best, which most prejudicial to them.
SInce amidst the Plees pleaded by Executors there is such difference as that
some induce one kind of judgment, some another, some drawingmore loss, and
burden upon Executors then others: Let us consider of the differences, so as
light may be taken to choose the safest or fittest for each case.

If an Executor do utterly estrange himself from the executorship; Plea;
denying the Executorship.
saying that he was never executor nor ever administered as Executor (for that
must be added) then if issue be taken upon this plea, 21. H. 6. 19. 20. Bro.
62.
and it be found against him; 2 E. 4. f. 4. 1. 9. H. 7. 15.
the plaintiffes shall have judgment to recover not damages only, but even the
debt it self out of the proper goods of the Executor, if none of the Testators
can be found to satisfy it. Lib. Intr. 322. 333. 33. H. 6. 33. 34.
And this shall be thus not only where it is found that the defendant was
made Executor by the will, and proved it, and so could not choose, but know it,
but even also where he had never proved the will whereof he was made
Executor, nor ever administered by virtue thereof: yea though he did before the
Ordinary refuse to be Executor of this will, or to intermedle with the
execution thereof; yet if any other named Executor with him did prove the will,
or did not refuse to be Executor, let such other refuser take heed of
pleading that plea. For truth is against the first part of his plea, viz. that
he never was Executor; and so the verdit which must be veritatis dictum, must
needs pass against him, and make his own goods liable as well to debt as
damages. What if no other were made Executor but this only who refused before
the ordinary, may he safely plead that he never was executor? I think not,
since he so was executor before his refusal, He was suable as soon as the
Testator was dead.
that he might have released all debts due to the Testator, and given away all
his goods, therefore I think he must plead specially showing his refusal,
andnot generally deny his being Executour.

Nay admit he never was once named, made or intended to be made executor, yet
having pleaded this Plea, that he never was executor nor administered as
executor, if it shall be found by verdict that he did administer or
intermedle as executor, But if he did it as Adm. it is otherwise, yet see that
specially pleaded Co. Lib. Intr. 148. a.
the same blow or burden falls upon him, for then the latter part of this
Plea is found untrue, yea the whole upon the matter, for by his administering
he became an executor of his own wrong, and the denial of this executorship
by wrong or usurpation shall be as penal to him as the denial of a rightful
executorship. See Co. Lib. Intrac. Judgm. so entered fol. 145. b. Read and
Carters case.
The like Law where the executor pleades a release made to himself, or a
payment of the debt or other performance of the condition made by himself. Nay
I find in this latter case the judgment entered generally against the
defendant, as against another, Co. Lib. Intr. 29. a. not first de bonis
testatoris si, etc. See Bro. Ex. 22 these reasons for this diff.
for his own debt, not being executor. And the reason why the Law makes these
so penal to an executor is, because his Plea is not only false, but the
falsehood thereof was wilful, since it must of necessity be known to
himself to be so. And lastly for that all these Pleas, if they had proved
true, had been perpetual bars at least against the defendant, 33 H. 6. 23,
24.
the first indeed had not been a bar against another being in truth
executor or administrator. But if the executor had pleaded a release made to
his Testator, finding such an one among his writings which yet was either
forged or never both sealed and delivered by the plantife as his deed, So of
other perform. Co. Lib. Intr. 133. a.
or if he plead payment made by his Testator, neither of these Pleas found
against him shall cause the judgment to fasten upon his own goods, 6 E. 4. 1.
7 E. 4. 8 So Bro. Ex. c. 22 that the Book contrarily reported 34. H. 6. 22, 23.
is erroneous, as was descryd by Fitz. and al. 23. H. 8. the Record being not so
as the Book says the judgment was.
so if he denied the Bond or Bill, whereupon the Suit is grounded, to be the
Testators deed. For in all these cases the truth being not known to him, he
might honestly, and reasonably conceive it to be as he did plead. But what if
he plead fully administered, and this be found against him, which rested in
his own knowledge? shall not this false Plea expose his own goods in defect
of his Testators to the satisfaction of this debt? no it shall not for that
though this were a false plea, and that within his own knowledge, yet was it
not a perpetual ^^rre, for if it had been so found as was pleaded, yet assets
coming after to the hand of the Executor, the plaintiff should then have
relief, and satisfaction out of these since accrued assets. If any ask how
assets may after come, I will give him two or three instances. First, it may
be by recovery of debts before withholden, or of damages for goods taken away,
or by voluntary payment of a debt not before due, for that the time of payment
was not come. Secondly, if the Testator having a lease for twenty years did
demise the same to I. S. for the whole term, if he so long should live, if
he were alive in time of the former verdit, but now is dead, the term
continuing, this is now assets which before was not, whilst it was but a
possibility of a term. Other instances might be given, but these may suffice.
Lib. Intr. 148. 149. This good though the judge. were by non sum inform. and no
averment that it was without covin.
If the Executor pleaded that the Testator stood bound in such a Statute, or
that there was such a judgment against him of debt to the King, beyond the
satisfaction whereof the goods would not reach: This is in effect a fully
administered, though special, and not general, and the Law is alike (as I take
it) in all these cases as to the not making of the Executors goods liable. Co.
Lib. Intra. 152.
But in all these causes though the debt shall not be adjudged upon the
Executors own goods, 11 H. 4. 5. There a cap. ad sat. was awarded for the
Damages.
yet the damages shall, in default of the Executors goods to satisfy them. And
in these cases it is not material whether the judgment passed upon trial or
demurrer. Nay if the defendant Executor plead no plea, but confess the action
generally, or be condemned by Non sum informatus, the judgment is the same,
viz. to record the debt only out of the Testators goods, and the damages of
the Executors goods in default of the Testators, what if the Executor
defendant, confess that he have assets to the value of part of the debt, not
of the whole; there for so much as is confessed the plaintiff may pray, and
have judgment presently without damages, But he may I think forbear so to
do, and to the judgment for part ad that when more assets come he shall have
more. Lib. Intracion. Fol. 223.
and may maintain for the residue of the debt that the defendant also has
assets for the rest, and so go to trial, as appears both by the printed
Book of entries, and another manuscript which I have; But what if this trial
pass against the plaintiff? shall he then have an additionall judgment for
damages in respect of the former? I think he shall have costs, which
commonly run, with or in the name of damages, but without a writ to enquire
of damages, none being found by Verdicts, the Court does not usually adiudge
damages: yet in the Book of entries I find 6s. 8d. Fol. 542.
damages assessed by the Court upon a confession in a writ of Rationab. part
bonorum against Executors, and this has much affinity with the action of debt.
Yea, in the very action of debt where the Jurors for miscariage after their
departure from the Bar were fined, I find that the plaintiff renouncing the
assesment of damages by them made; M. 28. H. 6. To. a. 321.
and praying the Court to assesse the same, Lib. Intra. 329. a.
it was done accordingly, but this was a special case.

Whereas we before showed that an Executor denying his executorship shall if
it be found against him, pay the debt of his own goods for his false plea;
This thereabout occurreth to be added, viz. that that is only where the
immediate executorship of the defendant is denied. For if B. be made Executor
by A. and B. dying makes C. his Executor; now if C. be sued for the debt of A.
as Executor of B. Executor of A and he denies that B. was Executor of A.
which by consequence is a denial of his being now Executor of A. yet if this
fall out in trial against him, he shall not in his own goods stand liable to
this debt; because it is possible that he might not know to whom his Testator
was Executor. So if A. See Lib. Intr. 322.
made B. C. and D. his executors, and E. is sued as executor of D. the
surviving executor of A. if E. deny that D. his Testator survived B. and C. by
consequence whereof he denies the truth, viz. that the executorship of A. is
devolved to him, yet shall not this found against him, charge his own goods,
for he might be ignorant of this point in fact, viz. whether B. C. or D.
lived longest. And here he denied not his own immediate executorship, but a
mediate or more remote executorship; and so I think is the Law where C. being
sued as executor of B. executor of A. he pleades that A. by a latter Testament
made himself executor which is found against him, so as here he falsely
pleaded, and pretended himself to be the immediate executor of A. and so
denied the mediate executorship, viz. of B. to A. and of him to B. yet Quere of
this, for why should not as well his false making himself an executor
immediate to the indebted Testator charge his own goods as well as his false
denying of that executorship; since both plees tend to the overthrow of the
plaintifes action, and each equally rested in the defendants knowledge. But
this difference is between them apparent, viz. that the denial of
executorship, if true, is an utter, and perpetual Bar to the plaintiff, as
against him so pleading; but the affirming of an immediate executorship where
he was sued as executor mediate, does not so it true, but directs the
plaintiff to a better writ or action, viz. against him as immediate executor to
the indebted Testator.

Where we have before touched upon the coming of Assets futurely to executors,
I think it not amiss to consider a little the form and frame usual in pleas
of fully administered which thus run, viz. Quod die impetr. and plene
administravit omnia bona and catalla quae fuerunt praed. Lib. Intr. 151.
S. temp. mortis suae, and nihil hab. de bonis, etc. quae ^uer. praed. S. temp.
mortis, etc.

Thus tying his denial upon the things which were the testators at the time of
his death. 7. H. 4. 39. Bro. 50. This plea is not good per cur* because some
may ha^^ since accrued.
What if then the executor have at the time of this plea pleaded goods with
were not the testator^ at his death, but since accrued as before is showed, or
perhaps a lease for years sold by the testator upon condition to be void, if
five hundred pounds not paid at such a day, which happening after the testators
death and default made, the term returns; Or if the executor by a writ of
error reverse a judgment given against his testator for two hundred pounds,
and so is restored thereunto: May the plaintiff now reply generally that he
has assets which were the testators at the time of his death: How can the Jury
so find, when the truth is not so? Surely this case is not common, nor can I
show a president of a special plea therein. But in reason me thinks it should
be specially and not generally pleaded and set forth in the replication. And in
case where one sued as executor denies that he was ever executor or
administered as executor, Lib. Intrac. 322. a. b. but a place must be showed. So
21 H 6. 19, 20. Bro. 62.
I find sometimes the replication general that he did administer without
showing wherein or how, and sometimes special showing what thing was
administered and where. Here note, that the executor defendant denying (as he
must) two things, viz. 1. That he never was executor; 2. That he never
administered as executor* the plaintiff in his replication is tied to maintain
but the one of them as the truth of the case is; that is, if in truth the
defendant were made executor, but never did administer, now it must be replied
that he was made executor at such a place, without speaking any thing of his
administering. On the other side if he did administer, but were not made
executor, then only the administering is to be replied; So done Co. lib. Int.
144. b.
but if it shall be found that the defendant had administration to him committed
and so administered by virtue thereof, then is the verdict to pass for the
defendant, for this is no administering as executor, and upon a general denial
thereof this may be given in evidence, as the Lo. Dyar reports to have been
resolved. Mich. 13. and 14. Bliz. Die. 305.
But if the plaintiff do in his replication maintain both the points, shall
this make his plea double? Me thinks it should, yet I find it so replied, and
no exception taken for the doubleness. Lib. int. 322. b.
Tr. 17. H. 8. Rot. 28.

A sole woman being executor makes a deed of gift of the testators goods in
trust, Tr. 37. Eliz.
but continues possession of them and marries J. S. who also has possession
of the goods, and in an action of debt by a creditor fully administered is
pleaded: now upon evidence the verdict shall pass for the plaintiff; for this
alienation being fraudulent was void as to all creditors, and so as to the
plaintiff the goods continued the testators, and so assets in the defend^nts
hands, as was held in the Kings Bench. If fully administered be pleaded where
the defendant has assets for part but not sufficient for all, and so it is
found, yet shall not judgment be given for the whole, Yet Finch. 46. E. 3. f.
9, 10 held the contrary, viz. that judgment should be of the whole, but
execution only for so much, and a Sci. fac. for the rest when more assets.
but for part presently with a further award, that when more shall come to the
executors hand, the plaintiff shall then have further judgment for the rest,
so as that false plea does him no prejudice, but makes him in as good state,
the charges of trial excepted, as if he had confessed himself to have part.
And I think the plaintiff upon that confession of part may pray the like
judgment without maintaining that the defendant has sufficient for the rest;
for if that be not true, why should he be put to the charge of a trial by
Jury: yea Sir Edw Cook at the Bar Tr. 36. Eliz. See Co. lib. 8. f. 134.
said, that where fully administered is pleaded, the plaintiff is not tied to
maintain the contrary, but may presently pray and have judgment to recover it
when assets shall futurely come to the defendants hands, which was denied by
some; but truly me thinks the law should be as he said as well as in the former
case, where for the part which the defendant had not assets to pay, it so was
done upon verdict so finding. But there, as I conceive, it was not a present
judgment, but an award that he should have judgment futurely; so as after
when assets come to the defendants hands, the plaintiff must have a Seire
faeias against the defendant, to show cause not why he should not have
execution, but why he should not have judgment as I take it, yea where it is
found for the defendant, that he has fully administered, yet was is held by all
the Justices, 33 Hen. 6. 23, 24. and by ^riso^ 34 Hen. 6. 24. that when assets
after come to his hands, the plaintiff shall have a Scire sacias to have
satisfaction out of them, but there Markham, Yelverton, and Forteseu, were of
contrary opinion, and so was the whole Court, 4 Hen. 6. fo 4* And it stands
with great reason, that where upon a verdict fully found against the plaintiff,
So 19 H 6. f. 37 (...) 4. f. 24 See judgment so entered. Co. lib. Intr. 151. b.
judgment is given quod nihil capiat per breve, there he cannot have any writ
to execute the judgment for him, but is put to a new action of debt; yet where
it is found that the defendant has assets for part of the debt, but not
sufficient for the whole, there it is very congruous that the plaintiff have
presently judgment for part, and after when more comes, then by Scire facias
against the defendant obtain judgment and execution for the rest; ^o 7 E. 4.
f. 9.
for here both verdict and judgment were for the plaintiff against the
defendant, whose plea, that he had no goods, was false, and so found by the
jury. And this difference was strongly avowed by Sergeant Hanham, Mich. 33. 34.
Eliz. and after approved by Fenner Just. 36. Eliz. none contradicting it, It is
11 H. 6. 40, 41.
yet a book was cited, that the plaintiff recovering so much as was found in
the executors hands should be amersed for the residue, which Popham Chief
Justice denied to be law.

Chap. XVI.
Where judgment shall be against the Executors own goods, though no plea of
the defendant nor vastation do so occasion, and of the several manners of
judgment in several cases.
HOw by wasting, called by us commonly, a Devastavit, an executor may draw down
the execution upon his own goods, has formerly been handled and discoursed
of, as also what kind of pleas do make the executors own goods liable to the
debt, and what not. Now let us see where without mis-administring or
mis-pleading, yet the nature of the action shall lay the whole debt or thing
recovered upon the executors own goods. And this we shall find in some few
cases, 1. Where an executor is sued for rent behind after his testators death,
upon a lease for years, made to the testator, and by him left to his executor.
Here it shall be adjudged and levied upon his own goods, for that so much of
the profits as the rent amounted to shall be accounted as his own goods, and
not his testators, therefore is he to be sued as well in the debet as the
detin^t, where in other cases he is not, but in the detinet only being sued as
executor. So if any thing delivered to or detained by his testator come to his
hands, and he still detaines the same after the demand, and be thereupon sued
in an action of detinue, for this is his own act, nor in this case need he to
be named as executor, for he shall not answer damages for his testators
detaining. So if he assume to pay a debt of his testators having assets, and be
sued upon this Assumpt. the which debt is to be recovered in damages, and that
upon or out of the executors own goods, yet is this action and the assumption
which is the ground thereof founded in the executorship and his having assets,
for if either he had not been executor, or if he had not assets at the time of
the promise, it had been nudum pactum, 5 Mariae fol. 182.
and would not have bound him nor given good cause of suit. Nay to go further,
in the case of assumption by the testator, and suit against the executor,
thereupon we find the judgment in M. Plowdens Commentary given against the
executor generally, as if he had not been an executor, not fixing it upon the
testators goods, Read and Norwoods case.
yet there the very debt it self is included in the damages. Co. l. b. Intr.
fo. 1. 2.
But contrarily was it after in the seventh year of the late King, viz.
judgment given, that as well the damages as the costs should be levied of the
testators goods, if so much in value of them were in the defendants hands; and
if not, then the costs only of the goods of the executor. And this surely is
the righter and more just way, for there is no reason, that upon on a promise,
more then upon a bond, the law should cast the whole debt upon the back and
state of the executor. But perhaps the two judgments may be reconciled thus,
the later was given upon a verdict non assumpsit, being the issue, and there
the Jury assessed damages in certain, viz. two hundred fifty three pounds with
the costs. So as here the judgment was complete and full, viz. to recover the
said sum, but in the other case the judgment was had upon a demurrer, so as
the damages not being known, it was generally that the plaintiff should
recover his damages against the defendant. Sed quia nescitur quae damna, etc.
because it appears not to the Court what the damages were, therefore a writ
was awarded to inquire of damages, upon the return whereof executed, the
judgment was fully and completely to be given of a sum in certain, which
second judgment it appears not by the book in what manner it was entered, and
therefore might perhaps be then agreeable with the other. And that the said
first judgment before damages inquired of is not a plenary and full judgment,
Tr. 30. Eliz.
but an award of judgment has been diverse times resolved, Pase. 33. Eliz. in
com. banc.
and that therefore any defect and insufficiency in the declaration may be
showed time enough after the first, and before the second judgment. Yea if the
plaintiff dye before the second judgment, though after the first the action
falls to the ground: So if the defendant dye, otherwise of death after full
judgment. But this notwithstanding, and howsoever it there were done upon the
second judgment, me thinks it were righter and fitter that the first judgment
should express that the damages should be had and levied out of the testators
goods, for whom and in whose right the executor is sued.

Another case there is wherein the judgment must be as it seems against the
executors own goods, So for rent behind since the testators death.
viz. in an action of covenant for a breach of covenant since the testators
death; Co. lib. 5. fo. 31. the suit is in the debet as for his own debt.
for so was it held both by all the Judges of Common Pleas, except the L. Dyar,
M. 14. and 15. Eliz.
and by the pregnotaries in the late Queens time, where the case was of an
house upon the lease negligently burned in the executors time, for which
damages only were to be recovered. And sometimes where the executor himself is
so to bear the burden, Lib. Intr. 329. a. and b. De terris and catallis, etc.
I find the judgment entered that the sum recovered shall be levied of the
lands and goods of the executor.

Chap. XVII.
Of women covert Executors.
THere being two kind of persons who have some disability upon them, viz.
Femme coverts or married women and infants, touching whom we find in many
places question and disceptation in our books: We will consider of them by
themselves, or apart from others, yet not joining them together neither, but
each by himself separately.

First therefore of Femme coverts, touching whom we will consider these three
things.

First, whether they may make Wills and

Secondly, whether they may be made executors

Thirdly, what acts in execution of the executorship

A woman married, Sect. 1.
or femme covert, we know is Sub potestate viri, cui in vita contradicere non
potest, as says the writ given by the Law to the wife for recovery of her land
after her husbands death, being aliened by him. Therefore it is that Judges,
Sola and secreta examinata.
when a woman is to acknowledge a fine of any land, do examine her apart from
her husband, to know whether she be willing, or come to do it by the
compulsion of her husband: It is therefore hard for her to have freedom of
will, and consequently freedom to make a will. Besides, all her movables or
goods personal, Debts except which are not properly good.
which she had at the time of her marriage, otherwise than as executrix or
administratrix, are by the Law totally divested out of her, and settled in the
husband as fully ipso facto upon the very marriage, as any other that were his
own before: Of these therefore she can make no disposition, no more than of
other her husbands goods. But in case she do by will bequeath them, although
the will and gift be void, yet if the husband, 5. Ed. 2. Fitz. devise. 24.
as the case was in the time of Edw. the second, do after his wives death
consent to this her will and gift, by delivering of the goods bequeathed after
her death, or assenting that the legatee take them by virtue of such will and
gift; this amounts to a new gift by the husband. If a woman have a lease, an
estate by extent, a wardship, the next avoydance of a Church, or other chattell
real; these are not divested out of her into her husband by marriage, but in
case she over-live him, they continue to her as before, no alienation or
alteration having been made by the husband, who had power to dispose of them by
gift in his lifetime, though not by his will; yet such a woman in her husbands
lifetime could not of or for these things, without her husbands assent, make
an executor or will, but she dying before him, they would, by the operation of
law, accrue to him. And here then observe a case, though not frequent, yet full
of mischief when it happens: Suppose that a woman indebted a thousand pounds,
and having leases and moveable goods to the value of three thousand or four
thousand pounds, marries with I. S. and then dies before the debt be
recovered against her: in this case the husband shall have and go away with
all this value of his wife, and is not in law liable to pay one penny of her
debts, During her life he is, but not after.
because he is neither her executor nor administrator: What the Chancery could
do, or rather what the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper would do in this case,
I will not take upon me to say or determine. Another sort or kind of goods, or
rather interests a woman may have, viz. debts or things in action, which as the
former are not divested out of her by marriage into her husband, But the
husband may receive them, or release them.
nor yet can she thereof make an executor without her husbands assent,
although they be one degree farther from the husband than the said chatels
realls, for that though the husband do overlive the wife, he shall not be
entitled to them as to the former: 12. H. 7. f. 22.
But if his wife make him executor, The husband was sued in Spirit. Court. as
executor to his wife.
as she may, or if after her death he take administration of her goods, then
as he is thereby entitled to them, so is he liable also to pay her debts out of
the same, when he shall have received them.

Lastly, So she is often to former husband, and to father etc.
Dato, that a woman covert is executrix to some other person, and in that right
has goods moveable; these are not divested out of her, because she has them
not merely to her own use, but as representing the person of another: But
whether then may she without her husbands license or assent in respect of her
being an executor, and for continuation of this executorship make executors,
and consequently a will or not? Hereabout has been much diversity of opinion:
Some books generally speak that the wife may make an executor, but speak
nothing of the husbands assent, 39. H. 6. f. 27.
whether necessary or not. Elsewhere we find it mentioned, that if the husband
after the wives death countermand (some books false printed say command) the
proving of his wives will, 34. H. 8. S. Bro. Testame^ts 21.
then it loses all force, or becomes void and of no value: but in this case
is no mention in what state this wife stood viz. whether she were executor or
not, no nor so much as whether she had any thing in action or chatell real or
not, so as nothing in particularity can be grounded upon that case. But there
are express opinions that the husbands assent is absolutely necessary even in
this case, 18. E. 4. f. 11. Vavasor Inst.
so as without it the wives making an executor shall be merely void, and
consequently, he to whom she was executor, shall now by her death be dead
intestate. And of this opinion was Babington, chief Justice in the beginning
of Henry the sixth his time: 4. H. 6. f. 31.
Yet contrary hereunto was the opinion of Fineux chief Justice in the time of
King Henry the seventh, 12. H. 7. 24. b.
viz. that where the wife is an executor she may also make a will and an
executor without any consent or assent of her husband. Tit. D^vis. f. 27.
And to this opinion does Master Perkins after consideration of the books on
both sides incline. But some will say that since all this in the late Queens
time this has been contrarily resolved, (...) 29. Eliz. in (...).
viz. in the case between Andrew Ognell plaintiff, and Underhill and Apleby
defendants, in the end of which Case, it is in express terms said to have
been then resolved that a femme Covert or married woman, Cook lib. 4* 51. b.
could not make an Executor without the consent of her Husband. To this I
answer that this Case is to be construed with relation, Ad materiam subjectam,
viz. to the matter, and point in question, and under consideration; which was
that state of a woman whereof we have before spoken, viz. one having things in
action debts or duties to her belonging, a^ therein particular it was
arrearages of rent due to the woman before marriage. As for the point of a
woman executor to another person, it was never in that Case, under
disceptation, no nor once mentioned in the debate or arguments thereupon. Now
considering the very form, and phrase of judgments at the common Law, which
are thus, viz. Ideo consideratum est per Curiam, etc. not Adjudicatum est, that
is, it is considered by the Court, not in express terms, that it is adjudged:
This I say well observed (as to me it seems very remarkable) gives us to know
that no more is adjudged then is considered of, the judgment being contained,
and clasped up in the word Consideratum est. Wherefore since in Ognells Case,
the point of a woman coverts ability in Case where she is an Executor; To make
a will, and Executor has not been considered of the eyes, tongues, nor
thoughts of the Judges, being not once set upon it; It cannot be, that that
point is there resolved or adjudged. Besides, even in a few words expressing as
to me it seems, the reason of that resolution, it appears not to have been
the intent of the Judges, that the same should reach or extend to this Case, of
a woman covert executor: for it is added (as the reason of the judgment in my
conceiving) that the administration of the wives goods does of right belong to
the husband, which amounts to this in my understanding, viz. that where the
wives making of a will* and consequently of an Executor, may be prejudicial
to her husband, and prevent him of some benefit or advantage, or tend to his
loss, and disadvantage, there it shall not be avaylable or effectual without
his assent, and therefore not in the Case of her, who having debts or duties to
her due, would by making another to be her Executor exclude or preclude her
husband from that benefit, which to him should pertain as administrator of her
goods. Now as for the goods debts or credit to her as executor to some other
pertaining no benefit could redound to the husband, by having such
administration of his wives goods, for those should go, and be to the next of
kin of the wives Testator taking administration De bonis non administratis of
him, if ^hee have no Executor, and therefore her making an Executor as touching
these brings no hurt nor prejudice to her husband, and so is out of the reason
of Ognells Case. Since then it is so, and since the Law favors wills, and it
was by implication part of his will who made her Executor, that she should
have power to continue his Executorship by making another to succeed therein
after her decease for performance of his will; why should the Law give to the
Husband who can receave no prejudice thereby, power to give impediment
thereunto; for Frustra est inutilis potentia, even reason it self frames, and
awards against him in this Case a Quare impedit, or rather a Non impediet, as
to me it seems. Wherefore to conclude, I take it that the opinion of Fineux
is good Law in that point of a f^me covert Executor, though not in the other
point, where she only has debts, or things in action to her self due, for
therein the said resolution in Ognells Case, grounded upon good reason, gives
me satisfaction to differ from Fineux, who making no difference between the
cases held the Husbands assent needles in both. Posito then that the wife of I.
S. having debts due to her self, and being also Executrix to I. D. makes
without her husbands assent, I. N. her executor, and dies, what shall we now
say? shall we say, that as touching the goods, and credits, or things in
action to her as executrix of I. D. pertaining this will stands good, and I. N.
as her Executor may prove it contrary to her hus^ands will; and that as to the
credits to her self in her own right pertaining, the will is void, void, and
thereof her husband may take administration? Shall she dye both testate, and
intestate with a will, and without a will? shall she have both an executor,
and administrator? why not? Note.
to several purposes as well as where an executor is made only for one
particular thing or one place, the Testator may elsewhere dye intestate: and so
where the executorship is divided as before is showed, and one to whom part is
committed will prove the will, but the other to whom other part of the
executorship is committed will not take it upon him, here must needs be a
dying for part testate, and for part intestate.

As for the second point, viz. wives or women coverts being made executors, and
so having the office of executorship put upon them against their husbands will,
13. Ed. 1. Fitz. Exec. 119.
there has also been diversity of opinions. In the time of King Edward 1.
Brab. Justice says she may executor without her husband, and the
administration shall be delivered to her only. And I think he meant that
this might be without the consent of her husband or whether he would or not,
for so is it said in the time of King Henry the seventh to be the Law
spiritual, ^ Hen. 7. 15. b.
and indeed in Courts spiritual no difference is made between women married,
and unmarried, for ought I can find: there a wife sueth, and is sued alone
without her husband; he intermedleth not, nor is intermedled withal touching
the things pertaining to his wife. But at the common law it is otherwise, and
there as Bryan Chief Justice says, 2 H. 7. 15.
a wife without the assent of her husband cannot be executor, he meaning
thereby that the husband may oppose and hinder it: for such an one may be named
executor in and by a Will without the knowledge of her husband: let us then see
how after the death of the testator, the husband can hinder her proving of the
will or intermedling to administer, since it may be a matter both of much
trouble and danger to him, to have the executorship fasten upon his wife, and
consequently upon himself. On the other side, it may be a benefit and
advantage to the husband, and therefore we will also consider, whether the
husband may (though his wife would refuse) assume the executorship and fasten
it upon her. The testator therefore being dead, and fame or common bruit
carrying it to the Ordinary, that the wife of I. S. is made executrix, if she
come not in gratis, or voluntarily to prove the Will; Process or a citation is
to be sent out of the Spiritual Court against her, to enforce her coming in
to take on her the executorship. She coming may clearly, as well as any other
person (especially if her husband concur with her therein) refuse this
office, trust and charge, so as if there be no other executor named, the
Ordinary must commit the administration: If she should not come and appear,
she should be excommunicate as I take it, notwithstanding any allegation or
intimation by her husband of his unwillingnesse to have her take upon her the
executorship. But suppose she does come into Court and offers her self ready
to take the executorship upon her, and on the other side her husband expresses
his disassent thereunto, praying that she may not have the execution of the Will
to her committed, what will then be done? This I confess pertaines to another
learning, and not to that of our profession: but forasmuch as I find that in
the Courts spiritual a wife stands in the same plight and state as a woman
sole, the husband not intermedled with all in the affairs of the wife;
Therefore do I conceive that in that Court, the husbands refusal will not be of
force to hinder the committing of the executorship to the wife not refusing, at
least if there come not a prohibition to stay the Spiritual Courts such
proceeding: but whether a prohibition be in such a case to be granted or not,
as I find no resolution in my books, so will I not take upon me to resolve. This
stands clear in the rules of the law of England, 33 H. 6. 31. 43. 39 Ed. 3. 1.
that the wife is under the husbands power, and cannot contradict him in
pleading and doing other acts even touching her own Freehold: 27 H. 8. 24.
nay she cannot take lands nor goods by gift or conveyance, without her
husbands assent, as the law has been, and for ought I know is taken. But if
once the Will be proved, and the execution thereof committed to the wife,
though against her husbands mind and consent, I think it will stand sirme, and
the husband and wife being after sued cannot say that she was never executrix,
and I doubt whether the wife administering without the husbands privity and
assent, although the will be not proved, do not conclude her husband as well as
her self, from saying after in any suit against them, that she neither was
executor, nor did ever administer as executor. 18 H. 6. 4. The plea is that the
femme did or did not administer without speaking of the husband.
Yet perhaps this administration by the wife against her husbands mind, will
as against him be as a void act, else cannot I see how Brians opinion before
cited, viz. that the wife shall not be an executor, without or against her
husbands mind, can be law. On the other side if the husband of a woman, named
executor, would have his wife to take upon her the execution of the Will, 33 H.
6. 31. The husband may administer and prove the will for his wife.
and to prove the same, but she will not assent thereunto (wishing perhaps that
gain and benefit rather to some of her kindred by way of administration then
to her own husband by her executorship: as sometimes wives accord not well
with their husbands) in this case I think the Court Spiritual will not fasten
the executorship upon the wife against her will. But dato, that the husband
though the Will be not proved, does administer as in the wives right, but
against her mind and will, shall she be now hereby bound and concluded, so as
after she cannot decline or avoid the executorship: and surely I think that
during her husbands life, she stands concluded at the common law, for that
there she shall not be, nor can be sued alone as executor, and then being sued
with him she must join in plea with him, viz. that she neither was executor,
nor administered as executor, and then this act of her husbands given in
evidence, will as I take it, cause that the verdict be found against her, 1.
El. Die. 166. b. there is cited 3 H. rot. 112. Nota per Bill.
not so after her husbands death: then she may refuse, as the Lord Dyar says,
and cites as resolved. These things I thought good to offer to consideration,
and so leave them without resolution. Difference perhaps may be, where a woman
so made executor takes an husband after the testators death, before either
proving or refusing to prove the Will, and where she is made executor during
the coverture, as there is in case of a descent of her land to the heir of a
disseasor; for when there is upon her such a state of election, she marying
before her resolution or determination, does upon the matter deliver it into
the husbands hands: not so where it first finds and falls upon her in the
state of coverture: if the husband were indebted to the Testator, this making
of the wife executor is as I take it, a release in law, as well as if she were
the debtor, but if after the testators death she do marry such a debtor, it is
a devastation.

The third Point.
Touching the administration or execution of the Office of executor by a Femme
covert and her husband.
WE will now come to admit the execution of the will assumed by concurrent
consent of husband and wife, and the will proved with both their likeing in the
wives name, and examine what acts the wife of her self is able to do, and what
her husband without her.

It has been conceived by many of old, and by some of late, that if a Femme
covert or married woman executrix release a debt of her testator, or give away
the goods which she has as executor, 7 H. 4. 13.
or deliver a legacy bequeathed, it was firm and good, and on the other side,
that her husbands gift or release was of no value, See 18 H. 6. 4. In det the
plea shall be that she has fully administered and replic. that she has
assets, never me^tioning the husband.
for that the administration or execution of the will is committed to the wife
only, and some have gone so far as to say that she may sue or be sued without
her husband (in the Courts of Common Law, I mean, for in the Spiritual Court
it is true the husband is not joined with the wife in suit) but the law is
doubtless in all those points contrary, as not only some opinion also was of
old, viz. in the time of H. 7. but also has been in the late Queens time
resolved, for otherwise, if the wives gift or release should stand good, her
act might exceedingly endamage her husband, and make his goods liable to the
creditors, the testators state being wasted by the gifts or releases of his
wife. Wherefore it was held in the said late case, that unless due payment
were made to such women covert executors, their releases or acquittances be
void, and so also their gifts and grants: yea it was then held that the husband
of the wife executrix, 33 H. 6. 31.
may give goods or make releases of debts at his pleasure. But doubtless by
marriage, neither are the goods though personal which the wife has as
executor, divested out of her and settled in her husband as her own goods are;
nor if she dye, shall they acrue to the husband, if no alteration were of the
property, but shall go to her executor or to the next of kin being
administrator of her testator if she have no executor, and so was it held in
the first year of Queen Mary: Yea though for any other goods which the wife
had in her own right before marying, the husband alone without naming the wife
may maintain an action of trespass; yet touching such goods as the wife has
as executor the action must be brought in the names of the husband and wife to
the end that the damages thereby recovered may accrue to her as executor in
lieu of the goods. M. 31. El. in com. b. If the husband be to avow, it must be
in the right of his wife executor or administrator.
So also must the replevin for those goods be in both their names. But although
the husband be thus named with the wife, Manfilds case.
yet principally is it the suit of the wife, and therefore in such actions or
in debt by husband and wife, she being executor, if it come to trial by Jury,
the husband being an alien, Doctor Juli^ his case.
yet shall he not have trial per medietatem linguae or alienigenarum, that is,
by half aliens, as in other cases: Cases where an alien is party to a suite is
to be had. And whereto a wife made executor, power is given to sell land of
the testators; she may sell to her own husband, as was resolved in the time
of King Henry the seventh, 10. H. 7. 20.
where the Feoffees (it being land settled in use) were committed to the Fleet,
for that they would not execute an estate to the husband, according to the
wives state. But of this I much marvel, Bro. Just. Cui in vita 15. She may
sell to any other, but not to him.
since the Law intends the wife so under the husbands command and subjection,
that it holds not her disposition of land to him by will free, nor therefore of
force, and how shall this then be conceived to be but a partial sale; yet
volenti non sit injuria, and he that will put such power into the hands of a
woman under coverture, does in a manner subject it voluntarily to the husbands
will. Fenner Just. in ba. reg. Pas^. 37. Eliz. and 34. E. 3. Bro. Cui in vita.
15.
And it has been held by some, that even an infants or femme coverts
conveyance in such case of necessity should stand firm and unavoydable, No
prejudice to them that it be good.
because of the condition express or implied, that the state should be void,
if no such conveyance made.

Touching infants, and their making or being made executors.
BEing now to consider of disability by age, for want of years in persons
making or being made executors: Let us first take view of the several ages of
men and women to several purposes material in the laws judgment 35. H. 6.
41. b.
Wangford in Henry the sixth his time shows, and other books approve that she
has six several ages, respected in and by the law. As first the age of seven
years, for her father to have aid of his tenants to marry her. 18. Eliz. cap.
7.
when it was made felony to have unlawful carnal knowledge of any woman child
under the age of ten years, it being then conceived, as I think, that no such
could consent. Littleton have here no distinction between male and female. The
age of fourteen years is a woman's time to

Now of the male, or man, the first age material

The second age of males is fourteen years, accounted by the Law, the age of
discretion, especially material to two purposes, viz. First, that if one under
that age commit an act amounting to felony, yet is he to stand free from the
attainder and punishment incident to a fellon: Regularly it is thus, but non
est regula quin fall it, one of much less years having attained ripeness of
discretion and discerning, shall incur the like attainder as one of full age,
as was resolved in the time of King Henry the seventh, 3. H. 7. f. 1. 6.
touching an infant but of the age of nine years, who having killed another
boy of like age with his knife, and then hiding the slain boy, and excusing
the blood found upon him, by saying that his nose had bled: It was held by the
Judges that he was to be hanged as a fellon, his such nonage notwithstanding.
The other point, touching which, this age of fourteen years is especially
material, is touching an heir of lands held by socage; for in case such heir
be under that age, he is to be in ward to the next kin, but if he be of that
age, he is not to be in ward at all, for that the law judges him to be of
discretion at those years, and therefore a Guardian in Socage being in effect
but a Bayliffe accountable, he has no need of such an one, other than such as
himself shall choose.

by Knights Service, when his eldest son comes to that age, viz. fifteen
years, is to have of them aid for the making of him a Knight, toward which
every one holding by a whole Knights Fee is to pay twenty shillings, and so
ratably for more, more; and less, less: and each holding twenty pound land in
Socage, is to pay the like sum, and so ratably for more or less.

The fourth age of males, is the full age of

The last age of males respected by the law, Oblitum.
at which time Sheriffs are to forbear to impanell them in Juries, Another of
60 to exempt from being compelled to serve by the stat. of laborers 23. E. 3.
cap. 1.
and in case they do not, such old man may have a writ to the Sheriff,
grounded upon the statute for that purpose, made in the time of King Edward the
first, W. 2. cap. 38. 13 Ed. 1. no. na. br. 165. ^
commanding such Sheriff to forbear the impanelling of him; and he may have
an action to recover damages upon that statute: This is called by most a writ
of Dotage, a word, perhaps, anciently taken in a good and favorable sense, Pro
dote etatis, viz. a gift, privilege, or exemption allowed to age in favor
thereof, and as a benefit. Having thus by way of ingredient or introduction
taken view of these several ages, let us now see wherein and how age is
material, touching them who are to make or to be made executors, and what age
required thereabout. Master Perkins says, Devises. f. 97.
that one of four years old may make a will, and consequently executors; and
his reason is, because the executors being to account before the Ordinary, No
good reason, for one may make an ill account; specially having a childs
direction for his doings.
it cannot be intended but that the goods shall be distributed for the good of
his soul: He speaks as if he only made an executor by his will, but did not
bequeath any thing, but left all to the executors conscience and discretion,
which is not usual, though fesible, as before I have showed, or said at least.
But admit it were so, and no bequest at all contained in the will, yet since at
that age an infant has no discretion to elect a fit person to distribute his
goods, money, and other things; no nor to make continuation of an executorship
to another, to whom perhaps the infant was executor: I cannot see that his will
should be of any force, but if he be of the age of 14. years, being the age of
discretion, in the judgment of law, then I should hold him able to make a
will, although yet he be an infant till twenty one years, and can make no gift
of land nor goods which shall be of force. And Babington chief Justice, 9. H.
6. f. 6.
to other purpose makes like distinction between an infant of such tender
years, and one come to the years of discretion. So also as before we showed,
is it in the Case of felony. And that way also sounds that which Hanck: 2. H.
4. 22.
says in Henry the fourth his time, viz. that an infant of 18. years old may
be a disseisor; as implying that his years may be so tender, 40 Ed. 3. 44.
that as Candish says of an infant in Edward the third his time, he is not to
be intended able to know or discern between good, and evil, me thinks
therefore he should be at the least of the age of discretion, viz. 14. years
who should be able to make a will, and consequently an Executor. And the
custom for an infant of 15. years old to bequeath by will has as to me it
seems, 37. H. 6. 5.
affinity with this opinion, though there the Case was of land in a borou^h
devisable by custom: 11. H. 6. f. 40. 6.
and that way reflecteth the Case in the time of King Henry the sixth, where it
was said that an infant under 15. years of age should not wage his Law, viz.
take an oath to acquit himself of a debt or excuse his default in an action
real. And further reason of this opinion will arise out of the consideration
of an infant made an Executor.

Now touching an infant made Executor how young soever he be, the making of
him so is not void, but yet the execution of the will which is the performance
of the office of Executor shall not be committed to him till he come to the
age of 17. years by the Law spiritual, and till then (for that he is not
able to do the part of an Executor,) administration is to be committed to
some other; yet if it be a woman infant who is so made Executrix, Co. lib. 5.
f. 29. P.
in Case she be married to a man of 17 years old or more, now is it as if
she were of that age, and her husband shall have the Execution of the will,
and if administration were before committed during the minority of the woman,
M. 41. and. 42. Eliz.
it shall now cease, as is said in Princes Case. Yet I do a little marvel at
these opinions, considering that these things are managed in the spiritual
court, and by that Law; and it intermedles not with the husband, in the wives
case; now by that Law, and not our common law, comes in this limit of 17.
years. And I have seen it otherwise reported in, and touching this last point.

Further touching infants Executors, and under that age of 17. years this is
to be noted, viz. that such an one is not able as an Executor to assent to a
legacy, Co. lib. 5. fo. 29. But payment is to be made to the Exec. and not to
the adm. M. 15. and 16. El. in com. ba. rep 67. Co lib. 5. fo. 29.
so as it may by virtue thereof settle in the legatee. Also if administration
be during such minority committed with special words of restraint or
limitation, viz. that it is done to the use or profit of the infant Executor,
then no sale of lease or goods or assent to legacy, by such administrator will
bind or prejudice the infant Executor; But otherwise perhaps if the
administration during the minority be committed generally. Co. lib. 6. fo. 671.
And if the Testator himself, making an infant Executor do also appoint
another to be his Executor during his nonage, expressing it to be only for
the benefit, and behoof of the infant executor, I doubt whether this temporary
executor stand any whit restrained from what pertaines to the power of an
absolute executor, for there may be perhaps difference between him to whom the
owner of the goods commits the government of them, though but for a time, and
in special manner, and an administrator so specially made by the ordinary,
another being presently by the will of the owner or Testator to have the
administration, in whom for a time legal defect is found. But now let us pass
over this age of 17. and consider of the infant between that time of his being
admitted to take upon him the executorship, and his accomplishment of his full
age of 21. First, then suppose that he does release a debt due to his
Testator, whether shall this be good to bind him, and to discharge the debtor
as well as if the executor had bin of full age, he now having proved the will,
and being by the Law spiritual approved an able executor. And this point
coming in question in Russells Case, H. 26. Eliz.
in the late Queens time, consideration was had both of diverse good reasons
for enabling of this release, as that an executor represents the person of his
Testator, and in his right, and power, does these acts, and not in his own,
and therefore his infancy which is a state or condition of his own natural
person, shall no more disable him then it does the King, 16. H. 6. ret 45.
a Mayor or other head of a Corporation. 21. Ed. 4. 13. 24.
Also diverse Books were found to run that way as well in the case of an
infant as of a Femme Covert. But upon great deliberation in the Kings Bench,
and upon conference had with the Lord Anderson, Manwood, and other justices, it
was resolved, and adjudged that the release of an infant executor without
payment of the debt or duty would not bind or bar him, Co. lib. 5. fo. 27.
first for that if it should it would be a wasting or devasting of the goods of
his Testator, and so would charge his own goods. Secondly, It would be a
wrong which an infant could not do by his release. Thirdly, It was no pursuit
nor performance of the office or duty of an executor, but the contrary: And
upon this judgment a writ of error was brought in the Exchequer Chamber, where
it was agreed by all, that the release was not effectual nor binding, so as
this point now had the resolution of all the Judges of England. But it was
agreed, that if payment or satisfaction had been made, then the infant
executor might have made a good acquittance, and discharge, and indeed payment
it self if proved, brings discharge enough, except in the case of a single
Bill; Note that the principal case adjudged was not of a release of any debt
or duty by specialty, but of trespass in conversion of goods found or taken in
the Testators life time. But Po^ito, that this infant had assented to a legacy,
whether will this bind him or not? for in the said Case of Russell, it is said
that all things which an infant does according to the office, and duty of an
Executor, will stand firm; now it is part of his office to pay, and execute
Legacies. Yet since this act amounts to a vastation or wasting of the Testators
goods as well as the other, in case there remain not goods sufficient for
payment of the debts, and consequently here as well as in the other case, the
infants own goods would become liable to his Testator debts; I doubt, and
incline, that it is not nor can stand effectual, for except in the other we
admit a want or possibility of want of assets or goods, the release could
neither hurt the infant himself, nor do wrong to any other, and that
admitted, this case is of like prejudice; yet if this asset should be void so
also would be his payment of Legacies, and how then were he an able Executor
at the age of 17. yes to sue, and to be sued for debts, and Legacies, and if
upon suit it cannot be showed that debts will take up all or disable the
payment, then happily he may be forced to pay; Quaere notwithstanding whether
these acts though voluntary stand not good upon Been esse, or conditionally,
viz. if there be besides goods sufficient, etc. or that else the nonaged
Executor may have an action of account for the money by him paid to the
Legatee, and also avoid his assent where that only needful. But doubtless
neither the assent of such Executor before his age of 17. nor any payment of a
debt to him could be good, although such acts to or by another Executor,
before the proving of the will would stand firm, and good: for this infant
wants not only proving, but also ability to prove his Testators will, yea the
will stands suspended, and the Testator as it were intestate, whilst the
administration stands in force, so as during that time nothing can be done by
any as executor, and therefore there is great difference between the cases.
What if payment of a Legacy be made to an infant, can he make a sufficient
acquittance; This I confess is besides the point in hand, yet because it
concerns infants, and Executors (though not infant Executors) it is not amiss
here to cast some thoughts, and words upon the point, for that it many times
perplexeth both Executors, and Legatees. First, therefore in case the Executor
be of the years of discretion, viz. 14. I hold it clear that any payment to
him made will stand good, for that the Law at that age holds him able to
govern, and manage his own Lands held in socage, and consequently to receave
the rents thereof, wherefore whether he who makes such payment have any
acquittance or not; if he have proof of the payment, he is well enough
acquitted from any second payment, and if without payment he get an
acquittance, it will not suffice, the infancy of him who makes the acquittance
considered. Besides if the acquittance be as most usually they are, Notes of
(...) called acquittances.
but signed only with the name of the maker, and not sealed, it is only an
evidence or proof of payment, and no pledable acquittance, because no deed, so
as it nothing differs from proof by witnesses, save that it is not mortal as
they. But now if the infant be under the years of discretion, what shall we
say to a payment to him specially, if he be but three, or four years old or
thereabout: here I think caution is to be used by the executor generally,
and the surest way is, if he fear to keep it in any respects, to pay it into
the Court, where it is recoverable, viz. where the will was proved; yet the
case so may be, as that this payment may not be at all safe for the Executor.
As put the case that he entered into bond or statute to pay all Legacies by
such a day, to the several Legatees, here I think the payment into the Court
spiritual suffices not, Quae^^.
for that must make the receipt to be, with some charge, which is in some kind
an abatement; there I think therefore legally to secure the Executor, the
payment must be to or in the presence of the guardian because of noriture, viz.
him or her who has (though not as guardian in respect of lands) the custody or
education of the infant: for otherwise to pay it into the hands of such a
tender infant separate from any governor, or guardian, were to expose it to
loss, both for that he is not able to count the sum, and for that he yet
not being come to discerning years were like with Esops Cock, to part with
pearls or coin for plumes and trifles of no value. But in case no bond nor
other collateral penalty lie upon the Executor, or in Case the Bond or Statute
be only to perform the will generally which nothing alters the course of
payment, which by the will the Law lays upon Executors, then is not the
Executor put to any such payment, nor need pay without demand, and acquittance,
as in case of payment, upon a single Bill, or of a rent secke where no
distress can be taken, nor other penalty incurred: yet in that Case if demand
be, and acquittance ready to be given, let the Executor take heed, in Case
he be bound to performance, that he stand not upon the invalidity of the
acquittance in respect of nonage, for as I have said, proof by witnesses may
supply a nullity of acquittance, and much more the weakness or imbecility,
payment according to the testators appointment being the matter which acquitteth
the payer, and this the Executor may have testified under the hands of diverse
witnesses expressing circumstances, so as all dying may continue safely from
second payment as well as an acquittance, the witnesses whereunto are subject
to mortality, as well as the other. But herein Courts of equity do often
interpose helpfully for them who seek not evasion from payment, but only
security in paying. And of infant executors, and by occasion thereof, of
infancy in Legatorees, or Legatees, thus much.

Of Legacies.
ALthough these be not recoverable at and by the Common Law, but most naturally
at and by the Law Ecclesiastical, yet by suits in Courts of Equity, as the
Chancery and Court of Requests, they are often obtained, and of many things
touching them the Common Law takes notice, and has manifold occasions so to
do: we will therefore consider thereabout these parts or points, some whereof
have been in part before touched upon other occasions.

Whether any legacy in certain and lying in

When an executor can, or safely may pay,

Whether one executor alone may do it, and

What shall amount to an assent of the executor,

How a lease or chattell real may be given

Where an assent to the first or one part of









If the executor give it to another, the legetee has no remedy at the Common
Law per Prisot. 37 H. 6. 30.


As for the first, we have before showed the assent of the executor to be
necessary before any legacy can be had, for that debts are first to be paid,
and that the executor is to look to at his peril. But hereto add a little out
of M. Swinborne a learned Civilian, who says, that in case any goods be in the
hands or custody of J. S. and the owner does bequeath them to him, then may he
keep or retain them against the will of the executor, so as there be other
sufficient goods in the hands of the executor for payment of all debts: but
though thus as it seems would it stand in the Ecclesiastical Law, yet for
that no property is transferred to the legatee without the executors assent,
therefore doubtless the executor may at the Common law recover the thing
withheld, or damages to the value against the legatee detaining it. Another
case there is, wherein as the learned Civilian says, the legatee may take the
thing to him bequeathed lying in prender, viz. Horse, other beast or piece of
Plate, or other like thing known and in being, and that is where the testator
does expressly so appoint by his will. But herein doubtless the Common law, at
and by the which debts are recoverable against executors will oppose the law
Spiritual, for else by such appointment the testator might cause that all his
goods should be taken by legatees, and that none should remain to pay debts.
Yet if there be other goods besides sufficient for payment of debts, then
indeed I see not how the executor can hinder such taking without violating his
oath taken for performance of the will. If any say that it is also a breach of
oath in the other case, I say he observes not that there that clause in the
will being against the law is void, and consequently there is a nullity upon
it, and it is as if no such thing were in the will, and so the oath extends not
to it. And as a chattell shall not be transferred to a stranger without the
executors assent; so if the devisee be to the executor himself, till he elect
to take as legatee, it shall be in him as executor, as appears by the strain
and argument of two cases in Plowd. Comment. and more lately in the Kings
Bench, the point being diverse days argued was at last so resolved by three
Judges against one: Wel^den and Elkington.
and the reason of Coke at the Bar was very good, Paramour and Yardley.
for here the executor sustaines two persons, viz. an executor, and legatee,
and so all one, Po^tman and Simmes case.
as where the bequest is to another, for Quando duo jura concurrunt inuna
persona, Trin. 37. Eliz.
aequunt est ac si essent in diversis. All but Gaudy so agreed.


As for the second point, it may have these two parts: 1. When the executor is
able to give such assent to a legacy. And 2. when he may do it with safety. 21
Eliz. D. 367
As for the first, he is able before probat of the will to assent unto the
execution of a legacy, as elsewhere is showed, and that although he be not of
full age of 21 years; but if he be under 17 years, so as he is not able to
take upon him the office of an executor, and therefore administration is during
that time to be committed to some other; Co. lib. 3. fo. 29
Here his assent is not of force or effectual, as we find in Princes case to
have been held in the case of Pigot and Gascoine. As for the second part, till
all debts be paid, the executor may not safely consent that the legatee enter
into the lease or chattell devised, no more then he may pay money bequeathed,
if there be not sufficient also to pay all debts. Of these things more is said
elsewhere. Yet because the reader or he that desires direction in these points
will look for them under this title, I thought not good here to be altogether
silent touching them.

As for the third point, viz. Whether the assent of one executor where there be
many, be sufficient, 6 H. 7. 5. If the bequest be to one of the executors, he
may take it without assent of his compan. yet if a det, his compan. may release
it. 48 E. 3. 14, 15.
I see not how to doubt, since any one executor may give away any goods of the
testators, or release any debts due to him, therefore much more assent, which is
no more or greater work in effect then an atturnment of one lessee upon a grant
of a reversion. And if there want to pay debts, he only who assented shall
answer for it of his own goods, and not his companions. So held where but one
of the executors during nonage assented, in the case of Rhetoric and Chapel.
H. 9. Jacobi. Ror. 895. in ba. reg. C.
But if this executor be either under the age of 17 years, or under coverture,
viz. a woman married, such is not able to give a good assent to bind the
others, no nor themselves, for then thereby the Infant might draw a debt upon
himself, and the wife upon her husband, by assenting to or paying of a legacy,
there not being sufficient goods to pay all debts. But the husbands assent is
sufficient where the wife is executor, for his acts whom she has chosen to be
her head, may prejudice as well her as himself; yea though she were within
age, yet he being of full age, his assent will stand good. But if he or another
executor in his own right be above 17 years of age and under 21, I doubt
whether now his assent will be sufficient, at least except the case be put that
there be assets sufficient, which perhaps there may be material, though not in
the other. See more hereof after in the title of women covert, and Infants
executors.

As to the fourth point, first there may be an assent and election employed, as
well as express, for if in the devise or bequest the legatee be appointed to
do some act as in respect of the legacy, See Co. lib. Intr. 150. the executor
being devisee for life said, the other should have it after her death and he
entered and took admin. she dying intestate, yet held Assets in him.
and the excecutor does accept the performance thereof, this amounts to an
assent. So if the devise be to an executor for the education of some children
which he does accordingly educate, this makes an election to have the thing by
way of legacy, and not as executor, as appears by the case of Paramoor and
Yardly, Plowd. 543. So if an horse be bequeathed, and one offering to buy him
of the executor himself, he directs him to go and buy the horse of the
legatee; This M. 19 H. 7. Rot. 318. See lib. Intr. 321.
or if the executor himself offer money to the legatee for the horse, One gave
the third part of his goods to A with who^ the exec. accounted for the amount,
and Asued for that sum in det, but no judgment upon demurrer.
this implies an assent that it should be the legatees by the will, and so was
it held in the case between Low and Carter, where the devisee of a term did
grant it to the executor, and this acceptance of a grant from him was held to
imply the executors assent that it should be his to grant. But I see not well
how that should be law, which in the latter part of the Lo. Dyer is found, Tr.
37 Eliz. in ba. reg.
viz. where a term was devised to I. S. and he was made executor, and after
the death of the testator entered and occupied the lands a whole year without
proving the Will, Wherebe quests to exec. himself.
that this was an election to have it as devisee and not as executor. For first
he had good right to the term as executor before probat, and so might clearly
in that right have taken the profits, although it had not bin devised or
bequeathed to him, and that before any will proved. Secondly, he could not by
right have it as legatee without assent of himself or some other as executor.
Tr. 37 Eliz. If he by will bequeath it to I. S. this is an election to have it
as legatee.
Therefore this general accepation can determine no election, as elsewhere is
held. As for disassent or disablement to assent. As if the executor do once
declare his assent that the legatee shall have his legacy, he may then enter
into it or take it notwithstanding the executors countermand or revocation of
his assent after. So on the other side, I think if he do fully and expressly
deny that the legacy shall take effect, he cannot after make a good assent
thereunto, for that election once made must stand peremptory, be it refusal to
assent, or assent. Yet quae. of this, for that the refusal to assent may be
checked by sentence or decree, in the Spiritual Court or Court of Equity, and
so an assent be enforced. But if the power of assenting be legally lost by the
means aforesaid, viz. disabled, I see not how any legal interest can be
transferred by that compelled assent, So if the exec. take a new leas his
assent after is void. Tr. 37. Eliz. in Carters case.
howsoever decreed. And what is said of a legacy bequeathed to another, the
same may be understood in case where the bequest is to the executor himself,
and he makes his election to have it as legatee, 19 Eliz. D. 359
or as executor. But if where an Horse is bequeathed to A, the executor after
the testators death does ride the horse or use him in the Coach, or in the
Plough; I do not take this to be any such disagreement to the execution of the
legacy, as that the executor cannot after assent to the legatees having
thereof, no more (though it be somewhat more) then where a drinking-cup is
bequeathed, and the executor after the testators death does use it to drink
in, nay, if a lease of land be bequeathed to A, and the executor continues the
depasturing of the testators therein, yet is not this any disagreement to the
execution of the legacy, but if this lease-land were let out by the testator
from year to year, and the executor discharges the tenant, and takes it
into his hands at the years end, this I conceive to be a dis-assent to the
legacy, and so also perhaps may his taking or distraining for any rent
thereupon due after the testators death; yet am I not resolute that the
dis-assent is so peremptory and unchangeable, as the assent, remembering the
case in King Henry the eight his time, 14. H. 8. 23.
where a term being granted by a lessee conditionally, so as the assent of the
lessor could be had by such a day, though the lessors assent were at one time
denied, yet might it be yielded at another, so as it were at any time before
the day: But yet there it was held, that if no time of assent were limited,
then one express denial or refusal would be peremptory, so as the refusal
were expressed to the party to whom the assent was to be given otherwise, if it
were but in speech to or among strangers. This and the former case, Die. 359.
After choice once made, no variation.
19. Eliz. give the best light to this point that I remember. Now for
disablement to assent, it was held in the forementioned case of Low and
Carter, that where a term is bequeathed to A, and after the testators death
the executor takes a new lease of the same land for more years in possession,
or to begin presently; now by this was the term left by the testator
surrendered and drowned, so as it could not pass to A by the executors assent
after.

As to the fifth point, viz. in what manner a lease for years or other
chattell real may be bequeathed to one for a time, with remainder to another;
it has been heretofore much doubted, when a lease for years was bequeathed to
one for life, or for so many years as he should live, whether the limitting of
a remainder thereof after his decease were of any validity in law or not: and
this doubt had this ground; any state for life in the judgment of law is
greater than any term for years, therefore when a termer has by his will
given his term, or his house or land, which he so holds for years to one
for life, or for so many years as he shall live; this testator and devisor
has not in the judgment of the law any estate remaining in him; and therefore
it was thought very hard for him to give or limit a remainder to another: But
after many arguings and debatings, it was in the late Queens time resolved
that such a remainder was good, and that if the first devisee died before the
term expired, Plow. Com. 520. and 542.
that then he to whom the remainder was limited, might enter and enjoy the
residue of the term: As for the giving of part of the years to one, and the
residue to the other: viz. If the term being twenty years, the Lessee
bequeatheth ten thereof to his wife, and the remainder to his daughter. Of this
no doubt ever was, but that it was good, for that after the first state
limited, there remained a further term, viz. ten years more in the Devisor,
whereof he had power to dispose, whereas in the other case, after the term
limited to one for life, there remained but a possibility that this life
should not take up the whole term. But now put we the case a third way, viz.
that the termor devises or bequeatheth the thing in lease to one child
intaile, with remainder to another, and dies, and the first enters and dies
without issue; now whether shall the next in remainder, or the executor of him
so dying have the term residue, and this case came in question, and was
adjudged about the middle of K. John his reign in the Exchequer, for there
Master Hamond holding by lease for years from the Crown, the manner of Akers
in Kent devised the same by his will to Alexander Hamond his eldest son and the
heirs males of his body, with remainder to Ralfe Hamond, another son in like
manner, and the like remainder to Thomas Hamond, and made the said Alexander
executor, Both Alexander and Ralfe were executors; but that makes no difference.
who after his fathers decease elected to take as legatory, and after Ralfe
Hamond died leaving issue male, and making his wife executrix; Alexander not
having issue male, granted the whole term by deed to B and C. for the behoof
of himself and his wife during their lives, and after to the use of his
youngest daughter whom Sir Robert Lewkenor married; then Alexander dying without
issue male, the wife, and Executrix of Ralfe Hammond entered claiming the term,
and being kept out sealed a Lease, whereupon an Eject firmae was brought, and a
Jury appearing at the Bar in the Exchequer found a special verdict in effect
Vt supra. And in argument of this Case, first the maine question was whether
this case were all one in Law with the former, where a term was devised to one
for life, which remainder over so as by the death of Alexander Hammond without
issue male, the term should go to the next in remainder as in the other Case,
by the death of the devisee for life dying within the term it should do. And
on the plaintifes part it was urged to be all one, so that by virtue of the
Bequeasts supra, Alexander had an estate to him, and his Executors only, so
long as there should be heirs males of his body, and he dying without such
issue, the term remained to the Executors of Ralfe, who had the remainder in
like manner, and left issue male which still lived, and so that seat of Ralfe
yet had continuance. For it was admitted by the counsel on that side, that the
term could not go to the issue male of Ralfe, according to the words, and
intent of the will, since it was impossible to make a term to descend without
an act of Parliament. This therefore they said the Law should work, which was
nearest to the intent, viz. that after Alexanders death it should go first to
his Executors, and assignees, so long as issue male of his body does continue,
and for want of such issue, then to Ralfe his Executors and assignees, so long
as his issue male should last, and therefore in this case the issue male of
Alex. failing, the executor of Ralfe, whose issue male fails not, should
enjoy the term, and so judgment ought to be given for the plaintiff, being
lessee of that Executor: on the other side it was said by the defenda^ts
counsel, that this Case differs much from the other Case, where the term or
Land held by Lease, is given but for life to the first with remainder to
another; which Case as having been often resolved, was clearly admitted to
be good law; for in that case the intent of the Testator might, and did take
effect. But in this case if the land should go to the Executors, and assignees
of Ralfe Hammon, it must go against the intent of the Testator, whose mind,
and will was, as it appears by his word, that it should go only to the issue
male, of one son after another, and not to any Executors. Now then since this
intent was so contrary to the rules of Law that it could not take effect,
therefore it must be void, and so all the words of heirs Male standing void,
the Will is to be construed as a sole, and absolute gift, and bequeast to the
said Alex. and consequently the term must go to his Executors, and assignees.
And for this point resemblance was made to a Case resolved in the King's Bench,
Windsmore and Holford, vel Holbord in. 28 and 29. Elizab. argued; and Tr. 29.
Eliz. adjudg^^^.
where a Lease was made by indent. to A. Habend. to A. B. and C. for their
lives: now because B. and C. could take nothing it was resolved that A. should
not have i^ for their lives, but for his own only. This Case was said to come
very close in reason to the Case in question; for as here the intent of the
Lease was that B. and C. should be estated for their lives, and since that
could not be, therefore the naming of them should be utterly void, and as if
they had not at all been named; and their lives shall not stand as a measure
for the estate of A. So in the other Case the intent of the will, being that the
Lease or Land leased should go to the heirs Males of the body; first, of
Alexander, and after of Raulphe; since this cannot be, therefore the words,
and name of heirs males should stand for a mere blancke and cipher, and not
to measure out any state to the said Alex. and Ra. and their Executors, and
assigns. Also it was said on the defendants part that an estate for life in
the judgment of Law is of so short, and uncertain continuance, that if A.
make a Lease to B. for his life, and after makes a Lease of the same Land to C.
for years now, shall not this latter Lease be void absolutely, for any part
of the term, but shall stand in expectance of the death of B. and as soon as
he dies, shall take effect immediately, whereas if the Lease to B. had been
for ten years or any like term, then the Lease to C. should have been void
for so many years of his term, thus it appears that a State for life is very
momentary in the judgment of Law, and not reputed of any certain continuance
so much as for a day, but it is otherwise of an estate tail, so as if A.
having given Land to B. in tail does after (without indenture which makes an
Estoppell) make a Lease to C. for xxj. years, and then B. dies without issue
during the term, yet shall not the Lease take effect, because it was utterly
void at the first making. For an estate tail being a state of inheritance may
in the intendment, and judgment of Law have continuance for ever, as appears
both by the Case of Adams and Lambert, where it is held within the Statute of
Chaunteries which speaks of gifts to have continuance for ever. Therefore a
reversion upon an estate tail is no assets, nor gives cause of receipt,
otherwise in all these Cases it is touching a reversion expectant upon a state
for life. Again it was said by the defendants council that an estate may be
limited to A. and his heirs during the life of B. with remainder to C. as in
Chudlies Case was resolved, but if Land be given to A. and his heirs, so long
as B. shall have heirs of his body or heirs males with remainder over to C.
this remainder is utterly void. So as there is in the judgment of Law a great
difference between the largenes, and continuance of an estate tail, and of an
estate for life. And if (which is worth the observing) a fe^ simple cannot
afford a remainder to be drawn out of it after such a gift to one, and his
heirs during the continuance of an estate tail, or of the measure thereof;
much less can a term yield such large thongs to be cut out of it, as a
remainder after an estate to one so long as he shall have heirs of his body,
or heirs Males, which is all one. And in this case the remainder was held void
by Baldwin, 28 H. 8. Die. fo. 7.
and Shelley, though Engl field were of contrary opinion, as the Lord Dyer
shows. Further it was said, that if such a conveyance by will should stand
good, it would raise a perpetuity not to be cut off, by any recovery.

But whereas the case of Hammon has been related before, (so by way of
admittance it was argued as a gift, and bequest to Al. Ham. and the heirs
Males of his body with remainder in like manner to Ralfe. The truth of the case
was, that the words of the will, were only to Alexander, and his heirs Males
(not speaking of his body) and so to Ralfe, which as was urged by the
defendants counsel, made the Case stronger against the plantifes: for admit
that the former way Alexander should have had but a state determinable upon the
continuance of his issue Males, yet here not so. Since the reason why in
Wills, such a devise being made, the Law should supply the words (of the body)
is only to make an estate tail to the issues Male according to the Testators
intent. Now in this case of a term for years so bequeathed no estate tail
could possibly be, though these words had been in the will, and therefore the
motive to the Law failing, no such supply will be made by the Law, since it
would be to no purpose: consequently, here was neither state tail nor issues
or heirs Males of the body, on whose continuance this state of Alex. should
be determinable. Therefore it was an absolute, and total bequest of the term
to Alexander for ever, viz. so long as the Term should continue: for as a
bequest to one for ever is as much as a bequest to him, and his heirs; so a
bequest to one and his heirs, is as much as if it had been to him for ever.

And this Case after six arguments, on each side at the Bar (if I much
mistake not) was upon argument by the Barons adjudged for the defendant, by the
Lord chief Baron Tanfeild, and Mr. Baron Bromley, Mr. Baron Denham, (who only
heard as I take it, one argument on each side, made of purpose in respect of
his coming into his place after the former arguments) being of the contrary
opinion: and the judgment proceeded upon the point formerly touched, that as
this case was the state of Alexander did not end by his death, and remain to
the Executors of Ralfe. Other points were stirred which will be touched upon
other divisions after in this Chapter. It will be observed that I do more
fully express reasons, and points enforced on the defendants part, then on the
plaintifes, whereof let these two reasons be accepted. First, That I better
could relate that then the other, being the first who argued for the defendant,
and hearing little of that which was by others said on either side after, nor
hearing the Courts, Nec ad hoc conductus, nec pedibus fortis. Secondly, the
labor did lie on the defendants part to prove that this Case differed from the
common case of devise to one for life, with remainder to another.

We are now come to the sixth point. viz. that where House, or Land held by
lease, or the proffits thereof, or the lease or term it self which in a Will
makes no difference, is bequeathed to A. for life, or for some part of the
term with the remainder to B. and the Executor assenteth that A. shall enjoy
his bequest, Ploud. 545. 6.
whether this shall enure to B. also since without the Executors assent. Co.
lib. 10. f. 47
no legacy can take effect. And it has been resolved that this assent shall
be effectual, as well to all the remainders as to the first estate, and so
according to former resolutions, it was admitted in Hamons Case, that Alexander
his assent to take as legatee sufficed (if the bequest had been good) for the
remainders to Ralfe, and others. And the reason of this doubtless is, because
here the particular estate, and the remainder are all but one estate in Law;
they make but one degree in a Writ of Enter, nor shall have but one year, and
a day to enter for mortmaine; And an atturnement to the grantee of a rent or
reversion for life with remainder over does enure also to the remainder, which
being an assent has much affinity to that of the Executor, each tending to
perfect the grant of another man. Now then whereas it was urged in Hammo^ds
Case, that the state limited to Ral^e, should take effect not as a remainder
but as a new estate to commence futurely. viz. when Alexander should be dead
without issue male: if it should be admitted to be so, then could not the
assent of the first state to Alexander have enured to this, since to A.
remainder it works as being one estate with the first, which reason must
fail the other way. This difference between a remainder, and new estate future
brings to my mind the case of a rent by way of new Creation granted by C. out
of land to A. for life or in tail with remainder to B. in like manner where it
has probably been held, although this limitation to B. cannot be good by way
of remainder, because C. had no estate in the rent remaining with him when he
made the grant to A. yet should it be good by way of new grant, and creation to
commence futurely. But this doubtless cannot so be but with a difference, for if
the grant were by indenture between C. on the one part, and A. only on the other
part, now B. being no party to the deed can take nothing by it except by way of
remainder; but if he were party to the indenture, or if the grant were by deed
poll to which all men are alike parties, then it happily may enure as a future
grant to B. This not impertinent.

Now as the executors assent to one cannot enure to another though of the same
thing, except by way of remainder, so neither can it any way where the things
are not the same, except in very special cases; as if a termor bequeath a rent
to A, and the land it self to B, the executors assent that A should have the
rent is no assent that B should have the land; Plowd. Com. 521. In Bret and
Rigdens case.
yet I think the assent that B should have the land, does imply the assent that
A should have the rent. So of common or other profit.
1. For that the restraint imposed by the law, against the passing of a
chattell by a will without the executors assent, being out of respect to the
payment of the testators debts: now if the land shall pass to B, it is no more
availeable to the testators debts that it pass discharged of the rent then
charged. 2. Since the gift and bequest was of the land charged with the rent,
therefore if this bequest shall take effect it shall carry the land according
to the testators intent, viz. with this charge upon it: for what else does the
executor in this but assent that the will of the testator herein do stand and
take effect, and consequently B must take the term according to the will, and
not in any different or contrary manner.

Next we are to consider of the manner of assents by executors, which has some
affinity with the fourth point. But here we shall consider only of assents
conditional, now to this purpose we will cast our eyes upon two sorts of
conditions, viz. precedent and subsequent. As for ^he former, an executor may
to a legatee absolutely given assent upon a condition precedent, as thus. I am
content, that if you can get and bring in to me such a bond wherein the
testator stood bound unto I. S. that then you enter upon the term, or take the
corn or cattle to you bequeathed. So of other like conditions which may
precede the assent, as if you can get the assent of my coexecutor, or if you
will pay the arrerages of rent to the lessor behind at the testators death, or
if you will pay the wages already due to the servants attending about the
cattle or corn to you bequeathed. In this case, if the condition be not
performed, there is no assent, and therefore the conditioning in this manner is
good. But if it be upon a condition subsequent, as thus I do agree, that you
shall have the thing bequeathed to you, provided that you shall pay so much
yearly to me, or to such a creditor of the testator, now the legatee entering
into or taking the thing bequeathed, shall not lose it again by failing to
perform the condition afterward, for the executor by his assent cannot make
that legacy conditional which the testator gave absolutely, no more then he
can make that bequest to be absolute which the testator gave conditionally,
except by a release made of the condition. As in other things, so in this the
executors assent is like to the atturnement of a lessee, which cannot be upon a
condition subsequent, where the grant is absolute or without condition, though
yet he may to his atturnement prefix a condition precedent.

In the eighth place we are touching the bequest of leases or chattels real,
to consider what manner of interest one to whom a remainder of a term after
the death of another is limited, has, and whether he may grant the same or
dispose thereof during the life of the first. And as to that it is clear that
he has but a possibility of remainder, for that possibly the whole term may
be spent in the life of the first, to whom during his or her life it is
bequeathed, now a mere possibility is not grantable. Therefore was it resolved
in the late Queens time, 99 Eliz. Fulses case.
where he in remainder granted or sold his state or interest to another
during the time of the first, that this grant was utterly void, because a
possibility cannot be granted; Lampets case. Co. l. 10. fo. 48.
but whereas some opinion in that case was delivered that this possibility
could not be released, no more then granted, it has since bin resolved that he
in the remainder by his deed of grant or release to the devisee for life may
make his estate, which before was determinable by his death to be now absolute,
so as it shall continue to his executors, administrators, and assigns after
his death during the whole term. It may be that what was conceived in the said
case of Fulsey, negatively of the validity of a release by him in the
remainder, might be meant or perhaps expressed of a release to him in the
reversion; but surely me thinks though he could not surrender, yet his release
or defeasance to him in reversion or remainder having the freehold or
inheritance, should dissolve or destroy this term residue after the death of
the divisee for life, so as there the freehold should be discharged thereof.
But Quae. for I have not known this in question. As for the other point of
Fulses case, it was in the said later case of Lampett confirmed and admitted
for good law, viz. that this possibility of remainder could not be aliened nor
conveyed to a stranger.

Now we are come to the ninth point, 9 Point.
viz. to examine whether any act of the devisee for life can frustrate or
defeat him in the remainder of the term, and whether by the act of God, viz.
the death of him in the remainder before the first devisee for life shall
defeat it. As to the first, it has diverse times been resolved, Plowd. 520.
Wel^den and Elkington, 10. El. D. 277, 19 Eliz, D. 359. Cont. ^ El. D. 253. and
33 H. 8. Bro. chatelx. 23.
that no grant made by the first man cut off or defeat the second, though
formerly it were held otherwise; but according to the later resolution was it
also held or admitted by all in the said case of Hamo^d, where was such a
grant. And as this cannot be done by direct grant or alienation, no more can it
by an indirect, or employed, as by taking of a new lease, which is a surrender
in law of the old lease, no more then by an express surrender. Nor doubtless
by outlawry, whereby the term of the first divisee is settled in the Crown.
But if we put the case further of waste committed by the tenant for life, or
breach of condition by not payment of the rent or otherwise, these for the
whole in the later case, and for the part wasted in the former, do so destroy
the lease, and put the reversioner in Statu quo prius, as that all remainders
must needs fail; so of a feoffement or other like forfeiture by fine. As for
the death of him in remainder, it was urged in the case of Hamond, that since
it was but a mere possibility, if it could not take effect, and become an
estate in the life of him to whom it was limited, it could not settle in his
executor; and to that purpose were cited the case of the Rector of Chedington,
and more expressly as resolved in the point, the case of Price and Atmore.
Weleden and Elk. ubi supra. But there the point was never que^tioned, though
such death was there.
But* the Court resolved (and found former resolutions in other Courts that
way) that the death of him in remainder did not hinder, but that it may settle
as well in his executors upon the death of the devisee, as it should have done
in himself, if he had overlived the first divisee for life. If the lessor
enter and levy a fine, and the divisee for life enters not, nor claims in
five years, he in the remainder may enter, as having a right futurely accrued.

In the last place we intermedled only with Leases bequeathed, 10. Point.
wherein yet is to be understood, that what thereof is spoken, is to be
extended to, and understood of all other chattels real, as wardship of body
and lands, estates by extent upon statutes or judgments, terms otherwise than
by lease, in faires, markets, rents, annuities, commons, advowsons, and other
profits; yea, one single next avoidance of a Church. Now we come to consider of
bequests personal, principally, Of forf^i^ure, revocation and other loss of
lega^ie.
if not only, viz. how such may be forfeited, lost, or revoked. First then, we
will consider of the acts of the legatee; secondly, of the acts of God; thirdly
of the acts of the testator. The legatee, as from the Civilians I learn, may
forfeit his legacy by his mis-cariage toward the will: Swinb. de testam. 352,
353. Except as tutor or guardian he accuse it.
as if he use means to have it concealed and kept from being known, and
consequently proved. So if he accuse it of falsity. So again, if he deface or
destroy the will. Also if being by the will appointed to be tutor or educator
of a child, he refuses so to be; so says Master Swinborne: but Silvester
Prierius seems to me opposite in that where he says, Sum. Silv. 284.
Si legatum fuerit aliquid ea condition ut facias aliquid, tale legatum non
est conditionale, sed modale; so as he takes away the force of a condition from
words conditional, whereas the other without words conditional raises a
condition implied. Lastly, if the legatee presume too far upon the strength
of of the bequest to him, so as he takes the thing bequeathed without the
consent of the executor; thus also does he forfait his legacy, says Master
Swinborne, De testam. 25^.
unless the testator did will and appoint he should so do. The falling into
enmity with the testator, will be considered of more fitly, as I take it, among
the acts of the testator. In the next place let us see what acts of shall God
cause a legacy not to take effect, first thus: If the legatee die before the
testator, this legacy is lost, and his executor shall not have it: So also
says Master Swinborne, if it be appointed to be paid after the death of the
executor, and the legatee dies before the executor, De testam. 255 Vide Bro.
Devise 27. and 45. th^re were diverse days of payment, and the devisee dyed
before the last; his executor shall have it. 14. vel 24. H. 8. 36. H. 8. and 3
El. Die. 59. See this difference.
it is lost; and so also if he dye before the condition performed, says he;
Let us come now to time of payment, and death before it. If there be a day
certain limited for payment, and the legatee die before that day, his
executor shall have the legacy; contrariwise, if the payment were limited to
be made when the legatee should be married: but if it were only expressed to be
toward the marriage of the legatee, and she die before marriage, her
executors shall have it, says Swinborne. Now put the case that a legacy is
bequeathed to B to be paid when he shall be five and twenty years old, and B
dies before that age, it shall now be paid to the executor, and that presently
without staying till B should have been of that age, Sum. Silv. 283.
says Prier. Nay, says Swinborne, if the words of the will be so, According
hereto; vide Die. ubi supra, per majorem opinionem Justiciat.
viz. when he shall come to such an age, then if he die before, his executors
shall not have it at all, but if the bequest be general; and further it is
added in the will that the testator would have that legacy paid the legatee at
such an age there though he die before such age, yet his executors shall have
the sum bequeathed. The difference may seem very nice, yet happily it wants
not some probable color of reason. Now lastly, let us come to the testators
own act, Acts of the testator.
who clearly has power to revoke or countermand any legacy, though he revoke
not the rest of the will; and here first of revocation presumed. If there fall
out Graves inimicitiae inter legantem and legatarium, Sum. Silic. 285.
legatum caducum efficitur, says the Summist; Sed non propter leves, says he,
and si graves si tamen redeant ad amicitiam, reintegratur legatum, that is, by
grievous enmity after arising, and never reconciled between the testator and
legatee, the legacy is dissolved, otherwise of a light breach, or falling out,
though it continue until the death of the testator. This I conceived to be
rather fit for this place, as an act of the testator, then to be reckoned or
registered among the acts or forfeitures of the legatee, for that it is not by
the Summist made material, or any point of difference, whether the legatee
gave just cause of offense, or that the testator unjustly conceived
displeasure, and so grew into causeless enmity. Therefore also do I hold it
of the nature of a revocation implied or presumed, for that although no
revocation be made, yet since the testator has ceased to bear good will to
the legatee, he cannot be intended to will him good, nor consequently to be of
the same mind, touching the benef^t^ing of him, as he was when he ^ade his
will: yet here again it is worth the con^^deration whether the circumstance
following may not make a difference in the case thus; that where the testator*
dies shortly after the breach and enmity grown, and before he come to the
place where his will is, or at least to opportunity of perusing and reforming
the same: There this very alteration of affection should make an alteration in
the will, and a revocation of the amicable bequest. But where he living a good
space after, and coming to the place where his will was, and specially if he
do again peruse it, and yet does not cross nor expunge that bequest, here it
may be presumed that either his enmity ceased, or that so far as to continue
this bequest, the charity or other motives inducing him to make it, stood
unvanquished and not extinguished by this breach of former amity. For as the
continuance of time and opportunity after the making of a verbal or
nuncupative will, without reducing it to writing, and causing it to be attested
by witnesses, though the testator live diverse years after, does strongly argue
his intent not to continue, that what was done in an extremity should stand as
his will: so on the contrary, the permitting of a bequest expressed in a
written will, to continue without any crossing, blotting, or defacing, may
argue against contrary presumption, the testators mind, that it should continue
as part of his will. But now let us consider of more express revocation, and
to that purpose will I relate a late decree in the Chancery, made by the Lord
Keeper, according to the opinion of the Master of the Rolls, three Judges, and
two Doctors, Masters of the Court; Between Robert Air and William Air
complainants, and Hester late wife of Christopher Air their brother, and now
wife of Sir Francis Wortley Defendant; Thus was the case. The said Christopher
Air, 15. Jacobi, by his last will and testament gives and bequeatheth to the
said Robert Air, his brother, an hundred pounds, and to the said William his
brother a thousand pounds, and gives to the said Hester his wife all the
residue of his estate, and makes and ordaines the said Hester his sole and only
executrix, saving for the performance of his will ordaines Robert Air and
William Air, his said brothers, whom he entreats to join as executors in
trust with his wife, for the better performance of this his last will.
Afterward, 5. Jan. 1624. being sick of the sickness whereof he died, he was
moved by Master Damport, and Master Stone, to settle his estate; to which
motion he yielded, and Master Stone, and Master Damport did demand of the said
Christopher, what friend he thought fittest to be his executor, and to whom he
would commit the care of discharging his funerals, and performing his will,
whether he trusted any person more than his wife, to be his executor? To whom
he answered, That his wife was the fittest person for that purpose, and
therefore should be his sole Executrix, and then the Testator was moved by M.
Stone to give, and bequeath legacies to his father, to his brethren, and to his
kindred, whereunto he answered he would give or leave them nothing, and being
further put in mind to remember his friends and others, gave and bequeathed to
Lionell Atwood his Godchild, 20 or 30s. and being thereupon moved by his wife
to give his said God-sonne more, or a greater legacy, or the like in effect;
said, thou know not what thou do, do not wrong thy self, 20s. or 30.
Shilling^ is money in a poor bodies purse, or the like in effect, and the
rest, he^left them to his wives discretion or disposition, and the said
testator did speak the words aforsaid, or the like in effect. Animo testandi
and ultima^ volu^tat, declarandi, as the witnesses then present did co^ceive.

This will was proved by the oath of the said Hester, and this Codicell being
pleaded as a revocation of the said bequests, The said master of the Rolls,
Ord. 27. Iun. a. 2. Caroli regis.
Judges, and Doctors were by the Lord Keeper, and the order of the Court
desired to reduce the matter upon the will, and Codicell into a case, and to
c^rtify their opinions, whether the said Codicel were a revocation of the
legacies given to the plaintifes or not. And they after counsel heard at
several times, viz. both common lawyers, and civillians, and many hours spent
in conference together did finally resolve with one unanimous consent, That the
legacies to the plaintifes given were not by the said (...) revoked, and so
certified under their hands, upon reading whereof 25. Novembr. decree being
resolved to be made if cause were not showed to the contrary. 27. Novembr. on
which day the defendants counsel before Lord Keeper in the presence of the
master of the Rolls, and the said three Judges, and Sir John Heyward,
alleging what they could in stay of the said degree, It was by a general
concurrance of opinion decreed, that the legacies given to the said plaintifes,
should be to them paid on our Lady even with 20. Nobles in the hundred for the
detaynment thereof.

This case I thought fit to relate somewhat at large, because it pitcheth upon
the point of revocation without plain, full, and express terms. And surely
as wills are to be made out of disposing memories, and understandings, so
also with deliberate, and advised judgments, and therefore by like reason not
to be countermanded or revoked by sick, or slight expressions. And this
seems to me very agreeable with the rule, and reason of the common Law. For as
reason it self does dictate that Nihil ta^ consentaneum est aequitati
naturali, qua^ (...) quodque dissolvi eodem modo quo conficitur; So has the
common Law of England, in my understanding resolved* as for the purpose, if the
King present a clarke to a Church, and he is thereupon admitted, and
instituted thereunto: Now yet before induction may this be revoked as a will
may. Yet if the King shall after, and before induction present another man to
this Church without an express repeal or countermand of the former
presentation, it shall not hereby be revoked. So if lands were conveyed to
certain uses, To help this was the Stat. made 27. Eliz. cap^.
with a clause or power of revocation; the sale of the same to another did not
revoke the former. But if a state were merely at will, then the conveyance to
another by the common Law, amounted to a revocation. Therefore was the Statute
made tempore Henrici 8. to redress this, 6. H. 8. cap. 9.
viz. that where the King had granted lands, or other things to one during his
pleasure, this should not be revoked by a grant to another without recital of
the former, and declaration that the King had determined his pleasure.

Being now to consider of relation in the Executors assent, it is meet that
since these discourses are principally intended, for those who are not grounded
Students in, or professors of the Law, that we show what we mean by
relation, or what it is in Law. Thus therefore be it conceaved; that relation
is a kind of fiction in Law, making a thing done at one time to be accepted,
and repuld, or to have its operation as if it had been done at another time
past. As for the purpose. A does bargain, and sell freehold lands to B. in
August by inden^ure which is not enrolled until October following, yet this
has such relation to the date of the indenture, that if A. after that, and
before the inrolment become bound in a Statute, or granted a rent charg, or
made a lease for years, or took a wife, or committed felony, yet shall none
of these be of any force to charge or prejudice the state of B. for that the
Law adjudgeth him now owner by relation as from the time of the date: yea if a
servant departing in August for some great breach with his Master do kill his
master in October, this is in law petty treason, as if he had continued
servant when he did the fact, because it relates to the malice conceaved when
he was his servant. Now then having showed that a term or other chatell real
or personal, passes not nor is transferred in property to the devisee until
the assent of the Executor be thereunto had; We now put the case that this
assent is not had till a year, or some such good space after the Testators
death, and make our question whether this shall have relation to the Testators
death, viz. to be in the laws account as if it had then been. Or perhaps to
some purposes so to stand, and to others not so. That this is useful, and
material to be known be it thus showed. One bequeatheth his term of tithes
of an advowson of an House or land by him first leased to an undertenant for
rent, and dies in May, the Executor assenteth to the bequest in October,
between which two times tithes be set out, the Church becomes void, rent
grows payable; now if this assent shall relate to the Testators death, the
devisee shall have these else not; the like cases may be put of the brood of
Cowes, Mares, and Ewes, fallen between the death of the Testator, and the
assent; so also of Fleeces of Sheep shorn, etc. Now to come to the point, it
is reported by the Lord Cook, to have been held in the late Queens time, Tr.
41. Eliz.
that this assent shall as between the Executor, Co. lib. 5. fo. 1^.
and the legatee, have relation to the Testators death, B. San ders Case.
yet so that if the Executor before his assent to the devisee of a lease
committed wast; Vide Plow. com. of an action of tresp. against a stranger for
taking before assent. 280. b.
now the action of wast shall be brought against the Executor, in the Tenuit
for the wast done before, and not against the devisee in the Tenet. But put the
case that the legatee before the Executors assent granted the term to I. S.
now if to any purpose this assent shall have relation, it shall certainly so
be to make good this grant, as making the legatee to be estated, and
consequently able to grant before the Executors assent, yet do I not find any
opinion or resolution in the Point, but find it debated at the Bar in the
late Queens time between Puckering, P. 25. Eliz.
and Egerton, in the case of administration granted to A. after her grant a
free term, left by her intestate husband; but I find no resolution therein,
nor perhaps wants there material difference betwixt that case, and the other:
for there the devisee had at least an inception of title by gift of the owner,
wanting only a circumstance of assent to perfect it: but here this woman till
administration had not so; unless perhaps the Statute 21. Of Henry the eighth,
directing or enjoining ordinaries to grant administration shall amount to a
kind of title, ad rem: though not yet in re. But to return to the Point of
assets; 48. E. 3. 15.
where a reversion is granted by deed or fine, if the lessee a good time after
do atturne, this shall have no relation to the time of the grant; So as for
wast committed or rent grown due between the grant, and atturnement, the
grantee can have no remedy. Therefore it is good for him who buyeth or has any
thing of the gift of a legatee, to have the assent of the Executor, before the
sale or gift well testified, or if the assent be not had till after, let him
take a new gift, that he may not rest in a doubtful case, for besides the
premises that great legist, Sir Edward Cook when he was a practiser to
Master Stubbes of Norfolk, for his Sea gave his opinion as I have been
confidently informed, that where a lessee, for years, being outlawed did grant
his term, and after reversed the outlawry, this did not make good the grant by
relation, it not being in the grantor at the time of his grant, and this has
much affinity with the principal point, for there if the relation help not,
the grant is not good from the Legatee.

Diverse cases of bequests considered, and expounded.
IF a termor of an House, 14. Eliz. Die. 307. conte, in a grant. 31. Eliz.
bequeath his House to B. without expressing how long he should have it, he
shall have the whole term, and number of years, So of land.

Also by the name of the House, the Orchards, Gardens, and Backesides do
pass: yea if the House with thappurtenances be bequeathed thereby, the lands
belonging to the House or used with it do pass, though yet they would not so
do, by such words in any lease, Sum. Silv. 286.
deed, or grant, yet by some Civilians or Canonists, the Orchard belonging to
an House shall not pass by the only gift of the House without some words,
showing the intent of the Testator so to be; or except one gate or door lead
as well to the Orchard, as to the House, but some other of them hold that it
does pass without any such help of circumstance, so as it be adjoining to
the House.

If a lessee for years give his term by his will to A. he shall have it
without paying any rent, Ibid. ut supr^
for the Executors shall pay it for him, a* I find in the Summist, but against
reason me thinks.

If one bequeath his indenture of lease, his whole state in that lease passes.
So if one bequeath his obligation or other specialty, the debt or duty it self
shall go to the legatee; and by the canon or civil law the very action it
self passes, Ibid. ut. supra.
viz. as I conceive, ability to sue the debtor in his own name; but in our law
it is otherwise, the suit must be in the executors name, for a debt or thing in
action cannot be assigned except by or to the King, and only at the common law
is the debt recoverable; but the Spiritual Court may force the executor to sue
or let his name be used in the suit for and by the legatee.

If one bequeath all his movables, Yet 48. E. 3. 14, 15. It is admit. that
such a divisee of all goods after debt paid, shall have a duty resting in
account.
debts due to him are not bequeathed, nor corn, nor fruit growing on the
ground, nor stone, nor timber prepared for building, as the Canonists and
Civilians hold.

On the other side, if one bequeath the moiety of all his goods, the legatee
shall have only the moiety of that which remains after debts paid, Quae.
for that only is to be accounted the testators which he has ultraes alienum.
36 Hen. 8. Die. 59.


By a bequest of all utensils or householdstuff, Die. ib. supra.
plate nor jewels are not given.

If one bequeath to his wife all her apparel, Sum. Silv. 286.
she shall not have as some Civilians say, her ornaments of gold or silver, by
which is meant as I take it, chains, jewels, bracelets, rings, etc. but others
are of contrary opinion, except they be such things as are not lawful for her
to wear.

If a Bed be given by a will, Ibid.
Venit ornamentum ejus, says the Civilian, that is, the furniture thereof
passes, viz. not only the bed, bedsteed, bedcloaths, but also the curtains and
valents, as I take it. But I think that by gift of a Coach by will, the
Coach-horses pass not, yet perhaps the furniture of the Coach-horses may pass
as appertenant to the Coach, for so I think they shall do, rather then by
bequest of the Coach horses without the Coach.

If one bequeath to A, Ibid.
meat, drink, and clothing, or alimenta, he shall have, says the civil law,
also lodging, habitation, and all things necessary for the maintenance of life,
viz. as I take it, fire and washing, etc.

If one bequeath to his daughter ten pounds a year for her apparreling, Ibid.
b.
and she demands none in four years, now shall she not after that time have
the arrerages of this ten pounds by year for the time passed.

If a man bequeath one of his horses or cowes, Ibid.
not naming which, to I. S. he is to choose which he will, so it be not the best
of all, says the civil law, and perhaps the mention of that exception grows
out of respect to the hariot, which the Lord should have, or the mortuary which
the Parson should have.

A man bequeathes thirty pieces of twenty shillings to A, Ibid.
twenty to B, and ten to C, to be had in such a Chest or Casket, and it is
found after his death, that there be but thirty in all in that casket or box,
now each shall be abated ratably, says my summist, so as A shall have fifteen,
B ten, and C five, and this stands with good reason and justice, for so each
has a proportionable part. And it were reasonable, that it were by Parliament
established for law, that all both legatees and creditors should be paid in
like proportion, where the state will not suffice for full payment of each,
rather then that an executor should have power to pay one all, and another
nothing, yet if the testator left sufficient to make good all those sixty
pieces bequeathed, Quae. if that which is wanting in the casket shall not be
supplied and made up, for if the cases following found with the same author be
good law, it should seem so to be.

If one, Sum. Silv. 286.
says he, bequeath to I. S. that which is another man's, and whereto the
testator has no right, then ought his executor to buy it, and give it to the
legatee, or else satisfy him to the full value, and this not only by the
civil, but also by the canon law, and in foro conscientiae, says my author.

Again, if A bequeath to B such an horse by name, Ibid. 287.
and after sels away that horse, and dies, now is his executor bound to answer
the value thereof to B; and if the testator after his sale of that horse had
bought another, and called him by the same name as the first, now shall this
later horse pass to B, says the book, except it can be proved that the
testator sold the former horse of purpose to revoke his will touching that
bequest.

So again find I, Ibid. 286.
that if one having but a moity or one half of Green close, or of a stack of
corn, or other chattell, does give the whole, so as the words be apparent to
reach to more then his moiety, then must the executor buy out the others part
for the legatee, or give him the value; but if the words be but general so as
they may be reasonably satisfied with the testators part, no supply shall be
made. So also if one having goods in pledge bequeath them, it shall be
construed to extend no further then his right.

A bequest is made of an hundred pounds to be paid at a future time, Ibid.
284. a.
viz. diverse years after the testators death; a question is made by the
Summist, whether the profit of the money in the mean time, shall go to the
legatee or the executor, and he resolves with this difference, if the day were
given in favor of the legatee being an infant, who could not safely receive it
any sooner, then he shall have the profit; but if the respite of payment were
in favor of the executor, then shall the legatee have but the bare sum
without any addition of mean profits.

If one bequeath all his term or goods to his executor for payment of his
debts, 15 Eliz. Die. 331.
or debts and legacies, it is a void bequest, because it is no more then the
law would say if he had said nothing. Plow. Com. 545. b.
So if it be generally to perform his will. Co. lib. 8. 96. a.


If one seized in fee simple of land bequeath it to his executor to pay debts,
the executor has no state of freehold; for if he should, then it must be
either for life, which might end by his quick death before debts paid, or in
fee-simple, which would carry away the land for ever from the heir, where
perhaps a few years profits might suffice to satisfy the debts, yea then by
the death of the executor the land should descend to his heir, and not go to
his executor, who would be executor of the first testator.

If one give or grant all his goods having leases for years as well as
movables, By deed or word in life.
the leases shall not pass, 4 E. 6. Bro. Done, etc. 43.
as was held in the time of Ed. the 6. And so also was it admitted in Portmans
case, Tr. 37. Eliz. in ba. reg. Portm. ver. Simmes or Willis. diverse times
argued.
for the word bona comprehends only movables by the better opinion there.
But the point in that case was pertinent to this place, viz. a bequest in a
will of all the testators goods, and whether thereby a lease for years passes
or not, was diverse times debated, but not resolved, the Judges differing in
opinion in that point, but in another point which made an end of the case, all
agreed. Yet the better opinion was as I find in my report, that a lease would
pass by such words in a will though not in a deed or grant by word otherwise
made, for that legacies are demandable in the Spiritual Court, where bona and
catalla are taken for all one. Cap. 28.
See also the state of Marlbr giving an action to the successor ad repetenda
bona predecess. Yet an eject. custod. has been maintained thereupon: 4 E. 3.
cap. 7. So the stat. 5 R. 2. ca. of forf. of goods by those who go beyond the
Sea.
so also upon the stat. for executors de bonis asportatis in vita testator.
has it been resolved, and where administration is granted, it is only omnium
bonorum, without speaking of chattels, yet has the administrator interest in
leases as well as movables. cap. 16.
On the other side the stat. de prerog. reg. mentioning only forfeiture de
catallis is clearly extended to movables, so also in the writ of assize de
catallis quae in eo capta fuerint, In all these goods are comprehended
and in the writ of execution upon a stat. there is only the word catalla, and
not bona, and in the case reported by Kelway temp. Henry the 7th. it seems bona
and catalla were taken for synonyma or all one. 13 H. 7. Kelw. rep. 35. a.
It does not appear that these stat. and writs were alleged or considered of
temp. Ed. 6. but in Portmans case the most of them were.

If one will that his wife or any other shall have or hold or enjoy the moiety
of his lease with his executor. This implies not that the executor have the
other moity as a legacy also, but otherwise as the law casts it upon him, no
more then where the moiety of fee-simple land is devised to the younger son,
this shall not make the elder son to have the other moiety otherwise then by
descent, as between Low and Charter was conceived. But there being a Proviso
in the wives bequest, that if she married from the house, Low and Carters case
Tr. 37. Eliz. in ba. reg.
then etc. Popham cap. Justice held, that if she married at all, this was a
marrying from the house, for she was no longer widow of that house, though she
married with one of that kindred, and who had no other house, but would dwell
in the bequeathed.

CAP. XX.
Of the Executor of an Executor.
I Should be taxed of omission, if I should not show whether the things
fore-spoken of Executors immediate, extend also to the mediate or more remote
Executors. See Plow. 184. a Debt against the Executor of an Executor
Assuredly, were I not by the books otherwise informed, I should think it
somewhat strange, that the mediate Executor in the fourth, fifth or further
degree should not by the rules of the common Law, stand in like plight Executor
to the first Testator, as the first and immediate Executor, aswellas the heir,
and assignee in the third or thirteenth degree is capable of all advantages in
like sort as the first and immediate heir, 19 Ed. 1. and 14. Ed. 3. Fitzh.
Executor 87. and 103.
and assignee. And indeed we find both in the time of Edward the 2. and
Edward the 3. Execution sued out upon a judgment, and Statute by an Executor
of an Executor, and why he might not as well maintain an action of debt, etc.
I see not. 11. Ed. 3. and 13. Ed. 3. Fitzh. Ex. 78. 92.
But I must confess, I find both books to the contrary before any Statute
made in the point, 25. Ed. 3 cap. 5.
and after an act of parliament to enable them to bring actions, and to make
them subject to actions, yet the Statute speaks nothing of conferring upon
them the Testators goods. Now if they had title to them before that Statute and
without the help of that Statute, it is strange if they should not be suable
for debts. But since that Statute, and at this day where by a will a special
trust is recommended to an Executor, as to s^ll land, etc. This not performed
in his life time, shall not be performable by his Executor, 19. H. 8. 9. 10. 4.
El. Die. 210. 32. H. 8. cap. 37. So 32. H. 8. 28. leases.
contrariwise of an interest, as to take the profits of lands for certain
years toward payment of debts, and legacies: and where the stat. temp. H. 8.
gives remedy to Executors for recovery of rents of inheritance behind in the
Testators life, And 32. H. 8. cap. 34. Conditions, and 13. El. cap. 5. and 27.
I doubt not but executors of executors are within the equity as well as within
the Stat. 9. Ed. 3. cap. 3. that the executor who appears at the grand distres
shall answer alone. Eliz. cap. 4. Of fraudulent conveyances.
Yet the statute Westminster. 2. cap. 23. for executors was taken not to extend to
executors of executors. 21. H. 8. cap. 15. for falsifying recoveries. 39. H. 6.
45.
Quod non est lex. So as now in all cases except of special trust or
authority, 7. E. 3. 62.
without the office of executorship, The executor of an executor, how far
soever in degree remote, stands as to the points both of being, having, and
doing in the same state and plight as the first and immediate executor.

CAP. XXI.
Touching Administrators.
OF these also as standing in much affinity with executors, it may be by some
expected that I should have treated. But first my excuse is, that these of
executors only having grown to so great a bulk above expectation, I was
unwilling to enlarge it further. Secondly, that which in the points of having,
and doing is before set forth, and showed touching executors, may be applied
to, and understood of administrator, sthough not what is spoken of being, and
unbeing, or revocation of executorships, and other circumstantiall points.

Lastly, I may perhaps if these find good acceptance, ad ere long that which
appertains to Administrators distinguished from Executors, or wherein they
stand in different state.

CAP. XXII.
Considerations in conscience touching payment of Debts, Legacies, and the
preferring or respect of persons.
TO the advertisement what course executors are to hold in their payments, I
thought good to add this in foro conscientiae. That when as it shall stand in
the executors will and election to pay whom he will, and as he will in respect
of equality in the dignity and degree of the debts, all being for the purpose
by specialty, and none of record, and yet he has not wherewith to pay or
satisfy all; Here he may have three ways or courses in his eye.

First, where there is equality in the honesty audita querela for equal
contribution in bearing of loss by them who stand in equal degree: so of
legacies.

The poverty and inability of some, and the foro conscientiae justify the
paying more to one and suffering him to lose less (if any thing) then another.
For as the widows mite was a greater gift, so a greater loss then more out of
abundance. Where charity finds, or may find place or neernesse to place of
giving, it may find greater motives of preserving from loss, So of legacies.

Peccatur (as I think) in conscientiam. But let every one stand or fall by or
to his own, or to him who is greater then his conscience. This equality S. Paul
in another case recommends to the Corinthians. 2 Cor. 8. v. 14.
And Solomon whilst no inequality appeared in the point of right, showed his
disposition to have made an equal division of the child between the mothers,
who were joint claymers and competitors for it.

See more of Conscience, Doct. and Stud.

FINIS.

