A Demonstration In brief, Of what I have noted in a Book, Entitled, A
DIALOGUE Between a CHRISTIAN and QVAKER.

Wherein is manifest That Thomas Hickes and his Confederates speak not by the
Spirit of God, neither is he ruled, touching the Mystery of God in Faith, by
Holy Scripture, but on the contrary.

Thom. Hickes, what thou have to say in Answer (charge me only) and no other
Person.

Hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God, for lo thine enemies make a
tumult, and they that hate thee have lifted up the head, they have taken crafty
Counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. Behold,
says the Lord, they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever
shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake, and every tongue
that shall arise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn.

Psalm. 83.1, 2, 3. Esai. 54.15. Printed in the Year 1673.

It Is written, Brethren, I have in a figure transferred to my self, and to
Apollo for your sakes that ye might learn in us, not to think of man above that
which is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. the same Apostle for confirmation of the Mystery
of God, which he taught, brought the Holy Scriptures for Testimony thereof,
Romans 10.8. and says that he witness no other thing than those which the
Prophets and Moses did say should come, Act. 26.22. Now, the Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Now the Spirits of the Prophets is mans's
Spirit, that is to be subject to the Prophets, to wit, Holy Scriptures, but the
Spirit of God no Scripture says is to be subject to, or to be tried by the
Holy Scripture, etc. It Is noted in the 20th Article of the Church of England,
that it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to
God's word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture that it be
repugnant to another; this saying is true, etc. Having spoken in brief of the
Authority of the Holy Scripture, I shall from the manifestation of God's
Spirit, and according to the Holy Scriptures demonstrate Tho. Hickes his folly,
and damnable Heresy in his aforesaid Book. He says in Page 5. there is a
Pamplet lately published by Robert West, Entitled, Damnable Heresy
discovered: That there is such a Book published by me, it is true; but for his
saying in that Page 5. where he arraigneth and condemns as guilty of damnable
Herefie ( viz.) the denying to worship the measure of light in every man,
that is false, as by my Book may appear. It was for his denying the light
within, which convinces the World of sin to be the Lord, etc. He says in his
Book Page 5. many Quakers that read this particular in that Book, condemns it,
and censures the person that asserted it. Mark! Can any Quaker read this
particular in that Book (to wit) measure of Light, which is not in that Book,
or censured me for it, as may appear by that Book. Again, he says in Page 5.
of his Book, Forasmuch as he affirms, this light communicated unto Adam, was
not only God's gift to him, but also the fountain whence all that light
proceeds, which is imparted or communicated unto the Creature; but dareft thou
stand by this assertion, says he. Mark, I never affirmed such a thing. It is
his Assertion, and not mine; for I have better learned of the Lord, and do know
him in whom is hidden all the Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge, and from him in
me have I received of his fullness, to him be glory for ever; and not from old
Adam, but from the second Adam, who is a quickening Spirit. Tho. Hickes says
in his Book Page 53. He that shall give a false relation of another man's
Assertion, such a man is false and deceitful: See by what he says in his own
Book, is not he such a man, that has in one Page of his Book three times
committed that folly, etc. In Page 5. and 6. his Book, he says, Is this
Christ within, God or a Creature? If God, then its the same with what was said
before; if a Creature then it is no Heresy, much less damnable Heresy, to
affirm, that they who worship this measure of light in every man, are
Idolaters; forasmuch as they worship a Creature, etc. Here he says, the light
in every man is a Creature. Mark, Is not this his saying, his solly, etc. Is a
thing so, because a man says so? Nay, we are not to think of men above what
is written (to wit) Holy Scripture: if so, where is any Holy Scripture, that
says, that the light in every man is a Creature. He says in his Book Page
65. speaking of the light within, it is proved, says he, that it self is but a
Creature, etc. Is not this privily to bring in damnable Heresy (to wit) first,
to say the light in every man is a Creature, and then after 50 Pages to say,
that it is proved, when there is no Holy Scripture brought, nor sound Reason for
proof, but his own saying, etc. may not every false person deceive a man of
what he has, if his saying may be taken for proof without farther evidence;
for a man may say and swear falsely, as the people did in the days of old, Jer.
5.2. they swore then, that they that were no Gods lived, ver. 7, And now Tho.
Hickes says, that the light in every man is a Creature: Is this your
Champion, O ye Baptist People, that ye boast so much of, saying his Book can
never be answered: surely the pride of Jordan will be spoiled, Zech. 11.3. in a
Dispute with me before many Witnesses, he affirmed that the light in every man
was man's spirit, and that God breathed it into Adam, and that it did convince
them of fin, but as then he brought no Holy Scripture for confirmation of his
affirmation; even so now, he brings no Holy Scripture to witness it, but his
own saying, nor can he, as by my Book as before is noted, may appear: And yet
he would have people believe, that the Holy Scripture is his Rule in Faith and
Practice, etc. Know all then, that I do own the Holy Scriptures, as before is
noted, and by them, through the manifestation of God's Spirit do know, that
Tho. Hickes is not ruled touching the Mystery of God in Faith by them, but sets
up his own sayings above them to oppose the Holy light in man, to which the
Scripture gives Testimony unto, as may appear by what follows, for the help
of the weak understanding. First, I shall bring the Holy Scriptures, which
testifies what God is. Secondly, where he is. And thirdly, where that which
may be known of God was and is manifested, to the end Tho. Hickes his sayings
may be tried, whether they be according to the Holy Scriptures, yea, or nay.
And first to the first, That God is Light. It Is written, This is the Message,
says John, that we have heard of him and declare unto you, that God is Light,
and that in him there is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. Christ says, I and
my Father are one: and says Christ, I am the Light of the World, John S. 12.
That was the true Light, which ligheth every man that comes into the World,
says John, John 1.9, 15. and was before me, says he: To this agrees the
Testimony of David, who says, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, Psalm.
27. So much in brief, touching what God and Christ is, etc. Secondly, Where he
is, says David, If I go up into Heaven thou art there; if I make my Bed in
Hell thou art there, Psalm. 139. And Solomon his Son says, For thine
uncorruptibl Spirit is in all things, Wisd. 13.1. Says the Lord, do not fill
Heaven and Earth: By common consent this manner of S^^ech is, that he does fill
Heaven and Earth; says St. Paul speaking of the Lord, above all, through all,
and in you all. Thirdly, The Holy Scripture testifies touching this Infinite
and Incomprehensible God, That that which may be known of God, speaking of them
that had not the Law, is manifest in them, Romans 1.19. And Christ says. The
Kingdom of Heaven is within you, Luke 17.21.



Question. Is the Lord in Unbelievers and Idolaters?

Answer. Yea: If he was not in Unbelievers before they do believe, how then
could he be the Author and finisher of their Faith: It Is written, He is the
Author and finisher of his Peoples Faith, Heb. 12.2. That he was in Idolaters,
the Lord himself testifies; When Israel was sacrificing to Balaam and burning
incense unto graven Images, at that time, says the Lord, I am the Holy One, in
the midst of thee, Hos. 11.9. The Church of England consesseth, and I wish they
knew what they did say, That Heaven and Earth is full of the Majesty of thy
Glory.

Having produced so many Evidences touching what God is, and where he is, hear
what Tho. Hickes says in his Book Page 3. by way of Answer to a Question
touching the holy Light in man, and the great God of Heaven and Earth, and then
choose whom you will believe; whether you will believe the Testimony of the
Lord and his holy Prophets, which before is noted, or the Testimony of Tho.
Hickes, which followed, as it it is noted in his Book Page 3. says he, But if
thou say this Light in every man in Christ and God, I do not only deny it,
says he, but charge it with Blasphemy, etc. Mark, does he not in this
particular charge the Faith of Gods Elect with Blasphemy, and the Confession of
the Church of England also. No Holy Scripture says as he does, but on the
contrary, etc. Therefore I conclude that Tho. Hickes and his Confederates are
not ruled in Faith nor Words by Holy Scripture, but in pretense, etc. It it is
written in old Translation, Esai. 8. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they
speak not after this meaning, it is because they are not of the Morning-light,
if not of the morning-light, know whose Children ye are: the word (no light in
them) is not in the old Translation to be read; for as it is before noted, the
uncorruptible Spirit, who is Light in all things, and the manifestation of the
Spirit is given unto every one to profit withal, etc. 1 Corinthians. 12.7.

Quest. Is Christ in Reprobates? It Is written, Know you not your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye are Reprobates.

Answ. It Is written, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that be lost; whom
the God of this World has blinded their minds, lest the Light of the Glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4.
Again, it is written, I am he, which was dead, and am alive, says Christ, which
tries the Hearts and the Reins, and that the Churches shall know, Rev. 2.
Which words implies, that the Churches then were without the knowledge of
Christ in them, as the Baptist Churches now are, which state is not approved
of, or Reprobate. The Lord give them an understanding that they may know it,
for they have need, as the Churches then had that were fallen, to repent, and
do the first work, Rev. 2.5. The which if they do, they shall know the
Testimony which God gives of himself, that he which believes has the witness
in himself, that is the Faith, which is the evidence of things not seen (to wit)
the Lord, who is the Light in every man, whom man has despised, Isai. 53.3.
and have abhorred, and the evil doers hated, Zech. 11.8. John 3. In Page 5. of
Tho. Hickes his Book, he says, that Robert West in his Book Page 6. tells us
that the Spirit which God breathed into Adam was not man's Spirit, but another,
which he calls, The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed Lord: That I have so
written is true, the Cause why I did so was, because Tho. Hickes affirmed, that
the light in every man, that did convince them of sin. Was man's Spirit not
Christ; for said he, whilst Christ was figured out in Types, he was not
actually in being, etc. Upon this my spirit by the Testimony of Jesus, which is
the Spirit of Prophecy, who then manifested unto me his folly; but he
gathering a Company on his side, over bore me by words, his Company also
mocking and scoffing then at me, I patiently then bore it, and told him, that I
should oppose him in Print; but being persecuted and imprisoned, forbearing my
Testimony for the Truth and against deceit, had not the opportunity to Print it
until the Year 1672. which was then performed. For if I should be silent to
such an affirmation (to wit) First, that the Light within, which convinces man
of sin, was man's spirit, I having knowledge from the Lord, that that Spirit
which convinces of sin was the Spirit of the Lord, should have been unfaithful
to my knowledge, and suffered the Lord, who is a Spirit to be robbed of his
Glory; for the glory of that work of convincing of sin is the Lords, not man's
spirit. Upon this I was necessitated to distinguish the spirit of man, from the
Spirit of the Lord, etc. But he says in his Book Page 5. that I have
wretchedly and profanely perverted that Text, Lam. 4.20. Because I testify
that the breath which God breathed into Adams nostrils, by which Adam became a
living Soul, was not man's Spirit, but another (to wit) the true light, the
anointed of the Lord, of whom the Kings of Israel were but figures, etc. In
Page 17. of his Book, he says, I grant the Son of God is called, The Word of
God; if so, then he was before the World was made, and is not the Son of God,
the anointed, etc. And before that he affirmed, that the Word by which God
made the World was not the Christ, neither was he actually in being whilst he
was figured out in Types; see how he contradicts himself. Mark, the Son of God
is Christ the anointed of the Lord, by him God made the World, Heb. 1.2. It Is
written, By the Word the Lord was the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by
the breath of his mouth, Psalm. 37.6. Now has not Tho. Hickes manifested his
ignorance, first, in affirming that the Word by which God made the world, was
not the Christ; and now grants the Son of God is called the Word of God, as may
appear by his Book Page 17. Again, he says in his Book Page 78. it is not
denied but that Jesus Christ as Mediator was in purpose and promise long
before: neither do I, says he, question the Eternal Deity of that Word, which
in time took flesh, but though this is, and by me must be granted, yet I
believe not, that the Word was then made flesh, that Christ was actually made
known as God in flesh, according to the Mystery and intendment of those Types;
does he not here again contradict himself? First, he says, Jesus Christ was
purpose and promise, and then says, I do not question of that Word which in
time took flesh; does not this contradict his affirmation before noted, etc.
For first, he has granted the Son of God is called the Word of God: Secondly,
he has granted the Eternal Deity of that Word in time took flesh; all which
tends to what I have contended for, and he opposed: True it is, whilst the
first Tabernacle was standing, the way into the Holiest was not manifest, Heb.
9.8. Tho. Hickes says in his Book Page 52. speaking of me, there was one of
thy friends, says he, that pretended to perfection, yet the same person I
proved guilty of Blasphemy, in saying the Kingdom of Heaven was in his Dog.
The same man says, he interpreted that Text Lam. 4.20. which intends a
person to mean the Spirit of God in man, which he calls the Anointed Lord;
and are such instants as these the Character of a perfect man, etc. I never
said to him that the Kingdom of Heaven was in my Dog, neither did he ever prove
me guilty of Blasphemy: indeed about 10 or 12 years past, he asked me, whether
or no I did say so: I then replied, Answer me to my Question, and I will answer
thee. My Question was, Does the Lord fill Heaven and Earth, yea or nay? said
he, I will not answer: Then said I, neither will I answer thee. Does not his
denial to answer my Question manifest, that fear had surprised the Hypocrite.
Is this fairly done to publish in Print ten or twelve years after he asked me
that Question, that he proved me guilty of Blasphemy, who then was afraid to
answer to my Question. It Is written, He that hides hatred with lying Lips, and
he that utters a slander is a fool, Prove. 10.18. Touching that of Lam. 4.20.
I have spoken of before. Has not Tho. Hickes in his Book Page 52. perverted
the Text Lam. 4.20. in saying which intends a person; What person was that
which was the breath of the holy Prophets nostrils? The Text says, alluding
unto Genesis 2.7. as it is noted in the Margin of the Bible that the breath of our
nostrils, even the Anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits, etc.
Touching Perfection, Is believing Perfection attainable on this side the Grave
to be spoken against; then the preaching of God himself is to be spoken
against: for he preached to Abraham, saying, Walk before me, and be thou
perfect. Again, Christ taught his Disciples, saying, Be ye perfect as your
Father which is in Heaven is perfect. Again, the end of the Ministry is for the
perfecting of the Saints, as Scripture witnesses, etc. I am a witness for the
Lord, that the Ministry which makes not the Comers thereunto perfect, and gives
them the knowledge of God on this side the Grave is a false Ministry, and the
Ministers thereof are deceivers, etc. In Page 3. of Tho. Hickes his Book he
says; Yea, that which thou call light in thee, has in many things
misguided thee. This his saying is his folly; for Job testifies, speaking of
the light of the Lord, That by his light he walked through darkness. Job 29.3.
To this agrees the promise of Christ, He that follows me, says Christ,
shall not walk in darkness but shall have the light of life, John 8.12. I
witness the same promise to me made good, amongst the many thousands of the
Lords people this day. It Is written, That Job spoke of the Lord the things that
are right, Job 42.7. But now Tho. Hickes and his Confederates have spoken of
the Light within, the things which are wrong, etc. For if any man do or speak
the things that are wrong or false, he is not guided by the light within so to
do, but by another spirit, etc. There are three Spirits in man (viz.) the
Spirit of God, which is the light, whose Name is called the Lord, as it is
written, The Lord is that Spirit.: And man's spirit, which is the Candle: And
the spirit of the Devil, which moves man, or tempts man to sin. Now either of
these three Spirits may be followed, etc. The foolish Prophets of Israel
followed their own Spirits, and saw nothing, Ezekiel. 13.3. Now he that follows
his own spirit may say, that he is led by the light within, or speaks by that
light, as too many have done, not knowing what spirit they have followed,
because they thought there had been but two spirits in man (to wit) the Spirit
of God, and the spirits of the Devil, etc. Now if it should be so, the Soul of
man that being a Spirit must be of the substance of God, or of the substance of
the Devil: I say again, if there be but two Spirits in man, the Soul of man
being a Spirit, must be God or of his Substance, which is blasphemy so to say,
or of the spirit of the Devil. Consider of it: Therefore there is a necessity
to know what man's spirit is; for that end I did distinguish in my Book,
Entitled, Damnable Heresy Discovered: The Spirit of man, which is the Candle,
from the light within, which is, the Lord; and the spirit of the Devil from
them both, etc. By what is written may appear, that the light within may be
silent, while men may follow other spirits, and that the ^^ght within, as it is
taken heed unto and followed, guides out of darkness. Tho. Hickes says in his
book Page 62. You speak of no other Resurrection, but of Christ's dying and
arising in you, etc. Know all men, that I do believe, when the Soul of man is
redeemed by the Lord from under the dominion of Death, the resurrection is not
finished, nor when the body shall be delivered from the dominion of the man of
the Earth, then the Resurrection is not finished; for in that state man may
marry and die. Now Christ says, The hour comes that all that are in their
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God and shall come forth, they that
have done well to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the
resurrection of condemnation, then there shall be no more marrying, nor giving
in marriage, nor dying any more, Luke 30.25. Joh. 5.28. Hos. 13.14. 1 Cor. 15
54.

Again, it is written, Every man shall receive according as he has done in the
body, whether it be good or evil, etc. Touching things noted in Tho. Hickes his
^ook against the Quakers, as he calls them, they are of age to speak for
themselves, etc. Touching what I have written is to manifest his folly and
falsehood, that he may not proceed any farther; and it was upon me, and in it I
have peace with God, on whose side I have written, and on whose side I have
been a Soldier above these twenty years, although for it I have been
imprisoned and troubled to many Assizes, but the Lord has, as his promise is,
delivered me: Glory be to him for ever and for evermore, Amen.

Written by me Robert West,
About the 60th year of my Age, to be Printed in the Year 1673.

