The West-Country Counselor OR, The Devonshire Damsels ADVICE to the Lasses of
London, In their Choice of Kind and Loving Husbands.
To the Tune of Fond Boys, etc.
Licensed according to Order.





PRetty Lasses attend to the Lines which I send,
As a Token of Love, from the Hand of your Friend;
And be sure you take heed, when the same you do read,
It will Profit you much in the great time of need:
Have a care of young Men, for there is scarce One in Ten
But are False and Deceitful; be careful, O then.
Some will court halt a score, whom they swear they adore,
Nay, and others perhaps, will have Twenty and more,
Whom they swear they love by the Powers above;
Every one by themselves they will call their dear Dove:
Thus they will flatter ye then, have a care of such Men,
(...) true-hearted Lovers there is scarce One in Ten.
They will strive to make bold with your Silver and Gold
And, without special care, of your dear Copyhold,
Having rifl'd your Store, and they find you grow poor,
It Is a thousand to one if thy come any more:
Have a care of such Men, for there is scarce One in Ten
But are False and Deceitful; be careful, O then.
Once my Father's Man Ned he came up to my Bed,
Where he begged and entreated for my Maidenhead,
I did presently frown, and I cracked the Knave's Crown,
From the top to the bottom I tumbled him down;
Faith I fitted him then, have a care of such Men,
For a true-hearted Lover there is scarce One in Ten.
Now it happened one Day, that a Friend Yea and Nay
Came to court me, and fain he would frollick and play;
But I put him to flight, and it being dark Night,
He slipped into the Well where he put out his light:
Have a care of such Men, for there is scarce One in Ten
But are False and Deceitful; be careful, O then.
Some will dwindle, and cry, swear they love till they dye,
When, alas! they dissemble, nay flatter, and lie;
When they once have berray'd a poor innocent Maid,
Then with scorn and derision they will her degrade:
Have a care of such Men, for there is scarce One in Ten
But are False and Deceitful, etc.
Such Deceivers as these, you may know, if you please,
When they proffer to cuddle and tickle your Knees,
Strait their Company spun, for the further they run,
You may quickly be ruined and clearly undone:
Have a care of such Men, for there is scarce One in Ten
But are False and Deceitful; be careful, O then.
Nay, I further declare you may know by their Hair,
If it be Red or Yellow, then then you may swear
They will never prove true, but will love than you;
And the sandy Complexions are Flatterers too:
Have a care of such Men, for there is scarce One in Ten
But are False and Deceitful, etc.
Of a two-colour'd Beard, you had need be afraid;
Now if by such a one you by chance are ensnared,
You Will have Sorrow and Woe, they will be Jealous I know,
And will watch, peep, and haunt you wherever you go:
Have a care of such Men, for there is scarce One in Ten
But are False and Deceitful, etc.
But the Black and the Brown, does in City and Town,
Are delightful and pleasant, they seldom can frown;
By the Powers above they are all over Love,
And as Loyal they are as the dear tender Dove:
Lasses these are the Men that will honor you then,
There Is not one of them false in full Fourscore and Ten.
Printed for J. Deacon at the Angel in Giltspur-street, without Newgate.


