THE VOICE OF Him that is escaped from BABYLON.

Reasons given forth to all sober minded people, why I departed from the
Ministry of thos^ called Ministers of Parishes; and why I departed from the
Ministry of those called Anabaptists; and why I have, and what I have
contended for, some years past.

It Is the duty of believers in Christ, to contend for the faith that once was
delivered to the Saints; Although for it I have been persecuted; and am hated:
Woe is me, my Mother, that thou have born me a man of strife, and a man of
Contention to the whole Earth, Jer. 15. 10.

LONDON, (...)

The Voice of him that is escaped from Babylon.
Reasons given forth to all sober minded people, Why I departed from the
Ministry of those called Ministers of Parishes; and why I departed from the
Ministry of those called Anabaptists: and why I have, and what I have
contended for, some years past.
It Is the duty of Believers in Christ to contend for the faith that was once
delivered to the Saints, although for it I have been persecuted: and am hated:
Woe is me, my Mother, that thou have born me a man of strife, and a man of
contention to the whole Earth, Jer. 15. 10.
When I turned at the reproofs of God, then the word of God entered into me,
and by it my understanding was enlightened; and understanding was given me, and
then did I see that the Parish Ministers so called, was Teachers of that, that
they walked not in themselves. When I pressed them to it: to wit, to walk as
examples to the people of what they preached; some of them told me, the things
I said ought to be done, and it was good if it was so: but it could not. Then
being asked the Reason, one of them replied; to wit, William Hughes of
Marlebrough, who said, he should then wrong his wife and Children. Upon this I
departed from them, being satisfied of them that they was sayers and not doers;
for I had proved others of them before: Then after my departure from them, with
whom I walked in an Independent way, as they called it, I went and heard the
Anabaptists so called, whose Conversations was more agreeable to what they
said, than those called Parish Ministers, but their doctrine was one in this
particular; to wit, that Christ died, but for a Remnant whom they called the
Elect: I being unsatisfied with that doctrine, by reason of a friend whom the
Lord made useful to me; who proposed this question to me, Whether Christ dyed
for all, if not, how can it be preached to all, that he dyed for them; and
whether the pressing of all to believe, be not the pressing of men to believe a
lie, if he dyed not for all, seeing all are pressed upon (...) b^li^^^ ^h^t ^^
dyed for them* After I had considered of it* this wrought in my understanding,
that it was uncertain who Christ dyed for, if he dyed not for all, and, that it
was a lie, to preach to the people, that he dyed for them; if he dyed not for
them; and that for me to believe he dyed for me, if he dyed not for all, was
uncertain: and so I was put upon the trial of my faith. In the proving of
which, I found that it was not according to the form of the Apostles doctrine;
for that was, that he casted death for every man, and that he dyed for all, and
gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time, God being no
respecter of persons, for when we was enemies, Christ dyed for the ungodly: the
just for the unjust, as it is written, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, (not that he did then) and that he might bring us to God. I being
convinced of this form of doctrine, contended for it, with those baptized
people with whom I accompanied; and in love to them, and the truth obtained a
dispute between them and one John Cooper, concerning that matter, but the
things disputed of, being stated unsound proved to be of little profit; as for
the matter or question disputed on, it was stated thus: Whether that Redemption
by Christ was greater or larger, then salvation by Christ; now, this is not
according to the former sound words Stated, to wit, the Scriptures of the
Prophets, for there is none saved by Christ's death, but those that are
redeemed from all unrighteousness, and there is none redeemed from
unrighteousness, but by the blood which is the life; for the death of Christ
singly considered, saves not from death, but the life; as says the Apostle,
we are saved by his life, for the life is the Ransom (...). 5. 10.
that redeems to God: so then, Redemption and Salvation by Christ is equal:
now, Christ gives himself a Ransom for all, as it (...). 20. 28.
is written, for the free gift is unto all, and lights every man that comes
into the world, and this is to be testified in due time. Now, ^^m. 2. 6.
when I saw that the baptized people would not be convinced of their error, to
wit, of personal Election and Reprobation before time: I departed from them,
for I knew by light received, that God who works all things after the Counsel
of his own will, has ordained a way of life, and a way of death, before we
was; but did not decree persons to those ways, but set them before them, to
choose life and good, death and evil; as it is written, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. and thus
our salvation is of God, because he has ordained the way, but our destruction
is of our selves, if we turn from it, or if ^ called Baptists, I began to
consider, that I had contended for the form of truth, but where was the power
to be known, and what was it, that so my mind might be stayed upon it; for as
yet, I knew not the Lord although he was within me, and had enlightened my
understanding, by which I did know, and discern Doctrines; thus the Lord was
within me, and I knew it not, then it did appear to me, according to Scripture,
that, that was the Lord which did search the heart, and make manifest sin to
me, and did reprove me for it; then I questioned what the everlasting Gospel
was, and reasoned with some what it should be. Some said one thing, and some
another, ^o that their sayings satisfied me not what it was. It was so ordered
by the Lord about two or three years, after I had separated from the Baptists,
that I went to their meeting; then they desired to reason with me what the
Gospel was: to which I agreed willingly: now, it was referred for a fourteen
days after, and then it was Reasoned by them and I. There was about eight or
ten of their Teachers, besides many people, he who was their chief Reasoner was
one Blase Allen, who affirmed that the everlasting Gospel was Remission of sin,
by the blood of Jesus Christ, and glory by him at his appearing: to all, that
thus receive it, its the power of God unto salvation. I asked him whether he
meant the visible blood that was shed without the gates of Jerusalem, he said
yea, I asked then of William Crabb, and Nicholas Ellyot, and other Teachers
there present: whether they did own it, they said yea, and gave me a Copy of
it in writing; and asked me whether I would deny it, if I did, I should deny
the whole, or else grant the whole of their affirmation. To that I replied,
It Is written, thou shall not sow thy field with mingled seed, nor wear a
Linsie Wolsie Garment. This is a mingled affirmation, said I: some things may
be owned, and some things must be denied, then being admitted by them, I made
my exceptions, to wit, that I did deny that to be the everlasting Gospel;
namely, Remission of sins by the visible blood, and that for these Reasons.
First, that-blood had a beginning which was shed without the gates of
Jerusalem, but the everlasting Gospel had no beginning: again the Gospel was
preached to Abraham, and them that are dead, and Christ preached the Gospel,
before the visible blood was shed; and remitted sins, and there was none saved
without Remission of sins, and without shedding of blood there is no Remission
of sins, therefore, Remission of sins by that blood was not the everlasting
Gospel. Then they said they would prove it, which they endeavored about two or
thee hours bringing these following Scriptures, Isa. 52. 10. Romans 10. 15. Act.
13. 32, 33, 38. Luke 2. 13. Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 28. Col. 1. 20. Heb. 12. 24.
Rev. 1. 5. Mat. 26. 28. Heb. 9. 14, 22. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 3. Act. 5. 3. And then
said, We have proved it. I denied it. A friend to truth desired those
Scriptures mentioned might be proved; which was not assented to, but the
question was put upon the people, because of the remaining questions, whether
to them they had proved it, because they said they had, and the people replied,
Nay; The other things agreed to be reasoned then, was, what the Ministers of
the Gospel was to direct the people to, to which was agreed on by both sides,
To Christ: the next question was, Where he was; they said, in heaven; then said
I, where is heaven. Then said they, we have proved what was to be reasoned or
asserted: then said I, the kingdom of heaven is within you, and Christ is in
heaven, then said they, prove it; I said, Will you deny it? they then was
silent. Then said I, I should not prove it, except they did deny it; many other
wordspassed, with which I shall not trouble the Reader. For matter, this is the
sum of that present meeting. After this they said, that I was fallen from the
faith, and that they were sorry for me and others; I then examined what might
be the meaning of this their saying, and I found in my understanding that they
did mean, because I do believe the first principle to be preached to men, is
the light that shines in darkness, to wit, in their hearts, whereas they
preached to men, the first principle to be believed is without men, and not
within men: Now I confess it had been a question some time in my understanding
whether Yea or Nay, I had not fallen; and I found that I had fallen, from
making the sayings of men, or the Letter of Scripture, the ground of my faith:
now I had made a large profession of God and Christ at a distance from me, but
knew neither, my faith at that time was like that of the Samaritans, who
believed because of the saying of the Woman: but truly, as they said, so say I:
they said, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ the Savior of the World. For,
friends, it is one thing, to believe the Scriptures, or Reports of men, but
it is another thing to believe Christ: For example, Agrippa believed the
Prophets, when he believed not in Christ, for he says unto Paul, thou have
almost Act. 2^ 28.
persuaded me to be a Christian. Now the promise is sure to the ^eed, but not
to Reports of men, for thus it is written, whosoever believes in him shall
never be confounded or ashamed, and in truth I am a witness, As the mind is
turned to the measure of him, Romans 10 11.
and on it stayed, there is virtue proceeds from him, which purges the mind,
and then gives peace, and an understanding to know him which is life eternal;
thus have I wandered from one City to another Country, and from the Teachings
of men, and am taught of the Lord. Glory be to him for ever who shows me
Mysteries, and the times of Ministrations. Behold, I show you some of them,
Christ is hid in God and shall appear; the Gentiles are partakers of the divine
nature, and so made fellow-heirs with the Jews of the kingdom of heaven: God
is in Christ, and Christ is in the Light, and the light is in the world now to
be manifested for the obedience of faith to all Nations, the body of Saints
shall be raised, and we then that are alive shall be changed, and ascend in the
sight of her enemies, to meet the Lord when he shall be Revealed, in like
manner as he did ascend into heaven. The Saints both Jews and Gentiles shall
come with him, and shall be seen by enemies in the kingdom of God, and the
dominion under the whole heavens, shall be given unto the Saints of the most
high, and they shall Rule, and Reign on Earth in the kingdom of Christ, and
then the kingdoms of this World shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ; the time is at hand that these things shall be performed: although
it may seem as an idle tale, unto many whose hearts are flow to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken; and therefore perverts the Prophets words, yet
shall they certainly come to pass. And now, friends, all beware of
persuasions, that are contrary to the Scriptures of the Prophets, for the
spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: hold fast therefore the
form of sound words, and learn to speak such words that cannot be condemned:
for when words are spoken that are questionable, there is occasion given of
disputing: and beware of putting one dispensation in the place of another, for
that is turning truth into a lie, beware also of Preaching dispensations
together without distinction, for then it will be an uncertain sound, and an
occasion of disputing; now the servants of God in former times gave the sense
of what they did read unto the people; and gave distinction in the sound of
their Ministry, and caused the people to understand it, and was meek toward
them that did not understand, although they did oppose what was spoken. For
example, Christ said to his disciples, Whither I go ye know, and the way ye
know: Thomas says, We know not the way, yet Christ did not say to him, I deny
thy spirit, but (...) 14. 5.
reasoned with him and his disciples: Learn to do so also, beware what comes
into thy bucket, least thou pour that out which is not of God, although thou
may say it is. Remember that when Joshua the High Priest was standing before
the Lord, Satan was standing at his right hand, therefore watch and be sober;
and be more ready to hear, then to offer up the sacrifice of fools, for they
understands not what they speaks, and therefore will not give an account of
it, when they are asked; lest their folly should be made manifest. And you that
have been deceived by words when your faith stood in them, and now your faith
stands in the power of God, keep your understanding exercised in it, that you
may discern doctrines, and give attendance to reading, and beware of being
puffed up for one, against another, I write not to shame any, but to warn all.
It was a sin in Israel to limit the Holy one, and it has been the sin of many
Generations, even to this present time: therefore as its written, Beware of
men, prove all things, and the Lord Mat. 10. (...).
give you understanding in them. Now that there may be no occasion given
amongst the Lords people of disputing concerning Manifestations, or
Ministrations: know that the day of preaching or manifestation of the glorious
light in the World, is not the day spoken of in Act. 17. 31. In which God will
judge the World by the man whom he has ordained: but it is, and was the day in
which all are judged, who are obedient to it, according to men in the flesh,
that they might live according to God in the Pet. 4. 6.
spirit: so then by the Gospel are the Saints judged and purged, and the Prince
of the World judged and cast out, and for this cause was, and is it preached:
Now when this is preached in all Mat. 24.
the World (mark, in the World) for a witness, the end of this World shall
come: and take to his dominion under the whole heavens, and give it to the
Saints of the Most high, then they shall rule, and all that did afflict them
shall then come bending to them, and then shall be fulfilled what is written,
to wit, A King shall Reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall Rule in
Judgment; In which day Behold I^rael after t^^ flesh shall be gathred from all
Countrie^ and place^ in the Lan^ of Canaan, (...) ^it, those (...) them that
believed n^^ the Gospel, and then shall the Saints sit upon throne^ and judge
them and the world. Romans 8. 23^
a multitude of promises shall be fulfilled: which is not, as yet fulfilled.
Now under the Reign and Rule of Christ and his Saints shall Satan be bound,
that he may not deceive the Nations, and afterward he shall be loosed for a
time, and then will he gather his numberless number, who will compass about
the beloved City; but fire from heaven shall consume them, and then shall all
the Children of the wicked be raised, and come to Judgment. Now this is the day
spoken of in Acts 17. 31. In which he will judge the World according to the
Gospel: for under the day of grace, the Children of the wicked would not be
judged by the Gospel: therefore, he then by the Man Christ Jesus, will Judge
them according to the Gospel: know also that when the Son of Righteousness or
day-Starr is risen in the heart, our body is not risen: for he that had the Son
of God revealed in him, says, Not that I have already attained unto the
resurrection of the dead, but he groaned in himself, to wit, for the redemption
of our body; and they also that was tortured, not expecting deliverance looked
for a better Resurrection, but received not the promise, that they without us
should not be made perfect. Now it may be objected, Are not the Heb. 11. 40.
Saints that are asleep in Jesus perfect? My answer is, Their spirits are
perfect: but their body although sanctified was weak, for they suffered in it,
and it was sown in weakness Now there is a difference between weakness and
wickedness; Christ was crucified through weakness, but in him there was no
wickedness; a word to the wise is sufficient. Again, know that the spirit in
man is to be preached to, and not the seed, for that came not to be ministered
to, but to minister, and did preach unto the spirits that was disobedient in
the days of Noah: now the spirits of men was sometime disobedient, but the
divine nature was never disobedient; therefore man's spirit is not the seed, but
a receptable subject or Candle, formed in man, by which he might receive the
divine nature, for the flesh and blood cannot receive it. Again know that the
Revelation of Jesus Christ in us, is not the second appearance of Christ spoken
of in Scripture: for he who had the Son of God revealed in him, says, We wait
for the Lord from heaven, and to them that look for him, the second time shall
he appear without sin unto salvation. Now, there are differences of
Ministrations, but the same Lord.

And now a few words to the people of the Land of my nativity after the flesh.
I beseech you teachers and hearers examine your selves (for the day of the Lord
is at hand) whether you know what you teach, and what you worship: I put this
question unto you. Suppose those who do worship stocks and stones, or the Host
of Heaven, should ask you What God you do worship, what would you say unto
them, that they might be certain and know your God. Now they will expect,
either the sight of him, to wit, of your God; or the sense of him that they may
feel him; or else what shall they believe, as the object of their faith, if you
cannot manifest him unto them, that they may see him, or feel him. Do you think
that they will leave a certain for an uncertain, for a parcel of words? What
they do worship, if you should ask them, they can show you: but I fear many of
you worship you know not what. For I asked one of your Teachers, to wit,
William Spinnage, called Minister of Poulshott, whether he knew the Lord, and
he said unto me that to know the Lord, was to be the Lord: Woe is me, O people
for you, your Teachers are leight and treacherous, and preach to you that they
know not, words that do not profit, and you are ever learning, but comes not to
the knowledge of the truth, which would make you free, but loves to live in
your sins: what will you do in the end thereof? for the Lord will appear in
flames of fire, rendering vengeance upon all that know 2 These. 1. 8.
him him not, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power. Mind this you that know not the Lord, these words
are not spoken in vain. Now, if you would ask me, what God I do ^orship, my
answer is, A measure of the same light which shines unto you, which is one in
the male, and in the female: and thus we, as its written, know whom we worship,
and declare John 4. 2^
him unto you, that you may know him, for he is not far from every one of us:
now that which may be known of him in the particular, is manifest within them.
For to every one is the manifestation of the spirit given to profit withal:
and that is the spirit of the Lord, that convinces you of sin. I have written
John 16. 8^
this, because I have reasoned with many, that have granted, that they ought to
be lead by the spirit of God. But, said they to me, there be many false
spirits, and how shall we know the spirit of God, from the spirit of Error.
Now as I have said to them; so I say to all, That which makes manifest sin unto
man, and reproves him for it, that is the spirit of God, therefore obey and
follow it, for the devils knows the voice of Christ, but follows him not:
be you not like them, for the Lords spirit will not always strive with man:
awake to righteousness and sin not, and dishonor no longer the profession of
a Christian, in saying you cannot in this world be free from sinning; when in
very deed you will not come to Christ, it is written, he is able to save to the
uttermost all them that come Heb. 7. 25.
unto God by him, will you give the Scripture the lie, and dishonor the Lord:
O you foolish and unwise, how long will you hate knowledge, and delight in
folly. Now to conclude, let not the unclean spirits within you deceive you, in
persuading any that I have written, or given this forth, because I would be
advanced, or because I hate any. I tell you nay, it is because I fear the Lord
who would reprove me, if I should Levit. 19. 17. Psalm. 50. 18.
suffer sin upon my brother, and not reprove him; or, if seeing a thief I
consent to him.

Here follows in love a general Epistle to all Saints who are the Remnant of
Jacob, in the midst of many people, as a dew from the Lord, and as showers upon
grass.
Elect, according to the foreknowledge of God, through obedience to the truth,
and sanctification of the spirit, Grace mercy and peace be multiplied amongst
you, from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ: Brethren, know
certainly, that although we be weak in Christ, as he was in the days of his
flesh in the Father, yet our life is hid with Christ in God: and when Christ
who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory: now we
are the Sons of God, but we know not what we shall be; but this we know, we
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, and every one that has this
hope in him, purifieth himself even as he is pure: and know it is not only
given to us to believe on his name the light, but also to suffer for it, that
your faith might be more pure then Gold that is tried in the fire; for it is no
strange thing to suffer for the Lord, for it has accompanied our brethren
which was in the World before us: and our suffering for the Lord is an evident
token we are of God; and to them under whom and by whom we suffer, it is a
token evident that they are not of God. And now brethren the day of our
Redemption draws nigh; be faithful to the death, and valliant for the truth
upon Earth, in this day of Zions controversy against Babylon, for the Lord is
with us, and the shout of a King is amongst us, and goes before us, to make
War in Righteousesse, and to thresh the Nations, and to stain the glory of all
flesh, and to bring in contempt all the honorable of the Earth, that so the
great Whore which has corrupted the Earth may be consumed; and it is in order
to the remainingdispensations which is to come, to wit, the filling of the
Earth with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters do cover the Sea, that so
the unclean spirits may pass no more through the Land, but be bound; for so
they shall be for a thousand years: for the Nations shall not be deceived under
the Rule and Reign of Christ, who shall Reign in Righteousness, and Rule in
Judgment, after the Redemption of the body of our brethren the servants of God;
who are yet asleep in Jesus, at which time we shall be changed; to wit, the
body, and so as i'ts written, they without us should not be made perfect, for
as by one offering all that are sanctified are made perfect for ever; even so
at one season, in a moment, in the Twinkling of an eye shall they be raised,
and we changed, and meet the Lord our Root, the offspring of David, the bright
and morning Star, who is one with that within us, and not another Lord, but
another manifestation of the same Lord; for there are differences of
Ministrations, but the same Lord, yesterday, to day, and for ever, and now
brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace in which we stand,
which is able to build us up, and to give us an inheritance amongst all them
that are sanctified by faith in him: Farewell,

A warning from Zion to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and to the Virgins that
sleeps and slumbers.
Awake from sleep ye slumbring men, for night on you long time has bin: the
midnight cry is a near at hand, and Christ shall Reign over all Lands; in
Righteousness for to set free Zion from her Captivity; Awake from sleep and
slumber then, you Virgins all in number ten; your Lamps prepare with Oil to
trim, that you with him may enter in; he is the Sabbath of the Lord, where we
do rest with one accord, and longs for you for to come in, that you with us may
to him sing; Halleluja to him is our song, for unto him it does belong; who
have raised us from death's State, to Reign with him that did us make. And now
farewell to worldly joy, which formerly did us annoy; and Captivate us: time
has bin, when we rejoiced and lived in sin; then death did Reign, which now is
fled, before him which is now our head; the Lord of glory is his name, its on
our hearts to spread his fame: that darkness may fly quite away; that light
over all may bear the sway; for darkness it his time has had, and Babylon
has made men mad; the Prophet false, and Beast also, shall now alive into lake
go: for Christ must Reign, then all give place; for evil shall fly from his
face: Why will you dye, O Sons of men, or where is the place to purge from sin;
or where is the thing that will you save, from sin when you are laid in grave:
as you do dye so shall you rise, the dead in sin cannot him praise; a woeful
day for you 'twill be, who from your sins are not set free; O take my counsel I
you pray, and turn to the light the true way; which in you is as he has bin,
the thing that does reprove for sin; but if you will not turned be, yet of
your blood now am I free; who am a witness for truths sake, that he would save
you from the lake; but force you he will not for why, to him that way is
Tyranny; his ways are equal and in love, to all; for he does all reprove: that
is his witness, and 'twill stand, for it is greater then that of John; the
works he does is a sign, he would you save, he is so kind. And thus of you my
leave I take, who have written this for your sake; with this my prayer for you
all; who yet are living in the Fall,

O Father dear, in Christ appear, to them that sin annoyes; That they with me,
may be set free, to praise thy name with joys.

Written by R. W. and sent from the Devizes, in love for the use of all.

Since the writing of this before mentioned, I was pressed in spirit to write
this following; that men might learn and know that Zion and her Converts are
two for matter, before they are married, and when they are married or given
unto the Lord, they are one in you, with him but not in time of being, for they
was made and begotten in time.

Here follows the Testimony of him that is come unto Mount Zion, showing what
it is singly considered, before God did light it, or man is joined to it:
written for the use of all those that asks the way to Zion, with their faces
thitherward.

Mount Zion, or the heavenly Jerusalem, for matter is spirit but not the spirit
of God or Christ: for Zion or Jerusalem ^^a. 14. 32. Heb. 11. 10.
is founded or made, and the maker of it is God: Now that which is founded or
made had a beginning, therefore not made of God, but by God; for if it had been
made of God, or of the divine nature Christ, then no part of it could have been
defiled: Now the spirit that is found in mankind is part of it, to wit Zion, as
the body of mankind is part of the Earth; so that the spirit in man by mankind
is not begotten but gave, and found in man by God: as it is written, yet had he
the residue Mal. 2. 15. Eccles. 12.
of the spirit, as says Malachi, Now the spirit of man may be defiled, but the
divine spirit cannot; therefore, says the Apostle, the wicked touches him
not. So then, Jerusalem that is above which is free, is the mother of men's
spirits: and the Zech. 12. 1.
spirit in mankind that gives life to his body, is the daughter Psalm. 85. 5^
of Zion, which is one for matter, before defiled, or when its purged and
brought again into a Virgin state; therefore, every one that is begotten by the
word of God, and born again, is begotten in, and born of the spirit, and so, as
it is written, of Zion, its true, to wit, that this, and that man, was born in
her, Mark that which is bor^ in Zion, is tha^ which was born, and tha^ was man:
for the divine nature was not begotten again; but man was begot an^ born again,
and that in Zion. Again if it should be man^ spirits, that's begotten again, and
given unto the Lord, then (...) would be she that's given unto the Lord but now
its h^ that is give^ unto the Lord Isa. 33. 14^ Number. 5. 2^ 12, 14.
for he is born in a measure of the same: now a measure of the same in a
particular, is called by the name of the same without him; which cannot be
comprehended by a particular man. For example, the measure of Christ in man, is
called Christ: now all the Sons of men cannot contain him, for he is the
express Image of his Fathers person, incomprehensible above all, and through
all, the life of the spirit in us, that gives life to our body: now before any
man can be born again, his mind must be purged, which will not be, except it be
turned to the light in him, and he abide its purging; which is done by Judgment
and burning, therefore the Hypocrite will not keep his mind to the light,
because it is a fire, but cries out when his mind is in Zion, to wit, his
spirit, Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings, and so flies the
Judgment of the Gospel, by which the Saints are Judg^d and purged. Now until
the mind and conscience and spirit of a man be purged, it cannot enter into
its Mother Zion, but is shut out without the City: Miriam when Leprous and the
Lepers of Israel is its figures. Now that which separates between the clean and
the unclean, is the Lord, who is a fire round about Zion or Jerusalem, which is
free from sin.

A song of Zion, gave forth by a son of Zion, that men might know the gates of
Zion; which the Lord loves more then all the dwellings of Jacob.
1
The glory of the Lord is come, on Zion it does shine,
The brightness of it does surmount, the Sun; for it is divine.
2
Which makes my mother for to be^ most glorious in his sight,
And all her Children holy ones; which is the Lords delight.
3
Upon her head there is a Crown, that will not fade nor swerve,
Most glorious for to behold, for it is of Twelve Stars.
4
And underneath her feet there is, a moon sometime does shine,
Which into blood turned shall be: for it was not divine.
5
But in Zion the Lord will dwell, for he has chosen she:
A wall of fire round about, to her the Lord will be.
6
If that her new name you will know, and of her children dear;
When she on earth is manifest, 'twill be, The Lord is there.
7
Within this City safety is, from sorrow death and pain;
On it the heat of Sun lights not, nor on it comes rain.
8
Though it no Ravenous beast does pass, as Lion, Wolf, and Bear;
So that in her all safe they are, there is no cause of fear.
9
Her waters clear as Crystal glass, most lovely to behold,
Her street is rich and glorious; for it is of fine Gold.
10
No Ship in her does pass with sail, nor gallion with ores,
The Merchants of great Babylon, comes not near her shores.
11
A tree of life within her is, most lovely is his root,
Whose leaves are green continually: bearing twelve manner fruit.
12
For healing of the Nations, are the leaves of this tree,
To give knowledge of salvation; to all he is so free.
13
Most glorious things are spoken of, the City of our God,
But how may man now enter in, to setle his abode?
14
There is no way but by the gates, the wall is very high;
Your minds to him turned must be, or else without must lie.
15
Where Is he that I to him may come, and Zions gates to know,
He is within manifesting, to thee thy sins he shows.
16
Your spirits it is Zions gates, where knocked long has him,
O lift it up and He to you, will suddenly come in.
17
Then in your spirits will He be, to you a hope again,
And then with he you shall he free, in Zion to remain.
18
For he will open unto you, the gate of righteousness,
Through which the righteous Nation, have entered into rest.
19
And thus in love I have you shown, the way to Zion's hill,
The City of solemnity; where the Lord God does dwell.
20
That so without you may not be, amongst those unclean beasts,
And where the wine press trod shall be, so there will be no rest.
Concerning the Mount of Olives, which stands before Jerusalem, which shall
cleave in the midst, and be removed: this Testimony I gives of it.
The mount before Jerusalem spoken of by Zechariah, is a Mystery of iniquity
not created by God, but gendred by men's Zech. 14. 4.
joining unto the Serpent: which mount stands before their spirits, as the
mount Olives did before Jerusalem on the East thereof; whereon stands their
idol gods which they have set up in their hearts. Now mount Olivet is alluded
to, by the Prophet, because upon mount Olivet stood the idol gods of Solomon's
strange wives; and therefore it was called the mount of Corruption, Mount
Olivet mentioned, or mount of Corruption, is one in Rank with Hagar and mount
Sinai, and the mount before Jerubbabel; which is a mystery of iniquity, in
which Satan moves, which shall become a Plain, be removed, and consumed. Deuteronomy.
23. 3. 1 Samuel 15. 3.
as you may read 2 Kings 23. 13. but in the margin its rendered, the mount
Olivet. Now when the feet of the Lord which is power shall stand upon it, it,
will cleave in midst, in which day the light shall not be clear nor dark. So it
is with every one until they can discern between their spirit and the divine
nature: and then the mountain that stands before Jerubbabel, to wit, the
mystery of iniquity in mankind, shall become a plain, and be removed and
consumed, by the spirit of the Lord, and the brightness of his coming, in all
his; and then, as it is written, the Lord my God shall come, and all his Saints
with thee, and Reign in mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients
gloriously: but mount Sinai or Hagar shall be cast out with her Children, and
shall not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, in ten generations for ever:
but shall be utterly destroyed from under heaven. Amaleck is its figure.

Now for this cause, is, and was the Gospel preached, to wit, for the
consummation of iniquity, and by it, shall it be destroyed. If thou ask me,
what the everlasting Gospel is, I answer, the glorious light in the World, it
has been preached under differing names or sounds, which I shall if God
permit, in my next book, inform the Reader with.

A song of my beloved, to my beloved, which is within the Veil; song by her
that was barren, in the I Will of the sea, Isa. 24. 15.
1
My Mother is a Queen most bright, and I her daughter dear,
Beloved of the Lord of life; who of me takes care.
2
A wall unto my Mother is, the Lord who keeps from sin:
So that in freedom she is preserved, though Captive I have been.
3
And then I was in prison strong, where I defiled have been,
But now I am purged again, and am made a Virgin.
4
Come my beloved unto me, for welcome thou shall be,
For thou have done for me great things, and by thee I am free;
5
From death and sin by thee my Love, and now am thine by right,
For thou have bought me with a price, and me redeemed with light.
6
I have Redeemed thee; let me go, and I will come again:
For comely now thou art to me; and I Will with thee remain.
7
I will not let thee go my love, come now thou into me,
That so a Child now I may have, an Heir that is free.
8
A Virgin I am made by thee, known unto thee in light,
O that I had a Son by thee: who art in glory bright.
9
I will return to thee my dove, and thou shall have a Son,
According to the time of life, what is said it shall be done.
10
Shall she that barren was now bear? Yea, thou shall bear by me
A Child an Heir which is free, in which thousands shall be.
11
Behold a Virgin is with child, Emanuel is his Name,
A King of Zion is this Child: Now I will spread his fame.
12
And I will sing unto my King, which wonders great has wrought.
For he to me have done great things, a Child for me he got.
13
I barren was and did not bear, in prison was I strong,
By the Children of Babylon: they have oppressed me long.
14
Rejoice now thou that barren was, and praises to him sing:
For he to thee and thy Children, will great deliverance bring.
15
Lift up your heads you holy ones, Redemption draws near;
Your life which hid in God has been, will suddenly appear.
16
For now a Nation shall appear, which have been much in scorn,
O who have heard of such a thing, in one day to be born?
17
No sooner Zion traveled, which has been long in pain,
But all her Children she brings forth, with her King for to Reign.
18
A goodly sight is it to see, the King with all his Taryn,
For they in white all clothed shall be, and shall on the Earth Reign.
19
Both Zion and her Children dear, for married they shall be,
And then Zion unto her Sons, a City may you see.
20
A Heaven new and Earth also, the Lord will have remain,
For he to it married will be, and he in it will Reign.
21
Why should it seem incredible, Prophets have it foretold:
And in the faith of it have dyed, the Holy men of old.
Nevertheless when the son of man comes shall he find Luke 18. (...)
faith on Earth? But he that is fallen from the faith of Gods Elect, may say
this following Inscription; Within this Temple 1 Cor. 6. 1^ Rev. 12. 17 Prove.
5. 1^ Mala. 2. 14
lies a woman bereaved of her life, my mother, companion of the Covenant, the
wife. Beware of the error mentioned in, 2 Timothy 2. 18.

Written the 22 of the 8 month 1658. in love to all. For the foundations of the
Earth shall be shoken and their Cedar works uncovered, and their Gods famished:
Zeph. 2. And men shall worship the living God, who is to be praised for ever
and ever, Amen.

Reader, the ways of the Lord which is invisible, have been figured forth by
visiable dispensations under differing administrations: but now the time is
near, that the Sons of God shall appear, Romans 8. 19* Mat. 13. 43. Luke 13. 28^
in a visible manifestation, to be seen by their enemies in the Kingdom of
their Father.

This following Question I do propose in love, to them whom it concerns, to
consider of it.

Q. What is that, that the ministry of the Gospel quickens^ the seed of God in
man, or the spirit of man, or man in the spirit of his mind? I do in this way
proceed for truths sake, because I have been denied to be reasoned with,
concerning things delivered that is questionable.

Again, beware of accusing the Apostle Paul falsely, you who in your printing
and preaching says, that he, to wit Paul, desired to know nothing among the
Corinthians, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified: now he says no such thing,
but he then knowing that all that live in pleasure and wanton upon earth, kills
the just; therefore says, I, brethren, when I came unto you, determined not to
know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified; for he
determined before he came unto them, that they crucified unto themselves the
Son of God.

FINIS.

