Strange and Wonderful NEWS FROM NORWICH: The like not in all ENGLAND besides.
In a Letter from Norwich, to a Friend in London.
SIR,
I Doubt not but you have heard of the Red hot Zeal of our Town. We are
altogether for advancing the Protestant Religion; in order to which (though I do
not remember one Papist Convicted here these seven years) We tick^e off the Non
Cons, and that which makes Father L. Laugh in's sleeve, is to see the Heretics
so smartly Laskt with the same Rods, that were provided for Catholics Backs.
-- But enough of that -- We lately Elected Members here to serve next
Parliament, and sure no Body will blame us for choosing those that served us so
well in the last; for you must note, we hate Abhorrers. And tho we like Religio
Med^ci very well, presented them an Address against Popery; Which (tho forty to
one but you have it in the next Gazette) I here send you, perhaps you will look
for some mention of the Popish Plot and Successor and 20 other odd things in
it: But I Will assure you, That Is the fault of the Scribe, who sat up a little
too late drinking the Dukes Health, and so clearly forgot them. However you may
see We are free enough of our Money, and that is one Symptom of Goodnature,
though in Truth we do but put out this Complement to usury: For We hope (if
Fawning and Wagging the Tail will do it) to see are long the Parliament
appointed at the Loyal City of Norwich; where to entertain them I Will assure you
we have a pack of Sermon-readers can worry a Text as shrewdly as any at
Bristol, Chichester or Ludgate it self, yet still you are not bound by the
Canon to Believe that this whole City joined in this Address, for there was a
small parcel of about 2000 that never heard on it; but its enough, 'twas under
Common Seal, and done by those that Rule the Roast, and you know the Giblets
generally go with the Goose; however I send it you (as people show Monsters)
for a Rarity, being confident all England cannot show the like, except the
Worshipful Burough of Crickland put in for a snack; Oh happy Popish Successor!
that has at least 250 little People in a whole Kingdom, that dare espouse his
Interest! My Service to your good Lady, and our Conntry man Roger, who I hear
is come again, and Reprinting his Ca^e with Additions,

I am your Humble Servant T. W.


To the Right Honorable the Lord Paston, an^ Augustine Briggs Esquire the most
cordial sense of the truly Loyal Freemen and Citizens of the said City,
submitted to their prudent Considerations, by and with the consent of th Common
Council of the same City, declared under the Common Seal.
WE do with all Gratitude, return you our most hearty Thanks for your great
and indefatigable Care in the Service of His Majesty and your Country as our
Representatives in the late Parliament, not doubting but you did faithfully and
worthily discharge the Trust reposed in you by the Electors. Therefore we do
earnestly desire, seeing you are again Chosen to serve in the ensuing
Parliament, That you would with all Cheerfulness and Earnestness, endeavor to
the utmost of your power to preserve his Majesty's Person and Government both
in Church and State, as it is now by Law established.

And we not only desire your endeavors to desend his Majesty's Person and
Established Government, but also his Honor and Grandeur, as well by Punishing
and Suppressing all Seditious and Scandalous Libellers of his Person and
Government, as also by Granting his Majesty such suitable Supplies, as his
urgent Occasions shall require, which we hope may be an effectual means to
secure this Nation from Popery and Faction.

And lastly, We most Humbly desire you to become Humble Suitors to His Majesty,
for the continuance of his Favor toward, and good Opinion of his Loyal and
Obedient Subjects and Citizens of Norwich, and to assure his most gracious
Majesty that we do resolve to stand by Him, his Heirs and Lawful Successors
with our Lives and Fortunes against all Oppositions and Pretensions whatsoever,
as we are obliged by our Allegiance.


BUT all People are not of one mind, and therefore to please as many as we can,
we shall here add the Address of that Great and Loyal County of YORK, to the
Right Honorable Persons by them Elected Kts. of the Shire, for the approaching
Parliament, as follows.

To the Right Honorable Charles Lord Clifford, and Henry Lord Fairfax.
May it please your Lordships.
THE Assurances we had of your Fidelity and Activity for the Service of our
King and Country, in the Parliament began at Westminster, the sixth of March
1678. was the only reason of our Choice of you to represent us in the last
Parliament, and our Experience of your Faithfulness and Diligence in the same
Service, the last Parliament, is the only ground of our uncontradicted Choice
of you again this day, into the same Trust, for the ensuing Parliament, and we
judge it our Duty, as good Protestants, Loyal Subjects and true Englishmen,
not only to express our hearty concurrence with you in, but also to return you
our real and public Thanks, for the many good things you did and were about to
do, in both the last Parliaments, and more especially for your seasonable
Address to his Majesty, your necessary Votes, Resolutions, Orders and Bills,
whereby you have endeavored 1. To preserve the Protestant Religion, his
Majesty's Person, and the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, from the many
Dangers which threaten them. 2. To Exclude a Popish Successor. 3. To Unite all
his Majesty's Proteslant Subjects. 4. To purge out the Corruptions which
abound, in the Election of Members to serve in Parliament; and 5. To secure us
for the future against Popery and Arbitrary Power, and we entreat you to
proceed in a Parliamentary way to the accomplishment of these excellent things;
and we assure you that these things being done, we shall with great
cheerfulness be willing to supply his Majesty, to the utmost of our Abilities
with Money, for the securing of his Interest, both at home and abroad.



This Paper was presented to the Lords abovenamed, when they were Elected
Knights for Yorkshire, last M^nday 28th. of Febr. in the Castle at York, which
being publicly read, there was mighty Acclamations, fully testifying the
Universal consent of the Gentlemen and Freeholders.

FINIS.

