THE WELCHMANS Protestation, Concerning the corruptions of these times. With
her last Will and Testament, writ and pupplished with her own hand fifteen
tayes after her own teath. With a Song her was never apide in awle her life,
pecause her was Sheare her Country.

Printed, 1641.

The Welchmans Protestation concerning the corruption of these times.
FIrst her was vow, and protest, her was awlewayes live in te faith tat her
ancient predecessors was live in, and tey was called Protestants.

Item, he was never apide to hear tat her was Teputie of Ireland, and her was
never love treasons, pecot her was always love her head a creat teale petter.

Item, her was never love to pee papisticall Pisshit, nor never was love to pow
to te Alter, by S. Taffie, her was afraid a shiding, and peheading, or hanging.

Item, her was never apide in all her life to pe Patentee, pecot her was
awleways love her own ears, and hate te pillory.

Item, her was hate to pe Shudge for diverse reasons.

First, be causpopie her was very pitiful, and was never find in her heart
to hang te poor Rouges.

Item, tey say, Shustice was pe plind, and her was love her eyes extremely.

Item, her was not apide to te ship-moneys.

And lastly, her was never apide to pe hanged her self, put like te Monkey py
te middle.

Item, her was never apide to pe papist or puritan.

Item, her was never apide to pe Arminian, pecot her was like a creen stick,
her was pow to much.

Item, her was never love te Prownist, her was awlewayes call her prother, and
her was porne a creat teal petter Shentleman ten her self.

Item, her was never apide to company of te Adamites, for if her go naked in te
winter, pecot her was awlewayes take cold.

Item, her was never affect te Family of love, pecot Cod was never please her,
if her lie with her neighpours wife. Put her was ever telight to pe Shentleman
of Wales, to ride on hunting, and follow te pawling Togs over te hills, over te
tales, over te tich, over te pales, to hunt te nimple Hare, with te pugle horn
py her side, and catch her if her can, and roast her for her supper, when her
has cot her cood stomach in catching on her, it is was a creat teal petter ten
peheading, or hanging, or putting her head in te pillory, and make her look
like an Owl in te Ivypush, or scratching out her eyes, or powing to Idols, or
pe called prother when her was none of her Kindred, or catching cold with te
Adamites, or tamning her own soul, for loving her Neighpours Wife, pecot tose
tat was ever telight in it, her was take it for Shinkin up Morgan, up Howell,
up Will, up Raph, up Taffie, for py Saint Taffie, her was telight in peace
apove awle tings.

Te last Will and Testament of Thomas up Shinkin, up Morgan, up Howell, up
Will, up Raph, up Taffie, Shentleman of Wales, which was writ and pupplished
fifteen tayes after her own teath and puriall py her own hand.

IN te name of te creat Cot Amen.

To morrow after te Feast of Saint Taffie, in te fourteen, fifteen, twenty
year of the Rain of Cadwallin, te pig, son and heir to creat Prute, te creat
Prittaine, I Thomas up Shinkin, up Morgan, up Howell, up Will, up Raph, up
Taffie, peing sick of pody, put in mind and memory, Cod knows, was here make
her last Will and Testament.

First her was make her loving Wife Shillian her sole Executioner.

Item, her was kive, her eldest son Shon, up Thomas, up Shinkin, up Morgan, up
Howell, up William, up Raph, up Taffie, a creat stone house tat stands in te
pottome of te Mountain, in te full face of te Sun.

Item, her was kive her eldest servant Thomas up Morgan, up Shon, up Raph, up
Taffie, pecause her was cood Shentleman, and was serve her, her creat
Crandfather, four yards of frise to make her mourning Shak^t.

Item, her was kive her daughter Shennie four yards of pul-rush to make her
cold ring.

Item, her was kive her eldest son Shon up Thomas, up Shinkin, up Morgan, up
Howell, up William, up Raph, up Taffie, because her was have some of her own
fathers spirit, and valor, her two-edged pack sword.

Item, her was most earnestly entreat her loving Wife Shillian, and sole
Executioner, to pay awle her tepts her was not shuse put pay, if cot had spared
her life her was pay avvle.

Item, her was kive ten shillings for shunkets.

Imprimis, four creat sheeses cut out in causpopie.

Item, four pushells leeke roasted.

And lastly, four pushells of onyons to make awle her couzens and kinfolks
cry.

Item, her was kive ten shillings to te creat clearke of creat Saint Mary's,
tat her was ring te creat pell to kive creat Cod Almighty tat her was coming
tat her was send Saint Peter to open her creat cate and let her in.

Item, her was most earnestly entreat her loving cretiters to whom her was owe
creat sums of moneys, tat her was take whole pound of creise in steed of pound
of moneys.

Item, her was love her overseers if her was ho^^st to her, and se her will
executed, and her was interceed for her, when her was in heaven with her creat
Saint Taffie.

And tus her pequeath her soul into te hands of te allmighty who was her
maker, and redeemer, and her was in a creat teale of hope was prove at last her
sanctifier, and her was pequeath her podie to te cround to pe puried in te
Church of creat Saint Mary's; and her was awlwayes tesire tat her neighbors if
tey were shentilemen to testify with her tat her was tie in te protestantine
faith and set teyre hands to it.

The hands of her neighbors.
Shon up Harrie, up Shames, up Raph Howell, up Morgan, up Taffie, up Raph, up
Shinkin.

A Song which her was never apide in awle her life pecause her was sheere her
Country.
Creat St. Taffie, and little St. Tavid,
How well was receive te creen onyon*
And every neeke
Eat pushells of leek,
Except was receive te Communion*
Was puilt her a cappin was covered most prave,
And was puilt at te foot of te mountain,
When her was taste te crape
Was scorn te drape,
And was drink te fair e water of te Fountain.
Was tinke it much f^tter
If tat her was got her
To eat te fat peefe a^^ ^e mutton.
Put in stead of awl tese
Her was eat tosted cheese,
Until her was preake off her putton.
Tilpury Camp was a creat while ago,
Taffie Taffie.
Pecot her was tere with one tousand more,
Couzin Taffie.
Was creat teale of horse
And a creat teale of folk
Taffie, Taffie.
Was a creat teale of Cunn
Made a creat teale of smoke
Couzin Taffie.
Taffie was borne in te Chinke of a w^ll,
Taffie, Taffie.
Her Father was Cuckold
Her Mother was tell,
Couzin Taffie.
FINIS.

