AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND CONCERNING POETRY.

By SAMUEL WESLEY.

Fungor vice Cotis.
LONDON: Printed for CHARLES HARPER, at the Flower de Luce in Fleetstreet. MDCC.

PREFACE.
I Have not much to say of this Poem, before I leave it to the Mercy of the
Reader. There Is no need of looking far into it, to find out that the direct
Design of a great part of it, is to serve the Cause of Religion and Virtue;
though 'twas necessary for that End to dispose the whole in such a manner as
might be agreeable to the Taste of the present Age, and of those who usually
give such sort of Books the Reading. If there be any Thoughts in it relating to
Poetry, that either are not known to all Persons, or are tolerably ranged and
expressed, the Reader is welcome to 'em for Over-weight: If there are too few of
these, I yet hope the Pardon of all candid Judges, because I Have done the best I
could on this Argument. I cannot be angry with any Person for ranking me amongst
the Ogylbys; my Quarrel is with those that rank themselves amongst Atheists,
and impudently defend and propagate that ridiculous Opinion of the Eternity of
the World, and a fatal invincible Chain of Things, which, it seems, is now most
commonly made use of to destroy the Faith, as our lewd Plays are to corrupt the
Morals of the Nation: An Opinion, big with more Absurdities than
Transubstantiation it self, and of far more fatal Consequence, if received and
believed: For besides its extremely weakening, if not destroying, the Belief of
the Being and Providence of God, it utterly takes away any sort of Freedom in
Humane Actions, reduces Mankind beneath the Brute Creation; perfectly excuses
the greatest Villainies in this World, and entirely vacates all Retribution
hereafter. One would wonder with what Face or Conscience such a Set of Men
should hope to be treated by the Rules of Civility, when they themselves break
through those of Society, and common Humanity: How they can expect any fairer
Quarter than Wolves or Tigers; or what Reason they can give why a Price should
not be set upon their Heads, as well as on the Others; or at least why they
should not be securely hampered and muzzled, and led about for a Sight, like
other Monsters. It Is the fatal and spreading Poison of these Men's Examples and
Principles which has extorted these warm Expressions from me; I cannot with
Patience see my Country ruined by the prodigious increase of Infidelity and
Immorality, nor forbear crying out with some Vehemence, when I am giving
Warning to all honest Men to stand up in the Defense of it, when it is in
greater and more eminent danger than it would have been formerly, if the
Spanish Armada had made a Descent amongst us: I don't speak of these things by
distant Hearsay, or only from our public Prints, but from my own Knowledge and
little Acquaintance in the World, and therefore others must have observed much
more, and cannot but fear, that if things go on as they now are, without a
greater Check, and more severe Laws against these wide and contagious
Mischiefs, at least without a more general united Endeavor to put those Laws
already made in strict Execution, we are in a fair way to become a Nation of
Atheists. It Is now no difficult matter to meet with those who pretend to be
lewd upon Principles; They Will talk very gravely, look as if they were in
earnest, and come sobrii ad perdendam Rempublican: they would be Critics too,
and Philosophers: They attack Religion in Form and batter it from every
Quarter; they would turn the very Scriptures against themselves, and labor
hard to remove a Supreme Being out of the World; or if they do vouchsafe him
any room in it, it is only that they may find Fault with his Works, which they
think, with that Blasphemer of old, might have been much better ordered, had
they themselves stood by and directed the Architect. They Will tell you the
Errors of Nature are every where plain and visible, all monstrous, here too
much and there too little; or, as one of their own Poets, Here she is too
sparing, there profusely vain.
What would these Men have, or why cannot they be content to sink single into
the bottomless Gulf, without dragging so much Company thither with 'em? Can
they grapple Omnipotence, ar are they sure they can be too hard for Heaven? Can
they Thunder with a Voice like God, and cast abroad the Rage of their Wrath?
Could they annihilate Hell, indeed, or did it only consist of such painted
Flames as they would fain believe it, they might make a shift to be tolerably
happy, more quietly rake through the World, and sink into Nothing. There Is too
great reason to apprehend, that this Infection is spread among Persons of almost
all Ranks and Qualities; and that though some may think it decent to keep on the
Masque, yet if they were searched to the bottom, all their Religion would be
found that which they most blasphemously assert of Religion in general, only a
State Engine to keep the World in Order. This is Hypocrisy with a Witness, the
basest and meanest of Vices; and how come Men to fall into these damnable
Errors in Faith, but by Lewdness of Life? The Cowards would not believe a God
because they dare not do it, for Woe be to 'em if there be one, and
consequently any Future Punishments. From such as these, I desire no Favor,
but that of their Ill Word, as their Crimes must expect none from me, whose
Character obliges me to declare an eternal War against Vice and Infidelity,
though at the same time heartily to pity those who are infected with it. If I
could be ambitious of a Name in the World, it should be that I might sacrifice
it in so glorious a Cause as that of Religion and Virtue: If none but Generals
must fight in this sacred War, when there are such infernal Hosts on the other
side, they could never prevail without one of the ancient Miracles: If little
People can but well discharge the Place of a private Sentinel, it is all that is
expected from us. I hope I shall never let the Enemies of God and my Country
come on without Fireing, though it serve but to give the Alarm, and if I dye
without quitting my Post* I desire no greater Glory. I have endeavored to show
that I had no Personal Pique against any whose Characters I may have given in
this Poem, nor think the worse of them for their Thoughts of me. I hope I have
every where done 'em Justice, and as well as I could, have given 'em
Commendation where they deserve it; which may also, on the other side, acquit
me of Flattery with all Impartial Judges; for it is not only the Great whose
Characters I have bear attempted. And if what I have written may be any ways
useful, or innocently diverting to the virtuous and ingenious Readers, he has
his End, who is

Their Humble Servant S. WESLEY.

AN EPISTLE TO A FRIEND CONCERNING POETRY.
AS Brother Prynne of old from Mount Orgueil,
So I to you from Epworth and the Isle:
Harsh Northern Fruits from our cold Heavens I send,
Yet, since the best they yield, they will please a Friend.
You ask me, What Is the readiest way to Fame,
And how to gain a Poet's sacred Name?
For Saffold send, your Choice were full as just,
When burning Fevers fry your Limbs to Dust!
Yet, lest you angry grow at your Defeat,
And me as ill as that fierce Spark should treat
Who did the Farrier into Doctor beat;
You to my little Quantum, Sir, are free,
Which I from HORACE glean or NORMANBY;
These with some grains of Common Sense unite,
"Then freely think, and as I think I write.
First poize your Genius, nor presume to write
If Phoebus smile not, or some Muse invite:
Nature refuses Force, you strive in vain,
She will not drag, but struggling breaks the Chain.
How bright a Spark of Heavenly Fire must warm!
What Blessings meet a Poet's Mind to form!
How often must he for those Life-Touches sit,
Genius, Invention, Memory, Judgment, Wit?
There Is here no Middle-State, you must excel;
Wit has no Half-way-House 'twixt Heaven and Hell.
All cannot All things, lest you mourn too late,
Remember Phaeton's unhappy Fate!
Eager to guide the Coursers of the Day,
Beneath their Brazen Hoofs he trampled lay,
And his bright Ruins marked their flaming Way.
Genius.
You Will ask, What GENIUS is, and Where to find?
It Is the full Power and Energy of Mind:
A Reach of Thought that skims all Nature over,
Exhausts this narrow World, and asks for more:
Through every Rank of Beings when 't has flown,
Can frame a New Creation of its own:
By Possible and Future unconfined:
Can stubborn Contradictions yoke, and bind
Through Fancy's Realms, with Number, Time and Place,
Chimaera-Forms, a thin, an airy Race;
Then with a secret conscious Pride surveys
The Enchanted Castles which 't had Power to raise.
Wit.
As Genius is the Strength, be WIT defined
The Beauty and the Harmony of Mind:
Beauty's Proportion, Air, each lively Grace
The Soul diffuses round the Heavenly Face:
It Is various, yet it is equal, still the same
In Alpine Snows, or Ethiopian Flame;
While glaring Colors short-lived Grace supply,
Nor Frost nor Sun they bear, but scorch and die.
Judgment.
Nor these alone, tho much they can, suffice,
JUDGMENT must join, or never hope the Prize:
Those Headstrong Coursers scowr along the Plains,
The Rider's down, if once he lose the Reins:
Soon the Mad Mixture will to all give Law,
And for the Laurel Wreaths present thee Wreaths of Straw.
Iudgment's the Act of Reason; that which brings
Fit Thoughts to Thoughts, and argues Things from Things,
True, Decent, Just, are in its Balance tried,
And thence we learn to Range, Compound, Divide.
A Cave there is wherein those Nymphs reside Invention and Memory

Who all the Realms of Sense and Fancy guide;
Nay some affirm that in the deepest Cell
Imperial Reason's self does not disdain to dwell:
With Living Reed it is thatched and guarded round,
Which moved by Winds emit a Silver Sound:
Two Crystal Fountains near its Entrance play,
Wide scattering Golden Streams which never decay,
Two Labyrinths behind harmonious Sounds convey:
Chiefly, within, the Room of State is famed
Of rich Mosaic Work divinely framed:
Of small Extent to view, 'twill all things hide,
Heaven's Azure Arch it self not half so wide:
Here all the Arts their sacred Mansion choose,
Here dwells the MOTHER of the Heaven-born Muse:
With wondrous mystic Figures round it is wrought
Inlaid with FANCY, and anneal'd with Thought:
With more than humane Skill depicted here
The various Images of Things appear;
What Was, or Is, or labors yet to Be
Within the Womb of Dark Futurity,
May Stowage in this wondrous Storehouse find,
Yet leave unnumber'd empty Cells behind:
But ah! as fast they come, they fly too fast,
Not Life or Happiness are more in haste:
Only the First Great Mind himself can stay
The Fugitives, and at one Glance survey;
But those whom he disdains not to befriend,
Uncommon Souls, who nearest Heaven ascend
Far more, at once, than others comprehend:
Whatever within this sacred Hall you find,
Whatever will lodge in your capacious Mind
Let Judgment sort, and skilful Method bind;
And as from these you draw your ancient Store
Daily supply the Magazine with more.
Furnished with such Materials he will excel
Who when he works is sure to work 'em well;
This ART alone, as Nature that bestows,
And in Perfection both, the accomplished Verser knows.
Knows to persuade, and how to speak, and when;
The Rules of Life, and Manners knows and Men:
Those narrow Lines which Good and Ill divide;
Learning.
And by what Balance Just and Right are tried:
How Kindred-Things with Things are closely joined;
How Bodies act, and by what Laws confined,
Supported, moved and ruled by the Universal Mind.
When the moist Kids or burning Sirius rise;
Through what ambiguous Ways Hyperion flies,
And marks our Upper or the Nether Skies.
He knows those Strings to touch with artful Hand
Which rule Mankind, and all the World command:
What moves the Soul, and every secret Cell
Where Pity, Love, and all the Passions dwell.
The Music of his Verse can Anger raise,
Which with a softer Stroke he smooths and lays:
Can Emulation, Terror, all excite,
Compress the Soul with Grief, or swell with vast Delight.
If this you can, your Care you will well bestow,
And some new Milton or a Spencer grow;
If not, a Poet never expect to be,
Content to Rhyme, like D -- y or like me.
But here perhaps you will stop me, and complain,
To such Impracticable Heights I strain
A Poet's Notion, that if This be He,
There never was one, nor ever is like to be.
-- But soft, my Friend! may we not copy well
Tho far the Original our Art excel?
Divine Perfection we our Pattern make
The Idea thence of Goodness justly take;
But they who copy nearest, still must fall
Immensely short of their Original;
Converse.
But Wit and Genius, Sense and Learning joined,
Will all come short if crude and unrefin'd;
It Is CONVERSE only melts the stubborn Ore
And polishes the Gold, too rough before:
So fierce the Natural Taste, 'twill never b' endured,
The Wine is strong, but never rightly cured.
STYLE is the Dress of Thought; Style.
a modest Dress,
Neat, but not gaudy, will true Critics please:
Not Fleckno's Drugget, nor a worse Extreme
All daubed with Point and Gold at every Seam:
Who only Antique Words affects, appears
Like old King Harry's Court, all Face and Ears;
Nor in a Load of Wig thy Visage shroud,
Like Hairy Meteors glimmering through a Cloud:
Happy are those who here the Medium know,
We hate alike a Sloven and a Beau.
I would not follow Fashion to the height
Close at the Heels, nor yet be out of Sight:
Words alter, like our Garments, every day,
Now thrive and bloom, now wither and decay.
Let those of greater Genius new invent,
Be you with those in Common Use content.
A different Style's for Prose and Verse required,
Strong Figures here, Neat Plainness there desired:
A different Set of Words to both belong;
What shines in Prose, is flat and mean in Song.
The Turn, the Numbers must be varied here,
And all things in a different Dress appear.
This every Schoolboy lashed at Eaton knows.
Yet Men of Sense forget when they compose,
And Father DRYDEN'S Lines are sometimes Prose.
A varied Style do various Works require,
This soft as Air, and towering that as Fire.
None than the Epistle goes more humbly dressed,
Tho neat 'twou'd be, and decent as the best.
Such as the ingenious Censor may invite
Often to return with eager Appetite;
So HORACE wrote, and so I Would wish to write.
Nor creeps it always, but can mount and rise,
And with bold Pinions sail along the Skies.
The self-same Work of different Style admits,
Now soft, now loud, as best the Matter fits:
So Father THAMES from unexhausted Veins,
Moves clear and equable along the Plains;
Yet still of different Depth and Breadth is found,
And humors still the Nature of the Ground.
READING will mend your Style, Reading.
and raise it higher,
And Matter find to feed the Immortal Fire:
But if you would the Vulgar Herd excel,
And justly gain the Palm of Writing well,
Wast not your Lamp in scanning Vulgar Lines,
Where grovelling all, or One in twenty shines:
With Prudence first among the Ancients choose,
The noblest only, and the best peruse;
Such HOMER is, such VIRGIL'S sacred Page,
Which Death defy, nor yield to Time or Age;
New Beauties still their Vigorous Works display,
Their Fruit still mellows, but can never decay.
The Modern Pens not altogether slight,
Be Master of your Language ever you write!
Immortal TILLOTSON with Judgment scan,
" That Man of Praise, that something more than Man!
Even those who hate his Ashes this advise,
As from black Shades resplendent Lightning flies,
Unwilling Truths break through a Cloud of Lies.
He Words and Things for mutual Aid designed,
Before at Variance, in just Numbers joined;
He always soars, but never's out of sight,
He taught us how to Speak, and Think, and Write.
If English Verse you would in Perfection see,
ROSCOMMON read, and Noble NORMANBY:
We borrow all from their exhaustless Store,
Or little say they have not said before.
Poor Insects of a Day, we toil and strive
To creep from Dust to Dust, and think we live;
These weak imperfect Beings scarce enjoy
Ever Death's rude Hand our blooming Hopes destroy:
With Lynx's Eyes each others Faults we find,
But to our own how few who are not blind?
How long is Art, how short, alas! our Time!
How few who can above the Vulgar climb,
Whose stronger Genius reach the True Sublime!
With tedious Rules which we our selves transgress,
We make the Trouble more who strive to make it less.
But meanly why do you your Fate deplore,
Yet still write on? -- Why do a Thousand more,
Who for their own or some Forefathers Crime
Are doomed to wear their Days in beating Rhyme?
But this a Noble Patron will redress,
And make you better write, tho you write less:
Whatever a discontented Mind pretends,
Distinguished Worth can rarely miss of Friends:
Do but excel, and he will at last arise
Who from the Dust may lift thee to the Skies;
For his own Sake will his Protection grant;
What Horace ever did yet Mecaenas want?
Or if the World its Favors should refuse,
With barren Smiles alone reward thy Muse;
Be thy own Patron, thou no more wilt need,
For all will court thee if thy Works succeed;
At least the few Good Judges will commend,
And secret growing Praise thy Steps attend.
Who showed Columbus where the Indies lay?
True to thy self, charge through, and force to Fame the way!
If Envy snarl, indulge it no Reply,
Write better still, and let it burst and die!
Rest pleased if you can please the Wiser Few,
Since to please all is more than Heaven it self can do.
There are who can whatever they will believe,
That B -- 's too hard for B -- y, Three are Five:
That Nature, Justice, Reason, Truth must fall,
With Clear Idea's they will confound 'em all:
That Parallels may travel till they meet;
Faith they can find in L --, no Sense in STILLINGFLEET.
Disturb 'em not, but let 'em still enjoy
The unenvied Charms of their Eternal Moi.
If to the craggy Top of Fame you rise,
Those who are laboring after never despise.
Nor those above on Honor's dazzling Seat
Tho disobliged, with saucy Rudeness treat,
Revenge not always is below the Great.
Their Stronger Genius may over thine prevail:
Wit, Power and Anger joined but rarely fail.
Tho Eagles would not choose to hawk at Flies
They Would snap 'em, should their buzzing Swarms arise
Importunate, and hurt their Sun bright Eyes.
Nor should the Muses Birds at random fly,
And strike at all, lest if they strike they die.
Why should we still be lazily content
With thredbare Schemes, and nothing new invent?
All Arts besides improve, Sea, Air and Land
Are every day with nicer Judgment scanned,
And why should this alone be at a stand?
Or Nature largely to the Ancients gave
And little did for younger Children save;
Or rather we impartial Nature blame
To hide our Sloth, and cover over our Shame;
As Sinners, when their Reason's drowned in Sense,
Fall out with Heaven, and quarrel Providence.
Yet should you our Galenic Way despise,
And some new Colbatch of the Muses rise;
No Quarter from the College hope, who sit
Infallible at Will's and judge of Sense and Wit:
Keep fair with these, or Fame you court in vain,
A strict Neutrality at least maintain!
Speak, like the wise Italian, well of all;
Who knows into what Hands he is doomed to fall?
Write often and much, at first, if you would write well,
For he who never attempts will never excel;
Practice will file your Verse, your Thoughts refine,
And Beauty give, and Grace to every Line:
The Gnat to famed AEneis led the way,
And our Immortal COWLEY once did play.
Let not the Sun of Life in vain decline,
Or Time run waste; No Day without a Line.
Yet learn by me, my Friend, from Errors past;
O never write, or never Print in Haste!
The worst Excuse Ill Authors ever advance,
Which does, like Lies, a single Guilt enhance.
Lay by your Work, and leave it on the Loom,
Which if at moderate distance you resume,
A Father's Fondness you will with Ease look through,
And Objects in a proper Medium view.
It Is Time alone can Strength and Ripeness give;
A Hasty Birth can never expect to live.
Fly low at first, you will with Advantage rise;
This pleases all, as that will all surprise.
The Subject.
No Work attempt but where your Strength you know,
Be Master of your Subject, Thoughts will flow:
The newer it is, the choicer Fruit 'twill yield,
More Room you have to work if large your Field;
The Sponge you oftener than the Pen will want,
And rather Reason see to prune than plant;
Yet where the Thoughts are barren, weak and thin,
New Cyons should be neatly grafted in.
If you with Friend or Enemy are blessed, A Judge.

Your Fancy's Offspring never can want a Test,
Tho Both, perhaps may overshoot the Mark:
First Spite with Envy charges in the Dark;
Unread they damn, and into Passion fall,
It Is Stuff, it is Blasphemy, it is Nonsense all;
They sleep (when doz'd before) at every Line,
While your more dangerous Friend exclaims, -- It Is fine,
It Is furiously Delightful, it is Divine;
The inspiring God's in every Page confessed;
A COWLEY or a DRYDEN at the least!
Yet you will from both an equal Judgment frame
And stand the nearest Candidate for Fame:
What Envy praises, or what Friends dislike,
This bears the Test, and that the Sponge should strike.
Choose to be absent when your Cause is tried,
Lest Favor should the partial Judge misguide;
Nor others Thoughts implicitly prefer,
Your Friends a Mortal, and like you, may err.
Upon the last Appeal let Reason sit,
And here, let all Authority submit.
Divest your self of self whatever you can,
And think the Author now some other Man.
A thousand trivial Lumber-Thoughts will come,
A thousand Fagot-Lines will crowd for room;
Reform your Troops, and no Exemption grant,
You Will gain in Strength, what you in Numbers want.
Nor yet Infallibility pretend;
He still errs on who thinks he never can mend:
Reject that hasty, that presumptuous Thought!
None ever but VIRGIL wrote without a Fault;
(Or none he has, or none that I can find,
Who, dazzled with his Beauties, to his Moles am blind.)
Who has the least is happiest, he the best,
Who owns and mends where he has once transgrest.
Nor will good Writers smaller Blots despise,
Lest those neglected should to Crimes arise;
Such Venial Sins indulged will mortal prove,
At least they from Perfection far remove.
Nor Critical Exactness here deride,
It looks like Sloth, or Ignorance, or Pride;
Good Sense is spoild in Words unapt expressed,
And Beauty pleases more when it is well dressed.
Method.
Forget not METHOD if the Prize you would gain,
'Twill cost you Thought, but richly pays the Pain;
What first, what second, or what last to place,
What here will shine, and there the Work disgrace.
Before you build, your MODEL justly lay,
And every Part in Miniature survey;
Where airy Terraces shall threat the Skies,
Where Columns tower, or neat Pilasters rise;
Where cool Cascades come roaring down the Hill,
Or where the Crystal Nymph a mossie Basin fill:
What Statues are to grace the Front designed,
And how to throw the meaner Rooms behind.
Draw the Main Strokes at first, 'twill show your Skill,
Life-Touches you may add whenever you will.
Even Chance will sometimes all our Art excel,
The angry Foam we never can hit so well.
A sudden Thought, all beautiful and bright
Shoots in and stunns us with amazing Light;
Secure the happy Moment ever it is past,
Not Time more swift, or Lightning flies so fast.
All must be free and easy, or in vain
You whip and spur, and the winged Courser strain:
When foggy Clouds hand bellying in the Skies,
Or sleety Boreas through the Horizon flies;
He then, whose Muse produces ought that is fine,
His Head must have a stronger Turn than mine:
Like Sybils Leaves the Train of Thoughts are ranged,
Which by rude Winds disturbed, are nothing if they are changed.
Or are there too in Writing softer Hours?
Or is it that Matter nobler Mind o'erpow'rs,
Which boasts her native Liberty in vain,
In Mortal Fetters and a Slavish Chain?
Death only can the Gordian Knot divide,
Tho by what secret wondrous Bands it is tied,
Even Reason's self must own she cannot decide:
For as the rapid Tides of Matter turn
We Are fanned with Pleasure or with Anger burn,
We Love and Hate again, we Joy and Mourn.
Now the swift Torrent high and headstrong grows,
Shoots through the Dykes, and all the Banks overflows;
Strait the capricious Waters backward fly,
The Pebbles rake and leave the Bottom dry;
Watch the kind Hour and seize the rising Flood,
Else will your dreggy Poem taste of Mud.
Hence old and battered Hackneys of the Stage,
By long Experience rendered Wise and Sage,
With powerful Juices restive Nature urge,
Or else with Bays of old, they bleed and purge;
Thence, as the Priestess from her Cave inspired,
When to his Cell the rancid God retired,
Double Entendres their fond Audience blin^d,
Their boasted Oracles abuse Mankind:
False Ioys around their Hearts in Slumbers play,
And the warm tingling Blood steals fast away;
The Soul grows dizzy, lost in Senses Night,
And melts in pleasing Pain and vain Delight.
Not that the sowrest Critic can reprove
The soft the moving Scenes of Virtuous Love:
Life's Sunny Morn, which wears, alas! too fast;
Pity it ever should hurt, or should not always last!
Has Bankrupt Nature then no more to give,
Or by a Trick persuades Mankind to live?
No -- when with Prudence joined it is still the same
Or ripens into Friendship's nobler Name,
The Matter pure, immortal is the Flame.
No Fool, no Debauchee could ever prove
The honest Luxury of virtuous Love;
Then cursed are those who that fair Name abuse,
And holy Hymen's sacred Fillets loose;
Who poison Fountains, and infect the Air,
Ruin the Witty, and debauch the Fair;
With nauseous Images their Scenes debase
At once their Country's Ruin and Disgrace.
Weigh well each Thought if all be Just and Right,
For those must clearly think who clearly write.
Nothing obscure, equivocal, or mean,
Much less what is or impious or obscene:
Although the tempting Serpent play his part,
And wind in glittering Folds around thy Heart;
Reject the traitorous Charmer, tear him thence,
And keep thy Virtue and thy Innocence.
In wild America's rank Champaign grows
A Tree which Europe often too dearly knows;
It rises high in cool enchanting Groves,
The Manchinel, or Eves Apple.
Whose green broad Leaves the fainting Trav'ler loves;
Fair is the treacherous Fruit, and charms your Eye,
But ah! beware! for if you taste you die.
Too well alas! it thrives when planted here,
Its deadly Branches shade our Theater.
Of Measures, Numbers, Pauses next I sing,
And rest the breathless Muse with cautious Wing:
Of Embryo Thoughts, unripen'd yet by Time,
The Rules of Verse, of Quantity and Rhyme:
With trembling Steps through Shades unknown I stray,
And mark a rugged and a dubious way;
Yet some small glimmering Light will hence be showed,
And future Trav'lers may enlarge the Road.
Measure.
Of CHAUCER'S Verse we scarce the Measures know,
So rough the Lines, and so unequal flow;
Whether by Injury of Time defaced,
Or careless at the first, and writ in haste;
Or coursly, like old Ennius, he designed
What After-days have polished and refined.
SPENCER more smooth and neat, and none than He
Could better skill of English Quantity;
Tho by his Stanza cramped, his Rhimes less chaste,
And antique Words affected all disgraced;
Yet vast his Genius, noble were his Thoughts,
Whence equal Readers wink at lesser Faults.
From France their Alexandrins we receive
Which more of Liberty and Compass give;
Hence by our dull Translators were they used,
Nor CHAPMAN nor old STERNHOLD these refused;
They borrow from Hexameters their Feet,
Which with Asclepiads and Iambicks meet;
Yet in the midst we still a Weakness see,
Their Music gives us no Variety.
More numerous the Pentameter and strong,
Which to our Saxon Fathers did belong.
In this their ancient Edda Vide Edda Saemundi -- apud Sheringham. de Gentis
Anglorum Origin, page 28, 29. Hiaelp beiter eitt eun thad their hialpa mun
Vid Sekum og Sottum giorv ollum,
I know your only Help, the powerful Charm
That aids in ev'ery Grief and every Harm,
Thad kann eg annad er thorfa Ita
Syner their ed vilia lakner lisfa.
I know the Leaches Craft, and what they need
Who Doctors in that Noble Art proceed.

seems to write,
Mysterious Rhimes, and horrid to the sight:
Their Runic Staves in this on Rocks engraved,
Which long the Assaults of Time it self have braved.
In this our ancient British Bards delight;
And, if I measure his rough Numbers right,
In this old Taliessin used to write Vide British Chronicle, and Taliessin's
Prophecies; Prryff fard l'yffred in ^dwyfi i Elphin
Am gwalad gynefio ymmeo Goribbin.
Jonas ddewn am golwis Merddin
Bebach Pob Brenmam geilw Taliesin.
Me Elphin now his Bard may justly boast
Who sung of old amid the Fire-wing'd Host:
Once Merlin was I called, well known to Fame,
Whom future Kings shall Taliessin name.
Gwae a gasglo olud Tra foyna bud,
Gwae erbin didd brawd ni chospo i gnawd,
Gwae ni cheidw i gail ag of y^fugail,
Gwae in cheidw i ddesaud chag bleidduo.
Woe to the Wretch who Wealth by Rapine gains,
And woe to him who Fasts and Prayers refrains;
Woe to the Shepherds who their Flocks betray,
And will not drive the Romish Wolves away.


This still Possession keeps, few else we read,
And Right as well as Fact may justly plead;
Although the French Intruders often pursue
Their baffled Title, and their Claim renew;
Too often Impressions on our Armies make,
Cut off our Straglers and our Out-Guards take;
Which lazily our Authors now admit,
And call the Excursions of Luxuriant Wit;
With Badger-Feet the two-top'd Mount we climb,
And stalk from Peak to Peak on Stilts of Rhyme.
Sweet WALLER'S Dimeter we most approve
For cheerful Songs and moving Tales of Love,
Which for Heroic Subjects wants of Strength,
Too short, as Alexandrins err in Length.
Our Ear's the Judge of Cadence; nicely weigh
What Consonants rebel, and what obey;
What Vowels mixed compose a pleasing Sound,
And what the tender Organs grate and wound.
Nor at thy Reader's Mercy choose to lie,
Nor let his Judgment want of thine supply:
So easy let thy Verse so smoothly fall,
They must be read aright if read at all.
Numbers.
Nor equal Numbers will for all suffice,
The Sock creeps low, the Tragic Buskins rise:
None knew this Art so well, so well did use
As did the Mantuan Shepherd's Heavenly Muse:
He married Sound and Sense, at odds before,
We hear his Scylla bark, Charybdis roar;
And when in Fields his Fiery Coursers meet
The hollow Ground shakes underneath their Feet:
Yet nicer Ears can taste a Difference when
Of Flocks and Fields he sings, or Arms and Men.
If I our English Numbers taste aright,
We in the grave Iambic most delight:
Each second Syllable the Voice should rest,
Spondees may serve, but still the Iambic's best:
The unpleasing Trochee always makes a Blot,
And lames the Numbers; or, if this forgot,
A strong Spondaic should the next succeed,
The feeble Wall will a good Buttress need:
Long Writing, Observation, Art and Pain
Must here unite if you the Prize would gain.
Pauses.
Pause is the Rest of Voice, the poor Remains
Of ancient Song that still our Verse retains:
The second Foot or third's our usual Rest,
Tho more of Art's in varying often expressed.
At every Word the Pause is sometimes Olli sedato respondit cord Latinus. Virg.
made,
And wondrous Beauty every where displaid:
-- But here we guess, and wander in the dark;
How should a hoodwinked Archer hit the Mark?
The little Glimpse that DRYDEN gives, is more
Than all our careless Writers knew before;
A few Chance Lines may smooth and roundly fly,
But still no Thanks to us, we know not why.
He finds Examples, we the Rule must make,
Tho who without a Guide may not mistake?
Mr. Dryden's Riddle, in his Preface to Virgil.
"Tho deep yet clear, tho gentle yet not dull,
"Strong without Rage, without overflowing full.
If we that famous Riddle can unty,
Their brightest Beauties in the Pauses lie,
To Admiration varied; next to these
The Numbers justly ordered charm and please:
Each Word, each happy Sound is big with Sense,
They all deface who take one Letter thence.
But little more of Quantity we know Quantity.

Than what our Accent does, and Custom show:
The Latin Fountains often we forsake,
As they the Greek; nay different Ages take
A different Path; Perfume and Envy now
We say, which Ages past would scarce allow:
If no Position make our Accent strong
Most Syllables are either short or long.
Primitive Verse was graced with pleasing Rhimes, Rhyme.

The Blank a lazy Fault of Aftertimes;
Nor need we other proof of this to plead
With those the sacred This was observed before Mr. Le Clerc was born. Vide
Song of the Well, Number. 21.17.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Vide Psalm. 80, and 81. Where some Verses have Treble, others Quadruple Rhimes,
four in one Verse.


Hebrew Hymns can read:
If this to lucky Chance alone be due,
Why Rhyme they not in Greek and Latin too?
Ode 1. (...)
(...), etc.
(...)
(...).

PINDAR at first his ancient Copy traced,
And sometimes equal Sounds his Numbers graced;
Till with the more than human Labor tired,
He dropped his Rhyme, and owned him uninspir'd.
ORPHEUS and HOMER too, who first did dream
Of numerous Gods, and left the One Supreme,
Religion both and Poetry did wrong,
Apostatized from Rhyme, and lost the Soul of Song.
Yet still some weak and glimmering Sparks remained,
And still our Great Forefathers this retained;
Nor Inundations of Barbarian Rome,
Vide p. 13.
Our ancient Rhyme could wholly overcome.
Never cramp thy Reason for some paltry Chime,
Nor sacrifice Good Sense to Numbers and to Rhyme:
Both may be saved and made good Friends; and here
The Poets Art and Happiness appear:
But when some stubborn Word denies to draw
In Numbers, and defies the Muses Law,
Reject it strait, unworthy such a Grace,
Another yoke which better fills the Place:
Much Reading will thy Poverty amend
And Taggs without the help of Crambo lend.
The Double Rhyme is antiquated grown,
Or used in Satyr or Burlesque alone;
Nor loves our stronger Tongue that tinkling Chime,
The Darling of the French, a Female Rhyme.
Now, daring Muse! attempt a stronger Flight,
Beyond a Vulgar Verser's cautious Height,
Beyond thy self, and consecrate to Fame
Those who a Title to the Laurel claim,
And may to aftertimes embalm thy Name;
Commend the Good, to all but Vice be kind,
And cast the smaller Faults in shades behind;
Who first, who next; the Balance justly hold,
As that which shines above, and flames with Heavenly Gold.
Great N -- BY the first, ROSCOMMON gone,
He rules our Empire now of Wit alone:
The Beauties he of Verse exactly knows,
The famous DRYDEN'S not more smoothly flows:
Had ORPHEUS half so sweetly mourned his Fate,
As VIRGIL sung, or Sh -- d did translate;
H' had made the Manes once again relent,
They would again Eurydice have sent:
Death's Temple we with sacred Aw survey,
With Admiration read his Great Essay:
Was Art or bounteous Nature here more kind?
Strong Sense! Uncommon Learning! Thoughts refined!
A Godlike Person, and an equal Mind!
The next in Dignity, if not the same,
Is Deathless D -- t's loved and noble Name:
How did he sing, Paraphrase on Psalm. 148. O Azure Vaults, etc.
(listened the Heavenly Quire;)
The Wondrous Notes of DAVID'S Royal Lyre!
Ah! Why no more? must we for ever long
And vainly languish for so sweet a Song?
The next is Tityrus, who not disdains
To read his Name among the tuneful Swains;
Unwearied in his Prince's glorious Cause,
As he of Faith, Defender of the Laws;
Easy to all but to himself, he shares
His Monarch's Favors, and his Monarch's Cares:
His flowing Language clothes his massy Sense,
Nor makes with pompous Words a vain pretense,
Sound without Soul, to Wit and Eloquence.
Tho Great, he is still the same he was before:
-- I sue for nothing, and I Will say no more.
M -- ue left the Muses peaceful Seat,
And bore the Cares and Honors of the Great:
The Pollio he of our Augustan days,
Who Wit rewards with more than hungry Praise;
True Worth his Patronage can never miss,
He has his Prince's Smiles and that has his.
Nor should he pass unprais'd whom all admire,
Who, mixed with Seraphs, rules the Western Quire;
Flowing and pure his unexhausted Vein,
As Silver Thames, which, rolling down the Plain,
Salutes his Sacred Dome. --
But those profane who meanly thus commend,
The Immortal Cowley's and the Muses Friend.
Of matchless DRYDEN only Dryden's Skill
Could justly say enough, -- of Good or Ill.
Envy must own he has our Tongue refined,
And manly Sense with tenderest Softness joined:
His Verse would Stones and Trees with Soul inspire,
As did the Theban and the Thracian Lyre:
His youthful Fire within, like Etna, glows,
Tho Venerable Age around his Temples snows:
If from the modern or the ancient Store
He borrows oughr, he always pays 'em more:
So much improved, each Thought, so fine appears,
WALLER or OVID scarce durst own 'em theirs.
The Learned Goth has scowr'd all Europe's Plains,
France, Spain, and fruitful Italy he drains,
From every Realm and every Language gains:
His Gains a Conquest are, and not a Theft;
He wishes still new Worlds of Wit were left:
Thus haughty Rome, when, all the Firm surpassed,
Her Eagles found our moated World at last;
Touching upon the unhospitable Coast,
Good Laws bestowed for our wild Freedom lost;
With Arts of Peace our stubborn Soil manured,
And naked Limbs from Frost and Sun secured:
-- But ah! how dear the Price of all we gain!
What Shoals of Vices with 'em crossed the Main?
What Pride, what Luxury, a foul, an odious Train?
Who weighs, like Galcacus, the Good with Ill,
Would wish they would let us been Barbarians still:
Such thankless Pains Ignatian Firebrands take
An honest Pagan spoil, and a bad Christian make.
Blessed be kind Heaven, which wrapped me in a Gown,
And drew me early from the fatal Town!
And blessed Her Name, to endless Ages blessed,
Who gave my weary Muse this calm Retreat and Rest.
True to my God, my Country, and my Friend,
Here, may I Life, not wholly useless, spend,
Steal through the World, and smiling meet my End!
I envy not Great Dryden's loftier Strain
Of Arms and Men designed to entertain,
Princes and Courts, so I but please the Plain:
Nor would I batter Profit for Delight,
Nor would have writ like him, like him to write.
If there is Hereafter, and a last Great Day,
What Fire's enough to purge his Stains away?
How will he wish each lewd applauded Line
Which makes Vice pleasing, and Damnation shine,
Had been as dull as honest Quarles or mine!
With sixty Years of Lewdness rest content!
It may not be yet too late, O yet Repent!
Even Thee our injured Altar will receive;
While yet there is Hopes fly to its Arms and live!
So shall for Thee their Harps the Angels string,
And the Returning Prodigal shall sing;
New Ioys through all the Heavenly Host be shown
In Numbers only sweeter than thy own.
CONGREVE from Ireland wondering we receive,
Would he the Town's loose way of Writing leave,
More Worth than all their Forfeit Lands will give:
Iustness of Thought, a Courtly Style, and clear,
And well-wrought Passions in his Works appear:
None knows with finer Strokes our Souls to move,
And as he please we smile, or weep, or love.
When Dryden goes, it is he must fill the Chair,
With Congreve only Congreve can compare.
Yet, tho he natural is as untaught Loves,
His Style as smooth as Cytherea's Doves,
When ever unbiased Judges read him over,
He sometimes nodds, as Homer did before:
Some Lines his most Admirers scarce would please,
Nor B -- s Verse alone could raise Disease. Vide Collier's Reflections on
Mourning Bride, and Garth 's Dispensary.

For smooth and well turned Lines we T -- admire,
Who has in Iustness what he wants in Fire:
Each Rhyme, each Syllable well-weigh'd and fair,
His Life and Manners scarce more regular.
With Strength and Flame prodigious D -- s writes
Of Love's soft Wars, and cruel martial Fights:
Scarce LEE himself strove with a mightier Load,
Or labored more beneath the Incumbent God:
Whatever of old to Rome or Athens known,
What France or We have gleaned, it is all his own.
How few can equal Praise with C -- ch obtain,
Who made Lucretius smooth, and chaste, and plain?
Courted by Fame he could her Charms despise,
Still wooed by that false Fair he still denies,
And pressed, for Refuge to the Altar flies;
Like votive Tablets offers up his Bays,
"And leaves to our lewd Town the Drudgery of Plays:
In lofty Raptures, born on Angels Wings
Above the Clouds, above Castalian Springs,
N -- inspired, of God and Nature sings;
And if one Glance on this poor World he throw,
If ever he mind the Crowd and Buzz below;
Pities our fruitless Pains for Fame and Praise,
And wonders why we drudge for Crowns and Bays.
Could B -- be sober, many he would excel,
Few know the Ancients, or could use so well;
But ah! his Genius with his Virtue's fled,
Condemned to Want of Grace and Want of Bread.
Even Envy B -- re's Subject must confess
Exact and rare, a curious Happiness,
Nor many could the Fable better dress:
Of Words what Compass, and how vast a Store!
His Courage and his Virtue's only more:
More various Scenes of Death his Fights display
Then Aghrim's Field or Landen's fatal Day:
Let beauteous Elda's Tears and Passion prove
His Soul is not unknowing how to love:
Disrobed of Clouds he viewed the Stagyrite
As Nature he, confessed to Human sight:
His Rules surveys, and traces to their Springs,
Where the blind Bard of flaming Ilium sings;
Thence with the Mantuan Swan in narrower Rings,
Tho more exact, he, stooping from his height,
Reviews the same fierce Wars, and Gods and Heroes fight:
That beauteous ancient Palace he surveys
Which Maro's Hands had only Strength to raise,
Models from thence, and copies every Grace:
Each Page is big with Virgil's Manly Thought,
To follow him too near's a glorious Fault.
He dared be virtuous in the World's Despite,
While D -- n lives he dared a Modest Poem write.
Who can the ingenious S -- y's Praise refuse,
Who serves a grateful Prince, and grateful Muse?
Or P -- r read unmoved, whose every Page
So just a Standard to the opening Age?
Neat S -- n's courtly Vein's correct and clear,
Nor shall he miss his Praise and Station here:
Nor should the rest whom I unnam'd must leave,
(Tho such Omission they will with ease forgive:)
Unknown to me, let each his Works commend,
Since Virtue, Praise, as Shame does Vice, attend.
Poets, like Leaves and Words, their Periods know,
Now fresh and green, now sear and withered grow;
Or burnt by Autumn's Heat, and Winter's Cold,
Or a new hasty Birth shoves off the old.
Happy are those, and such are some of ours,
Who blessed by bounteous Heaven's indulgent Showers
Bear wholesome Fruit, and not gay poisonous Flowers:
Who would not even a Lawreat's self commence
Or at their Virtue's or their Faith's Expense:
Renounce their Creed to save a wretched Play,
And for a crowded House and full Third Day
At one bold Stroke throw all their Heaven away.
What gained Euripides by all his Sense,
Who madly railed against a Providence?
Apostate Poets first seduced Mankind,
But ours upons the Pagan Herd refined;
They Virtue praised at least, which ours abuse,
And more than Paganize the Heaven-born Muse:
No Signs of Grace, or of Repentance show,
Like Strumpets lashed, more impudent they grow.
Now learn, my Friend, and freely I Will impart
My little All in this delightful Art:
Of Poetry the various Forms and Kinds,
The widest, strongest Grasp of human Minds:
Not all from all, but some from each I take,
Since we a Garland not a Garden make.
EPIC's the first and best, Epic.
which mounting sings
In Mighty Numbers worthy mighty Things,
Of High Adventures, Heroes, Gods and Kings:
By lively Schemes the Mind to Virtue forms,
And far beyond unactive Precept warms.
The Subject may be either feigned or true,
Too Old it should not be, but less too New:
Narration mixed with Action most delights,
Intrigues and Councils, varied Games and Fights:
Nothing so long as may the Reader tire,
But all the just well-mingled Scenes admire.
Your Hero may be virtuous, must be brave;
Nothing that is mean should his great Soul enslave:
Yet Heavens unequal Anger he may fear,
And for his suffering Friends indulge a Tear:
Thus when the Trojans Navy scattered lay
He wept, he trembled, and to Heaven did pray;
But when bright Glory beckoned from afar,
And Honor called him out to meet the War;
Like a fierce Torrent pouring over the Banks,
Or Mars himself, he thunders through the Ranks;
Death walks before, while he a Foe could find,
Horror and Ruin mark long frightful Lanes behind.
Machines.
For worn and old MACHINES few Readers care,
They Are like the Pastboard Chaos in the Fair:
If ought surprising you expect to show,
The Scenes if not the Persons should be new:
With both does MILTON'S wondrous Scheme begin,
The Pandemonium, Chaos, Death and Sin;
Which D -- s had with like Success assayed,
Had not the Porch of Death's Grim Court been made
Too wide, and there the impatient Reader staid.
And G -- h, tho barren is his Theme and mean,
By this has reached at least the famed Lutrine.
If tired with such a plenteous Feast you call
For a far meaner Banquet, Meal and Wall;
The best I have is yours, tho it is too long,
And what is behind will into Corners throng.
A Place there is, if Place it is named aright,
Where scattered Rays of pale and sickly Light,
Fringe over the Confines of Eternal Night.
Shorn of their Beams the Sun and Phoebe here
Like the fixed Stars, through Glasses viewed, appear;
Or those faint Seeds of Light, which just display
Ambiguous Splendour round the milky Way;
The Waste of Chaos, whose Auguster Reign
Does those more barren doubtful Realms disdain:
Here dwell those hideous Forms which often repair
To breath our upper World's more cheerful Air
Bleak Envy, grinding Pain, and meagre Care;
Disease and Death, the Goddess of the place,
Death, the least frightful Form of all their Race;
Ambition, Pride, false Ioys and Hopes as vain,
Lewdness and Luxury compose her Train:
How large their Interest, and how vast their Sway
Amid the wide invaded Realms of Day!
Soon would they our frail Race of Mortals end,
Did not kind Heaven auspicious Succors lend;
Sweet Angel-Forms, Peace, Virtue, Health and Love,
How near allied, how like to those above!
These often drive the Air, those Furies chase
And fetter in their own infernal Place:
These lent at once NASSAW and ENGLAND Aid,
And bright MARIA to our Shores covey'd:
Her, all their Power and all their Charms they gave,
To govern what her Hero came to save.
Nor Envy this, who in her noisome Cell
By Traitors in their swift Descent to Hell,
Her rising Glories heard, then with a Groan
She crawled before her Sov'reign's direful Throne:
A Pile of Sculls the odious Fantom bore,
With Bones half-naked mixed, and dropping putrid Gore;
There thus -- Shall Heaven defraud us of our Reign,
And BRITAIN, only BRITAIN break her Chain?
What can we there, while more than mortal Grace
Forbids our Entrance, and secures the Place?
Awhile I gazed and viewd her as I fled,
When first she came, till half my Snakes were dead;
And had I tarried longer near her Throne,
Had soon some base insipid Virtue grown:
So fast the wide progressive Ills increase,
If longer unoppos'd our Power will cease;
The base degenerate World dissolve to Peace;
Our boasted Empire there will soon be over,
And Mortals tremble at our Arms no more.
She said, her Tidings all the Court affright,
And doubled Horror filled the Realms of Night:
Till out foul Lewdness leaped, and shook the Place,
The fulsom'st Fiend of all the infernal Race;
A crusted Leprosy deformed her Face;
With half a bloodshot Eye the Fury glar'd,
Yet when for Mischief she above prepared,
She painted and she dressed, those Arts she knew,
And to her self her self a Stranger grew,
(Thus old and battered Bawds behind the Scenes,
New rigged and daubed, pass on the Stage for Queens;)
Nor yet, she cries, of Britain we'll despair
I Have yet some trusty Friends in Ambush there,
All is not lost, we have still the Theater:
I Will batter Virtue thence, nor fear to gain
New Subjects daily from her hated Reign;
Is not Great D -- ours and all his Train?
He knows he has new Laurels here prepared,
For those he lost above, a just Reward,
For his wide Conquests he will command the Guard:
Headed by him one Foot we'll scorn to yield,
Tho Virtue's glittering Squadrons drive the Field:
Grant me, Dread Sovereign! a Detachment hence
We'll not be long alone on our Defense,
But hope to drive the proud Assailants thence.
Bold Blasphemy shall lead our black Forlorn,
With Colors from Heaven's Crystal Ramparts torn,
And Anti-Thunderrs armed; Profaneness next
Their Canon seize, and turn the Sacred Text
Against the Assailants; brave Revenge and Rage
Shall our main Batt'ry ply, and guard the Stage.
-- But most I on dear Ribaldry depend,
We Have not a surer or a stronger Friend.
Now shall she broad and open to the Sky,
Now close behind some double Meaning lie;
Now with sulphurous Rivers lave the Trench,
And choke the Assailants with infernal Stench;
Each nicer Virtue from the Walls repel,
And Heaven it self regale with the Perfumes of Hell.
This from the World our dreaded Foe will drive,
As murmuring Bees are forced to leave their Hive;
Souls so refined such Vapors cannot bear,
But seek their native Heaven and purer Air:
When She and all her heavenly Guards are gone
And her bright Hero absent, all is our own:
If any pious Fools should make a stand,
To stop our Progress through the conquered Land,
They soon shall pass for hot-brained Visionairs,
We'll run 'em down with Ridicule and Farce.
Must they reform the World! a likely Task!
It Is Vizard all, and them we'll soon unmask.
The rest will tumble in, or if they stay
And loiter in Damnation's ample Way,
I Have one Expedient left, which cannot but take,
My last Reserve; From you black brimstone Lake,
Whence two Canals through subterranean Veins
Are drawn to Sodom and Campania's Plains,
My self I Will fill a Vial, and infuse
My very Soul amid the potent Juice:
This Essence near my Heart I Will with me bear,
And this among my dearest Favorites share,
Already tutored by the Theater;
Who passed those Bugbears Conscience, Law and Shame
Have there been taught that Virtue's but a Name:
Exalted Souls who vulgar Sins despise;
Fit for some new discovered nobler Vice;
One Drop of this their frozen Blood shall warm,
And frighted Nature's feebler Guards disarm:
Till their chill Veins with hotter Fevers glow
Than any Etna or Vesuvius know,
Scarce equaled by their Parent Flames below;
Till wide around the generous Canker spread,
And Vengeance draw on each devoted Head:
Impatient Heaven it self our Arms shall join,
The Skies again with forky Lightnings shine;
Till glutted Desolation pants for Breath,
And guilty Shades shall crowd the Realms of Death.
-- She said, the Motion pleased, she wings away
And in blue poisonous Foggs invades the Day:
Part of her direful Threats too true we find,
And Heaven avert the Plagues that yet remain behind!
The Path which Epic treads the TRAGIC Muse Tragedy.

With daring tho unequal Steps pursues;
A little Epic shines through every Scene,
Tho more of Life appears, and less Machine;
More Action, less Narration, more Delight;
We see the Gods descend, and Heroes fight.
While Oedipus is raving on the Stage,
Mild Pity enters and dissolves our Rage;
We lower our haughty Spirits, our Pride and Hate,
And learn to fear the sad Reverse of Fate.
A Tyrant's Fall, a treacherous Statesman's End
Clear the Just Gods, and equal Heaven defend:
Ungrateful Factions here themselves torment,
And bring those very Ills they would prevent:
Nor think the soft Intrigues of Love too mean
To fill the Stage and grace the Tragic Scene!
Who from the World this Salt of Nature takes,
Twice Slaves of Kings, of Life a Desert makes.
The Moral and Pathetick neatly joined,
Are best for Pleasure and for Use designed.
Be this in Tragic an Eternal Law;
Bold Strokes and larger than the Life to draw:
Let all be Great; when here a Woman's seen,
Paint her a Fury, or a Heroine:
Slaves, Spendthrifts, angry Fathers, better fit
The meaner Sallies of COMEDIAN Wit;
But Courtly HORACE did their Stage refuse,
Nor was it trod by Maro's heavenly Muse:
A Walk so low their nobler Minds disdain,
Where sordid Mirth's exchanged for sordid Gain;
Where, in false Pleasure all the Profit's drowned,
Nor Authors with just Admiration crowned:
Hence was the Sock a Task for servile Wit,
Course PLAUTUS hence, and neater TERENCE writ:
Yet if you still your Fortune long to take,
And long to hear the crowded Benches shake;
If you would reform the Mob, loved Vice restrain,
The Pulpits break, and neighboring B -- drain;
Let Heaven at least, if not its Priests, be free,
The Bible sures's too grave for Comedy:
If she nor lewdly nor profanely talk
She Will have a cleaner, tho a narrower Walk.
Our Nation's endless Humor will supply
So large a Fund as never can be dry;
Why then should Vice be bare and open shown,
And with such Nauseous Scenes affront the Town?
Why thrive the Lewd, their Wishes seldom crossed,
And why Poetic Justice often lost?
They plead they copy Nature. -- Don't abuse
Her sacred Name with such a vile Excuse!
She wisely hides what these, like Beasts display,
Even Vice it self, less impudent than they,
Remote in Shades, and far from conscious Day.
From this Retrenchment by strong Reason beat,
They next to poor Necessity retreat:
The Murderers, Bawds and Robbers last pretense
With equal Justice, equal Innocence!
So Crack, in pious Fit, will plead she is poor,
It Is a hard Choice, Good Sir, to starve or whore!
-- Is there no Third, or will such Reas'nings pass
In Bridewel's rigid Court, or save the Lash?
Where the stern Judge, like Radamanth, surveys
The trembling Sinner, and each Action weighs.
A lazy, black, encumbered Stream rolls by,
Whose thick sulphurous Vapors load the Sky;
Near where, in Caves from Heaven's sweet Light debarred,
Shrieks, Groans, and Iron Whips, and Clanks of Chains are heard.
And cannot you thrash. or trail a Pike or Pole?
Are there no Iakes in Town, or Kennels foul?
No honester Employment, that you choose
With such vile Drudgery t'abase the heaven born Muse?
The numerous ODE in various Paths delights, Ode.

Love, Friendship, Gods and Heroes, Games and Fights:
Her Age with Veneration is confessed,
The first great Mother she of all the rest.
This I know some have affirmed that Moses 's Song in the 14 th of Exodus was
writ in Hexameters, but I cannot perceive any such thing in it, any more than in
the 90 th. Psalm, or the Book of Job, which seem to be written about the same
time with it. The Song of the Well, in Numbers, page 15. is clearly an Ode of
unequal Measures.
MOSES used, and DAVID'S Royal Lyre,
This he whom wondering Seraphs did inspire,
Whence PINDAR stole some Sparks of heavenly Fire,
Who now by COWLEY'S happy Muse improved,
Is understood by some, by more beloved:
The Vastness of his Thought, the daring Range,
That imperceptible and pleasing Change,
Our jealous Neighbors must themselves confess
The British Genius tracks with most Success;
But still the Smoothness we of Verse desire,
The Regulation of our Native Fire:
This from experienced Masters we receive,
Sweet FLATMAN'S Works, and DRYDEN'S this will give.
If you in pointed SATYR most delight, Satyr.

Worry not, where you only ought to bite:
Easy your Style, unstudy'd all and clear.
Prosaic Lines are pardonable here.
There are whose Breath would blast the brightest Fame,
Who from base Actions court an odious Name,
With Beauty and with Virtue War proclaim;
Who bundle up the Scandals of the Town,
And in lewd Couplets make it all their own:
Just Shame be theirs who thus debauch a Muse,
To vile Lampoons a noble Art abuse:
As ill be theirs, and half of Oats's Fate,
Who always dully rail against the State.
Kings are but Men, nor are their Councils more,
Those Ills we cannot avert we must deplore:
Not many Poets were for Statesmen made,
It asks more Brains than stocks the Rhiming Trade:
(At least, when they the Ministry receive,
To Poets Militant their Muse they leave.)
All sordid Flat'ry hate, it pleases none
But Tyrants grinning on their Iron Throne:
Yet where wer'e ruled with wise impartial Sway,
The Muses should their grateful Homage pay:
It Is base alike a Tyrant's Name to raise,
And grudg a Parent Prince our tributary Praise.
No wonder those who by Proscriptions gain
In Marian Days, or Sylla's bloody Reign,
Of the divine Augustus should complain;
Who stoops to wear a Crown's uneasy Weight,
As Atlas under Heaven, to prop the State:
No Glory strikes his Great exalted Mind,
No Pleasure like obliging all Mankind;
He lets the Factious their weak Malice vent,
Punished enough while they themselves torment:
Satiate with Conquest, his dread Sword he sheaths,
And with a Nod disbands ten thousand Deaths.
Who dares Rebellious Arms against him move
While his Praetorian Guard's his Subjects Love?
Admired by all the bravest and the best,
Who wear a Roman Soul within their ample Breast:
Tho charmed with both, which shall they more admire
In Peace his Wisdom, or in War his Fire?
-- One Labor yet remains, and that they ask,
Alcides never cleared a nobler Task;
O Father! banished Virtue O restore!
Let Hydra Vice pollute thy Reign no more!
Strike through the Monster-Form, which threatening stands,
Fierce with a thousand Throats, a thousand Hands!
Rescue once more thy Trojans sacred Line
From slavish Chains, so shall thy Temples shine
With Stars, and all Elysium shall be thine.
FINIS.

