A SERMON PREACHED IN St. MARIES-Church at Gates-head in the County-Palatine of
Durham, AT THE FUNERAL OF George Johnson, GENT. Deceased, May 29. Anno Dom.
1683.

By RICHARD WERGE, A. M. Rector of that Church.

WHEREUNTO IS ADDED, An ELEGY by a Friend.

Of whom the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 38. LONDON, Printed by Henry Clark,
for Joseph Hall Bookseller and Book-Binder upon Tyne-Bridge, Newcastle upon
Tyne, and Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

A SERMON PREACHED In St. Mary's-Church of Gateshead, in the County-Palatine of
Durham, at the Funeral of George Johnson Gentleman, deceased; May the 29th.
Anno Domini 1683.
Heb. IX. Part of the 27th. Verse. -- It is appointed for men once to die.
THE first Adam, the Protoplast of all mankind, was made upright, his
Righteousness, was not the Righteousness of his Person only; but it was the
righteousness of Humane Nature; It was a Connatural Endowment, it was given to
man with his Nature; so that if Adam, had continued in that his estate,
according to his first Creation, He had (with all his posterity) been free from
death: But being created mutable, and yielding to the Temptation of Eve, (who
was enticed by the Devil, in the shape of a Serpent) He by his transgression
fell; nay, his disobedience remains ours by imputation; yea further, the sin
imputed, makes us liable to the punishment to be inflicted, and that is death
threatened upon sin, in those words, In the day that thou eatest, thou shall
surely die.

All Saints are mortal, though not equal: The greatest sins, through Christ,
upon Faith, and Repentance are venial; and the least sin, in its Nature,
without Faith, and Repentance is mortal, and makes men liable to death
temporal, spiritual, and eternal. Now,

The death, that I shall (here) speak of, is a temporal death, the Consequent
of sin.

We see in the Text, that it is a Statute Law; it is appointed for Men once to
die: It is a Statute Law, that has been in force in all ages, and will be to
the end of the world. The Law of the Medes and Persians, which was not to be
altered, is not so sure and firm as this.

Neither riches, nor honor, nor beauty nor strength, nor any outward
privilege, can free men from death. The Prophets, do they live for ever?
Ministers, Magistrates, Masters, Servants, the deformed, the beautiful, high,
and low, rich, and poor they are all subject to death. Abraham, the Father of
the faithful, Isaac the Patriarch, Aaron the Priest, Josiah the Prince, these
all died.

All flesh is grass, Death, is the end of all flesh; it is the way of all the
Earth.

When Zerxes upon an hill, beheld his great Army, both by sea and land, he
wept, considering, that within one hundred years, there should not be one of
that great company left alive.

The World is a Theater; the earth, is as a Stage, placed in the midst: Here,
high, and low, all sorts of people act their parts, as in a Tragedy; the cries
of new born children are as the Prologue; our false hopes, our vain joys, our
fierce distractions are as the Musich that divides the Acts: Time holds the
glass, and when the last sand is fallen, death strikes the Epilogue, and the
Play is done. Man's life, is like a winters day; when the Sun is then
strongest, it is but weak; when it is at the highest, it is but low; and when
it shines longest, it is but short.

Every thing has its spring, growth, and decay: and all men have their dates,
however eminent in degree; and the shank of their Compass is so set in a
Center, that the Circle of their lives is oftentimes abrupt, before it be drawn
to a full round.

Some, whose bodies have been strong, fitted for war, have by spears, and
glittering sword been laid upon the ground, purpled with the broken, and bloody
carcases one of another, mixed as in an horible winepress; others by the
distemperature of diet, continually labor, contagiousness of air, and
afflictions by sickness, have been weakened, and have yielded up the ghost.

There are some Scriptures affirmative, testifying, that all men are liable to
death. There are other Scriptures negative, testifying, that there are none
exempt from death.

The cause of death is universal, and that is sin. Sin, is the true and proper
cause. Death entered into the world by sin, Romans 5. 12. Death, is the wages of
sin; now, all have sinned, and therefore, all are liable to death. (...), Death
is a propriety inseparable from man, said Nazianzen.

Nothing can bear off fatal blows, when Death-strikes with its Ragged-staff.

When the rich Cardinal of Winchester was struck with an uncurable disease, and
was told by his Physician, that he could not live; said he, will not Death be
hired? will money do nothing? must I die who have so great riches? If the whole
Realm would save my life, I am able either by policy to get, or by riches to
buy it: but all would not prevail, but that he died of the same disease.

Caesar and Pompey, who got such famous victories, and were exalted to so great
honor, Marcellus, and Belisarius, those succesful Commanders; Saladine, the
Conqueror of the East, and Alexander the great, who got so many victories, and
had Ambassadors sent to him from all Countries, to congratulate his conquests,
and to do him homage, and bring him presents these all died.

Though men live a long time, yet they die. All the days of Lamech were seven
hundred seventy and seven years, and he died. All the days of Methusalem, were
nine hundred sixty and nine years, and he died. Joshua's Sun had a time to set;
and they who live a long time, die at last.

which way ever you look, you may see something that may mind you of mortality.
When you behold the dust of the Earth, you may then remember that you are dust,
and that to dust you must return. When you look upon the flowers of the field,
you may then remember that man comes forth like a flower, and is cut down. When
you look upon the clouds, you may then remember, that man going to the grave is
as a cloud, that is consumed, and vanishes away. When you behold the fowls of
the air, you may then consider, that Man's days are as the Eagle, that hastes
to the prey. When you look upon the water, you may then remember that man dying
is as the foam upon the water; and as water spilt upon the ground. When you
come to Church, you see the Sepulchers of others; and some of you can scarcely
go from the places where you stand, but you will tread upon the dormitories of
some of your progenitors. When you travail abroad, you hear of the death of
others; and when you come home, upon your tables you see the carcases of
creatures slain for your use; All which things should put you in mind of that
mortality to which you are all liable.

Objection. The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 15. ver. 51. We shall not all sleep.

Answer. That, is spoken only of such as shall be living at the very moment of
Christ's coming to Judgment: all before them shall die; and (even) they shall be
changed, which is equivalent to death.

Obj. Enoch, was translated that he should not see death; and Elijah was wrapped
up into heaven, and died not.

Ans. There was a special reason, why those two were freed from the ordinary
way of dying.

It was a long time between the promise of Christ, and the Exhibition of him;
and therefore to support the faith of believers, in a freedom from death by
Christ, the Lord was pleased to give those two real demonstrations; the one
before the flood, and the other after the flood.

Besides that, one or two extraordinary Instances, do not infringe an ordinary
Rule; especially, when it is altered by him who set the Rule. Moreover, they
were both changed, which is answerable to death; and thereby, their robe of
mortality, was taken off before they were admitted into heaven Our death, is a
change; and their change was as death.

We see by experience, that men of all estates, and conditions are taken away
by death; even the righteous perish, and merciful men are taken away. No
privilege can exempt men from death.

Nascimur, Morimur; and therefore, Solomon in his 30th. of Prove. joins the Womb
and the Grave together; to show, that we are no sooner born, but death waits
for us. Every one that has his Genesis, must have his Exodus. One hearing one
boast that he could decline any word, he told him, he could not decline death.
We eat and we die, said the old Stoich. We put death into our mouths and death
on our backs; we are all posting on to the grave, which is the House of all the
living.

The decree of God, in this respect, is established; and the law of nature, in
this respect, is in violable, and universal. We are all born alike, and we
must die alike; We came naked into the world, and we must go out naked. Mors
omnes reddit aequales; aequat divitibus pauperes, et liberis servos. Death
makes all alike; it makes the rich and poor, masters and servants alike; death
puts an end to all civil distinctions.

Having done with the illustration of this truth, I shall now speak to you by
way of Application.

First Instruction.
Hence we are informed of the stability of God's decree. God's purpose was,
that if man sinned, he should die; and God has made good his word ever since;
all the posterity of Adam has been liable to death. Indeed, God is
unchangeable in his Essence, his Attributes, his Councels, and his Word. What
God says, shall be done; what he speaks, shall be accomplished; whatsoever God
wills, purposes, and speaks, shall be brought to pass, Numb. the 23d. verse the
19th.

Second Instruction.
Hence we learn the frailty of man's nature. There are many dangers, and
diseases attending us, so that we may say with Saint Paul, We are in deaths
often.

Third Instruction.
By this we see the sad effects of sin. There is an evil in sin, and that is
the violation of God's Law: and their is an evil after sin, and that is death,
the punishment of sin. Draco, the severe Lawgiver, being asked, why (when all
sins were not equal) he appointed death to all, he answered, he knew all sins
were not equal; but he knew the least deserved death. It was the speech of
Heraclitus concerning a Bow, (...), its work is to kill; so, the effect of sin
is death. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
over all men, for as much as all have sinned. Romans the 5th. ver. the 12th.

Indeed the Apostle says, there is a sin not unto death; but that is to be
understood of the event, not the merit. The least sin being committed against
an infinite Justice, deserves death. this was a principle impressed upon
nature; the very Heathens were sensible of it: the Apostle speaing of the
Heathens, Romans the 1st. and the 32d. says thus; Knowing, that they which
commit such things, are worthy of death. It is plain by the words of the
Apostle, that the Heathens knew this: and the Prophet is positiye in it, The
soul that sins it shall die. Ezekiel. the 18th. and the 4th.

The first Adam had two Sacraments laid before him, a Sacrament of life, and a
Sacrament of death; the tree of life, was a Sacrament of life; by eating of
that Tree, he was to be upheld in his obedience, which was the way to life: Had
he continued eating of that Tree, he had been freed from temporal death; and
after an enjoyment of a temporal happiness in this world, he should have been
translated to an estate of eternal blessedness, in heaven: But by eating of the
forbidden tree (which was a Sacrament of death) he was liable to death: Now
Adam was a representative Person, the root of all mankind; so that in Adam, all
sinned and in him, all men are liable to death.

The Fourth Exhortation.
Make use of your thoughts about man's mortality, as a remedy.

First, against pride: It was decreed by the Senate of Rome, that when the
Roman Conqueror, was in his Triumphs, and had so many acclamations, and
praises, and other occasions of pride; that one should cry thus, Remember that
thou art a man: that so the consideration of his mortality might keep him from
pride.

They are in no peril of death: that is, they think themselves to be in no
peril; and this is the cause, that they are so holden with pride, Psalm. 73. If
men did mind their latter end, if they did consider, that in a short time, they
must be turned into dust, surely they would be humble; but they think only of
this life, therefore they are so proud.

Man who at first, was made like unto God, is now, like the beasts that perish;
not a brute, but brutish, in respect of sensuality, and mortality. He who was
created Lord of the Universe, must now say to corruption, thou art my Father,
and to the worm thou art my Mother, and Sister: And this is the fruit of sin;
and the thought of it, should make us low in our own eyes.

Secondly, Make use of the thoughts of man's mortality as a remedy against
Covetousness.

Facile contemnit omnia, qui semper se cogitat moriturum. That man, is easily
persuaded to contemn all things, who is always mindful of his own death. A
little money will serve for his expenses, who is to go but a short journey. A
little parcel of earth will hold them, who now ambitiously seek after the whole
world. Why should man be inordinatly desirous after great territories, and rich
clothing, who in a short time, shall have no more Land, than the compass of his
grave; and no more clothing than those vestiments appointed for his burial! The
Psalmist accounts this a great piece of vanity; surely every man walks in a
vain show; surely they are disquieted in vain. He heapeth up riches to himself,
and knows not who shall gather them. Psalm. 39. Why should they accumulate
riches, and endeavor to grasp the world, who in a short time, must lay their
heads upon a green Turf? Our life is like the Macedonian Empire, that was in,
and out like a flash. Vita, vitrea; fumus, and umbra sumus. Our life is like
glass; we are as smoke, and as a shadow; and therefore, the Apostle exhorts
thus, 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Brethren, the time is short, it remains, that
they that have wives be as though they had none; and they that weep, as if they
wept not; and they that rejoice as if they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as
if they possessed not; and they that use the world as not abusing it; for the
fashion of this World passes away. Why should frail man, be in ordinately
desirous after riches, pleasures, and honors of the world; when he may be so
quickly taken from them, or they from him?

The Fifth Exhortation.
As the thoughts of man's frailty, should diswade you from those sins of pride,
and covetousness; so it should persuade you to several practical duties.

1 It should put you upon the study of true wisdom. David desired to be
instructed how to number his days, and that time he had yet to live, Psalm. 39.
5. And Moses learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians desired in the behalf
of himself and others, to be taught to number their days, Psalm 90. 12. So
teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Neither
David, nor Moses desired to know in a literal sense, what year, or what day
their life should end; but in a spiritual sense, how they might live so as that
they might end their lives well any day of the year, or any hour of the day.
There is no kind of learning more weighty than this.

2. This should move you to repentance. Hezekiah did so upon a message of
death. We cannot promise life to our selves till to morrow; and therefore we
should repent to day. Whilst a woman is with child, none can tell what kind of
birth it will be; and so time travelleth with God's decrees, and in their
season brings them forth; but little does any man know what is in the womb of
to morrow, till God has signified it by the event: and therefore, it is fit
suddenly to set about repentance, before days of darkness come.

3. It should persuade you to a reverential fear of God. Fear him, who is able
to kill both body and soul. God is a God life and death; he kills, and makes
alive; he has the Keys of death and hell, Revel. 1. 18. Who would but fear
him, who has within him the power of life and death?

4. This should persuade us to patience under all adversities, and diseases.
Death will put an end to all such evils. Many are the troubles of the
righteous: a particular instance hereof we have in. paul, whose sufferings are
largly set out 2 Cor. 11. 23, 24. If you should meet with the like, consider
that within a while, death will put an end to all such evils; and therefore,
you should bear up your Spirits now.

5. Let this move you to desire, and to seek after heavenly things. There is no
good foundation of hope, nor any good ground of joy to be found here; and
therefore, the frequent meditation about death should move you to desire after
heaven and happiness. Our conversation is in heaven, says the Apostle, from
whence we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like to his glorious body. One reading that
Scripture, that No man has seen God at any time, and lived, cried out thus, O
then that I might die, that I might see him.

6. This should persuade you to be willing to die. Aliter se habere non potest
necessarium, said Aristotle, That that is necessary cannot be otherwise: And
therefore be of his resolution, who said, Cum nequeo mutare, aequo animo feram.
When I cannot turn aside an evil, I will bear it patiently. There is a
necessity of all men's dying. The extent and community of this condition,
shows the necessity of it. The wise man dies as the fool, Eccles. 2. 16. The
beggar died, and the rich man died, Luke 16. 22. Those who (in respect of their
office) are as Gods upon earth, shall die like men. The mighty man and the man
of war, the Judge, and the Prophet, the Prudent, and the Ancient, the Captain,
and the Honorable man, the Councellor, and the cunning Artificer; and the
eloquennt orator; these, who are the stay, and staff of a Nation shall be taken
away, Isai. 3. 1, 2, 3.

Therefore since Death cannot be avoided, it is fit, that men should cheerfully
undergo it. Thus did Elias, he sat under the Juniper tree, and desired, that
he might die, and said, it is enough, Lord, now; O Lord take my soul, for I am
not better than my Fathers. Thus died faithful Simeon; Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace.

Indeed, Christians, do not desire Death, as Death. Paul, in that respect,
would not be unclothed. And Peter must be carried whither he would not: but
when Christians consider the decree of heaven, the settled purpose of God; and
the unalterable Laws of nature; and the benefits they obtain by it, then they
should be ready to say, now farewell world; farewell relations; and welcome
death, welcome Christ; welcome heaven. Queen Elizabeth, professed, that She
preferred her Coffin before her Cradle, and her Burial-day before her
Birthday. And you should be cheerful in the thoughts of death, which cannot be
resisted; and should account it an happy change to go from night, to day; from
darkness, to light; from death, to life; from sorrow, to solace; from a
troublesome world, to a resting place in Heaven.

7. Let this persuade you to be patient about the death of others. When
Galienus, the Emperor, was told of the death of his Father, why said he, I knew
that my Father was mortal. When Anaxagoras was told of the death of his son, he
answered, he knew his son was mortal. Consider the greatness of Job, and the
goodness of Job: he was the greatest of all the men of the east; supposed by
some to be the King of the Edomites; and as for his goodness, he was a perfect,
and upright man: consider the sudden death of his seven Sons, and three
Daughters; consider with what contentedness and thankfulness he did bear all,
Job 2. 21. Job in this case, will be a worthy pattern of contentment to you in
the like case; and a strong inforcement to this duty. When your Friends die,
you should not be as men without hope: you should consider, that their death
could not be resisted, nor can their life be recalled; and that he that has
taken them away, can provide for them better than you can do; and can make an
abundant supply of them to you another way, and can be better to you than many
friends. Friends can do you no good, except God be your friend; and if God be
your friend, you will not stand in need of other friends; He will more than
supply the room of all friends and relations. You cannot account those friends
that are taken away by death, to be utterly lost. It is observable, that Job's
Children who were taken away by death, were not numbered amongst the things that
were lost. It is said, that the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before,
Job 42. 10. He had seven thousand sheep before, and he had fourteen thousand
given him again; he had three thousand Camels before, and he had six thousand
given him after; and so for other things, they were all double: But when his
Sons and daughters are mentioned, there is the same number as before, seven
sons and three daughters; and yet it is said, that God gave twice as much as he
had before; the reason is this; His Cattle were utterly lost, and their number
was doubled; and his sons and daughters were the same number as before; and
yet, they were accounted double; because, though they were taken away by death,
yet they were not absolutely lost.

8. Let us, by this that has been said, be persuaded to prepare our selves for
death.

Death is common; none can exempted from it; and it is certain, none can avoid
it; and therefore, it is fit, that we should be always prepared for it. Death
is an Enemy, which we must encounter; an Enemy which we must overcome; and
therefore, we should be always in a readyness for it.

In order to your preparation.
1. Think of those things, that may put you in mind of death.

It has been an ancient practice of the Devil, to persuade men to be forgetful
of death; some of the Egyptians did hide their dead, the Scythians did eat
their dead, the Greeks did burn their dead, and let the Wind blow away their
ashes: others, have thrown their dead bodies into the sea, to be devoured of
fishes, on purpose, that there might be nothing before their eyes, to mind them
of death: But surely it will be Christian prudence to have death always before
your eyes, and to look at those things, that might put you in mind of Death.
God clothed our first parents with the Skins of dead beasts, that they might
think on Death. And he now feeds us with the flesh of slain beasts, that we
might remember the same.

2. Endeavor to disaffect the things of the world. So long as men have towering
thoughts, and ambitious desires after honor: so long as men are full of
immoderate cares about the things of the world: So long as they affect delicate
fare, and costly arraiment, they are unwilling to hear of Death. But, when they
come to have their affections dead to the world; when those intemperate desires
after great possessions are quenched; when men undervalue, and disesteem the
world, and look upon all the glory thereof as a fancy; when men have their
hearts cleansed from the love of the world, then they are easily persuaded to
be willing to die.

3. Set your houses in order, for the comfort, and convenience of them that are
to live after you. When Hezekiah, received a message of Death, he was commanded
to set his house in order, Isai. 38. And it is of great use for all Christians.
When men's estates are unsettled, then their minds are unsettled; but, when men
have discreetly disposed, of their estates for their families, and relations,
their fears and troubles are in a great measure over, and they are then in a
fitter condition to die.

4. Set about repentance. It was good counsel, that one gave to his Scholar,
that he should be sure to repent one day before he died; which came to this,
that he should repent every day; because he knew not, but that might be the day
of his Death. It is one of the Devils ways to destroy souls, by tempting them
to defer and delay the time of repentance: He deals with sinners in this case,
like a cunning Usurer, who flatters his debtor, till he has failed his day,
and then he seizes upon his land. And therefore, let us cry out, quamdiu cras,
quare non hodie? How long shall we say to morrow? why not to day? You may die
to night, and how can you repent to morrow? It will be your prudence speedily
to repent.

I would willingly persuade you, to set about the confession of all your sins,
both in thought, word, and deed. Mourn for your sins; for Original sin, for
Actual sins, for the sins of your Youth, and riper years. Mourn for your sins
of Omission, and Commission; for sins at home, and sins abroad; for sins of
Ignorance, and sins of Presumption. But this is not enough; a sorrow for sin,
an acknowledgment of sin, do not make up true repentance. Judas repented, and
acknowledged his sin, in betraying innocent blood, and yet he retained a
murtherous principle: for he afterward murdered himself. And therefore, you
must add to these, reformation of life: There must be a change of the heart,
and such an alteration of the mind, and disposition, as may produce a new life,
and conversation.

To this your repentance add faith; the end whereof is the salvation of the
Soul. Being thus prepared, you will be in a condition like St. Ambrose who
declared, that he was neither ashamed to live, nor afraid to die. Being thus
prepared, you will be meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light.

And now, I cannot but say something of this worthy person deceased, whose body
is now brought to be inhum'd.

I cannot be silent without wrong to the Church, and dishonor to God: neither
can I speak without loss to his merit. I am afraid, that except I were a more
worthy Encomiast, able to expatiate in a formal Panegyric, that what I shall
say, will be a diminution of his worth.

Posibly, some may judge it unfit to commend the dead though they have been
famous in their Generations; But you know of whom it was said, that he was a
burning and a shining light; and I think it fit that they who honor God,
should be honored both in life and death.

He had a strong body, and a solid judgment, an excellent dispatch of business,
not apt to be elevated, or dejected. By his vigilance, care, industry, and
activity, (God blessing his endeavors) he has done many and great things for
the good of himself and others in this place.

He was clothed with humility, of an obliging temper, of a most sweet
disposition; seldom seen to have an angry countenance; nor did I ever hear him
speak evil of any man.

He was a Peace-keeper, and a Peacemaker; ready to compose differences, far
from doing any wrong to others; and far from revenging wrong done by others: He
was made up of kindness, he never declined any capacity of doing good.

His assiduity in waiting upon Ordinances, and his love to the Ministers of the
Gospel, was admirable; especially to those whom he found to be the Orthodox,
and Loyal. His principle was to fear God, and honor the King; to be obedient
to the Laws, both of the Church, and State. His zeal was great, in
endeavoring, that loyal and faithful Subjects might be elected to sit as
Members in Parliament.

He was an excellent Subject, Husband, Father, and Friend.

He frequently appeared at this Font, as a Godfather, to the Children of the
poorest persons. He was ready to entertain strangers: the blessing of them that
were ready to perish, was upon him. He was zealous of good works, as being the
necessary fruits of Christian faith. he was come to the top of St. Peter's
Climax, brotherly kindness, and charity. No man could better say his prayers,
as being dove-like, free from gall and rancor. His patience was great, under
God's afflicting hand; in his greatest extremities I never heard him murmur.

The Sun in all his journeys, has scarcely seen a better qualified person.

He was Gateshead's darling: in respect of his meekness, and charity, he is
hardly to be equalled; never to be exceeded in this place, (or his place.) He
shined as the Morning star among the living; and dying, as the Evening star
among the dead.

These are the due praises of this glorious Saint.

He has faithfully discharged his duty toward God and man. He has now a writ
of ease from all his industrious labors; he has fought a good fight, he has
finished his course, and is now gone to wear that Crown, that is laid up for
him.

Audite Posteri! If my voice would reach it, I would speak to the generations
that are yet to come.

You of this present age can bear faithful witness of these his virtues; and
of the truth of what I speak; and I hope, that those, who come after will
always mention his name, as being of blessed memory, knowing that the righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

We have reason to believe, that his Soul is now beholding the face of God in
glory; that it is warbled in the Quires of ever blessed spirits, in that vortex
of eternity; and that his body shall be raised in glory, and being reunited to
his soul, shall enjoy happy immortality, and immortal happiness.

Now let us all endeavor to worship, and glorify God with our bodies, and
souls in this life, that our bodies, and souls may be glorified in the life to
come, Amen.

AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF George Johnson, GENT. Of Gates-head, in the
County-Palatine of Durham, who died May 29. An. Dom. 1683.
Dignum laud Virum, Musavetat mori;
Coelo Musa beat
-- Hor. Ode 8. Carminum, Lib. 4. Virtus in astra tendit.
Paulum sepultae distat inertiae
Celate Virtus
-- Hor. Lib. 4. Carminum, Ode 9.
AWake, awake dull Muse, awake and see
How just my cause is for an Elegy.
See where he lies, an Object who may make
Th'obdurat'st heart relent; and now partake
With us in Funeral Obsequies: See where
His breathless Substance lies, that was so dear;
So prized, so valued. Do but cast an eye,
And 'twill b'enough t'enforce an Elegy.
How can thy succinct Temples now admit
Or entertain repose? see how we sit
Pil'd up in sorrow; every corner keeping
Its Pect'ral lugent. What Is Melpom'ne sleeping?
Hark, hark, the sighs, see, see the tears that fall,
Many they are; 'cause many loved; nay, all.
Oh, that I had no cause t'implore thy skill
To this sad Elegy! Oh, that my Quill
Might want those blacker drops caused by a day
More black to us, than in themselves are they!
Alas, alas, alas, This, this our sorrow,
Needs not a second Cause! we need not borrow
Or beg an higher grief! Why so? Our loss,
Is not in Trifles, but in Sum, in Gross.
If Death and Fate, with their Consultants, had
A parley held to have made our loss more sad,
Such; such an Object in our Confines, they
Could not have fixed on. O, that they should lay
Their plotting heads together, thus to take
Our only Patron from us! Thus to make
A day of sorrow, grief, by poling from us
Ourman of Hope, the Prince of men among us!
He was that Hand that handed out relief
To Orphans, widows; strangers, in their grief
Had their access unto him: Still he had
An heart to Pity; Families were clad
By his successful hand: Nay, Sheet's toosmall
A Continent to speak his Virtues all.
He was the man on whom numbers depended;
Now, being gone, numberless hopes are ended,
He, he it was 'pon whom our structure stood
Corradicated: One, whose Life was good,
And Actions still exemplary: Many,
Supported by him were; oppressed never any.
O cruel Death! how could thou smite or wound
That Breast, wherein all virtues have bin found?
How was it his aged Smiles could not prevail
With thee beforeth' Arrest? His worth no bail?
Hard, covetous Usurer, that fore the day,
Feteht Interestand Principle away!
Had thou but left his fellow, 'twould have been
Part satisfaction; but this Stratagem
Who of us all can wave it? Let that Eye
That here denies his Tear, be ever dry.
Sure, sure, he was more highly born by Grace,
Than Nature; for, in him the first gave place;
And as a strong man's bound by stronger power
So Grace in him threvv Nature out of door:
This, by his Life appeared; for none ere cried,
But he their Cause examined, and supplied
Their present wants, with heart and breast as full
For all their wants, as theirs through want were dull.
He was the vvonder of our Age: a Gem,
Valued and prized amongst the best of men;
And not without due merit: for his Deeds
Proclaim him highly worthy; Blazons, spreads
His Name, as memorable; And though he
Lie dormant in his Urn, yet's Memory
Will still be waking. Future Ages shall
Applaud our Johnson, and him Worthy call.
Unbyast in his Verdicts? of a Spirit
Equanimous and Noble. None can merit,
(Principle-vvise) an higher Laud; or claim
More just Encomiums. H'vvas still the same.
True to the Church, sound in his Judgment; High
Thoughts of his King he still retained. The Eye
Of all his Country he: In's place, for's time,
He like a Constellation, bright did shine.
No porlant Ear he had, or did allow
Susurrous Tongues in any. To outdo,
I mean o'r-reach his Neighbors, never he
Was seen, or known, or found. True Charity
Kept residence in's Soul; H'was firm and strong
As Rock or Mountain to his Friend. Among
Ten thousand thousands not his second. What
Remains now? Perfection. He was that.
J. J.
-- JOHNSON, Semper bonos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt.
FINIS.

