DAMNABLE HERESY DISCOVERED, AND THE Head of GODS CHURCH UNCOVERED, AND THE
Spirit of Man from the True Light DISTINGUISHED, According to the Scriptures of
TRUTH, AND Testimony of SAINTS.

Every plant that my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up, and
every plant that bears not fruit in Christ, shall be taken away, says the
Amen.

Mat. 15. 13. Joh. 15. 3. Printed 1672.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
Lthough the Earth is full of the Majesty of the Lord, and his presence is in
every place, etc. Yet in the Vision of the Lord I see, as it is noted in the
Scriptures of Truth, that the Lord is as a Stranger in the Earth, despised by
man, and abhorred by the Nations; Yea by them that do evil is he hated now, as
in the days of old, etc. Jer. 14. 8. Isa. 53. 3. Isa. 49. 7. Joh. 3. 20. and
although now to many his light is come, and his glory is now revealed, which is
for Salvation to the ends of the Earth; Yet darkness covers the Earth, and
gross darkness the People: yea them which profess much love with their mouths,
and draw near with their lips in a profession of God and Christ, without them,
etc. Yet because of their denying Obedience of Faith, to that which may be
known of God within themselves, even the life of Jesus in their mortal bodies,
that is the true light which lights every man that comes into the world, Jo.
1. 9. and the Salvation of all that obey that holy thing, Luke 1. 34. I say
again, for their not Obedience of Faith to that holy thing, darkness covers
them, etc. In the days of old, the Holy One was in the midst of the people,
Jer. 14. 9. as he is now, and the holy Prophets called them to the most high,
but none at all would exalt him, Hos. 11. 7. Yea the Lord himself testifies,
as Scripture witnesses, that he was the Holy One in the midst of them, Hos.
11. 9. Behold at that time they were Idolaters, sacrificing to Balaam, and
burning Incense to graven Images, Hos. 11. 2. etc. Now this may serve to prove,
that the Lord is in the midst of them that are Idolaters. Mark that, etc. It
has been, and now is the manner of the Sons of men, when true Prophets call
them to that the Lor testifies unto, as Scriptue witnesses, (to wit) that he
is the Holy One in the midst of them, and that that which may be known of God
is manifest in them, Romans 1. 19. etc. to belie him, saying, it is not he, Jer.
5. 12. Isa. 65. 2. Romans 10. 21. But these were false Prophets that were amongst
the people, that belyed the Lord, 2 Pet. 2. even so now there are false
Teachers amonst the people, as may appear by this following Treatise, that deny
and belly the Lord, saying, that the Light which every man is lighted withal,
is not Christ, but man's spirit. Mark, the holy Scripture testifies, that John
bore testimony to the Truth, and his testimony was that that was the true Light
which lights every man that comes into the world, and that he was in the
world before me, says he, John 1. 15. And Christ says, as Scripture
testifies, John 8. 12. Mark, By world understand men in wickedness: And
Solomon testifies, that the poor and deceitful man the Lord lights both their
eyes, etc. Now this may serve to prove, that Christ was in the world before
John the Baptist, and that the light which every man was enlightened withal, was
Christ the Holy One in the midst of them, etc. Now is not this most damnable
Heresy to deny the Lord? The Apostle Peter foreseeing the false Teachers that
should be amongst the people, says, they shall bring in damnable Heresy, even
denying the Lord that bought them, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of. Which thing is now made manifest, (to wit) the folly of them
that deny the Light within to be the Lord: That so they may proceed no farther,
are thesE lines written, etc. I knowing from the Lord the deceivableness of
such Teachers, would persuade men from hearing those instructions, which cause
them to err from the words of knowledge, Prove. 19. 27. Jer. 23. 16., etc. and
to hearken to Gods wisdom, and her teachers, who call to men to turn from
darkness, (to wit) false Ministry, and to turn to the light within, which is
the true Ministry, and from the power of Satan unto God, even to that of him in
them, that Holy thing, that he may turn them from the evil of their ways and
doings, which is a blessed State, etc. For without Repentance all shall perish,
Luke 13. 3. etc. For friends, know, that though Christ tasted death for every
man, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the First
Testament, etc. Yet no Scripture says, he tasted death for every sin; because
that Repentance and Remission of sin is to be preached in his name for
obedience of Faith unto Repentance, without which there is no Remission of
sins, nor an Inheritance amongst them that are sanctified through Faith in
Christ Jesus, nor knowing the Lord, whom to know is life eternal, John 17. 3.
But such knowledge is not to be attained unto whilst men are in sin, or in such
a Faith, that they cannot be freed from sin on this side the Grave, or that
Revelation is ceased, because without Repentance there is no Remission of sins,
and without Revelation there is no knowing of the Lord. It is written no man
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom he will reveal him. Again, there
is no promise that Christ will manifest himself to them that are in sin, but on
the contrary, John 14. 21, etc. Adam for one sin was drove forth of Paradise,
and certain it is; Mark it, that no man in sin shall enter into it again (to
wit) Paradise, etc. The seed of Abraham after the Flesh, when Repentance for
remission of sins was preached, then they said, we have Abraham to our Father,
Mat. 3. 9: Joh. 8. 39. denying obedience of Faith to Repentance. And do not
many, called by the name of Christians, now say, we are Christians from being
Baptized with water, which never knew obedience of Faith to Repentance, etc.
Behold Abraham's Son in the Parable is in Hell, yet he was a Rich man, etc. and
was not that for denying obedience of Faith to Repentance, Luke 13. 3. etc.
Lazarus that was a Beggar, is in Abraham's bosom. A word to the wise is
sufficient, etc. Finally the Lord has sworn, and an Oath was for the
confirmation of an end of strife, touching them that do always err in their
hearts and do not know Gods ways, they shall never enter into his Rest, Psalm.
95. 11. Heb. 4. 5, etc. Know Gods decrees are not now to making, although now
declared, etc. That which is required of all men, and all men bound to it, upon
the penalty of perishing, etc. is Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, according to the Order of the God
of Order, Luke 22. 24. As the Apostle Paul testifies, when he said, I have
kept back nothing which is profitable unto you; testifying both to the Jews,
and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, Act. 20. 21. Selah.

Here follows a Demonstration of the Affirmation of Thomas Hicks, that was a
Baptist Teacher in the Borough of Devizes, at a Meeting in that Town, touching
the Light in man; with the Reasons why his Affirmations are to be opposed and
denied.
He that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his neighbor comes and
searches him out. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others may fear.
Prove. 28. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 20.
THomas Hicks then and there affirmed, that the Light within was man's Spirit,
which did convince them of Sin, and that God breathed it into Adam, and that it
was in every man: And that they which did worship the Light within, were
Idolaters and breakers of Gods Commandments; for said he, the Light within is
not Christ's, but man's Spirit; for whilst Christ was figured out in Types, he
was not actually in being: and said, that the word by which God made the world,
was not the Christ. This Affirmation I had given me in writing by his
approbation, by another Baptist Teacher one J. W. at the same time, which
afterward in a short time I put in Print, in a Book called [The Cause of
Causes declared] and never by him denied, etc. His Affirmations consisting of
many particulars at that time of their Meeting, I only denied this particular,
(to wit) Whilst Christ was figured out in Types, he was not actually in being:
And then I brought these sayings, noted in holy Scriptures, as a Reason why I
did deny that particular: First, Christ saying, (to wit) Before Abraham was, I
am. Secondly, John the Baptist witnessed, (to wit) he was in the world before
me. Thirdly, Stephen's testimony, This is he that was in the Church in the
Wilderness. Fourthly, the Apostle Paul saying, (to wit) They did all eat and
drink of the Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, etc.
These Scriptures I brought, to prove that Christ was in being, when he was
figured out in Types; Joh. 8. 58. Acts 7. 38. 1 Cor. 10. 4. And then I
concluded, saying, That their sayings were true, but his was false. Then he
said, that he would prove it: using many words of what he had taken notice of
in James Naylors Book, [called Love to the Lost] by which he darkened the people
by words he uttered without knowledge for a long time; and then said, that he
had proved his Affirmation, etc. I then denied it, and said, I should oppose it
in Print; but was hindered hitherto by reason of my being persecuted and
imprisoned. But now according to my promise I have committed it unto the Press,
for the Truths sake, and the peoples information. I have divided his
Affirmation into eight particulars, and shall through Gods assistance touch
upon each briefly. And first, to the first Affirmation, (to wit) the Light
within is man's Spirit, this I do deny for these reasons.

First, because the holy Scripture says, the Spirit of man is the Candle of
the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. Secondly, no holy Scripture says, that the Light
within is man's Spirit. Thirdly, it is written, that the wicked rebel against
the Light, Job 24. 13. Mark, over man's Spirit man has power, except he be like
a City without Walls, or broken down, Prove. 25. 28. If so, then man cannot
rebel against his own Spirit. It is written, Take heed to your spirit, and let
none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth, Mal. 2. 15. Mark, it
cannot be properly said to a man that has a wife, if he be unnatural to her,
that he rebels against his wife, because she is his Inferior. Even so to a man
that deals treacherously with his own Spirit: It cannot be properly said, that
he does rebel against his Spirit. Therefore the Light that the wicked do rebel
against, is not man's Spirit, but a holy thing that is above man in its
excellency, or man's Spirit, because rebellion is a rising up against a
Superior in Authority, etc. Again, man's Spirit is the Candle of the Lord:
Mark, a Candle singly considered is darkness, and but a receptible subject to
receive light, which when it has received it, gives of what it has received,
(to wit) Light. Again, the light which the Candle receives may be put out, and
yet the Candle remain as before it was lighted. Even so the Spirit of the Lord
by man may be put out or quenched, and yet man's Spirit remain in his body, and
the Light too, as a Candle whose light is put out, etc. How often is the Candle
of the wicked put out, Job 21. 17. By what is written it may appear, according
to holy Scriptures, for of them we are to think above men, 1 Cor. 4. 6, etc.
That the Light within is not made Spirit, but it is the Lord, as says the
Prophet David, the Lord is my light and my salvation, Psalm. 27. 1. That was the
true light which lights every man that comes into the world, of which John
bore witness, that was before him, John. 1. 10, 15. as David witnessed before,
etc. By what is written it may appear, that Thomas Hicks has spoken evil of
the holy thing, Luke 1. 35. and that he knows him not by his first
particular, etc.

I shall now touch upon his Second Particular (to wit) that Men's spirit did
convince them of sin. This I do deny: First, because no holy Scripture says so:
Secondly, because the holy Scripture says, that the Spirit (speaking of the
Holy Ghost) shall convince the world of sin, that is, meaning wickedness.
Thirdly, That the Law is Spiritual, by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, and
that the Law of God is light; And that all things when they are rebuked are
manifested by the light, Ephesians. 5. 13. Prove. 6. 23. Psalm. 19. 7. And that the Law
of God is perfect, converting the Soul, making wise the simple, etc. Mark that
which convinces of sin and converteth the soul, etc. Must be of a Divine
Nature, for there is nothing beneath, Gods Nature can convert a soul and make
wise the simple, But this the inspiration of the Almighty does; Job. 32. 8,
etc. It is that which gives understanding for that is perfect, and it is in
man as a Law to its work, convincing man and converting the souls of them that
believe, etc. By what is written it may appear in his second particular, he
knows not the second Adam who is a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. From the
spirit of man, etc. Much more might be said, but I will pass to his Third
Particular (to wit) that God breathed it (to wit) man's spirit into Adam. This I
do deny for this reason, no where the Scripture says so. Secondly, The
Scripture testifies that the Spirit of man was by God given to man, and that
man has power over it, (as is before excepted) Eceles. 12. 7. Prove. 25. 28.
Therefore man's Spirit cannot be that Spirit which God breathed into Adam by
which man became a living soul, for these Reasons man's Spirit is mutable and
may be defiled and imprisoned, etc. Captivated by man's submitting to the Devil,
and treacherous dealing with it, Mal. 2. 14, etc. But man has not power over
the breath of God that God breathed into Adam, by which man became a living
Soul, neither can the wicked one touch that (to wit) the Breath of God: By it
were the Heavens made and all the Host of them, Psalm. 37. 6. The breath of our
Nostrills the anointed Lord, Lam. 4. 20. by which man became a Living Soul,
that is the true light which lights every man which comes into the World:
Adam was a man, and his Spirit the candle, and he was lighted as it is employed
by holy Scriptures, for every man is lighted, etc. By what is written it may
appear that man's Spirit was not breathed into Adam, but given of God to man,
and that the breath that God breathed into Adam was another Spirit, etc. By
what is written it may appear, that Thomas Hicks knows not that Spirit by
which man became a living Soul or the second Adam that is made a quickening
Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45, etc. Fourthly, He says it was in every man, in every
man is man's spirit, or else man's body would be dead: But man's spirit is not the
light within, as has before been proved, and yet the light shines in man, for
it shines in darkness and is through all, and the manifestation of the Spirit
is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. If it be hid it is hid
in them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3. Yea, in the midst of Idolators is the holy
One, as before has been proved, Hos. 11. 8, etc. Fifthly, Thomas Hicks says,
That they that did worship the light within, were Idolaters and breakers of
Gods Commandments. This I do deny for these Reasons, No holy Scripture says
so. Secondly, Those Gentiles that had not the Law in a Book, without them, did
by nature the things contained in the Law, and then they knew God, whom no man
can know, except he keeps his Commandments, says John, He that says he
knows God and keeps not his Commandments is a Liar, 1 John 2. 4. Now Paul
says, the Gentiles knew God, Romans 1. 21. because, says he, That which may be
known of God is manifest in them, for God has shown it to them, Romans 1. 19,
etc. If so, then they did by nature the things contained in the Law, and at
that time they were Disciples of the Lord: For the promise of the Manifestation
of the Lord is only to the Disciples, not to the world, Jo. 14. 21, etc. To
this Thomas Hicks must confess, for the Scripture cannot be broken, etc. Again,
It is written that when they knew God they glorified him, not as God, neither
were they thankful, neither did they like to retain God in their knowledge, but
changed the truth for a lie, (to wit) for false gods and false worships, etc.
And then they were Idolaters: But when they did things by nature contained in
the Law, then they knew God and were no Idolaters, etc. By what is written it
may appear, that they which worship the light within, when they worshipped the
light or divine nature were not Idolaters, etc. Sixthly, Thomas Hicks says,
that the light within is not Christ, but man's spirit. That the light within is
not man's spirit before is proved. That Christ is the light, and that the light
is come into the World Christ testifies himself, John 3. 19. and many are
witnesses that do believe, for he that does believe has the Witness in
himself, 1 John 5. 10. That the Son of God is come and has given us, yea
thousands of us understanding to know him, etc. And this is life eternal to
know the Only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17. 3. Glory be
to God for ever, and for evermore, Amen. Seventhly, Thomas Hicks says, That
whilst Christ was figured out in Types, he was not actually in being. This I do
deny, for this Reason. No holy Scripture says so. Secondly, Christ says,
before Abraham was I am, and John says, he was in the world before me, as
before is proved. And David says, Why do the Heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing, the Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers
take Council together against the Lord, and against his anointed, Psalm. 2. 12.
Again, he says, the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I
make thine enemies my footstool. Who is this that David in spirit calls Lord,
if not Christ? Again, Peter speaking of Christ, says, he went and preached
unto the spirits in Prison, which sometime were disobedient in the days of
Noah. Again, it is written, he is the head of the Church, and that all things
are made by him: If so, by what is written it may appear, that Christ was
before the World was, and was actual whilst he was figured out in Types, etc.
Oh! Is not this man a great Liar. Eighthly, Thomas Hicks says, That the word
by which God made the World, was not the Christ. This I do deny, for these
Reasons; No holy Scripture says so. Secondly, Because God made the Worlds by
his Son, Heb. 1. 2. Again, It is written, by the Word of the Lord were the
Heavens made, Psalm. 33. 6. Again, his name is called the Word of God. Again, In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;
all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made: In him was
life, and the life was the light of men, etc. Mark then, the light of men was
from the beginning the Word, by which God made the Worlds, etc. It is written,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, are One. Oh! The Ignorance of this
man: he denies the light within to be Christ. Again, he denies Christ to be
actually in being whilst he was figured out in Types. Again, does he not deny
the present being of Christ in the World, in denying the light within to be the
Christ? Again, does he not deny the everlasting being of Christ, in saying the
Word by which God made the Worlds is not the Christ? Again, does not he deny
him that all the Prophets give their Testimony to? that whosoever believes on
him shall not perish, but have everlasting life, etc. Thou wandering Star
Repent, or else for thee the midst of darkness is reserved for ever. Remember
me, a Friend to thy soul has warned thee, whom thou know to have been a
great sufferer for bearing my Testimony against deceit, Robert West, etc. This
following Question I do propose, with the consequence that will follow, to the
end that the Nations may be no longer deceived by the Antichristian Teachers.

Quest. If the life of Jesus Christ that lights every man that comes into
the World, was not the head of Gods Church and the salvation of it, but the
flesh and blood that he pertook of; then whether from the beginning until the
time that he took on him that flesh or vail, Heb. 10. 20. the Church of God had
any head or salvation? Again, if that flesh or vail of Christ was the head of
Gods Church and salvation of it, then when that was put to death, whether the
Church had either head or salvation, etc. if the life of Jesus Christ was not
the head and salvation of it? For Christ was put to death in the Flesh, but
quickened in the Spirit, and raised again, and is ascended up into Heaven, where
he was before, even the second Adam that is made a quickening Spirit, that he
might fill all things, and now is he as he was before, the searcher of all
Hearts, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. even Jesus that was dead and is alive, and behold he
lives for evermore, Revel. 2. 8. To him give all the Prophets Witness, That
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. This
is the Root of Jesse, and Offspring of David, the bright and morning star,
whose goings have been from everlasting, which now is the Ensign of the
Gentiles that is lifted up. To him shall be the Gathering of the People, and
his rest is glorious, as is written, Isa. 11. 10. To him be Glory for ever, and
for evermore, Amen.

Council for all those whose simplicity is betrayed by subtilty.
REturn, O friends, unto your rest,
And cease from errors; that is best.
No peace without the tree of life, --
In false conceivings stands the strife.
Be not of them who strike at flame,
For to have their desire;
Such often like the flies consume,
By striking at the fire.
God does his Angels Spirits make,
They Minister to man;
His Ministers are flames of fire; --
See, strike you not at them:
Lest as the Flies that strike at flame,
For to have their desire,
You like the Flies consume your selves,
By striking at the fire.
POSTSCRIPT.
A word of Advice to all Teachers, that so they may take heed of what Spirit
they follow; and also to Hearers, that they may take heed to what words they
hear.
Friends,
THere are three Spirits in man, and they are three moveable Powers or
Substances singly considered, (to wit) the Spirit of God, that is the Light;
and the Spirit of Man, that is the Candle; and the Spirit of the Devil, and
that tempts to Sin, etc. It is a high knowledge to know the motion of the Lords
Spirit, from the motion of Man's Spirit, and the Devils motion from them both.
Mark, Man may speak, as Paul did, when the Lord speaks not, nor Satan moves Man
to speak, 1 Cor. 7. 12. Now if the Teacher believes there are but two Spirits
in Man, then he may follow his own Spirit, as the foolish Prophets did, Ezekiel.
13. 3. saying, Hear the word of the Lord, when he has seen nothing: For know,
man's Spirit opens not the mysteries of the Lord, nor the holy Scriptures, but
the Spirit of the Lord does, etc. Now when men shall Teach, that have not
received the Spirit of the Lord, as that no man can receive that is in sin and
wickedness, because the Holy Spirit will not be touched by the wicked; It is
written, the wicked touches him not, 1 John 5. 18. Again, the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God; and for his not receiving the
things of the Spirit of God, he cannot know them: the reason is, because he
denies Obedience of Faith to that which may be known of God, that is within
himself, by which all that do yield Obedience of Faith to, do come to
Repentance, as it is written, Turn at my reproof, and I will pour out my Spirit
upon you, and make known my mind unto you, Prove. 1. 23, etc. I say again, when
men shall teach, before they have yielded Obedience of Faith to that which may
be known of God within themselves, by which true Repentance is wrought, then
they do utter words without knowledge, and then the Spirit of the Lord, which
is the Testimony of Jesus, and Spirit of Prophecy, etc. will stir in the Lords
Servants, and witness against them, and then the Servant of the Lord for so
doing they will hate, and account him a man of a contentious Spirit: Of this I
am a witness. Therefore take heed what Spirit you follow, and what Doctrine you
hear: For every plant that my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted
up, and all Cedar works shall be uncovered, and the Lord himself shall alone be
exalted. For the Ministry of the fullness of the dispensation of Christ is come,
and the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of
the Sun as the shining of seven Days: Yea the Lord will now be the light of
his people, and the days of their mourning shall be ended, Isa. 60. 20. Amen.

WE who in scorn are called Quakers, often times are denied to be reasoned with,
except we will own the holy Scriptures to be the ground of faith and rule of
life; for all such are these lines written to consider of. Do you own the Holy
Scriptures to the ends whereunto they were written? and to the ends whereunto
the Lord appointed them to serve? We do, etc. If you do, let them be Witnesses
between us, who are in scorn called Quakers, and you, touching the ground of
Faith and rule of Life, etc. The holy Scriptures testify, that Jesus is the
Author and Finisher of the Faith of Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Joseph
and Moses, with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, as the Author to the Hebrews
Witnesses, Heb. 11. 12 2. And as other Scriptures testify to him, give all
the Prophets Witness, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Now is there any holy Scripture says, that Scripture is
the ground of Faith; if so, bring that Scripture, ye Baptized people, or be
silent for ever; for it is written, We are not to think of men above that which
is written, and the Spirits of the Prophets, are Subject to the Prophets. What
Scripture was the rule of the life of Abel, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham? I know
not of any Scripture that they had; It is employed by holy Scripture, that they
were lighted by the true light; for every man was lighted that came into the
World, and that Abraham saw Christ's Day, and that the light from on high did
visit men to guide their feet in the way of peace: Was not that the rule of
life, and guide of their youth, etc. The Jews said to Christ, that they were
Moses his Disciples, and Christ said, there was one that did accuse them, even
Moses in whom you trust: So say I to you, that do say the Scripture is your
gro^nd of Faith, and rule of Life. The holy Scripture testifies against you:
You say to a single person You (...) and call the Months and Days of the Week
not as the holy men of old did: What rule have you in Scripture to say to a
single person, You: and the Months of the Year and Days of the Week as you do?
Do you not follow the Custom of the Heathen, of whom the Lord has said, Learn
not the way of the Heathen. It Is written, When the Lord shall assemble the
Kingdoms, to pour upon them his Indignation, then he will return to the People
a pure Language, that they may call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him
with one consent, said, Zeph. Chap. 3. verse 9.

FINIS.

