THE WELCHMENS PRAVE RESOLUTION: IN DEFENSE OF Her KING, Her PRITISH
Parliament, and Her Country, against te malignant party.

Subscribed by Shon, ap William, ap Richard, ap Thomas, ap Meredith, ap Evans,
ap Loyd, ap Price, ap Hugh, ap Rowland, ap Powel, ap Shinkin, ap Shones.

LONDON, Printed for J. Harrison, June 7. 1642.

THE WELCHMENS RESOLUTION.
SInce her toe understand, tat te enemy toe approach and treaten not only to
cut her troat cowartly, put also to hinter te procetings of te Pritish
Parliament, her tink it high time to look apout her. And tough her coms as
fierce as a creat Lion to her, and look as high as Pawls; yet if her Welsh
Plood pe once up, by Cods plutter a Nails her will overlook her foe, like her
Welsh Mountains, and squeze her proud enemy in te name of Saint Taffey.

Werefore since it vas ever regorded, and kanown, tat her Countrymen in aul her
perecrinations and ampulations, vas always magnanimous and courageous, and
would never kill her enemy, before her had calenged her, and given her notice
tereof, and so by consekence her became always valiantly victorious, her toe
terefore make kanown her Resolution to te hole Urld.

Tat wereas diverse strange, and underfull Plots have been couspired against te
State, her will venture every trop of ploud her has in her pody to find out
tose plotters, and by Cod if her find her, her vill cut her in pieces like
cause bobby, and make her a preakfast to te Crows.

Tat her toe protest her love to her King from her heart, and vill kill all
tose, tat are enemies to his Majesty, yet her is vise enough to make no
Protestation tereof, and be voted a Traitor. Her vas wit enough i will warrant her.

Tat tough her vas love her King, yet her could never apide te malignant party.
Put py Saint Taffey her could never know, wat it is malignant party vas: her tink
it is a Welsh English praise, for her could never understand it in her life.
Put because every pody speak of te malignant party, her must speak too for
company sake someting, terfore her wish, tat all factious Roundheads, and te
malignant party were hanged both togeter on a Welsh Gibbot, tat her King may be
troubled no longer with tem; oterwise her vill take some speedy course with tem
both.

Her is resolved to tickle to Irish Rogues, and if her continue in Repellion,
till her run home and fet her Pill, and her Welsh hook, her vill make all her
pones in her pody to quake, like a quotidian Ague, and if her toe not gape to
her for mercy as wide as a Pillinf^ate Oyster-wifes mouth, by Cot her vlll
squize te Rebellious Rogues to some purpose, unless tey fly like Finches, and
run away like a Young Suckling, py Cod her will follow her with a huntret
Horse: and if her leave any good Actions behind tem (which I am confident vill
be very few) ten her vill send tem to te Red-Pull, and te Fortune, pecause tey
want good Action. Tat her will fortify her self against te long-feared
Insurrection in Monmouth, for tere ^re a multitude of Papists in tat Shire, and
if her fetch her Pill, and her Welsh Hook, and her two edged pack-sword, her
vill carbon^toe te Rogues if tey repel: and tey shall never pe permitted by any
kanown toleration to kill so many of her Countrymen by the half, as were
killed lately in Saint Shorges Fields of Horse and Kine, py the malignant
party: For peing Horse, I conceive tem to pe te malignant party; put if tey hat
pin Asses, he shoult have sworn ten tey had been Roundheads.

Tat her is Resolved to have te Book of Common Prayer in referent ant pious
observation, and tough some turpulent Scesmaticall and Amsterdamean-pated
Coxcombes toe call it Pottage, py her consent, tose tat vill eat no Pottage,
shall eat no meat, wose stomachs are so contentious.

Tat her was in preparation a long time, and is now fully resolved to raise an
Army against her terrible enemy Little-eyes, one of the malignant party, who is
a creater eyesore unto her, ten Cheapside-Crosse is to te Roundheads, who
does not only consume her Corns, and te Fruits, but also devoureth her
Cause-bobby, and tosted Sheese, which makes her Welsh plood rise hot and violent
against tem: her has terfore fortified her Garrison against her Little-eyed
Enemy: and her calenged her enemy once pefore into te open Field; put as soon
as te Alarm sounded, her enemy like a very cowart ran away: put now her has
taken more deliperate consultashons apout her, and has callet a learned
Council of War; and it was conclutet on, Tat her shall encompasse her enemy
rount, and by Cod her will not leave Little-eyes alive, if her can overcome her
by strength, or catch her by Policy, wereof her has very much: and let her
enemy run, her can run after her, i will warrant her.

Her is Resolvet to make War also against her oter Enemy Robbin-Runhole, who
eat up and root out all her Onions and Leekes, ant spoil her Mountains.

Finally, her has mate an apsolute Resolution to levy War against Tom
Pack-piter, a little nimble Shentleman with a plack page, a pox on her for a
plout-tirsty Tyrant, one of the malignant party, and a creat enemy to te State
of te Poty, her cannot sleep for it is Rogue pincheth, and stingeth so terribly,
her can neither walk or sit peaceably, her punishes her pack so intollerably,
so tat her cannot be at quiet, poth Night and Day, this Tom Pack-piter toth so
torment her: her is terefore intentet to pring all te Ammunition of Arms
against her Enemy, put her know her to be a cowar^, for her alwares comes
behind her, and tare not come before her face; yet sometimes te Rogue shows
her base condishon, for her can no sooner turn her pack, but nimble Tom vill
apuse her before her face: her is terfore resolved to curb in her insolences,
and if her can catch her, by Cod her vill preake her neck down from te top of
a Mountain.

Tese are her Countrymens Resolutions, which being very famous and commendable,
her have tought recusite and necessary to declare unto te hole Urld: and
withal her has tought is as pertinent to make kanowne, wat her is Resolved,
wat not to be, and wat not to do, as to resolve, wat to be and wat to do.

First, her is resolved to pe no Deputy, for her love to keep her Neck on her
shoulders petter then so.

Item, Tat her ville be no Pishop, for fear her sold be lent to te Tower
tirteen togeter, like a Pakers tozen.

Item, Her vill be no Judge, for her kanowes tat ten her should hang all
Prownists, and so consequently be a Delinquent, put her has wit enough to keep
out of te Tower, Loy ye tere now.

Item, Her vill pe no Papist, pecause her vould not be called te malignant
party, or supposed to pe an Irish Repel, or imagined to be a contriver te
destructive demolishon of te State, or an enemy to te Parliament.

Lastly, her vould pe no Roundhead, pecause her vould love her King, and vould
not pe (like tem) Enemies to God and te Urld, put lovers of te Flesh, and te
Devil, who is newly turned Roundhead, with wom her toe leave all tose factious
Pretten.

FINIS.

