A VINDICATION OF Anne Wentworth, TENDING To the better preparing of all People
for Her Larger Testimony, which is making ready for Public View. Published
according to the Will of God, and Direction of Charity. By Anne Wentworth.

Be still and know that I am God. I will be exalted among the Heathen: I will
be exalted in the Earth. The Lord of Host is with us, the God of Jacob is our
Refuge. Psalm. 46. 10. 11. To which is annexed: A Letter written by an eminent
Christian, concerning the said Anne Wentworth, and directed to the several
Congregations of the Anabaptists, and their respective Pastors. As also a Song
of Triumph by the said Anne Wentworth, a Daughter of Sion, newly delivered from
the Captivity of Babylon, etc.

How should we Sing the Lords Song in a strange Land? Psalm. 137. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Where is God my Maker that gives Songs in the Night? Job* 35. 10. Let the
Saints be joyful in Glory, let them Sing upon their Bed* Psalm. 149. 5. Printed
in the Year 1677.

THe Great Searcher of hearts has seen, neither is it unknown to several
Christians in and about this City of London, or to the Consciences of my very
Enemies, what Severe and Cruel persecutions I have sustained for the space of
Eighteen years, from the unspeakable Tyrannies of an Hard-hearted Yoak-Fellow:
and since, from the bitter zeal of several eminent professors of Religion,
commonly called Baptists, Who have most unjustly and unchristian-like caused
all their pretended Church power to wait upon and serve the wrath of my
oppressors; and who not being able truly to charge me with any sin committed
against God that called for such a proceeding, have declared me an Heathen, and
a Publican for matters of Conscience, in which I was faithful to the Teachings
of God, according to the Scriptures of Truth, and obeyed the voice of the Lord,
who called me out from amongst them, that I might not partake of those Terrible
Plagues, and dreadful judgments which are coming upon all Formalists,
Hyppocrites, and profane Persons, who are all of them the Inhabitants of this
Earth; and who (however separated from one another now, by outward forms, and
observations, or inward notions and opinions, in that particular and great day
of the Lord, which is coming upon this Nation, will be found to be in one
Spirit, and Principle.

My cause in this respect, being committed to Almighty God, the Righteous Judge
of all, unto whom I have appealed, and who has accepted my appeal, and is
speedily arising on my behalf, I will say nothing of it here. But only acquaint
thee, whoever thou art, that read these few lines, that it has pleased my
most gracious God and Father ( who abounds toward his Children in all wisdom
and prudence of Love) to turn all the fierce wrath of man, which has been
against me, into his own praise: And to change all the evil mine Enemies have
thought and done against me, into a sweet design for good; making all my
unspeakable sufferings from man, my wonderful supports and deliverances from
God, a figure of his intended dispensations toward his Enemies, and people in
this Nation: Revealing to me how Babylon the Mother of Fornications is in her
inward principle and Spirit, as also in her outward practices and pollutions,
spread over the whole face of the Christian world; and every where found among
the litteral and outward Churches: How her delusions, forceries, and
fornications are here most bewitching and dangerous, because she here comes
forth as the mystery of iniquity, dressing and adorning her self in all the
forms and notions of the heavenly things, sitting, and showing her self in the
Temple of God: As also revealing to me, that the judgments which are determined
to come upon her, should begin at the House of God, the Formal Carnal Notional
Christians, the worshipers in the outward Court: And that the flood of the
Divine vengeance having swep't away what is to be destroyed there, the Rod of
Gods anger should be thrown into unquenchable fire, and the indignation of the
Lord should end in the utter desolation, Ruin and confusion of the Profane
world and grosser Babylon. And that these things are at the very door, and
ready to enter upon us as an Armed Man.

And because the mouth of iniquity is opened against me, and I bear the
reproaches of the mighty ones wherewith they have reproached, the footsteps of
the Lord and his deallings with me; representing me as a Proud, Passionate,
Revengful, Discontented, and Mad Woman, and as one that has unduly published
things to the prejudice and scandal of my Husband; and that have wickedly left
him: designing (according to the craftiness and subtlety of the old Serpent in
all Ages) by Marring my face, to darken and disappoint my Testimony from the
Lord, which I am with all convenient speed making ready for public view. In
great tenderness to all people concerned in my Testimony, and that they may be
the better prepared to receive the same when it shall be laid before them; I do
in the presence of the most holy and Jealous God, who is our God, and yet a
consuming fire; and in a deep sense of the manifold weaknesses, infirmities,
and passions I am subject too, hereby solemnly declare.

That I am not conscious to my self of any spiritual pride in this matter, nor
in the least desirous to have any appearance, or to make any noise in this
World. Nor durst I for ten thousand worlds pretend to come in the Name of God,
or in the pride and forwardness of my own Spirit put my self into this work,
without his express command concerning it, and his Spirit and presence with me
in it; having learnt what unprofitable things the Staff and Mantle are, without
the God of the Prophets: how dangerous and desperate an attempt it is, to put
the Commission and Authority of God upon the Dreams and Visions of my own
heart. I am well assured, if spiritual pride, the eagerness of my own spirit,
any worldly design, or any other delusion whatsoever has engaged me in my
present Testimony, the holy God will discover me herein, and take open
vengeance on all my Inventions, my Idols, and strange Gods; and that this
matter will prove unto me like the waters of Jealousy unto the suspected
person. And I have also through the tender mercies of God, the riches of an
assurance, that my God who has been so many years Emptying me from Vessel to
Vessel, breaking me all to pieces in myself, and making me to become as nothing
before him; and who has by many and great Tribulations been bowing my own will,
and fitting me for his service, and who having taught me to tremble at his
word, has thereby called and commanded me into this work, when I was as a thing
that is not in my own eyes, and pleaded with him to be excused, I have I say,
the riches of an assurance, that this God will be with me; and however the
Spirit of prophecy in a poor weak Woman shall be despised by the wise and
prudent of this world, yet Wisdom is justified of her Children; and that God
who has commanded me to go forth in his Name, will by a Divine power go before
me, making way for me, and subduing the Spirits before me which I am to deal
with, and will also by a Divine presence, support me in the midst of all those
sufferings his work can bring me into. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings
God has ordained strength, because of his Enemies, that he might quell the
Enemy and the avenger, Psalm. 8. 2.

And I declare, I have no wrath, discontent or revenge in my Spirit against the
person of my Husband, or of any of his abettets; but am taught by the
forgiveness of God, freely to forgive all the Injuries he has done me; and my
hearts desire and prayer to God* (who can alone change the heart) is, that he
may be converted, and saved; and I bow my Soul to the Father of lights, that
the Eyes of all my persecutors may be opened; some of which I judge to be the
Lords People, however acted in this matter by a Zeal without knowledge. God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.

And however I am censured and reproached by persons who judge only according
to outward appearance, but not Righteous judgment, that I have unduly left my
Husband; I do for the satisfaction of all plain hearted ones that may be
offended at their reports herein, Declare, first, That it would be very easy
for me, from the great Law of self-preservation to justify my present absence
from my Earthly Husband to all persons who have learned to judge of Good and
Evil, not only according to the outward Act, but the inward Spirit and
Principle; and who have tenderness enough, duly to weigh the various Tempers of
minds, and the different circumstances of Bodies: Forasmuch as the Natural
constitution of my mind and Body, being both considered, He has in his
barbarous actions toward me, a many times over-done such things, as not only
in the Spirit of them will be one day judged a murdering of, but had long since
really proved so, if God had not wonderfully supported, and preserved me. But
my natural life, through the springing up of a better, not being otherwise
considerable, then as it is my duty to preserve it in a subserviency to the
will and service of that God, whose I am in Spirit, Soul, and Body. I will not
urge any thing of this nature as my defense upon this occasion, having learnt
through the mercy of God, not to be afraid of him, who can only kill the Body,
but can do no more. I do therefore secondly, in the fear of him who can kill
both Soul and Body, further declare, That I was forced to fly to preserve a
life more precious than this natural one; and that it was necessary to the
peace of my Soul, to absent my self from my earthly Husband, in obedience to my
Heavenly Bridegroom, who called and commanded me (in a way too terrible, too
powerful to be denied) to undertake and finish a work, which my earthly husband
in a most cruel manner hindered me from performing, seizing, and running away
with my Writings. And however man judges me in this action, yet I am satisfied,
that I have been obedient to the Heavenly Vision herein, not consulting with
flesh and blood. All the clouds of afflictions, troubles, sorrows; and deaths,
upon the outward man, are nothing, compared with those of the inward man; when
the life of our Souls is angry, and withdraws himself, cutting off the sweet
beams of a spiritual communion between himself and us. This was my case, and I
am not afraid or ashamed to say my Soul's beloved has abundantly owned me in
this matter: and whilst men have done all they can to break my heart, he has
bound up my Soul in the bundle of Life and Love, and he pleads my cause, and
takes my part, and has spoken by his Word, with power and authority from
Heaven, saying, I shall abide with him, and he will abide with me, and come and
Supp with me, and never leave me, nor forsake me: And he bids me take no
thought what I shall eat, what I shall drink, or wherewith I shall be clothed,
but cast all my care upon him, for he cares for me. And I am enabled in his
power to role my self upon him; and my heart is fixed, trusting in him; and
comforted with his word, in which he has caused me to hope, having no
confidence in the Arm of Flesh, knowing that the Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof; and that he knows all my weaknesses, and wants, and my
willingness to work, so far as he inables me, that my own hands may administer
to my necessity, that I may not be burdensome to any. And he has assured me,
that the man of the earth shall oppress no more; no more shall I return to be
under the hands of the hard-hearted Persecutors, unless he become a new-man, a
changed man, a man sensible of the wrong he has done me, with his fierce looks,
bitter words, sharp tongue, and cruel usage. And I do further declare, That in
the true reason of the case, I have not left my Husband, but he me. That I do
own every Law and Command of God in the letter of his word, to be right and
true; and do submit to every rule given forth by the Spirit of God, to govern
the relation of Man and Wife in the Lord. And that I always stand ready to
return to my Husband, or to welcome him to me: (and have signified so much to
him by several Christian friends) provided I may have my just and necessary
liberty to attend a more then ordinary call and command of God to publish the
things which concern the peace of my own Soul, and of the whole Nation. In
which work, I stand not in my own will, but in the will of him who has sent,
and sealed me; as the day will very quickly declare, and decide this matter
between me, and my Husband, and all his abettors. To which day I do here appeal
for my justification, not doubting but that God to whom I have committed my
cause will speedily arise, and cause my Innocence to break forth as the Noon
day. For I do hereby declare in the presence of the most holy God, that I have
no revengful, worldly or sinister end in this matter, but am against my own
natural will obeying God herein: And I do in all tenderness admonish and
caution all my Enemies, and all persons whatsoever to whom these Papers shall
come, that they take heed least they hurt themselves, in reproaching me; and
that they do not set themselves to justify by the letter that Spirit that is
to be condemned, or to condemn that Spirit which it ownes and allows. And that
they take heed least they urge the letter of any command against the Spirit of
it, and so come to condemn themselves in the Person and case of another. The
Spirit and the letter are no where contrary, but thou may think them so; and
by not duly attending upon the Spirit in the letter may unnaturally set the
letter to oppose the Spirit from whence it comes, to which it testifies, and
whither it tends. I beg of you all that read these lines for your own sakes,
that you will remember still how the Jews did of old, vilify, reproach,
condemn, and execute our Savior, and justified themselves herein by the letter
of the Law of God; with the breach of which Law they were continually charging
him throughout his whole life, yet was it exactly according to their own Law,
and in those very cases about which they were so much offended at him. Nor has
it fared otherwise with the whole seed of Christ and all the spiritual
manifestations of him in all ages. The best of Men, and Principles, have still
been challenged for their Nonconformity to the letter and outward rule,
although they have been most agreeable thereunto. As the Apostle speaks, not
without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ.

And I do further declare, that the things I have published and written, and
which are such an offense to my Husband, and indeed the cause of all the
Persecutions I have suffered from others, were written sorely against my own
natural mind and will; That I often begged of God I might rather die, then do
it. That I was commanded of God to record them. That my own natural temper was
so greatly averse to it, that for eleven months together I withstood the Lord,
till by an Angel from Heaven he threatened to kill me, and took away my sleep
from me: And then the terrors of the Lord forced me to obey the command. And
indeed, the writings that man was so displeased with, were in themselves very
warrantable, if I had not had any such command of God, for I only wrote the way
he lead me in a wilderness of affliction for 18 years, to do me good; and
declared my experiences, my great and wonderful deliverances, my many answers
of Prayers in difficult cases from time to time: but most true it is, I did not
speak of these things, nor set Pen to paper (for several reasons) till the Lord
commanded and by his word and Spirit constrained me so to do at 18 years end,
after I was consumed with grief, sorrow, oppression of heart, and long travail
in the wilderness, and brought even to the gates of Death, and when past the
Cure of all men, was raised up by the immediate and mighty hand of God. And
being thus healed, I was commanded to write, and give glory to him who had so
miraculously raised me up from the grave. And I do further declare, the things
I have written are true, and no lie: and that what is so distasteful in them to
man, are such things as I could not leave out, without prejudice to the Truth,
and disobedience to God. And what ever censures I now undergo from man's day and
judgment for this plain dealing in matters which concern so near a Relation in
the flesh, I am well assured my faithfulness to God herein, will be owned in
the day of his impartial and righteous judgment. And yet I must declare, it
would have been much more agreeable to my Spirit, to have concealed the
miscarriages of my Husband, then to have exposed them, if I had not been under
a command herein not to be disputed: and it was not without great resistings
that I was at length made obedient, having tasted of that love, which both
covers, and teaches us to cover a multitude of sins: And yet I am fully
persuaded, that my duty to God in this matter, will be found not only most
reasonable and necessary on my part, but exceeding beautiful in its season, and
to have been managed in some measure of the Spirit of that God, who is still
Love, and in whom there is no fury, however he marches against, goes through
the Briars and Thorns, and burns them together when they are set against him in
Battle. And whereas my Enemies have represented me as one distracted, and
beside my self; in answer to such wicked proceedings against not only me, but
the truth, I do for the Truths sake further say, First, That I judge my Enemies
who have raised this false report of me, to be themselves most highly
concerned, that this their Report should be found a Lie; for as much as if it
were otherwise, the cause and occasion of my distraction might justly be laid
at their own doors; for as the Preacher says, Eccles. 7. Oppression makes a
Wise man Mad. Secondly, And yet I also judge it is the mistaken and rotten
Interest of my Adversaries, not only to report, but to believe me a person
beside my self: for if I be sound in a right mind, how Mad must they be
discovered to have been, in their blind rage and fury against me and my
Testimony. Thirdly, I do with great cheerfulness receive the reproach of this
report; and all the humiliation that goes along with it; as a further measure
of my conformity to my Savior, and fellowship with him in his Sufferings. For
thus has he throughout all ages been blasphemed in his Prophets, his
Messengers, and in himself. Thus when Elisha sent a young Prophet with
instructions to anoint Jehu, his Fellow Servants asked him; Wherefore came this
Mad fellow to thee? 2 King. 9. Thus we read in Mark. 3. That the Kindred of our
Lord went out to lay hold on him, for they said, he is beside himself. And
again, in Joh. 10. Many of the Jews said, he has a Devil, and is mad. Fourthly,
I do with great pleasure acknowledge, that in this great work ( in which I am
set for a sign and a wonder) I have no wit, no wisdom, no understanding, no
will of my own. And if this be to be mad, I confess my self to be beside my
self to God; whose Love constrains me, and whose Spirit has in this matter
after an irresistible, but sweetest manner, Captivated my proper understanding,
will and affections, to his Divine wisdom and will. And Lastly, I am well
assured, that it will speedily, very speedily be known, that I am not mad, as
my Enemies have reported, but have spoken forth the words of truth and
soberness. I have not run before I was sent; but the word of the Lord is, Come
unto me, and his Spirit is upon me. And he will perform every Iota and title of
his own word, to overthrow Babylon with such an overturning, as never was, nor
never will be again. The beginnings of this overturning will within a few days
be seen upon her more refined parts, and the severity of the wrath shall
afterward come upon her Walls. Although man is so confident I am deceived, and
has laden me and my Testimony with all manner of reproach, yet the God whom I
serve and obey, and who has spoken by me, will speedily turn the flood of
scorn, contempt, bitter railing, false accusations, scandalous papers, and
lying Pamphlets upon them, by whom they have been poured out against me. The
Lord frustreth the tokens of the Liars, and makes Diviners mad; he turns
wise men backwards, and makes their knowledge foolish: but he confirms the
word of his servant, and performs the Counsel of his Messengers, Isa. 44.

And now in this Faith and assurance I do shut up this my Vindication and
preparitory Testimony, Declaring unto all people whom it may concern, That it
is the Lord has moved me, and his Spirit which has stirred me up. My heavenly
Bridegroom is come, and has given me courage, with an humble boldness, and holy
confidence to speak the truth in all faithfulness, and to fear no man, but God
alone, in whose strength I stand to encounter with all discouragements from my
own understanding, will, affections, former thoughts and principles within; and
with all opposition from difficulties, dangers, temptations of friends, and
conspiracies of enemies without; I am sensible any of these things would be too
strong for me, a worm of no might or strength; but I have renounced my self,
and laid down my own wisdom and will in this work, and am given up to all the
will of God herein, standing upon my watch, and having in his power put on the
whole Armor of God, the Shield of Faith, the Brestplate of Righteousness, with
my Loins girt about with truth, and my feet shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of peace, having taken the Helmet of Salvation, and the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God, Praying always with all prayer and
suplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and
supplication for all Saints. In this spiritual warfare, and combat I am called
to wrestle not only against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, and
Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and against spiritual
wickedness in high places: and must have no respect of persons because of
advantage, but be faithful to God and his Word, sparing neither Friend nor
Brother in matter of Truth, nor calling good evil, or evil good; nor putting
light for darkness, or darkness for light; but obeying God, and not Man; loving
him above all, keeping his Commandments, and pleasing him, although the whole
world should be displeased. Man has made my Cup very bitter, and my Cross very
heavy for obeying God, but my God has sweetened my Cup, and caused it to
overflow with draughts of Love; my God has made my Yoke easy, and my But then
light, because he bears me and them; he draws me, and binds me with Cords to
the Altar, his left hand is under my Head, his right Hand does Embrace me, and
his Banner over me as Love. I must not, I will not be afraid to make my boast
of my God, by whose Almighty Power I have been hitherto helped, and upheld, or
else I had perished in my afflictions. When the compassion and bowels of man
were shut up, the tender mercies of God were opened. When it was come to
Mordecay's pinch, Israel's distress, Paul's straight, God appeared. My
extremity was his opportunity; he beheld my affliction, the sorrows and Agonies
of my Soul; my groans, my prayers, my cries, my appeals ascended up for a
memorial before him, and were had in remembrance with him. And he will arise,
and that right speedily, he will make haste and not tarry, but send relief from
Heaven, and save me, and all the poor of his Flock who heat the voice of their
own Shepherd, and follow him, but a stranger they will not follow. He will
smite the Rocky heart, he will convince the Consciences of men, he will bring
down all them that glory in appearance, in face, and not in heart; he will make
a speedy decision, he will turn the stream and flood of scorn and contempt cast
upon me, and his poor despised ones in me; he will arise to our joy, and they
shall be ashamed that have hated us without a cause, and cast us out for his
Name's sake, saying, Let the Lord be glorified. I have committed my way unto
the Lord who judges righteously, who will not suffer the guilty always to go
undiscovered and unpunished. He will take the Cup of trembling out of my hands,
and put it into the hands of them who have afflicted me, who have said unto my
Soul, Bow down that we may go over: and he will make their own Tongues to fall
upon themselves, and will measure out unto them again, the measure they have
meeted. The Lord has said it, and he will perform it. The Lord will plead my
cause, and the cause of all his meek ones: but his anger is kindled against all
Formality, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, and Profaneness. He knows the secrets of all
hearts, we are all open and naked in his sight: there is no dissembling in his
sight, no mocking before him, no outward Form, no empty Opinion can shelter
from his wrath. Upon the 13. of the Twelfth Month 1673. The Lord wonderfully
discovered to me the unprofitableness of the best outward forms of Religion
without the Power: and what a great deal of blindness, injustice, false
accusations, barbarous usage, bitter and cruel zeal, with all manner of
wickedness, has at this day taken Sanctuary in the exactest Forms according to
the Letter, which are without the Spirit, yea, in enmity against it: It was the
time four eminent Professors of the people called Baptists, did in a most rough
and severe manner come to deal with me, to accuse me falsely, and blindly, and
bitterly to rebuke me, although I was then in a very weak and dangerous
condition of body. And I mention it here, because it is a time in remembrance
with the Lord, and God was in that very season pleased to open mine eyes, to
show me where Babylon was, what Spirit she was built upon, and how the Lord
would begin to strike at her, and throw her down, and then it was he called me
out from her, that I might escape the anger I then saw was kindled against her.
And however they are now justifying themselves, and their proceedings against
me, and have condemned the Innocent; yet an appeal has been made to God, and
accepted by him, and he will search out this matter, and make a true and
manifest judgment of it, for there is nothing hid from him, and this matter is
now become a public figure. Yes, I am satisfied God will speedily arise, and
decide this controversy, and he has shown me when I have been thinking his
Chariot wheels move slowly, that then his motion has been swiftest: And that
whatever seems to hinder, and work against me, does indeed help on, and work
things to a more full and perfect end. And although I should be surrounded, and
beset on every side, and left alone in the midst of all discouragements from
within, and without, yet can I believingly call to all that fear the Lord to
come and behold the wonders of the Lord for my deliverance. I cried unto him
when there was none to help me, and in a deep sense of my own unworthyness and
nothingness, my Soul was humbled, and laid low at his foot, and my heart was
lifted up to him. and he raised me from the Grave, and took fast hold of me at
that very time when heso wonderfully healed me, which was the 3d of the 11
month, 1670. Then was the full communion between Christ and my Soul, the Love
knot, the comely bands of Marriage; then did he espouse me unto himself for
ever, and enable me to follow him, and give up my self as a thank-offering unto
him, no more to be my own but the Lords, subjecting my self to all his will as
a chaste Virgin, holy in lip and life, pure and undefiled in heart. Then did the
Lord my God say unto me, I even, I am he that comfort thee; who art thou
that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of Man
which shall be made as Grass. And again he said, he was come to Judge the
Fatherless and the opressed, that the Man of the earth may no more oppress. And
many more precious Promises did the Lord make to me, when he first called me to
write what man has been so offended with; and his word was, and is my support,
and he has comforted me therewith, assuring me as soon as I had done his will,
I should receive the promises. And he afterward revealed to me, (what I did
not then know) that my oppressions and deliverance had a Public Ministry and
meaning wrapped up in them, that it must be seven years before I could perfect
that writing, and the Lord would bring forth his end in all this, and give an
open Testimony to the world that he had chosen and called me to write to
glorify him. And now I have done his will, my deliverer is come to make good
his word, and set me free from the oppresion of Man, and to bear witness
against him that has wounded and oppressed me for 18 years, and more severely
is his anger kindled against them who have so deeply wounded me since the time
of my healing, and who have made me an Heathen and a Publican for no other
cause, but obeying the word of the Lord, and following him. And as near as
New Years day is, before that day the Lord will begin to cast a cloud of his
anger upon all them that have done me so great wrong, and persecuted me without
a cause; and stroke after stroke will follow, until all Hypocrisy be
discovered and formality thrown down, and whole Babylon sinck like a stone
never to rise up any more: and let not the minds of any be lifted up to scorn
me, because I have said, God will begin to appear in my behalf within so short
a time: for my God has a many times over made that Season of the year eminently
signal to me in the dispensations of his grace and providence toward me. Then
was I entered into my aflictions, then was I in an extraordinary manner healed,
and chosen and called to write what has occasioned so many persecutions to me
from formal and literal professors; and now it will be completely 7 years since
my healing; and the Lord has made known the end of all his dispensations to me,
and has revealed to me, that I shall now receive the promises, having done his
will, and be made partaker of his blessing: for he will fulfill his word, to
bind up the Broaken hearted, and proclaim liberty to the Captive, and open the
Prison doors; and I shall no more be under the oppression of man; and he has
also revealed to me what wrath shall fall upon the same spirit throughout the
Nation, which every where oppresses the true seed, as I have been oppressed by
it; and the deliverance which is drawing nigh through terrible things in
righteousness, to all his poor and meek ones. A more full account of which
things, and how the Lord has lead me into this ministry and witness, I am with
all convenient speed preparing for the Press, and had before this been made
public, had not my Enemies hindered, by seizing and destroying my writings. And
in the mean time I beg of all Persons to whom this paper shall come, that they
will for their own sakes lay a side all prejudice, and try me, my Spirit and
Testimony according to the word of God, and wait patiently upon the Lord to
know his mind in this thing* and in love to themselves, take heed how they
rashly reproach and condemn me and my witness, least they should in so doing
run against that Hiding of power the Prophet Habakuk mentions, chap 3. 4. and
that they be watchful over themselves, that they be not found dispising
Prophecy and quenching the Spirit, because of the contemptibleness of the
messenger: always remembering, that God will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise,
and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent; that be chooses the
foolish, the weak, the base and despised things of the World, yea, and things
which are not, to bring to naught things that are. In a word, let all Persons
so far take the Alarm, as to look well to their own Souls, where they stand;
Whither they are founded upon that Rock against which the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail; whither they are interested in that Covenant of Grace which is
ordered in all things and sure, and which is all our Salvation in a day of
desolation. Whether they be in the number of those that are Eating and Drinking
with the Drunken, and beating their Fellow Servants; or of the Family of the
true Noah who shall be taken into the Ark, and preserved in the day of that
Flood of the Divine vengence, which is ready to overflow the inhabitants of the
Earth.

What I have here published is according to the word of truth which must be
fulfiled in its time. It is but a very little while and this matter will be
cleared, made manifest, and determined. In the mean while I declare to all the
world I am at rest in the will of my God who has not left me without his
witness, presence, and seal in this work, and who ever thou art, that can not
yet see a Divine Charactar, either upon me or it, my advice to thee is, that
thou perplex not thy self concerning me, but wait patiently upon God, and
quietly expect the discovery which the day will make herein.

To the Congregations of the Anabaptists and their respective Pastors.
THese verses contain the summons, complaint, and appeal of a despised and
oppressed Christian, once a member of one of your Churches, now by your unjust
and unchristian abuse of her, made a spectacle to God, Angels, and Men, yea, a
gazeing stock to this great City, and a byword to the common Rabble. Beloved,
have you so learned Christ? Does the Gospel teach you to defame you neighbor
in Coffee-Houses, Ale Houses? will not that word spoken by the Holy Ghost to
the Apostle James restrain you, 1 James 26. If any man among you seems to be
religious, and bridle not his Tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's
Religion is vain. You may sooner hinder the Sun from shining, then the truth of
God from displaying it self in such manner, and by such instruments as he is
pleased to choose, who is the Holy one of Israel, who will not suffer himself to
be limited by man; the great God has put the word of truth in her mouth, and
dare you forbid her to declare it? can your scorn and contempt of the weak
instrument, frustrate the purposes and Counsels of God? no, his foolishness is
wiser then your imaginary wisdom, and his weakness stronger then all your
conjoined power. Can you prove that God has not spoken to her and by her? No,
you dare not produce that Book of hers (in yours custody:) you too well know it
would demonstrate her to be in the Truth, and your selves shameless Liars. Pray
consider, if one of your Preachers should be silenced, you would presently cry
out of Persecution; and dare you attempt to silence the Word of God, whose
sound is gone forth to the ends of the Earth? Take heed of resisting, deriding
a Message sent from Heaven, (though by a weak Instrument) lest you be found
guilty of Blasphemies against the Spirit of God; but rather to day, while you
hear his Voice, harden not your hearts, lest he swear in his wrath, that you
shall never enter into his Rest. It is heard and received by such who love the
Truth, and submit to the Power of it; but if you persist in your Rebellion
against it, you will find and feel to your cost, that Truth is stronger than
all. Consider these-things Brethren, and the Lord give you understanding to
judge aright.

The 5th of the 10th Month, 1677.
The Lord Awaked me in the Night-Season, and by his Spirit taught me thus in
Verse, and made me Sing unto him a Triumphant Victorious Song over my Enemies,
with a command from God to send it forth into the World, to be answered by the
same Spirit of Love, Meekness, Gentleness, Goodness, Plainness, Lamb-like,
lowly and Humble, for such is the Spirit of Gods Teachings.

Let us be followers of our Head, Christ Jesus, as dear Children, whom we have
for our Example, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. For he that overcomes, shall Inherit all
things, and I will be his God, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters: The
Promise belongs either to Sons or Daughters walking in the Truth, Revel. 21. 7.

I Am commanded by the King of Kings, to send this in the same manner and
method he taught it me; Let none despise the Spirits teaching, quench not the
Spirit, despise not Prophecy; There has been too much despising and
disdaining of me already, I pray God forgive them for all their hard speeches;
and cruel usage of me, for they have done they know not what; The Lord help us
to remember our Creator in the days of our youth, and declining years, for when
we have done all we can to please our selves, yet the end of all is death; for
pride, passion, self-will, bitterness, wrath, envy, malice, will yield no
comfort at the Judgment Seat, where we must give an account of all the deeds
done in the flesh, whether they be good or evil; Eccles. 12. 14.

Who has believed our report, ( has been the cry of old) and to whom is the
Arm of the Lord revealed, Esa. 53. 1. For they have not at all obeyed the
Gospel, Romans 10. 16.

To England sweet, my Native soil,
This summons now I send,
Her speedy answer I require,
Before this Year does end.
In four and twenty years, Declare
What evil have I done,
What all this time they have against
My Conversation.
What cause gave I to make your wrath
So hot to burn at me?
Speak as you will answer it to God,
And let all hear and see.
In Coffee-House and Alehouse now
Why do you me Defame?
Why does your Church, a Heathen me,
And Publican proclaim.
Speak out and spare not what is my sin,
Speak truth in his presence,
Else God a bitter Cup will give
You, as your recompense.
If he who judges Heaven and Earth,
Disowneth what you have done;
Then to curb you, and set me free
He Is now most surely come.
You Will punish me, and think for me
No Prison is too ill,
But whether you or I offend
most, he determine will.
I Am falsely slandered, and oppressed,
By men that have no Love:
But I commit my cause to him,
who sees, and sits above;
And from his Sanctuary looks,
and roars out of Sion,
To show my Foes, he is my God,
and I his little one.
He sees my griefs so great, the weight
I can no longer bear,
That now he comes to be my Judge,
The Innocent to clear:
To restifie he is my Spouse,
and Husband of my Soul;
Whom I must serve, and keep his Laws,
though proud men would control.
I give no other cause, but in
the Worship of my God;
If clean from sin, I Am in his sight,
my Foes will feel his Rod.
The same measure of wrath which they
do pour forth upon me,
According to his word, he will pour
On them, as they will see.
They cannot excuse themselves before
God, for what they have done:
They hate me, 'cause I in Gods word
and ways of Truth do run.
Full eighteen years with grief consumed,
and to the Grave bowed down,
Because the Lord have raised me up,
to make his power known*
And bad me show his wondrous works,
and glorify his Name.
This only, nothing else but this,
a great offense became.
They rage, they Persecute to Death,
a Woman weak and wan,
For giving all glory unto God,
and not to wretched man.
Now Countrymen, if I the Truth
do not make to appear,
Disprove me plainly if you can,
Before the next New Year.
For after that, great wrath expect,
which on those will burn as fuel,
Who to their fellow creature were
Not merciful, but cruel.
And have no Love to God, his way,
His Truth, and holy word,
But only love themselves, as he
has seen, and much abhorred.
For taking up this heavy Cross
to follow the Lord my God,
Wormwood and gall they give, and scourge
me with their sharpest Rod.
O God arise, make have to judge
between my Foes and me,
O stop their mouths, clear me, and let
not guilty ones go free.
Now strike at Babylon, thou said
This year thou would begin
To pour thy Plagues on that great Whore
Babylon, for her Sin.
Give Testimony, speak aloud
O Lord, and make them hear,
To let them know, I speak from God,
And only him do fear.
Thou know, O Lord, I have no end,
Doing and suffering this.
But that thy will obeying I,
May gain Eternal bliss.
If King and subjects cannot me
disprove, in what I say,
If truth I speak, O Lord, let them
Not take my life away.
That will not quench the wrath denounced
For what is already done;
Nor can prevent the pouring sorth,
That wrath which is begun.
What he has purposed and decreed,
on Babylon to do.
Shall suddenly in one day come,
Her Judgment, Plagues, and woe.
As he revealed has unto
his faithful Servant John.
Such as never was, nor e're again,
the world shall fall upon.
That for my Native soil and folks,
I now could weep and mourn,
Though they unkind to me, no thanks,
But Grief and Scorn return.
Only some of the little flock
Of Christ I late have seen,
Who have to me, distressed and left
Alone, a comfort been.
Blessed be his power, who helped, and faith,
He will my sorrows end,
I hope he will my foes convince,
That they their lives may mend.
Take me O Lord from strife of Tongues,
as thou have promised me,
Give rest and peace, if so thou please,
O take me home to thee.
Let me no longer bear this Yoke,
And in this vile world stay.
Think on thy promise Lord, and free
me, before New Years Day.
The Ninth of the same month the Lord taught me this Song in the Night.
IF all Men cannot disprove what by me God has said,
Then with all England it will be very sad.
What ye do, do quickly, before New Years Day,
Least after that, all your lives be swept away.
Woe, woe, to England, for what she has done,
For woes upon England will certainly come.
Because she does not love God with all her heart,
Nor (...) up her self to take his Childrens part.
Shall I yet doubt when God upholds me then,
Fear mortal Men, who' ve done the worst they can.
No, lift up thy Head, and now rejoice,
That God for thee made such a choice.
A. W.

My Maker is my Husband, the Holy one of Israel, my Redeemer, the Eternal, ever
living God, my Father, in obedience to his reveiled will do I suffer, in
obeying his strict commands I offend; their are several of his Children that
are sufferers with me, and are not ashamed of me in my bonds (which are) for
doing the will of Christ. Now, as they have owned me so, God will own them, and
bless them, but for such as are ashamed of me, under my reproaches for Christ,
they in time may be more ashamed for their Neglect, in not owning me in the
work of the Lord. O my God, fulfill thy word, and deliver me, for thou know I
have suffered as much Tyranny and Cruelty under a formal profession of
Religion, as I could have done amongst Turks, Heathens, and Infidels, and if
so, then what need is it that my Countrymen should so highly scorn me as they
do, for if I live to see New Years Day over. I shall be able to speak to them,
and ask them how they do, and rejoice when they will have cause to mourn; and I
now know my friends from my foes, and if I out of this world be taken, it will
be my greater mercy to be singing Halauajah in Heaven.

FINIS.

