BRITANNIA ITERUM BEATA: OR, A Poem-Narrative OF Her Gracious MAJESTY'S
Departure from LISBONE, With Her Thrice-Welcome Arrival at PORTSMOUTH.

By W. W.

Veni jam AVGVSTAE Oceani VICTRIX. Juvenal: -- Omen habes magni clarique
triumphi,
Regem aliquem capies. --
Printed at London by James Cottrel, Anno 1662.

BRITANNIA ITERVM BEATA: OR, A Poem-Narrative Of Her Gracious Majesty's
Departure from Lisbone, etc.
NO Victories over the Dutch, do I here sing,
Nor what new Treasures from the Indies bring
Our dancing Fleet; but from a Neighboring Mine,
What Is greater far, the Treasure KATHARINE.
Till now I thought, the Portuguez in vain
So eagerly did Plow the Indian Main
In quest of Gold, when his own private Store
Could show far richer then their Dirty Ore.
But see the Reason, sure, he did intend
To make our Britain Wealthy, and to lend
Us Lisbon's All: Nay, and to sent it home,
Suppose our CHARLES obliged would become.
He Is bound; she comes: yet it that Nation knew
To falsify their Word, it cannot be true:
For sure, me thinks, I see fair Lisbon's Strand
Walled round with Thousands, which though drooping stand,
Do living Bulwarks seem, to keep her there;
Yet do they fall, when she does once appear:
And those that thought her Passage to deny,
Now walk a Breach, that she might pass thereby.
Fain would they have her stay, fain have her go;
At one time questioned tongues speak I and No.
Each bended have two Knees; the one to pray
The Gods for Wind, the other Her to stay.
Each pleasant, yet sad Face, a double Eye
Does bear; the one does weep, whilst to other's dry.
Great Contradictions sure, does reconcile
That Peace-make Cheek on which Tears meet a Smile.
It Is strange; and none but such a Saint as she
Of such a Miracle could Actress be.
Hold! hold your Medley-Mourning; it is in vain:
See where she comes, heading her Virgin-train.
The Crowd straight make a circling Lane, that she,
Though going from them, yet might with them be:
And like a Labyrinth, they run it round;
But the Way out to Here Is not long unfound.
She saw their Drift; yet angry not, looked down
With such a Brow as never knew to frown,
Upon the kneeling Throng on either Hand,
Whose Knees were couchen'd by the yiedling Sand.
Here casts an Eye, there Nods; here throws a Smile:
So parting Nurses Children do beguile.
But see, she now unto the Bank is come
Which parts great Neptunes Kingdom from her Home;
Where she surveyed, as proudly there did stand
A floating City under the Command
Of Neptunes eldest Son, which that did bring
A Present to Her from the Oceans King.
She kindly does accept it; but what is more,
Resolves to thank Him on the British Shore.
Then Smiles a Farewell, looking round about;
And thus she puts the People out of doubt:
Steps on the Boat; where whilst this Foot did stand,
The other is kept Prisoner by the Land:
But sure it was not long; for smiling, She
Again looks back, and straight it was set free.
No sooner entered, but the Saylors shout;
And cry, They Portugal have in their Boat.
And well as heavy lading might they fear,
When Lisbons Hearts, and sad ones, all were there.
Now scarce their Oars had struck a treble Stroke,
But they, unto a greater Bulk of Oak
Resign their precious Freight; where Sayls they hoise,
And sleeping Anchors, with a hideous Voice,
They call from the Deep: so does Charon roar,
When tugging he, Styx Waves do bend his Oar.
The rais'd-now Canvas swells, 'cause proud to know
Their CHARLES his KATHARINE does stand below:
And straight into a Canopie they spread,
Although unfit for their great Mistress Head:
Who checks their promptness, bids the Vessel stay;
Which they straight hear, and crouching do obey:
The Reason she, almost forgot a Thing,
Designed a Present for great Britains King:
A precious Thing indeed; it was her Heart,
Which would take leave before it did depart.
The Brutish Seamen cry, Their Wind does fail,
When straight the Peoples Sighs do swell their Sail.
Which plainly does their Mountain-Grief express
To let her go, and yet their willingness.
But what far stranger is, I Will tell you, they
Could water lend, if shallow were their Bay:
For now sad Lisbons Pavements do drink more
Then ever did her large and spungie Shore.
But wind nor water wanting, does she go,
Gliding from what her Eyes direct her to:
Till crawling distance at the length had made
Of Lisbons Towers and Bulk, an Azure shade.
Then do her sad and gloomed Eyes survey
The lofty Banks of the wide-gaping Bay:
Whose distance seemed willing to let her out,
Till their sharp Nooks advancing, put this Doubt,
Whether they did not all intend to meet,
And so to hinder the glad-passing Fleet:
Who void of Fear, with a Majestic Pride,
Does cut her Channel, and through it does ride
Unto her Mother-Ocean; where fit Gales
Do gladly whistle in her willing sails;
And puffs her on so fast, that what a Land
Spacious once seemed, seems now a heap of sand.
And now the Queen her Portugal cannot see,
Yet sees her Portugals Epitomie.
But 'twas not long; for whilst she looked about,
Her Eyes returning, find the spot washed out.
The Sun at length, though posting he did ride,
Who was at Sea, had from his Wain now spied;
And therefore leaves the Spheres, cause he did know
The Sea had then Divinity below
In greater store: here he dances, here he plays;
Here he falls, here he baths his choleric Rays.
But when he found that he was looked upon
With greater luster far, then was his own,
Blushing looks down; and then, for anger he
Will needs go drown himself there in the Sea.
The Night follows; veiled with a Mourning-Cloud,
His Sister-Moon does bring his Milky-shrowd:
The Stars his Torches; all the Planets run
Now to the Burial of their Brother-Sun.
They all descended are now to the Deep,
And yet they do their Heavenly station keep:
For when the Saylor does his forehead rear
Unto the sky, they to him there appear:
Then looking down into the Oceans Brine,
He also does observe them there to shine.
Why does the foolish Sterns-man look so high,
When he may sail, now, by the Oceans sky?
By this time had sad Cynthia almost gone,
In both her heavens, her procession:
But bolder now, by grief, resolves to see,
Before she went away, that glittering she
Sol fell by: through the crystal venters in,
Where slumbring lay the thoughtless Queen, within;
And boldly dared to reach her veiled eyes,
Which feel, unveil, then bid their Mistress rise;
Who angry roused, does with one single breath
Two Miracles; both give, and take from death:
She life unto the buried Sun straight gave,
And bids the Moon go take his watery grave.
No sooner spoke, but Moon and Night are fled;
The thankful Sun, now peeping, rears his head:
Ever since, sad Night attends the Moon; the Sun
Dances, glad of his Resurrection:
They both, by turns, thrice seven times did shine
Upon the Poup, the Flanks, the lofty Pine,
Which from the spreading middle up does sprout,
Of her so mountanous, yet moving root;
Whilst the poor Brittons longings, and their fears,
Do think it more then thrice three seven years.
But see now, how the Saylors thronging stand,
Who shall discover first, and show the Land
Unto the ready Queen, whose wandering eyes
Do fetch long Journies in the seas and skies
In vain; when a too-forward seaman cries,
With cheerful Voice, See where Great Britain lies!
Then did directly point at that which he
Nor any of his Fellows, sure, could see:
But for his credit, at length there appears
A Bank, which to the skies his sharp Head rears.
He seen, sees; and as the Queen drew nigher,
The Hill grows proud, and still strutteth higher.
And now, each gentle Gale affords their Eyes
More then thrice welcome fresh Discoveries.
The British shores are crowded all along
With a still praying and expecting throng;
Who furnished, since their own eyes could not do it,
Each with a glazen eye to play the scout;
These wandering to and fro, at length did meet
A happy one with the advancing Fleet.
He joy'd, cries out, See how they cut the Main!
See how attended with a scaly train,
The wooden hills do roll! see how they show,
With Sayls, like walking mountains topt with snow.
But 'twas not long, that only this, and some
Were happy; for now, all cry out, They come!
And whilst they gazing stand, each private eye,
Without a help, each Pulley can discry.
Now Peasants dancing, from aloft do give
A welcome to the Queen, with a Long live!
The courchying Shepherdesses too, stand by,
For joy, clad in the gay months Livery.
The Queen observes, and bids the Pilots ride
Nearer unto the high Cliffs craggie side;
Over whose top, the wealthy soil does peep,
To see her new Queen, while she is in the deep.
The panching Rocks fain would fall asunder,
That they might welcome her with a thunder,
Such as they know will do the neighboring Forts,
With roaring Echoes of their Guns reports.
The trees all bow, and drooping seem to stand,
Because their roots now tie them to the land:
But by their messenger, the VVinde, they strew
Those waves with leaves, over which the Queen does go.
From whom, these soft amusements stole the thought
Of landing, till she to her Port was brought;
To whose blessed shore, the Pilot with glad pride,
His sad and melancholy Bulks does guide;
Grieving, since past all dangers of the sea,
They in the Haven now should shipwrack'd be:
And now, thus to receive their heaviest doom,
As banished Traitors, when returned home:
They only to their King their lives resign;
But these, their dearest All, their KATHARINE.
The Sayls now flagging fall, the Streamer too,
Which used, with dancing courtship, so to woo
The wind into the sayls, now hangs his head;
The fluttering Jack resolves no more to spread.
But see! the flaming shore does now express
The better contrary, in its excess:
And whilst her sands, the Queens advancing feet
Do bless, a thousand thousand hearts them meet;
And thrice thrice-loyal ones are all thrown down,
To pave a Causey for them, to the town;
Whose gates she with the like joy enters through,
As Londons did great CHARLES, not long ago.
The Peoples shouts now fill the smiling skies,
They Vows, with sparkling Bonfires sacrifice;
Where round them does a busy small crowd stand;
Each has a liberal, though little hand.
The Pavements all, do by their luster shine,
Whilst some allay their heat with lusty wine.
The Chanel drunk, yet gulping, does he go,
And whistles joy, as he reels to and fro:
And whilst some, sweating, do the Bells employ,
The Steeples know the cause, and dance for joy.
The lofty Towers, which over the rest do clime,
Do, with their singing Cannons too, keep time.
In fine, naught else but general Joy is seen;
Each action echoed with Long live the Queen.
The tongue-ty'd Babe, which can nor speak nor go,
Does, with his shrug and smile, express it too:
His little gelly'd hands, joined, seem to pray
Both for his Queen, and many such a day.
Great CHARLES, ere this, had heard a fresh Express
Speak Portmouths joy, and Britains happiness:
He straight glad London leaves; the first time he
Did leave her, that, he gone, she glad could be.
Her streets have fires too; but her hearts within
Have more, to sacrifice them to their Queen;
To whom, ere this, he swelled with joy does bring
Great Britains All, wrapped up in her great King:
And now they interview; but what they say
Is for the gods to speak, for us to pray.
May he now tie their hands, which tied their heart;
And may the world give end before they part.
May from them both, to future England spring
Such as himself, a good, a valiant King.
May also after-ages from them shine,
With such as she, a virtuous KATHARINE.
To this, let all but seamen cry Amen:
May our blessed Queen never go to Sea again.
FINIS.

