Ferguson's Text Explained and Applied, IN A SERMON Before the Right
Honorable, Sir Robert Geffery, Knight. Lord Mayor of LONDON; AT Guild Hall
Chapel, December the 6th. Anno Dom. 1685. BY Robert Wensley, Vicar of
Chesthunt, Hartfordshire.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, for Benjamin Took, at the Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1686.

Imprimatur,

C. ALSTON R. P. D. HEN. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Robert Geffery, Knight. Lord Mayor OF THE City of
LONDON.
MY Lord,
THE so extraordinary Civility Your Lordship was pleased to express to me for
this SERMON, (which I can attribute to nothing but the design of it, viz.
Loyalty, which is, and always has been most grateful to Your Lordship) has
however so highly obliged me, that I should think my self guilty of no less
Ingratitude, than that which I blame in others, should I refuse to submit it to
Your Lordships Disposal.

I beg leave to tell Your Lordship, That this Discourse was first Preached
(mutatis mutandis) when the late Duke of Monmouth was in the height of his
Rebellion, in my own Parish; where not only Castares, but Ferguson himself,
(that Bloodiest of all the Rebels) was formerly at The Conventicle at
Theobalds, a Frequent, and amongst his Followers, a most Celebrated Preacher.

Wherefore, I thought it my Duty to let my People see, how much they had been
abused by him, and such Seducers, and to Preach up Loyalty amongst them from
his own Text, which (as I was then Informed) he had wrested to Rebellious
Designs.

By this, Your Lordship may plainly see, that I have always (even in the worst
of Times) endeavored to do my Duty to God and the King, with all Faithfulness;
though I am forced to tell Your Lordship, (because I live by some ill
Neighbors, who seek to do me all the Mischief they can, only because by all
means Lawful I endeavor to make them do their Duties) That I have Labored
under the greatest Disadvantage and Discouragement, and suffered the greatest
Persecution for it, of any Man in England (that I know of) of my Age and
Station.

All that I can return to Your Lordship for your great kindness, is only (like
Beggars) to have Recourse to my Prayers for you, That Your Lordships Name may
be as Famous in all Ages for Loyalty, and for the Just and Honorable Rewards
of it, as now it is in your Self, the Loyal Lord Mayor of London, and in the
Great and Loyal Lord Chancellor of England: And (if the Infinite Happiness of
Heaven can admit of Degrees) That your Lordship may enjoy in the World to come,
a degree of Glory as much above other Men, as You do at this present. Which is,
and shall be, the Hearty Prayer of,

My Lord,). Your Lordships most Faithful, and Obedient Servant, Robert Wensley.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Guild Hall Chapel, December the 6th. Anno Dom. 1685.
EZEKIEL, Chapter XXI. v. 25, 26, 27. And thou profane, wicked Prince of Israel,
whose Day is come, when Iniquity shall have an End.

Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown; Exalt him
that is low, and abase him that is high.

I will over-turn, over-turn, over-turn it; and it shall be no more, until he
come whose right it is; and I will give it him.


OF all the Sacred Writings, none are more easily wrested to ill Purposes, than
the Prophesies of the Old Testament, and the Revelations of the New. Strength
of Imagination, and the litteral Sound of the Words, supplying the place, in
the Vulgar, of strong Sense, sound Reason, and all manner of Helps of
Interpretation: So that they are easily brought to believe any thing that their
Seditious Teachers deliver to them, as a Mystery grounded on some obscure Text
of the Prophets, or the Apocalypse.

Amongst all the Prophetical Writings, (if we may believe Report) none has
been more abused than this Text, by that Grand Traitor and Trumpeter of Hell,
Ferguson; who, whilst he pretended to be a Preacher of the Gospel of Peace,
sounded an Alarm to Rebellion with these Words; against which, nothing can be
a greater Argument, if rightly Explained and Applied.

Wherefore, it cannot be amiss for me to endeavor rightly to Explain and Apply
them both to Things and Persons.

First then, to Explain the Words, it will be necessary 1st. The Explication of
the Words.
to enquire;

I. Who this Prince was, of which we have here so severe a Character? II. What
his Crimes were, for which he is here so dreadfully threatened?
As to the First, I need but refer you to the I. Who this Prince was.
Words of St. Hierom, who expressly says: Post urbis Hierosclymae subversionem
and captivitatem Populi, ad Ducem Israelis sermo dirigitur quem nemini dubium
est significari Sedechiam. St. Hierom Commentarium in Textum.
After the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the Captivity of the Jews, this Speech
is directed to the King of Israel; whom no body doubts to be Zedekiah: Whose
sad Story you may read at your Leisure, in the 24th. and 25th. Chapters of the
2 d. of Kings, and in the Last Chapter of Jeremy.

The sum of it, in brief, is this:

Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, besieged Jerusalem, and took it, with
Jehoiakim the King, and all his Nobles: All which, (after he had destroyed the
Temple) together with all the rich Vessels belonging to it, all the Treasures
of the King's House, and the Riches of all the City, he carried away with him
into Babylon, and deposed Jehoiakim; and made Mattaniah, his Father's Brother,
King in his stead; and changed his Name to Zedekiah: Who, notwithstanding all
this, Rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar; and being overcome by him, had his Sons
slain before his Eyes; and (that he might never see a better Object) his own
Eyes were put out, and he carried in Chains to Babylon: And Jehoiakim was by
Evilmerodack, the Babylonian King, re-placed upon the Throne of his Ancestors.

Thus was the Prophecy in the Text fulfilled, even to a Word: For Zedekiah's
Day of Punishment came unexpectedly upon him, and his Iniquity had its Reward;
His Diadem was removed, and his Crown was taken off: Jehoiakim, that was low,
was exalted from a Prison to his Throne; and Zedekiah, that was high, was
abased from his Throne to a Prison. Thus did God Almighty utterly Over-turn all
Israel, till the Kingdom was given unto him, whose Right it was.

As to the further Sense of this Prophecy, the same St. Hierom (diverting his
Speech to Zedekiah) gives it us in these following Words: Venit (inquit) tibi
dies quae longo tempore praefinita est in te; and propter te Sacerdotium and
Regnum interiit Judaeorum. Iniquitatem ponam tibi in perpetuum, quoe non statim
tibi reputata est, sed donec veniat Christus cujus est judicium and tradet ei
Pater Regnum and Sacerdotium vel Ecclesiam de Gentibus Congregatam. Id. St.
Hieronimus ibid.
The Day is come, which was long before determined concerning Thee; and for thy
sake, both the Kingdom, and the Priesthood of the Jews, has perished. I will
place this Iniquity upon thy Account for ever; but not immediately to be
reckoned for, but when Christ comes, whose is the Judgment, and when the
Father gives him both the Kingdom, and the Priesthood, or the Church called
from amongst the Gentiles.

For then, indeed, it was, that both the Jewish Religion and Government were
absolutely Over-turn'd by the Romans, when the Apostles had just finished their
Work of Preaching the Gospel to all Nations, and making them Disciples of
Christ: For ever since, the Jews have continued mere Vagabonds upon the Face of
the Earth, And an hissing, and a Byword to all Nations.

So that, (according to St. Hierom) Zedekiah's Crimes had an ill Influence upon
all Israel, for many Generations, even till their final Destruction, after our
Savior's Crucifixion: So that, we may well conclude, that they were most
odious to God: And therefore, it cannot be but worth our while, to proceed to
the next Enquiry proposed: viz.

II. What Zedekiah's Crimes were, for which II. What Zedekiah's Crimes were,
the Text styles him, Thou wicked and profane Prince of Israel; and for which
He and all Israel were so dreadfully punished?

Now, if we will take the pains to read the places of Scripture 2 Kings c. 24.
v. 17. etc. 25. and Jeremiah cap. ult.
beforementioned, we shall find his Crimes to be these three, viz.

Ingratitude, Treachery, and Rebellion. Ingratitude, Perfidiousness, Rebellion.


First, Ingratitude against the King of Babylon.

Nebuchadnezzar had Raised him from a Subject, to be King over Israel, instead
of Jehoiakim, whose Right it was; and in token of his Favor, had given him a
new Name: But He ungratefully endeavors (as far as he could) to Unmake his
Maker.

Whereas, Common Gratitude (if he had retained any Sense of it) would have
bound him fast to the Service of such a Prince, who had conferred so great
Honors and Obligations upon him, that even all that he could do for his
Service, was little enough to express his Grateful Acknowledgments: But
(instead of this) such was his ungratefulness, that no Ties (though never so
Sacred) could hold him to his Duty; but even contrary to his Faith and Promise,
he Treacherously endeavors to Ruin Nebuchadnezzar, with those Favors he had
conferred upon him.

And this brings me to Discourse his second Crime, viz.

Secondly, His Perfidiousness or Treachery. 2ly. Zedekiah's Perfidiousness.


In all probability, the King of Babylon bound Zedekiah, by all manner of
Promises and Oaths, to be faithful to him; for common prudence could persuade
no less: and we have this further Warrant for it, That one of the best
Commentators (as to the sense of the Ancients) tells us directly, That the
Loquitur propheta Sedekiae faedifrago. Cornel. a Lapid. in textum.
Prophet here speaks to Zedekiah, the Covenant-breaker.

What then could be a greater breach of Faith, than for him to abuse so great
and so honorable a Trust, to quite contrary purposes? What could be greater
Treason, than for him who had received the Regal Authority over the Jews, on
purpose to keep them in Subjection to the King of Babylon, to be the first that
Opposed it; and to be the Ringleader of Rebellion against him?

This leads me to take Notice of his third and last Crime, viz.

Thirdly, His Rebellion. 3ly. Zedekiah's Rebellion.


Had not Zedekiah been the Chief Governor under Nebuchadnezzar, he could not
have been the Chief Rebel against him: And therefore, this did fully complete
both his Ingratitude and Treason; and above all other, his Sins is particularly
laid to his Charge (2 Kings c. 24. v. ult.) even by God himself.

Having now Explained the Words, lest it should be asked, What is all this to
us? I shall proceed to the next part of my proposed Design, viz.

Secondly, Rightly to Apply these Words thus The 2 d. part of this Discourse;
the Application.
Explained, both to Persons and Things.

First then, as to Persons: 1. To Persons.


I freely Confess, That there is nothing less becomes the Pulpit, than Personal
Reflections, where they are not necessary, or at least highly convenient. But
since common Fame assures us, That this Text was Applied to Seditious Purposes
against our present Sovereign (Whom God long Preserve!) I cannot but think it a
necessary Duty to wipe off those Foul and Impudent Aspersions from our Royal
Master, and to let you see where they naturally fall.

With what Face could any one (but Impudence it self) Apply Zedekiah's
Ingratitude, Perfidiousness, and Rebellion, against such a Prince, whom even
the worst of His Enemies, cannot but own to be the Best, and most Grateful
Master; the most Faithful of all Friends, and (when He was in that capacity)
the most Loyal of all Subjects?

Do not We of the Church of England owe the Preservation of our Religion to His
Royal Faith and Gratitude?

Has He not in the most Grateful and Public manner Acknowledged our Services
(though we did but our Duty) in Endeavoring to Maintain The Succession in the
Right Line?

Has He not Passed His Royal Faith for the Preservation of our Religion and
Government by Law Established, in His repeated Promises, and His
Coronation Oath? Oh! May His Royal Word and Oath be as Sacred and Inviolable,
as all good Subjects do Esteem His Person and Authority! And as He derives His
Power from none but GOD, so may He Govern after God's example; That, as By
these two immutable Things, His Word and Oath, It is impossible for God, it may
be no less impossible for the King, to Lie! That so His NAME may be Recorded to
all Ages, by those Glorious Titles of JAMES the Grateful, and JAMES the Just.

In the mean while, let Us follow His Example, in being as Faithful Subjects to
Him, as He was to His Royal Brother, who has particularly Recommended Him as a
Pattern for our Imitation: For in his last Page 166. Part the first.
Declaration, perused by himself, and Ordered to be Published, He who best knew
Him, gives us this Recommendation of Him; That He could not forbear to
Recommend to all his other Subjects, the profound Respect, and the entire
Resignation and Obedience, which his Royal Highness continues to Practice to
his Person and Government.

Let this then Suffice to stop the Mouths of all our Railing Rabshake's against
God's Anointed.

But since they have always been too ready to make Personal Reflections, and
False Applications of Scripture, it is but Justice that we should Retort upon
them, such as are apparently true; especially, where, without the least Stretch
or Force, they mutually Apply themselves; as (certainly, if ever words did)
these of the Text most directly Apply themselves against the Authors of the
late Rebellion amongst Us.

For, What need I mention the late Earls of All the Late Leaders of Rebellion,
Guilty of every one of Zedekiah's Crimes.
Shaftsbury, Argyle, and such like? when their Horrid Ingratitude to his late
Majesty, as well as to this Present, against so many and so great Obligations
of reiterated Pardons and Honors heaped upon them, and their no less
Perfidiousness against their repeated Promises and Oaths, as well as their
barefaced Rebellion, are so visible to all Persons, that are not fully
resolved they will not see?

I shall therefore confine this part of my Discourse But most especially the
late Duke of Monmouth.
to that Unfortunately-Deluded Prince, The late Duke of Monmouth.

And surely never was there any Person, in which Monmouth's Ingratitude far
greater than Zedekiah's.
all Zedekiah's Crimes did so Manifestly appear, as in him.

And though it is not in my Nature to Trample upon a Dead Lion, or to Triumph
over those that are Fallen; and though I would no more revive his Crimes, than
I would his Person, yet Necessity forces me to it, that I may Endeavor to give
some Satisfaction to those that mean well, and yet may be Deceived by the
Impudent Clamours of his Party, to think too well of him.

1. Then, as to his Ingratitude.

Did not his Royal Father Raise him from the Infamy derived from his Mother, to
the highest Honors, scarcely denying him any thing that was Great, except only
His Crown, and the Just Rights of his Royal Successor?

And were not all these Favors conferred upon him, by the Mediation of his
Royal Uncle, our present Sovereign?

Hear what His late Majesty says in His Declaration beforementioned, Page
149. line 19. ibid.
where He does Freely Testify for his Dearest Brother, that the Duke of
Monmouth (till he made himself incapable of his Friendship) never had a more
entire or fast-Friend about His Majesty; and there was scarce ever any Honor
or Benefit conferred upon him, but it was obtained by his Royal Highness his
Intercession.

And yet, How well he requited Them, by being Privy to at least, if not
Consenting to such Consultations, as directly tended to the utter Destruction
of Them both, is too sadly known amongst us! Not only, not regarding the Life
of his best Benefactor, but (Oh most horrid Ingratitude!) taking no care (to
say no worse) of the Life of his most Affectionate and Indulgent Father!

A Father, that (by the Mediation of his Royal Uncle) had such an Excess of
Kindness for him, as not only to Pardon him, so Wicked and so Unnatural a
Conspiracy; but again to Receive him into His Bosom; and to seek, by His
former Methods of Kindness (though Alas! all in vain!) to Reclaim him from the
Society of Hellish Traitors, that Conspired against His Life and Government?

So that all Things considered, Zedekiah was a Grateful Person in comparison of
him; and our Wise and Loyal Senate had too much reason to style him, In their
Address to His Majesty.
That most ungrateful Rebel, James late Duke of Monmouth.

Nor (2ly.) Was his Perfidiousness less than his Ingratitude. 2ly. His
Perfidiousness no less than his Ingratitude.


For (not to mention his frequent breaches of his Matrimonial Vow, made to his
most virtuous Duchess; a Lady that had obliged him by all means possible: and
of his repeated Promises to his greatest Patron his Royal Uncle) How often,
upon the account of his several Honors and Offices, had he taken the Oath of
Allegiance, and the Holy Sacrament, to bind him to that, to which Nature it
self had most strictly tied him, (i. e.) His Duty to his most Loving Father,
and his most Gracious King? How did he promise his Royal Father; Nay, swear to
Him under his Hand, That His first letter amongst the Papers in the late King's
Declaration. page 138.
For the time to come, the whole study of his Life should be, to show how truly
Penitent he was: And yet (Oh Unnatural Treachery!) all these Bonds were too
weak to hold him from Joining with such Bloody Traitors, as sought the very
Life of the King his Father.

And this leads me to Discourse his Last Crime, viz.

3ly. His Rebellion. His Rebellion the completion of all his Crimes.


This is the Crime that made all the rest Appear in their proper (i. e.) their
most odious Shapes: So that it is impossible for any Man (that is not absolute
Impudence) to Palliate or Conceal them.

For He himself assures his Uncle, then Duke of York, That if He would grant
him the Kindness to bring him to the King his Father, In his first Letter,
ibid. p. 137. in fine, and p. 138.
If ever he should do any thing against him, he must be thought the most
ungrateful Man living.

And he might as well have added the most Perfidious Man on Earth: Ibid. p. 140.
For in his second Letter to his Father, he tells him; Neither do I imagine to
receive your Pardon, any otherwise, than by the Intercession of the Duke, whom
I acknowledge to have offended; and therefore, beg Your Majesty would direct
how I am to apply my self to Him, and I shall do it, not as an outward form,
but with all the sincerity in the world.

Now, Was not this Favor granted him? Did not his then Royal Highness
introduce him to his Father, and Intercede for His Favor to him?

And yet, Did he not (as soon as possibly he could) Publish the most False,
Treasonable, and Seditious Declaration against Him? and, Did he not raise the
most unnatural War, and endeavor thereby to Deprive his Lawful Sovereign of
His Crown, which He himself owned to be His undoubted Right; and to Depose Him
from His Throne, and to place himself upon it, though he himself confessed
(more than once) That he had no manner of just Right or Title to it?

So that Zedekiah's Rebellion compared with his, would appear but a just
Defense of himself, and his Country.

And as his Faults did exceed his, so his Punishment As his Crimes were greater
than Zedekiah's, so his Punishment was not less.
came not short of what was here threatened in the Text, but fulfilled it, even
to a Tittle.

For is not his Day come, when his iniquity had an end? Is not his Diadem
removed, which he vainly fancied to himself? is not his Crown taken off, which
his ambitious Thoughts had placed upon his own Head; nay, and his Head too? is
he any longer the same he was? is not our Dread Sovereign, who was so low,
Exalted, from his Banishment, to the Throne of His Ancestors? is not He, who
was so high in his own, and his followers Conceit, abased, and laid in the
Dust? In a word, Has not God utterly over-turn'd Him, and all his Rebellious
Accomplices, so that they are no more? and, Has he not given to him the Diadem
and the Crown, whose unquestionable Right it is?

May it be Established upon Him, and His Lawful Heirs and Successors, so long
As the Sun and Moon endures: To which Establishment, let every one of us
Contribute his part, by doing his Duty in his Station, to prevent all Rebellion
for the Future. To which end, that I may not be wanting in Mine, I shall
proceed to what remains, viz.

Secondly, To Apply this Text to such Things, The 2 d. Application to Things;
viz. against Rebellion chiefly.
against which it is directly and naturally Applicable.

And surely, it can be Applied against nothing so directly, as against
Zedekiah's Crimes of

Ingratitude, Treachery, and Rebellion.

As for the Two former, they being mainly comprehended and completed in the
Latter; I shall restrain my Discourse against that Crime that contains all the
rest, (i. e) Rebellion.

For, no Man can be a Rebel, but he must be Every Rebel must be,
Ungrateful, as well as Perfidious.

(1.) He must be Ungrateful. 1st. Ungrateful.


For, the Preservation of his Life or Fortune, and of what soever can be dear
to him, he owes wholly to his Prince; who gives Life to the Laws, by which they
are preserved by his vigorous Execution of them; without which, all Law is but
a dead Letter, and signifies nothing at all to the Safety or Welfare of Human
Society.

(2.) He must be Perfidious also. 2dly. Perfidious.


For no Man can Rebel, but he breaks those Ties of Nature, as well as his
Promises and Oaths (which, by our Laws, every Subject is supposed and required
to take) by which he is bound to maintain his Prince's Life and Government.

Now, against all Rebellion, this Text does apply it self, as the highest and
strongest Argument that can be, by answering all the Pretenses and Excuses,
that can possibly be made for it: For, What No just or sufficient Excuse for
Rebellion.
greater Excuses can be imagined, than those which were the real Causes of
Zedekiah's Rebellion? May the Invasion of our Rights, Liberties, and Lives, or
the Violation of the True Religion, be sufficient Excuses for it? All these
Zedekiah had in the highest manner; and yet was blamed and punished in the
highest manner for his Rebellion.

His People's Properties, Lives, Liberties, and Religion, were utterly invaded
and violated.

First, As to their Properties, Lives, and Liberties: 1st. Not Property, Life,
and Liberty.


Was not the King of Babylon a mere Invader of them all? What Right had he (but
only what his Sword had given him) to the Country of Judea? And yet, did he not
by mere Force, (without so much as a Pretense of Right or Title to it) besiege,
take, and destroy its Chief Vid. 2 King. c. 24. from v. 10. to v. 17.
City? Did he not seize as his own, and carry away with him not only all things
of Value in it, but all Persons also of any use to it, killing many of them,
and making the rest his Slaves in Babylon?

Was it not to preserve his People's Lives from Murder, and to regain their
Liberties and Properties from the highest Injustice, and the greatest Slavery
and Tyranny, that the King of Israel rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar? And yet,
all this could not excuse his Rebellion.

But though Life, Liberty, and Property, which relate only to this World, will
not excuse Rebellion against the worst of Tyrants; yet surely, Religion, that
must bring us to Eternal Life, is so sacred a thing, that the least Violation
of it will be a full Excuse: But this will appear as vain an Excuse as the
former, if we consider the Instance in the Text. For,

Secondly, As to Religion, even that which God 2dly, Not Religion.
himself had Instituted amongst the Jews; it was no less violated by the King
of Babylon, than their Liberties and Properties.

For, Was not Nebuchadnezzar the highest Idolater, and the greatest Promoter of
Idolatry in the whole World?

Was it not He, that cast Shadrach, Meshach, and Vid. The 3 d. Chap. of Daniel,
Abednego into the Fiery Furnace, (heated seven times hotter than it used to
be) only because they worshipped the True God, and would not Fall down and
worship the Golden Image that he had set up.

Was it not He, that not only profaned, but destroyed the Temple of the Lord,
the Glory of the Jewish Religion?

Was it not He, that not only polluted their most Sacred Altar, (where was the
Secanah, or Glory of God) but pulled it down, and utterly defaced it? Was it
not He, that had seized all the Sacred Vessels, and Inestimable Treasures of
the House of the Lord, and carried them away to be in the highest manner
profaned in Babylon?

And was Zedekiah's Rebellion any thing more, than an Endeavor to regain his
People's just Rights, and to Re-establish the True Religion amongst them? And
would not all this excuse him?

For our full Satisfaction in this Particular, let us read 2 Kings chapter 24. v.
20. and we shall there find it expressly said, That it was for this cause that
God had Cast out him and all Israel out of his Presence, (i. e.) out of his
Protection. For (says the Text) through the Anger of the Lord, it came to pass
in Jerusalem and Judah (until he had cast them out from his Presence) that
Zedekiah rebelled against the King of Babylon.

Since then nothing can excuse Rebellion, Give me leave (as a further
Application of these Words) to press these Two Considerations:

1. The Greatness of the Sin of Rebellion. Two Considerations against Rebellion.
2. The remarkable Punishments of Rebellion.
The First will be apparent in these Three Things:

1. Rebellion is a Complication of all Sins. 2. A Sin for which no Amends can
be made. 3. A Sin, which seldom is, or can be Repented of.
First, It is a Complication of all Sins. 1st. Rebellion is a Complication of
all Sins.


It is not any single Act of Profaneness or Perjury; but Thousands of
Perjuries joined in one.

It is not any particular Act of Injustice or Murder; but all manner of Rapine,
Plunder, and Desolation; all sorts of Rapes and Adulteries; innumerable Murders
of Innocent Persons; and Violations of all things Sacred, are the necessary
Consequences of it.

It too often makes Children to sheath their Swords in the Bowels of their
Parents; and Subjects to destroy the Lives of their Sovereigns, which they
ought to defend, though with the Loss of their own.

How often does it bring in a Foreign Enemy, to enslave a Nation? Have not we
too dearly experienced this in England? Look into our Histories, and ye may
find, that we could never have been Conquered either by the Danes, Saxons, or
Normans, nay, not by the Romans themselves, had it not been for our Intestine
Wars and Rebellions.

In a word, There is no Crime so black and horrid, (at which the Conscience of
any thing, but the Devil himself, would startle, and be amazed) but that
Rebellion too readily draws us into it. Nay,

Secondly, It is such a Sin, as no Amends can be 2dly. It is a Sin, that no
Amends can be made for.
made for.

How can any one make Amends for memberless Rapines, Plunderings, and
Desolations of whole Towns and Countries? Unless we could suppose him possessed
with all the Riches of the Indies.

But if we could suppose all this; yet, How can he make Amends for the Lives of
so many Thousands, that are killed in Rebellion?

Can he raise them from the Dead, and restore them safe and sound to their
Friends and Relations? Could we suppose this; It is utterly impossible, that he
should make any Amends for any one Soul, which is eternally lost by it.

For since Sedition is reckoned up by St. Paul, (Gal. 5. v. 20.) in that black
Catalogue of Sins, that shall shut us out of the Kingdom of Heaven; What can we
think shall become of all those that die in the very Act of Rebellion? Now
since all the Angels of Heaven can never satisfy for one Soul, but must let
that alone for ever; How can any Mortal Man make Amends for Thousands?

If then that undoubted Axiom in Divinity be true; Non tollitur peccatum nisi
restituatur ablatum.
That a Sin can never be forgiven, unless Amends be made for the Injury; What
Hopes can we have for such as die in this Sin, (especially, such as are the
Chief Authors of Rebellion) for which they know beforehand, that no
Satisfaction can be made?

Most especially, if we consider,

Thirdly, That Rebellion is such a Sin, as can 3dly. Rebellion seldom is, or
can be Repented of.
seldom or never be truly Repented of.

The Prophet tells us, That 1 Samuel 15. v. 23.
Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft: And indeed, in nothing are they so
alike as in this, That they are seldom or never Repented of.

For as God Almighty may justly be supposed to harden the Hearts of such
profligate Wretches, as shall dare to give their Souls to the Devil, so that
they cannot Repent, and defraud him of his Bargain: So we have great reason to
believe, that he that shall dare to venture upon Rebellion, (which he knows to
contain all other Sin,s (though never so horrid) or at least to lead him into
them, and which he cannot but know, that no Amends can be made for) may justly
be deprived of God's Grace; so that (if we could suppose him to be able) yet he
shall never be willing to make any Amends for it, or else shall be deprived of
Time and Opportunity to do it.

And indeed, such sad Examples has this Age afforded us of Impenitent Rebels,
as are too apparent Arguments, to prove this to be a most undeniable, though a
most sad Truth: For, notwithstanding those strange Miracles of Providence in
His Majesty's Restoration, and those no less strange Miracles of Mercy toward
the Rebels themselves, (which, one would have thought, should have forced any
thing but the Devil himself to Repentance) yet, How few of them did ever show
any real Remorse for their former Rebellion! Nay, How many of them have still
persisted in it, till They have brought upon themselves swift Destruction!

And this now brings me to discourse what I next proposed: viz.

Secondly, The Remarkable Punishments of Rebellion, 2dly. The remarkable
Punishments of Rebellion in this Life.
even in this Life.

These are so visible both in the Sacred History, and in the Histories of our
own Nation, that he must be a Stranger to both, that has not taken Notice of
them.

As to the Sacred Writings, I need instance in The Examples in Sacred History.
no more, than those remarkable Judgments upon Corah, and his Company, Numb. c.
16. and upon Absalom, and his Confederates, 2 Samuel c. 18.

Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with several of the Princes of Israel, conspire
together against Moses and Aaron: For which Schism and Sedition, (lest they
should go unpunished) God created a new thing Numb. c. 16. v 30.
upon Earth, (as though all known Punishments had been too small for such
Rebels) and made the Earth open her Mouth, and swallow them up, so that they
went down alive into the Pit of Hell.

Neither did the People escape, who were drawn in to join with them: For,
though Aaron made all the haste that could be, To make an Atonement Ibid. Verse
the 47, 48, and 49.
for their Sin, and (as the Text says) the Plague was but begun amongst the
People; yet, They that died in that Plague, were Fourteen Thousand and Seven
Hundred.

As for Absalom, who, led by the Council of Achitophel, The Example of Absalom
and his Confederates.
had raised a most Unnatural Rebellion against his own most Indulgent Father,
King David; His Punishment, though not so miraculous, yet was no less
remarkable than the former.

Concerning which, I need say no more, than the Words of our Vid. Homil.
against Rebellion, Part the 4th.
Most Loyal Mother, the Church of England: viz.

Absalom, though he was most Beautiful of Person, of great Nobility, being the
King's Son, in great Favor with the People, and followed by a great Army of
them; and so dearly beloved by the King himself, 2 Samuel c. 14. v. 25.
that he gave Commandment (notwithstanding his Rebellion) that his Life should
be saved: When Et ibid. Chap. the 16. 17, and 18.
for these Reasons, most Men were afraid to lay violent Hands upon him, A great
Tree, stretching out its Arm as it were on purpose, caught him by the long Bush
of his goodly Hair, and so hanged him up.

To give an Eternal Document, That neither Comeliness of Personage, neither
Nobility of Blood, nor the Favor of the People, no, nor the Favor of the King
himself, can save a Rebel from due Punishment.

God the King of all Kings, being so offended with him, that rather than he
should want due Execution for his Treason, every Tree shall be a Gallows, and
the Hair of his own Head an Halter to hang him with.

And as for Achitophel, (though otherwise an exceeding Vid. 2 Samuel c. 17. to v
24.
Wise Man, yet the mischievous Counselor in this Rebellion) for lack of an
Hangman, (a convenient Servitor for such a Traitor) he went, and privately
hanged himself.

Thus happened it to the Captains of that Rebellion, 2 Samuel c. 18. v. 7, and 8.
besides Forty Thousand of the Common Rebels slain in the Field, and in the
Chase.

And very few Instances of Rebellion can we find, (should we search all the
Histories of all Ages) but that the Subjects that Raised it, or their
Posterity, have smarted severely for it: Which will most evidently appear, if
we look into,

Secondly, The Histories of our own Nation. 2dly. The Examples taken out of our
own Histories.


For, though sometimes we may have known some particular Rebels (such as
Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Shaftsbury, our Late Achitophel) which having Sinned
above the Revenge of all Temporal Punishments, God has reserved (we may
believe) to His own Vengeance of Eternal Flames, to assure us of a Future Life,
wherein such Villainies shall be punished; yet we can scarcely produce any
Examples of such Rebellions, as did generally benefit the People, or prosper
long amongst Us; but of the contrary, we have many and grand Instances.

I shall only take Notice of these Three, because they are so very Remarkable:
Viz.

I. That against King Richard the Second. II. The Two last Rebellions of this
present Age.
As to the First: Though they had forced him 1st. The bloody Punishment of the
Rebellion against Richard the II.
to Resign his Crown in open Parliament, to Henry of Bullenbrook, and had
Confirmed it to him, by all the means that Policy could contrive, or Law could
dictate; yet (as that Loyal Bishop of Carlisle, Mr. Trussell's Hist. of Henry
the IV. p. 52.
Dr. Thomas Merks, whose Name ought always to be remembered as a Martyr, for
his Loyalty, foretold to them) The Child that was yet unborn, did Rue the Work
of that Day. For though this Rebellion prosper'd, in the highest manner, for
Two Generations; yet in the Third, such a War was Raised thereby, between the
two Royal Families, as lasted Vid. ibid. Hist. of Richard the III. p. ult.
near an hundred Years, and was the Occasion of the Loss of the Lives of near
an Hundred Thousand Subjects; amongst which, were most of the Nobility and
Gentry of this Nation.

Neither had it had an end so soon, had not God Almighty been pleased, of his
great Mercy (by several strange Over-turnings) at length to Give the Crown to
them whose Right it was, in whose Posterity both the Families of York and
Lancaster were firmly United.

So fully was that Old Verse (which ought never to be forgotten) confirmed to
us.

De male quaesitis vix gaudent tertius haeres.
The Third Heir scarcely ever enjoyes ill-gotten Estates.
But I need not go so far for Examples of this kind, our own Experience being
too well supplied with them, even in this present Age; the two last Rebellions
amongst us being no less apparent Instances of the like Punishments.

For, Secondly, As to that Rebellion against 2dly. The Rebellion against
Charles the First.
Charles the Blessed Martyr, never to be thought on without the utmost horror!

Though it prosper'd for a while, yet what did we get by it?

Instead of the Best of Men, and the Best of Kings, (who was inhumanely
Murdered by his own Subjects at his own Door, under a damnable pretense of
Justice) we were forced to truckle under a Base and Bloody Usurper.

Instead of The best Church and Religion in the World, Established amongst us,
we had made our Nation nothing but a sink of all manner of filthy Schisms,
Heresies, and Confusion.

Instead of the Best of Governments, under which every Man could Claim the same
Right and Law for his Possessions, as the King Himself, we brought upon our
selves the Iron-Rod of mere Arbitrary Power, and knew no Law nor Right, but
what the Sword gave us.

Instead of the most Blessed Peace and Plenty that our Nation ever enjoyed, we
brought upon our selves nothing but Sequestrations, Decimations, Rapine,
Sacrilege, and the most Unnatural War and Bloodshed.

To Sum up all: All that we got by that Sea of Blood, and those vast heaps of
Treasure spent in that Rebellion, was only this, Viz. That we had entailed upon
our Posterity (had not God been more Merciful unto us) all those things which
were the main pretenses for those Fears and Jealousies, which raised the first
Feuds and Commotions amongst us; unless we add (which with good reason we may)
those amazing Judgments of The most Dreadful Fire, and the most Raging
Pestilence, which were the Just Punishments of that most unjust Rebellion.

But, Thirdly, As to this last Rebellion. 3dly. The fatal consequences that
would have ensued, had Monmouth's Rebellion prevailed.


Supposing the Late Monmouth had prevailed, and by plain force had platted the
Crown upon his own head; What could we have expected from such an Usurpation,
but only another War Between Him and His Whigg-Parliament, or else between the
Two Houses of York and Monmouth, that might (in all probability) have lasted as
long, and have been no less Bloody than the former, between the Two Families of
York and Lancaster?

But God Almighty (thanks to his Holy Name) has by a most signal Providence,
put an end to all these Calamities and Dangers, and has Utterly Over-turned
both these Rebellions, and their Authors and Abettors; almost miraculously
fulfilling the last Verse of the Prophecy of my Text, so clearly even to every
tittle of it, as though the Prophet had meant it of none but our Times, Viz. I
will Over-turn, Over-turn, Over-turn it, and it shall be no more, until he come
whose right it is, and I will give it him.

For, how wonderfully has he Over-turned the Usurper his Family, and the Fagg
end of a Parliament, that had unjustly seized into their own hands the Supreme
Power of the Kingdom; and made them stink in the Nostrils of all good Men?

How prodigiously has He Over-turn'd the Committees of Safety, the Keepers of
our Liberties, that kept them from us, and the old Invincible Army of
Implacable Rebels, and all their Commanders, who Usurped the Command of all
things amongst us?

Lastly, How miraculously has He brought the Wheel over the Whiggs, and
utterly Over-turn'd them, and all their Rebellious Devices?

And by those very Means, by which they thought to have destroyed our King and
Government, has so firmly settled the Crown upon his Head, whose undoubted
right it is, and so immoveably Fixed and Established His Throne, That (unless
we, by our Sins and Abuses of his Mercies, do provoke God to permit them) we
have Reason to believe, that neither the Devil himself, the first Rebel, nor
all his Followers, shall ever be able to shake it.

To sum up All that I have said:

Since seldom or never any Rebellion has long The general Application of the
whole Discourse.
Prosper'd; but has generally been, even in this Life, its own Punishment:
Since it is such a Sin that contains all other Crimes; and no Amends, nor any
sufficient Excuse can be made for it: And lastly, Since it is such a Sin, as
can very hardly (if at all) be Repented of; and, by Consequence, Since there is
very little or no Hope of Forgiveness for it: If we have any Regard to our own
Happiness, either in this World, or That which is to come, Let us follow the
Wisest Advice of the Wisest of Men: viz. Proverbs c. 24. v. 21, and 22.
My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to Change.

And let us always bear in mind the Reason that Solomon gives us (the Truth of
which our own Experience has so often confirmed) viz. For their Calamity shall
rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

And, lest any should be drawn into Rebellion with a Show and Pretense of
Religion, Let me add the most necessary Exhortation of the Great Apostle of the
Gentiles, viz. Romans c. 16. v. 17, and 18.
Now, I beseech you, Brethren, mark them that cause Divisions amongst you,
contrary to the Doctrine ye have learned, and avoid them.

For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
Bellies; and by good Words, and fair Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the
Simple.

For so long as such Deceivers are marked by the People, for Godly and Precious
Men, (as to my Knowledge, the greatest Rebels, even Ferguson himself, has been
cried up as the Most powerful, and Soul-saving Preacher amongst them) it is
impossible, but that all manner of Rebellious Principles will be planted in
their Heads.

But if our Magistrates would Mark such as make Divisions amongst us, contrary
to the Doctrine we have received in our Church, so as to execute our Laws with
all Vigor against them; and if all the People would so Mark them, as to Avoid
them, it would be impossible for them to turn our Faith into Faction, and our
Religion into Rebellion.

And methinks, they have shown themselves such barefaced Rebels to all our
Nation, that he that can still have such a Kindness for them, as to continue
still to follow them, does clearly demonstrate to the World, that he has but
very little Loyalty to his King, or Religion to his GOD.

Let me Conclude All with this short Prayer:

That God Almighty would Unite all our Hearts in the Ways of True Religion
toward Him, of Temperance and Sobriety toward our selves, of Justice and
Charity toward all Men, and of Duty and Loyalty toward our Sovereign: And
that, as He has so signally Over-turn'd His Enemies, and given Him the Crown
and Diadem, whose right it is; so He would please to Establish the Work that He
has wrought amongst us, upon the sure Foundations of Peace, Truth, and
Righteousness: And that to this End, He would bless our KING with length of
Days, and all Happiness in this Life; and finally, Crown Him with Immortal
Glory.

To which Prayer, I am sure, every True Son of our Loyal Mother, the Church of
England, cannot but heartily say, AMEN.

Now, To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, (the Great
Disposer of all Things, and the Giver of all Victories) be ascribed (as is most
due) all Praise and Glory, Majesty and Dominion, now and for evermore,

AMEN.
FINIS.

