THE Pious Communicant Rightly Prepared; OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning the Blessed
Sacrament: Wherein the NATURE of it is Described, our Obligation to frequent
Communion Enforced, and Directions given for due Preparation for it, Behavior
at, and after it, and Profiting by it.

WITH PRAYERS and HYMNS, suited to the several Parts of that Holy Office.

To which is added, A Short DISCOURSE of BAPTISM.

By SAMUEL WESLEY, A. M Chaplain to the most Honorable JOHN Lord Marquess of
Normanby, and Rector of Epworth in the Diocese of Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. MDCC.

The Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem:
Dedicated to Her most Sacred MAJESTY. In Ten Books. In Folio. Each Book
Illustrated by necessary Notes: With Sixty Copper Plates, by the celebrated
Hand of W. Faithorn. The Second Edition, revised and improved with the Addition
of a large Map of the Holy Land, and a Table of the Principal Matters. Written
by the Author of this Manual on the Sacrament. Printed for C. Harper.

PREFACE.
WHEN so many excellent Treatises have already appeared on this Subject, it may
well be wondered why, after all, so mean a Pen should attempt so weighty an
Argument; since it is almost impossible to say any thing New upon it, and the
mildest Question a Man must expect, who now handles it, would be of the same
Nature with that of Job to his Friends; Who knows not such Job xii. 3.
Things as these? But one that is resolved to write a Book, seldom wants an
Excuse for doing it, and will be ready to draw one, even from the Number of
those which have gone before him, since this might have hindered others as well
as him: And besides, there is a different Size of Writers, suitable to the
different Capacities of Readers; and Acquaintance, or Inclination, or sometimes
pure Accident, may be the occasion of some Persons reading one Book, when they
would not have read another, and perhaps, to Profit more by it, than they might
by another better written on the same Subject. What I have aimed at in this
Manual, is to be as clear and methodical as I could, both in the Description of
the Nature of the Sacrament, and the Occasion and Ends of its Institution, and
in the Directions for our Behavior in relation to the Reception of it. I have
endeavored to give a rational and distinct View of it in all the Notions,
wherein Learned and Pious Men have represented it: To press home the
indispensible, though much neglected Duty of frequent Communion, which I am
persuaded would highly conduce to a general Reformation of Manners, and to
repair the Decays of Christian Piety amongst us. To lay down some plain Rules
for our Preparation, and Heads of Examination, in order to our worthy
Receiving, with Meditations or Prayers suited to every Part of the Office, and
inserted in their proper Places. As to the double Appendix, the former relating
to our Religious Societies, whose Rules and Orders have been published and
defended by Mr. Woodward, in his late Book on that Subject; and my Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells, in the Life of Dr. Horneck, and for whom, Her late Majesty
of Blessed Memory was so much concerned while She was living; their whole
Design appeared to me so highly serviceable to Christianity, that I could not
but take this Opportunity to recommend it, and shall still be of the same mind,
till I can see, what I have here offered on that Head, fairly answered. And the
latter, which relates to Baptism, will be granted not unnecessary, when several
(I hope) well-meaning Persons, especially in those Parts where I live, are
unsatisfied about it: And it is the same which has been done before by the Right
Reverend and Pious Bishop of Ely, in his Aqua Genitalis, after his Mensa
Mystica; and by others who have labored on the same Subject. Likewise, I have
added the Great Hallel, or Paschal Hymn, which was usually sung by the Jews at
their Passover, and by our Savior and his Apostles, at the Institution of this
Sacrament. Nor am I unwilling to own that I have through the whole, wrought in
any memorable Thoughts which I have met with in such Authors, as have handled
the same Argument; having done all as plainly and compendiously as I was able.
To conclude; if the whole, or any Part of this little Book, may any ways tend
to promote the Glory of God, or the Piety and Happiness of Mankind, especially
of that dear Flock, over which it has pleased God to give me Charge, I shall
not much regret my Composing, and Adventuring it abroad into the World.

THE CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION. Page 1. Chap. I. Of the Nature of the Sacrament. 3. Chap. II. Of
the perpetual Obligation that lies upon Christians of riper years to
communicate, and even to frequent Communion. 42. Chap. III. Of Examination
before the Sacrament, and Preparation for it. 94. A Confession when we are
Preparing for the Communion. 128. A Collect for Perseverance. 132. For Faith.
134. A Thanksgiving before the Sacrament. 135. A Collect for Charity. 137.
Chap. IV. Of our Behavior immediately before the Communion, and when we
receive it. 143. An Act of Penitence. 163. An Act of Faith. 165. An Act of
Humility immediately before Receiving. 167. An Act of Praise after Receiving.
169. An Act of Love. 170.
Chap. V. Of our Behavior after we have received, and during the whole course
of our Lives, especially the Time betwixt different Celebrations. 173.
Questions for the Evening. 186. Questions for the Morning. 187. Short
Directions for those who are really straightned for Time, and cannot go through
the larger Methods of Examination already given. And a Prayer for one in
Affliction and Want. 187, etc. Of BAPTISM. 189. The Great Hallel or Pasehal
Hymn, etc. 251.

THE Worthy Communicant.
INTRODUCTION.
THE End of every Christian Duty, is to make us still better and holier: The
height of our Perfection, consists in the Imitation of God: unless we know God,
we cannot be like him; and the clearest Revelation of his Nature, and of his
Will is left us by his Son, in his Holy Gospel: The Blessed Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, is an Epitome of that Gospel The word Sacrament is
often used in the Fathers for the whole Christian Religion.
, and a lively Representation of our Savior's Sufferings: He therefore who
frequently and devoutly receives it, cannot be an ill Man, but must needs make
a more than ordinary Progress in Virtue and Holiness. For the promoting
whereof, I have undertaken to write this little Manual, wherein I shall
endeavor in the

I. Chapter, to give a clear and rational Account of the Nature of this
Sacrament, and the Occasion and Ends of its Institution. As in the

II. Of the perpetual Obligation which lies upon all adult Christians to
communicate, and even to frequent Communion. In the

III. Of our Examination before it, and Preparation for it. The

IV. Our Behavior in it. And in the

V. After we have received, and during the whole course of our Lives,
especially the Time betwixt different Celebrations.

To which shall be added Prayers, Meditations, and Hymns suited to the several
Parts of this Holy Office.

CHAP. I. Of the Nature of the Sacrament.
I. THE Sacrament of the Lord's Supper may be thus described. It Is a Memorial,
and Representation of the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, instituted by
Christ himself in the room of the Jewish Passover; wherein, by the breaking of
Bread, and drinking of Wine, we renew our Covenant with God, praising him for
all his Goodness, and testify our Union with all good Men; and whereby the
Benefits of our Savior's Death are sealed and applied to every faithful
Receiver.

. II. ['Tis a Memorial of the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ.] I confess, the
whole Sacred Action has been styled by the Fathers, as well as by some
Excellent Persons of our own Church, the Christian Sacrifice, the unbloody
Sacrifice; and is indeed such, in the same Sense that Prayer and Praise,
whereof it is in a great measure composed, are styled under the Gospel,
spiritual Sacrifices: Nay, it comes yet nearer to the Nature of the old
Eucharistical, and other Sacrifices, because it is an Oblation of something
visible, namely, Bread and Wine, to be consumed to God's Honor; which are then
offered when the Minister places them on the Christian Altar, or Holy Table;
(as was done more solemnly by lifting them up in the ancient Church)
immediately after which, in the Prayer for the Church Militant, he beseeches
God to receive our Oblations, (as well as Alms and Prayers); which may relate
to the Bread and Wine, newly offered: But since it has no shedding of Blood
therein, which has been thought essential to a proper Sacrifice (...), macto:
and facio, is used in the same Sense.
, and that the shedding of our Savior's Blood, is only Sacramentally
represented in it, and not actually and properly poured forth, as it was upon
the Cross, whereon he was once offered, to take away Sin; and since the
Sacrament is a Memorial of that one Oblation of Christ, and it is contrary to
the Nature of a Memorial or Remembrance of the Sacrifice of the Death of
Christ, to be the same with that Sacrifice it remembers; for these Reasons we
cannot own any such proper, propitiatory, attoning Sacrifice Homily of the
Sacrament, Part 1. We must take heed lest of the Memory it be made a Sacrifice,
exactly as Eusebius, who says our Savior left us, (...).
in the Sacrament as the Romanists do believe, any more than we can think with
them, that it is available both for quick and dead; of neither of which we find
any Footsteps in the Holy Scriptures. Suffice it therefore, that we believe it
a Sacrifice in the highest Sense, that Prayer and Praise are so called in the
New Testament, because it requires, and is composed of the most exalted Acts of
both; that we believe it an Offering, or Dedication of the Bread and Wine to
the sacred use, as well as we therein offer our selves anew to God; and that we
believe the whole Action, a Memorial, a Commemoration, and Representation of
the inestimable Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, whereby alone we expect Life
and Salvation.

III. First, It Is a '[Memorial or Commemoration of Christ's Death, and of the
Sacrifice which he thereby offered for us.] That is, by this sacred Action, we
record, and keep it in mind, till he come again to Judgment. And that according
to his own Command, as St. Luke St. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
relates it of the Bread, and St. Paul both of the Bread and Wine; This do in
remembrance of me. As forgetfulness of God's Goodness and Ingratitude for it,
must needs have been great occasions of the fall of Man, so that very fall
renders us still more forgetful and ungrateful. Mankind will therefore have
always need enough of Helps to their Memory in religious Matters: And some of
these, God has appointed wherever there has been a revealed Religion. Thus the
Sacrifice of the Passover was instituted for a Remembrance of what the
Israelites suffered in Egypt, and of God's wonderful Mercy in delivering them
from it, as well as to typify or shadow forth unto them Christ himself, our
great Passover. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was in like manner
instituted; That we might keep in memory that which Christ suffered for us, and
delivered to us; such a sensible Sign, and remarkable solemn Action, being much
more likely to preserve a lively impression of it, than if it had been only
barely recorded in History. Now this Commemoration may be considered either
with respect to our selves, or with respect to God: as it respects our selves,
we not only therein commemorate God's Love in general to Mankind, in giving his
Son, and our Savior's Love, in giving himself a Ransom for all Men, to bring
them into a Capacity of Salvation on their Faith and Obedience; but yet
farther, the actual Application of his meritorious Sacrifice to our selves, on
our performing the Conditions of his Covenant, and his infinite Goodness in
making us partakers of his Holy Word and Sacraments, and thereby calling us to
this State of Salvation, and preserving us in it. As this Commemoration relates
to God, we do also, in the Communion, present a Memorial of a sweet Savor
before him, and beseech him for the sake of his dear Son, and by his Agonies,
and bloody Sweat, by his Cross, and Passion, and precious Death, to have Mercy
upon us, and grant us the Remission of our Sins, and all other Benefits of his
Sufferings. Not that God is either ignorant of our Wants, or unwilling to
relieve us, or forgetful of us: But we must be sensible of these things our
selves, and of God's Power to help us, and seek for Relief in those ways he has
appointed. And well may we more solemnly commemorate our Savior's Sacrifice in
this Sacrament, when we do the same in some degree, even in our daily Prayers,
and ask all for his sake, and in a Sense, offer him anew to his Father,
applying his Atonement, and pleading his Merits, and trusting in his
Intercession and Meditation. Nor ought we to forget that the ancient Liturgies,
did not only commemorate our Savior's Death in the Sacrament, but likewise his
Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven.

IV. Secondly. But there is not only a Commemoration, but a Representation too
of our Savior's Death, in the Holy Communion. It Is not a bare Remembrance of
it, it is a lively Scheme and Figure of what he endured: As often as ye eat of
this Bread, and drink of this Cup, says the Apostle, ye do show forth, or
rather, by way of Command, show ye forth, the Lord's Death till he come.
Declare it, proclaim it, tell the People what great things he has done! Whence
this Representation of Christ's Death in the Sacrament has a respect to others
to whom we are to declare it, as well as it relates, like the Commemoration
beforementioned, to our selves and to God. We do by this proclaim unto Men and
Angels, the manifold Wisdom and Goodness of God, and the Kindness and
Condescension of our ever blessed Redeemer; and in a manner preach the Gospel
to every Creature, while we here represent so considerable a part of it, as our
Savior's Death, and own that we are not ashamed of his Cross, but rather Glory
in it.

V. We represent it also to our selves: that is, we do by this sacred
significant, and lively Action, fix it more deeply in our Affections and
Memories. The Bread represents our Savior's Body, who is the true Bread of
Life that came down from Heaven: The Wine, his Blood: The Breaking of the
Bread, the Torments he endured on the Cross, and the Wounding of his sacred
Body; as the pouring out of the Wine is a most lively Figure of the shedding
his most precious Blood. But of this, more hereafter.

VI. But in the last place, we also represent our Savior's Death, to God the
Father, in the Holy Communion: This we do by those Actions which he himself has
appointed, as means of supplicating him, and obtaining his Favor: Beseeching
our heavenly Father, who of his tender Mercy, did give his only Son Jesus
Christ to suffer Death upon the Cross for our Redemption, that we duly
receiving the Holy Mysteries, according to our Lord Jesus Christ's Holy
Institution, in remembrance of his Death and Passion, may be Partakers of his
most blessed Body and Blood. The Priest neither makes nor offers the real
natural Body of Christ, in the Holy Communion, but he makes his spiritual or
sacramental Body, and therein represents his natural Body as well as he also
represents what he really suffered for us, in the verity of that Body; this he
represents to God as well as to us, and every devout Communicant should
faithfully join in the Representation:

VII. The next thing observable in our Description of the Holy Communion is,
[That 'twas instituted by Christ in the room of the Jewish Passover:] This as
it gives great Light into the Nature of it, and the most weighty Controversies
concerning it, so the Matter of Fact it self, is too evident to be doubted or
denied, and of too great moment to be lightly passed over: As will appear if we
consider the Time, the Form, the End of the Institution of this Sacrament,
compared with that of the Passover, and the Expressions of John the Baptist and
the Apostles, relating to the Communion it self, or to our Savior, who
ordained it.

The Time of its first Institution and Celebration, was the Night of the
Paschal Supper, immediately after Supper. We are told by Buxtorf. Synag. cap.
13. p. 302. de Paschat celebrando. Fagius in Exodus 12.
learned Men, that the old Jews had a very ancient Tradition amongst them, that
the Messiah should come to redeem them the very same Night in which God brought
them out of Egypt, the Night of the Passover, whereon they also say that God
vouchsafed to the old Patriarchs and holy Men, most, or all of those famous
Blessings and Deliverances which we read of in the sacred Writings; which is no
obscure Indication, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was to succeed the
Paschal Supper.

VIII. The manner of their celebrating the Passover also proves the same; For
the Master of the House, took Bread, and brake it, and gave it to those about
him, and said, This is the Bread of affliction which our Fathers did eat in
Egypt. Buxtorf. ubi supra.
that is, the Memorial of that Bread, in the same Sense that our Savior said,
This is my Body; after he had taken Bread, and blessed and brake it, and gave
to his Disciples, as the Jews also called the Passover, The Body of the Paschal
Lamb.

And in like manner, the Cap. The Master of the Feast took it after Supper, and
when he had given Thanks, gave it to the rest, and said, This is the Fruit of
the Vine, and the Blood of the Grape. This was the third Cup which they drank
at the Passover, and called it, The Cup of Blessing. Lightfoot, Vol. II. p. 260.
All the Company drank of it, the sick as well as the healthy. Buxtorf. p. 296.
Thus our Savior after Supper took the Cup, this third Cup, and when he had
given Thanks, gave it to his Disciples, and said, Drink ye All of this, for
this is my Blood of the New Testament [New Covenant] or this Cup is the New
Testament [New Covenant] in my Blood. St. Mat. 26. 28. St. Luke 22. 20.
As Moses said, when he sprinkled all the People with Blood. Heb. 9. 20. Exodus
24. 8.
This is the Blood of the Covenant which God made with you; it was not only the
Seal of the New Covenant, but likewise the Sanction of it: And it is remarkable
that our Savior calls it the Fruit of the Vine, as did the Master of the Feast
at the Passover. And so the Apostle calls the Sacramental Cup, the Cup of
Blessing.

IX. There Is yet another thing remarkable in the Passover, which our Savior
retained in his Sacrament, and that is the Hymn, or great Hallel, which the
Jews always sung at this Festival, and still continue to use it in that shadow
of the Passover which they yet retain. Buxtorf. ubi supr. Patrick in 113 Psalm.
It consisted of six Psalms, from the 113 to the 118. inclusively; wherein were
mentioned, as their Rabbis teach. 1. Their Deliverance from Egypt. 2. The
Division of the Red Sea. 3. The Giving of the Law. 4. The Resurrection from the
Dead. And 5. The Sorrows of the Messiah. Lightfoot, Vol. II. p. 354.
It Is expressly said, that our Savior and his Apostles sung a Hymn after they
had eaten, (...), not (...); they all doubtless joined in it, as was the Custom
of their Countrymen, which they could not have done, had it not been a Form
well known unto them: And what more proper than those Psalms already mentioned?
which shows the Lawfulness of singing in the Christian Church, and of the whole
Congregations joining in it, some think Judas not being here excepted,
Lightfoot.
and that in a set Form, out of the Psalms of David, which have made a great
part of the Liturgy of the Church, for near Three Thousand Years. Nor was this
Sacrament ever celebrated without singing by any regular Christians: St.
Chrysostom on Heb. 10. says of those of his Time, That in the Sacrament they
did offer Thanksgiving for their Salvation, by devout Hymns and Prayers to God.
And before him, Pliny's famous Letter mentions the Christians as jointly
singing Hymns to Christ: And Tertullian in his Apology, has left it on Record,
that it was the Custom of Christians to close their Agapae, or Love Feasts,
with singing, either some portion of Scripture, or something of their own
Composure. Tertull. Apol. cap. 39. p. 106. Edit. Cantab.
I Have insisted the longer on this Head, because there are some Persons, who, I
think, very unreasonably, not only neglect the Practice of this Angelical Duty
themselves, but even censure it as unlawful in others: to whom we may answer,
We have such a laudable Custom, and so have the Churches of God had, in all
Places and all Ages.

X. Yet farther, there is a remarkable Analogy, or resemblance in the End of
their Institution, between the Passover and the Supper of the Lord: God said
concerning the Passover, to the Children of Israel; This day shall be to you
for a Memorial Exodus 12. 14. Ver. 27.
, and you shall keep it a Feast to the Lord throughout all your Generations.
Exodus 12. 3.
Remember this day in which you came out of Egypt, and thou shall show thy Son,
etc. Exodus 13. 8. Lxx. (...).
And the Red Wine which they made use of therein, was to signify either the
Blood of their Children, shed by Pharaoh; or rather, the Death of Pharoah's
firstborn, as well as afterward of himself and the rest of the Egyptians, in
just Vengeance for their Cruelty to the Israelites; and of the Blood which was
on their own Door-Posts, whereby they were preserved from the Pestilence. Thus
in the Lord's Supper, our Savior commands his Followers, to do this in
Remembrance of him, and thereby to show forth his Death till he come, as the
Israelites were to keep the Passover for ever, or throughout all their
Generations. Much the same word being here used by the Apostle, to express our
Celebration, or Annuntiation of our Savior's Death in the Sacrament, that is
used by the ancient Greek Translators of the Bible, to signify that of the
Passover enjoined to the Jews (...).
. In which sacramental Feast we are to preserve the Memory of our Deliverance
from the slavery of Sin, much worse than that of Egypt.

XI. Lastly, There are several Expressions in the New Testament which will not
suffer us to doubt of the Analogy between them. Thus the Baptist calls our
Savior, The Lamb of God St. Ioh. 1. 29.
; and St. Peter says, That we were not redeemed with corruptible things, but
with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish 1 St. Pet. 1.
18, 19.
. And St. Paul, alludes most manifestly unto it; Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the Feast, not with the old Leaven,
etc. 1 Cor. 5. 7.


From all which it appears, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was
instituted in the room of the Passover, and that our Savior retained many of
the Ceremonies therein, as well such as God himself had immediately Vid.
Cudworth, and Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, p. 6.
appointed, as such as the Jewish Church had added, either for the more lively
Representation of the thing, or else for decency and order: and from what has
been said, we may have great Light into the Nature of the Holy Communion,
especially as to the last Head insisted on, that it is a Memorial and
Representation of our Savior's Death, of his Body which was broken, and his
Blood which was shed for us.

XII. I proceed to the Matter of this Sacrament, the exterior Matter, or
outward Elements, the visible and sensible Signs, namely, Bread and Wine which
the Lord has commanded to be taken and received. 'Twas from the Fruits of the
Ground, that the first Offerings were made to the Lord: Some have been of
Opinion that Noah was the first that offered Bread in Sacrifice, and that
thence he received a Name among the Ancients. Dickenson in Delphi Phoeniciss.
p. 169. And Dr. Spencer de Sacrificiis, thinks that Noah was called Ogyges,
from Ogh, which signifies Panis subcineritius, Bread baked under the Embers,
and offered in Sacrifice. p. 659.
Melchisedeck's bringing forth Bread and Wine, has also been thought an Act of
his sacerdotal Office, and not an Instance of Hospitality only. We are sure
that the Mincha, Meat Offering, or Bread-offering, so often mentioned by Moses,
which was to be offered every Morning and Evening, and is called the Most Holy
of all the Offerings of the Lord, was composed of Fine-Flower, with a
proportion of Wine added unto it Exodus 29. 40. Levit. 2. 3.
. Bread is the most simple and common Food, the most easy to be obtained, and
yet the most necessary, the Staff of Life: Wine was also as common in those
Countries, as it is useful and refreshing, making glad the Heart of Man, Psalm.
104. 15. Nay, cheering God and Man, Judge. 9. 13. That is, Wine was acceptable
to God in Sacrifices: For some, or all of which Reasons was our Savior pleased
to make Choice of Bread and Wine in the Celebration of these Mysteries, as well
as because they were used by the Jewish Church, in the Passover. And these are
in the Sacrament solemnly offered to God, as an acknowledgment of his being the
Creator of all things, and Sovereign Lord of the World; according to the
ancient Doxology Vid. Mede of Christian Sacrifice, p. 359.
at the presenting of them on the Lord's Table; which was much the same with
that in the Revelations, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor,
and Power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure, they are,
and were created.

XIII. And Bread and Wine they are still after the Consecration; not common,
but Sacred and Sacramental. They are changed in their Use, but not in their
Substance. They are not changed into the Substance of the Natural Body of
Christ, which hung upon the Cross, and his Blood which was there shed for us; a
monstrous and novel Opinion, first established by the Council of Lateran, above
twelve hundred Years after Christ; and then by that of Trent, among other
Articles of their New Creed; no where to be found in Scripture, (as some of the
most Learned Romanists have confessed) but directly contrary to it, as it is to
the Writings of the Fathers; not believed at present by many Learned Men in the
Church of Rome Vid. Preface to Discourse of the Eucharist.
; overthrowing the very Nature of a Sacrament, and leaving nothing for an
outward Sign; destroying the Foundation of our Faith, which is grounded on
Miracles, which imply the certainty of the Judgment of our Senses on their
proper Objects; introducing the most monstrous absurdities, which if granted,
would render the Christian Religion, which is the only reasonable Religion in
the World, the most absurd, and most unreasonable; supposing actual length,
without any thing long, and the same of whiteness, redness, solidity, moisture,
breadth, and thickness; involving the most horrid, as well as most ridiculous
Consequences: That our Savior did eat his own Body, and gave it to his
Disciples to eat; making Christians the worst of Cannibals, to eat their God a
thousand times over Eoquem tam amentem esse putas, qui illud quo vescatur
credat Deum esse? Tully de natura Deorum.
; implying penetration of dimensions; contradicting the very Nature of a Body,
which cannot be in two places at the same time Rubric after Communion.
, much less in Earth and Heaven; contradicting our Savior's own Words, that we
should not have him always, St. Mat. 26. 11.
that is, his Body, with us, though in his Divinity, his Spirit, his Power, his
Graces, he is with the Church to the End of the World St. Mat. 28. 20.
; contrary to the End of the Institution, which was to be a Memorial of his
Body broken, and Blood shed for us; contrary to the Words of the Apostle 1 Cor.
11. 26, 27, 28.
, who calls it Bread and Wine, after Consecration, thrice in one Chapter Vide
supra.
. For which Reasons, and many others that might be alleged, our Church
declares, in her Twenty Eighth Article, of the Lord's Supper, That
Transubstantiation, or the Change of the Substance of the Bread and Wine in the
Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved in Holy Writ, but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, overthrows the Nature of a Sacrament, and has
given occasion to many Superstitions.

XIV. But how is it then called the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ,
and in what Sense is he present there, and how are the faithful said therein,
to eat his Body and drink his Blood, both by the ancient Fathers, and by our
own Church, and most other Protestants of all denominations Lutherans, Calvin,
Beza, Assemb. Catechism, great and less; Cranmer, Ridley; Communion Service
English, Tigur. Liturg. etc.
?

That this is true in some Sense is evident from Holy Scripture it self, as
well as from the Consent of all Christian Churches. Our Savior said, This is
my Body, and this is my Blood. And the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 16.
, The Cup of Blessing; is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ, the
Bread of the Body of Christ? And to the same purpose in the next Chapter.

Thus our forementioned Article, That the Bread which we break is a partaking
of the Body of Christ, and the Cup of Blessing a partaking of the Blood of
Christ. And in the Catechism, that the inward part, or thing signified in the
sacrament is, The Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily, and indeed taken
and received [by the faithful] in the Lord's Supper. And the like in several
places in the Communion-Office. From all which it appears how little Reason our
Adversaries have to brand us for Sacramentarians, or such as deny the Body and
Blood of Christ, in a sound Sense, to be received in the Lord's Supper.

XV. But what Sense that is, we come now to enquire.

First, The Symbols, the very Bread and Wine, are in a figurative, typical, and
sacramental Sense, the Body and Blood of our Savior. They are more than a bare
or ordinary Figure; they do really and actually from their Institution,
represent and exhibit Christ's Death unto us, as did the Paschal Lamb, the
delivery of the Jews out of Egypt. This our Church affirms in her Homily of the
Sacrament, Part I. That we must be sure to hold, that in the Supper of the
Lord, there is no vain Ceremony, no untrue Figure of a thing absent, but the
Bread and Cup of the Lord, the Memory of Christ, the Annunciation of his Death,
etc.

XVI. But there is yet more in it; for,

2. There is, in the Blessed Sacrament, a real spiritual presence of the Body
and Blood of our Savior, to every faithful Receiver. Christ, as to his
Divinity, is every where, and more effectually and graciously present to his
own Institutions, and will make his Promise good, to be with his Church to the
End of the World St. Mat. 28. 20.
; and doubtless is so in this Sacrament, as well as in the other of Baptism;
and herein he conveys all the real Benefits obtained by his Sufferings, to
every faithful Receiver. His Natural Body is in Heaven, where it will remain
till he comes to Judgment. He is spiritually present in the Sacrament, present
by Faith to our Spirits. The forementioned Homily tells us that in the Supper
of the Lord, we are not only to hold that there is a Memory of Christ's Death,
but that there is likewise the Communion of his Body and Blood in a mavelous
Incorporation wrought in the Souls of the faithful. And again; If God has
purified our hearts by Faith, we do at this Table receive, not only the outward
Sacrament, but the spiritual thing also, not the Figure, but the Truth, not the
Shadow only, but the Body. And to the same purpose, our Learned Bishop Jewel,
That not the naked Figure, and bare Sign and Token only, but Christ's Body and
Blood are verily and indeed given unto us in the Sacrament; we verily eat it,
and drink it, and live by it, and [thereby] Christ dwells in us, and we in him.
Yet, he goes on, 'We say not that the Substance of Bread and Wine is done away,
or that Christ's Body is fleshly present in the Sacrament, but we lift up our
hearts to Heaven, there to feed on him. Though, by the way, What need would there
have been of the Sursum Corda, or Invitation to the People in the Primitive
Church, to lift up their Hearts to Christ in Heaven, if whole Christ, God and
Man, were actually present upon the Altar?

XVII. But neither the Apostles, nor the Primitive Church, nor our Church of
England, ever held that the Sacrament was so much as in this latter Sense, the
Body and Blood of Christ, to all that received, but only to the faithful
Receivers. For those who received unworthily, the Apostle tells us, they were
guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, therefore surely they did not
properly communicate of his Body and Blood, which he that does has eternal
Life; nay, they did eat and drink their own Judgment or Condemnation, not
discerning the Lords Body. And to the same purpose is that famous saying of one
of the Fathers, That the Wicked do only press with their Teeth the Sacrament or
outward Sign of the Lords Body, but do not really communicate in it. Neither
did the Fathers ever think that we were to eat the Flesh of Christ in a gross
carnal, Capernaitical sense, whatever high Expressions they may have sometime
used concerning this Mystery, wherein they may have been followed by devout
modern Writers. Hear one for all: It Is St. Augustine, de Doctrina Christiana,
Lib. 3. Cap. 16. where, in his Rules for interpreting Scripture, he instances
in that Text, which has been so much controverted of late years, the 6th of St.
John Ver. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood, ye
have no Life in you: Si praeceptiva locutio, etc. If, says he, the Expression
forbid any wicked action, or command a good one, then it is not figurative; but
if it appears to command any Wickedness, or forbid any Good, it must be
figurative. Thus he goes on, that expression, Except ye eat the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no Life in you, seems to command a
very wicked thing; it must therefore be understood in a Figure, and the meaning
of it is, that we are to communicate in our Lords sufferings, and to lay it up
in our Remembrance, that his Flesh was crucified and wounded for us. And when
any Romanist fairly answers this, we may safely promise them to believe
Transubstantiation.

XVII. But if Christ be no otherwise in the Sacrament than figuratively in the
Symbols, as they are a Commemoration of his death, and spiritually and
effectually present to the faithful Reeeiver; Where is then, it may be asked,
the Mystery, which all acknowledge in this Sacrament, and which is so often
called by ancient Writers, the venerable, the awful and the tremendous Mystery
or Mysteries of our Faith?

In answer, We do own, that as in general great is the Mystery of Godliness; so
there is something, which far transcends our Reason, in this Sacrament, and in
the manner of our Saviors acting on our minds therein, though the Fact it self
be clearly revealed in Scripture. The manner, I say, is still mysterious, how
it becomes to us the Body and Blood of Christ: How the inestimable Benefits of
Christ's Death are communicated to us by the reception of the humble Signs; how
we are thereby united to him, and he to us: this, as the Apostle says, perhaps
on the same occasion, is indeed a great Mystery, Ephesians. 5. 32.
and we can no more give an account thereof than we can of 'the Wind which
'bloweth where it lists. We ought therefore firmly to believe it, we ought to
adore the depth of the divine Wisdom in it, without going about so fruitless an
attempt as to fathom and comprehend it. But to go on with our description of
this Sacrament.

XVIII. By the eating this Bread and drinking this Wine, continuing thus in
their proper substances, though Grace is added to them by their being taken and
blessed, or set apart to this sacred use, we do most solemnly and Sacramentally
[renew our Covenant with God.]

God made a Covenant in Paradise with all Mankind in our first Parents, which
was called, The First Covenant, the Condition whereof was, Do this and live;
the Sanction, In the day thou eatest of the Tree of Knowledge thou shall surely
dye, or become obnoxious to Death, both Temporal and Eternal: Adam broke this
Covenant by his Disobedience; and being the Head and Representative of Mankind,
by him Sin and Death entered into the World; he lost his original Righteousness,
and became the Parent of a sinful and a miserable Offspring, and in him all
died; 1 Cor. 15. 22.
or were obnoxious to the same Curse, which he was to suffer.

XIX. Yet God, who is rich in Mercy, did not leave him to despair, but
immediately made another Covenant with him, called the Covenant of Grace, or
the Second Covenant, established on a better Security and on better Promises,
which was briefly contained in those Words, Genesis 3. 15. The Seed of the Woman
shall bruise the Serpents Head, See the excellent Discourse of these Two
Covenants in the Preface to the Whole Duty of Man.
that is, Christ, the promised Seed, should destroy the Principality of the
Devil, rescue lost Mankind from his Slavery, and again reconcile us to God.
This was yet more clearly revealed to Abraham, that in his Seed, that is, in
Christ, should all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. Genesis 22. 18.
'Twas farther illustrated in the Types and Figures of the old Law; but the
full and complete discovery thereof was reserved to the Times of the Gospel,
which is called the New Covenant; containing the most perfect Revelation of the
Divine Will, the Promises of God, and those Conditions on which he accepts and
forgives us; Which were on Christ's part his suffering in our room, as our
Surety, and a Sacrifice for us to atone his Fathers Anger; Heb. 9. 12. 10. 10.
as on our part, Faith, St. Mark 16. 16.
Repentance and not a Sinless, as in the First Covenant, but a sincere
Obedience. Acts 3. 19, 25, 26.


XX. This General Covenant is first applied to particular persons by Baptism,
wherein we are now admitted into it, as Abraham and his Posterity were by
Circumcision into the same Evangelical Covenant, Gal. 3. 17.
and are thereby actually dedicated to Gods Service, and renounce the World,
the Flesh and the Devil; and because there are none who come to age without
having been guilty of some Breaches of this Covenant, we do, after we have
taken it upon our selves in Confirmation, renew it again at the Holy Communion:
Of which we shall still have a clearer notion, if we consider it as it is a
Feast, or as it is a solemn Oath, and on both accounts a federal Rite, or a
Token, Pledge or instituted Sign of our being actually in Covenant with God;
without which what right had we to approach unto him, or how could we expect
any Mercy from him?

XXI. Let us consider the Holy Communion as a Feast, a sacred Feast, which was
used among the Ancients at the Confirmation of Covenants, in token of Amity and
Friendship between the Guests. Thus in that noted Instance, at the ratifying
the League between Isaac and Abimelech, Isaac made a Feast, and they did eat
and drink and swear one to another. Genesis 26. 30.
But this was more than an ordinary Feast, there was generally a Sacrifice
added to it, at which they believed God himself present, a Partaker thereof,
and a Witness of their Agreement. Thus when Jacob and Laban made a Covenant,
Jacob offered Sacrifice upon the Mount, and called his Brethren to eat Bread.
Genesis 29 54. And the Passover was both a Feast and a Sacrifice: and it is the
Character which God himself gives of his Saints, or those that were relatively
or federally holy, that they had made a Covenant with him with Sacrifice, Psalm.
50. 5. And the Apostle speaking, as it is very probable, of this Christian
Banquet the Holy Communion which comes in the room of the Passover, exhorts the
Corinthians to keep the Feast not with old Leaven, etc. 1 Cor. 7. 8.
Thus it is called the Table of the 1 Cor. 10. 21.
Lord: and the Wine, the Cup of the Lord. And God vouchsafes therein to come in
unto us, and sup with us; nay to kill the fatted Calf for us, and feast us with
his own Sacramental Body and Blood; and thereby assures us of his Favor and
Goodness to us, and renews his Covenant with us, and gives us leave to do the
same with him.

XXII. But we confirm this Covenant by a most solemn Oath, as well as a Feast,
in this Holy Communion; for it partakes of both. The very Word Sacrament
originally signified that Military Oath which Soldiers took to their General,
to bear Faith and true Allegiance to him, to obey his Commands. In the Lords
Supper we swear Fealty and Homage to the great King of Earth and Heaven; and,
as well as in Baptism, engage to be his faithful Servants and Soldiers to our
Lives end. Which Oath, as all others, does imply an Imprecation, as did the
ancient Sacrifices used at the Ratification of Leagues, wherein the Beast being
cut in pieces, the Parties agreeing went between them, wishing that their Blood
might be so poured out, and they themselves cut in pieces, if they ever brake
their Vow and Covenant. To which the breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of
the Wine does answer in the Communion: as it may farther signify, that we
resolve to be faithful even to the Death, to our great Lord and Master; and if
there be occasion are ready to shed our Blood for him, as he did for us. The
Commemoration whereof is indeed the main End of the Sacrament, and the
principal Notion wherein we are to represent it to our Minds; but there are
subordinate Ends and other useful Notions, under which we may consider it, in
order to profit by it. Among which is,

XXIII. The next thing in our Description of this Sacrament [That we therein
praise God for all his Goodness:] As much as this is included in that very
ancient name of it, the Eucharist, which is used in the Scripture for giving of
Thanks in general Ephesians. 5. 4.
, but applied to this most solemn Act of Thanksgiving in the blessed Sacrament,
not only by the earliest Ecclesiastical Writers, but even by an ancient Version
of the New Testament. For the Syriac retains the Word Eucharist both in the 2d
of the Acts 42. and in the 20th v. 7. In both of which places, what we render
breaking of Bread is with them (...)
breaking the Eucharist. And a Word of the same Original is used both by the
Apostle and the Evangelists in the Description of its Institution 1 Cor. 11.
24. (...) so St. Luke 22. 19.
; and where our Savior is said to give thanks over the Bread, by St. Luke and
St. Paul; and to bless it, by St. Matthew St. Mat. 26. 26.
, the same thing is intended, for he blessed and praised God for his Gifts; and
by that Thanksgiving did sanctify the Bread; both derive God's Blessing upon
it, and set it apart to a sacred use, to be the thankful Memory of his own
Death till he come to Judgment. And accordingly in this Sacrament the Church
does render most solemn Thanks and Praise to God the Father, for his
inestimable Love in the Redemption of the World by the Death and Passion of his
dear Son; and to Christ himself, who gave his Body to be broken and his
precious Blood to be shed for us; as well as for all the Benefits of his
Passion, especially the Pardon of our Sins and Eternal Life.

XXIV. The next thing to be taken notice of in this Sacrament is, That we do
therein [testifie and express our unfeigned Union with all our Christian
Brethren,] with all those that bear the Image of the Heavenly. This was
doubtless one great end of its Institution, that thereby all the followers of
our Savior might be united together in the most sacred and indissoluble Bands,
and that all men might know them for his true Disciples by their Loving one
another: St. John 13. 35.
and thus the Apostle argues, The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, the Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many are one Body, for we are all
Partakers of that one Bread: where he hints at the Mystical Union between
Christ and his Church, and of all the Members thereof one with another. 1 Cor.
10. 16, 17.
Feasting in common has been always esteemed both a Token of Amity and
Friendship, and the way to increase and preserve it. In the Holy Communion we
may be said to renew our Covenant with one another, Pliny, ad confaederandam
disciplinam coetus Chrianorum.
as well as with God, and seem yet further, even to imprecate his Wrath upon
our selves if we break that sacred Band. And to the same purpose were the
Agapae or Love Feasts among the Christians, both in the Apostles times and a
Century or two after: Vid. Tertul. Apol. c. 39. p. 105.
And the frequent reception of the Communion must needs render Christians more
charitable and increase a holy Love among them, because without this Charity
they know they ought not to communicate; as the too general neglect of this
Sacrament may well be reckoned one great cause of the great decay of that Grace
amongst us. For the partaking of this Divine Feast, and the consideration of
Christ's wonderful Love to us in laying down his Life for us, even when we were
Enemies, must needs constrain us to forgive all those that trespass against us,
and with a pure heart servently to love one another.

XXV. Hitherto we have for the most part discoursed of what we our selves are
to do in the Reception of the Holy Sacrament. To commemorate and represent the
Sacrifice of our Saviors Death, according to his Institution, by eating of
Bread and drinking of Wine; therein renewing our Covenant with God, praising
him for his Goodness, and testifying and exercising our Unity and Charity
toward all our Christian Brethren.

XXVI. I proceed, in the last place, to that which we are to receive from God
in the conscientious discharge of our Duty, and devout Reception of this Holy
Communion: Which is contained in the last part of our Description, [That
thereby all the Benefits of our Savior's Death are sealed and applied to every
faithful Receiver.]

XXVII. The Sacraments are Seals of God's Covenant with us. The Apostle
expressly affirms it of Circumcision, Romans 4. 11. Galat. 3. 14.
as it was a Sign of the Evangelical Covenant made with Abraham and all his
faithful Children, that is, all that should believe in God as he did. In the
room whereof Baptism was introduced by our Savior as another Seal of the same
Covenant, and means our Initiation into it: And one Sacrament being a Seal, it
follows by parity of Reason that the other must be so also. The Holy Symbols,
when duly received, do exhibit and convey unto us divine Virtue and assistance,
and all the inestimable Benefits which were purchased for us, and reached out
unto us by the Death of a Redeemer; as Justification or actual Pardon of our
Sins, the reinstating us in God's Favor, and assuring us that he is reconciled
to us, and that we are accounted righteous before him; as well as
Sanctification, or actual Strength and Grace to conquer our Sins and to obey
his Commands. It Is true, the beginnings of these are conferred in Baptism; we
are so far regenerate therein, as to be grafted into the Body of Christ's
Church, and to partake of its Privileges by the operation of his Holy Spirit
within us, who will never be wanting to us or forsake us, unless we our selves
do put a Bar to the Divine Assistance by confirmed ill Habits and by a wicked
Life. But since the Divine Image, which we there recovered, is very often
obscured again by the Temptations of the World and the Devil, and the remains
of Sin within us, there is need enough of our being renewed again by
Repentance; nor has God here left us without Hope or Comfort, but
notwithstanding the Dream of the old Novatians, has appointed a Remedy even for
those who sin after Baptism, and that is this other Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of the Lord, wherein as we renew our Covenant with him, we receive new
Strength to obey his Commands, as has been the constant Faith of all good
Christians in all Ages: we therein obtain not only the strengthening, but
likewise the refreshing of our Souls, as the Catechism expresses it, which
includes Divine Consolation, and Joy in believing, and such Peace as passes all
Understanding.

XXVIII. But may some here object, Where is this Blessedness you speak of?
Where are these Promises in Holy Scripture, of such wonderful assistance in
this Sacrament?

In answer, This Holy Communion is the Substance of all other Christian Duties,
to which so many Blessings are promised throughout the whole Gospel (or else
why do we perform them?) of Faith, and Repentance and Thanksgiving, and Holy
Vows, and Prayer, and Praise, and Confession, and Adoration; and consequently
it must share in all their Blessings and Benefits. It Is a Memorial or
Commemoration of our Savior's Love and Sufferings; and if God has promised in
the old Law that in every place where there is a Memorial of his Name, he will
meet and bless his People, Exodus 20. 24.
much more may we expect it under the Gospel. If our Savior has so solemnly
promised, that where two or three are gathered together in his Name, there he
will be in the midst of 'em and bless 'em, much more will he be so at this
great Synaxis, this more general and solemn Assembly of Christians to celebrate
his Name, and record his Praises. Thus Ignatius in Epist. ad Ephesians. If the
Prayer of one or two be of so great force, that it brings Christ among them;
how much more will the unanimous Prayers of the Bishop and the whole Church
ascending to God, prevail with him to grant all they desire?
He has not commanded us to seek his Face in vain; nor is it in vain to do this
in Remembrance of him. The showing forth the Lord's Death cannot be without
exceeding Comfort to those who have reason to hope they have a share in it.
It Is a big Expression [The Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ:] it is
surely far more than an empty Figure: It Is not a little matter to eat the Lords
Supper, to partake of the Table of the Lord, wherein if he that eats and drinks
unworthily eats and drinks Damnation; surely he that does it worthily must eat
and drink Salvation. No less can be intended in our Communion of Christ's Body
and Blood, than the eternal Son of God's uniting himself by his Spirit to our
Souls in this Holy Sacrament; and even by his own Divine Nature, whereby he in
a sense, and in some degree, makes us Partakers thereof; and communicates unto
us all the Blessings he has obtained for us, by this Heavenly Food nourishing
up our Souls to everlasting Life: Giving us herein the Earnest and Pledge of
our Immortality, as well as the means of it; and assuring us, that because he
lives we shall live also; which is the meaning of those Expressions Dwelling in
Christ and Christ in us, and being one with Christ and Christ with us; and of
the Ministers praying in the very delivery of the Elements, That the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ may preserve our Bodies and Souls to Everlasting
Life; according to our Savior's own Words, He that eats my Flesh and
drinks my Blood dwells in me, and I in him; he shall live by me; he shall
never die; he has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. And
whether or no these Expressions were then precisely meant of the Sacrament,
which they might well be by Anticipation and Prophecy, though it were not then
actually instituted; for he speaks in the same place of his Death in the same
manner; they are yet certainly true of the partaking of Christ's Sacramental
Body and Blood, and feeding on him in our Hearts by Faith with Thanksgiving.

XXIX. Which brings to the close of our Description, that all these Benefits
are conferred in the Sacrament, only on [the faithful Receiver.] For none but
such are properly Partakers of the Body and Blood of the Lord. If Judas did
outwardly partake of this Sacrament, as our Church seems to have thought he did
See the Exhortation, Lest after the taking of the Holy Sacrament, the Devil
enter into you, as he entered into Judas.
Satan did but the sooner enter into him, because he received with a Heart full
of Treachery, Covetousness and Malice. I take Faith here in the largest Sense,
for a practical assent to the whole Scheme of the Gospel, and consequently a
ready and firm Belief of its Revelations, Threatenings and Promises, accompanied
with sincere Resolutions and Endeavors to obey its Commands. Though the more
peculiar object of Faith in this Sacrament must be the Merits of our Savior,
and that Pardon which he purchased for us by his own Blood. But of these
hereafter more at large under those Qualifications which are requisite to those
who would partake worthily and profitably of this Holy Communion.

CHAP. II. Of the perpetual Obligation that lies upon adult Christians to
communicate, and even to frequent Communion.
I. WHerein I shall first prove in general, the indispensible Obligation which
our Savior has laid upon us to receive this Sacrament. 2. The Extent of it, it
reaches all adult Christians. 3. Its Duration, it is perpetual, it lasts till
the End of the World. 4. That we ought to receive it frequently; And in the 5th
and last place, I shall answer those Objections which are brought either
against receiving the Communion in general, or against frequently receiving it.

II. 1st. Of the Obligation in general to receive. And one would wonder how
any, who are called Christians, and do but remember the Reason of that Name,
should ever think themselves dispensed with from that Obligation; since there
is scarce any so ignorant as not to know that it is the express Command of our
Lord Christ, Do this in remembrance of me. St. Luke 22. 19.
He has the supreme Authority over us, and we have professed an entire
Obedience unto his Laws, and have vowed at Baptism to keep Gods holy Will and
Commandments; and there is not one Command in the Gospel more express than this
is. Every part of the Sacrament, every Notion wherein we can represent it to
our Minds, is an Argument for our receiving it. It Is the Remembrance of our
Savior's Death; and does not that deserve to be remembered? It Is the lively
Representation thereof to our Minds; and do we not need this, for are we not
too apt to forget it? It Is done by the breaking of Bread and drinking of Wine,
and is this so hard a thing that God requires of us? Or if our Savior had
asked some great thing, should we not have done it? Much more when he requires
so easy a Testimony of our Gratitude and Obedience? We think our first Parents
very inexcusable, who could not keep one Command, and refrain from one Tree, to
please their Creator: 'Twas no difficult task, but yet there is less difficulty
in what our Savior requires of us, to eat of this Bread and drink of this Cup.
He requires us not to abstain, but to feast, in order to obtain his Favor.
Have we not all broken our Covenant with God, and ought it not to be the most
welcome Tidings to us in the World that we may again renew it? Have we nothing
to thank him for, that we are so backward to render him this Sacrifice of
Praise? Or is it not to him we owe our Life and Breath, and Being, and yet
more, if it be not our own faults, our Redemption, our Salvation and our
eternal Happiness? Have we no Ingenuity, have we no Gratitude left, or can we
give God thanks in a better way than in that which he himself has appointed; in
the highest and most solemn Ordinance of his Holy Gospel? Is Holy Friendship,
is Christian Unity and Love so frightful a thing, that we will not so much as
endure this Symbol of it? Is it not a good and pleasant thing for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity? Is there any Amity, any Endearment so close so
intimate among Men, as that which is professed, increased and exercised among
Christians at this Holy Table? Is it not a desirable, a necessary thing to be
at Peace, to be Friends with all Mankind, to forgive our Enemies, to have the
Love and the Prayers of all Good Men? And must not all this render the Mind
exceeding quiet and happy? And is not this happy Temper to be very much
heightened and strengthened by our coming to the Lord's Table, and even by our
Preparation for it, as well as by our actually partaking of it.

III. And if all this be not enough, if it be not sufficient to have Peace on
Earth, or we do not much regard it; are we not however desirous to be at Peace
with Heaven? God reaches out to us in this Holy Sacrament the Pledges of his
Love, and Pardon and Friendship; He sends his Ministers to assure us hereof;
nay, he sends his own Son (surely we will reverence the Son!) as an Hostage, to
satisfy us of the kindness of his Intentions: We entertained him not, it is
true, as we ought to have done: The Heir was killed, he was stoned, he was cast
out of the Vineyard by ungrateful Husbandmen: well, he only requires that we
should remember his Death, and not crucify him anew by our Sins, by our
neglecting this or other Duties: and is this our Kindness to our Friend, that
we think this too much to do for him, especially when he has done so much for
us? Surely he left us such a Legacy as deserved that we should think on him
that left it; though it is true, the Payment thereof is conditional, and among
other Conditions on which we expect Life and Pardon, this is not the least,
that we should receive this Holy Sacrament, which is the very Seal of that
Pardon sent down unto us from the oftended Majesty of Heaven. Are we so very
strong and secure, so rooted and grounded in Faith and Love that we need no
more assistance, no more help from God's Spirit, or his Institutions; that we
thus reject the Counsel of God, and that Grace which he so freely offers us? Is
it a small thing to dwell in Christ, and Christ in us, to be one with Christ,
and Christ with us? To be united to him? To see him whom our Souls ought to
love? To despise the World in comparison of him? To sit under his Shadow with
unspeakable delight? To have our Hearts pant after him, and long for him, and
be ravished with his Perfections, and assured of his Love, and impatient to
break through this Earthly Prison, to shake off this importunate Clog, this
troublesome Companion, this weary Flesh and Blood which hangs about us; and
groan earnestly to be delivered; and cry out, Oh that I had the Wings of a
Dove, that I might fly away and be at rest, that I might rest for ever in the
Bosom of my Redeemer, in whose presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose Right
Hand are Pleasures, unexhausted Rivers of pleasure for evermore?

IV. Is this worth desiring? Or are these only Fancies, and the fair, but
fading Colors of Rhetoric and Imagination? Ask any very pious person, who
comes with Humility and Devotion to this Sacrament, whether they are not as
sure of all this as that they breath? Whether Jesus has not been known of 'em
in breaking of Bread, and they have not been often filled at his Holy Table
with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory? A rational, nay we may call it, a
divine Joy and Satisfaction, because we know its Author, we know its Object.
Good Men speak what they know, and testify what they have seen, and can almost
arise to that Testimony of the Apostle concerning Christ's actual Bodily
presence here upon Earth, 1 St. John 1. 3.
That which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have
looked upon and our Hands have handled of the Word of Life; that which we have
seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have Fellowship with us,
and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

V. Well, if we believe the Foretasts of Heaven worth desiring, worth thirsting
after; our blessed Immortality, our happy Resurrection worth securing; the
earnest thereof worth enjoying; we shall think all these no contemptible
Arguments or weak Motives to persuade us to the Reception of this Holy
Communion: We shall not easily slight our Savior's Command, or those great and
inestimable Benefits we shall all partake of, if we are worthily present at it.

VI. But our Obligation to receive will appear yet stronger, if we consider the
great Sin we are guilty of in neglecting it, and the heavy punishment we may
expect for the same. Whatever our pretenses are for it, we do hereby in effect
slight the Inviter and Invitation; as well as that divine Feast, that Heavenly
Food which he has provided; saying in our Hearts, and by our Actions, as Israel
of the Manna, Our Soul loathes this light Bread. We separate from our Brethren,
and are guilty of a partial Schism. We are disobedient to the just Laws of our
Country, both Civil and Ecclesiastical. We discourage our Pastors by the
thinness of the Appearance on these occasions. We neglect the means which God
has appointed to strengthen us in Virtue. We are unthankful as well as
disobedient; and too like those in the Gospel, who slighted the repeated
Invitations of the King, who sent out his Messengers to call 'em to the
Marriage, but they would not come, St. Matt. 22. 2, 3, etc. for which he justly
declared, that those who were bidden were not worthy, v. 8 (there are unworthy
Non-Communicants, as well as unworthy Communicants) and that none of them
should taste of his Feast; nor was this all, for he sent forth his Armies and
destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City. v. 7. Which Parable, though
it seems to relate more immediately to the Jews, whose City and Nation were
destroyed for rejecting the Gospel; yet those must likewise be included in it
by parity of Reason, who refuse to obey that Gospel which they pretend to
receive, and will not come to this Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, though so often
and so kindly invited, but neglect it, either for the most part, or even for
all their Lives (upon how frivolous Pretenses we shall see hereafter) and it is
accordingly applied to such by our Church, in the Exhortation which is
appointed to be read when the Minister perceives the People backward to come to
the Communion.

VII. [Next as to the Extent of this Obligation.] It reaches all adult Persons
who have been baptized. This was carried so high by the ancient Church, that
they thought the Communion was absolutely necessary to Salvation, and therefore
gave it to Infants as soon as baptized, as do the Greeks to this day: wherein,
though I think 'em mistaken, it shows their Opinion, of the universality of its
Obligation, and the necessity of receiving it. The Apostle says of the Jews in
the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. That they did all eat of the same spiritual
Meat, and did all drink of the same spiritual Drink; and much more ought all
Christians to do so, who have a much more spiritual Religion. The Passover was
enjoined to all the Congregation, and even to every Man's Servant that was
circumcised; with this severe Sanction, that the Man who neglected it, without
a lawful Excuse, That Soul should be cut off from among his People. Numb. 9. 14.
Our Lord said to all his Disciples, Take eat; and particularly of the Cup,
Drink ye all of this; his infallible Spirit foreseeing that some would deny it
to the Laity in after-Ages: and it is said in St. Mark, they all drank of it.
St. Paul styles it the Communion, because all Christians did partake of it; as
appears from that Expression, 1 Cor. 10. 17.
we are all partakers of that one Bread; and in the next Chapter, he fairly
implys, that the main End of all regular Christians meeting together in
public, was to eat the Lord's Body. And all that believed, at the first
planting of the Gospel, Chap. 11. v. 20.
continued steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine, and in the Communion Acts 2.
42.
, (as it ought to be translated) Vid. Mede of the Christian Sacrifice.
whose outward part consisted in the breaking of Bread, and drinking of Wine,
as the inward in Prayer and Thanksgiving. To this agrees Antiquity: For the
Primitive Christians allowed no such thing as coming to the public Assemblies,
and going away without receiving, which none did, unless the Catechumens and
Excommunicate, there being a very ancient Canon Can. IX.
among those which are called the Apostles, that forbids any such disorderly
practice on pain of Excommunication. Our own Church reckons all Persons who are
of years of Discretion, as Communicants, which has been also the Opinion of the
wisest and most learned among our dissenting Brethren: The Covenant we all
entered into at Baptism must be renewed by us in the Lord's Supper, unless
there be any such as do repent the making it, or as have never broke it. And
the same might be made appear from the Nature of the Sacrament, insisted on at
large in the first Chapter.

VIII. [And its Duration is as perpetual as its Obligation is universal.] The
Passover was to be kept by the Jews for a Memorial for ever, Exodus 12. 14.
throughout all their Generations. This for ever lasted till the end of the
Jewish Age or World, and the Passover is to be observed till the end of the
visible World, the Consummation of all things. The Institution it self being
without any Term, and Christ having commanded his Followers to do this in
Remembrance of him, they must still continue doing it, unless he fixes a Term,
or gives them a dispensation for the doing it. But the Nature of it proves that
it still remains; for a Remembrance implys absence, and the Reason of the
Remembrance lasts as long as the absence continues; and since Christ will not
be with us, as to his corporeal presence till the Time of the Restitution of
all things, or the end of the World, we must till then, remember him in this
Holy Sacrament.

IX. [Which is as evident from Scripture as it is from Reason.] As often as ye eat
of this Bread, show ye forth the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
namely, till his second coming to judge the World; in which sense that
Expression is generally used in Scripture, especially by this Apostle. Thus he
tells us, That at the last day, those which are alive, and remain till the
coming of the Lord, shall not prevent those which are asleep 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15.
; which whole Description evidently relates to the last Judgment. And our
Savior uses that Expression in the same Sense in relation to St. John, who
himself interprets that Phrase, [if I will that he carry till I come,] by that
other, that that Disciple should not die. Now it is evident that what St. Paul
here declared, was by express Command and Revelation, and that he committed no
more to Writing, than he had before in the Name of Christ delivered to the
Churches. For thus he himself assures them; I received of the Lord that which I
also delivered unto you, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
whence he goes on to give an exact Account of the Institution of this
Sacrament.

X. But further: None will deny that we must offer the Sacrifice of Prayer and
Praise unto God through Christ, to the End of the World: That we must
commemorate, and represent our Savior's Death, in such manner as he has
appointed. That we may, and ought to renew our Covenant with God, and solemnly
to express our union with all good Men, and dedicate our selves to the most
High, and sacrifice our Sins before him; and that all this shall never cease
till Time shall be no more: If then we ought to perform all these things
singly, why not altogether in this Sacrament, as we are sure the Church of God
has done ever since its Institution in all Places and all Ages?

XI. And as the Arguments for the perpetual Obligations of our Savior's
Commands in relation to this Sacrament, are unanswerable, so the Objections
against it appear so thin and contemptible, that one would wonder how any Men
of Sense should ever stumble upon them. The chief pretenses of those who oppose
the perpetuity of this Sacrament are, that the coming of the Lord mentioned by
St. Paul, was only his spiritual Answer to Snake in Grass, p. 113. Naylor's
Love to the Lost, p. 77.
coming, and that the Communion of his Body and Blood is also spiritual, as
opposed to any outward partaking of it.

XII But that the coming of Christ here mentioned, must be understood of his
last coming to Judgment, has been already proved from St. Paul's use of that
Expression in other places: Nor does it appear that he ever uses it in any
other Sense. However, it cannot be taken here for his appearance, or coming by
his Spirit only in the Hearts of Believers, because that was already
accomplished in those who were baptized, and had sincerely embraced the Gospel.
He was certainly come to the Apostle himself, in a very high and miraculous
degree and manner, far beyond what any Christians can now expect, and yet he
received the Sacrament; for he says, We are all partakers of that one Bread,
that outward literal Bread whereof he was discoursing. Nor was it only the
Mystery which he had received of the Lord Vide supra.
, but directions for the whole outward administration, which he describes at
large in the place formerly quoted 1 Cor. II. 23.
, which we do truly perform as far as the outward celebration, if we eat the
Bread and drink the Wine, and there is far more than a permission for our doing
it, since we have a positive Command.

XIII. Nor therefore is it enough to pretend that we receive inwardly and
spiritually, unless we do it outwardly also, since Christ has appointed such an
outward administration? It Is true, the outward part, without the inward, is so
far from being beneficial, that it is through his own fault highly dangerous to
the Receiver: But God's Word enjoins us both, and the latter is conveyed by the
former. Teaching all Nations, as well as baptising them, was to continue to the
End of the World; but yet all own, that neither the outward Teaching, nor
Baptism can avail, without the inward Teaching and Baptism of the Spirit; and
the same may be said of Prayer, and other Christian Duties. I shall conclude
this Head with the Concessions of the chief Teachers of those who deny the
perpetuity of this Ordinance, one of whom says, Answer to Snake, etc. p. 114.
That they do not censure those who are conscientiously tender in Observation
of these things, and for practicing what they believe is their Duty, either in
breaking of Bread, or in Water Baptism. And another before him Naylor.
who pretends a concern for those who were troubled in mind about this
Sacrament, owns, That the Lord's Supper is of great use and profit to weak
Believers, for bringing them into one Mind and Heart. For us therefore who dare
not pretend to perfection, but whose best Plea must be that of the Publican,
God be merciful to me a Sinner; let us cry out with the Disciples, Lord
increase our Faith; and make use of the same means, the same Holy Sacraments
which they made use of, that we may obtain our desires. Which we shall be more
careful to do, if we set before our Eyes the dreadful Examples of those who by
slighting and forsaking the Sacraments, and especially this Memorial of
Christ's Death, have fallen into damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them; either denying his Divinity, or even his very* Existence without
themselves; or else forsaking him by wicked Works, and falling into all manner
of Licentiousness and Lewdness; all which might have been prevented, had they
been devoutly and frequently present at this Holy Ordinance.

XIV. Nor is it less evident that we are to receive the Communion frequently,
than that the Obligation to receive it is perpetual; which will appear from the
Nature of the Sacrament, and from the Words of Institution. From the Apostle's
Example, and that of the Primitive Church, and the Commands and Example of the
Church of England, and of all others who think themselves at any time obliged
to receive it; as well as from the great Benefits to be obtained by frequent
and devout Communion.

XV. 1. The Nature of the Sacrament, the very Form and Words of Institution,
sufficiently prove, that we ought frequently to communicate. It Is a
Commemoration of our Savior's Death, a Renewing of our Covenant with God, a
solemn Profession of our Religion and Badge of our Christianity, a means to
receive Divine Assistance, and how then can we be too frequently present at it?
Our Lord has not, it is true, precisely determined how often we should come, for
he has left this to the Discretion of the Church, and as a Trial of our
Devotion: But the very Words of Institution seem to require our presence
frequently; for if we are to do this in Remembrance of our Savior, and the
oftener we do it, the better and more lively will be our Remembrance of him, if
we perform it with due Reverence and Devotion; if this be granted, we cannot, I
think, be too frequent at the Holy Table. Nay, the Apostle hints something to
this purpose as our Savior's own Command, who at the Institution, when he
spoke of the Cup, required his Disciples to do this [as oft] as they drank it:
whence the Apostle draws this Consequence. For [as often] as you eat of this
Bread and drink of this Cup, etc. which Words do at the least imply some
frequency in the reception of the Holy Sacrament, both as commanded by our
Savior and practiced by his Apostles.

XVI. Whose undoubted Practice, as it may be evinced from other places, is a
farther Argument for frequent Communion. For the first Christians, we read,
continued daily with one accord, breaking Bread from House to House. And again,
continued steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine and their Communion, in breaking
of Bread and in Prayer (...). Vid. Patrick, p. 8.
, Acts 2. 42, 46. which few or none deny to relate to the Holy Sacrament: And
it has been well observed, that the Word which we translate continuing
steadfastly, does relate to the frequency of their Receiving, as well as to
their Constancy in it, or not being tired with it. And it appears from the
History of these Corinthians, that they did not use to come together into one
place, or meet in public Worship, without eating the Lord's Supper.

XVII. And the Practice of the Primitive Christians, is a good Proof of the
Practice of the Apostles, since doubtless they derived it from them. There are
learned Men who are of Opinion, that some of the Primitive Christians received
twice a day Patrick, which he gathers from Tertull. in his Coron. Milit. cap. 3.
, as the Mincha or Breadoffering in the old Law, was offered Morning and
Evening. And if they met publicly twice a day, there is no doubt but they
received as often, because they had no religious Assemblies without the
Communion. They thought the whole sacred Action imperfect without it; and this
was so well known among them, that the word Synaxis, which properly signifies
no more than a Convention, or Congregation, was yet generally appropriated to
the Holy Communion, because, as is said, they knew no such thing as one without
the other. For they thought the Sacrament was appointed by Christ, as a means
of supplicating and obtaining God's Favor, nay, as the only means to do it in
public Assemblies Mede of the Christian Sacrifice.
. And therefore do unanimously apply that Prophecy in Malachi Malac. 1. 11.
, In every place Incense shall be offered unto me, and a pure offering; to this
Christian Sacrifice. And the Apostolical Canon beforementioned, does expressly
excommunicate those as disorderly Livers, who were present at Prayers, and went
away without the Communion; which the Ancients call, Judge Sacrificium, the
continual or daily Sacrifice: And the Penitents among them who were excluded
from it, did prostrate themselves on the Earth, at the Gates of the Church, and
earnestly entreat with Tears and sad Lamentations all that went in, to pray for
them, that they might be again reconciled and admitted to the Lord's Table. And
'twas to this their frequent Communions, that we may in great measure attribute
their exemplary Piety, and fervent Charity, and stedfastness in the Faith, and
ardor and zeal for Martyrdem: And for this last Reason, in order to arm them
against that fiery Trial, St. Cyprian says they communicated every day in the
African Churches; and they did the same in St. Ierom's time, in those of Spain
and Rome; and the same seems to have been the practice at Milan, when St.
Ambrose was Bishop there; for he says, [That this Sacramental Food was daily
received for a Remedy against daily Infirmities,] adding, that there is no
Remedy more effectual for refreshing and comforting the Soul, and restoring it
to that Grace from whence it had fallen, than the frequent partaking of this
Sacrament with purity and humility.

The Ethiopian Church does to this day celebrate the Communion every Sunday,
and that with the addition of those ancient Feasts of Charity Ludolphus his
Hist. of Ethiop. lib. 3 p. 298, 299.
, which are now disused in other Churches; which shows that the Gospel was
planted amongst them very early, and before those Feasts were abrogated.

XVIII. And indeed, one would wonder how this Sacrament came to be so rarely
received, and what should be the Original of that inexcusable Neglect which we
find at present in the Western Churches, and particularly amongst our own
People, in relation to that Holy Ordinance. Now upon an impartial Enquiry, it
will appear that this is chiefly owing to two Causes: First, the great decay of
Piety and degeneracy of Christianity, when the Love of many waxed cold, and the
great Apostasy broke in upon the Western Patriarchate. But there seems to be a
second Cause of it, namely, the monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
already mentioned and confuted; which when the Romanists had once stumbled
upon, it seems they dared not trust the Laity with frequent Communions, lest if
they often saw the Bread, and touched and tasted it, they should be tempted, as
many of their Priests now are, from the same Reason, at last to believe their
Senses, and to think it really Bread, and not that natural Flesh and Body of
Christ which hung upon the Cross. To prevent which, they took care to let the
Laity receive but very rarely, though the Priest himself does it every day, at
least if the Mass be the Communion, though how he can communicate by himself, is
something difficult to a Protestant understanding; but since it is a flat
Contradiction in Terms, we must acknowledge it is the more like
Transubstantiation.

XIX. And for our own Nation, it is well if the same Enemy which has sown so
many other Tares among us, has not had a Hand in these also; for it had been
impossible to have formed any Schism amongst us, had we still practiced
frequent Communion. However, thus much we are sure of, that the unwary
Expressions of some who had the Guidance of Consciences in the last Age, and
their insisting only on the terrible danger of unworthy Receiving, but seldom
or never on that of resusing to receive at all, or neglecting an Opportunity
when offered, was a great occasion of this Inconvenience; which as it went so
high in those days that in some places they had never received the Communion in
five, six or seven, nay, not in fourteen Years, Mr. Jeans and Dr. Casaubon, in
the Bp. of Derry's Admonit. Lightfoot, Vol. 2. p. 1127.
so we are assured, by Authors of good Credit, that the use of the Sacraments
was in diverse Parishes at length hardly known or named. And though this very ill
Custom has been since amended by those who began it, at least here in England,
yet the Leven of it remains so diffused through a great part of the Nation, that
it will not be easy to bring them to a better mind.

XX. However, we have both the Command, and the Practice of the Church of
England, to engage us to frequent Communion. Three times a year, at the least,
it was brought to at the Reformation. His present Majesty's Injunctions require
the Clergy to administer the Holy Sacrament frequently; and most of the
Episcopal Charges, and Articles do the same. And the Rubric, that in Cathedral
and Collegiate-Churches, they shall ALL receive at least every Sunday. And the
Communion Service is still continued on Sundays and Holidays in all our
Churches, to put Persons in mind of their Duty, and there is no doubt but the
Church would have the Communion actually celebrated wherever there is a
sufficient Number to receive Vid. Rubric after Communion. Parag. 1, 2, 3, 4.
; and there are now monthly Communions in many, and it is to be hoped, most of
the considerable Towns in England, and in London, in several Churches, every
Lord's Day.

And even our Dissenting Brethren are so far convinced of their former
miscarriages in this matter, that they have now, generally, monthly Communions;
and if we have followed them in their Errors, ought we not much more to do so
in their Reformation?

XXI. The Advantages of frequent Communion, to the great Ends of Christianity
and Reformation, to all the parts of a good Life, shall be the last Argument to
engage to the practice of it. How far the Sacrament it self conduces to those
Ends has been already declared, and the more frequently we receive it, as we
ought; the greater Benefit shall we obtain by it. The oftener the Vows of God
are renewed upon us, the stronger will the Cord be, and with more difficulty to
be broken. The oftener we come to these Waters of Life, the more will our Souls
be refresht by them; the more frequently we partake of this Bread of Life, the
greater Strength shall we receive in the inward Man, and higher Degrees of
Grace and assistance in God's Service. And as the great Zeal and Piety of the
Primitive Christians already mentioned, was very much owing to their daily
Communion; so if we impartially consider those amongst us who do most
frequently communicate, I Am persuaded we should find them the most devout and
rational Christians, and generally the best of Men; whilst those are the most
profligate Wretches who have no regard at all to this blessed Feast, and through
the whole course of their Lives scarce ever receive it.

XXII. But 'twill now be time to consider those Objections which are brought
against receiving this Sacrament, or at least against frequent Communion.

For the First, Against receiving in General, the most common Objections may be
reduced to the following Heads. Either a bad Life, or multiplicity of Business,
or want of preparation, or the danger of receiving unworthily; or else the
manner of receiving, and the ill Characters, perhaps of some of the
Communicants: The four former being usually brought by Persons of all
Persuasions; the two latter, principally by those who are dissatisfied with our
way of Worship.

XXIII. As for the first, and more common rank of Excuses, before we come to
the particular Consideration of them, it may deserve a Remark, that our Church
has already fully answered them; and all Persons have heard as much, as often
as they have heard the Minister read the Exhortations at the warning for the
Celebration before the Communion; and therefore it is neither fair nor modest,
it argues neither Ingenuity nor Conscience, still to insist upon them, without
any addition to their Strength, or taking notice of what has been said to
satisfy them. The two former Objections, Business and a bad Life, are answered
in the second Exhortation, in these words. It Is an easy matter for a Man to
say, I will not communicate, because I am otherwise hindered by worldly
Business. But such Excuses are not so easily accepted and allowed before God.
They that refused the Feast in the Gospel, because they had bought a Farm, etc
were not so excused, but counted unworthy of the Heavenly Feast. And as to that
which is taken from a bad Life, it is added, If any Man say I am a grievous
Sinner, and therefore am afraid to come, wherefore then do ye not repent and a
mend? The two latter, Unpreparedness, and the Fear of eating and drinking
unworthily, are also fairly hinted at in the End of the first Exhortation, and
a Remedy appointed for them. If any Man cannot quiet his Conscience, but
requires farther Comfort or Counsel, he is directed to go to the Minister of
his Parish, or (such is the Church's Caution and Indulgence in so tender an
Affair) to any other Discreet and Learned Minister of God's Word, and open his
Grief, that he may receive Ghostly Counsel, or Spiritual Advice, suitable to
his Condition. And he who neglects to take this Method, it is evident that he
either does not understand, or does not regard the Churches Direction in these
Matters.

XXIV. But to come to the more particular Examination of these Objections. The
first of which is taken from a wicked Life, a Man's being a most grievous
Sinner, and therefore he comes not to the Holy Table. This is, indeed, a most
inexcusable Excuse, for though some have thought that a Duty may atone for a
Sin, yet one would think none should be so wild to persuade themselves that one
Sin could ever atone for another? But in answer to it, we must say of this
Sacrament, as Ananias did to St. Paul of that of Baptism, Act. 22. 16.
Why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized and wash away thy Sins. The
Sacraments are doubtless, Means to confer Grace on those that are truly
penitent, truly sensible of their Sins, and afflicted for them; as well as to
confirm and strengthen it in those who already lead a holy Life. It Is true,
that the Lord's Table is no place for a wicked Man who resolves to continue in
his wickedness, who does not heartily resolve, by God's Grace, to strive
against it, and actually and immediately forsake it: For it is not meet to cast
the Children's Bread to Dogs, and the Holy Sacrament is a Token and Pledge of
Pardon and Reconciliation, the Seal of a Covenant between God and Man: But what
has any to do with the Sign who has not the Substance? What has a stubborn
Rebel to do with his Prince's Pardon? Yet after all, we know that Christ came
into the World to save Sinners, though he saves them no other way but by
Repentance; nor is it while they remain so, but upon a change of their minds,
that he actually justifies the ungodly. It Is not the repenting Sinner, but the
obstinate Sinner that is excluded from the Lord s Table, who is also, if he
lives and dies such, as certainly as God is true, excluded out of Heaven. But
for those who are indeed desirous to do better, though their Faith be yet but as
a Grain of Mustard Seed, they shall not be rejected, by that merciful Redeemer
who will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax: and surely,
the Sacrament cannot but have that good effect on all who are not quite
hardened, as to make them think on their ways, and amend their Lives when they
approach unto it. And it is well if the great Reason which keeps many from it,
be not, lest they should be thereby obliged to forsake their Sins, (which they
are not yet willing to do,) and to the Exercise of an exact Examination, and
severe Repentance.

XXV. And as some have raised Objections against Receiving, because of Sins
that are past, or of which they may be at that very time guilty, so there are
others who say they dare not come to the Sacrament, for fear of falling into
Sin after they have received, as if that were unpardonable; an Error much of
the same Nature with that which some Persons ran into in the Primitive Church,
who deferred their Baptism till the point of Death for the same Reason. But in
answer; as it is granted that Sins after Baptism may be forgiven, on true
Repentance, so doubtless they may after the other Sacrament; for not only the
Corinthians, but even the Apostles themselves were guilty of failings after the
Communion. A confirmed Habit, or inveterate Course of Sin is damnable, as well
before the Sacrament as after it: But the devout and frequent receiving of it,
is the best way to prevent the falling into such a desperate Condition: And for
lesser failings, from which none are free, those will be forgiven if we are
truly penitent for them, and constantly strive against them.

XXVI. Another Pretense, something allied to this last, is, That Men are at
Variance with their Neighbors, and that keeps them from the Sacrament. In
answer, It Is owned that we ought to come to this Feast of Love with true
Charity, forgiving all our Enemies, which if we do not practice every day, we
cannot so much as repeat the Lord's Prayer, without imprecating a heavy Curse
upon our selves: But in the present case, the matter may be brought to a short
Issue: Either you have really offended your Neighbor, or he has offended you,
or as it often happens, you are both to blame: If the former, you know your
Duty; Leave thy Gift before the Altar, and be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come and offer thy Gift: If the second, and he trespass against thee seven
times a day, and say, I have offended, forgive him, and receive together with
him. If both are in fault, both must make satisfaction: If either refuses to be
reconciled, the Fault is in the Refuser, not in him that is willing, who shall
not be punished for the other's Guilt; though the uncharitable Person, is by no
means fit for this Holy Table, while he continues in that unchristian Temper.

XXVII. [Multiplicity of Business is another Excuse, or Objection against
Receiving.] The Cumber of worldly Affairs, and being troubled, like Martha,
about many things, while this one thing, which is so very needful, is too often
postpon'd and neglected: exactly the same pretense with theirs in the Parable
already mentioned, who when the King sent to invite them to the Marriage of his
Son, began with one consent to make Excuses, and went their way, one to his
Farm, another to his Merchandise. One said, I have bought a piece of ground,
and must needs go to see it; which as indifferent an Excuse as it was, was yet
better than theirs who absent themselves from God's public Worship, only to go
and see their Ground, when they long before have bought it. Another, I have
bought five Yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them. He had his Stock to look
after, which he thought an unanswerable Reason for his absence. As the third
did, who had married a Wife and could not come, but must stay at home to look
after the Affairs of his Family. It Is well worthy our Consideration how open
the Holy Spirit has here laid the common Springs of Men's neglect and indevotion
in these and the like matters: All which Excuses are so contrived that they
seem to insinuate, as if the Sacrament were only for recluse Persons, such as
are abstracted from the World, and live like Monks and Hermits; whereas it is
evident that 'twas designed for all Christians, and one great End of it, was,
to take off our Hearts from the World, and fit us for Heaven. But to be more
particular, 'twill be easy to show, that this pretense of Business to excuse
Persons from receiving the Sacrament is almost always either false, or vain, or
wicked, or altogether.

XXVIII. 1. It Is often false in Fact, and we are not really so hindered by
Business, but we might be there, if we had any regard either to the Feast or to
the Inviter: since that Business can only excuse us, which could not possibly
be done before, which cannot be done after, and which must of necessity be done
at the very time when we should receive: But if Men would be ingenuous, they
would be forced to acknowledge that they very rarely have any Business of this
nature. And indeed, what Business, unless of such high necessity and mercy has
a Christian to do on the Lord's Day; the very Name whereof shows the propriety;
and that it is none of our own, but set apart for a Holy Rest, and Christian
Sabbath, and the immediate Service of our blessed Redeemer? Nor is it at all
probable, that those who can find time, notwithstanding all this urgent
Business, for Visits, for the Entertainment of their Friends, for idle and
unprofitable Discourse, (both before the Lord's. Day, and even upon it) and
it is well, if not for their Sins too, should yet be able to find no time for
their Savior, when he invites them to his own Table. Judge then how wretched
an Excuse this is, when by a palpable Falsehood Men would defend their
Disobedience.

XXIX. But secondly. This Excuse is weak and foolish: For supposing we should
really find out some little Business to employ our selves in, just before, and
during the Celebration, yet what can be more foolish than to put off a greater
Affair for a less; a matter of Life and Death, for what is of little or no
moment? But what is the whole World to my own Soul; and what a miserable
exchange should I make, if through the Cares of this World, and the deceitfulness
of Riches, I should by gaining the one, eternally lose the other? Besides, if
Business could defend a Person for one neglect or omission, how immodest, as
well as foolish, is it to bring always the same Excuse, and still to postpone
our own Happiness, included in our Obedience?

XXX. And such a practice is as wicked as it is foolish. For it is a high Affront
and Injury both to the King and the King's Son; and will they not both
extremely and justly resent it? It Is a Wrong and Injury done unto them, as much
as it is in our Power to injure them: like him in the Gospel, rather to leave
our Savior than to part with our Possessions, or so much as to step out of the
World for a few moments. To say we'll not come because we are busy, is in
effect, to say we'll come when we have nothing else to do. To put it off till
another time, is fairly to own, we think it a matter of no great concern, for
whatever we think so, we set immediately about it.

XXXI. But there is oftentimes something very bad at the bottom of this Excuse,
and those who make it, would do well seriously to ask themselves whether by
Business they mean not something worse? some appendage to it, which stings
their Consciences, and dares not let them come to the Sacrament. Are they not
guilty of Intemperance, or Injustice in their Dealings in the World? If they
are, they must be remitted to the Answer given to those under the former Head,
for no pretended necessity can excuse their Sin, and they have no other way to
escape God's Anger, but Repentance and Amendment.

XXXII. A superstitious Fear, and mistaken Reverence for this Ordinance, and
terrible apprehensions concerning it, chiefly grounded on some misapplied Texts
of Scripture, do very frequently keep Persons from the Lord's Table. But if we
are but as willing to know and to do our Duty as to make Excuses for the
neglecting it, such a full Answer may be brought to these Objections, as would
scarce fail to give Satisfaction.

XXXIII. The first and chiefest Text, and which many have so often in their
Mouths, as if Do this in remembrance of me, were never to be taken notice of;
is that in the 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself. And there are several Expressions sounding
much the same way in the first Exhortation before the Communion, that we ought
to be very careful when we come thither, Lest it increase our damnation, and
lest Satan enter into us as he did into Judas, and fill us full of all
Iniquity, and bring us to destruction both of Body and Soul: which very severe
Sentences are here made use of, to persuade Men to true Repentance before they
come to the Sacrament; but they can mean no more than that of St. Paul, whereon
they are grounded, and therefore must be interpreted by it. And to understand
that aright, we must enquire into the meaning of those two Phrases, Receiving
unworthily, and that Damnation which is threatened upon it.

XXXIV. And the context evidently shows, that the Receiving unworthily, for
which the Corinthians are here blamed, was receiving with that inexcusable
Disorder, whereof they were guilty at the Sacrament: One was hungry, and
another drunken, at their Feasts of Charity, which then accompanied that
Ordinance. There were Schisms and Divisions among them, even at that Feast; one
great End whereof was to promote Christian Unity and Love. One came before
another, and the Rich despised the Poor. They did not discern the Lord's Body.
They made no difference between that and common Food, at least, considered it
not as the Spiritual Body of the Lord, or, as some think, Lightfoot.
not as a Christian Sacrament, but as a Heathen Feast, or a Jewish Passover.

XXXV. Whereby they did eat and drink Damnation to themselves. By which cannot
be immediately intended eternal Damnation, but temporal Judgment, as the word
here undoubtedly signifies, which we translate more harshly by Damnation. For
the following words explain it; For this cause many are sick and weak, and many
are fallen asleep; that is, God's heavy Judgments fell upon them in this Life,
some think a Plague, or some contagious Disease, in order to bring them to
Repentance; which Sense is confirmed by the two following Verses. If we would
judge our selves, or consider of our Faults and repent and amend, we should not
be judged, that is, afflicted with these temporal evils. Though, even those were
in order to amendment, and such Punishments as were proper to a State of
probation, for it follows; When we are judged we are chasten'd of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world; namely, at Gods last dreadful
Tribunal.

XXXVI. But it may be asked, is there no other unworthy receiving, and no other
damnation as a consequent thereon, but what have been now described? Yes
doubtless; for we then receive unworthily, when we continue in our Sins,
notwithstanding our Obligations to leave them when we come to the Sacrament:
And if we do not repent of this very heinous Sin and that in some proportion to
the high Aggravations of it, the consequence of such impenitence will be no
less than eternal misery. But still, it is evident from the foregoing
Considerations, that neither of these are here in the Text immediately
intended; and I think all sober Divines are agreed herein.

XXXVII. Add to this, that there is not the least Ground in the Words, or in
the whole Chapter, or indeed in any other Scripture, to excuse any Person for
not receiving, or to deter them from doing it, but rather quite the contrary.
Because the Man who had not the Wedding Garment was bound Hand and Foot and
cast into utter darkness, did this excuse those, who would not come to the
marriage? No, 'twas so far from it, that the King sent forth his Armies and
destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City. Christ commands us to come,
his Ministers invite us, it is our own Faults, if we come unprepared, but
nothing can excuse our Neglect and Refusal. Let a man examine himself, and so
let him (not stay away and refuse to receive, but) eat of this Bread and drink
of this Cup.

XXXVIII. There Is another Text which has been widely mistaken in the same
manner, and on the same occasion. It Is that of St. Paul to the Romans, He that
doubts is damned if he eat. But nothing can be plainer, than that this place
has no manner of relation to the Sacrament, any more than to any other Food;
for it is to be understood of eating meats sacrificed to Idols, or of any of
those Meats which the Jews, from the ceremonial Law, accounted an abomination;
whereof the Apostle says, that he who did it with a doubting Conscience,
without being satisfied of the Lawfulness of it, he was damned or condemned,
namely, by his own Conscience, which accused and judged him for it: And this
appears to be the immediate Sense of the words, by comparing them with the 14.
v. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that is, either by Christ's
words, that nothing which enters into the mouth defiles the man: or else, by
immediate Inspiration, as he received many other things. I know, says he, that
there is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any thing
unclean, to him it is unclean; which evidently refers to those distinctions of
Meats, which at that time made so great a disturbance in the Church of God.

XXXIX. But since it may be urged, that acting with a doubting Conscience is a
Sin, in what case soever, and therefore much more in relation to the Sacrament,
we must in the last place consider the different degrees of doubting, which
compared with our Obligation to Duty, will quite remove this Objection.

We may reckon three Degrees of Doubting. 1. When Men have some small remaining
scruples, and unreasonable unaccountable Fears, after the strictest Examination
into the Rules of their Duty, and all moral Satisfaction therein, concerning
their Obligation unto it, or of the Lawfulness of any Action.

2. When the mind is as it were in a Balance, unresolved, whether a thing be
lawful or unlawful, a Duty, or otherwise, and the Reasons on neither side do
sensibly and visibly preponderate, so as to incline to acting or not acting;
and this is the most true and proper doubt. Or else,

3. When Men are absolutely dissatisfied, by reason of some mistaken
Principles, or the Temptation of the Devil, so that they directly question
God's mercy; or at least their own Fitness for it, and for the Seals of it, and
thence are on the very brink of despair.

XL. As to the first of these Cases, where there only remain some unaccountable
Scruples, so that a Person says, I am afraid to do such or such a thing, though I
know not why I am afraid; and when whatsoever bears the Face of an Objection,
has been fairly answered; the Rule is, we may perform any indifferent Action,
for that very reason, because it is indifferent, and there are no circumstances
that alter its nature; we must perform what is a certain Duty, as is in the
case before us, receiving the Sacrament, because we are to look on any
unreasonable Scruples to the contrary, as no other than the Temptations of the
Enemy. If as in the second place, we do properly doubt, and the Arguments
appear to us equal for the doing or not doing such an Action, we must omit an
indifferent Action, because there can be no hurt in such omission, but there
may be in the doing it; as in the case of eating Flesh lately mentioned; we may
not omit a certain Duty, as receiving the Sacrament, but ought rather to
suspect our own Reasoning where our Duty is so clear by undoubted Revelation;
though we must carefully use those means which God has appointed for removing
that Scruple and Doubtfulness. But in the third place, where the degree of
doubting is so high, as to reach even to despair of God's mercy, from which
dreadful Condition he evermore preserve us, and which is often the effect of
some grievous Sin, continued in without Examination and Repentance; this, I
think, is the only doubting which incapacitates us for receiving. And that this
does so, is intimated in the first Exhortation before the Communion, That it is
requisite no Man should come to it, but with a full Trust in God's mercy, and
with a quiet Conscience. But then due methods must be used to obtain this happy
Temper, and he must open his Grief to his spiritual Physician, that he may give
his Advice and Prayers against the Tempter, and that he may receive the benefit
of Absolution, or a solemn authoritative declaration of Pardon on his sincere
Repentance. To which, if he adds his own Prayers and Endeavors, he may well
hope that God will restore unto him the Joy of his Salvation, and that he shall
be admitted to this blessed Feast: To the neglect of which formerly, he ought
to examine if he does not owe his present Trouble.

XLI. Want of Preparation is also often brought as an Excuse for not receiving.
Persons have not had Time for such strict Examination, as they think necessary,
and therefore, they say, they dare not come. Now to this common and popular
Objection, I shall first oppose, both the Authority and Reason of a very
excellent Person, who clears the whole difficulty in a few words, Archbishop
Tillotson of frequent Communion, Fol. Edit. p. 283, 284.
It is, says he, a pious and commendable Custom in Christians before their
coming to the Sacrament, to set apart some particular time for the Work of
Examination; but how much every Person should allot, is a matter of Prudence,
some have reason to spend more time, because their accounts are heavier, and
some have more leisure and freedom: But the End is to be principally regarded,
which is to understand our Condition, and to reform what is amiss; and if that
be observed, whether more or less time be allowed, matters not much. He goes
on. The best preparation for the Sacrament, is the general Care of a Good Life,
and he that is thus prepared, may receive at all times, when opportunity is
offered, though he had no particular foresight of that opportunity, and he shall
do much better to receive than to refrain, because he is habitually prepared,
though he had no time for actual preparation; and (to quote no more) we cannot
imagine that the Primitive Christians, who received so constantly, could allot
any more time for the preparation for it, than for any other part of divine
Worship. Thus far the most reverend Author, wherein he says nothing against
either Preparation or Examination, which he owns to be highly useful, but only
against refusing to receive for want of actual preparation, or always allotting
a considerable portion of time to this Exercise, even when Persons are before
habitually prepared to receive, and have not time for such actual Preparation.

XLII. I cannot think of any other Objections made against receiving the
Sacrament by any Persons who own themselves satisfied with the public way of
Worship; though there are two more, which have been brought by such as differ
from us therein. The first from the posture of receiving. The second from the
Company. Our Savior and his Disciples, they say, did at the first Institution,
receive in a Tableposture: and they dare not take it kneeling, because it looks
so like that Adoration of the Sacrament, which we blame in the Church of Rome:
Nor can they, without great Scandal, join with such a promiscuous Society, some
of whom, perhaps, to their own knowledge, may be very ill Men.

XLIII. In Answer to the first. The Sacrament being instituted in the room of
the Paschal Feast, and during the Celebration of it, our Savior made use of
the same posture wherein he and his Disciples were before placed, which being
according to the Custom of the Ancients in Feasting, a sort of recumbency or
leaning on one another's Bosoms, neither sitting nor kneeling, it could not
perhaps be changed without disorder, till the whole Ceremony was over. But from
hence none can justly conclude, that the Gesture of kneeling at the Sacrament,
in order to express our deep Humility, is any ways unlawful: Kneeling is a fit
posture for all acts of Devotion. The Eucharist is the highest act of Worship,
or rather, it contains in it many other acts, Prayer, Praise, Thanksgiving and
Adoration: And why should we not then in the celebration thereof, fall down and
kneel before the Lord our maker? The Jewish Church added the Bread and the Cup
to the Passover; these our Savior himself used in the administration thereof;
and is not this a much greater alteration, than that of a single Gesture? He
retained the second Cup of Blessing, used by the Jews, he received after
Supper, with several other Circumstances which are not at present observed,
even by those who make these. Objections against our Form, for much less
considerable alterations. The main Reason why some well-meaning Persons might
at first scruple kneeling at the Sacrament, seems to have been the Fear lest
this should tend to the Adoration of the Elements, or of any fansied corporal
presence of Christ's Body and Blood in them: But this is entirely precluded by
our Church, who must be allowed to know best the meaning of her own Injunctions
and Practice; and in order to prevent any misinterpretation of this innocent
and decent Ceremony, she has expressly declared Rubric after Communion Service.
, That thereby no Adoration is intended, or ought to be done either unto the
sacramental Bread and Wine, which is bodily received, or unto any corporal
presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood. And this has so far satisfied all
Persons who are not extremely prejudiced, that the Members of Foreign Churches,
who have received the Communion here in England, have willingly, and gladly
done it kneeling. Tigurin Liturgy, p. 139.
And one would think none of those who differ from us should any more object
against this practice, till they had answered what one of their own Opinion in
other things, has offered in the defense of it. Baxter' s Christian Directory,
Part 2. page 3.
Who acknowledges, that for kneeling, he never heard any thing to prove it
unlawful: If there be any thing, says he, it must be either some Word of God,
or the Nature of the Ordinance which is supposed to be contradicted: But 1.
There is no Word of God for, or against any Gesture: Christ's Example can never
be intended to oblige us more in this, than in many other Circumstances that
are confessedly not obligatory, as that he delivered it but to Ministers, but
to a Family, etc. and his Gesture was not such a sitting as ours. 2. And for
the Nature of the Ordinance, it is mixed, and if it be lawful to take a Pardon
from a King upon our Knees, I know not what can make it unlawful to take a
sealed Pardon from Christ by his Ambassador, in the same manner.

XLIV. To the second Objection, That Persons cannot join with unworthy
Communicants; we may first ask, who made any Man the Judge of Hearts, and how
we are sure any Person is unworthy, since none is so but the Impenitent? When
our Savior told his Disciples at the Institution of this Supper that one of
them should betray him, they did not ask him, Lord is it my Neighbor? But Lord
is it I? And accordingly, we ought surely to be more concerned for our selves
than for others. And is it not suspicious that there is something very much
amiss in our selves, when we are so ready to censure our Neighbors? Does it
not look as if we were solicitous to take off Men's Eyes from our own Faults,
though at the expense of another's Reputation? Let any one consider the World,
and he will soon acknowledge that the worst of Men are the most uncharitable. But
farther, it is certain that the visible Church will always be made up of Good
and Bad, and the Tares will never be entirely separated from the Wheat till the
End of the World. Our Savior knew that Judas was a Devil, and yet he did not
remove him from the Sacrament, nor refuse to receive with him. If other Men
receive unworthily, to their own Master, they stand or fall, but that shall
never injure me, if I my self am a worthy Receiver. But supposing there ought
to be more exact Discipline in any Church (and we know too well who those are
that have now rendered that almost impracticable among us) yet this can be no
just Reason for our not communicating with it: Since the Church of Corinth was
more notoriously corrupt in this matter, than they can pretend ours to be:
There were not only Drunkards, but even an incestuous Person in their
Communion; and yet St. Paul did never advise any to separate from them, or to
call a more pure Church out of that Church, but only to Try and Examine
themselves, and so to receive. Besides, if any Person be publicly scandalous,
so as to give Offense to the Congregation, we know our Rubric permits him not
to receive, but orders the Minister to put him back from the Communion: Though in
large Parishes, it is perhaps impossible for him to know every Person; and if
any be really scandalized at another's wicked Life, he ought to make the
Minister acquainted with it, if he has first reproved him himself without
Success; and till he has done both these, he has not the least pretense for an
Objection on that account against receiving. And as this is agreeable to the
constant practice of the Church of God, so it is also the Opinion of the most
sensible of those who are dissatisfied with some things in our Communion.
Baxter ubi supra.


XLV. The Objections against receiving in general being thus, I hope, fully
answered, there remains only something like one against frequent Communion; and
that is, that there is danger lest, as in other things, Familiarity breeds
Contempt, so the commoness of this Sacrament should take away the Reverence due
to it: But this is easily answered, because the same might be said of Prayer
and Preaching: Besides, if it were a good Argument against frequent Communion
now, it had been so in the Primitive times, when they received every day; but
this rather increased than diminished their Reverence for the Sacrament, and
would do the same by us if we received with that Care that we ought, and with a
just Consideration of the Dignity of this sacred Ordinance.

CHAP. III. Of Examination before the Sacrament, and Preparation for it.
I. WHAT has been said in the former Chapter is by no means intended to
dissuade Persons from a due Preparation before they receive the Holy Sacrament;
it being certain that none ought to come thither without being habitually
prepared; none, if it may be had, without some superadded actual Preparation.
He that comes without the former of these, is certainly without the
Wedding Garment, and in danger of being bound Hand and Foot, and cast into
utter darkness: He that comes without the latter where it may be had, will fall
short of that Comfort and Benefit which he might otherwise have in this Holy
Ordinance. It may not therefore be unnecessary to enquire more distinctly into
each of these, and to show wherein they consist.

II. By habitual Preparation, is meant, that which is transacted in the entire
frame, the uniform course of a Religious Life. When a Person has made it the
main Business of his Life to mortify all ill Habits, and to introduce better in
their room; to cleanse himself from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, to
perform his Vow in Baptism, to be sanctified and renewed, to repent and be
converted, and Holy as God is Holy. And he that is in this happy Condition, as
he is always fit to die, so is he always fit to receive the Sacrament, even
though he should be hindered from any actual Preparation.

III. Nor yet does it hence follow that such actual Preparation is to be
neglected where it may be had; nay, it is undoubtedly highly useful, and tends
very much to the perfection of a Christian Life. This Preparation chiefly
consists in Examination, or the strict trial of our Lives and Conversations by
the Rule of God's Word. A due knowledge of the Nature of this Sacrament. the
solemn Seal of God's Covenant with us, and of the Nature of that Covenant,
which he has made with us by his Son, is presupposed in every Communicant: Though
where any are ignorant of these first Principles, they may find some account of
them in the first Chapter of this Manual: Nor ought any to presume to receive,
without they have such knowledge, however, an equal clearness in these Matters
cannot be expected, nor is it required from all sorts of People, but a Man
shall be accepted according to what he has, if he has made the best of his
Opportunities of Knowledge. And after all, a Person that is truly humbled for
some degrees of ignorance in these and other spiritual Matters, is in a much
safer Condition, than those whom Knowledge puffs up, without either Humility or
Charity.

IV. A competent Knowledge being presupposed, of the Nature of these Holy
Mysteries, there will not need much proof that some actual Preparation is
highly requisite before we receive them. It Is true, the Preparation of Man's
Heart, in this, as well as all other Cases, is from the Lord: But none are so
weak, as not to know their own Endeavors, are also necessary; we must judge
our selves if we would not be judged of the Lord. We must purify our selves
before we eat the Passover, for he that presumes to eat it in his uncleanness,
that is, without repenting of his Sins, that Soul shall be cut off from among
his People. We ought to be cleansed according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, and if we have done our Endeavors, the good Lord will pardon what
is unavoidably wanting. Josiah commanded the Levites to prepare and sanctify
themselves, and to prepare their Brethren against that famous Passover which
was kept in his time. And if Preparation was so necessary for the Jewish
Passover, we cannot think it altogether needless when we are to partake of this
Christian Feast; which we ought to keep neither with the Old Leaven, of Judaism
or Heathenism, or an open notorious wicked Life; neither with the as dangerous
Leaven of malice and hypocrisy; but with the unleavened Bread of sincerity and
truth. Without such preparation, we may eat and drink unworthily, kindle God's
Wrath against us, and provoke him to plague us with diverse Diseases and sundry
kinds of Death.

V. But a great part of this Preparation, as has been said, consists in
Examination: For how can we know how Accounts are between Heaven and us, unless
we look into them? What our Debts are? What Mercies we receive? What we still
want, and which the best way to obtain them? What Sins we are to confess, and
to fight against? Where we are to plant our Batteries? Where to expect an
Assault? What the best methods of Defense? What Auxiliaries we want, and where
to obtain them? This the Apostle strictly commands every Man to do, to examine,
or prove himself, and so to come to the Holy Table; not to come without
Examination, or to stay away on pretense of not being examined. Something
indeed of this Nature is the Practice of every good Christian every Day of his
Life, (as it has been even of moral Heathens) to examine his Conscience before
he sleeps, what Sins he has that day committed, and by what Steps he fell into
them, and penitently and earnestly to implore Forgiveness for what is past, and
Grace for the future, to do better: And it is not easy to imagine how any Man
should be a very good Christian without it; whereas whoever does constantly and
carefully practice it, (for which he may find excellent Rules and Directions
among the Devotions annexed to the Whole Duty of Man, and for want of that,
there are some Questions added at the End of this Treatise) must needs make a
more than ordinary Progress in Christianity, and will more especially find a
wonderful advantage therein, as to the easiness of his actual Examination and
Preparation for the Communion.

VI. Which actual Preparation and Examination immediately before we receceive
are highly requisite, because they may make up for defects in the habitual, as
being more exact and more solemn than our daily Inquisition into the State of
our Minds. And this may be done with very great Advantage, by setting apart
some one day in the Week before the Communion, where a Person is at his own
disposal, and his necessary Affairs will permit him, entirely, for this great
Concern, in order to search and try our ways and turn again to the Lord. This
would be near the End of the Week, because otherwise the Impression made by it,
may be apt to wear away again before the Sacrament, or at least not to be so
deep and lively as at less distance: Nor might it be so convenient to put it
off to the very last Day of the Week, lest something or other should intervene
and hinder it. But for those who have not really leisure for such a solemn
Preparation, or in the case of an accidental Communion, which could not be
foreseen; if they are before habitually prepared, we have already seen the
Opinion of our best Divines, that they ought not to reject such an Opportunity,
for want of a more solemn actual Preparation. However, he who has but a little
time, ought to do his diligence to give of that Little. A Servant or laboring
Man, may at least redeem an Hour or two, either in Mornings or Evenings, for
this great Work, which they can do for their worldly Interest, on any
extraordinary Occasion. Few have so much Business but they can find time for
their Diversions, many for their Sins, and are our Souls only not worth a few
Hours, which he who bought them so dearly, assures us, are more worth than all
the World? Besides, most of the following Directions may be observed while a
Person is employed in many sorts of Work, especially in the Fields, and
concerns of Husbandry: And for many Tradesmen, they have yet greater leisure,
which one would think should be much better filled up this way, than in a
shameful Idleness, or in what is yet worse, the reading ill Books, and profane
and immoral Plays, which scarce ever fail of rendering the mind, not only weak
and trivial, but even averse to Piety and unfit for all the Offices of a Holy
Life. For those who are really straightened as to time, there will be particular
Directions for Examination, and for their Ease, the following Rules are
abbreviated. But this is not the case of so many Persons as plead that Excuse,
since we shall frequently hear Men complain, that their Time lies upon their
Hands, and they know not how to employ it: And for such as these, and all those
who can command so much time, as to go through them, the larger Directions
which now follow, are chiefly intended.

VII. When the Day approaches, whereon we expect one happy Opportunity more to
meet our Savior at his own Table, whose Invitation, by his Ministers, we are
to receive with the greatest Joy, and the greatest Reverence; the first thing
we do, would be to sequester our selves from the World, nay, even from all
worldly Thoughts, and the troublesome Cares of Life. To do this with all
possible Intention, and with the whole force of our Minds, with firm Resolves
and full purpose of Heart, not to admit any other Business, any other Thoughts,
unsuitable to this great Work. Which having begun with devout Prayer for the
Divine Assistance, let us proceed in the impartial Examen of our Consciences on
the following Heads. 1. Of our Repentance. 2. Holy Resolutions. 3. Faith. 4.
Thankfulness. And 5. Charity. All which if we find in some good degree wrought
in us by God's Holy Spirit, we may approach with comfort to this Sacrament.

VIII. And first: We are to examine our selves concerning our Repentance;
wherein the Nature of it consists, whether habitual or actual; and under actual
Repentance, may be included our particular Examination by the Rule of God's
Commands, before we approach the Sacrament.

The general Nature of Repentance, consists in a thorough Change of Heart and
Life, so as to hate all Sin, and turn to God; to love God more than the World,
or our Lusts, or even, than our own Lives, in the prevailing bent, the settled
Choice of our Minds, and to evidence this by keeping his Commandments: To live
in the course of no greater Sin, such as Drunkenness, Swearing, Uncleanness,
neglect of Public Worship, or the like; which waste the Conscience, and are a
perfect Contradiction to true Repentance, and must be left immediately, as we
would avoid eternal Misery: not to indulge so much as Sins of Infirmity, nor to
say, is it not a little one? such as sloth, passion, forgetfulness of our Duty
in some Instances, wandering Thoughts, or the like: for a Christian is to fight
against all Sin, and such as are at first comparatively little, yet do all
deserve God's Anger, and eternal Punishments, and will if they are neglected,
grow bigger, and at last perhaps, irresistible. I say, true Repentance is a
thorough Change, of the whole Man, the Principles, Inclinations and Desires, as
well as outward Actions; and hence it is called in Scripture, the New-Man, the
New-Heart, the New Creature, because we are all by Nature the Children of
Wrath, and guilty of Original Sin Vid. Discourse of Baptism.
; nor is there any who has lived to years of Discretion, but what has made that
sad use of his Reason, to sin against his Maker, and to commit many actual
Transgressions, if not to fall into grosser habits of wickedness; from which
God knows, very few can say they are wholly innocent in this degenerate Age:
Now there is no way to recover from this, and to escape God's Anger, but by
forsaking Sin, with the greatest abhorrence and detestation. It Is therefore
evident that those are miserably and dangerously mistaken, who fancy they
repent, because they have some Fear of Hell, some light checks of Conscience,
and transient Sorrow for offending God, without effectually leaving all
wickedness, and coming to God from whom they have wandered, and leading a Holy
Life. Then have we this habitual Repentance, when by God's Grace we do in the
main course of our Lives, express our Love to God, and hatred of Sin, and
sorrow for it, and are become New Men, and make it our chief Business to strive
against our Corruptions, manfully to resist them, effectually to work out our
own Salvation: To have that Image of God renewed in us, which we lost by the
Fall. And thus much for habitual Repentance.

IX. Actual Repentance, is that which every good Man puts in practice on his
falling into any Sin; and which he should renew more particularly and exactly,
before he comes to the Lord's Table; whereunto we are directed in the first
Exhortation on the Sunday before the Communion, which we would therefore do
very well seriously to peruse, in order to our Preparation for it. Wherein we
are taught, That it is our Duty to search and examine our own Consciences, and
that not lightly and after the manner of Dissemblers with God, but so as that
we may come Holy and Clean to this heavenly Feast. And we are further directed
to do this, by the Rule of God's Commands, and whereinsoever we shall perceive
our selves to have offended, either by Will, Word or Deed, there to bewail our
own sinfulness, and to confess our selves to Almighty God. And to assist us
herein, we may find large and exact Catalogues of Sins in several Books of
Devotion, particularly those annexed to the Whole Duty of Man; which if you
have not, you may if you please, make use of this following, and examine your
self concerning the particular Breaches of God's Commands, either of the first
or second Table.

X. The Breaches of the first Command of the first Table, are; 1. Atheism, or
at least, Atheistical Thoughts or Discourse (too common among the foolish Wits
of the Age) 2. Polytheism, or believing, or worshipping more Gods than one, the
main thing forbidden in this Command; under which may be included Ditheism, or
worshipping two Gods, of which those cannot clear themselves who pay Divine
Honors to any, whom they believe not essentially one with the Father; and
Tritheism, if any now are guilty of it, which is worshipping three Gods,
whereas there is but One Supreme; there can be but One God, (though Three
Persons,) who is over all, blessed for ever. 3. Covetousness, which is
Idolatry. Immoderate Love of our selves, or of the World, that
Carnal-mindedness, which is Death. A violent and unreasonable Passion for any
Person or Thing in this World. 4. Wilful Ignorance of God or of his Word;
carelessness of our Souls, neglecting or despising Instruction. 5. Presumption
upon God's Mercy. A false Peace and Security in Sin. As on the other side,
distrusting his Power or Goodness, or murmuring against him, or despairing of
his Mercy. 6. Worshipping Angels or Saints. 7. Witchcraft, or doing
interpretative Homage to the Devil, by using Charms, consulting with Wizards,
cunning Men and the like; which is esteemed by our greatest Divines, a degree
of renouncing our Christianity. Bp. Hopkins, Bp. Andrews, W. D. of Man, etc.
8. Unthankfulness, Lukewarmness, Indevotion, Pride, Impenitence. 9. Want of
Love to God, Faith in him, Dependence on him, Submission and Resignation.

The Breaches of the second Command, are; 1. Idolatry, which is making any
Images with intent to bow down to them, or worship them; or actually paying
such Worship to them, even though God himself be represented by them; any visible
corporeal Representation of God, being a contradiction to his pure spiritual
Nature, and a high Breach of this Command; Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
as is even the forming any corporeal Image of him in our mind, much more
believing a material God. 2. Sacrilege. Robbing or profaning Churches,
detaining Tithes, or any thing that is dedicated to God, (God forgive all
Nations, Families and Persons that are guilty of it!) 3. Loathing Manna;
neglecting, or disesteeming, or ridiculing God's Word, or not profiting by it;
contemning, abusing, causless grieving his Ministers. 4. Adding to his Word;
making any thing necessary to Salvation, which he has not made necessary;
coining and imposing New Articles of Faith, not contained in Scripture.
Superstitious scrupling what is lawful, without endeavoring to have the
Conscience better informed. Irreverence or Undecency in God's Worship, refusing
to glorify God with our Bodies as well as Souls, when both are his. 5. Want of
inward spiritual Worship, without which, the outward is but like a dead
Carcass; (though this may be referred also to the first Command.)

The Breaches of the third Command, are; 1. Taking God's Name in vain (which
those who do are particularly branded as God's Enemies, Psalm. 139. 20.
either by false or rash Oaths; or rash or impossible Vows; or by breaking
lawful or possible Oaths or Vows, the Vow in Baptism, or at the other
Sacrament; or by mentioning that glorious and fearful Name the Lord our God,
without an act of Reverence and Devotion. 2. Swearing by any Creature. 3. Want
of a just Concern for God's Honor; encouraging, or not discouraging, or
reproving, or punishing, where it is possible and practicable, those Monsters of
Men, who blaspheme, or prosane God's Holy Name; Levit. 5. 1.
or discouraging, or not assisting to our Power those who would do it, and who
have more Zeal for God's Glory: Or not heartily lamenting those Sins, if we are
where the Tide of wickedness runs so high, that we cannot have them punished.

The Breaches of the fourth Command, are; 1. The taking it quite away, and
mocking God in desi^ing him; to have mercy upon us for our Offenses against it,
and to incline our Hearts to keep it, when we believe it, (as some do) purely
Typical and Iudaical; whereas a seventh part of Time is evidently of
moral-positive Obligation, being enjoined before the Fall, and there is little
doubt, was observed by the Patriarchs before the Law, (for it is not reasonable
to suppose, that Religion could continue Sixteen Hundred Years in the World,
without a stated time of public Worship) So St. Athanasius, St. Chrysostom.
Bid, many old Councils, in England and other places, our Book of Homilies, Mr.
Hooker, Archbishop Usher, Bishop Stillingfleet, Bp. Patrick, Bp. Hopkins, etc.
as by all Christians since our Savior; tho the precise seventh Day of the
Week was indeed peculiar to the Jews. 2. All Profanation of it, by weekly, or
work day Labor, or any Works, but of Necessity or Charity. Unnecessary,
worldly, or vain Discourse or Visits; much more by Playing, Dancing, or the
like; which make it indeed a Jewish, not a Christian Sabbath. 3. Neglecting to
employ the whole Day, as far as our Strength and Necessities permit, in public
or private Acts of Religios Worship. 4. Suffering any to profane it, who are
under our Charge, and whom we can binder from doing it, or not giving them time
for God's Service. 5. Not permitting our Servants, or very Beasts to rest on
that Day, or any manner of Cruelty toward them. 6. Refusing to observe any
other Days appointed by lawful Authority, for God's public Worship, either
Fasts or Feasts, (if our Occasions and Circumstances will permit.)

XI. As for the second Table, containing our Duty to our Neighbor, as the
first does our Duty to God. We offend against the first Command of it, the
fifth in the Decalogue, by any ways dishonouring our Parents, whether Natural,
our Father and Mother; or Civil, the Magistrates, the King, and those that are
in Authority under him; or Ecclesiastical, our Ministers and lawful Pastors; or
any other Superiors, as Masters or Mistresses, or our betters and Elders. By
being undutiful, stubborn or unnatural to those to whom we are indebted for our
Birth and Education: By rebelling against our Prince, or being unthankful to
him, or reviling him, or lightly believing ill of him, or of those commissioned
by him, or opposing them in the exercise of that lawful Authority he has
deputed unto them. By contemning or defrauding our lawful Ministers, or
forsaking them, or discouraging them by neglecting public Worship (of which
also under the third.) By being unfaithful to Masters, or careless of their
Concerns, or stubborn and refractory and disobedient to their lawful Commands.
By incivility and rudeness and want of due Respect to our Superiors, rising up
before the hoary Head: Or in the reciprocal Duties, want of Kindness,
Watchfulness, Support, Instruction, Provision, from Superiors, and doing what
in them lies for the Souls and Bodies of those committed to their Charge.

For the sixth: 1. The direct Breach of it is Murder, the old Version, Thou
shall do no Murder, being better than the New, thou shall not Kill; for all
know that all killing is not murder, nor is it unlawful, as in a just War, or
the like: But murder is killing without, or against Law, or by a wrested
pretense of Law, worse than all the rest. And under Murder, are doubtless
included Duels, for such the Laws have justly made them; and it is little better
to fight in an unjust War, or without enquiring into the Justice of it, merely
for Pay or Plunder. Bishop Sanderson's Cases of Conscience.
2. The next Breach of this Command, is, by Wounding or Hurting our Neighbor,
or procuring others to do it. 3. Procuring Abortion, or Onan's Sin. Genesis 38. 9.
4. Malice, or Envy, or Revenge against our Neighbor, with which none must
come to this Feast of Love. 5. Causless, rash, immoderate. or implacable Anger,
and any expressions of it by Word or Action. 7. Murdering the Souls of any, by
ill Advice, or Command, or Temptation, or Example. 6 Self-murder; the highest,
and most unnatural Breach of this Command, which argues the height of
Discontent and Despair, and where it once proceeds to Action, cuts off all
Repentance; and therefore the least Inclinations to it, are to be abhorred and
repelled, as a most dangerous Temptation of the Devil, and to be as severely
repented of, where they have found any admission. 8. Want of Meekness, and
Forgiveness, and Charity, and Compassion toward our Neighbor.

In the seventh, are forbidden; 1. Expressly, Adultery. 2. Fornication, and all
actual Impurity. 3. All incentives to this odious Sin. Unchaste Looks, Dresses,
Books, Plays, Songs, Poetry, Pictures, Conversation; Idleness, Pampering the
Body; and lastly, Drunkenness, which is so often the occasion of this, and
almost, all other Sins.

The direct Breach of the eighth Command is, Stealing, either open, and
forcibly, which is Robbery; or private, which is These and Pilfering; and so is
injuring our Neighbor by pretense of Law, by Extortion, by Oppression, by
unequal laying of Taxes, or otherwise. 3. Cheating in Trade; false Lights,
Weights, Coin, Measures, Imposing on our Neighbor in Buying or Selling, Lying,
to raise the Price of Goods. 4. Denying, detaining, or delaying the Hire of the
Labourer, or lessening, or raising it beyond a just proportion. 5. Living
extravagantly, not proportioning Expenses to Incoms, thence running into
unnecessary Debts without an honest Care, and greatest Diligence to discharge
them. 6. Fraudulent Conveyances, Forgeries, Breach of Trust, removing
Landmarks, extravagant or covetous Gaming, neglecting to provide for our own.
7. Refusing or delaying to make Restitution to any we have injured by any of
these means, without which, no Repentance, no Forgiveness, whenever we are in a
Capacity to do it; or else giving it to the Poor, or to Religious Uses, if we
cannot find the Person injured.

The Breaches of the ninth, are; 1. Bearing false Witness, by direct Perjury.
2. Pleading against our Conscience; or not swearing the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth, when required in Courts of Judicature. 3. Slandering our
Neighbor, or lightly taking up an evil Report against him, or spreading
malicious Truth, or any way speaking ill of him, unless when God's Glory, or
our own Reputation, or another's Welfare is concerned. 4. Uncharitable
Censures, deriding or exposing any one's Infirmities. 5. Talebearing and
whispering, the Vice of mean and ignoble Souls. 6. Dissembling, Flattering, and
Lying. 7. Neglecting to defend our Neighbor's Reputation, where we can do it
with decency and honesty.

In the tenth, are forbidden; 1. The desiring any. thing that is my Neighbor's,
without a just Compensation, or where he is not willing to part with it. 2.
Discontent and repining at our own Condition, or envying our Neighbors. 3. The
first allowed pleasing motions to any Sin, especially to Impurity, or
delightful Reflections on past Wickedness.

XII. Thus much for the chief Breaches of God's Commands, upon all of which, we
would do well distinctly to examine our selves in our Preparation for the
Sacrament, especially, as to those Sins whereunto we have formerly found our
selves most strongly inclined, and whereof we have been most frequently guilty.
We ought also to reflect on all the Aggravations of them, how frequently, how
inexcusably, against how much Goodness and Patience of God, how many checks of
our own Conscience, and perhaps, advice of Friends, against how many Vows and
Resolutions we have committed them. Especially, if after we have vowed against
them formerly at the Holy Sacrament, concerning which we are to make an exact
Disquisition, for God certainly remembers all those Vows, though we may have
broken them, and forgot them. And if we do not yet find our Hearts sufficiently
affected for it, if the Love of Christ and all his Sufferings for us, cannot
melt us into an ingenious Sorrow for our Offenses, let us consider God's
dreadful Judgment, his terrible Indignation against impenitent Sinners, and
earnestly pray to God, for the sake of his dear Son, to take away our stony
Hearts, and give us that godly Sorrow which works Repentance to Salvation. And
proportionable to our Sins, must be our Sorrow and our Repentance, though here it
may be necessary to interpose a Caution: There are some pious Persons of such
weak Judgments, and tender Consciences, that they are, it may be, ready to
accuse themselves of many Sins, whereof they were never guilty: But we must not
lie to God, nor belie our selves, nor charge our selves, any more than charge
God, foolishly: And where we find in our Examination, that God has preserved us
from any Sins, or given us more Strength against any which have formerly been
too hard for us, we ought not by any means to be unthankful for his Goodness,
but ascribe all to him, and praise him for his Grace, and endeavor so well to
improve it, and those Talents which we have, that he may still bestow more upon
us, and make us perfect in Repentance and all good Works.

XIII. Having thus strictly examined our selves concerning our Breaches of
God's Commands, and our serious effectual Repentance for them, we proceed in
the next place, to firm and Holy Resolves to do better for the future; to avoid
those Evils we have fallen into, to perform those Duties we have hitherto
neglected. We are to ask our selves in the presence of God, whether we do
indeed, steadfastly purpose to lead a new Life, without which, it is the highest
presumption to approach these dreadful Mysteries: And accordingly, we are
actually to make most solemn Vows, as well as Resolutions, of better Obedience:
The force of Resolution only, is not small, it gives new Strength and Energy to
the mind, and helps to perform what one would think at first sight almost
impossible: Bodily Diseases, we are told, have been cured by it, which have
been thought desperate, and why may not also Diseases of the Mind. There is a
Spirit in Man, and it is the Breath of the Almighty, and it has a noble Force,
if we will but stir it up, and make use of it: But when Vows are added to these
Resolves, when we resolve in God's Name, and in his Sight, and through his
Strength, and by the Assistance of his Grace, and pray earnestly and faithfully
for it, and conscientiously use the means to obtain it, to avoid Sin, to
increase in Goodness; all these make such a Cord as is not easily broken. Nor
are we to be discouraged from making New Resolves, because we may have broken
such as we have formerly made: No, we are to be troubled for our Fall, but not
to lie still in the Dirt, but to rise immediately, and endeavor to recover the
Ground we have lost, in our way toward Heaven: We are to observe what was the
occasion of our stumbling, how we came to break our former Resolves against our
Sins. If it was ill Company that led us into it, we are carefully for the
future, as much as possible, to avoid such Company, as we value the Favor of
God, and our own eternal Happiness. And so if Love of this World have made us
neglect our Duty to God, or our Neighbor, we are to resolve against that;
actually to draw off our Minds from these perishing Objects, and fix them on
the unfading Treasures of a better World. And thus are we particularly to level
our Holy Resolutions against those Sins which do most easily beset us, most
frequently prevail over us; solemnly, upon our Knees, before God, to Renounce
those Works of the Devil, or to renew that Solemn Renunciation of them, which
we made in our Baptism, as well as to renew those Sacred Vows which we then
made to keep God's Holy Will and Commandment, and to walk in the same all the
Days of our Lives. Which will not only have a very great Influence on our
future Actions, to preserve us from running upon any Temptation to our former
Sins, or from the neglect of our Duty; but will be also by God's Grace, a
mighty Guard upon us, even when we are actually tempted; the Impression of
those good Resolves being still deep and fresh on our Minds, and giving them a
strong tendency to Good, and aversion to Evil, and the horrid Guilt of Perjury
appearing before our Eyes, if we should again break God's Commands: Nor had the
Psalmist himself any stronger Guard against Temptation than the Sense of his
Vows, and the awful presence of that God to whom he had made them. Psalm. 16. 8.
I have set the Lord always before my Face, that I might not sin against him.
And, Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy
righteous Judgments.

XIV. The third thing concerning which we are to examine our selves before we
approach this Holy Table, is, Whether we have a lively Faith in God's Mercy
through Christ. Not a dead, cold, and unactive, but a lively Faith; for, Faith
without Works is dead: and such is the ungrounded fatal Presumption of every
impenitent Sinner; for what is more common than for bad Men, who live in direct
contradiction to our Savior's Laws, in repeated Acts of Intemperance,
Injustice, Uncleanness, immoderate Love to this World, and in the neglect of
their Duty, of Praying, of God's Word and Sacrament; What is more common than
to hear such mistaken Wretches as these cry out, that God is merciful, that
Christ has died, and they hope to be saved, though they bring forth no Fruits
meet for Faith or Repentance? They believe the Promise of the Gospel, though they
never take care to perform the Conditions of it: But they forget, or are
willingly ignorant that it contains threatenings too, and that very terrible
ones against the Impenitent and Disobedient; and that Christ himself has told
such, that he will say to them at the last day, Depart from me, I never knew you,
because Workers of Iniquity. But the true lively Faith here required is, Such a
Belief of God's Word, and such a Trust in his Mercy, through his Promises by our
Savior, as produces a constant and ingenuous Obedience. Now if we find this
Faith weak and languishing, we must pray as the Disciples did, Lord increase
our Faith! And to that End, we must consider the Promises of God unto us, for
the sake of his dear Son our Lord, in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen,
ratified and certain. In whom alone the Father is well pleased, by the Merits,
of whose Obedience and Sufferings, his Satisfaction, his Intercession and
Mediation, he is reconciled to lost Mankind, and offers Pardon to all that are
penitent and obedient. And this is all our Salvation, and all our Desire; the
Hope of Holy Souls, the Ground of their Consolation and their Triumph, which
are fixed so firmly upon that Rock of Ages, that they can never be moved; who
has told us, That if we believe in God, we must believe also in him, as the
means of conveying all the Father's blessings; nay, as being himself, as he is,
God, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. Whence it follows, that he himself,
the second Person of the glorious Trinity, may, and ought to be the object of
our Trust, our Faith, and our Adoration, both in this Life, and in the hour of
Death, as he was of blessed St. Steven's who cried out in his last Agonies,
Lord Jesus! receive my Spirit Act. 7. 59.
And thus in our preparation for the Holy Sacrament, without the reception
whereof, I see not how any can live comfortably, or die happily, we must
actually advert unto, deeply and seriously consider those Promises which God
has made us by his Son, of Grace and Pardon, on our Repentance and Obedience:
That those who come to the Father by him, he will in no wise cast out. St. John
6. 37. That they shall not see Death, but are passed from Death unto Life. St.
John 8. 51. 5. 24. That there is no condemnation for them which are in Christ
Jesus, and who those are, we are immediately told, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8. 1. That all who are weary and heavy laden
with the Burden of their Sins, if they come unto him, he will refresh them;
St. Matt. 11. 28. and several others of the same nature; the substance of the
Gospel being promises of eternal Life to those who yield a sincere, and
impartial, though not absolutely sinless and perfect obedience to the Commands of
it; all the threatenings thereof, being only the unavoidable Consequences of
wilfully rejecting it. Now the very Nature of the Sacrament shows the necessity
of Faith toward worthy Receiving; for how can we renew our Covenant with God,
unless we believe he is really willing to be reconciled to us, and have a firm
Faith in his Truth, his Power and his Goodness? And how could we have any well
grounded hopes of Pardon, but from the Revelation of the Gospel, and by the
merits of a Redeemer? And to the exercise of this Grace, the Church also
directs us when we approach this Holy Table, requiring us, to have a lively and
steadfast Faith in Christ our Savior; and so in the Exhortation, the Sunday
before the Communion, that it is requisite that those who come thither, should
have a full Trust in God's Mercy. Not that all are required to have the same
degrees of Faith; for there are doubtless different measures of it as in the
Resurrection, one Star shall differ from another in Glory: 1 Cor. 15. 43. But
our Faith ought certainly to be so strong as to overcome our Infidelity, to
over come the World: It is to be sincere, and then it will not want acceptance,
though it be but as a Grain of Mustard Seed, for our gracious Lord has promised
that he will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax: St.
Matt. 12. 20. Though we are always to press forward, that this as well as all
other Graces may still be increased, toward which, nothing can more highly
conduce, than the frequent and devout reception of this Sacrament.

XV. The 4th. thing concerning which we are to examine our selves in our
preparation, is, whether we have [a thankful Remembrance of Christ's Death;]
whereunto the Church directs us in such pathetical Expressions as were scarce
ever excelled, and I question whether equalled in any other Liturgy; though not
only the ancient Churches, but our Protestant Brethren, particularly the
French, and the Tigurine, have excellent Forms on this occasion: I mean that
passage wherein we are exhorted Exhortation at the time of the celebration.
above all things to give most humble and hearty Thanks to God the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the World by the Death and
Passion of our Savior Christ, both GOD and Man; who did humble himself even to
the Death, upon the Cross, for us miserable Sinners; who lay in darkness and
the shadow of Death, that he might make us the Children of God, and exalt us to
everlasting Life. This we are to do [above all things] because this true and
unfeigned Gratitude is the principal Ornament of the Wedding Garment. This
seems to have been the chief and immediate End of the Institution, Do this in
Remembrance of me; and hereby ye show forth the Lord's Death till he come: And
how is it possible for any ingenuous mind to remember, to reflect upon our
Savior's sufferings, without the most tender Resentments, the highest
Thankfulness and Love? For how can a Rebel be fit for Pardon, if he is not
thankful when it is offered him? It Is therefore necessary that we should so
long, so seriously remember the exceeding great Love of our Master, and only
Savior thus dying for us, even before we come to the Solemn Sacramental
Commemoration of it, till our Hearts burn within us, as did the two Disciples,
that we may thereby be in some measure fitted to meet our Savior, and that he
may make himself known unto us, as he did unto them, in breaking of Bread: St.
Luke 24. 32. But we must take care that this Remembrance have a future lasting
influence on our Lives: Ill Men may remember Christ's Death, but it is certain
that whatever they may pretend, they do it presumptuously, not thankfully,
because it is not productive of a Holy Life. It makes them nothing better, but
rather encourages them to go on in their Sins; whereas true thankfulness will
naturally produce unfeigned Obedience: And to make us both obedient and
thankful, one would think there should need no more than to consider deeply
from what Evils Christ has saved us by his Death; no less than the Power of
Sin, the Wrath of God, and everlasting Misery: And what Benefits he has
obtained for us by it; the Pardon of Sin, the Favor of God, Grace to serve
him, and eternal Happiness; some of which are actually conveyed, as all of them
are assured and sealed in this blessed Sacrament, to every penitent, faithful,
grateful Receiver.

XV. The last thing necessary to a worthy Communicant, is Charity. [ To be in
Charity with all Men.] When we bring our Gift to the Altar, we must be first
reconciled to our Brother: We must offer it, and sincerely desire and endeavor
it; and if he refuses to be reconciled, the Fault is on his side, nor ought
another's Crime to keep us from our Duty and Happiness. This Charity must also
show it self in an universal Love to Mankind, wishing, praying for,
endeavoring, and as much as in us lies, promoting their temporal and spiritual
Welfare. But especially, this Holy Love is to be acted and exercised toward
all Christians, and particularly toward those with whom we communicate; not
forgetting the Poor, whom we are to relieve, as well at the Offering, which
ought not to be neglected at the Sacrament, as any other way that lies in our
Power. The exercise of this Divine Grace, is more eminently necessary when we
approach to this blessed Feast, because 'twas one great End of its Institution;
it being designed to increase Christian Unity, and Holy Love among the
Faithful, who herein communicate both in temporal and spiritual good things;
who Feast and make a Covenant with each other, as well as with the great
Inviter; and being many are hereby made one Body and one Bread. 1 Cor. 10. 17.

We are therefore carefully to examine our selves before we come thither,
whether we heartily forgive our Enemies, and are ready to render Good for Evil?
Whether we feel this Divine Flame in our Hearts, and dearly love all those that
bear the Image of the heavenly? And in order to produce in us both parts of
this Grace, one would think we should need do no more than consider seriously
how many Talents our Lord has forgiven us; how much he has done and suffered
for us, even while we were his Enemies; and that we are all Members of one
Body, whereof Christ is the Head.

XVII. And thus have we finished what relates to our Preparation for the
Sacrament, and those several Graces concerning which we are to examine our
selves before we approach unto it: Repentance, attended by good Resolves,
Faith, Thankfulness, and Charity. Not that we should forbear to come thither,
if we do not find all these in the utmost perfection; but where we find any of
them weak and languid, we must strengthen the things that remain, and be
humbled for our Imperfections, and endeavor earnestly after higher degrees of
Grace, and consider the means appointed to increase them, especially the Holy
Sacrament, wherein they are to be all exercised and renewed, as will appear in
the next Chapter. And in the mean time, most humbly and devoutly to fall upon
our Knees, and in the following, or any better Forms See the excellent
Devotions added to the Whole Duty of Man, or those in the Christian Sacrifice.
of Prayer, thus address our selves to the Giver of all good things, for a
Supply of our Necessities.

A Confession, when we are Preparing for the Communion.
ALmighty and most merciful Father! who may for my Sins be most justly
displeased with me, for ever cast me off from thy presence, and condemn me to
Everlasting Misery. I am ashamed, O Lord, and blush to lift up my Face unto
thee, for all my misdeeds are before thee, and my most secret Sins in the Light
of thy Countenance. I was shapen in Iniquity, and conceived in Sin; by Nature
dead in trespasses and sins, averse to Good, and violently inclined to Evil;
ignorant of God, and an Enemy to him, in a lost and undone Condition, and
utterly unable to help and to deliver my self. And I have added to this
Original Sin many heinous actual Trangressions, [Here let the Penitent repeat
those Sins whereof, on the former Examination, he has found himself guilty.]
The Remembrance of all which, I desire may be most grievous as their burden is
most intolerable unto me; for I have done all these abominations, with many
aggravating Circumstances, which have highly increased the Guilt of them;
without regard to thy tender Mercies, or to thy terrible Judgments, or to my
own repeated Vows and Resolves of Repentance and Obedience. O make me to abhor
them, and my self for them, and to repent in Dust and Ashes. I know that my
sorrow for them is no satisfaction to thy offended Justice; yet since thou do
require it of me, to render me capable of thy Mercy, work in me, I beseech
thee, by thy Holy Spirit, such a true and unfeigned Remorse for them, that I
may entirely forsake them, and come Pure and Holy to thy Heavenly Feast. O God
be merciful to me a Sinner, who cry unto thee in an acceptable Time, and in the
Day of Salvation! O Holy, Blessed and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons and One
God, have mercy upon me a miserable Sinner! O God the Father of Heaven, who
did send thine Only Son out of thy Bosom to taste Death for every Man, that we
might not die eternally; accept his Atonement, accept his Intercession, and be
reconciled unto me through his Blood. In my Father's House is Bread enough and to
spare: O let me not perish with Hunger. O Son of David have mercy on me, and if
thou can do any thing, since thou can do all things, help me. By thine
Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious Death and
Burial, Good Lord deliver me! I desire not to be saved from the Guilt of my
Sins only, or from those heavy Punishments that are due unto them, but from
their Power and prevailing Influence on my Mind: from all my Sins, even those
which have been most dear unto me; and am willing to cut off my Right Hand, or
pluck out my Right Eye, so I may but enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. My
Savior came to take away the Sins of the World; He has born all our Griefs, he
has carried our Sorrows; he was wounded for our Transgressions; he was grieved
for our Iniquities; he has excepted none out of that General Pardon which he
has purchased for Mankind, and offered to all those, who are qualified for
receiving it. I present the Merits of his inestimable Sacrifice before thee, O
offended Majesty of Heaven! I have no Merits of my own; I have nothing, I am
nothing, but vile Dust and Sin: But he is worthy, for whose sake I beg Mercy of
thee, which I most humbly implore and expect, only in that way which thou have
appointed, and on those Conditions which thy Son has revealed in his Holy
Gospel; by an unfeigned Repentance, a firm Faith, a sincere, and an impartial
Obedience. O therefore take away all mine Iniquities and receive me graciously,
who like the Prodigal, desire to return to my Father's House. And since it is
thou alone who do both put into our Minds good Desires, and can also give
us Grace to perform the same, assist me now and ever in those Holy Resolves
which I make of new and better Obedience. Vouchsafe me thy Grace to avoid all
those Occasions and Temptations, whereby I have been too often drawn to Evil.
Let thy Blessed Spirit evermore comfort and guide me, and lead me into all
Truth, and all Goodness. Let me henceforth Evidence my unfeigned Love to my
Savior, by keeping his Commandments; and let that and all other Graces be
excited and increased in me at this Time in my approaches to his Holy Table.
Pardon the frivolous and sinful Excuses which I have too often made for my
Absence from it; my want of Preparation for it; the Deadness and Indevotion of
my Soul in receiving it; and my shameful Unprofitableness by it! O that I may
now sit under my Savior's shadow with great Delight, and that his Fruit may be
sweet unto my Taste: That I may in this Sacrament, receive greater Strength
than ever against my Sins, and be thereby nourished up unto Everlasting Life;
that so after this painful Life is ended, I may sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven; for the sake of Jesus Christ, who ever
lives to make Intercession for us, in whose most perfect Form of Word, I
conclude my unworthy and imperfect Prayers, saying.

Our Father, etc.

Collect for Perseverance.
O GOD of all Power, and all Love, who art the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, and have assured us in thy Holy Word, that thou will not break the
bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. Accept, I beseech thee, for the
sake of thy Dear Son, any weak beginnings of Goodness which thou may have
wrought in me by thy Holy Spirit. Despise not the Day of small things. Help me
to continue to the End, that I may be saved. And now that I have put my Hand to
the Plough, grant I may never look back, lest I be accounted unworthy of the
Kingdom of Heaven. My Strength, O Lord! I ascribe unto thee, for my own Heart
has often deceived me, and I know that all my Strength is weakness, and my
Wisdom folly. Assist me therefore by the mighty Aids of thy Holy Spirit, and
while I am to wrestle, not only against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalites and Powers, let the strong Man be bound by a stronger than he,
and the God of Love bruise Satan under my Feet. Let me be content to suffer
shame for thy sake, and never be drawn away by the Number or Greatness of bad
Examples. Lead me not into Temptation, and let me never be so hardy and
presumptuous as to rush into it. Keep me always sober and vigilant, temperate
and humble, ever upon my Guard, watching and praying, that the Enemy may obtain
no advantage against me. Accept and confirm all my Vows and Resolutions of
Obedience. Let me have a constant Respect unto the blessed Recompense of
Reward, and by patient continuance in well doing, seek for, and at length
obtain Glory, Immortality, and Eternal Life, through thy Mercies in Jesus Christ
my Lord.

Amen! Amen.
For Faith.
O LORD, who have said that he who has but Faith as a Grain of Mustardseed, may
remove Mountains, and that without Faith it is impossible to please thee,
Increase my Faith, and let me thereby overcome the World and the Flesh, and
quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil. Let me firmly believe all thy Promises
to the Penitent and Obedient, and all thy Threatenings against impenitent
Sinners. Let me not rest in a dead Faith, a presumptuous Opinion, that I shall
be pardoned or saved, without performing all those good Works which thou have
prepared for me to walk in. Give me that Faith which works by Love, and by an
impartial Obedience to thy Commands. Let me firmly believe in the Lord Jesus,
that I may be saved; and not trust in my own Righteousness, but in his Merits,
who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Let me always hope in him for Pardon
of what is past, and Grace to serve thee better for the future. Let me have a
lively and steadfast Faith in him, when I approach to his Table, that I may draw
near and take the Holy Sacrament to my Comsort, and that it may powerfully help
me forward in the right way which leads unto Everlasting Life. To the unfading
Glories of that happy State, where Faith shall be changed into sight: where,
with Holy Souls, who are departed this Life in the true Faith and Fear of thy
Holy Name, I may enjoy the End of my Faith, the Salvation of my Soul, and see,
and love thee to all Eternity, through Jesus,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving before the Sacrament.
WHAT shall I render to thee, O God of all Grace, for the Riches of thy
Goodness toward me a miserable Sinner! How utterly unworthy am I, even of the
common Blessings of Life! And yet art thou pleased out of thy infinite Mercies
once more to permit me, to invite me to tread thy Courts, to sit at thy Table,
and to Feast on Angels Food. O that my Heart could be fully possessed with
Thoughts of Gratitude and Love! O let my Mouth be filled with Thanks, and my
Lips with Praise, for those inestimable Benefits! God will in very deed dwell
with Man, though the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him. My Savior will fulfill
his gracious Promise, and be present with his Church in his own Institutions,
till the End of the World. I have now one happy Opportunity more offered me to
renew that Covenant which I have so often broken; to obtain greater Strength
against my Sins, and to sacrifice them all before God at his Holy Altar, even
after I have either frequently slighted the like Invitations, or been present
at thy Holy Table without due Preparation and Devotion, or have soon forgotten
those Promises which I there made, and those Vows of God which have been upon
me. But, O Lord! as my utter unworthiness does more magnify thy infinite
Goodness, so let the Sense of the one produce in my Mind more lively and
lasting acknowledgements of the other. For which, help me to magnify thee O
God my King, and to praise thy Name for ever and ever! and grant that I may now
approach thy Table with such devout Praises, such true Gratitude, such humble
Love, as may there be accepted of thee; and being increased and confirmed by
the renewed Pledges of thy Favors, I may continue to show forth thy Praise in
the steady Course of a fruitful, thankful, and obedient Life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen!
A Collect for Charity.
O LORD, who have told us, that all our doings without Charity are nothing
worth, pour into my Heart, I beseech thee, the most excellent Gift of Charity,
that I may love thee above all things, and love my Neighbor as my self. I am
now approaching once more to that Feast of Love which my Savior has provided
for me: O that my Heart may be entirely penetrated with his Love, and that the
endearing Thoughts of what he has done and suffered for me even while I was an
Enemy, may wholly subdue in me all Hatred and Wrath, and Malice, and Revenge,
and criminal Self-love, and Peevishness, and immoderate Anger; and may render
it as delightful to me, as it is necessary, to forgive all that have offended
me, as I expect that God for Christ's sake should forgive me. Give me a
constant Disposition to love my Enemies, to bless them that curse me, do good
to them that hate me, and pray for them that despightfully use me, and
persecute me. [Here, if you have any Enemies, 'twould be well in particular to
name them, and ask Pardon for them, and then add,] Forgive, O Lord! my
Trespasses, as I desire from the bottom of my Heart, to forgive all those that
trespass against me; and help me by a wise, a gentle, and a peaceable
behavior, and by all good Offices toward them, to heap Coals of Fire upon
their Heads, and melt them down into a better Temper. Grant that I may more and
more covet that best Gift of Charity, and may feel it daily increase in my
Heart toward all my Christian Brethren. Let my Love unto them be advanced in
proportion to their Excellency in Piety, and nearer Resemblance to God.
Especially, unite me in the most fervent and tender Affection to all those with
whom, by thy Grace, I shall partake of the Bread of Life at the approaching
Communion. Let us be all one Body and one Bread; and grant that I may heartily
seek the Welfare both of their Souls and Bodies Bless thy Holy Catholic
Church, especially that part of it planted in these Kingdoms: Reform her
Professors, heal her Breaches, disappoint and convert her Enemies. Pity all
that suffer for Righteousness sake. [Here add any particular Church that is
persecuted, as suppose in France, Scotland, etc.] Comfort the afflicted,
support the miserable, help those that have no helper, and in thy due time,
deliver thine Israel out of all their Trouble, for Christ his sake. Amen!

XVIII. Having thus finished the Directions concerning such a stated
Examination and Preparation as is necessary or highly convenient to those who
have Opportunities for it, in the Week before the Communion, I should here add
a Summary of them for the use of such as have not Time or Convenience for such
a larger Preparation: But think it more proper to remit that to the End of this
Tract, and shall add a word or two in the Conclusion of this Chapter,
concerning our Behavior betwixt this forementioned Preparation, and our actual
approach to the Sacrament, especially in the Morning of the Communion.

XIX. For the former; as for the Time that passes between our Preparation and
Reception, he who desires to be a Worthy Communicant, can hardly be too
careful, or too much upon his Guard, lest he should build again the things he
had destroyed, and fall from his stedfastness. He cannot therefore do better
than to repeat his Examen, not only every Evening, which has been the Custom
even of Heathens, and every Evening and Morning as many serious Christians, but
even oftener in the day, if there be Opportunity, according to the practice of
devout Persons of other Communions, Marquis de Renti, Father Paul the Venetian,
etc.
for, why should we not follow a good Example, whoever it be that gives it? And
hereby we shall preserve that good Frame which it is to be hoped we have already
acquired by our solemn Preparation, and if any criminal Thought, Word, or
Action should escape us, may immediately wash it off again by a speedy
recollection and Repentance, that our Wedding Garment may be clean and
unspotted when we enter into the Marriage. In order whereunto, 'twould be
advisable to avoid mingling with worldly Business, as much as possible;
however, to shun such Conversation and Diversion as would be apt to efface, or
lessen those good Impressions which with so much Pains, may have lately been
fixed on our Minds.

XIX. In the Morning which immediately precedes the Communion, shake off Sloth
betimes, remember who it is that calls, rise early to meet your Redeemer. And
with the Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 5. 3. in the morning direct your Prayer unto
him, and look up for his Grace and Assistance: contrary to the very ill Custom
of too many who make the Lord's Day as short as they can, and indulge their
Sloth and Idleness on the Day more than on any other. But so will not the pious
Christian, especially when he designs and desires to be a Worthy Communicant;
but considers the great Advantages of being early at his Devotions, before his
Mind be filled or diverted by any other Object; and that wonderful Spirit and
Life, which it adds to his Meditations and Prayers, when his Mind is thus fresh
and vigorous, his Body refresht by rest and sleep, and his Spirits recreated
and revived; when he sees and hears all the Creation round him praising God:
with whom he may join, and make it his first happy Employment to sing his
Praises; either in the Lxiii Psalm, O God my gracious God, etc. the five first
Verses. Or (if he pleases) in the Sacramental morning Hymn, Awake my heart,
etc. annexed, among others to this Treatise. Then, after his Examen, he may
repeat the Devotions used at the Preparation, or any other from the Whole Duty
of Man, or other pious Books, or of his own Composing. As for eating, or not
eating any thing the Morning before we receive, it is a thing in it self
indifferent, and therefore must be determined according to the Constitution of
the Communicant. If a Person be strong and healthy, and finds no inconvenience
from abstinence, but rather that his Mind is thereby more abstracted from the
World, and more fixed and intent on what he is going about, as well as he gains
more time to fit himself for it; in such cases it may be better to abstain from
any Food, as our Ancestors did formerly from other lawful things, before the
Communion. Vide Bede's Ecclesiastical History.
But on the other side, if Persons be of a weak Constitution, and find that
such Fasting the Morning before they receive, does really disorder them, and
render them less fit for God's Service, they may be assured in such cases, as
St. Paul says of another indifferent Action, they may do what they will, they
sin not; or rather they would here do better to eat than to forbear, because
Fasting is no farther a Duty or acceptable, than as it tends to the better
performance of other Duties. Besides, there is no such thing as Fasting here
enjoined, or any Example of it in the Scriptures; and our Savior instituted
this Sacrament after Supper. Which I mention, because some weak Persons may
have brought this among other frivolous pretenses against receiving, that when
they have tried to Fast, as that morning, they have been thereby thrown into
great Disorder.

CHAP. IV. Of our Behavior immediately before the Communion, and when we
receive it.
I. WHEN the pious Communicant is going to the House of God, and more nearly
approaching to his Holy Table, he ought to keep his Heart with all Diligence;
steddily to fix his Thoughts, and Intentions, and Expectations, and all little
enough, considering the subtilty and vigilance of his Adversary, who, as he
does all he can to hinder Men from coming to this Sacrament, so doubtless he
will not be wanting in his Endeavors to disturb them when they come, and
obstruct their profiting by it and happiness in it. If we have any Discourse in
our way thither, it ought to be only such as that in the 122 Psalm, which is
thought to have been repeated by the pious Worshippers of old, when going up to
offer at the Temple in Jerusalem. In the first and second Verse. I was glad
when they said unto me, let us go into the House of the Lord. Our Feet shall
stand in thy Gates O Jerusalem. Now as this accurate Care, and steady Intention
of mind is highly necessary when we approach the House of God, so is it more
particularly and eminently needful when we draw near to the Holy Table: If we
suffer our Words, our Eyes, or even our Thoughts, to wander in our way thither,
we shall find it very difficult, and next to impossible to retain those good
Dispositions, which we brought with us from our private Devotions, or even to
retrieve them when we are present at the place, and in the Act of Worship. And
indeed, this seems to be the very Reason why we are so often disturbed with
wandering Thoughts in God's Service, and find so little Comfort or Benefit
sometimes in the highest Acts of it, because we are seldom upon our Guard in
our approaches to it. A Prudent Christian will therefore be so far from
indulging himself in unprofitable Discourse or wandering Thoughts when he is
coming to this heavenly Banquet that as soon as he is entered the House of God,
he will fall on his Knees, and acknowledge his glorious Presence, who inhabit
therein, and humbly implore his Assistance and Grace, and retire deeply into
himself, and endeavor to compose his Mind to such a devout Frame as may some
way qualify him to meet his Savior and receive a Blessing from him.

II. Which leads to our Behavior during the actual Celebration of this
Sacrament. And after the most strict and impartial Enquiry into the useful
Labors of good Men on this Subject, one must be forced to acknowledge, that
nothing can be found so complete so rational, and so moving, as those
Exhortations and Directions which the Church has provided on this occasion, in
her Communion-Service; containing the Quintesence of all the ancient Offices,
and carrying so much of the Primitive Simplicity, Gravity, and Piety through
every part of it, that it has been acknowledged to be very full and excellent,
even by those who are so unhappy as not to use it.

I shall therefore take those Directions which are necessary to regulate our
Behavior at the time of receiving, from the several Parts of the Churches
Office, which will be of great Advantage in order to fix the ensuing Advices in
our Memories, and assist us in their Practice, when we shall meet with them all
in order (except some few things which relate to our private Devotions) in the
Churches excellent Form already mentioned; on every part whereof we ought
therefore to bend our Minds with the utmost Intention, and go to along with
every Word which the Minister pronounces; which if we are careful to do, and to
observe those Directions he therein gives us, we cannot fail of being worthy
Receivers.

And we are therein directed to most of the same things which were before
mentioned, as necessary to our Preparation, though here they are to be all
exercised and acted anew, with the utmost Intention of our Minds. And they are,
first, Repentance. 2. Faith. 3. Devotion. 4. Humility. 5. Thanksgiving. 6.
Charity. And in the last place a particular, actual, and solemn Remembrance of
our Savior's Death, and the Ends of it, and of the Institution of this
Sacrament.

III. And first, for Repentance, which we must renew and exercise at the Table
of the Lord, because we are there to renew our Covenant with him, and must
consequently with the deepest Contrition, implore his Pardon for our frequent
Breaches of it. I do not know whether ever there were in any humane Writings,
so lively, full and pathetick a Form of Confession, as that which the Church
here uses, in the Name of all those which are minded to receive the Holy
Communion; and one would think it were scarce possible for any, unless the most
hardened Sinner, to repeat this Confession after the Minister without being
touched and moved by it, and without feeling something of Contrition and Sorrow
for his Offenses. This I dare affirm, that there is no good Man, who has duly
prepared himself for this Ordinance, but when he comes to this part of the
Office, will find himself most sensibly and deeply affected with it: For as the
Church has immediately before invited those who do truly and earnestly repent
of their Sins, to draw near and take this Holy Sacrament; so it instructs them
in this most humble Confession to Almighty God, how to exercise that
Repentance: In the first part whereof, we are taught, to acknowledge and bewail
our Sins. In the second, actually to repent of them, to detest and abhor them.
In the third, 'to beg mercy for Jesus Christ's sake; and in the last place, to
implore strength against them.

IV. 1. To acknowledge them, and to bewail our manifold Sins and Wickedness,
since we can by no means hide them from the Eye of Heaven, and they are the
truest and justest Causes of Lamentation and Sorrow. Nor are we to rest in
generals, but here again, to call to mind the greatest and most heinous Sins,
whereof on our former Examination, we have found our selves guilty, whether in
Thought, Word, or outward Action. These we are to acknowledge, we have most
grievously committed; which may imply the heinous aggravation of them, for
which we must own, that we have provoked most justly God's Wrath and
Indignation against us, that we have deserved his Anger, and all the dreadful
Consequences thereof, in the Punishments both of this and another World.

V. And having thus confessed and acknowledged our Sins, their number,
continuance, extent, and aggravation, we are directed to proceed to the formal
Act of Repentance for them; to profess, that we do earnestly repent, and are
heartily sorry for these our misdoings; and woe to him, who, though he joins in
this solemn protestation with all good Christians yet does not truly and
earnestly repent of his Sins, nor is heartily sorry for them, which how can he
be thought to be when he falls into them again, on the next Temptation?
whereas, if we do truly repent of them, the Remembrance of them will be indeed
grievous unto us, and their Burden intolerable. We shall know how evil and
bitter a thing it is to depart from the Living God, and be weary and heavy
laden, and fly to Christ to give us rest. Which Repentance and abhorrence of
our Sins, ought to be raised to the greatest height, at the time of
Consecration, when we see Christ's Sacramental Body broken, and his Blood
poured out for us: and just at the time of receiving, when we ought with an
Holy Indignation to bring our Sins, and nail them to the Cross of Christ; to
kill those Murderers, as Benaiah did Ioab, at the Horns of the Altar; to
sacrifice them there, and hew them in pieces before the Lord; in short, to be
deeply afflicted for them, and to make firm Resolves to forsake them.

VI. In order to which, we must in the third place, ask mercy for Christ's
sake, and pardon for all our Sins; as the Church teaches us in those moving and
tender Expressions; Have mercy upon us! Have mercy upon us most merciful
Father! For thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past.
And this we have need to pray for, since without Forgiveness, the past Guilt
remains, as well as the Punishment due for our Sins, though we should no more
commit them. But both are remitted in this Sacrament to the worthy Receiver,
not by Virtue of our own Merits, or any Preparation, Examination, or
Repentance, or even of the very Act of outward receiving, but merely for
Christ's sake, on account of his Merits and Intercession, and by the Virtue
which flows from his wounded Side, his spiritual Flesh and Blood, inwardly
received by the Faithful in this Ordinance.

VII. Now we are taught to conclude this Confession, with praying, that God
would grant us that we may ever hereafter serve and please him in newness of
Life, without which, all that is past is in vain; nor is there any that is so
perfectly renewed that he has not still need to purge out something of the old
Leaven. And though God will give such Grace to those who worthily partake of this
Sacrament, yet has he appointed Prayer as the means to obtain it, and of our
perseverance in well-doing, and daily increasing in Goodness; which Prayer does
virtually contain a Promise to use our own utmost endeavors to amend our Lives;
that Resolution of better Obedience, which seems to be the very Act wherein we
renew our Covenant with God, and engage to fulfill our part of it; which if we
do faithfully perform, he will never be wanting to his.

VIII. Thus much for Repentance. The second Grace to be exercised at the
Sacrament is Faith, which we are to reduce into Act when the Minister declares
in the Absolution; That Almighty God has promised forgivenness of Sins to all
them that with hearty Repentance, and true Faith, turn unto him; further
praying, 'That God would have mercy upon us, pardon and deliver us from all our
Sins, confirm and strengthen us in all Goodness, and bring us to Everlasting
Life. Which Absolution we are humbly to receive upon our Knees, as an
authoritative Declaration, from one commissioned by Christ himself to bind and
loose, and to remit and retain Sins: to which we are to add a hearty and
faithful Amen; as being fully assured that God will perform what he has
promised by his Son, if we neglect not our parts in the Covenant. Faith is here
more eminently necessary, as well with respect to all the Promises of the
Gospel, as to the particular Benefits of this Sacrament, and the application of
them to our selves. For our Lord has said, He that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, has eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last Day.
The faithful Receiver eats and drinks Salvation; this Sacrament shall eminently
conduce unto it. He is thereby united to Christ, one with Christ and Christ
with him, and by virtue of that indissoluble union, sealed in this Holy
Ordinance, he receives a Principle of Immortality, whereby he shall be, not
only raised from the Death of sin in this World, but at length raised from the
Grave, and live in endless Happiness: which also seems to be the meaning of the
Prayer in the very delivery of the Elements, The Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ preserve the Body and Soul to Everlasting Life; to which, most
devout Christians add their private Amen, as being fully persuaded that it
shall have that happy efficacy to every worthy Receiver. And the same Act of
Faith they are to exert when they hear the Minister read those comfortable
Words which our Savior says by himself and his Apostles, to all that truly
turn unto him, Come unto me all that travel and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you, etc. To which the devout Soul will be ready to answer, Draw me,
and we will run after thee! or with St. Peter, To whom should we go but to
thee; thou have the Words of eternal Life. And so in the rest of the Sentences,
applying them to himself by a particular Act of Faith, and saying, Lord, I
believe, help my unbelief. And this Faith will be mightily advanced by our
actual advertence to Christ's spiritual presence in this Holy Ordinance, more
eminently, graciously and peculiarly, than in any other. And the highest Act of
it, is to be exercised at the very instant of receiving.

IX. Devotion is in the third place highly necessary to a Worthy Communicant,
at the time of Celebration, and in all the parts of that Holy Office. By which
Devotion is meant, the intense abstraction, or withdrawing of the Mind from all
wordly things, till it acquires a contrary bent and inclination, and mounts
freely and vigorously toward Heaven, despising and trampling all the
ridiculous trifles of this perishing World, and counting all things but Dung
and Dross, for the Knowledge, for the Love of a crucified Redeemer; which every
very good Man experiences in some happier moments of his Life. Now the way to
obtain this, is the vigorous acting of Faith, Repentance, Humility, and Divine
Love; and the Energy and inward free motion of the Mind toward Heaven. And to
this, the Church invites in those Words which were used on this occasion in the
Primitive times. The sursum corda! or, Life up your Hearts! to which the
Congregation replys, We lift them up unto the Lord: which we have the highest
reason to do, when he confers such inestimable Favors upon us, and when Christ
instituted this Feast, as has been said principally for this Reason, that we
should think upon him, our absent Friend; give our selves a little ease and
breathing from the amusements and care of Life; escape from this World, and fix
our Hearts upon a better, upon that happy place, where Christ sits at the right
Hand of God, and whither, if we are faithful to him, we shall at length also
arrive, seeing he has prayed to his Father, That all those whom he has given
him, may be with him where he is, that they may behold his Glory. St. John 17.
24.

X. A fourth Grace is Humility. This is indeed included in Repentance, for a
true Penitent must be humble: But we must be more explicit in it, and are
directed by the Church, to form a particular Act thereof, immediately before
the Consecration; when the Priest kneeling at the Lord's Table, says in the
name of all that communicate, We do not presume to come to this thy Table, O
merciful Lord! trusting in our own Righteousness, but only in thy manifold and
great Mercies. We are not worthy so much as to gather up the Crumbs under thy
Table. And indeed, one would wonder that any Christian should think he could
express too great Humility, either of Body or Mind, when he comes before the
Throne of God to receive his Pardon. It Is this most humble prostration of Soul,
this abasement, and annihilation of our selves, and utterly disclaiming our own
merits, which seems to be the bottom of that seraphical Divinity, which has
made so much noise in the World. If they make it more than this, it is dangerous
Enthusiasm, as has appeared both in the Church of Rome and others. If they rest
it here, as is done in some part at least, of Sancta Sophia, it is accountable
and rational, and may be of great Advantage in the course of a Christian Life;
especially in the Sacrament, where the lower we abase our selves, the higher
will God raise us. And this we ought particularly to exercise when we see the
Minister approaching to us, with the Bread or Wine, and firmly to believe, that
we shall receive our Savior together with them.

XI. But yet fifthly; this ought not to hinder, but rather to increase our
Thankfulness; because, as has been said, the Sense of God's Goodness must needs
be advanced by the consideration of our own unworthiness. To this the Church
especially, directs us: Above all things, ye must render most humble and hearty
Thanks to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the World
by the Death and Passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And again, after
the Sursum Corda, we are invited, To give Thanks to our Lord God, to which the
Congregation answers, It Is meet and right so to do. On which follows that
solemn Act of Thanks and Praise which the Priest alone pronounces, as it is said
our Savior did in St. Luke 22. 19. and in 1 Cor. 11. 24. He took Bread, and
when he had given Thanks, he broke it. From which Actions, the whole Sacrament
obtained two Names; the Eucharist, from giving Thanks, as it is expressly called
in two or three places of the New Testament, in the Syriac Version; and
breaking of Bread, as it is styled in the Acts of the Apostles. Now this
praising God, and acknowledging and adoring his infinite Goodness, ought to
spread it self through every part of the Office: And even our Repentance and
Humility would be so managed, as to increase our Praises. But we should more
especially, exercise our Thankfulness, when the Minister says, It is meet,
right, and our bounden Duty, that we should at all times, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
and in all places give Thanks unto God; on which follows that Seraphical
Anthem, repeated by Saints here below, and Angels above: Therefore with Angels
and Archangels, etc. In which the pious Communicant joins both in Heart and
Voice, as well as in the particular Prefaces before it, wherein we are directed
to praise God, either for the Birth of Christ, or his Resurrection, or
Ascension, or for his sending the Holy Ghost; or else we adore the Divine
Trinity in the Unity of the Godhead: which Prefaces seem to have been added,
because the Church does not doubt, but that so often at least, as these greater
Festivals return, there will be a Communion. And after we have received, We
entirely desire our heavenly Father, mercifully to accept our Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving; and we most heartily thank him, that he has vouchsafed
to feed us, who have duly received these Holy Mysteries, with the spiritual
Food of the most precious Body and Blood of his dear Son, and assured us
thereby, of his Favor and Goodness toward us: And then we again break out
into that Hymn of Praise to the whole Blessed Trinity, part of which is the
same that was sung by the Angels at the Birth of our Savior; Glory to God on
High, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men. But more especially, are we to have
our Hearts filled with the most exalted Praises, in the very Act of Receiving,
to which the Minister exhorts us in the delivery both of the Bread and Wine.
Nothing but Faith, and Holy Joy, and humble Praise, are then to be admitted.
Then, when the Holy Soul is in the Mount with God, and says, it is good for her
to be here, and if any thing of disturbance can find Entrance, it is because she
must so soon return again to a sordid, vexatious, impertinent World, when she
is now already on the Wing for Heaven, is advanced so far upward in that
glorious Road, and would so gladly fly away and be at rest in the Bosom of her
Redeemer.

XII. The last Grace is Charity, taken in the largest Sense, for Love to God
and to our Neighbor. 1. Love to God, the Soul of all Piety, which quickens and
enlivens every Christian Duty. This is here increased by remembering God's Love
to us, in sending his Son, and our Savior's Love, in giving himself to die for
us. This Sacrament is the dearest Token of his Love, and the Church accordingly
tells us, That to the End, we should always remember the exceeding great Love
of our Master, and only Savior Jesus Christ in dying for us, he has instituted
and ordained Holy Mysteries as Pledges of it. And the actual and lively
Consideration hereof, of Christ's wonderful Love toward us, miserable Sinners,
so ungrateful, so unworthy, so often guilty of broken Faith, and broken Vows,
who have loved the World and our own Lusts, more than him, who have grieved
him, who have wounded him, who have crucified him by our Sins, and who continue
to do so; (for there is no Man that lives and sins not,) and all this, to him
who still loves us, and still offers us Peace, and Pardon, and Grace, and
Heaven, and even his own blessed Body and Blood in this heavenly Feast: Shall
not all this prevail with us to give him our worthless Love again for the rest
of our Lives? To give it him without exception, and without reserve. It must,
it will, it cannot fail of having this happy effect, if we carefully regard
every part of this sacred Action, and intently consider our Savior's Death, as
represented therein; especially while the Minister is consecrating the
Elements, the whole Prayer of Consecration being made up of a lively and
thankful Recognition of our Savior's sufferings, and of his instituting the
Sacrament in memory of them. We are therefore, in order to the exercising and
increasing of our Love to Christ diligently at that time, to regard the
Minister with our Eye, and Christ with our Hearts. When we see the Bread
broken, and the Wine poured out, then to consider with all the Agonies of our
Souls, and with Hearts pierced and melted with the Love of Jesus, what Agonies
he himself endured for us, both in his Body and Mind. Then to look on him whom
we have pierced, and mourn for him, and delight in him, and hate those Sins
which were the cause of this, and which can only divide us from his Love; and
especially when we actually receive. Then are our Souls to be intimately united
to his Divine Person. Then are we to embrace him as the chiefest of Ten
Thousands, and fairer than all the Children of Men; to adore his infinite
Perfections, to be lost in the contemplation and admiration of them, and to be
wholly ravished with his Love.

XIII. Which will mightily assist us in the exercise of the other branch of
Charity, Love to our Neighbor, for this cannot but be easy to us when our
Minds are raised to this happy Temper. The Love of Christ will subdue the
Enmity of our Natures toward each other, that Pride which is the cause of
almost all Quarrels, that bitterness of Spirit, and Rancor, and Malice, and
Revenge and Anger. Those obscene Birds will all fly away before the Beams of
the blessed Sun of Righteousness, as did the Devils of old from their Oracles.
All our Hatred will be against our Sins, all our Indignation, our Resentments,
our Revenge, (for neither were those in vain implanted in our Minds) will be
turned quite another way. O how happy would the World be, did but the Body of
Christians frequently and worthily receive the Communion. I am confident,
nothing could sooner heal the wide Wounds of Christendom, as I believe the
neglect of it has been the great Original of them, as well as of all our own
Factions and Divisions. All good Men must love one another, if they often met
at this Holy Table. They could not, they dared not there retain, or nourish any
pique against each other. They would Love much, both Christ and his Members,
because they so often considered that much was forgiven them. And though this may
seem a Digression, yet the Truth and Consequences thereof appear so plain, and
so considerable, that I knew not how to omit it. But to return; Charity is here
to be actually exercised toward all Christ's Members, especially toward those
with whom we communicate. We are to knit our Hearts most closely and intimately
to them, with the Bands of Holy Love. Poor and Rich, without exception, only
loving those most that love God most. We are to pray for them all, and not only
in the Offertory, but on other occasions, to do them all the Good we can, by
faithful Counsel, by tender and prudent Reproof, and by all lawful and possible
means, promoting the welfare of their Souls and Bodies. And lastly, by devout
Prayer to God for them, as we are directed: That all who are partakers of this
Holy Communion, may be filled with his Grace and heavenly Benediction. But though
our Charity is to begin there, we are not to confine the Exercise thereof to
those only who then actually communicate with us, for we are also directed by
the excellent Spirit of our Church, showing it self in those Holy Confessors
and Martyrs who composed her Liturgy; humbly to beseech God to grant, by the
Merits and Death of his Son Jesus Christ, and through Faith in his Blood, that
not only we, but also his whole Church may obtain Remission of our Sins, and
all other Benefits of his Passion. Which may he grant who has so dearly
purchased it for us, to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all Glory,
Honor and Dominion, now, and to Eternal Ages. Amen!

If there be any time between the Consecration and actual Receiving, the
Communicant may make use of these following Devotions.

An Act of Penitence.
O Infinite offended Goodness! who art a consuming Fire to the obstinate
Sinner; but infinite to pardon those who confess and forsake their Sins. I
desire earnestly to repent of all my Misdeeds! I will acknowledge my
Transgressions before thee, and mine Iniquities will I not hide. I have sinned!
I have sinned! O Father, against Heaven and before thee. Against thy Mercies
and thy Judgments, the Thunder of thy Law, and the still small Voice of thy
Gospel. Against the clearest Manifestations of thy wonderful Love, in sending
thy Son to shed his Blood as an atonement for the Sins of the whole World;
which precious Blood of his, I have too often trampled under Foot, and
crucified the Son of God afresh by my repeated Iniquities. Not all his bitter
Agonies have been so far able to pierce my hard Heart, as to make me entirely
forsake my Sins which were the Cause of them. Though he sweat Drops of Blood in
the Garden; though his Soul was exceedingly sorrowful even unto Death; though he
endured the Contradiction of Sinners; though he was mocked, and buffeted, and
spit on, and crowned with Thorns, and scourged, and fainted under his Cross,
and was nailed unto it, and raised in the Air a spectacle to Men and Angels;
though he there groaned under the weight of our Guilt, and of our Sins imputed
unto him, though he thirsted, though he fainted, though he cried out as if thou thy
self could have forsaken him; though he bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost.
O! shall all this nothing move me! shall my Heart be as hard as the nether
Millstone! Cannot the Blood of Jesus soften it, and cleanse it; that Blood of
sprinkling which speaks better things than that of Abel? Shall I not now at
least detest, abhor, forsake all those Sins which cost my Savior so dear!
shall I again commit them! shall I any more favor those Iudas's which
betrayed, those Herod's which mocked, those Pilates which crucified the Lord of
Glory! O Lord, my Heart is deceitful, and desperately wicked, and has often
already deceived me, and my Goodness is as the morning Cloud, and early Dew
which soon passes away, and without thy Grace I shall again fall into those
very Sins which I now detest and abhor: which that I may never more do,
imprint, I beseech thee, in my Mind, so lively a Sense of my Savior's
Sufferings, and let me receive, and carry away so lasting an Impression of them
from this Sacrament, that I may henceforth die unto Sin, and live unto
Righteousness; that I may subdue and mortify more and more all criminal
Desires, and the whole Body of Death, through Jesus Christ my Lord.

Amen!
An Act of Faith.
I Desire to believe, Lord help my Unbelief! I believe that thou can do all
things, and if thou will, can make me clean. I choose thee for my chief Good,
I depend upon thee, as my only Happiness. I believe all thy Promises are Yea,
and Amen, faithful and true in thy Son Jesus, and that those who come unto thee
by him, thou will in no wise cast off. He is able to save to the uttermost; he
is mighty to save and to forgive. In him alone thou art well pleased; through
him, O God, art thou reconciled to Mankind, and have made them capable of
everlasting Happiness; from whence none shall be excluded who believe in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and obey his Commands. On him therefore do I cast my
self, and on his Merits is all my hope for Time and for Eternity; believing
that there is no other Name given under Heaven, by whom I may receive Health
and Salvation. In this persuasion do I now approach to thy Holy Table, humbly
believing and expecting, that my Savior will be known unto me there, and will
meet me and bless me; that his Body and Blood shall preserve my Body and Soul
to everlasting Life; that he will pardon my Sins, and strengthen me in Grace;
guide me by his Counsel, and bring me to his Glory.

Amen!
An Act of Humility immediately before Receiving.
WHence is it, O Lord, that such a Wretch as I, so loathsome and deformed with
Sin, should once more be admitted to thy presence to taste the Bread of Life!
Whence is it that my Savior should be Guest to one that is such a Sinner? O
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my Roof, nor that I should
come under thine: I desire to humble my self before thee, with the utmost
prostration and adoration. I cast my self at the Feet of Jesus, and will not
let him go, except he bless me. I am nothing, I have nothing, I desire nothing,
but Jesus, and to be with him in Peace, in the heavenly Jerusalem. The lowest
place in Heaven will be infinitely above what I can deserve, who wonder why
thou should cast thine Eyes on such a nothing. A Covenant and League uses to
be made between those that are equals; but there is an infinite distance
between God and me by Nature, and if possible, a yet greater distance by my
Sins: Yet has that God who dwells in the High and Holy Place, vouchsafed to
promise that he will also dwell with the humble and contrite Spirit, that
trembles at his Word. Come therefore, O Lover of Souls! O ever blessed Jesus!
who, though thou fillest Heaven and Earth with the Majesty of thy Glory, did
yet humble thy self when thou came into the World, to the inconveniences of a
Cave, a Stable, and a Manger: My Heart is yet meaner than any of these, but
thou can purify and cleanse it, and make it a Temple fit for thy self to
dwell in. Come and meet me in thy own comfortable Ordinance, who have promised,
though thou will resist the proud, to give Grace to the humble. I beg this, O
Father, for the sake of Jesus Christ my Savior, who humbled himself to the
Death upon the Cross, for me a miserable Sinner; to whom with thee and the Holy
Ghost, Three and One, be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever.

Amen!
An Act of Praise after Receiving.
ALL Glory and Honor, and Praise, to him who sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever! To him who has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own
Blood, and has now entertained us with that heavenly Food, which those who
taste with Faith, shall never die. I have tasted that God is Good, and that
blessed are all those that trust in him; he is not a barren Land, or a dry
Wilderness. He has given me Meat to eat at his own Table, which the World knows
not of: such Joy as no Man can give or take from me. He has assured me of his
Favor and Goodness toward me, and given me the Seals of his Pardon, and the
Pledges of Everlasting Happiness. Alas! how poor am I of Thanks for such
inestimable Benefits! what have I to render to the Lord of Life and Glory for
these and all his Favors! I devote and dedicate all my little all unto him; my
Soul and Body, for Time and Eternity, without Exception, and without Reserve.
It Is but a mite, but it is my All! O give me more, that I may restore it to the
Giver. Accept, O gracious God, this my poor Sacrifice of Praise, and help me
also to order my Conversation aright, that I may see thy Salvation: that in
Heaven, the place of Eternal Praises, I may with Angels and Archangels, and
all the glorious Company there, adore, and magnify, and bless thee, and sing
Hallelujabs and Hymns of Praise unto thee for ever and ever.

Amen!
An Act of Love.
O Infinite Goodness! O amiable Jesu! O bleeding, dying, agonizing Love! What
Man, what Angel in Heaven durst have ever thought of such a way to appease
God's Anger against Sinners, as the Death of thee the Only begotten Son of God,
had not thy Father freely sent thee, had not thou thy self as freely
descended to Earth, and taken our mortal Clay upon thee, to do, and to suffer
the Will of God? Who could have believed this, had not thou thy self revealed
it, and confirmed it by so many Miracles! Nay, as if it had not been sufficient
to die for us, thou have also given us the heavenly Food of thy blessed Body
and Blood, to be our spiritual Nourishment in this Holy Sacrament. Thou have
made me partaker of those venerable Mysteries: Thou have renewed that Covenant
with me, which I trust shall never be broken! O! was there no other way to save
Mankind, but the Death of him that lives for ever! were all the Souls of the
lost Sons of Adam worth one Groan, one Torment, one Drop of the precious Blood
of the Son of God! So thou did think, who made us out of nothing, who did
take this most endearing method to obtain our Love: And will thou accept it?
may I offer it? will thou receive a Magdalen, after she has so long wandered
from thee? will thou dwell in such a Breast, which has been so long a Cage of
unclean Spirits! yes, thou thy self have said it, thou have assured me of it,
thou have sealed my Pardon at thy own Table, and requirest nothing of me in
return, but my worthless Love. I grieve, and I love, O my Redeemer, for all
that thou have done for me, for all that I have done against thee. O when shall
I love thee without any Interruption, any Disturbance from this intruding
World! when shall I be ever with thee, and be satisfied with thy Love! My Heart
beats toward thee, my Soul desires, and pants, and longs earnestly to be
united with thee, never, never more to be divided. I would fain be more like
thee, I would refuse nothing for thee. O how shall I express my Love, and what
shall I do for him who has done all for me! Come, O thou whom my Soul desires
to Love! thou chiefest of Ten Thousands, and all together lovely, and fill my
Heart so full with the Sense of thy Goodness, and with longing desires after
thee, that I may frequently, that I may constantly present my self here at thy
Table, to meet thee, and bless thee. That I may show I have been with Jesus, by
telling what great things he has done for me, by endeavoring to make all
others admire and love him; that I may still aspire more earnestly toward
those blessed Regions of Peace and Love, where he is entered before me to
prepare a place for me; and in the mean time, let all my Actions be guided by
the Love of Jesus, that I may be made perfect in his Love, and it may expel all
other Loves from my Heart, that are inconsistent with it. That so when he shall
appear, I may be like him, and see him no longer in Types and Sacraments, but
Face to Face; see him as he is, and be for ever with the Lord. Make haste my
Beloved and be thou like a Roe or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices!

Amen! Amen!
CHAP. V.
I. HAving already in the First Chapter of this little Treatise, given an
Account of the Nature of the Sacrament. In the Second; Of the Obligation which
lies on all adult Christians to receive it, and even to frequent Communion; and
answered the Objections which are commonly brought against it. In the Third;
Given some Rules for our Preparation for it, and Heads of Examination in order
thereunto. In the Fourth; Discoursed of our Behavior at the Time of the
Celebration, and those Graces which are then in a particular manner to be
exercised. I proceed in the Fifth and last Chapter, to add some plain
Directions after we have received, and what Influence this Holy Sacrament ought
to have upon us; and how we ought to behave our selves in relation to it, both
immediately after, and between one Sacrament and another, as well as through
the whole Course of our Lives.

II. First. Immediately after our Receiving. The first thing to be done at our
return, would be to retire from the World, and fall upon our Knees before our
Father which sees in secret, and bless and adore him, with all the ardor of our
Souls, for his undeserved Mercy, in having admitted us once more to his Holy
Table, and for all the good things which he has there bestowed upon us. After
this, to reflect on the whole Action, and carefully to examine our selves how
we have performed every part of it. Whether our Minds have been deeply affected
with the Sense of our Sins, and of our Savior's Love in dying for us. Whether
our Thoughts have been wandering, or fixed on the engaging Objects before us?
Whether the sacred Food of our Savior's spiritual Body and Blood has been
sweet and delightful to us, and we thereby find our selves comfortably
satisfied of God's Favor and Goodness, and strengthened in his Fear and Love,
and our Hearts more raised toward Heaven? If we find the contrary, and that we
have been cold or wandering, and oppressed with that deadness, or aridity of
Spirit (as some call it) which even good Men sometimes complain of, we must
enquire into the Reasons thereof; as whether this was not for want of due
Preparation, or from sloth or negligence in the Morning, or want of earnestness
in our private Devotions, or of taking a just Care to raise our Hearts toward
Heaven, and to fix them on the Feast and the Inviter; or from our unnecessary
mingling overmuch with the World soon afterward; or not keeping our Feet, our
Thoughts and Affections in good order, when going to the House of God, or when
present there, or not bending and fixing them with the utmost Intention to what
we were employed in; or not considering as we ought, Christ's Love, and God's
Presence, and Goodness, and Majesty, and Glory; or coming in our own Strength,
and depending too much upon it, not casting our selves entirely on God's Mercy
through Christ; some or more of which miscarriages may have been the cause of our
want of Comfort or Advantage from this Sacrament, for which we therefore ought
to blame our selves, and not to charge God foolishly; to be humbled for them;
and carefully to note them down, or remember them against the next Sacrament,
that we may be then more watchful against them, and avoid what has now been so
disadvantageous unto us. Nor are we to be unthankful, if on Reflection we find
that God's Grace has preserved us from any such Inconveniences; that our Hearts
have been fixed, our Devotions enflamed, our Affections raised, our Love to
God, and hatred of Sin, heightened and augmented by what has past at that
heavenly Feast; and that it has been sweeter to us than the Honey and the
Honeycomb, and helped us to despise the World, and to long for Heaven. These
are Blessings which ought not to be forgotten, but the Remembrance of them
should be dear unto us; we ought to revive the Impression of them upon our
Hearts, and to sink them deeper there, that they may have a future lasting
Influence on our Practice.

III. And here it may be necessary to interpose a double caution as to these
Matters. There are some who are so afraid of Enthusiasm, that they almost
forbid a devout Christian to expect or to desire any more than ordinary Joy or
Delight in God's Service; nay, to suspect it when ever he finds it: while
others fancy that they have no Communion with God in any Duty, nor are indeed
any thing the better for it, if they have not always these sensible tastes of
his Goodness. A rational Christian ought to keep the mean between these two
Extremes, so as neither to despise, far be it from him, that heavenly Manna,
that Angel's Food of Joy, in Believing; the pleasures of God's House and Table,
the Fruits of the Tree of Life, the foretasts of Heaven; for which he pants, as
the thirsty Heart does after the refreshing Streams; being fully persuaded, by
Reason, Experience, and Scripture, that Joy in the Holy Ghost, and Fellowship
with the Father and the Son, are something more than Enthusiastical Fancies;
that God can communicate himself to his Creatures, in what measure, and by what
means he pleases; and that his own Institutions are those means whereby he does
thus communicate himself to prepared and holy Minds; and therefore he cannot
rest in the outward only, but prays for the Light of God's Countenance, and the
Joy of his Salvation, which make up so great a part of the Happiness of Heaven;
and when he has thus tasted how good the Lord is, he cannot but be entirely
thankful for it. But yet, neither does he estimate his Profit in any religious
Duty, or the presence of God in them by these sensible Ioys only: He knows our
weak Nature is neither able long to bear them, nor is often fit for them. He
expects not all Canaan, while on this side Jordan, though he cannot but be
delighted with a taste, sometimes of the Fruits of that happy Country. He
believes he has then Benefit by any Duty, and particularly by this Sacrament,
and that then God is present with him in it, when he finds that he is thereby
more settled in his Faith, his Hope, and his Obedience; more rooted and
grounded in Holy Love both to God and his Christian Brother; when he finds his
will more submissive, and entirely resigned to God's Sovereign Will, and the
Duties of Religion growing gradually, more easy, and as it were natural, and
delightful to him: And consequently, he cannot be so well satisfied of his
profiting by a Sacrament immediately after he has received, (for he expects it
not all at once,) as at some distance of time, when the Grace he then received,
is as it were digested in his Mind, and spreads it self through all the Parts and
Offices of an holy Life.

IV. After examining the Frame of our Minds at the past Communion, we are, in
the next place, exactly to reflect on those Holy Vows and Resolves which we
have made at God's Altar, whether, against Passion, Impurity, Intemperance,
immoderate Love to the World, neglect of Sacraments, or of public, private, or
Family Devotion, or of the Souls of those whom God's Providence has committed
to our Charge, or any other failure whereof we found our selves guilty in our
former Preparation and Examination, and which we have anew vowed against at the
Communion; all which Vows, if we did now again solemnly renew, and implore, and
expect the continuance of Divine Strength to perform them, and consider the
means to obtain and preserve it, we should doubtless find great Advantage by
it; especially if we renewed the same in our daily Examination; which must
needs preserve both the sense of God's Goodness, and of our own Obligations
more fresh and lively on our Minds, and have a good Influence on our Practice,
though at greater distance from the Communion.

V. And indeed, this is the main hinge of the whole matter; the great means
whereby we must gain advantage by the Sacrament, and which, if we neglect, we
must at least, expect the loss of our Comfort, if not our Souls. It Is, to
remember all is not over as soon as we have received: No, nor that Day, nor
Week, nor indeed, while we live; for the Obligation is for ever. We do in the
Sacrament show forth the Lord's Death, Till he come, We engage our selves by
this Oath, as well as by that at Baptism, to be his faithful Soldiers and
Servants to our Lives End. We are not to think the Oath it self is all, since
it is but a Security to our future Faith, and true Allegiance: It Is not enough
to Vow; nay, it is better not to vow at all, than to vow and not to pay; though to
do both is still better than either. We cannot too often remember that those
Graces which we exercise at this Ordinance, must also be put in Practice through
the whole course of our Lives, and it is the reason of its Institution, that
they may by degrees be reduced into holy Habits. We must be inwardly bettered
by the Sacrament, as well as by other Duties, or else, indeed, we are not
better at all, for as one well observes, Religion is not a Road of
Performances, but a New Nature, evidenced by a New Life.

VI. But more especially, are we to call to mind these Promises and
Obligations, when we find our selves again attacked by any Temptation, either
to those Sins which we have formerly committed, or to any others. Woe to him who
after he has escaped the Pollutions of the World, and tasted the good Word of
God, and the Powers of the World to come in this Ordinance, shall yet fall away
again, return like a Dog to his Vomit, shamefully yield to the same Sin, which
he has before so solemnly renounced, and pretended to forsake, and thereby, in
a great measure, trample under foot the Blood of the Covenant, crucify the Son
of God afresh, and put him to open shame. I speak not of lesser unavoidable
Infirmities, such as wandering Thoughts, the first motions of Passion, or being
ready to give way to the violence of Temptation, though recovering again; but
what I here intend, is the relapsing into any grosser Sins, such as
Uncleanness, Injustice, Drunkenness, habitual Carelessness of Duty, and neglect
of God's Word and Sacraments, and our private stated Devotions; which last may
justly be ranked among greater Sins, as being too frequently the beginning of
all the rest. Not that even these are unpardonable on true Repentance; but that
the Aggravations of them are so exceedingly heightened by the addition of
Ingratitude and Perjury. An old Wound may possibly be cured at last, even when
it is badly healed; but then there is a necessity of its being laid open again,
and the Pain will be more exquisite than it was at the first. We ought
therefore, when attacked by any old Temptation, to oppose immediately this
powerful Armor against it; and whatever pleasure or profit it is baited with by
the great Deceiver, with Indignation to reject it. To reflect vigorously on our
new Obligations to the contrary, both of Promises, of Interest, and of
Gratitude. To say within our selves, I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed
to keep God's righteous Judgments. And, 'Get thee behind me Satan, the God of
Peace, whose I am, and who has promised to help me, shall bruise thee under my
Feet. And to this end we must be always upon our Guard, we must be temperate
and sober, or else we can never be vigilant. We must avoid ill Company, the
great Emissaries of Satan, as we would Satan himself. A great End of the
Sacrament is to make us look forward, and remember Christ's last coming, as
well as backward, in remembrance of his Death; and he who eats and drinks with
the Drunken, will soon be apt to say, My Lord delays his coming; though to such
he himself has said, That he will come in a day when he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not aware of, and will cut him in sunder, and divide him
his portion with the Hypocrites. The frequent Reflection on our latter End,
will also mightily confirm us in our holy Purposes of Obedience; the time of
our own particular Judgment, or at least of our passing into our unchangeable
Eternity, which we should often meditate upon, and Discourse concerning it with
our Fellow Christians, instead of those impertinencies, and worse, which make
up so great a part of common Conversation. And those who thus speak often one
to another, and remind each other of their Duty, need not be much concerned,
though they are despised for it by ill Men, since the Lord himself will hearken
and hear, and remember them for it when he comes in Vengeance to destroy the
Ungodly. Malac. 3. 16. 4. 1, 2.

VII. In the next place, we would do well to consider that the Sacrament is
appointed for our perfection in Grace, as well as Conquest over our Sins. It Is
not enough merely to escape the Pollutions of the World, but we must also
aspire toward Perfection, to be strong Men in Christ. We are all called to be
Saints, to Glory, as well as to Virtue, and why should we then be content with
the lowest measures? He that thinks he will be just good enough to be saved, if
he does not miss of that, must not, however, expect much Comfort. Nay, not to
go forward, is to go backward in the way to Heaven. We are obliged by the
Sacrament, to do all we can for him who has done so much for us: Always to
abound in the work of the Lord, since when we have done our best, we shall be
so far from Supererrogation However, as Health and Strength are infallible
Signs of Life, so we shall obtain this great Advantage by stronger Degrees of
Grace, that we may be better satisfied of the Truth and Sincerity thereof.
Consider, that this would render God's Service much more easy and delightful
to us. But this must cost us constant Pains and Labor, for Sloth is the
greatest Obstruction to our growing in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ; and is commonly the last Enemy in this World that is destroyed in
a Christian. Conquer that and all is done. Shake off that Ague of the Soul;
remember your Vows, call for Strength, believe and all things are possible.
Give Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, for he that does these
things shall never fall; and the higher we rise in Piety here, the shorter
Steps we shall have to Heaven, and it is very probable, the higher Degrees of
Glory among those many different mansions in our Father's House.

VIII. In the last place, when we are called again by God's Providence to
another Sacrament, which happy Opportunity we will be careful never to neglect;
let us, in our Preparation and Examination, impartially enquire how we have
performed those Vows we made in the last, and how we have profited by it. To
rejoice and bless God, if well, to be humbled if otherwise, and the greater the
Defect, the deeper the Humiliation. I speak here, of lesser Infirmities, rather
than of presumptuous, scandalous Sins, the Habits whereof, while unreformed and
unrepented, do utterly exclude from the Sacrament, as well as from Heaven. Nor
ought we by any means to be ungrateful, if we find that through God's Grace,
preventing us that we might be willing, and assisting us when we were willing,
we may have obtained any Advantage against our Spiritual Enemies: If any Sin be
weaker, any Virtue stronger; whether Patience, or Humility, or Resignation, or
Devotion; for which we are again to approach full of Gratitude to the Holy
Table, to offer the Sacrifice of Praise and take the Cup of Salvation, and call
upon the Name of the Lord.

These things if we observe and do, through the whole Course of our Lives, we
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior, but an abundant Entrance shall be ministered unto us into his
Everlasting Kingdom. To whom be Glory in the Church throughout all Ages. Amen!

Questions for the Evening.
1. WHAT Mercies have I received this Day, Answers of Prayer, Deliverance from
Evil, common or extraordinary Blessings?

2. What Sin have I committed? What Duty omitted?

3. What have I done, endeavored, or designed for God's Glory, or the Good of
my Neighbor; or have I lost any Opportunity for either?

4. With what Success have I encountered those Sins to which my Circumstances
or Constitution most incline me; Passion, Sloth, Impurity, Intemperance,
Vanity, etc.

5. How have I improved my Time this Day? Am I any wiser or better than I was
the last? Have I thought of Death and Judgment?

6. Have I Prayed? and How? And the same of Meditation and Reading?

7. What Mercy do I want for Soul or Body, my Self, or Relations, that I may
now ask it?

8. Have I remembered my Promises made at the last Sacrament, and how have I
performed them?

Questions for the Morning.
1 DID I Read and Pray, Meditate and Examine my self last Night; and in what
manner?

2. Did I think of God, last and first?

3. What Sin have I committed, in Thought, Word or Deed? What Duty omitted
since Evening?

4. What Occasions may I probably have this Day of serving God, or my Neighbor?

5. To what Temptations am I like to be exposed?

6. What Mercies have I received? What do I want?

Short Directions for those who are (really) straightned for Time, and cannot
go through the larger Methods of Examination already given.
1. BE sure this be more than a pretended Necessity; as in the case of
indispensible and unavoidable Business or the like; since the more
conscientious and exact you are in your Preparation and Examination, Note, That
this Sheet is to be placed after Page 186.
you may, generally speaking, expect the greater Advantage by the Sacrament.
Turtle-Doves or young Pigeons, were not accepted of Old, unless where the
Presenter could not reach a more costly Sacrifice.

2. This being taken Care of, never indulge any ill grounded Scruples so far as
to suffer them to hinder you from coming to this Divine Banquet. See what has
been already said on this Head, both from Authority and Reason, in Answer to
the Objections against Receiving.

3. It can scarce be supposed but you may redeem some time on the Morning of
the Lord's Day, when you may retire from the World; and, 1. Use the Prayers
here at Preparation, or any other that is proper for that Occasion.

2. Consider the Nature of the Sacrament, and your Happiness in having one
Opportunity more of partaking in it.

3. Examine your Conscience, by the Ten Commandments, as they are in our
Communion-Service; and in the Versicle added to every one of them, implore
Pardon where you find any Breach, and Grace for the future to observe them
better. And the same of any other Sin, not so easily reducible under any
particular Command, such as Drunkenness, neglect or abuse of the Sacrament, and
the like.

4. Fix your main Battery against that Sin which you find the strongest;
whether discontent with your Condition, hard Thoughts of God, Intemperance,
Passion, Pride, Sloth, Impurity, or what ever else. Most heartily lament it,
most earnestly resolve and implore Strength against it, and draw near to the
Holy Table, with Faith to obtain it, and fear not but your Savior will meet
and bless you.

A Prayer for one in Affliction and Want.
O GOD! who art Infinite in Power, and Compassion, and Goodness, and Truth! who
have promised in thy Holy Word, That thou will hear the Prayer of the poor
distitute, and wilt not despise his Desire. Look down I beseech thee from
Heaven, the Habitation of thy Holiness and Glory upon me a miserable Sinner,
now lying under thy Hand in great Affliction and Sorrow, who fly to thee alone
for help and Comfort. I am weary of my groaning, my Heart fails me, the Light
of my Eyes is gone from me, I sink in the deep Waters, and there is none to
help me, yet I wait still upon thee my God. Though all the World forsake me, let
the Lord still uphold me, and in him let me always find the truest, the
kindest, the most compassionate, unwearied Almighty Friendship; to him let me
ease my wearied Soul, and unbosom all my Sorrows!

Help me, O Lord! against Hope, to believe in Hope! Grant that I may not be
moved with all the Slights and Censures of a mistaken World. Let me look by
Faith beyond this Vale of Tears and Misery, to that happy place which knows no
Pain, or Want, or Sorrows, as being assured that there is an End, and my
Expectation shall not be cut off. I know, O Lord! that a Man's Life consists
not in the abundance of Things that he possesses, but that he who has the most
here, as he brought nothing with him into this World, so he shall carry nothing
out. I bless thee that thou have not given me my Portion among those who have
received all their Consolation here, whose Portion is in this Life only.
Neither let me expect those Blessings which thou have promised to the Poor,
unless I am really poor in Spirit, and meek and humble. I know nothing is
impossible with God, and that it is thou alone who give Power to get Riches,
and that thou can by thy good Providence, raise me from this mean Condition
whenever thou please, and wilt certainly do it if it be best for me, and
therefore humbly submit all unto thy wise and kind Disposal. I desire not
Wealth or Greatness: Give me neither extreme Poverty, nor do I ask Riches of
thee, but only to be fed with Food convenient for me. I desire earnestly to
seek first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, well hoping that
in thy good Time, Food and Raiment, all other things that be needful, shall be
added unto me. I believe, O Lord! that thou who feedest the Ravens, and
clothest the Lilies, wilt not neglect me (and mine.) That thou will make good
thy own unfailing Promises, wilt give Meat to them that fear thee, and be ever
mindful of thy Covenant. In the mean time, let me not be querulous or
impatient, or envious at the Prosperity of the wicked, or judge uncharitably of
those to whom thou have given a larger Portion of the Good things of this Life,
or be cruel to those who are in the same Circumstances with my self. Let me
never sink or despond under my heavy pressures and continued Misfortunes. Though
I fall let me rise again, because the Lord takes me up. Let my Heart never be
sunk so low that I should be afraid to own the Cause of despised Virtue. Give
me Diligence, and Prudence, and Industry, and let me neglect nothing that lies
in me to provide honestly for my own House, least I be worse than an Infidel.
Help me carefully to examine my Life past, and if by my own Carelessness, or
Imprudence, I have reduced my self into this low Condition, let me be more
deeply afflicted for it; but yet still hope in thy Goodness, avoiding those
Failures whereof I have been formerly guilty. Or if for my Sins thou have
brought this upon me, my unthankfulness for thy Mercies or abuse of them, help
me now with Submission and Patience, to bear the Punishment of my Iniquity: Or
if by thy Wise Providence thou art pleased thus to afflict me for Trial, and
for the Examples of others; Thy Will, O my God! not mine, be done! Help me, and
any who are in the same Circumstances, in Patience to possess our Souls, and
let all thy Fatherly Chastisements advance us still nearer toward Christian
Perfection, teach us the Emptiness of all things here below, wean us more and
more from a vain World, fix our Hearts more upon Heaven, and help us forward in
the right Way that leads to Everlasting Life; Through Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be Glory, Honor and Power, now and for
ever.

Amen!
APPENDIX.
A LETTER concerning the Religious Societies.
SIR,
HAVING in Conversation accidentally mentioned those Religious Societies which
have been for some time erected in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster, and of late in some other places, you were pleased to desire a
more particular Account concerning them, of their Orders, and manner of Life,
and what my Thoughts were as to what we then heard objected against them.

I must confess I have had the Curiosity to make a particular Enquiry about
them, and the Informations I have received, have been from such Persons, as I
think, I may entirely depend upon for the Truth of them, and what I have from
them, I here very briefly give you, referring them for a larger Account to Mr.
Woodward's little Book on that Subject.

In the first place, I find many Persons are in the same mistake which you were
once in, and confound these Religious Societies with the Societies for
Reformation, though they are quite different as to their Institution and
immediate Ends, and for the most part, as to the Persons whereof they are
composed. The immediate Business of the Societies for Reformation, is to assist
the Civil Magistrates in putting the Laws in Execution against Profaneness and
Immorality, and consists of Sober Persons of any Persuasion among Protestants,
though most of them, as far as I can observe, of the Church of England: But the
Religious Societies, as we call them for distinction from the other, are
composed of such as meet together wholly upon a Religious Account, to promote
true Piety in themselves and others; and are all of them strict Members of the
Church of England, none being admitted or suffered to continue, who are not
constant Communicants: Many of these, indeed, are likewise engaged in the
Business of the Reformation, and so on the other side, but this is only
accidental, and these two are distinct Bodies of Men one from the other.

I cannot tell, whether I can give you a better Character of those Persons who
compose these Religious Societies, and their Design and Employment in them,
than what Tertullian and other ancient Writers have left us of the first
Christians, in the best and purest Ages of the Church: I am sure I cannot speak
more Truth of them in fewer words.

They often meet together, say the Ancients of those first Christians; ad
confoederandam Disciplinam; and to pray, and sing Hymns to Christ as God. We
assemble our selves, says Tertullian, to the Repetition of the Holy Scriptures,
we support our Faith by Religious Discourse, we excite our Hope, we fix our
Confidence, we increase our Knowledge, by the Exhortations of our Teachers; we
gather a Stock for the Poor according to every Man's ability, which we expend,
not in riotous Feasting, but in helping the Indigent, and Orphans, and the
Aged, and those who are persecuted for the Cause of God.

This is their Design and Employment in their Meetings, and for the Methods
whereby they regulate them, they appear to be chosen with all Christian
Prudence; but they are too large to be here inserted, and therefore I must
again refer you to Mr. Woodward's Book for a full Account of them.

The main thing for which I am concerned, is to give you my Reasons why I
believe such Societies as these, if further propagated, would be so far from
being any Injury to the Church, as may be the Opinion of some Persons who
either may not fully understand them, or are prejudiced against them, that I
think, I can make it appear they would be of great Advantage to it.

I know few good Men but lament that after the Destruction of Monasteries,
there were not some Societies founded in their stead, but reformed from their
Errors, and reduced to the Primitive Standard. None who has but looked into our
own Church History, can be ignorant how highly instrumental such. Bodies of Men
as these, were to the first planting and propagating Christianity amongst our
Forefathers: It Is notorious that the first Monks wrought honestly for their
Livings, and only met together at the Hours of Prayer, and necessary Refection,
as do most of those in the Eastern Countries to this day: And those who read
the Exemplary Piety of the old British Monks, and what indefatigable Pains they
took, and what Hazards they ran in the Conversion of our Heathen Ancestors, as
well as how stoutly they withstood the early. Encroachments of Rome, cannot but
entertain an extraordinary Opinion of them, and will be apt to judge charitably
of their great Austerities and Ascetic way of Living, though perhaps we may be in
the right, when we think they were in some things mistaken. However, this is
certain, that a great part of the good Effects of that way of Life, may be
attained without many of the Inconveniences of it, by such Societies as we are
now discoursing of, which may be erected in the most populous Towns and Cities,
without depriving the Commonwealth of the Service and Support of so many useful
Members.

It will be owned a desirable thing that we had among us some places wherein
those who are religiously disposed might have the Liberty, for a Time, of a
voluntary retirement; that they might escape the World, and vacare Deo, and
sibimet ipsis. This was once practiced with great Applause of all good Men, by
Mr. Farrar, of which we have an account in Mr. Herbert's Life, and a larger (as
I have heard) in Bishop Hacket's Life of Bishop Williams; and the same has been
lately attempted by Mr. St --. But if this should not be practicable, at least
generally, by Men of Trade and Business, though of never so devout Inclinations,
I see nothing that could come nearer it, than these Religious Societies. The
Design of that excellent Person, Archbishop Cranmer to have founded so many
Collegiate Churches out of the broken Monaste^ies, to consist of some Laity, as
well as Clergy, seems to have had something in it of the same Nature, (though in
a higher degree) with that of these Christian Societies now erected, namely, to
make a stand for Religion and Virtue, so many Redoubts against an encroaching
World, where any might receive Counsel, and Advice, who addressed themselves
unto them; but since we were not so happy to have this accomplished, Why may
not these Societies in some measure supply the want of them? For if they were
once erected in the most considerable Towns and populous Villages, or where one
was not large enough, out of more neighboring Villages united, they might be
able notably to assist the Rural Deans, where there are any, and in some
measure supply their Want where there are none: and would not this disarm that
Objection against Diocesan Episcopaey, which is brought from the extent of its
Jurisdiction?

However, if this be ultra crepidam, it is certain that this would hold of
Parish Priests, and they would, as some have already done, soon find
extraordinary Advantages by it. There are a great many Parishes in this
Kingdom, which consist of several Thousands, some of some Myriads of Souls:
Now, what one Man, or two, or three, is sufficient for such a multitude? What
Strength to visit them? What Memory, unless very extraordinary, to retain but
their Names? Those who have but one or two thousand, will find their Cares
heavy enough, especially now they have neither the Catechists of the Ancients
to assist them, nor those Clerks which are mentioned in the Rubric, and seem
to have been designed for that End, at the Reformation: And may not we say of
these great Numbers, as the Disciples did to our Savior when they saw the
multitudes, from whence shall we buy Bread, that these may eat? But would not
these things be rendered much more easy to the careful Pastor; when such
considerable Bodies should act [in Subordination to him, and with Direction
from him,] to promote those great Ends, for which he has so solemnly dedicated
himself to God? They would be as so many Churchwardens, or Overseers, or
almost Deacons under him, caring for the Sick and Poor, giving him an account
of the Spiritual Estate of themselves and others; persuading Parents and
Sureties to Catechize their Children, and fitting them for Confirmation;
discoursing with those who have already left the Church, to bring them back to
it, or who are tempted to leave it, in order to preserve them in it; the effect
whereof we may guess by the contrary, there being, it is likely, Ten, who are
persuaded to leave the Church by their Neighbors, to one, who is immediately
wrought upon by the Dissenting Teachers. This assistance would in all
probability conduce as much to the Health of the Minister's Body, by easing him
of many a weary step and fruitless Journey, as to the great satisfaction of his
Mind, in the visible Success of his Labors. In short, it seems a necessary
Consequence, both from what Success the Design has already had, and from the
very Nature of it, that if it went forward in such manner, and with such
Limitations as are proposed, it would be so far from injuring the Church, that
these several Societies would be so many new Bulwarks against its Enemies,
would give it daily more Strength, and Beauty, and Reputation, and it may be
more than many wish to see it ever have.

And for the State, they might also be not inconsiderably serviceable to it,
and highly promote Loyalty and Obedience, as well as all other Parts of
Religion and Virtue.

There is hardly any considerable Design, but may be carried on with much
greater Success, by united Bodies of Men, than by single Persons. We see it in
Trades every day; and why should we not learn from those who are wise in their
Generation? We see what a wide Progress, Heresy and Infidelity have made by
their poisonous Clubs and Combinations: The very Players are formed into
Companies, or they could not be half so mischievous to Religion and Morality:
The Church of Rome owes, perhaps, her very Subsistence, at least, most of the
Progress she has made of late Years, to those several Societies she nourishes
in her Bosom: Why may not we learn from Enemies; and what better way than to
fight with their own Weapons? At least, why may not we have Congrogations to
propagate Good Manners, as they have one to propagate their Ill Faith?

Nay, it must be owned there have been some devout Persons among them, who by
this very method of forming lesser Religious Societies in Towns and Villages,
as well as the greater Cities, have done great Things toward the Reformation
of Manners, and promoting Piety and Virtue. The Noble and Pious Monsieur de
Renty, in France was of this Number: He employed much of his time in this happy
Exercise, particularly at Caen, where he settled many Societies of devout
Persons, to meet Weekly, and consult about the Relief of the Poor, and
preventing Offenses against God, which succeeded to admiration: He did the same
among Tradesmen, both at Paris and Tolose, whom he brought constantly to go to
Prayers, sing Psalms, read Books of Devotion, and Discourse of their spiritual
Concerns one with another; and used all his Interest with Gentlemen of his
acquaintance to erect petty Societies of the same Nature, even in lesser
Villages, where they had any Influence over the Inhabitants See his Life, p.
149, 155, 158, 159.
. And why should we not transplant any excellent Fruit into our own Soil, and
get all the good we can from Persons of all Communions?

Public Assemblies, in the Church, though constantly and devoutly attended by
the Members of these Societies, yet must be owned to be improper, on several
Accounts, for those excellent Ends which they propose in their stated meetings:
It Is not there proper to discourse of many things which fall under their Care,
nor is there any room for Christian Conversation, if it were decent to practice
it. Pious Discourse must be owned as necessary as it is a delightful Employment
to all good Christians, and yet what more generally and shamefully neglected,
and even by the accursed Rules of Civility, exploded out of the World. This
Practice, that late excellent Person, Dr. Goodman, has endeavored to retrieve,
and has recommended it in so charming a manner in his Winter-Evening
Conference, that he would not have failed of making many Converts to it, had
there been Virtue enough left in the World to make use of his Directions: Now
if this Religious Discourse be lawful and commendable where it is accidental,
or among a few Persons only, I would fain know how it should come to be
otherwise when it is stated and regulated, and among a greater Number? Is it
any more a Conventicle than any other Meetings? Is there any Law that it
offends against? Is it any greater Crime to meet and sing Psalms together, than
to sing profane Songs, or waste Hours in impertinent Chat or Drinking? Indeed,
one would almost wonder how a Design of this Nature should come to have any,
Enemies, nor can I see any Reason why good Men should be discouraged from
joining in it by those hard words, Faction, Singularity, and the like, when all
possible Care is taken to give no just Offense in the management of it.

The Design of these Societies, as I am satisfied by considering the first
Founder, and the Encouragers of them, and their Rules as well as Practice, is,
by no means to gather Churches out of Churches, to foment New Schisms and
Divisions, and to make Heathens of all the rest of their Christian Brethren;
which would be as indefensible in it self, as dangerous and fatal in its
Consequences both to themselves and others: So far are they from this, that
they have brought back several to the Church who were divided from it; but
their aim is purely, and only to promote, in a regular manner, that which is
the End of every Christian, the Glory of God, included in the Welfare and
Salvation of themselves and their Neighbors; and if any rational Method could
be proposed, besides those they have already pitched upon, to guard against
these possible Inconveniences, there is no doubt but they would embrace it.
Though after all, how there can possibly be any occasion of Schism, any crevice
for it to creep in at, where nothing is done but in Subordination to the lawful
Ministry, and by Direction from it, and where one of the very Bonds of the
Society is the constant frequenting of public Prayers, and Communions, while
on the other side, there is no visible private Interest to serve, no Faction to
flatter or humor, I must confess I am not sharp-sighted enough to discern, and
dare challenge any Instance of a Schism any where occasioned, in such
circumstances, ever since the Birth of Christianity.

It cannot be denied but that there may, and will be some Persons in these
Societies of more Heat than Light, more Zeal and Warmth, than Judgment and
Discretion; but where was ever any Body of Men without some of such a
Character? They are of like Passions with other Men, and why may not they
expect the same Allowances? But since the very Rules of their Institution do
strictly oblige them to the Practice of Humility and Charity, and to avoid
Censoriousness and spiritual Pride, the common Rocks of those who make a more
than ordinary Profession of Religion. I see not what humane Prudence can
provide any farther in this matter.

I had like to have forgot one considerable Advantage of these Religious
Societies, if they should once come to be more common amongst us, and that is,
that out of them it would be easy to form Societies for Reformation; for
Persons must be first truly and deeply concerned for Religion themselves,
before they are likely to be so concerned for others, as to be willing to
sacrifice all to make them better. That there is need of a general Reformation
of Manners, has not been denied even by those who have had the most need of it
themselves: And that the Governors both in Church and State, do most earnestly
desire it, we can no less doubt without the highest Affront to both, when they
have by so many repeated Acts, solemnly declared as much to the Nation. That a
firm Combination of good Men, is the best way to bring this Design to a good
Issue, we may more than guess by what has been already done by such methods;
And for all the Objections which have been brought against those who have
embarkt in this pious and generous Undertaking, I believe there is no
unprejudiced Person who has read the Right Reverend Bishop of Glocester's
Defense of them, but are fully satisfied that they have but very little weight,
and are there fairly answered. And as it is known that the late Archbishop was
a hearty Friend of them, and their Design, so his most Reverend Successor has
given them a just and noble Commendation in his Letter to the Bishops of his
Province, wherein he requires them, To press the Clergy of their respective
Dioceses, to invite their Churchwardens and other pious Persons among the
Laity, to ioyn with them in carrying on the Reformation of Manners; after which
he adds, [We may very reasonably expect the happy Effects of such a
Concurrence, from the visible Success of that noble Zeal wherewith so many
about the great Cities do promote true Piety and a Reformation of Manners.]
Thus far our most Reverend Metropolitan, and since that time, the same Design
has been publicly espoused and recommended by several others of the highest
Character. And indeed, if the General Reformation of Men's Manners be ever
effected by the Terror of the Laws without Execution, or those Laws be ever
effectually executed by the straggling Endeavors of a few good Men, who charge
singly against such infernal Hosts of Infidelity and Lewdness; if any thing
considerable herein be accomplished, unless by such a Combination, I shall own
my self happily mistaken; but whether I am or no, the Event will teach
Posterity. I shall conclude this long Letter with the remarkable words of the
excellent Author of the Whole Duty of Man, in his Causes of the Decay of the
Christian Piety, the close of the Twentieth Chapter.

That Scandal, says he, which we have brought upon our Religion, as it was not
contracted by the Irregularities of one or two Persons, but by associated and
common Crimes, so neither will it be removed by a few single and private
Reformations. There must be Combinations, and Public Confederacies in Virtue,
to balance and counterpoise those of Vice, or they will never recover that
Honor which she acquired by the general Piety of her Professors. He goes on;
In those Primitive Days, there was such an abhorrence of all that was ill, that
a vicious Person was looked upon as a kind of a Monster or Prodigy, and like a
putrified Member cut off, as being not only dangerous but noisome to the Body:
But, alas! the Scene is so changed, that the Church is now made up of such as
she would then have cast out, and it is now as remarkable an Occurrent to find a
Good Christian, as it was then to see a Bad.

I shall add no more, but that it was well the Worthy Author concealed his
Name, when he published such disobliging Truths: At least, if he had been now
living, he would scarce have escaped the Censure of Forwardness, and a Zeal not
according to Knowledge.

SIR, I am Your obliged Friend, SAM WESLEY.

APPENDIX.
Of BAPTISM.
I. CONCERNING which, I shall briefly enquire what it is; what Benefits we
receive by it; what are our Obligations from it; whether our Savior designed
it to remain always in his Church; and lastly, who are the proper Subjects of
it.

II. First, What it is; and Baptism may be thus described. It Is the first
Sacrament of the New Testament, instituted by our Savior in the room of
Circumcision, and the Jewish Baptisms, to continue to the End of the World,
wherein by sprinkling, dipping, or washing with Water, in the name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the damning Guilt of original Sin is washed away, we
enter into Covenant with God, are taken into the Church of Christ, and made
partakers of all the Privileges thereof; God's Grace here, and endless Bliss
hereafter, on our performing the Conditions of the Covenant.

III. It Is the first, or initiatory Sacrament, entering us into that Covenant,
which we renew in the Lord's Supper. 'Twas instituted by our Savior, who alone
has Power to institute a proper Sacrament or Sign, Seal, Pledge, and means of
Grace, perpetually obligatory on all Christians. We know not indeed the express
time of its Institution; for Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John,
St. John 4. 1.
long before he enlarged the Commission of his Apostles, to go and make
Disciples out of all Nations by baptising them St. Matt. 28. 19. see below of
the right Translation of the words.
. But we know 'twas in the room of Circumcision, for as that was a Figure,
Sign, Romans 4. 11.
and Seal of God's Covenant, and means of admission into the Church, so is
this. It seems also to have had respect to the way of admitting Proselytes
among the Jews, which both formerly was, and still is by Baptism Lightfoot,
Grotius, etc. Ammian. Epictet.
: and perhaps also to the Lustrations or Purifications among the Heathen, which
Grotius thinks with great Reason, were the remains of a Patriarchal Tradition,
in memory of the universal Flood; which the Apostle also seems to intimate when
he calls Baptism, the Antitype to the Ark, or the Deluge. 1 St. Pet. 3. 20, 21.


IV. The matter of this Sacrament is Water, which as it has a natural Power of
cleansing, is in it self more fit for such a symbolical and sacramental Use.
Some of the ancients have thought that God gave the first Blessing to the
Waters, Genesis 1. 10. because they were designed for Baptism. Which is performed
by Washing, Dipping or Sprinkling the Person in the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. That is, by this Ceremony, the baptized Person is obliged to
believe in the Holy Trinity, and to receive and obey the Gospel. The Gentiles
therefore were generally baptized in the Name of the whole Trinity, because
they did not before believe aright of any of the Three Persons: Though the Jews
and Proselytes who before did believe aright of God, seem to have been
sometimes baptized only in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Acts 10. 42. 19. 5.


. V. I said Washing, Dipping, or Sprinkling* (according to our Catechism) was
the manner of Baptism, though neither of them are, I think, expressly determined
in Scripture, either by Precept, or such Example as clearly proves it; or by
the force or meaning of the word Baptize. Nay, there are several places in the
Sacred Scripture which make it very probable they did wash, or sprinkle, as
well as dip or plunge the baptized, and we have Instances of it in the known
Practice of the ancient Churches. John's Baptism, in some things agreeing with
our Savior's, in others differing from it, cannot certainly be proved from
Scripture, to have been performed by Dipping. Not that St. John 3. 23.
of Enon near to Salim, where there was much Water; for this might relate to
Breadth rather than Depth, since a narrow place would not have been sufficient
for so great a multitude, Jerusalem and all Judea, etc. St. Matt. 3. 5.
that is, a great part, if not the generality of them. Nor any of our Savior
or his Disciples Baptisms, nor even that of Philip and the Eunuch Acts 8. 38,
39.
, tho'they both went down into the Water; for that going down, may relate to
the Eunuch's Chariot, when they descended, but implys no determinate Depth of
Water: it might be to their Knees, it might not reach their Ancles. The words
Baptize and Baptism do not necessarily conclude for Dipping, because they are
used in other Senses in several places of Scripture. Thus we read that the Jews
were all baptized to Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea 1 Cor. 10. 2.
; in neither of which were they plunged, the Body of the Water not touching
them (though the Egyptians were dipped indeed when they sank like Lead in the
mighty Waters Exodus 14. 28. 15. 10.
) they could therefore be only sprinkled by Drops of the Sea water, and
refreshing Dews from the Cloud, while in the Wilderness; which seems not
obscurely hinted in that of the Psalmist. Thou sentest a gracious Rain upon
thine Inheritance, and refreshedst it when it was weary. Psalm. 68. 9.
Again, Christ said to his two Disciples, that they should be baptized with the
Baptism that he was baptized with St. Mark 10. 38.
, namely, the Baptism of Blood, or Martyrdom; but neither he nor they were
dipped, but only sprinkled, or washed with their own Blood. Again, we read in the
Gospel St. Mark 7. (...).
of the Washing, it is in the original Baptisms of Pots, and Cups, and brazen
Vessels and Tables, or Beds: Yet Pots and Cups are not necessarily dipped, when
they are washed, but Water is often poured upon them. Nay, the Pharisees washed
the outsides of them only St. Luke 11. 39.
, and as for Tables or Beds, none will suppose they could be dipped, but only
sprinkled, or at most washed over. Here is the word Baptism, not in a
figurative, but natural Sense, taken otherwise than for dipping, namely for
washing or cleansing, and that this is the true meaning of the word Baptize, is
the Opinion of the greatest Scholars, and most proper Judges in this matter.
Hesychius, Stephanus, Scapula. (...). Lavo to wash. So (...). Lavatio, ablutio.
Washing, which may be done without dipping.
It Is true, we read of being Buried with Christ in Baptism, but we cannot argue
with any certainty from such a figurative Expression; which if it held exactly,
seems as much for sprinkling as plunging, because in Burials the Earth is
sprinkled on the Body, not the Body plunged through the solid Substance of the
Earth; and a Man is not buried, though he is put into his Grave, till he is
covered by thus casting, or sprinkling the Earth upon him; and on the other
side, we read that Baptism is called Tit. 3. 5.
the washing of Regeneration. And as there is no certain Proof of dipping from
sacred Scripture, so there is very great probability from the History of the
Apostles, that great Numbers were baptized by the Apostles themselves without
any such dipping, only by washing, sprinkling, or pouring Water upon them, or
some part of them, sufficient to a ceremonial Washing St. John 13. 10.
, and clearly representing the inward part of the Sacrament, or cleansing from
Sin; not the quantity but the quality being chiefly considerable, as it is not
much or little of the Bread and Wine, but the Substance of them only, which
with the Grace of God, makes the other Sacrament. The Iaylor and all his House
were baptized in the Prison. Acts 16. 33.
Cornelius and his Friends at home Acts 10. 48.
, and several Households. But is it likely they had all of them Ponds, Pools, or
Rivers, in, or near their Houses, sufficient to plunge all these? I think the
contrary is far more probable. And the same even of the 5000 at one time, and
3000 at another, which were converted and baptized by Saint Peter in Jerusalem
Acts 2. 41. 4. 5.
, where they had none but the gentle Waters of Siloam, as some think, the same
with Gihon, which were by Hezekiah brought into the City 2 Kings 20. 20. Fuller
says, there were no Water-Mills in Jerusalem, because no Streams large enough
to drive them. Pisgah Sigh't. Lib. 3. p. 329.
. It Is true, it was an ancient Custom to dip the baptized, which was rather
refreshing than dangerous in the warm Eastern and Southern Countries: But the
case is otherwise in our cold and frozen Climate, where oftentimes we have no
Ponds or Rivers unfrozen to dip in, and if we did, it would endanger the Health
or Life, both of sick and weakly grown Persons (as some of those who practice
it cannot be ignorant) and especially of tender Infants, and be more hard to
them than Circumcision it self; and as the ancients did undoubtedly baptize the
Clinics, or sick Persons on their Beds, by washing or sprinkling, not dipping
them, so may we do with Children or others in these Northern Parts, where the
danger seems much the same, since God will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice:
especially when he has not determined any thing concerning it in his Holy Word.
Though where adult Persons are baptized, or Children are able to bear it, our
Church is not against dipping Vid. Rubric in public Baptism.
; nor can this therefore be any valid Objection against it, or just Cause of
Separation from it. I shall close this Head with an Observation concerning the
Hebrew word which signifies to baptize (...)
, which a Reverend Person who was as well acquainted with that Language as most
in Europe Dr. Lightfoot's Appendix to his Life. Vol. 11. p. 16.
, has largely proved, to imply no more than sprinkling, not plunging, or
dipping; challenging all those who are of a different Opinion, to produce any
place in the Old Testament, where the word when it is used in Sacreds, and in a
transient Action, is not taken for sprinkling only.

VI. The first of the Benefits we receive by Baptism, is the washing away the
damning Guilt of original Sin, by the application of the merits of Christ's
Death. That we are all born under the Guilt of Adam's Sin, and that all Sin
deserves eternal misery, has been the unanimous Sense of the Primitive Church,
as well as it is positively and strongly asserted in the Ninth Article of the
Church of England: and even Heathens have been sensible of a Fall, though they
have been ignorant of the manner of it, and means to recover from it (and yet,
as before, they generally used washing or sprinkling for Purification. I
believe they had it from Orpheus, as he from the Phoenicians, and they perhaps
from Jacob.
) And it is no less certain, that we all feel the Effects of this original
Guilt, though there may be difficulties in the manner of its propagation: For no
modest good Man can be insensible of an inward strong propension to Evil: And
the Scripture plainly asserts; That we were shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did
our Mothers conceive us Psalm. 51. 5.
. That we were all by nature Children of wrath, and dead in trespasses Ephesians.
2. 1, 3.
and sins. That none can bring a clean Job 14. 4. and 25. 4.
thing out of an unclean. That in Adam all died. 1 Cor. 15. 22.
That by one Man's disobedience many (that is all) Romans 5. 10, 12.
were made Sinners. By one Man, Sin entered into Romans 3. 10, 23.
the world, and Death by Sin, which came upon all Men, for that all have
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. Nay, this almost in express Terms
as to Infants, who if they had not any Sin at all, no original Sin, How come
they to die, and what need would they have of a Savior, since they have no
actual Sin? But, it is said, That Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even in
those who had not sinned (actually) according to the similitude of Adam's
transgression Romans 5. 13, 14.
; which can relate to Infants only: which Texts are allowed by all but
Pelagians, to be clear Proofs that the whole Race of mankind are obnoxious both
to the Guilt and Punishments of Adam's Transgression: To the Punishment as well
as the Guilt of it, which doubtless was not only temporal Death, but extended
likewise to spiritual and eternal. The Scripture having concluded all under
Sin, as the Jews under Unbelief, that God might have mercy upon all Gal. 3. 22.
Romans 11. 32.
: Which takes off any mistaken Imputation on God's mercy, or his Justice, since
the Remedy is as wide as the Wound, the Obedience and Death of the second Adam
have repaired the Ruins which were occasioned by the Crime of the first, and
brought mankind into a possibility, and capacity of Salvation: And as by the
offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, so by the
Righteousness of one, the Free-Gift came upon all Men to Justification of Life.
Romans 5. 18.
Which virtue of Christ's Death and Resurrection are applied to us in Baptism:
Rev. 1. 5.
For he loved, us and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood. He gave himself
for the Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water, by the Word Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.
; namely, by Baptism, as an Instrument of our Justification, as our Church
fully asserts in the Office of Baptism. That all Men are conceived and born in
Sin, First Exhortation before Baptism.
in the old Adam, Ministers certifying after private Baptism.
in original Sin, and in the Wrath of God; and prays, That the Person to be
baptized, may be washed and sanctified with the Holy Ghost, and delivered from
God's Wrath, and by Baptism, receive Remission of Sins, and enjoy the
everlasting Benediction of God's heavenly washing: and again, That the Water
may be sanctified to the mystical washing away of Sin; Prayer immediately
before Baptism.
and teaches us, That those who are born in original Sin, and in the Wrath of
God, are by the Laver of Regeneration in Baptism, received into the Number of
God's Children, etc. And accordingly, does upon good Ground affirm in the
Rubric at the end of the Office, That it is certain by God's Word, that
Children which are baptized, dying before they commit actual Sin, are saved:
and this is agreeable to the unanimous Opinion of the ancient Fathers St.
Cyprian, Theophylact. Lactant. Greg. Naz. Origin, St. August. St. Ambrose, St.
Ierom, etc.
, and of the Primitive Church, which differed from the Pelagian Heretics in
this very point; those Heretics pretending that Children were baptized only
that they might be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven, whereas the Orthodox
held, that they ought to be baptized, especially in case of danger, for the
washing away the Guilt of original Sin.

VII. Another Benefit of Baptism, is, that we thereby enter into Covenant with
God, without which, as has been said on the other Sacrament, What has a sinful
Creature to do with his offended Maker? Into that everlasting Covenant, which
he has commanded for ever Psalm. 109. 11.
; that New Covenant, which he has promised to make with the spiritual Israel.
To give them a new Heart, and a new Spirit, (new Principles, new Inclinations)
to sprinkle clean water upon them, that they may be clean, and to remember
their Sins and iniquities no more. In short, to be their God, as he promised to
Abraham, in the Evangelical Covenant which he made with him, and all his
spiritual Offspring. Genesis 17. 7, 8.
That Circumcision was then the way of admitting into Covenant with God, and
that Baptism is the same now, I suppose none deny, who own any Sacraments:
Baptism being also styled in Scripture, the Stipulation, Contract, or Covenant
of a good Conscience, as good Interpreters translate that place in St. Peter
already mentioned. 3. (...) stipulatio, Luther, Beza, Grotius, etc.
Our part of the Covenant, (which includes an Oath and a Vow,) is to renounce
the Devil, to believe what God has revealed, to observe what he has commanded;
God's part, to give us his Grace to perform what we promise, and unspeakable
Rewards for our imperfect Obedience.

VIII. By Baptism, we are admitted into the Church; and consequently made
Members of Christ, the Churches Head. The Jews were admitted into the Church,
or made Proselytes, by Circumcision, the Christians by Baptism. For as many as
are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ Gal. 3. 27.
; that is, are mystically united to him, and made one with him. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body 1 Cor. 12. 13.
, namely, the Church, which is called the Body of Christ Ephesians. 4. 12.
; whence the Fathers style Baptism, the Door of the Church, and the Sacrament
of our initiation, or entrance into Christianity. From which vital, more than
political, because spiritual, mystical and sacramental Union with Christ,
proceeds the Influence of his Grace on those who are baptized; the Honor and
Exaltation of our Nature; the Benefit of his Protection and Intercession for us
with the Father; as from our Union with the Church, a share in its
Instructions, in its Privileges, in all the Promises Christ has made to it, in
its Intercessions and Supplications, and in the other Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, as soon as we come to Age and Understanding to receive it.

IX. By Baptism we are made the Children of God, who were by Nature Children of
Wrath. It Is the Sacrament of Adoption, as our Church affirms Thanksgiving after
Baptism.
, which seems to mean these two things by that Regeneration, which in so many
places it ascribes to Baptism, namely, The being grafted into the Body of
Christ's Church, and being made the Children of God by Adoption and Grace.
Thanksgiving after Baptism, and Collect for Sunday after Christmas.
There is something more in this Baptismal Regeneration, than barely being
admitted into the Church, or having the Guilt of original Sin washed away: It
relates to some actual positive Benefit conferred on the Believers, and is the
effect of our being engrafted into the Church, and therefore not the thing it
self only. Except a Man be born again of Water and of the Spirit, says our
Savior, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. St. John 3. 5.
By Water then, as a means, the Water of Baptism, we are regenerated, or born
again, whence it is also called the washing of Regeneration. Our Church affirms
no more of Baptism, ascribes no greater Virtue to it, than Christ himself has
done: Nor does she ascribe it to the outward washing only, but to the inward
Grace, which is added to the outward to make it a Sacrament. We say not that
Regeneration is always completed in this Sacrament, but that it is begun in
it: a Principle of Grace is infused, which we lost by the Fall, which shall
never be wholly withdrawn, unless we quench God's Holy Spirit by obstinate
habits of Wickedness: There are Babes as well as strong Men in Christ. A
Christian's Life is progressive, as is our natural Life; and though the Seeds of
Grace, should like the reasonable Soul, the Principle of Life, and of all
Action, be infused in a Moment, yet there requires time to produce strong
habits of Grace, as well as of Reason; as every one knows, who is any thing
acquainted with his own Mind, or with the Word of God. And the same our Church
affirms in her devout Collect for the Nativity, where she prays, That we being
(namely already in Baptism) regenerate, and made God's Children by Adoption and
Grace, may daily be renewed by his Holy Spirit Which we learn from St. Austin,
to have been also in his time, the Judgment of the Catholic Church, who has
these Expressions near the end of his Discourse, de morihus Eccles. Cathol. In
that most holy Law, says he, the Renovation of the new Man is begun, that by
going on it may be perfected: in some indeed this is done sooner, in others
later, but in many it proceeds to a New Life, if any Man diligently regard it.
For thus says the Apostle, Though the outward Man perishes, the inward Man is
renewed day by day. He says, It Is renewed that it may be perfected. Thus far
he, and indeed it is evident that this Renovation, though to be daily perfected in
the course of a Religious Life is yet begun in Baptism. That which is born of
the flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit. St. John
3. 6.
The Holy Spirit of God descended visibly on our Savior at his Baptism. St.
Matt. 3. 16.
It descended miraculously on the first Christians after they were baptized; on
Simon Magus himself, there seems to be little doubt, Act. 8. 13, 17. as well as
on others, and doubtless 'twas his own Fault that he lost it, because he did
not improve it, but grieve and quench it by wilful obstinate Sin: And from
hence it is that the Apostle says, that the Bodies even of very bad Christians
were the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. And we are not to doubt but
this Holy Spirit descends as really still on those that are baptized, though not
so visibly, so miraculously as he did formerly; whence Christians are in
Baptism sacramentally washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of our Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
Nor will this Holy Spirit ever leave us, but strive with us to perfect what is
now begun, unless we finally leave him, and forfeit his Protection, by
neglecting to perform our Engagements in Baptism. Now in consequence of this
Baptismal Regeneration, and our being therein made the Children of God, we are
also Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. For by this we enter into it: If
Children, then Heirs, Heirs with God, and joint Heirs with Christ; and
Inheritors of that Kingdom which cannot be moved Romans 8. 17.
. Baptism does now save us, if we live answerable thereunto, repent, believe,
and obey the Gospel. It Is that which admits us into the Church here, and Glory
hereafter. And many have been of Opinion, that by the Sea of Glass like unto
Crystal, which is mentioned in the Revelation Rev. 4. 6.
, before the Throne of God, was figured out our Baptism, through which we must
pass if we ever come to Heaven.

X. But all these Privileges imply Obligations: Something to be done on our
parts for the obtaining them: a Contract or Covenant without Conditions, being
little better than a Contradiction; and the Conditions of this Covenant, are
Repentance, Faith and Obedience. Baptism is but the way of our Entrance into
Covenant with God, into the Church of God, but the Obligations thereof remain
as long as our Lives, as the Benefits reach yet further. Faith only without
Repentance will never save us. The Doctrine of the Apostles was Repent and be
Baptized Acts 2. 38.
for the Remission of Sins; and Repent and Believe the Gospel: and Truth itself
has assured us, that except we Repent we shall all perish. But yet we are
indispensibly obliged by our Baptism; First, To believe all Divine Revelation,
especially the Holy Gospel; to believe Christ the true Messiah, the eternal Son
of God, the Savior of the World, and actually to trust in him for Remission of
Sins, and eternal Happiness. And because all the Gospel cannot be repeated at
Baptism, the Church has all along made use of a Form of sound words,
comprehending the Substance thereof; and for many ages, that particular Form
which is called the Apostles Creed, containing that Doctrine which they preached
to all Nations: And to this the Person to be Baptized, is obliged to testify
his assent, either by himself or others. But though this be a good Step, yet this
alone will not save him. For he must not only believe Gods Word, but likewise
obediently keep his Commandments. Those who are buried with Christ in Baptism,
must remember they are to be Dead to Sin, to walk in newness of Life, and to be
careful that they maintain Good Works, Romans 6. 3, 4. Tit. 3. 8.
agreeable whereunto is the excellent Advice of our Church to the Baptized.
Office of Baptism, Exhortation at the End.
That it is their Parts and Dutys being made the Children of God and of the
Light by Faith in Jesus Christ to walk answerably to their Christian Calling,
and as becomes the Children of the Light. Remembering always that Baptism
represents unto us our Profession, which is to follow the Example of our
Savior Christ, and to be made like unto him, that as he dyed and rose again
for us; so should we who are baptized, dye from Sin, and rise again unto
Righteousness, continually mortifying all our evil and corrupt Affections, and
daily proceeding in all Virtue and Godliness of living. And would to God all
who are baptized, would but act according to these Directions, which would
prevent the unspeakable Scandal which is given by the bad Lives of Christians,
the high Dishonor of God, and their own eternal Ruin.

XI. And this Baptism is to be perpetual, to last as long as the Church, into
which it gives Entrance; to the end of the World. It must doubtless be highly
necessary, since without it, in an ordinary way there is no Entrance into the
Church or into Heaven. The outward Baptism is thus necessary, as a means to the
inward; as was outward Circumcision to the Circumcision of the Heart; nor would
it have availed the Jews to plead that they had the inward, and that was
sufficient, because whoever had not the outward too, that Soul was to be cut
off from among his People; he had despised, he had broken Gods everlasting
Covenant, by despising and neglecting the Seal of it. Genesis 17. 14. A Seal must
be something visible: a Sacrament must consist of something outward as well as
inward. The very nature of a Type implys the same: The Seal of Circumcision was
to last among the Jews, as long as the Ceremonial Law lasted, whereunto it
obliged them, making them Debtors to the whole Law, Galat. 5. 3.
and when that was abolished, and Baptism came in its Room, that must also last
by Parity of Reason, as long as the Gospel Covenant, into which it admits, and
whereunto it obliges all Nations. There is no doubt but our Savior's
Commission was to make Proselytes by baptizing with Water, for so the Apostles
did, which they dared not have done, had not it been contained in their
Commission: and this of Gentiles as well as Jews, as is undeniably clear from
the Acts of the Apostles; nay they did not only permit but command and exhort
to outward Baptism. Thus Ananias to St. Paul. Arise and be baptized, and wash
away thy Sins Acts 22. 16.
* Thus St. Peter to the Jews, Repent and be baptized. Acts 2. 38.
And to the Gentiles, and that with Water. Can any man forbid Water that these
should not be baptized? And it follows he commanded them to be baptized in the
name of the Lord: which was certainly more than a bare Permission or
Condescension Acts 10. 47.
. And as long as the Commission to the Apostles lasted, as long as Christ
promised to be with them, in the Execution of it, so long doubtless were they
to exercise it, and to baptize as well as to teach; for the Commission is to
both, as the Promise is to both: But Christ has promised to be with them, that
is by his Spirit, in their lawful Successors, till the End of the World. Which
explains that Expression of the Apostle concerning the other Sacrament, that
therein Christians were to show forth the Lords Death until he come; that is
till he come at the last day to judge the world, personally and visibly, in
like manner as his Disciples saw him bodily ascend into Heaven Acts 1. 11.
: which cannot therefore relate to his coming at Pentecost by his Spirit; nor
his coming to destroy the Jewish City and Nation, which was by his power, not
his person. Nor can the End of the world be here restrained to the Destruction
of Jerusalem, because that was but about Forty Years after Christ's Ascension,
and we are not to think the Commission was then voided, or that he has forsaken
his Church ever since: which was rather much confirmed by this terrible
Destruction which he had foretold should befall his enemies and crucifiers.
Besides that there is another word added, always; Lo I am with you always St.
Matt. 28. 20. (...).
; which strengthens and explains that Expression, to the end of the World. And
accordingly we are sure that as well the Apostles as their immediate
Successors, did receive all Nations into the Christian Church by Baptism, and
none without it; and have continued to do the same ever since, and doubtless
will do so to the End of the World. Nor therefore are those to be heard, who
deny the necessity or perpetuity of outward Water Baptism.

XII. But there is a yet greater Difficulty concerning the Subjects of Baptism,
whether only adult Persons, who can make a personal, public Profession of
their Faith and Repentance; or the Children also of Believers, who are brought
unto it on account of the Faith of their Parents, and Sponsors or Sureties, and
may have the beginnings of Faith and Holiness wrought in them by Gods Spirit.

XIII. And here before I enter upon this Argument, I think it may not be
inconvenient to declare, that I do it not for Argument's sake only. I would
have no Controversy with any Christian but who should be most charitable, nor
would I willingly provoke any, but to Love and to good Works: But yet I am
obliged to do what I can to preserve any that are under my Charge from what I
my self am convinced is an Error, and such is, I am satisfied, the denying of
Baptism to Infants, and I shall be very glad if these mean Papers may be useful
to any others on the same Occasion. Wherein I shall first lay down the Grounds
of Infant Baptism, taken from Scripture, Reason, and Primitive, and universal
Custom: And secondly, Endeavor to answer the Objections against it.

XIV. Our Grounds for Baptising the Infants, (at least) of believing Parents,
are such as these. 1. Because all Children are guilty of original Sin, and
consequently cannot be saved in an ordinary way, unless that be washed away in
Baptism. 2. Because such Children are capable of making a Covenant, and were,
and still are under the Evangelical Covenant, and consequently have a right to
Baptism, which is the initiating Seal thereof. 3. Because they may, and ought
to come to Christ, are capable of being admitted into the Church of God, and of
solemn sacramental Dedication to him. 4. Because the Jews did make Proselytes
of Children by baptising as well as by circumcising them; and consequently, our
Savior commanding his Disciples to make Proselytes out of all Nations by
Baptism, and not forbidding them to receive Children, they must needs baptize
them also. 5. It is very probable, if not positively certain, from the Acts of
the Apostles, that the Apostles did baptize Infants. 6. As it is certain that
the first Christians did so, and the Church of God have continued to do it, in
all Places and all Ages.

XV. The first Argument for Infants Baptism, may be taken from their being
guilty of original Sin, and consequently, in an ordinary way they cannot be
saved, unless that be washed away by Baptism. That there is such a thing as
this original Guilt or Stain of our Natures, see Section VI. where it is also
proved, that it is in it self damnable, as it must certainly be, if it makes us
the Children of Wrath; and if the Offense of the first Adam has rendered all
Mankind obnoxious to Judgment, to Condemnation, and to Death. It is true, the
second Adam has found a Remedy by his own Death, but the Merits thereof are
only to be applied in the use of those means he has appointed, the chief of
which are the Sacraments. All good Christians believe one Baptism for the
Remission of Sins; we being therein born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of
incorruptible. 1 St. Pet. 1. 23.
Baptism is the ordinary way, to which God has tied us, though he may not have
tied himself. Where it is not to be had indeed, the Case is different, but what
are extraordinary Cases against a certain standing Rule? That original Sin is
really washed away in Baptism, has been already proved; and that the same has
been the unanimous Opinion of the ancient Churches: And on that account, we
think we have great Reason to baptize Infants, as did the Holy Fathers of old,
that they may thereby be made Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

XVI. A second Argument for the Lawfulness of Infant's Baptism, is, because
they are capable of making a Covenant, and were, and still are, under the
Evangelical Covenant, and consequently have a right to Baptism, which is the
entering Seal there of.

That Infants are capable of entering into a Covenant, I prove from God's own
Words to the People of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. Ye stand this day all of
you before the Lord your God, your Captains, etc. with all the Men of Israel.
Your Little Ones, your Wives, and thy Stranger, etc. That thou should enter
into Covenant with the Lord thy God. God would never have made a Covenant with
Little Ones, if they had not been capable of it; it is not said Children only,
but Little Ones (such as Christ particularly orders his Disciples to suffer to
come to him, of which more below) and is translated in the Greek by a word that
signifies Infants, or Innocents Ezekiel. 9. 6. (...). The same word that is used
in those ancient Constitutions ascribed to the Apostles. (...). Baptize your
Infants.
The Custom of Nations, and common Reason of Mankind, does also prove that
Infants may enter into a Covenant, and may be obliged by Compacts made in their
Names by others, and may receive Advantage by them. The Apostle argues from a
Man's Covenant, which he says cannot be disanull'd to God's Covenant Galat. 3.
15.
; and surely, we may follow his Example. Infants may be still, as they were of
old in Circumcision, actually obliged to perform that for the future, which
they cannot actually perform at the Time of their entering into such Obligation.

The Infants of Believers, the true Children of faithful Abraham, always were
under the Gospel Covenant. They were included in it, they had a right unto it,
and to the Seal of it; as an Heir has right to an Estate, an Infant Prince to a
Crown, though there are some Solemnities required to give them Investiture, and
actual Possession of them. The Covenant with Abraham was a Gospel Covenant. The
Condition the same, namely Faith, which the Apostle tells us, was accounted
unto him for Righteousness Gal. 3. 15.
; the inseparable Fruit of which Faith was Obedience, for by Faith he left his
Country, and offered his Son Heb. 11. 8, 17.
. The Benefits were the same, for God promises to be his God, and the God of
his Seed after him Genesis 17. 8.
; and he can promise no more to any Creature, for this includes all Blessings
of this Life and a better. The Mediator the same, for it was in his Seed, that
is, in Christ Genesis 22. 18. Gal. 3. 16.
; that all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed: on which account the
Apostle says, that the Gospel was preached unto Abraham Gal. 3. 8.
. The same Promise that was made to him, the same Covenant that was made with
him, was made with his Children after him, for so it is expressly said Genesis 17.
7. Gal. 3. 7.
; and upon that account it is called an Everlasting Covenant. In this Covenant,
Children were obliged to what they knew not, to the same Faith and Obedience
which Abraham performed, or else no Benefit by it. It reaches beyond the Law;
for the Apostle expressly distinguishes this from it Gal. 3. 17.
. It Is true, there was something legal that was a sort of an appendage unto it,
namely, a temporal Promise of Canaan to Abraham and his Posterity Genesis 17. 8.
; To thee and to thy Seed after thee, will I give the Land of Canaan. But this
was but like a Codicil annexed to a Will, not the chief or main part of it; for
neither Abraham nor the Patriarchs did actually inherit Canaan; but as the
Apostle argues, God had prepared better Blessings for them, even Spiritual and
Heavenly, for which cause he was not ashamed to be called their God Acts 7. 5.
Heb. 11. 10, 14, 16.
. Now, to Abraham and his spiritual Offspring were the Promises made in Christ,
and the same which are of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham, and
blessed together with him Gal. 3. 7. Romans 4. 13.
. Circumcision was the Seal of that Covenant, and therefore it is it self
figuratively called the Covenant Acts 7. 8.
. The Children of those who professed the true Religion were hereby admitted
into the Covenant which God then made with his People, and obliged to the
Conditions of it, as when the Law was added, to the Observation of that also;
for he that is circumcised, says the Apostle, is Debtor to the whole Law; Gal.
5. 3. that is, was obliged to fulfill it when he came to age, as being thereby
made a Member of the Jewish Church, and bound to observe all its political and
ceremonial Constitutions, as were the Proselytes of Justice, who were
circumcised, whereas the Jewish Writers tell us, that the Proselytes of the
Gate, who were admitted by Baptism only, were only obliged to the seven
Precepts of Noah: And this St. Paul very well knew, having been bred a
Pharisee, and well acquainted with their Traditions. When therefore the old
Seal of Circumcision was taken off, this of Baptism was added by our Savior in
its room; one positive Institution succeeding another. A new Seal to Abraham's
Covenant; the Seals differred, but the Deed was the same, only that part of it
struck off, which was purely polical, relating to the Jewish Nation and
temporal Canaan only. And that Baptism did really come in the room of
Circumcision, we may learn as well from the clear Reason of the thing, as from
the Apostle's Argument Col. 2. 11. 12, 13.
, where after Circumcision, he mentions Baptism, as that wherein God has
forgiven us our trespasses; to which he adds, the blotting out the handwriting
of Ordinances, relating plainly to Circumcision, and other usages among the
Jews The Fathers are unanimous that this is the meaning of the Scripture now
quoted.
; which as fairly implies that Baptism came in the room of Circumcision, as our
Savior's stiling the other Sacrament, the Passover, does prove that it was
instituted instead of it, St. Luke 22. 15. Nor is it any more a proof that
Baptism did not succeed Circumcision, because it differs in some Circumstances
(as that they were generally (not always) circumcised the 8th. day, that the
Males only were circumcised for obvious Reasons of Decency, and the like,
whereas both Sexes are baptized) then the same Reason would prove, that the
Lord's Supper did not succeed the Passover, which we know did in many more
Circumstances differ from it, than Circumcision did from the other Sacrament.

XVII. A Third Argument for the Baptising of Infants is, because they may, and
ought to be made Proselytes; they ought to come to Christ, being capable of
admission into the Church of God, and consequently of solemn, sacramental
Dedication to him.

That Infants ought to be made Proselytes, or which is the same, to come to
Christ, is evident from his own words, St. Matthew. 14. 13, 14. They brought
little Children to Christ and the Disciples rebuked them. And Jesus said,
suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Which is carried yet farther by St. Luke 14. 18. They
brought unto him also (it should be rendered even) Infants, that he should
touch them, etc. And again, St. Matthew. 18. 2. and onward. He called a little
Child, and said, except ye be converted and become as little Children, ye shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And ver. 5. Whosoever shall receive one
such little Child in my Name, receives me. 6. But whosoever shall offend one of
these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a Millstone
were hanged about his Neck, and that he were drowned in the debth of the Sea.
In which place our Savior having spoken of little Children, Infants, Children
in Age, in all the former part of his Discourse, and undoubtedly mentioned them
four times one after another, it cannot be reasonably supposed that he should
all of the sudden change the Sense of the word, and speak of little Children in
a metaphorical or figurative Sense in the sixth Verse, when he says that they
believed in him. These Children were so little, that they were brought to him,
which yet our Savior says, did come unto him; so little, that he took them up
in his Arms. And yet he rebuked his Disciples for end^^vouring to hinder their
coming unto him. Christ's Command respected the future as well as present: his
Disciples or Ministers are still to suffer Infants to come, that is, to be
brought unto Christ. They cannot now come unto him, but by being brought unto
the Church, by being made Proselytes to Christianity. They cannot do this but
by Baptism, therefore they ought to be baptized. For of such is the Kingdom of
Heaven, or of God; not of such only as were like these Infants, but of those
very Infants, for if they themselves were not fit to be Subjects of that
Kingdom, How could others be so, because they were like them? But except a Man
be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
Infants are therefore capable of being thus born in Holy Baptism. They are
capable of being admitted into the Church, and have a right unto it. They were
in the Church of God under the Old Testament, being admitted by Circumcision,
nor are we to suppose that they are in a worse Condition under the Gospel, than
they were under the Law; nor would our Savior, surely, take away any
Privileges which they enjoyed, but rather make Additions to them. He, indeed,
actually commands his Disciples to admit Children as Proselytes, when he bids
them suffer such to come unto him. The Children of believing Parents have a
right to the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore to admission into the Church, and
consequently to Baptism, there being no other way of admitting them. Again,
Christ here expressly styles them Believers; one of these little ones which
believe in me: Why therefore, should not the Infants of Believers be thought
capable of the beginnings, of the first Principles of Faith as well as of
Reason; and therefore of Baptism, according to our Adversary's own Argument?
They are said to have Holiness as well as Faith; your Children are Holy, says
the Apostle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7. 14.
and that even of one believing Parent, initially and federally Holy: and if
they are so, who can forbid Water, that they should be baptized? It has been
the Custom of some of the most sensible Leaders of the Antipoedobaptist's
themselves, solemnly to dedicate Children to God soon after their Births, with
Prayer, and the like: and if they are capable of this, why not also of a
sacramental Dedication, which I cannot imagine how any Person can oppose, who
considers the Need which Infants have of it, the Capacity they have for it, the
great Benefits they receive by it, and the terrible Danger of neglecting it.

XVIII. A sourth Argument for the Baptising of Infants is, because the Jews did
make Proselytes of Children by Baptism, as well as by Circumcision, and
consequently our Savior commanding his Disciples to gather Proselytes out of
all Nations by Baptising them, and not forbidding them to receive Children as
well as others, they must needs baptize Children also.

That the Jews did certainly admit Proselytes by Baptism, as well as by
Circumcision, and that whole Families together, Children, as well as their
Parents; we have the unanimous Testimony of their most ancient, learned, and
authentic Writers, as has been abundantly made good by Dr. Hammond, Dr.
Lightfoot and others, who have labored on this Subject. The Males they
received by Baptism and Circumcision; the Women, by Baptism only, which
includes a sufficient Answer to a little Cavil against the succeeding of
Baptism in the room of Circumcision. That this is not a novel Custom, which the
Jews have learnt from the Christians, we may be satisfied by their inveterate
hatred against them, and especially against their Sacraments. Besides, they
themselves deduce this Practice from the Old Testament, from Jacob's commanding
all his Household to be clean, and change their Garments, wherein were included
the Maid Servants, those Captives which his Sons took from Sechem, and others.
Genesis 24. 24. 25. 2.
And the same Custom it is said they continue to this day, and receive
Proselytes by Baptism, as well as by Circumcision. As for the Consequence, it
seems unavoidable, unless the Matter of Fact could be disproved, on which it is
grounded Nay, it would hold firm, were it from Circumcision only, which has
been proved to succeed Baptism. For if it was the Custom of the Jews, when they
gathered Proselytes out of all Nations, to admit Children among others by
Circumcision, though they could not actually signify their Belief of the Law, nor
promise Obedience to it; then the Apostles who were sent to make Proselytes to
Christianity by Baptism, could never think of excluding Children, whom the Jews
before admitted, (seeing the Reason for their admission was the same in both
cases,) unless our Savior had expressly forbidden it. If it be asked wherefore
Infants are not as capable of receiving the Lord's Supper as of Baptism, we
answer, that the Reason is plain, because the Lord's Supper is a confirming
Seal, Baptism only the entering Seal of the Covenant, by which Children may now
be admitted into it, as they were of old by Circumcision. But we may argue more
strongly, that the Apostles did admit Children for Proselytes by Baptism, as
well as we know they admitted Women, though neither of them actually mentioned in
their Commission, because it was the Custom of their Country to do both, and
neither was forbidden by our Savior: As if any of our Ministers goes among the
Heathens, and converts them, he would certainly baptize Infants, and give the
other Sacrament in both kinds to the adult, because such was the practice of
those Protestant Churches whence he went.

XIX. A fifth Argument for the Baptising of Infants, is because it is very
probable, if not positively certain, that the Apostles themselves did baptize
them. Supposing those two Instances of Baptising Women had not been recorded in
the Acts of the Apostles, yet we might fairly have concluded, that when so many
Thousands, so many entire Households were baptized, Women were not excluded,
especially when it was the known Custom of the Jews to admit them Proselytes by
Baptism: and the same holds of Children, nay, more strongly, on the account of
Circumcision: three Thousand were baptized in one day by the Apostles Acts 2.
41.
, and it is likely five Thousand in another Acts 4. 4.
; And can it rationally be supposed that there were no Children among such vast
Numbers? Nay, does it not seem highly probable there might be many such there,
some in their Mothers Arms, others in their Hands, as is usual in such a
public Concourse, especially when there were Children present at the
Repetition of the Law already mentioned; and likewise at our Savior's
preaching, who in his miraculous Feast, is said to have sed five Thousand Men
besides Women and Children St. Matt. 14. 21.
. Again, the Apostles baptized many Families, or Households; nay, we hardly read
of the Master of a Family who was made a Convert, and baptized, but his whole
Family, as was before the Custom among the Jews, were converted, proselyted,
and baptized together with him. Thus the Iaylor's Household Acts 16. 33.
, He and ALL his. The Household of Gaius, which was so large, that he is called
the Host of the whole Church Romans 16. 23.
, of Stephanus; and Crispus, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, and ALL his
House. Can we, I say, suppose, that in all these Households, which we read, were
without exception, baptized, there should not be so much as one Child or
Infant, when we may observe very few of our own little Families, taking them
one with another, that are wholly without Children? But what if besides all
this we should find someting still more express for the Baptising of Children
in the Acts of the Apostles? In St. Peter's Sermon already mentioned, Acts 2.
38. thus he exhorts, Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of
Jesus Christ for the Remission of Sins, etc. For the Promise is to you, and to
your Children. The Answer was indeed to those adult Persons, who asked, What
shall we do? These he bids Repent and be baptized; but it reached further than
to those that made the Question; and though Children could not actually Repent,
yet they might be baptized; and there are two things in the words which show
they were here included. 1. Because the Apostle addresses himself to every one
of them, and among every one, Children must be contained. 2. They are expressly
mentioned, The Promise is to you, and to your Children, without any exception,
and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord your God shall call.
That is, all Gentiles to whom the Apostles or their Successors should come to
gather Proselytes from among them.

XX. The last Argument for baptising of Infants, may be taken from the general
Practice of the Christian Church, in all Places, and all Ages since the first
planting of Christianity. For the Truth whereof, we have unexceptionable
Evidence in ancient Writers. St. Austin St. August. de Genesi ad Literam. Lib.
X. Cap. 23.
, for the Latin Church, who flourished before the Year four Hundred, and Origin
Origin on the 6th. of the Romans
for the Greek, who was born in the Second Century, and famous about the middle
of the Third, both affirming, not only that the universal Church did then
Baptize Infants, but likewise that they received this Custom of Baptising them
from the Apostlos themselves, as we know they also did the change of the
Sabbath, and other things of like nature, not clearly asserted in the
Scriptures. St. Austin speaks of it in the most posicive Expressions,
proculdubio, says he, without doubt, it was delivered down from our Lord and
his Apostles. St. Cyprian is likewise clear for it, and a whole Council with
him, as appears in his Epistle to Fidus, and other places. So is Athanasius,
who flourished Anno Three Hundred Twenty Six, and he founds Infant Baptism on
the same places which we still make use of to the same purpose, suffer little
Children to come unto me. Now are your Children Holy, etc. St. Chrysostom is of
the same mind, and proves the Necessity of Children's Baptism, from their being
guilty of original Sin. And even Gregory Nazianzen is for having them baptized
in mere Infancy, in case of Danger, which he founds on the Circumcision on the
eighth day; and though in no Danger, he would not have it deferred till they were
above three Year old. Though even this was a singular Opinion of his, but such as
does no Service to the Cause of the Antipoedobaptists, since they are for
baptising adult Persons only. Siricius Bishop of Rome, about the middle of the
fourth Century, was for the baptising of Infants. So was St. Ambrose. And to go
higher, though Tertullian seems to have been much of the same mind with
Nazianzen, as to the delaying their Baptism, yet his very Advice in this
matter, fairly implys, that it was then the general Custom to baptize Infants.
And he in other places affirms that of Baptism, which is a sound Argument for
admitting Infants to it, namely, that it is necessary to Salvation, and that
without it, none can enter into Heaven. Justin Martyr says, that the outward
Circumcision which was to be performed on the eighth day, was a Type of the
true Circumcision; that Christians received this true spiritual Circumcision by
Baptism, through God's Mercy, we having need of it, because all born Sinners, and
that it was free for all Persons to receive it Just. Mart. (...).
; and therefore he must include Infants as well as others. And to the same
purpose, Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, who was partly cotemporary with
Justin Martyr, both of them flourishing near the middle of the Second Century;
for he mentions, Infants, Children, young and old, as born again unto God by
Christ: Now it is notorious, that by being born again, or Regeneration, the
Fathers understand Baptism, which is called in the Scriptures also, as has been
already observed, The Laver of Regeneration. Nor is it any valid Objection,
that several in the Primitive Church did delay their Baptism, and some of them
to the Hour of Death; since this proves more than the Objectors would have it,
who are not for delaying it till this time; and besides they did this upon
particular Reasons See this elaborately handled by Mr. Walker in his excellent
Treatise of Infant Baptism.
some because they thought all Sins damnable which were committed after
Baptism; others, because they were of Opinion that Baptism purged away all Sin,
original and actual; and it may be more than either, because they were
unwilling to leave their Sins, and live a strict and an holy Life; but this no
more shows the deferring of Baptism to have been the received Doctrine of the
Church, than it is the Doctrine of the Church of England, that People may
without Sin absent themselves from the other Sacrament, because too many
actually do it, and it is to be feared for the same Reason, namely, lest they
should be obliged to forsake their Sins, and lead a better Life. But this, we
affirm, that there is not one Instance to be found in Antiquity of any Orthodox
Christian, who denied Baptism to Children, when brought to be baptized; and
believe we may be positive that not one of the Fathers, or ancient Writers, for
the first Eight Hundred Years at least, ever held it unlawful. And that it has
been the Practice of all the regular Churches ever since, is as clear and
manifest, whereas we know that whenever the Popish Errors were brought into the
Church, they were neither early, nor universally received. For, not only our
own Ancestors when first converted to Christianity, not only all our European
Churches, but the African too, formerly did, and still do baptize their
Children, both the Coptis in Egypt, and the Abyssines in Ethiopia; as well as
the Churches of Asia, and even those of St. Thomas, who had for many Ages,
scarce any Correspondence with our Parts of the World. The Matter of Fact being
thus cleared, we may reasonably conclude from it, that since Infant Baptism has
been generally received and practiced by the Church of God in all Places and
Ages; since we can track it up as high as those who lived in the purest Ages of
the Church, and were almost cotemporaries with some of the Apostles, (for
Polycarp, who was Irenaeus his Master, lived in some part of the First Century)
for these Reasons we cannot think it unlawful, we must believe as St. Austin
says, that it was certainly handed down from Christ and his Apostles, and that
as it has now continued without interruption in the Church of God for near
Seventeen Hundred Years, so it will by God's Grace continue therein, in like
manner, to the End of the World. Whereas on the contrary, it would follow that
if Infant-Baprism were not true Baptism, there has been yet no true Church
since our Savior, since there has been none which did not baptize Infants; no
entire Church which has thought it unlawful, though some private Persons should
have had private Opinions. Not even those of Piedmont, though it is true, they
often delaid Baptism when they could not have it without the superstitious
Appendages of the Romanists; and if there were any sheltered amongst them who
did wholly deny Baptism to Infants, they also denied Baptism it self, and the
other Sacrament. I shall close this Head, and the whole Argument for
Infant Baptism, with this one Remark; That if there be no true Church but that
of the Antipoedobaptists, that Promise has never yet been fulfilled, That Kings
should be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church; for they
never had but one King and Queen of their Opinion, and those they do not love
to hear of: Now, we are not to think that God has forgotten this Promise for
1700 Years together; nor will they affirm it, there having been many excellent
Kings and Princes. Protectors of Churches, which have baptized Infants, and
have been in their Infancy themselves baptized; whence it it follows, that
Infant Baptism is true Baptism, and that tthose are true Churches who use it if
there ever yet were any since our Savior.

XXI. To sum up the Evidence for Infant Baptism: If outward Baptism be
generally, and in an ordinary way necessary to Salvation; if Infants may be
saved as well as others, and we ought to neglect no means to save them. If our
Savior commands such to come, to be brought unto him, and did himself put his
Hands upon them, and bless them, and called them Believers, and says, That of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and was angry with those that would have kept
them from him, and said, It was better for any to have a Millstone tied about
his Neck and be cast into the Sea, than to offend them; and it be the greatest
Offense to keep them from Baptism, which is the Gate to the Church, and so to
Heaven; If the Children even of one believing Parent have Holiness, federal
Holiness, by their Parents Charter, and may have the beginnings of real actual
Holiness wrought in them by the Holy Ghost, because they have had extraordinary
Gifts, and are therefore much more capable of the ordinary; if they are capable
of making a Covenant, or having a Covenant made for them by others, with
Privileges and Obligations annexed; if they have right to be Members of a
Church; if they were in the Jewish Church, and even in Abraham's Covenant,
which was a Covenant of Faith, an Evangelical Covenant, and were never excluded
by Christ, who would rather give them new Privileges, than lessen the old; if
supposing our Savior had designed that Children should not be baptized, he
must have expressly and formally excepted them from Baptism, and have forbidden
his Apostles to baptize them, which otherwise they would certainly have done,
because the Jews did admit Children to be Proselytes by Baptism, as well as
grown Persons; and yet it is not so much as pretended that he ever did thus
forbid them; nay, he commanded his Apostles to make Disciples out of all
Nations by Baptism, as the Jews did before them; if it is highly probable, even
from the Letter of the sacred Scripture, that the Apostles did baptize
Children, because they frequently baptized whole Households, and it would be
strange if there should be no Children among them; and it was the way among the
Jews, to make Proselytes of whole Families, small and great together; if the
whole Church of God, has in all Places and Ages, for almost Seventeen Hundred
Years together, baptized Children, and continue it now, and were never opposed
till the last Century by some in Germany, who were far from being of the best
Characters, and if they were in the right, and we mistaken, it would follow,
that there has been no true Church since our Savior and his Apostles, and that
all the old Fathers, and Bishops, and our first Protestant Reformers, and
Martyrs were either deceived themselves, after their most diligent search for
the Truth, or else did delude wilfully, and deceive others: Lastly, if there
are so many high and inestimable Benefits conferred in Baptism, no less than
washing away the damning Guilt of original Sin, and weakening the Power of it,
by the application of our Savior's merits, the engrafting us into Christ, by
making us Members of his Church, and thereby giving us a right to all the
Graces and Promises of the Gospel, the beginning of Regeneration, the solemn
early sacramental Dedication of us to the Service of the blessed Trinity, all
which Infants are capable of, as well as grown Persons: If all this be true, as
I hope I have made it out from the Word of God, from good Reason, and from the
Judgment and Practice of the universal Church; then surely it follows, that
Infants may be baptized, that they ought to be baptized, that our Church does
well in baptising them, that the Universal Church has done well in baptising
them; that those do extremely ill who neglect it, that those are dangerously
mistaken who forsake the Church, because she continues in the true Faith,
Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, and yet deny not to communicate with
those who hold dangerous and damnable Heresies, who some of them deny the Lord
that bought them, by denying the Divinity of our Savior, who many of them
believe, affirm, and too many teach, that the Soul sleeps till the
Resurrection: As on the other side, it will follow, that those are in a safe
and happy Condition, who lead a Holy Life, and continue in the Fellowship of
the regular established Church of this Nation, a sound Member of the Universal
Church of Christ; and therefore, though some may leave it, though many live
unworthy of it, yet we are assured Christ will not forsake his own, he will not
forget his Promises, it is founded on the Rock of Ages, and we trust, the Gates
of Hell shall never prevail against it.

XXII. Having thus established the Truth in Controversy, I come to answer
those Objections which are commonly brought against it, though indeed they may be
all, or most of them easily answered from what has been already said, and an
honest, and well meaning Christian, may be well established in the Faith, and
yet not fit for doubtful Disputations, which are to be left to those who have
more Learning, Time and Ability to manage them.

XXIII. I think their main Objection, and which they most frequently make use
of, is drawn from the mistaken Interpretation and Application of our Savior's
words to his Disciples, in the 28 of St. Matthew and 19. Go and teach all
Nations, baptising them in the Name of the Father, etc. Here, say they,
Teaching is put before Baptising whence they argue that all Persons ought to be
taught before they are baptized, and that since Infants are incapable of being
taught, they are also incapable of Baptism

In answer, 1. The Order of Words is no certain Rule for the Order of things,
either in common Speech, or in Scripture: We usually say, a Man was bred and
born in such a place (and the Latins accordingly, nutrit, peperitque) by a
common Figure: and many Instances of the same nature might be given from the
Scripture, which as the Rabbis tell us, speaks with the Tongue of the Sons of
Men. Instances we have of this in the first of St. Mark, v. 4. John did baptize
in the Wilderness, and preach the Baptism of Repentance. Again, v. 5. They were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their Sins. Now either the Order of Words
in Scripture, does not always infer the same Order of Things, or else it
follows that St. John did baptize before he preached, and before his Hearers
Confession and Repentance. Again, it is said in St. Mark 1. 15. Repent and
believe the Gospel. But Repentance does not always go before Faith, for Faith
rather in order of Time as well as of Nature, precedes Repentance, because the
Belief of the Promises, and Threatenings of the Gospel, is that which induces
Sinners to repent. Last of all; the place is certainly mistranslated. For
whereas we read, Go and teach all Nations, baptising them. And again, Teaching
them to observe all things, etc. which makes a plain Tautology, or improper and
undecent Repetition of the same Word in the same Sense; it ought to be
rendered, Go and make Disciples of all Nations by Baptising them. This is plain
from the very Construction of the Words. (...), etc. where (...) must agree
with (...), included in the Verb (...); but if it had only been teach or preach
to all Nations, baptising them, it might have agreed with (...), and must have
been (...), not (...), Now that (...) signifies (...), to proselyte, or make
Proselytes, Disciple, or make Disciples, has been sufficiently proved by
Learned Men who have wrote on this Controversy This is now owned by the
Antipedobaptists themselves, for Dr. Russel in the late Dispute at Gosport,
renders the word, Disciple, or make Disciples.
; the word (...) of the same signification, being here used by the Syriack, but
the word (...) in the 20 v. which answers the Greek (...), truly rendered
Teaching. But that Children are capable of being made Proselytes, has been
already proved, as they are of being further taught, when they are by Baptism
entered into the School of Christ.

XXIV. Their next Objection is taken from those Expressions in Scripture,
Repent and be baptized; believe and be baptized. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, and the like; whence they argue, as before, that Faith
and Repentance are to go before Baptism.

In answer; as to the order of the words, we have already proved that there is
nothing in it, though it is not denied, but that where a Person is capable of
making an actual Declaration of Faith and Repentance, he is obliged to do it
before Baptism. And such were those adult, or grown Persons to whom the Gospel
was at first preached, as Oral Profession was required by the Jews of adult
Proselytes; and the same does our Church require in the most solemn manner of
those who are baptized when of riper Age. But neither God or Man require more
of any than they are capable of performing: Nor is therefore such an actual
personal Declaration of their Faith and Repentance required of Infants.
Repentance, indeed, they need none, for any actual Sin; Faith they may have in
Principle, though they cannot outwardly express it. This is therefore done by the
Church in their Names, by the intervention of Sureties, who may lawfully and
usefully stipulate for them, and they remain obliged by such a stipulation,
Parents being naturally, these voluntarily bound to see to the pious Education
of such Children, toward which they cannot have too many helps: And would all
who have undertaken this solemn and weighty Charge, be but truly careful to
perform it, which without grievous Sin, they cannot neglect, would they do what
they promised for them, which surely is not impossible or very difficult to be
done; would they call upon these Children to hear Sermons, see that they
learned their Catechism, and do their best to have them brought up in the Fear
of God and fitted for Confirmation; and brought unto it, when of sufficient Age
and Understanding, there to discharge their Sureties, and to take the baptismal
Vow upon themselves, in order to receive the other Sacrament, we should soon
see another Face of Christianity among us, and I believe, few things would go
further in silencing the Objections which are brought either against baptising
Infants, or against our peculiar Form of Baptism.

XXV. Another Objection against Infant Baptism is, that there is no express
Command for it in Scripture; one positive Text, say they, would End all the
Dispute. On which they argue farther, that God was angry with his own People
because they did that, which, says he, I commanded them not, neither came it
not into my Heart; and the like in other places. Ier. 7. 31.

In Answer, as to what they so often affirm, that one positive Text for
Infant Baptism would end the Controversy, we have great Reason to question the
Truth of it; for it is as positively commanded in the New Testament (though were
it only in the Old, and not a part of the ceremonial or political Law, none but
Manichees would deny it, or a fair Consequence from it) it is, I say, as
positively commanded, that Christians should teach and admonish. one another in
Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing to the Lord with Grace in their
Hearts, Ephesians. 5. 14. as it is to Honor our Father and Mother: But yet, these
Persons absolutely refuse to do it, and they not only object against our way of
singing, but they are against any outward singing at all, and never practice it
in Religious Worship but are angry with us, and with some few of their own, who
still keep up that most heavenly part of God's Service See Grantham's Works,
and Axe to the Root.
. So strange a Power has an inveterate Prejudice, which will neither yield to
the Practice of all the Churches of God, nor to plain Scripture, Experience or
Reason.

But to let that pass, as to their requiring an express Command for
Infant Baptism, we answer, it is unreasonable to ask it, when they themselves
do practice some things for which there is neither Command, nor so much as any
clear Example in the Holy Scripture; as for Instance, the change of the
Sabbath; the admitting Women to the Lord's Supper, and even to Baptism, for
which last, they have no express Command, and, I think, but one Example. For
Baptism, they say that Women are included under all Nations, and we say the
same of Children, but neither are expressly named. As for admitting Women to the
Lord's Supper, we are not sure from express Words of Scripture, that ever any
Woman did receive it. They have in vain attempted to bring one express Text for
it, though there is no more doubt that they did receive, than that the Apostles
did baptize Infants. Nor can they evince any Example of Women's receiving from
the first and second Chapters of the Acts, where it is said, That the Apostles
continued in Prayer and Supplication with the Women; and afterward, 'That
those that believed continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking
Bread from House to House. For that place where the Women are expressly
mentioned relates only to Prayer and Supplication, not to the Lord's Supper;
and for the latter place, where those that believed are said to be together,
breaking Bread, its all along spoken of Men in the original See this Matter
fully cleared in Mr. Walker's Appendix to his Discourse of Infant Baptism.
; as St. Peter when he preached that Sermon which converted so many Thousands,
addressed himself to the Men only, Men of Israel, ver. 22. and Men and
Brethren, ver. 29.

And if Women and Sisters were included under Men and Brethren, may not we as
well argue that some of the twelve Apostles were Women, because those who were
convinced by St. Peter's Sermon, said to him and to the rest of the Apostles,
Men and Brethren what shall we do? ver. 37.

Nor is there any more express Command for admitting Women to the Communion,
than there is Example. The place that is pleaded for it comes short of proof;
Let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread 1 Cor. 11. 28.
. For though the word Men does in the original include both Sexes, yet what
follows, binds it to the Masculine only, the word Himself, being of the
Masculine Gender (...).
.

Since then they admit Women to the Communion without any express Command or
Example, but only by Consequences from Scripture, they can never show any
Reason why Infants should not be admitted to Baptism, when there are so many
Scriptures which, as has been proved, do by fair Consequence, show they have a
right unto it, and are capable of it. As for those places wherein God reproves
his People for doing what he never commanded them, it is evident that it is
only a way of Speech common to the Hebrews, which signifies his express
forbidding them to do such things, particularly that in Jeremy, as what goes
before makes fully evident. They have built the high places of Tophet, to burn
their Sons and their Daughters in the Fire, which I commanded them not. Now God
had expressly forbidden them to do this, and that on pain of Death Lev. 18. 21,
29. and Deuteronomy. 13. per tot.
But surely, there is a difference between the Jews offering their Sons and
Daughters to Devils, and Christians offering theirs to God, which even those
do, who will not Baptize them, though they have no more express Command for it,
than we have for their Baptism, or than they themselves for admitting Women to
the Communion.

XXVI. Having thus given a short Account of the Nature of Baptism, laid down
the Grounds of the Churches Practice in baptising Infants, and given, I hope, a
satisfactory Answer to the most plausible Objections against this Practice, I
shall conclude this small Treatise with an earnest Request to all those who
were baptized in their Infancy, that they would always remember the Vows of God
that are upon them, and evidence the same by their Care, to fulfill what they
have so solemnly promised; To renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and
steadfastly believe God's Word, and obediently keep his Commandments. That they
would continue steadfastly in the Doctrine and Fellowship which is so agreeable
to the Apostolical Practice, and to the Word of God. And lastly, That they
would by no means forget to pray earnestly for their mistaken Brethren, That
God would please to bring into the way of Truth, all such as have erred and are
deceived. That he would take away all Pride, Uncharitableness, Prejudice and
Blindness, and whatever may hinder godly Union and Concord. That as we have but
one Lord, and one Faith, so we may have but one Baptism, that so we may come in
the Unity of the Faith, and the Knowledge of the Son of God, to true Christian
perfection, to the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ. To whom with
the Father and Holy Ghost, Three and One, be Glory in the Church throughout all
Ages.

Amen! Amen!
The Great Hallel or Paschal Hymn, which was sung by the Jews at the Passover,
and by our Savior and his Apostles at the Institution of the Lord's Supper,
consisting of Psalms 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118. The two former were sung
toward the Beginning of the Feast, the rest at the End of it Lightfoot' s Vol.
II. page 258, 260.
. The first of these Psalms (the 113.) is still used by the Tigurine Churches
at the Communion Tigurine Liturgy, p. 116.
. And any of them, as they are here turned into Meter, may be sung, either in
Private, or by a Family, before or after Sacrament.
PSALM CXIII.
The same Tune with that in the old Version.
1. YE Priests of God, whose happy Days
Are spent in your Creators Praise,
Still more and more his Fame express!
Ye pious Worshippers, proclaim,
With Shouts of Joy his Holy Name,
Nor satisfied with Praising, bless!
2. 3. Let God's high Praises ay resound,
Beyond old Times too scanty Bound,
And through eternal Ages pierce;
From where the Sun first gilds the Streams,
To where he sets with purple Beams,
Through all the outstretcht Universe.
4. The various Tribes of Earth obey
God's awful and imperial Sway;
Nor Earth his boundless Power confines:
Above the Sun's all-cheering Light,
Above the Stars, and far more bright
His pure essential Glory shines.
5. 6. What Mortal, formed of Dust and Clay,
What Idol, even more weak than they,
Can with the God of Heaven compare!
Pure Angels round his glorious Throne
He stoops to view, nor those alone,
Even Earth born Men his Goodness share.
7. 8. The Poor he raises from the Dust,
The Needy if on him they trust
From sordid Want and Shame he will raise;
That they with mighty Princes placed
With Wealth, and Power, and Honor graced
May sing aloud their Savior's praise.
9. The Barren Womb, whose Hopes were past
His boundless Power unseals at last,
And saves her Memory and Fame:
He fills the House with hopeful Boys
Who their glad Mother's Heart rejoice;
O therefore praise his Holy Name.
PSAM CXIV.
Like the CXLVIII.
1. 2. WHen ransomed Israel came
From faithless Egypt's bands
The House of Jacob's Name
From hostile foreign Lands;
Judah alone
God's holy Place,
And Israel's Grace
Was his bright Throne.
3. 4. Amazed old Ocean saw,
And to its Chambers fled,
While Iordan's Streams withdraw,
To seek their distant Head:
Tall Mountains bound
Like jocund Rams,
The Hills like Lambs
Skipt lightly round.
5. 6. What ailed thee, O thou Sea
To leave thy ancient Bed?
Why did old Jordan flee
And seek its distant Head?
Ye Mountains why
Leapt ye like Rams
While Hills like Lambs
Skipt lightly by?
7. 8. All Natures utmost bound
The God of Jacob own!
Where Sea or Land is found
Fall trembling at his Throne;
At whose Command,
Hard Rocks distill
A Crystal Rill,
And drench the Sand.
PSALM CXV.
Like the C.
1. NOT unto us! we all disclaim:
Glory alone to God's blessed Name!
Whose Truth shall stand for ever fast,
Whose Love to endless Ages last.
2. Why should the insulting Heathens Pride,
Our Hopes alike and him deride?
Where is your God, why should they cry
Ye Hebrew Slaves! O Savior, why?
3. Blasphemers know he reigns above,
And soon will your vain hopes remove:
He all Events disposes still,
And all obey his Sovereign Will.
4. Not so the Gods to whom they pray,
Of Silver and of Gold are they:
To whom in vain their Vows are paid,
Adoring what their Hands have made.
5. Though Mouths they have, yet all their Art
Can neither Breath nor Speech impart:
Nor can they turn their useless Eyes
On those who kneel and sacrifice.
6. Though loud their Slaves for succor cry,
They neither hear nor make reply;
Nor can their Nostrils ought receive,
Though they rich Clouds of Incense give.
7. 8. The Bolts they wield they cannot throw,
Their Feet can neither move nor go:
With neither Breath nor Sense, nor more
Who them erect, and them adore.
9. The Rock of Israel is not so
In whom we trust, and whom we know;
Still trust his watchful Providence
Who is our help and strong Defense.
10. Ye Priests of God who daily bring
Incense and Praise to Heavens high King,
O trust in that Almighty Friend
Who still will help and still defend.
11. 12. He Will such whose hope on him is staid
Against all Fears and Dangers aid:
Still he will his Love on Israel place,
Still smile on Aaron's sacred Race.
12. Those who from Regions wide away
Their Vows at his High Altar pay,
In vain they shall not thither come,
But go with Blessings laden home.
14. Their pious Children too shall share,
The Almighty's Kindness and his Care;
Whose wondrous Bounty shall extend
To future Days, and know no end.
15. O happy Israel! who partake
His Blessings who the World did make:
16. Who over the Heavens triumphant rides,
And Earth's wide Globe to Man divides.
17. 18. The silent Dead no Praises give,
But we who by his Favor live,
While we have Breath will Offerings bring,
And grateful Hallelujahs sing.
PSALM CXVI.
Like the XCV.
1. O God, who when I did complain
Did all my Griefs remove;
O Savior! do not now disdain
My humble Praise and Love!
2. Since thou a gentle Ear did give
And hear me when I prayed,
I Will call upon thee while I live
And never doubt thine Aid.
3. Pale Death with all its ghastly Train
My Soul encompast round;
Anguish, and woe, and hellish Pain,
Too soon, alas! I found.
4. Then to the Lord of Life I prayed,
And did for succor flee:
O save in my distress, I said,
The Soul that trusts in thee!
5. 6. How good and just! how large his Grace!
How easy to forgive!
The simple he delights to raise,
And by his Love I live.
7. Then, O my Soul, be still, nor more
With anxious Thoughts distressed!
God's bounteous Love does thee restore,
To wonted ease and rest.
8. 9. My Eyes no longer drowned in Tears,
My Feet from stumbling free,
Redeemed from Death and deadly Fears,
O Lord, I Will live to thee.
10. When nearest pressed, I still believed,
11. Still glori'd in thy Aid;
Though when by faithless Men deceived
All, all are false I said.
12. To him what Offerings shall I make,
Whence my Salvation came?
The Cup of Blessing (...).
now I Will take,
13. And call upon his Name.
14. Those Vows which in my greatest straits
Unto the Lord I made,
Shall now be at his Temple Gates,
Before his People paid.
15. That Life which thou, O Lord, did save,
From raging Tyrants free,
16. That ransomed Life thy Bounty gave,
I dedicate to thee.
17. My Heart and Voice at once I Will raise,
Thy Goodness to proclaim:
With loud and grateful Songs (...).
of Praise,
I Will call upon thy Name.
18. Yes, all those Vows which in my straits,
Unto the Lord I made;
Shall now be at his Temple Gates,
Before his People paid.
19. His Priests shall mix their Hymns with mine,
His Goodness to record;
And all Jerusalem shall join,
With me to praise the Lord.
PSALM CXVII.
1. YE Nations who the Globe divide,
Ye numerous People scattered wide,
To God your grateful Voices raise.
2. To all his boundless Mercy shown,
His Truth to endless Ages known,
Require our endless Laud and Praise.
Doxology.
To him who reigns enthroned on high,
To his dear Son who deigned to die.
Our Guilt and Errors to remove:
To that blessed Spirit who Grace imparts,
And rules in all believing Hearts,
Be endless Glory, Praise and Love.
PSALM CXVIII.
1. GLad Hymns and Songs of Praise rehearse,
To th'Maker of the Universe,
Whose Goodness does so far extend,
Whose wondrous Mercy knows no End.
2. Let Israel, now no more oppressed,
With Quiet and with Plenty blessed,
Praise him who all their Bliss did send
Whose wondrous Mercy knows no End.
3. Let Aaron's Sons who round his Throne,
In sacred Hymns his Goodness own;
While his blessed Service they attend,
Confess his Mercy knows no End.
4. Let all who with Religious Fear,
Approach his Gates, and every Year,
With Gifts fair Sion's Hill ascend,
Confess his Mercy knows no End.
5. With deep distress encompast round,
To him I cried, and succor found;
He me from Exile did retrieve,
And safe, and free as Air I live.
6. He Is on my side, and I Will despise,
7. The Efforts of all my Enemies;
8. On him it is safer to rely,
9. Than Princes who may fail or die.
10. Though Troops of Foes besieged me round,
11. As angry Insects swarming sound,
12. Their short lived Mischief I can scorn,
Noise without Strength, like Fire in Thorn.
13. At once they charged and pressed me all,
Yet staid by God, I could not fall.
14. My Savior he, to whom belongs,
The Tribute of my grateful Songs.
15. Nor shall my single Thanks be paid,
Lend me, ye Saints! O lend your Aid;
Let Health and Joy be spread around,
With Praise let your glad Gates resound.
16. God's own Right Hand has Wonders wrought,
And conquered those against him fought.
17. He smiles, and grants me happier Days,
And here I now my Savior praise.
18. Heavy his angry Strokes did fall,
But ah! I well deserved 'em all:
Yet in the Confines of Despair
And Death, he found and saved me there.
19. Now to his Holy House returned,
Who late a helpless Exile mourned
Through the Everlasting Gates I Will go,
And pay him part of what I owe.
20. 21. A pious Crowd I Will with me bring,
And with glad Heart my Savior sing:
22. That Stone the Builders once displaced,
Now to the Corner's Head is raised.
23. God's Hand the great Event has wrought,
Wondrous and passing human Thought;
24. This is the Day the Lord has made,
Therein let all our Vows be paid.
25. Still hear and save! O still defend,
And heavenly Joy and Comfort send.
26. Blessed be he who will Blessings bring,
Pardon and Grace from Heavens high King.
We who from his high Altar bless,
Will for his People ask Success;
27. He from the Confines of Despair,
Has raised us to the Lightsome Air.
Let the crowned Victims haste away,
And Thousands after Thousands slay:
Wash the broad Courts with sacred Gore,
Till Bashan's Fields can send no more.
28. And what thou valuest far above,
Thee, O my God! I Will Praise and Love;
29. Whose Goodness does so far extend,
Whose wondrous Mercy knows no End.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-Luce
over against St. Dunstan's- Church in Fleetstreet.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem:
dedicated to her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. each Book illustrated by necessary Notes, explaining all the more
difficult Matters in the whole History: Also a Prefatory Discourse concerning
Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition revised by the Author, and improved with the
Addition of a Large Map of the Holy Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters;
with Sixty Copper Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorn. Folio.

Linguae Romans Dict. Luculentum Novum. A New Dictionary in five Alphabets.
Representing first, the English Words and Phrases before the Latin. Second, The
Latin Classic before the English. Third, The Latin Proper Names of Persons,
Countries, etc. Fourth, The Latin Barbarous. Fifth, The Law-Latin. The whole
completed and improved from the several Works of Stephens, Cooper, Gouldman,
Holyoke, Dr Littleton; a large Manuscript in three Volumes of Mr. John Milton,
etc. In the Use of all which for greater Exactness, recourse has always been
had to the Authors themselves.

Cole's Dictionary in Octavo, Eng. Lat. and Lat. and Eng.

The Pantheon; representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes, in a short, plain and familiar Method, by way of
Dialogue. Written by F. Pomey. For the Use of Schools. The Second Edition;
wherein the Whole Translation is Revised and much amended, and the Work is
illustrated and adorned with elegant Copper-Cuts of the several Deities, etc.

The Lives of the Roman Emperors from Demitian, where Suetonius ends, to
Constantine the Great. Containing those of Nerva and Trajan from Dion Cassius:
A Translation of the Six Writers of the Augustean History. And those of
Dioclesian and his Associates, from Eusebius and others, with the Heads of the
Emperors in Copper Plates; dedicated to His most Sacred MAJESTY. In two
Volumes. By John Bernard, A. M.

English Examples to Lily's Grammar Rules for Children's Latin Exercises, with
an Explanation to each Rule. For the Use of Eton School.

Gratii Falisci Cynegeticon, cum Poematio Cognomine M. A. Olympii Nemesiani
Carthaginensis; Notis perpetuis variisque Lectionibus adernavit Tho. Johnson,
M. A. Accedunt Hier. Fracastorii Alcon. Carmen Pastoritium: Jo. Caii de Canibus
Libellus. Ut and Opusculum vetus (...) dict. seu de Cura Canum incerto Auctore.


