Here the Author did intend to have placed his Effigies and Coat of Arms, but
the exact Sculpture thereof being so chargeable, and his Sufferings so great,
for which he has yet no recompense, he is enforced to be frugal in expenses;
and therefore entreats the gentle Reader to accept of the Verses that he
composed to be printed underneath the same; and courteously to correct the
Printers Errata.
These are the Verses.
This Figure here does lively represent
A Courage bold, but clearly Innocent,
Not prone to injure feeble Age, nor Youth,
But ever zealous to divulge the Truth;
Who Schism and horrid Treason did defy,
And unto Heaven for Truth and Justice cry;
Who for his love to Englands King and Church
Has been despised, reviled and suffered much;
Yet Truth of worth, and Honor gained so,
By being dubbed the Tyrant R^bell's so.
Peruse this Book, and you may surely see
Some Signal Emblems of His Loyalty.
J. W.
Fidelitatis Feodum Felicitas.
To the most Illustrious, High and Mighty MAJESTY of CHARLES the II: By the
Grace of God KING of Great Britain, France and Ireland; Defender of the Faith,
etc.

The Humble Declaration of JOHN VVENLOCK of Langham, in the County of Essex
Esquire, an V^ter Barrister of near Forty years continuance, in that Honorable
Society of Lincolnes-Inne.

Being first A Supplicatory Preface and Discourse to His Majesty, and then
humbly showing the great and dangerous Troubles and intolerable Oppressions of
Himself and His Family, and the true occasion thereof, in the woeful Times of
these late most unhappy Distractions.

Wherein the perfect Loyalty of a true Subject, and the perfideous malice and
cruelty of a Rebel, are evidently deciphered, and severally set forth to the
public view in their proper colors, as a Caution for England.

Hereunto are annexed certain Poems, and other Treatises, composed and written
by the Author upon several Occasions, concerning the late most horrid and
distracted Times, and never before published.

Nemo plus videtur aestimare virtutem, nemo magis illi esse devotus, quam qui
boni viri famam perdidit, ne conscientiam perderet. Sen. 72. Ep. Fortitudo tua,
fiducia fidelis conscitnciae. Bern. Conscientia mala, been sperare non potest.
Aug. London, Printed by T. Child, and L. Parry, for the Author, and are to be
sold at most Booksellers shops in London and Westminster Hall. 16^2.

ERRATA.
IN Page 9. l. 2. for are, read us. in p. 13. l. 23. for happily, r. unhappily.
in p. 14. l. 11. for, for any, r. or for any. in p. 18. l. 1. for gratitude, r.
gratuitie. in l. 6. for stickle, r. strive. l. 11. for works, r. words. l. 19.
for defection, r. defects. in p. 29. l. 11. for months, r. twelve months. p.
30. in the title, for demeans, r. demeanor. in p. 34. the last line but one,
for, to themselves, r. to the ruin of themselves. in p. 35. l. 14 for to
honored, r. to be honored. p. 37. l. 21. for four, r. forty. p. 38. l. 12.
for there, r. and there. p. 40. for very proper, r. prime and proper. l. 19.
and p. 52. for nor, r. and. p. 56. l. 1. for fanings, r. failings. p. 64. l.
37. for coarse. r. course.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the High and Mighty Majesty OF Charles the II. By
the Grace of GOD King of Great Britain, etc. Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Royal, Religious, and Sacred Sovereign,
WHen I had first most humbly presented my petition to your Majesty upon the
Long Gallerie stairs toward St. James his park in Trinity Term 1660. I did
presently implore your Majesty to be pleased but to peruse the same, and then
my self your poor subject should reap abundance of satisfaction therein; and
your Majesty's gracious answer unto me was, with a reiteration of these words,
I shall, I shall, and within less then an hour after, I did hear, that your
Majesty had performed your princely promise, for which I have ever since
desired to render to your Grace, the most humble and hearty thanks of a loyal
and grateful subject: And now most humbly prostrating my self at the feet of
your Maj^sties clemency again, I do most submissely and earnestly beg at your
gracious hands one favor more, beseeching your Majesty to be pleased to accept
of and to patronize these my weak endeavors, which most humbly and thankfully
I do Dedicate and present to your Grace; beseeching your Majesty to vouchsafe
the perusal of this Treatise, at some time when the heavy burden of those so
serious, and urgent affairs imposed upon you, will admit of an intermission:
and so your Majesty shall be truly informed what my condition is and has
been; which being once known to your Grace, I shall rest in abundance of quiet,
and with alacrity submit to such success, as the good Providence and will of
God, and your gracious Pleasure shall thereupon suffer to be produced; Royal
Sir, I am one of those, that have been a Cordial loving and obedient Subject*
in my Duty and Allegiance to your Royal and Religious Father and Grandfather
of glorious and blessed Memory, yet my Fate was never hitherto so propitious,
as to afford me any further favor then the common protection of a Subject: and
if the unhappiness of the Times, by the occasion of our sins, had not late
deprived us of that royal Favor, then in all probability I might have been in
such a posture before this time, as I should not now have been necessitated, to
seek an Office, to maintain me in my old Age: But I have almost been bereaved
of all my means and practice from my Age of 40 years to 60. the best time of
proficiencie in all a man's life: and yet I praise God for it, I can with a good
comfort and courage say to your Majesty that I am no absolute Beggar, but only
in Relation to God, and your good Grace, that is his lawful and undoubted
Deputy here upon the Earth; for by means of Gods mercy, and your Majesty's so
happy and Fortunate Access to your just and Royal rights, I am still in
lawful possession of an Estate in Lands, which although it be but small* yet
it is of a Noble Tenure, being late holden of your Majesty by a whole Knights
Fee, and which has lineally been enjoyed by my Ancestors, and continued in my
name, for the space of near 500. years, ever since the Reign of King Henry the
3d. and that is more then some great Ones are able to assert, and certainly a
blessing has been upon it, in the so long continuance thereof, being at first
honestly bought with their Money, and a Bargain I think more justifiable, then
some kind of purchasing either of Honor or Offices: And although my name be at
present and of late in some obs^uritie, yet it has not been always so in the
times of Antiquit^e for in the Reign of that Valiant and Famous Prince King
Edward the 1. there lived one of my name which had the Honor to be Lord high
Treasurer of England, and in the Reigns of King Henry the 6th and King Edward
the 4th there was another of my name, that was a Knight of the Garter, and of
the Rhodes, and also a Noble and warrlike Baron of Wenlock in the County of
Salop, from which place my Ancestors were first derived, and had their
Extraction, as appears by Ancient evidence and Records; I shall be heartily
glad if I can but make your Matie to smile at these my Relations, but I entreat
your Majesty to believe that it is not fondly a vain glorious humor, that
prompts me to relate these things, but my desire is to give a gentle caution to
some gilded Mushromes or pursie supercillious Upstarts of the new edition that
esteem themselves to be the only brave men, d^spising others, that are brought
low by their sufferings, and contemning all learning and loyalty, that is
destitute of a golden key, which they corruptly conceive to be the only means
to open the doorlock, that leads to preferrment; but your Majesty well knows,
how and when to conferr your Favors, and though some of your Majesty's
suffering Friends are not looked upon so soon as they expected, yet their hopes
are still firm enough, and we know, that, Deside^^ta diu dulcius obtinentur,
and we can wait with patience, but must not be too negligent, pe^entis
negligentia reprehend^tur ubi de dantis miserecordia non du^itatur, and of your
Majesty's mercy there is sound experience, and it is a prime policy for your
Grace in convenient time to reward Loyalty, for in so doing it will give
Occasion to others to have the better esteem thereof, Regis ad exemplar totus
componitur orbis, but if virtue be now neglected and let pass without regard,
how few hereafter will ever endeavor to be good in so bad times? and one
says, that both pity and sin it were, that such whose light the late
Egyptian Darkness could never extinguish, should now be suffered to sit in
obscurity. Some perhaps that shall read this book, will take my expressions to
be rash and violent, savouring more of animosity, then prudence, but when
Croesus his life was in danger it made his dumb son to speak and cry out: and
when the King the Father of our Country, the Church our Mother, and the peace
of the whole Kingdom, were so treacherously exposed to the danger of utter
ruin, what true hearted Son or Subject, could be so supinely silent, as not
bitterly to reprove such horrid actions* Quitacet consentire vide^ur: but such
as have tasted any true relish of Religion, do well know, they must not be
mutes in matters of such moment: Dissimulation may serve the turn for a time,
and in the view of a carnal eye it may seem to procure some good, but we ought
not to do evil that good may come thereof; Hypocrisy is a sin so odious in
the sight of God, and so contrary to his divine nature (who is truth it self)
as those that practice the same, can never expect to be matriculated members of
the celestial Society; but such as wait for their souls comfort, must be
content to forsake all, rather then to part with a good conscience, and so
endanger the soul; But I fear that too many of late, have stifled their
Consciences, to keep their estates and maintain their reputation amongst the
Vulgar, but such policy will not allways go away with the Garland: it was well
said of a Noble Spaniard once in England, that he would never forfeit his Soul
and his Honor, to save his Life; and indeed some brave Spirits, but mere
Moralists, have thought it a more Noble Exploit, to preserve Honor then Life,
and could never buckle to any dishonorable thing, but in despite of Ambition,
and desire of gain, or the pressures of Necessity, they have still resolved to
tread in the path^s of Virtue. And how many Heathens, as Codrus a King of
Athens, Cur^ius a Noble Knight of Rome and almost infinite others recorded in
History, have freely exposed themselves to unavoidable danger and death, for
the good and safety of their Country, whose memory ever since has been
immortal; and can Christians adventure upon any design too dangerous, when the
glory of God, the Honor and Power of his sacred Deputy, and the ^eligion and
Peace of their native Nation, lay all in the dust involved in blood? Pardon my
presumption I beseech your Majesty in what I have here inserted amiss, or
unworthy the view of so roial and exquisite an ^i^: and then I cannot but be
confident, that your Grace will take some piti^ upon me, being now grown into
years, and disabled by my great sufferings and losses to put on and prefer my
self, as some others ^^, for I find the Poet to be a true Prophet, that long
(...) said, Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusti domi --
but this defect may soon be supplied by the least glimpse of your Majesty's
favor: and I am sure your Majesty well knows that it is the Masters honor
to take notice of a faithful s^rvant; and that such as dare declare and stand
to the truth in bad times of danger are none of the worst subjects. And I doubt
not but that your Majesty in due time, will most roially perform whatsoever
your loial and loving subjects may in truth of modesty and justice expect from
your gracious bands: and that your Grace shall attain unto and accomplish all
those happy and blessed intents and ends for the which your Omnipotent Creator
has so justly and mercifully restored and advanced your Grace, to the glorious
throne of your so eminent Ancestors: Where God* grant that your Majesty and
your Roial posterity may safely sit and triumphantly reign to Gods glory,
the Churches peace, and these Kingdoms happiness, even so long as the Sun and
Moon shall shine upon the face of the earth. So will ever Pray*

Your Majesty's Loyal, Humble, and Officious Subject, John Wenlock.

To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty.
Most Royal and Magnificent Monarch, and my Sovereign Lord:
IT is a Proverb of the Wisest amongst Earthly Princes, that righteous lips are
the delight of Kings, and they love him that speaks right: for he that speaks
the truth, shows forth righteousness; and all such a^ be true in heart,
shall follow the same: and there is good reason for their Encouragement to
proceed on in such a Virtuous way as tends to eternal felicity, for
certainly the time will come, when that saying of the Psalmist, will be
verified, and made manifest to the World; There is sprung up a light for the
righteous, and joyful gladness for such as be true hearted: and the Lord God
likewise lays up sound Wisdom for the righteous, and is a sure Buckler for
them that walk uprightly; for the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom,
and a good understanding or success have all they that do his Commandments the
praise of it endures for ever. And this was truly experimented in that worthy
and religious Esquire of the body to that mighty Monarch Darius, when he
contended with his fellows, which of them should write the wisest sentence: It
was the desire of his soul to be instrumental toward the re-edifying of the
decayed Temple and City of Jerusalem; and in respect of those good desires, it
pleased the good spirit of God to inspire so much Wisdom and Understanding
into his heart, a^ when the Conclusive part of his sentence (which was, That
above all things truth bears away the Victory) came into consideration before
the wise and mighty Princes, he then who had undertaken the patronage and
desence of truth, was without contradiction applauded to be the wisest man, by
that general shout of the People; great is truth and mighty above all things:
and we need not doubt, since* by the alon^* mercy of God, those dark and
prodigious Clouds of Ignorance, perversity, and sedition, that have so long
obnub^lated the understanding of this Nation, do in some measure begin to be
now dispelled, by the Glorious splendour, and sunshine of your Majesty's most
gracious, and long-desired presence, but that such of your true and loving
Subjects, as with loyal hearts, and sincere and just expressions, though with
seeble hands and weak abilities, do now cordially endeavor to employ their
talents, and lend their aid by the casting of a mite into the Kingdoms
treasury, toward the rebuilding of that Sacred Temple of truth and peace
amongst us; shall never want the happy influence of your Majesty's good
countenance and protection: nor the favorable censure of any that have but
ventured to keep themselves immaculate, or but lately learned to be unspotted
lovers, and mainteiners of the truth. For whosoever he be that has attained
any sound notion of truth, must of necessity love the same in his inward parts,
neither dares he at any time forsake or deny the defense thereof. For indeed
God himself and his Word is the truth that every true Christian to his power
ought to justify and defend, and if any person be so Sacrilegious as to deny
this, he may too soon find it to be true, that he which denies the truth, does
deny God who is truth it self; and our Savior says, That if they deny him
before men, he will deny them before his Father which is in Heaven.

Most Royal Sir, I humbly crave your Gracious pardon for my presumption, in
thus boldly vindicating the truth; for the sincere maintaining whereof, both my
self and all mine (all circumstances duly considered) have as deerly and deeply
suffered, as any other, that have escaped with their lives: And I doubt not,
but that I may with a safe Conscience, and without Ostentation speak it, that I
have always endeavored to the uttermost of my Abilities, and upon all
occasions, to do and perform both unto your Majesty's blessed Father, and also
to your Royal self; far more cordial and constant services, then many others
that now participate of the bright Beams of your glory, but I do envy no man's
happiness; nay let them take all since my Lord the King is now returned home
in peace. And as your Majesty's happy access^ to your just and indubitable
rights, of the Crown of England will I trust add some repose, and tranquillity
to my poor aged body, and mean Estate; so above that I desire, if it please God
to be at peace and quiet in my mind, at which Haven of happiness and content,
I should scareely ever have arrived, if I had not made the Adventure, of thus
rendering these intiinsecal thoughts and conceptions of my mind to the public
view: Neither could I devise otherwise, how I might make your Majesty and
other Worthies of the Nation acquainted, with the truth of my demeanor and
sufferings, which I much desired to publish, to the intent also, that some who
are deeply drowned in the oblivion of their sins, may hereby if they please, be
put in mind of the ugly deformed shape, and the base and absurd malitiousnesse
of Rebellion: and truly to repent of their former Follies, and do no more so;
and that my Posterity and others, by mine Example, may be encouraged to the
imitation of my Loyalty, and faithfulness in succeeding ages. But I confess
that formerly I had good Friends, which might and would (if they were now
extant) have commended the truth of my Condition, to your Majesty's Royal and
Religious consideration: but the change of times, and death has deprived me of
such comfortable Assistance; and being I was made to reprove others, I am now
in a manner lest Friendlesse alone, and am as a byword and wonder unto many:
and yet no wonder it is, Libere enim and sine adulatione veritatem
praedicantes, and gesta pravae vitae arguentes, gratiam non habent apud
homines. And yet why should I tremble, to make this my address to your Sacred
Majesty, that is so lively a representation of my Creator, for to his
allmighty mercy in the merrits of Jesus Christ, who is for ever truth it self,
I may at all times with a pure heart, and humble Spirit, be confidently bold to
make my approach: and I beseech your Majesty to be pleased to assure your self,
that it is the truth and vigor of my Conscience that has compelled me, to
adventure upon this declarative discourse: a conscientious fear of the worst,
is a strong motive to an honest heart: Nam a recta conscientia non oportet
quenquam, in omni vita sua transversum unguem discedere. And forasmuch as in
this whole Treatise, I have sincerely endeavored to make truth my Center, and
Loyalty and Faithfulness my circumference, I am strenuously induced to
believe, that in your Majesty's judicious and exquisite eye, and in the secret
Cabinet of your rare and choycest Intellectualls, my Errors will be accounted
more venial, than those of others, that have so long been instrumental to
obstruct the course of Truth and Justice, and yet in the conjectural opinion or
judgment of many of your loyal and learned Subjects, do still endeavor, or
seem to hinder the progress thereof: Aliena peccata approbare peccatum est,
negligentia tacere: and in q^^ part possit homo proficere, si innocentiam
probatus fuerit amisisse: and it is the saying of Solomon, he that justifies
the wicked, and he that condemns the just, ^ven they both are an abomination
to the Lord: for it i^ not good to accept the Person of the wicked, to
overthrow the righteous in judgment: and if srail men forgetting their Duty
shall attempt to act any such injustice, it will not be long available to them,
or their Adherents, but their Purpo^^^ and Projects will fall in the Dust; for
the Psalmist tells us, that the Lord executes Righteousness and Judgment for
all them that are oppressed with wrong; and the Lord helps them to right that
s^ffer wrong: and who then are they that dare to contest against their
Creator? for the Prayer of the humble pierces the clouds, and till it come
nigh he will not be comforted: and will not depart till the most high shall
behold to judge righteously, and execute Judgment; and when men will not
believe that God is of perfect power, then he shows his strength, and amongst
them that know it, he makes their Boldness manifest: for indeed Truth is
never ashamed to show her face, it is against her nature to be hidden, or kept
from the light, Non ^mat verit^^ angulos, non ^i divers^ria placent; but she is
ever at home constant, and ready to utter forth her self, to such as seek unto
her, or will lend an care to her wise counsels: the integrity of Truth, is
armed with such confidence, as it dares speak, and fears no reproof; for the
Divine says, that Null^^ reprehensor formida^dus est amatori ^eritati^. Et
^ll^ veritatis defensor esse debet, qui cum rect^s^ntit, loqui non me ^uit; nec
^rubescit: and the Humani^^ could say, Licet veritas in causa nullum patronum
^ut defensorem obtineat, tamen per scipsum defenditur. Nam magna est vi^
veritatis quae contra omnium ingenia, c^liditatem, solertiam contraque fict^^
omnium infidias se facile per seipsum defendit. The contemplation of these
things (if it please your Majesty) together with the strong operation of my
Conscience, does still enforce me thus to expose my weakness to your Sacred
censure; but I confess my Heart does somewhat tremble, Ne quid indecorum serm^
meus resonet: and it would afflict me much, if my error and imbecility should
be the least occasion to infringe or disparage the truth of that ancient Adage,
Much experience is the Crown of old men, and yet I am sure, that the fear of
God is their Glory: and in regard of that, I trust that I shall always be as
fearful to offend as any man: It is said that Audaces fortuna juvat, but I
desire that Truth and Modesty may be my ushers into Favor, and good Fortune
(if any attends me.) I have likewise learned, that Sicut v^recundia laudabilis
est in malo, ita reprehensibilis est in bono: bonum vero erubescere insipientis
est. And therefore I do not yet understand the reason, why any of your
Majesty's Loyal and knowing Subjects that have still adhered to the truth, by
being the zealous and constant Assertors and Maintainers to their Power, of all
those good and wholesome Laws both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, that were in
use and approbation in the time of your Majesty's Royal and ever most blessed
Father, and in your prudent and pacifical Grandfathers days; and have so
deeply suffered for this their Fidelity, should now admit of the least blush,
or be in any degree fearful, in the just vindication and applause of those
religious, just and beneficial Laws; or beat all ashamed to show their
reluctance, at the remissness of the true and due execution of the same. But
your Majesty is wise as an Angel of God, and to your Divine discretion, your
loyal Subjects will religiously submit themselves: and who is he that does not
much admire and praise the Lord of Heaven, for your Majesty's most rare and
never heard of Clemency, and Mercy, wherein most superlatively you seem to
exceed, all the pious and potent Princes that ever lived before, or in your
days: and whereby also beyond and above them all, you come nearest to that
glorious attribute of your Creator, whose Power in specie, you represent here
on earth amongst us and whose mercy likewise is above all his works. Your
Majesty well knows that by Mercy and Truth Iniquity is purged, and that Mercy
and Truth preserve the King: and it is also not untruly said, Quod imperiu^ vi
quod fit, atrocius esse videtur, quam illud quod politia ^djungitur. And yet as
every good subject does truly admire at your Majesty's mercy, even so is he
well assured, that your Majesty is truly and sufficiently instructed, that
Policy which anticipates Religion, is too subtle to receive an approbation for
good, before the purest eyes of the Almighty God of Truth; and this in all
humility we likewise leave to your Majesty's serious and religious
contemplation* And I am confident that it is a most transcendent joy and
gladness to all your Majesty's true Subjects and Well-wisheers, to find your
Judgment, so surely settled, both for Doctrine and Discipline, in that truly
reformed Religion so christianly professed, and so lawfully established without
intermission by a trine of your late most eminent Ancesto^; for the same is so
well digested into nutriment, and has made such a deep impression upon the
hearts and consciences of most of the soberer sort, of this our Nation, as I
believe that nothing but death it self can be able to expunge the prints
thereof, and I am as it were in a kind of ecstasy, when my Fancy runs upon the
conceit, or the imagination of those ineffable and redundant rejoycings, that
the hearts of all honest and true bred Englishmen, are at this present
possessed withal: when after so long bitter and rebellious Deviaons, and so
sordid prodigious and devilish Usurpations, they be now so happy to behold the
Royal Tribe of Judah, so gloriously restored, and so triumphantly advanced to
the Regal Rights, and most Illustrious Throne, of their Royal Ancestors, there
to reign and flourish again, in despite of Satan, and all his envious
instruments. And when after so many miscellaneous ab^^rdities, as have
surreptitiously crept into the Church, by means of the horror, confusion, and
deformity of the late disturbances: We may now sensibly perceive the darkness
thereof, so sorely felt, to be dispelled, the glorious light of truth shining
forth in a splendid me^sure: And seeing that Korah and hi^ seditious company of
Sectaries, are in a manner swallowed up, or vanished into nothing, we may once
again with comfortable Consciences and confident hearts, expect to see, and
evidently to behold that sacred rod of Aaron to bud and blossom, and to bring
forth fruit afresh in due season, which that it may the better be able to
perform, with the more vigor and sincerity, I do h^mbly implore, that the sweet
influence of the dews of Heaven, and of your Majesty's good countenance and
protection, may continually and in abundant manner, be shoured and diversely
distilled upon the holy consecrated body thereof, and the several Members and
Branches of the same; and that they may soberly and religiously concur and
agree in such an Uniformity both of Doctrine and Discipline, as shall most
truly tend to the glory of God, the honor and contentment of your Majesty,
the settling of a firm and constant Peace and Tranquillity, both in Church and
Commonwealth, the credi^ and glory of their Divine profession, the comfort and
quiet of their Consciences, and the Eternal Salvation of their Souls and
Bodies, which i^ the summary intent and end of all true Religion: Let us
therefore remember the end and we shall not lightly do amiss; and if I mistake
it not, when the Jews in old time were the alone select people of God, and his
only true visible Church, there was a Law or Command given unto them, that they
should not interweave Linen with Woollen, nor sow any Miscellain upon their
grounds; and surely there is ^ secret mystery in it, which I leave to more fit,
grave, and wiser considerations then mine own. But a Learned Father says, that
in Ecclesia unam voc^^ esse oportet; and another tells us, Tabernaculum Christi
^st Eccl^sia; and we read that Christ our Savior his shelter or Coat, was
without seame or division: Indeed Scismes and Controversies in the Church
(especially in the Discipline or Government thereof, the very Basis of our
Public peace) do oftentimes prove to be of most dangerous and destructive
consequence; it is well known who is Seminator litium; and therefore I trust
that such as would seem to profess more purity and strictness in Religion,
then some others, and that pretend to fear God so truly, and to detest the
Devil so strongly, will in time learn to abhor and eschew the sinful effects
of those his so subtle suggestions. It has been observed, if it please Your
Majesty, that the great splendour and eminent degree of Governors, does
ordinarily strike a more ample awe and reverence into the hearts of the common
people, and makes them more tractable, and submisse, then they would be to
others of a far inferior rank; in which respect, as your Subject most humbly
under correction conceives, it is very requisite, and necessary, that the
Episcopal Governors of the Church, (as well in point of policy as Religion)
should be readmitted (as I trust they now are) to their full rights, power, and
privileges, both in honor and patrimony: the Churches Livelihood, Revenue, or
Patrimony, in good days was accounted to be Gods portion: and I have read that
Lands at first were given to the Church with an heavy curse annexed and imposed
upon all such as should afterward endeavor to disanull and make void the
guist, and so frustrate the good intent of the Donors thereof. And I do much
fear that the ancient and modern Sacrilege of some of this Nation, has been
none of the least sins and occasions to draw down the wrath of God upon us.
But now that, after so long and violent an intermission, themost of us have
learned again to say that Lesson of truth it self, Da Caesaris Caesari, let us
not forget the latter part of the sentence, but give also unto God the things
that are Gods. And if the once so glorious and full Moon of the Church, that
has so lately been obscured under the dis^all clouds of Tyranny and
Persecution, and now appears and moves in a serene Air, must still for any
seeming sound reasons in Religion or State, be forced to suffer an Eclipse in
any the least Degrees or Digits, (which I wish may never be) yet in the fear of
God, and to avoid the foul aspersion of the present and future ages, let the
same be never contrived, acted, or done, without the full, free, and legal
consent of all such parties whatsoever, or at least the Major part of them, as
by the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, in force and use before
the embrion of the^e late distractions, were duly and legally interrested to
give their voices of consent or denial, in matters of that nature and
consequence. And since it is certain, that the principal intent and end of all
the grand and solemn Assemblies, tending to Counsel and advice, which are in a
legal manner convoked in any Christian Kingdom, is or ought to be, above all
other things, for the glory of God, and the due maintenance of his Church, and
true Religion; which being taken pro concesso, it is paradoxical, and much
marvelled at by many, that such so worthy personages, are by common entendment
are most versed, and best skilled in Transactions of that nature, and whose
Reverend Learning, Wisdom, and Integrity, do likewise render them without
scruple, sufficient to be Assistants and Advisers in other things, of far more
trivial moment, should at any time, pro ratione ab scondita, and adhuc
incognitae, be exempted from, or deprived of their just and genuine Rights, and
ancient Privileges, so deservedly conferred, and so legally granted unto them,
or their Predecessors, by the Renowned, Pious, and Politic Kings of this
Realm, ever since Christianity was in England, and never yet so much as spurned
at, but in seditious and turbulent times, or be shut out of doors, when matters
of so deep concernment both in Church and Commonwealth, were in agitation and
disquisition: And if this Holy Order received the least skar or blemish in the
time of his late Majesty, I do believe confidently that it was compulsive, and
for some emergent reason of State, and not with his Majesty's free consent. But
prudent and moderate men, will ever have a greater regard to venerable
Antiquity, then to the humorous conceits and novelties of some giddy heads; and
I doubt there be some, that popularly were thrust on to act a part on the
Theater, that if they were truly sensible of their former failings, and duly
penitent for their so gross, erroneous, and dangerous Deviations, remorse of
Conscience and Humility, would not then suffer them at all to be ashamed to
give this character of themselves, Hesterni sumus and Ignor amus, etc. For it
was the saying of an Ancient Author, and also confirmed by Reverend Judges of
great Honor and Antiquity in this Nation, Quae praeter consuetudinem and morem
majorum fiunt neque, placent, neque recta videntur: and I fear that the
remembrance of this, and some other old Maxims, may be an occasion to some men,
and those none of the least considerable understanding and judgment, to
apprehend some doubts and jealousies concerning the conscience, though not the
legality, of some of the very late proceedings. And yet your Graces true loyal
and loving Subjects, do always desire to lie prostrate at the feet of your
Majesty's Clemency, and not in the least degree to oppose nor contradict (but
only in this humble way of Animadversion) any of your Councels, truly tending
to your Majesty's honor, safety, and repose; neither can I much fear, but
humbly hope that your Royal Prudence will not be offended at this my free, and
yet most Supplicatory Expostulation, for it were happy if your Majesty did know
the hearts of all your Subjects, so well as I do freely manifest mine own; and
I dare affirm it, under favor, that it will be a great grief to most of the
Judicious, Loyal, and Freeborn Subjects of this Realm, to behold the least
overture toward the future infringement or violation (either in case
Ecclesiastical or Temporal) of that Great Charter of the Liberties of England,
so long since granted and obtained, after the sad adventures and deep dangers
both of the Head, and whole Body of this Realm, and so oftentimes since
confirmed by the full and free consent, and pious suffrages of so many most
worthy Princes, and lawful and questionless Parliaments. And as your
Majesty's ever loyal Subjects do much congratulate, and highly commend the good
endeavors of all such, and do envy none of their present honors, as have
late in any degree been instrumental toward the so happy just and royal
access of your Majesty to your Crowns and Kingdom; so I believe it can never
enter into any of their Imaginations, that your Majesty in your true justice
and judgment, will ever in the least degree undervalue or neglect those that
have at the first ventured their Live^, (...), and Fortunes, for the keeping
and preserving of your Majesty's blessed Father, and his lawful Heirs and
Successors (if it had so pleased God) in their just and Royal rights, without
any alteration or diminution, for those were the true Subjects that strived to
nip Rebellion in the bud. And if others after their so long and strong
seductions, be now by the mercy of God returned to their due Allegiance, and
have done any acceptable service to their King and Country, let them bless and
thank God for it, and not be elevated in their minds, as if they had done some
strange work of supererogation, when alas all that they have performed, is but
the ministering of an emplaster, to the ^ores of some of their own making, and
what the exigencies and extremities of themselves and their Native country, did
enforce them unto: and what was also commanded, and required at their hands by
the Law of God, Nature and Nations, and by the municipal Laws of their proper
Country, which how obsolete they were become, and how grossly and
persidiously the same were wrested and abused, both in the letter and sense, by
too many that impudently presumed to deal therein, both a^ Bar and Bench, for
the venerable regard which I am bound to bear to the gravitie, and honor of
that profession, I am most heartily sorry, and much ashamed to remember. And
if any have so far forgotten the discipline of their own Profession, as they be
abashed to think of any return or retrospect thereunto: yet having now
abandoned their uncivil courses, if they will turn so civil, as to cast an eye
upon the first Paragraph of Justinians law, they shall see that, Justitia est
constans and perpetua voluntas, jus suum cuique tribuendi; whereby they may
plainly perceive, that whatsoever has been transacted in or toward the
restoration of your Majesty's rights, or the Countries liberties, is but an
act of justice, and then no men of integrity, will ever expect a bribe or
reward for their well doing: But if by your Majesty's roial beneficence any of
them, do or shall still meet with honors, large benefits, or other
advancements, yet in truth and equity, they ought to esteem them all as mere
acts of grace, and no otherwise. For a natural born subject is by Conscience,
and Allegiance strictly bound to the service of his lawful Sovereign, and when
he has done his deepest devoires in helping him to so rich a jewel as a
Kingdom, that is his right, yet has the Subject acted no more then his duty
requires: and if he should afterward be denied a promised reward for his
pains, yet in truth and equity he ought not to repine thereat: and this in
effect as I remember was the opinion of the learned Counsel of Conscience, to
a mighty Monarch in Christendom upon a question propounded upon the like
occasion. I do insert this to preserve some from being betrayed by
vain-glorie, and not to persuade your Majesty to be too parsimonious of your
Favors, when desert requires. Honos enim alit arts, etc. and although it be
true, that Virtus in se perfecta est, and nudo bomine contenta, yet I believe,
that Candor virtutis per munificentiam principis saepe nutritus est. Constancy
and confidence, are very requisite virtues in an eminent Prince, but as he is
confident so he must also be cautious: Qui ante non cavet, post doleat: and I
doubt not but that your Majesty has cast your judicious eye upon some
passages of the History concerning the life and success of Lewis the IVth*
King of France, which was for many years an ^xile from his right, and that your
Grace is also well read in those prudent and politic instructions, that
Charles the Fifth and famous Emperor of Germany did once give unto his dearly
beloved Son Philip the 2d. King of Spain. But a Prince that will truly
prosper, must take God to be the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the
beginning and ending of all his intentions, and actions: the word of Truth, is
the best compass, both in calm and tempest, that he can steer his course
withal: and to utter the very thoughts of my heart, the most strange and
miraculous Deliverances which your Grace has received from the power and hand
of Heaven, do sufficiently inform my belief, that you have truly taken that
Word, for a light to your feet, and a lanthorn to your steps: And that God
Almighty has hitherto preserved, and raised up your most Royal Gracious and
Sacred Majesty, and your Royal Heroic and Magnanimous Brother, that armipotent
Duke of York, for some memorable adventures, and noble exploits to be performed
on the earth, to all your High Renowns, and to his own eternal glory. And, next
to the Sacred Scripture of Gods own Penmen, I believe that your Majesty,
without offense, may have an especial regard to the godly Writings, and pious
Admonitions of your truly Religious, and Royal Father, of Glorious memory, the
true and transcendent Charity of a Christian at the point of death, does
forgive all the World: and yet this does not tie the hands of such as survive
from the due performance of Justice, according to the Precepts of the Law of
God, or Man: Justice and Judgment are of so Divine a nature, as they be called
the Habitation of Gods Throne, and Mercy and Truth shall go before his Face:
and when Mercy and Truth do meet together, then Righteousness and Peace will
kiss each other, and I doubt not but that your Majesty is Divinely taught by
the Spirit of God, how to establish your Throne in Righteousness: and Solomon
again says, that because Sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do
evil. And there be too many yet in this Kingdom, (with the grief of my Soul I
speak it) that be but slenderly convinced of the foul Facts of their late most
impious absurd and seditious errors: and it were lamentable if that saying,
Impunit as semper ad deteriora invitat, should be verified in any of them: such
as be truly humbled for their former offenses, will hang down their heads, and
obscure themselves, and not seek, and still strive to look up alost, as if they
forsooth had been ever free from all tincture of Treachery; a mist may be cast
before the eyes of the Simple, but the eye of understanding will spy them out;
for such a man as does but endeavor to commend, countenance, or justify, or
but connive alone at any bad actions, does secretly seem to persuade the like,
and so still promotes mischief; I wish that some had been endued with better
Discretion, and more Modesty, and that yet for their own sakes they would call
to remembrance this assertion of truth it self: He that covers his sins
shall not prosper, but who so confesses and forsakes them shall find mercy:
but he that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief; and God grant that so
much mercy and favor as is showed to some in this present world, be not an
occasion to make them think too well of their wicked doings, so lately and
unjustly acted, and so most happily hinder and prevent themselves of true
repentance for the same, and consequently of the mercies of God, which they
would seem so gladly to expect in the world to come. But as all your true and
loving Subjects do desire rightly to rejoice, in this their safe and salubrious
swimming in the Ocean of your Majesty's most rare and royal Clemencies, so I
hope we shall incessantly pray to God for grace, to make a sanctified use
thereof: and that all your Majesty's so loving and royal favors toward any of
us may really redound to your own proper safety and honor, and the Kingdoms
happiness. And I doubt not but that your Sacred Majesty by degrees, will dive
into all the several transactions, of these late distracted Nations: all
Innovation is dangerous; and what is done without President, is in the same
praedicament: the beginnings of Evil are to be well looked unto, Obsta
principiis, says one; and there is a rule, Quae malo inc^oata sunt Principio
vix est ut bono peraga^tur exitu. Et quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis
non convalesce^: and therefore I trust that in time by the means of your
Majesty's wisdom, merit and moderation, the very prints and relics of
Rebellion, will by little and little be quite obliterated and expunged, and the
Kingdom happily reduced to its pristine, pure, and genuine Government, and I
hope that such as have formerly ex Di^metro oppugned or opposed the royal Power
and Government, and yet of late were so industrious, dexterous and active to
restore the same again, have done this their good devoire, for mere
Conscience Sake, and not for the enjoyment of Honors, Places, or Preferments,
for any other mercenary, by, or finister ends; and that all others that were by
Law obnoxious to punishment, will now by your Majesty's mercy and goodness be
drawn into their right minds, and due allegiance, and so acknowledge their
errors; and for their own good, and to escape damnation hereafter, be ready to
return some honest amends and satisfaction where they have done evident wrongs;
and be seriously ashamed of all their former faults. Erubescere debemus and
condemnare peccatum, non defendere, quoniam pudore culp^ minuitur, defensione
cumulatur; and bitter is the portion of Oppressors, and strange is the
punishment to workers of Iniquity; and if ever there were barbarous injustice
practiced, and contempt of all truth and honesty countenanced, in any Nation
upon the face of the earth, it was certainly amongst us: for here was none
pinched to the quick, or persecuted to the proof, but such as utterly detested
to suffer their fantasies and conversations to run mad, and be corrupted with
the venom of Schism and sedition: these were ever exposed to the most bitter
extremities: and qualis s^^ cujusque fides and constantia tribulatio probat:
Neither were any so much despised and convitiated as those of the roial and
loial stamp: but a good conscience was still our comfort, Conscientiam malam
laudantis praeconium non sanat, nec bonam vulnerat convitium: Et si malum quod
de nobis dicitur, in nobis non invenitur, in magnam debemus laetitiam
prosiliare. Such only as would willingly admit themselves to be Halophants, and
quietly permit the weathercock or Vane of their judgments, and expressions to
be turned about, with the stormy blast of every Euroclydon, did esteem
themselves in a secure condition, and many of them did make a quick market, by
the means of their neighbors miseries; and although they had no Christian
regard at all toward us, yet we in charity did much pity their dangerous, and
desperate condition: for we had read, That the prosperity of fools shall
destroy them, and that goods unjustly gotten shall not profit in the day of
calamity, for the wrath of the Lord comes forth suddenly, and in their seen
i^y they shall be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance: and he that
works mischief, or sets a trap shall be taken therein, anguish shall
consume such men before they die, for he that defraudeth his neighbor of his
means is a man of blood, and he that takes away his living does kill him: Et
nunqu^m securus est reu^ animus, men's enim mala, conscientiae pr^p^^is agitatur
st^mulis. And it was neither our own wants, or their abundance, that ever could
incline us, to any approbation of their rude and rebellious actions; fides enim
nulla necessitate ad fallen^um cogitur, nullo corrumpitur praemio. And as they
did most unjustly deprive us of all our estates and subsistencies, so if the
Lord for our sins had suffered them to take away our lives, I am confident
that most of us, would have departed hence, with as brave and constant a
courage as Captain Baiard that valiant Frenchman did, when the Duke of Bu^bon
seeing him lie sore wounded, and at deaths door, said; That he was sorry for
him, having known him to be so brave and valiam a Knight: Sir, answered the
Captain, there is no pity of me, for I die an honest man, but you are to be
lamented, that have fought against your King, your Country and your Oath. And
although all of us I hope do desire most lovingly to embrace in the arms of
our Charity, all such penitent offenders, as do manifest and show forth the
Fruits and effects of true Contrition and Repentance in their carriage and
Conversations: yet I believe that we do still harbor and retain as odious and
rigid a Resolution against all Treachery and Treason, as ever that noble man of
Spain did express, when his Sovereign commanded him to lodge the said Duke of
Burbon, at his house in Madrid. And I most humbly beseech your Majesty to be
pleased to take notice that your poor Subject, was none of those Animals that
were either coeci, or non videntes, at the time when these distractions did
first begin, and so went blindly on with the mad Multitude in the dark, they
knew not why, nor whither, until by the influence of some propitious Starr
their eyes were opened, and so they recovered or obtained some imperfect sight
of their former Follies: but it pleased God to form your Subject of such a
temperature, as he could see to suffer from the beginning, and is like to
continue still in a suffering Condition to his latter end, if your Majesty
prove not a very good Lord and Master to me, and my Posterity: but my Loyalty
did never live without hope, either for this present life, or my future
interest in the World to come: and I have thought sometimes that my
constellation and Genius did argue something more then ordinary, because from
my very Childhood ever since that I could well read, I have taken an especial
regard and notice of this Proverb, My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are seditious, or given to change, and it had taken
so deep an Impression upon my heart, as all the Rebels in England were never
able to wipe out, unless they had pulled out heart and all. Quo semel est
imbuta recen^ serva^i^ ^dorem, testa diu, and I bless my God, that it was so
with me: Nam quod ^^venture non discitur, in matura ae^ate saepius nescitur,
and this has been lately too much verified by sad Experience. And when I first
began to bend my mind to the study of the Laws of this Kingdom, I did soon
perceive in my self a greater proclicity and delight, in the apprehension and
learning of such passages therein, as had referrence to the true and right
maintaining of the Royal Majesty of the head thereof, rather then to those
that merely concerned the body, and inferior members of the same. Many have
much marvelled that in the late so terrible times, I durst so freely utter my
mind upon every occasion, and have often advised me to be more wary, but my
answer was ever to this effect, That I did no more, then my duty required: and
I ought not to suffer sin upon my Neighbor, but to reprove him for it: and if
it were not the will of God, to protect me in mine innocence and integrity, I
was sure tha^ he would quite cast me off, if I turned an Hypocrite; for there
is an woe to the sinner that goes two ways: and the triumphing of the Wicked
is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite but for a momen^, they are exalted for a
little while, but are gone and brought low: the light of the Wicked shall be
put out and the spark of his Fire shall not shine: but who shall abide in Gods
Tabernacle? He that speaks the Truth in his heart, and in whose spirit and
lips there is no guile: and to them that rebuke the Wicked shall be delight,
and a good blessing shall come upon them: and since that, propter tim^rem
mortis tacere veritatem impietas est; how solicitous every soul of us ought to
be in the declaring and justifying of the truth, and in the performance of our
best duties and endeavors, toward the fostering and furtherance of the same;
Et b^^arum rerum etsi successus non fuerit, conatus tamen ipse honestus est;
and a wise man says, refrain not to speak when there is occasion to do good,
and hide not thy Wisdom in her beauty, for by Speech Wisdom shall be known,
and Learning by the word of the Tongue, in no wise speak against the Truth, but
he abashed of the error of thine own ignorance; Strive for the Truth unto
death, and the Lord shall fight for thee. Et non solum proditor est veritatis,
qui mendacium pro veritate l^quitur, sed qui non libere pronuntiat veritatem,
quam pronunciare oportet: aut non libere defendit veritatem, quam defendere
oportet. Nam qui veritatem occultat and qui prodit mend^cium uterque rous est,
ille quia prodesse non vult, i^^e quia nocere de^iderat. May it please your
Sacred Majesty, I have almost learned Divinity and Philosophy enough to contemn
the World, and am but very little ambitious of Preferment, and yet I confess,
that I would willingly imply my poor Talent, and the small remainder of my
days, to Gods glory, your Majesty's honor and service, and the good of my
native Country; and most gladly would I find out a way how to refresh my poor
Family, that for so many years together, by the malice of the Times, and in the
very despite of my Loyalty, have been exposed to so much hardship, and danger
of utter ruin and destruction: yet I am ashamed to beg so mean a Place as my
weak deserts do seem to require; It is not for Kings to give Trifles, said a
Noble Prince, but to give royally like themselves. In which respect I think it
is the best policy for such Suitors, to submit wholly to their Sovereigns
goodness: Your Grace in my conceit, may well challenge a double Title, to be
called the most Christian King, and in that regard also, your Majesty may very
fitly be esteemed to be, the prime Deputy of God Almighty upon the face of the
earth; and we know that in the pure eyes of his heavenly Majesty, then a true
and faithful heart there can nothing in the world be more acceptable: and
therefore your poor Subject, having no other gratitude at the present, does
most humbly presume to present, and offer to your Sacred Majesty the true
sacrifice of a loyal and loving Heart, not fearing to find the fruitful
success thereof, knowing that your royal and religious Majesty will adhere
unto, and stickle to be of the same merciful mind with your Almighty Creator,
Et ille apud Deum plus ha^et loci, qui plus attulit non argenti, sed fidei; and
if your Majesty will vouchsafe, and please to look upon me, I dare promise,
that by Gods grace, my works and actions in the time of prosperity, shall be as
full of Faithfullness and Loyalty, as ever my works were in the time of my
adversity: Tune enim veraciter fideles sumus si quod verbis promittimus
operibus complemus; and let the World think or say what it please, I do
protest, that I propound these things, not so much for mine own interest and
advantage, as for your Majesty's sake, and for the deep imprinting and high
advancement of Truth and Loyalty, and the memory thereof in the hearts of the
People; for although I do freely acknowledge mine own defection, coming far
short of my duty toward his late Majesty, and your Royal Self; yet my
Conscience does urge me to tell your Majesty plainly, that my Loyalty and
Sufferings are so remarkable, as if I should chance unhappily to be neglected,
and quite forgotten, the consequence thereof would be so bad, that Truth and
Loyalty would be esteemed but at a very low rate in our Country, and be made a
mere Ludibrium amongst many, in that factious, seditious, and schismatical
corner, where it has pleased God to lay out my residence. I most humbly beg
your Majesty's gracious pardon, for these my bold expressions, and I hope I
shall have it; for I desired never to rest or walk upon hollow and deceitful
Q^agmires, but upon reasonable, sound, and justifiable Grounds: and I have no
other certain way, or manner of means, how to make my Self or my Case truly and
effectually known to your Majesty, but only thus: and I now do cry to your
Grace in the words of the Psalmist to his God, The dark places of the earth are
full of the habitations of cruelty, but, O le^ not the oppressed return
ashamed. The beloved Son of Jacob by the despire and envy of his Brethren was
sold into Egypt for a Bondslave, where he lived in long obscurity, and endured
much pain and penury, until his Case was known, and the word of the Lord had
tried him; but then the King delivered him, the Prince of the People let him go
free: and after all his sorrows and sufferings his success was admirable. I
shall be heartily sorry, if in any Passage herein, I have given to any one the
least occasion of a just offense, but if your Majesty please to remember some
Considerations written upon the life and services of an eminent Statesman and
Counselor to Henry the Great, your Royal Grandfather of France, your Grace
will there find, that the Offenses of Tongues, Pens, and Impressions, above all
others, may be dissembled and winked at; and therefore I trust that the sayings
and writings of such as intend no hurt, but are void of impudency, and seek
only to illustrate the Truth, shall receive a mild and gentle interpretation.
And thus with my humble and hearty Prayers to God Almighty, for the true
felicity of your Sacred Majesty, and all your Royal Relations, I most humbly
submit my Self, and all that is mine, to your Majesty's mercy, and most
favorable censure, and clemency, craving leave to proceed on in the relation
of my services and sufferings, where, for method and order sake, I must begin
with my Address and Declaration intended to his late Majesty of ever blessed
memory; which had been presented unto him, if I had met with the happiness of
an access to his Grace.

TO THE Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The humble Declaration of Your Majesty's Written in the year, etc. 164^.
Loyal and Obedient Subject J. W. of L. in the County of Ess. Counselor at
Law; briefly showing his Troubles, and the true occasion thereof in these Times
of Rebellion.
May it please your Majesty,
AS I am in duty bound in the first place, to render most hearty thanks to God
Almighty, for his great goodness toward your Majesty, in blessing and
preserving you and yours so graciously in these woeful days of distraction: So
I cannot but esteem it a great mercy of God, and a most infallible sign of his
favor toward me your poor Subject, that he has always given me a heart, so
constant and loyal toward your Sacred Majesty, as I may boldly say, that
neither my hand, or tongue, or thought has agreed to any thing conducible to
the beginning, or fostering of this most unnatural Rebellion; For when your
Majesty sent forth Writs for the summoning of this late Parliament, your
Subject dwelling upon the Confines of Suff. and hearing what indirect and
unlawful means was used in the election of the Knights there, (Ignorance and
Affectation ambitiously striving to be the principal Electors) did begin
suddenly to smell a savor of some worse intentions; and thereupon when some of
his Neighbors requested his company to Chelmsford in Essex, to give a voice to
the electing of the Knights of the Shire there; your Subject made this Answer,
That he would not stir a foot upon that occasion, because he verily believed
that the Parliament would never come to good. It was a rash Speech, I confess,
but I have thought since, that surely I spoke It by some Prophetical
inspiration; and God knows, I have many times wished, that I had not guessed so
right. And afterward when your Majesty had granted to an Act, that the
Parliament should not be dissolved, without the consent of both Houses, your
Subject soon after being at a Public meeting in the Town where he lived, where
was then present one that was a Justice of the Peace, and a Lawyer, who told it
your Subject for good News. That your Majesty had condescended to such an Act,
and that now the Parliament would go on very confidently without any obstacles
or fears: Your Subject made him hereupon this subitain Answer, That indeed if
your Majesty had granted to such an Act, it might possibly conduce to some good
end: if it pleased God to give to the Parliament the Spirit of Grace and
Wisdom, that they went on in a legal and moderate way: but if they digress^d
from that method, it might then be a means to introduce great Inconveniences
and Distractions; for that your Majesty would perhaps depart from them, and so
their Expectations would be frustrated: For we that have read the Law (said I)
do know, that both Houses of Parliament, cannot make, nor alter Laws, without
the Kings Royal assent. Yes (quoth he) they will make Ordinances. Whereat your
Subject smiling, did again smell some dangerous Project to be in agitation, and
believed the said Party was one of their Fraternity, and that he had sure
intelligence of their indirect intentions of proceeding. In which your Subject
was likewise a remarkable Presager of the event of things; for the said Party
is since proved one of those good instruments, called a Committeeman. And in
the year 1642. your Subject being come down from Easter Term, happened in
Whits^n-week after to be at a Meeting in his Parish, where the said Justice of
Peace was present, and all the Chief Inhabitants thereof, and much inquiring
there was of News, concerning the settling of the Militia; and your Subject
told them, That he had heard of your Majesty's Proclamation touching the same,
but had not yet seen it. To which one of the Company made answer, That he was
at London the last week, and had both seen the Proclamation, and also an
Ordinance of Parliament to the contrary; and that he had them both there to
show. Whereupon the Party pulling them forth, your Subject took them and read
them before the whole Assembly, with an audible voice; then they asked your
Subject what he thought thereof, and what he intended to do therein. To which
your Subject, remembering his natural and legal Allegiance to your Sacred
Majesty, boldly answered, That he was soon resolved what course to take in that
business, without any study; for that he would by no means disobey your
Majesty's Proclamation, in submitting his Arms to the Parliaments devotion: and
besides, informed them all openly, That by the Common and Statute Laws of this
Kingdom, it was High Treason to levy Arms against the King. Which assertion of
the Truth they little esteemed; but affirmed notwithstanding, that they would
all send their Arms, and that it would fall heavy upon your Subject, if he
refused to do the like. But your Subject knowing a good Conscience in
Adversity, to be more pleasant, than a treacherous heart in Prosperity, little
regarding their Judgments, but resolved, if the will of God were so, to suffer
rather for well doing, than for evil doing. And though your subject thinks
himself unworthy to take in hand the legal defense of your Majesty's Right, yet
when he heard their irreligious, and undutifull Discourse, tending to the
slighting and undervaluing of your Majesty's Proclamation, and the applauding
only of the Parliaments Designs; your Subject was so jealous of your Majesty's
Just Royalties, Prerogatives, and Reputation, that he freely reprehended their
folly, and told them they were too confident in their conceits, That the
Parliament were many of them but weak men, and might fall into gross errors:
That it was not to be imagined, that all the wisdom in the Kingdom, was now
engrossed to the House of Commons; for it was able to afford many thousand
Assemblies as wise as they: That Truth only must be the square of Christian
men's actions, and not the fantastical and factious opinions of men: and among
other Passages also said unto them, That they professed themselves to be haters
of Idolatry, and yet it appeared they were much infected with Superstition, a
grand limme thereof; for they had as Reverend a conceit of their Parliament, as
the Papists have of the Pope, which is, that he cannot possibly err in his
Function.

Within a few days after came Warrants to Town, to command all our Arms
complete, to beat Colchester the next morning. The Constable came presently to
warn me, to send my Arms accordingly. I asked him to see his Warrant, which he
showed me; and when I had read it, I told him, That he knew my mind already,
for I had declared it sufficiently at the last Town meeting He confessed, that
I had so done, yet he must come to do his Office. Then I asked him, If his
Authority concerning this matter were derived from under your Majesty's Great
Seal. He answered, No, it was from the Parliament. Then I asked him whose
^o^stable he was. He replied, That I was a merry Gentleman to ask him such a
Question, and that I my self knew better than he whose Constable he was, and
what belonged to his Office. I answered him, That indeed I have thought I had
known something, but now the Laws are so strangely refined, that my Learning
is almost out of date: But I prithee, said I, tell me in good earnest whose
Constable thou art? He answered, The Kings. Then quoth I to him, Thou art a
very Fool; for the word of God says, His Servants ye are to whom ye obey; and
therefore you having no Authority from the King, but doing the contrary to his
Royal command, are surely the Parliaments Constable, and none of the Kings:
Whereat his Constableship was at a Nonplus. Then I told him, that I intended to
certify to the Captain, the Reasons under my hand, why I refused to send my
Arms: That if I offended the Law therein, they should then have my own
handwriting for a Witness against me. The next morning I wrote to the Captain
to this effect, That such a Warrant had been shown unto me, but withal, that
I had formerly seen your Majesty's Proclamation, and further intimated, that I
should be heartily sor^y to infringe the Allegiance I owed to my Sovereign, or
to give a just occasion of offense to others that were in subordinate power:
but I remembered that long since I had taken the Oath of Allegiance, and
therefore (were it but in that regard) how I could dispense with my self in
Disobeying His Majesty's Royal Proclamation I did not yet well understand, but
my Arms and Body were ever ready to defend his Majesty's Royal Person and
Honor. This Letter was delivered him in the open Field amongst the Trained
bands, where were present diverse Parliament men, which I dare say had a sight
of it: but I heard little thereof; only the next week I going to London, News
was brought home, that so soon as I came at my Chamber, I was apprehended, by
Order from the Parliament, and laid in Prison, and should be fined as much as
my Estate was worth; only because I refused to send my Arms at the last
Traineing: But it was but a false Fire to terrify my Wife and Children, and to
affright others from their duty and allegiance. Then at my return home, the
Parson of the Parish told me, That he heard I was like to fall into trouble,
and that he was sorry I had not done as my Neighbors did: I answered him, That
I was not sorry at all, for I had done as my Conscience, and the Law directed
me: But, quoth he, there will come danger of it: Gods will be done, said I, for
I am resolved to be constant, and never to turn Rebel, for I shall ever
account it an honor to suffer in my Princes Quarrel; and would fain see the
face of that man, that durst call me in Question for showing my true allegiance
to my Sovereign. Afterward I was threatened to have my house pulled down, and
all my goods taken away by Riflers, who said they had an Order so to do,
because I would lend no money to the Parliament. Soon after I went upon
occasion to the house of a Parliament man, none of the meanest St. Rober^
Crane, Knight and Baconet.
^ank, and he asked me, What was the reason that I was threatened to be rifled?
I told him, Because I would lend no money to the Parliament; Then belike, quoth
he, you lent none? No, said I, for I have no moneys to lend; but had I never so
much, yet I think I am able to make it appear to you, or any man that is of an
impartial Judgment, why I ought not to lend money to such a design; but now a
days, said I, men must not speak the truth, what they think: whereat he
clapped his hand upon his breast, and said thus, Before God I dare not speak
what I think my self. After, he asked What means was used to procure money in
our Country? I told him, The Ministers persuaded much; but, said I, every thing
that Parsons now speak in the Pulpit, does not work upon honest men's
Consciences, that smell of Loyalty and Discretion. After this I was too often
troubled with their Warrants, either about lending of moneys, sending of Arms,
or their nugatory politic Association, still roaring in my ears with an
Ordinance of Parliament; and still I told them, That these doings at length
would make the Ordinance roar in the Field. And I thank God I was so far from
obeying any of their Warrants, that I still gave them this answer, That by Gods
grace I would never do my self or posterity that wrong, to live or dye a
Rebel; and that all their projects would surely come to naught, and tend to
nothing but mischief in the end; ever Harping upon this string, That it was
without all question High Treason to levy Arms against the King, etc. and
sundry times I have labored to convince them by Gods word, and also read to
them the Statutes and other Reports of the Law, and Histories, which I did
think most fit to rectify their Judgments; and though it did them little
good, yet I trust that therein I did discharge my Conscience and duty toward
God and your Majesty. And soon after the Battle at Edgehill, when your
Majesty's Forces came toward London, the Constable of our Parish came late in
an evening, and charged me to send away my Arms the next morning, with a
months pay; I asked to see his Warrant, wherein it was specified, that we
should send our Arms to oppose your Majesty's Army; whereat I told him, That
his Warrant was somewhat too plain, for there was no mention of Cavaliers or
Malignants, but peremptorily his Majesty's Army: Then quoth he, sure that word
is mistaken; Yes, said I, you run too much upon mistakes, but you might have
spared the labor of coming to me, for you know my mind well enough. But,
quoth he, a man is not always of one mind, it is not fitting he should: Yes,
said I, if a man be an honest man it is not fitting he should turn Knave; and
for my part I will never meddle in this Rebellion, for if I should, my
Conscience would accuse me for an arrant Traitor: But, said he, what Answer
shall I make to the Deputy Lieutenants: Why, quoth I, you may tell them, that I
have ever been a true Subject to my Prince, and so I am resolved to continue;
and I will also be obedient to all subordinate powers under the King, so long
as they hold their Allegiance to his Majesty, but if they waive their
Obedience to the King, then must they give me leave to forsake them; for Arms
or Money I will never send, to oppose his Majesty, or any that take his part,
although I be chopped in pieces for it, and that is mine Answer. Not long after
came another of the Constables to my house, with a Warrant to search all houses
for Armor, which I perusing, said unto him, That his Warrant was general, but
I believed that my self was the only man in the Parish that he aimed at; Yet,
said I, as the Case stands, I am not bound by Law to obey this Warrant,
neither will I: Nevertheless because I have heard that some idle people have
reported, that I have great store of Arms in my house, therefore to take away
those fears and jealousies from you. I will (though not in obedience to your
Warrant, yet in point of Neighborhood) let you see what Arms I have, and
thereupon I carried him into every room in my house, and suffered him to search
where he pleased, but nothing he could find to take any exceptions at, for
indeed I had no Armor at all, but that I was formerly charged to find:
Notwithstanding this Treacherous Villain went soon after to the pretended
Lieutenants of the Shire, and certified them that I was a most dangerous man,
and had Arms in my house for at least 20* men, and that if my Arms were not
taken from me, I would be ready upon any occasion to do much mischief.
Whereupon Order was given that a Trained band should be raised to disarm me;
who soon after Christmas 1642. in ^ morning before daylight, beset my house,
and the said Constable who was their conductor, when day appeared, knocked at
my Gate, and asked to speak with me; And he was answered at a Window, that I
was not up, and requested to come some other time; Yet he continued knocking,
whereupon I arose, and went into my study opening against the Gate, and asked
him what his will was? He told me that he was come again to search for Arms;
Why so? said I, you have done that already; Ay but, quoth he, we have a Warrant
to apprehend your body; Nay then, quoth I, take it if thou can get it; With
that a Parliament Captain that was hidden behind the Pales, showed himself, and
said, Sir open your doors, for we must have ye: Sir, quoth I, thou art like to
tarry a while: Upon which denial, the Soldiers that were Ambuscadoed about the
house, began to appear, and cried, Give fire; whereat there rattled such a peal
of Muskets against the house, as were alone enough to have converted a Coward
to the Round Religion; whereat my little Boys starting out of their beds to
dress themselves, the Bullets peircing into their Chambers, did beat the
materials of the walls about their faces, insomuch that the Eldest, but 14.
years of age, came running to me, and said, O Father they shoot Bullets, let us
shoot at them again, although we die for it every one of us; But the Father had
no considerable Force, to equal the Child's Valor, and therefore thought it no
policy to provoke such obstinate hare-braind Rebels, and it was Gods great
mercy that I was so patient, for they reported themselves afterward, that if
we had but shot off a Gun, we had been all killed, and the house pulled down.
Again I went to the Window, and asked them what they intended? They presented
their Muskets and Pistols at the very face of me, and charged me to open the
doors: I replied, That if they had any Authority from the King, I would; They
said, No, but they had order from the Parliament; To that, quoth I, I will not
yield; Then they said they would break the house: I wished them to be advised,
for my house was my ^astle, and I was in the Kings peace, and if they did any
more then Law would justify, they must look one day to hear of it: Then as
fast as they could they broke open all the doors, seized upon me, searched
every Trunk and Chest in my house to find Plate, tumbled about my Bedding and
Apparel, with their Muskets in their hands, and Matches light, took away all
my Armor and Weapons, leaving me not so much as a Rapier, and forcibly carried
me away, saying, that for ought they knew I might be charged with Treason; for
these sots think every man a Traitor, that abhors to be so As we rode along
the Captain wished me to submit: I said that I had not offended the Law, and
therefore would make no submission: For these riotous Rebels, said I, that
have abused me and my house, have greater reason to make a submission then my
self. When we came at the place where these Deputy Lieutenants were, much
people was assembled on a Green before the house, to see what should become of
this horrible Malignant; then issued they out to examine me, before the
multitude, where it was laid to my charge, that I refused to send my Arms to
the Trainings; It Is well known, said I, that I have ever been as sedulous to
send them as any man, till now of late: But there is now most need, said they;
I answered, That his Majesty's Proclamation commanded the contrary, and when
there is an Order for it under his Majesty's Great Seal, then will I send my
Arms, before I will not: Then was I charged for not contributing to the
Parliament; I answered, That your Majesty had declared that none of his true
Subjects should furnish the Parliament with Horse, Arms, or Money, and that I
had rather offend all men living, then the King of England, or my own
Conscience: Then it was urged, That I said I would march to the King; Why, said
I, if my own house grow too hot for me, whither should I go for protection but
to my Sovereign. But, quoth one, there be a great many of Rascals with the
King; Sir, said I, take heed what you say, for you call in question the best
and wisest men in England, for I am sure they are with the King. Then one cried
out, That I had said the then Earl of Essex was a Traitor: I replied, His
Majesty had proclaimed him so, and as my Learning taught me, I doubted that he
would hardly answer his doings. Then said one, that I had called the Ministers
Pulpit-Knaves: I answered, that I did in my heart reverence all honest Divines,
but such as now a days came up to preach Sedition, and to abuse the King and
his Liege people, I knew another place more fit for them then a Pulpit. Then
said one in the crowd, You are in the way to Hell: But I having a better
testimony within me, laughed at him, and said, I hoped better things: But, said
I, (standing close by the Deputy Lieutenants, the Captain and Soldiers hemming
me in) here is a brave Company about me, what do all these people intend to
guard me thither? at which some could not refrain from laughing; and so the
terrible Examination ended. Then the Gentlemen requested me in, and used me
civilly, (though some of the Rascals had much abused me) and after much
discourse, they wished me whatsoever I thought, yet to be sparing of my Speech,
for they saw my Neighbors were malitiou^, and so dismissed me. But I knowing
my own resolutions, and thereupon dreading a worse mischief too soon to ensue,
within a few days after forsook my house, and have ever since lived a Lawyer
itinerant, and yet I trust that I have observed the Law justly, and also used a
very good Conscience, for now I am sure that I did not take a Fee for diverse
months after, but many times in my Travells, for speaking in your Majesty's
behalf, I have been soon after driven to take a thick Wood for a refuge. Since
my departure they have taken away some of my Goods, s^questred my Rents, and
seized my little Estate, so as my poor Wife and Children can hardly get any
means to subsist withal, whilst I am an exile from them, beset with many
Crosses, but hardly one Cross of Silver to relieve me. As God has given me a
Loyal heart toward your Majesty, so I have often grieved, that I had not
abilities equivalent to testify the same; bu^ I know your Grace will pardon
involuntary neglects, since by my pen and tongue, which are a Lawyers best
Weapon^, I have endeavored always to do your Majesty the best service I
could; and I doubt not but your Sacred Majesty will be graciously pleased to
take these things into your Princely consideration, and to afford your loyal
and true Subjects that have been thus unlawfully abused, a happy re^resse in
due time, for these intolerable wrongs and oppressions, which goodness of
your Majesty toward us, shall for ever engage us (if possible) in a more
reciprocal bond of Duty, Love, and Allegiance to your Majesty and yours, and
so I heartily beseech Almighty God to preserve and bless your Majesty, your
Gracious Queen, and your most hopeful, Royal Issue and Alliance, with all
prosperity in this life, and eternal happiness by Christ Jesus in Heaven.

Amen.
To the High and most Renowned MAJESTY OF Charles the II: By the Grace of God
most Mighty and Famous King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc.
A Continuation, or Exact and very True Relation of diverse Passages concerning
the Loyal Demeans and injust Sufferings of your Majesty's true and faithful
Subject John Wenlock of Langham in the County of Essex, Counselor at Law, in
the former Declaration mentioned; and the miserable distresses of his loving
Wife, his Children, and whole Family: occasioned by the Tyranny and cruel
Usurpation of the late most monstrous and unparalleled Rebels.
MAy it please your sacred Majesty in your royal Clemency, to take further
notice, that within a few days after, that the aforesaid barbarous Injuries
and unlawful Violences were put upon your said Subject in his dwelling House,
his apprehension and carrying away as a Prisoner, and return home again; the
said pestiferous Constable, formerly mentioned, being horribly vexed in his
rebellious Stomach, because he could not obtain his malicious Will, and
villainous Intention against your said Subject, which was to have him sent to
some Gaol, or Ship at Sea, to be kept in hold as a Prisoner, during their
pleasures, did therefore repair to a Justice of the Peace, a man in all
probability, as well qualified then, and of as good discretion for that Office,
as the other was to be a Constable, where he made a most untrue Complaint
against your Subject, informing the said Justice, That he went in fear of his
Life, and believed that your Subject would either kill him, or burn his Houses,
and also offered to take his Corporal Oath to that effect. Whereupon the said
Justice, in his grave indiscretion, very little, or not at all (as it seems)
regarding the profession of the Law, or the Law it self, in the compass of
Discretion; nor yet common Civilities to be expected and used amongst
Gentlemen, would not vouchsafe to send for your said Subject in a gentile and
neighborly way to confer with him, thereby to hear and observe what your Subject
was able to allege in his own defense, against the Complaints of such a paltry
Fellow, but immediately suffered the said Party, without any further
examination of the matter, to make a most false and wicked Oath against your
said Subject, and thereupon granted a Warrant of the Peace against him,
directed to the other Constable of Langham aforesaid, peremptorily to apprehend
your Majesty's said Subject, and to bring his Body before him; And hereupon the
said other Constable did forthwith repair unto your Subjects dwelling House,
and there made relation of the occasion of his coming at that time. Whereupon
your Subject did fairly request the said Constable to show him his Warrant;
which he presently delivered into your Subjects hand, who perusing the same
over did inform the Constable, That he much marvelled, That the Justice would
permit such an Oath to be made against him, before the matter were better
examined on both Parts, and that he also understood what excusatory Arguments
might be alleged on your Subjects behalf: For, said I, if the Justice had
refused to take the Parties Oath for a while, until the Cause had received a
further examination, yet no danger or prejudice could have accrewed to the
Justice, for his not accepting the said Oath, unless that my self, against
whom the Oath was tendered, had in the interim committed some violent and
unlawful Act against the Kings Majesty's Peace, which a Magistrate methinks,
in point of Charity and discretion, should not very fearfully expect to be
perpetrated by a Counselor at Law that was not as yet voted, and declared to
be Non compos mentis; but that odious name and censure of a Malignant, never so
incongruouslie imposed, yet (as the violence of the stream did then ru^) must
of necessity be a sufficient motive, and pretense to patronize all manner of
Rigors and Incivilitles. And further, your said Majesty's Subject did then
inform the Constable, that he had some good cause to believe, that the said
Warrant was not intended against himself, because thereby it was commanded to
bring the Body of Mr. Wenlock of Langh^m, and said I, there be some others in
the Town, that may well pass by that appellation; and therefore in regard,
that the usual Addition that i^ commonly given unto me, in all Writings, is not
inserted, neither my Christian name therein specif^ed, I am not bound to take
notice of such an ambiguous warrant, or to yield obedience thereunto; for
certainly there is some grand misprision therein committed, either by the
Justice of the Peac^, or his Clerk, or else the Informer. Why Sir? quoth the
Constable, without doubt you are the Man, that is intended by the Warrant. If
you think so, said, I then neither my self, nor any of my Family shall make
opposition against it: but if thou will provide me a Horse, and se^ me gently
upon his back, and lead him by the bridle, then will I pass along with you
without offering the least violence, but upon mine own free and voluntary
motion; I will not go (for the Reasons aforesaid) until thou do bring a
wiser Warrant. And hereupon his Reply was (as I remember) That he would not
meddle with me upon such terms, and so departed. And yet, before that I had
thus edoctrinated his Intelligibles, he was so zealous for the Cause, (he knew
not what) as he was very urgent to have me go away with him to the Justice at
that time, although it was then a deep snow, very bitter weather, and
altogether unfit for travel, unless it had been upon a far more necessitous
occasion. But within a day or two after, (if it please your Majesty) the former
Constable stable which had taken the Oath, and procured the VVarrant against
me, was about repairing toward my House, and perchance I espied him before he
entered my Gate, and went out and met him, and fairly said unto him, Come on
Neighbor, what News? or to that effect. VVhereupon he answered, that he was
come to tell me, That my self was the very man that he had made Oathe against.
If it be so, said I, indeed I am sorry for thee, for thou art a vile Wretch,
and know not what great wrong thou have done unto thy sel^; for God he
knows that I never intended thee any hurt, either in thy Person or Estate, for
God be praised I have more Grace to rectify my Conscience, and Conversation,
and a better Knowledge and Judgment in the Laws of my native Country, than
weakly to expose my self to shame and danger, by fouling my hands about such a
Varlet, as thou art: but if the Lord spare my life, until the Laws run in the
right Channel, I shall then endeavor by the course of Justice, to right my
self against thee, and such others of thy Tribe, as have so grossly abused me,
and sought my disgrace, and imminent destruction: in the mean time I shall
humbly crave at the hands of my most merciful M^ker, such a portion of
Patience as may enable me with courage and constancy, to endure such crosses
as his providential Wisdom shall think fit to afflict me withal, for his
glory, and mine own eternal good: and speaking unto him after this manner, or
to the same substance in effect, me thought the Party did look with a
turbulent, and somewhat dejected countenance, as if his conscience did accuse
him, and so turning his back like himself, he went his way: and to the best of
my remembrance, I did never see him after; for it pleased God, that within a
very few days following he fell dangerously sick, in which time of his
sickness (as I was afterward informed) he did oftentimes murmr and cry out,
that he had wronged Mr. Wenlock; and I hope that the Lord did give him grace to
repent, in some measure, for his sinful errors in that behalf: but the sad
event was, that the Party lay miserably sick, and languishing, for the space
of near a quarter of a year together, and so departed this life; when your
Subject was many miles distant from home, and wandering about on fo^t, as
privately as he could, to save and secure his liberty and life* for the truth
is, may it please your Majesty, that the malicious and false Oath taken against
your Subject as aforesaid, was one of the first, and none of the least Motives,
that induced him to depart from his Wife and Family. Which intolerable and
most infest Injury offered to your Subject, being also seconded, and
aggravated, by the bitter and barbarous expressions of some others of the
seditious Rabble, reviling his young Children as they went in the Fields near
his House, and a^king them if the Cavalier their Father was not yet dispatched,
together with the remissness and pitiful pusilanimity of the Magistrates
thereabouts, who were as timorous to act according to Law and Justice, as the
vulgar multifarious Monster was obnoxious, and prone at that time to all manner
of mischief; did something abate, and almost terrify your Subjects courage,
and confidence, being loath to render himself a Sacrifice to the inhumane
cruelty of Madness, Ignorance and Rebellion; and likewise desirous (if it
pleased God) to prolong his life, in hope to meet with some better opportunity
of making a further manifestation of his true and faithful Loyalty to his
Sovereign, and sincere love and affection to his native Country; and therefore
he did think it none of the worst Policy, for himself to withdraw, a while from
his Mansion house, that so he might not remain so continual an eye sore to his
aemulous and harebrain'd Antagonists, believing, that as his absence would
extenuate his own danger, so it might possibly occasion some mitigation of
their Malice: and hoping also, that their outragio^s frenzy would prove but a
Meteor and vanish sooner than a Nine days wonder, or at least begin to waine,
when that moon of madness was at the full; which Conjecture and imagination of
mine, I do verily believe, would not have proved frustrate, had not the
righteous God as a just punishment for all our sins, permitted that infernal
Prince Apollyon, and his Chaplain, in ordinary, mutually to be the banefull
bellows and brands, both to blow and kindle the fatal fire of Sedition in the
hearts and affections of that grossly ignorant, dis-ingenuous and inconstant
multitude, and which unhappily made them to be so instrumental, not only to
themselves, but also such real auxiliaries, to the long continuate sad
distractions, and ever to be lamented miseries, of these late so wilfully
distressed Nations. And in truth your Majesty's Subject might have just cause
to fear, that some or other of his Neighbors, so notoriously envious, might be
drawn by some Diabolical instigation, to make an Oath against his Life, as well
as his Liberty; for he had good reason to misdoubt the worse, in regard he was
so palpably guilty of such high Crimes as true intelligent legal Loyalty, and
just Integrity were then esteemed to be: and also because his place and
station was under a Climate where the far major part of the people, were so
prodigi-Ously zealous and fanatical: and where but very few of any note or
quality thereabouts, had the happiness or honor of a just occasion to be put
into the Catalogue of Sufferers, with that eminently Loyal, and ever to
Honored Knight of St. John's in Colchester, now the Right Honorable the Lord
Lucas, and that most Noble and Loyal Baronet Sir Benjamin Ayloffe, and that
worthy to be remembered, and discreet Knight, Sir Thomas Wiseman the Elder,
deceased; and therefore your Majesty's Subject well considering, that his so
constant opposition, to the violent force and torrent of Rebellion, would every
day more and more stir up the stomachs, and provoke, and sharpen the edge of
his pernicious and inveterate Enemies, so cruelly bent against him; and that
such also of his Neighbors as he esteemed to be his Friends, durst not make
any manifestation or testimony thereof, for fear of being marked with the brand
of Malignancy, and so in danger likewise to be exposed to the fury and madness
of the multitude for his sake, and knowing for certainty, that his own
Conscience in point of Religion, and his knowledge and judgment in the
municipall Laws of his Country, would never permit him in the least tittle to
alter his resolution, in the progress of truth and Loyalty, did hereupon
conceive and believe as aforesaid, that a private departure from his house for
a time, would prove his best visible posture of defense. And so toward the
latter end of the year 1642. your Subject with some reluctance, God knows, did
depart from his dwelling place, leaving his dear Wife, and small Children (as
the fate and face of the Tyrannical times did then appear) in a Forest or
Wilderness, amongst Brutish and Barbarous animals, and yet with a competent
and sufficient estate, for their comfort support and maintenance, in my
absence, if their innocencies had not been injuriously deprived and violently
robbed thereof, within a short time after my departure. And so it was if it
please your Majesty, that the change of air, did never breed the least change,
or alteration in your subjects mind and affections, but wheresoever he came,
and upon all occasions his discourse was still pathetical on your Majesty's
most glorious Fathers behalf, very freely reproving the cross hallucinations,
perversities and rebellion of the times; and vindicating his Majesty's regal
rights, and just and lawful Prerogatives, to the uttermost of his power; in so
much as many times he found that he gave offense to some, and made others of a
more honest condition, somewhat timorous to entertain him for fear of the
Bugg-bear and his r^mbling ubiquitarie spirits, that then kept the bewitched
Country in so much awe, for alas the most part of the people thereabouts, were
so sottish, as to idolize mere shaddows, and yet fondly to neglect the Almighty
God that made them, and ready to offend and grieve his good spirit, by their
irreverent despising and horrible rebelling against his most perfect and
specifical Image, that then was upon the face of the earth; which profane
impiety your subject could not pass by, without ministering some reproof,
although some that pretended to be his friends, did diverse times tell him, that
he did procure his own wrong, and prejudice thereby; yet your subject having a
more assured regard and a more firm and vigilant eye, upon the future, then
the present time, could not upon any occasion refrain in a Christian and
moderate manner, to declare himself, and in despite of all opposition, still
persisted in that religious and heroical resolution of loyalty, and the
discharging of his own conscience before God and the World; and thus after many
sore rubs, dangers and affronts your subject approached unto the village of
Dalham in Suffolk the Thomas Dalton now Dr. in Divinity.
Rector whereof being my kinsman, and one that I may well affirm to be a very
loyal learned and orthodox Divine, did give me most free and noble
entertainment; and where by the means of the great love and especial regard
both of himself, and his virtuous wife, expressed toward me, being in that
distressed condition, and whom in truth of nobleness, they esteemed as their
Kings friend above their own kinsman, and together with the civil courtesies
and generous respects of another noble Gentleman then Lord of that town; and
others of his worthy family at Dalham Hall, your subject did receive, and enjoy
a comfortable rest and residence, for many weeks together, being linked in a
pleasant and sweet society, with some royal bird of his own feather, and where
quotidian and frequent discourses, did pass amongst us, concerning his late
Sacred Majesty and his affairs at Oxford, whither your subject^ said kinsman,
intended suddenly to repair, and also offered to my self a friendly and fair
means of conduction thither, which I did thankfully embrace, and approve of,
yet before I undertook so long and dangerous a journey, I was very solicitous
to see my wife and children, and to take my leave of them, not knowing what had
success I might meet with (as the times then were) nor whether I should ever
live to see them again, in this world, or not; after which resolution thus
taken, without delay I began to ma^ch, and did beat upon the ^oof homewards,
(as I was driven to fetch my compass) I believe above four miles at the least,
but when I approached the territories of my own unhappy Country, that professed
stage of rebellion, mine ear^s were sa^ly saluted and summoned, with the
beating of drums, and thundering of guns, for indeed the most part of the people
in that quarter, were so much holy mad that their most continual practice, and
greatest endeavor was, to seek occasions, and prepare materials to macerate
themselves, and to muster up the ruin and confusion of these once so happy, and
late most flourishing nations: And further to try my patience, when I came
within a flight shot of mine own house, I was casually met withal and
discovered by a man that dwelled in the same Town of Dedham, where the rebels
were then a training up themselves to work mischief, which party I durst not
well trust, in regard that some of his neighbors, but a short time praeceding,
had so barbarously endangered the lives of my self and my whole family, and so
forcibly broke open my house, and stolen away my goods: which entering
presently into my confideration, I thought it not safe to tarry at my own
House, misdoubting that the Party would give notice of my being about home, and
that so I might be liable to a second surprise; for I knew well that the mere
fury and madness of the multitude, was in truth as legal as any Warrant* they
could obtain against me, from such seditious Simpletons, as then pretended to
be in lawful Authority thereabouts; and therefore to eschew the present
danger, within the space of an hour, as I remember, I departed from my House,
and went to a poor Tenants of mine in a Village near adjacent, where in a
little close room, I did anchorise my self for that day, and at Evening my Wife
came unto me, there in the poor man's bed we lodged together for that night; in
the Morning I soon prepared my self for my retraiting foot march to Dalham
again, whither my God in his mercy did safely conduct me, with a settled
resolution to have gone to Oxford with my said Kinsman: but in the interim of
my absence, which was not many days, the air there also did begin to
overcast, and the Country to smell so strong of Rebels and Gunpowder, that my
Kinsman being of a Sound stomach, and an honest Divine, that could not
dissemble, knew not at all how to relish or digest such poisonous Vapors, as
the infectious stinch of Rebellion, did daily cast forth and present before
him, and therefore as an Antidote against further danger, and a Preservative
for his health, liberty, and safety, he was enforced to change the air, and so
departing from his House, went immediately to Oxford, before that your Subject
could make his return to Dalham. Notwithstanding whose absence, (that was the
nearest to me in relation there,) yet I still found as much nobleness at that
place, as might in reason or civility be expected; and therefore finding my
self to be welcome, and well at ease, I continued there the longer, for indeed
Journeys were not very pleasant unto me, in regard that I traveled for the
most part on foot, which I commonly used to do at that time, because I did find
that kind of passage, to be more free from suspicion, and danger, and also
less chargeable to those, that were willing to give me a friendly
entertainment. But my Fates were such as my quiet repose and felicity at Dalham
aforesaid, must not admit of any long continuance there, for to the intent and
end that I might be made truly sensible of my former sins, and present
sufferings, and least I should be lulled asleep in security, or vainly puffed up
with a false vision, and shadow of Prosperity, it pleased God, that a Messenger
of Satan was sent to buffet me* and th^s it hapened: There lived in that Town a
mean mechanical fellow, a Blacksmith by his Trade, that was a daily Workman and
Reteyner to the Parsonage, where my chiefest abode then was; and this Party
was reported and taken to be a dangerous stubborn and rebellious Roundhead, and
by some that well knew his Conditions, I was oftentimes advised to beware of
him, and not to discourse or utter my mind in his hearing: But this Fellow,
set on surely by the Devil, the first Father and cunning Contriver of all
Rebellion, Malice and Mischief, and a sworn Enemy to all Truth, had a fervent
desire, (as the sequel declared, to work me a Mischance) when he once
understood me to be a constant Maintainer thereof; And yet he presented himself
unto me in a more subtle specious and angelical Garb and Posture, than others
of his Brethren, of a far more cleanlier Profession, had done before him, for
he ever endeavored by fair words, and submisse Demeano^r, to infinuate himself
into my respect and favor, always expressing more signs of Service toward
me, then either I expected or desi^ed at his hands; and sometimes when he did
espy me walking alone in the Fields, he would repai^e unto me with the pretense
of much observancy, and an ardent desire to conser with me; telling me, that he
had heard, and also perceived, that I was a man of much knowledge, and
therefore he thought himself happy, when he had any opportunity of Discourse
with me, whereby his Judgment might be the better informed in the truth of
many things, concerning the troubles and divisions of these times, entreating
me still to exouse his boldness of access unto me, and protesting that
whats^ever his Opinion had formerly been, yet he had now a great desire and
love to learn the truth: and also assuring me, that I need not misdoubt or fear
to speak ^y mind unto him freely, for he would be faithful un^o me, and would
never be an Instrument to procure to so honest and loving a Gentleman as I was,
the least hurt or ^njury in the world: And after many such meetings and
expressions, your Majesty's subject being of an open heart, and free from all
deceit, did hope and imagine that such others as spak^ fai^ly, were of his own
nature and disposition, and that their real intentions, were correspondent to
their verbal expre^^^ons, and therefore he began to b^leeve, that this late so
vip^rou^ a Vulcan, was now capable of conversion; and hereupon in truth of
charity, toward the poor seduced wretch, and ^o preserve his body from the
hands of the hangman, and his so^l from the danger of the devil; I did
oftentimes very freely converse with him, always endeavoring to evince, and
rectify his depraved judgment, to molifie his mind, and by Scripture, law
and reason, to convince him of his errors, and ever presenting to the view of
his apprehension, that ugly monster of Rebellion, in as hideous and horrible a
shape, as I was able to limne it out* or blaze forth the pedigree thereof,
telling him that the Devil was ^he first father of Rebellion, and that all
others, that were infected with that witchcraft, were his own undoubted
children, and the very proper soldiers that fought under the devils b^nner;
and informing him at large of the loyalty of that holy Prophet David, toward
his Sovereign, notwithstanding that he was his enemy, and sought his life, and
was a man in some manner forsaken of God; and how benignly and mercifully the
Lord likewise dealt with David for his uprightness, and pious and just
demeanor in that behalf: and also relating unto him at sundry times many other
passages, presidents and precepts out of holy Scripture, and several authentic
Authors and Histories, which did declare and make manifest the religious
necessity, of the subjects true obedience, and loyalty to their lawful
Sovereign; and withal showing him how great and honorable the rewards have
been, that truth and loyalty has received, both in ancient and modern times:
and how prodigiously fatal and fearful, that desperate condition and period of
rebels and traitors had ever been; and how odious their memory in all
succ^ssions of ages: and such or to the same effect, was the most part of your
subjects continual conference with Barnard the Blacksmith, for so was he
called, but he being then an instrument of h^ll, and so not capable of good
Counsel, but one of those Fools that hated Instruction, and having the fire of
Envy and Sedition kindled in his putrified stomach, could not rest long in
quiet, without the working of some manner of wickedness; and therefore he went
to the Committees, those rural nutritious Instruments of Rebellion, and there
he made his complaint against a Noble Gentleman then living in the Town, and
that was your Subjects loving Friend, and ancient acquaintance, whereat I was
much moles^ed and grieved, and therefore soon after, upon a Sunday at night
when the said Barnard came to the Parsonage, where I then was, I did begin
somewhat sharply to expostulate the matter with him, and said that I was
heartily sorry to see him still continue so turbulent and factious a fellow, as
to run about with such trivial complaints, against honest and worthy
Gentlemen, to whom he was so much beholding, and by whose means he had obtained
his principal maintenance and livelihood, telling him, that if I had thought
this gross humors would still have fed upon the leaven of malitiousnesse and
peevishness, I would never have utter^d my mind unto him so freely as I had
done, for I now believed that he would prove ^ kind o^ ^ Judas in the
conclusion; But the greatest hurt and injury, said I, will ever redound upon
thy self, for by such false and perfidious dealing, thou will draw the wrath of
God upon thee and thine, and make thy self odious and abhorred of all honest
men, or words to that effect: And he returning me cross answers, I confess I
did bitterly reprove him for his seditious sauciness, the issue whereof was,
that the next morning very early one of the Maid Servants in the house ca^e
running up into my Chamber in an extafie, and with tears in her eyes, ^uefully
told me that we were all undone, for Barnard had raised the Town, and beset the
house, and that he would presently carry me away Prisoner to Cambridge; and
that her Mistress was in a most fearful affright at the hearing thereof.
Whereupon according to my usual courage and confidence, I began to smile, and
wished the Maid to pacify her self, for I was not afraid of such Rascals,
but would suddenly rise, and come down amongst them, and perhaps give some
allay to their fury; and so with all expedition I dressed my self, and came
down into the Parsonag^ Hall, where the said Barnard then was, accompanied with
such a rusticall rabble of mere animals, as his Impudence could command, or
their own ignorance would permit, to dance after the mad Music of his
pernicious Pipe, and there at first casting mine eyes upon the tenebrous object
of a Blacksmith, I did thus encounter him: Ha, how now Barnard, what news this
morning? to which he made answer, That I must go with him to Cambridge before
the Committees; What must I go with thee, quoth I, upon what Authority? let me
see thy Warrant: Whereunto his reply was, That he had no Warrant to show me,
but that himself was Authority and Warrant sufficient, for he could tell of his
own knowledge, that I was a Malignant, and therefore it was lawful enough for
him to apprehend me, and also to carry me away without any further Order; and
indeed, although the wicked wretch did not rightly understand what he said, yet
I knew well, that his Authority was equivalent to the Committees, and as legal
to an inch, (as the case then stood) yet I thought it no policy to acknowledge
so much to him, least he should be too proud of his power, and so the more rude
and violent against me* wherefore I still harped upon this string, That without
some color of lawful Authority, I would not stir a foot; for I had then no
business at Cambridge, and if a man of my Quality and Profession should submit
himself to travel about the Country with such a Company of Idle fellows and
upon ^o frivolous an occasion, without the command of a W^rrant, it must needs
redound much to the blemish of my judgment and reputation, and therefore I
plainly told them, that I was resolved not to go along with them, unless it
were upon other terms; and hereupon the vile Vulcan, believing that all his
Rebellious retinue were ready at his command, did cry out to the Constable to
do his Office, and to lay hold of me, for I was the Malignant and only man that
he intended to take; And upon this I turned my self toward the party to whom
he directed his Speech, as I perceived, and said unto him, Art thou a
Constable? who answered, Yes Sir: Then quoth I, Friend I charge thee in the
Kings Majesty's name to see the peace kept, for I have done no man wrong, but
was at quiet in my bed, until this riotous Assembly did thus disturb me, and
therefore I counsel thee to be wary, and well advised, for if thy self, or any
of thy Company here, do offer any violence to me, without a lawful Warrant so
to do, you were better bite off your nails, and leave scratching for ever; but
certainly that which is done already will not be forgotten, when time shall
serve, for I shall hazard to make you all smart for it; And it is probable
that this animosity of mine, and heroic manner of demeanor, did so much abash
or pacify the Peasants, as not one of them durst offer to lay hands upon me;
But it was reported afterward, that this Barnard had sent to Cambridge in
Post-hast for a Warrant against me, that very morning, and that the intention
of their coming so soon to the Parsonage, was but to protract time, and to
stay me with wrangling discourse, until the Messenger was returned with his
tackling; and the truth is, I had been gone from thence within a few hours, if
these unlucky Fellows had not thus Treacherously sought to prevent me, but as
it happened they did but hasten my ^ourney, for the Gentlewoman of the house,
being wonderful solicitous that I might be delivered from the danger and
torment of this Vulcans Hammer and Anvill, knowing that he and his Trayterou^
adherents might bruise me into pieces, but never could fashion me into any
other form or shape, did quickly endeavor to prepare a passage for my
departure, and escape from amongst them. And thus it was, she sent up to Dalham
Hall for some Gentlemen that were there, entreating them to come down presently
to the Parsonage which they did, and whilst that some of them were in hot
dispute with this Barnard, and reproving him for his thus acting the part of an
Impudent, and Treacherous wretch, the Gentlewoman did whisper in my ear, and
told me, that she wished with all her heart, that I were out of their fingers,
for quoth she, if they have once gotten you to Cambridge, God knows how cruelly
the Villains there may deal with you, because you have always spoken so much
against their Treasons, and are known to be so stout and true a Subject to the
King, and therefore she most earnestly advised me to get away if I could, and
told me that her Maid should presently unlock a backdoor out of the Parlour
into the Garden, and a back-gate out of the Garden into a back yard, and so I
might soon escape into the fields: and accordingly this door and gate were
quickly set open, and a sign given me thereof, that so I might take my fittest
opportunity: but I confess it went much against the height of my stomach, to
run away as it were from such Rascals; but the Gentlewomans importunity, and
the love of mine own liberty, did a little work upon me, and therefore when I
did observe the whole company to be most bu^ie, violent and full of discourse,
I suddenly slipped into the parlour, as if I went to look for something, and
without taking my leave of any body in the hall, or elsewhere in the house, I
nimbly glided away thorough the garden into the backyard, and so getting over a
pale, I soon obtained the wide fields, where I made my march, as if I ran for a
wager, and endeavored to fly as swift as Pegasus, toward a great wood not
far off, for like a subtle fox, when I had formerly rambled about the fields
for my recreation, I well observed where the best covert was for my safeguard,
if I should chance at any time to be hunted. I was got but a little way from
the house, before I met with some that knew me well, because I had ordinarily
frequented the Parish Church: I only entreated their silence, and made haste
toward my desired port, and soon I attained the wood, and brustled into the
thickest part thereof as near as I could, and being almost quite out of breath,
I rested my panting limbs upon an old stub there, and first giving thanks to my
God for my good deliverance, I then began to ruminate what course I were best
to take for my safety, for I well knew that I must not dwell there long,
although it was a musical place, for indeed the Choristers of the wood, did
sweetly chaunt their melody to my solicude, but above all a Robin-red-breast
was so courteous to court me so nearly, as I began to believe that her pure
innocence, was ambitious of my company; but presently, to disturb the least of
my comforts, I was alarmed with the noise and hallow of the Hunters, that
endeavored to rowse their Game ag^in; but I was lodged close and said squat:
and yet I believe that if they had entered the Wood they might possibly have
made a second surprise of me: but although that day immediately before was very
clear, yet it pleased the providence of God upon the sudden, to send a most
violent and raging shower of rain, which so soundly wet the wood and timber
trees, that it spoiled their sport, and I heard no more noise of them: and yet
I continued a good while after in my harbor, for fear of some secret
ambuscado; but at length I began to move, as soon as the shower was over, but
the rain that had dropped upon me in the wood, together with my brus^ling
amongst the trees and bushes to get out, did make me as grievously wet, as if I
had been drench^ over head and ears in a river, but in that pitiful case I
wa^, yet I ventured out, and knew not well whither to bend my course, but soon
I resolved my self for a Gentleman's house about a mile off, with whom I was
acquainted since my being at Dal^am: and when I drew near the house, I quickly
espied the Gentleman in his yard, looking upon a workman that was there at
work, which party dwelled in Dalham, where I had met with my late surprisal,
and before I came, had related to him the manner thereof, and so soon as the
Gentleman did discover my approach, he came toward me with a smiling
countenance, and said he was sorry to see me in such a wet condition, but
heartily glad that I had escaped out of mine Enemies hands, and entreated me to
walk in; I returned him thanks, but said unto him, That his house was no place
for me, as the case stood, I must not tarry there: No, quo^h h^, but I wish you
might tarry, if it were without danger, for it is to be feared that they will
suspect this house, and therefore it is no policy to stay long, but you may
venture to go in a while, and dry your clothes against the fire, and take some
refreshment; and indeed his courteous offer came very seasonably, for besides
the need which I had of a fire to dry me, I had taken no sustenance all the day
before, by reason o^ my former disturbance. Well, in I went, and there a sweet
and loving Gentlewoman his Sister, did presently prepare me the best repast
that the house could afford, and whilst I was taking the same in have, I
desired the Gentleman to send out some spies, to discover whether the Coast
were clear or not, for I did misdoubt that my Hunters might still be upon their
chase, to smell me out. And withal requested him to draw on a pair of Boots,
that would sense water, for indeed mine own were sufficiently liquored, being
as wet within as without: these things being soon dispatched, out we went
together on the back^ide into the Fields: and then I told him whether I did
intend to travel, and take my repose for that night ensuing, and the next
Morning to depart out of the Country, but quoth I, the way to the house I know
not, and loath I am to make inquiry about the way leading thereunto, least by
that means I should be suspected, and so be discovered, and besides if the
Gentleman himself be from home none of his Family does know me, and then
perchance I may miss of my entertainment, and so lie all night in the Feilds:
Well, quoth he, let not that trouble you, for I will not leave you thus, but if
it please God, I will see you safely arrived there, and I will warrant you
welcome, for the Gentlewomen is as Royal as her Husband, I was glad to hear of
that, and most thankfully embraced his courtesy, and so very cheerfully we
marched along, the most private way thorough the standing Corn Fields, and long
grass, it being on Midsummer day and our Journey near five miles: yet in a
short time with many a wet and weary step we arrived at the place we so much
desired, where my Comrade and my self boldly entering, we soon understood that
the Gentleman of the house was not at home, but the Party we first saw there
did conduct us into the Parlour, where the Gentlewomen the Mistress of the
House, did soon after appear and gave us a very kind welcome, and instantly in
a few words, I related my Condition unto her, and what a Danger I had escaped
that day: she rejoiced greatly at it, and said that she was heartily glad of my
safe Arrival there, for she had heard much of me, but was never before so
happy as to see me, and casting her eyes toward the Chimney, which was then
adorned with Summer-like Ornaments, as green Boughs, green Rushes, and Flowers,
she meerily said, Sir, though you be a stranger, yet I believe at this time you
have more need of a good fire then of green Rushes, and forthwith she commanded
her Servants to disrobe the chimney of all those Ornaments, and quickly to make
a good fi^e, which together with a bottle of Sack and other good cates she
presented us with, did much refresh us after our wet Journey, and there we both
reposed our selves together for that night, and in the morning betimes my
loving fellow Traveller departed, and wen^ and certified my Friends, with whom
I had formerly been, how well I was got off, and how far I was on ward on my
Journey; and soon after that he was gone, I did arise my self, and took some
good refreshing, and with much thankfulness to the house, I went away, and
ben^ my course toward the other side of Suffolk; and it was well that I made
so much has^e, for within an hour after that I was gone from thence, (as I was
not long after informed) the bold Blacksmith and his ragged Regiment were come
to that Town, with an Hue and Cry to search after me, but they came a little
too late, God be thanked. And yet further also, if it please your Majesty,
about a year or two after, I did hear to my great comfort, that this
Blacksmith was become a convert, for whether he was convinced in his
conscience, to see the gracious deliverance that God gave me out of his hands,
and thereby was occasioned to consider the better of me, and the good Counsel
I had given him, or whether he was utterly ashamed of the base Treachery that
he had practiced against me, true it is, that he removed from Dalham to another
Town some 7, or 8 Miles off, and there fell quietly to his work, deserted the
Rebellion, and never meddled any more therein. Now I was upon another foot
March, to find out new adventures, and glad to accept of the meanest
entertainment I could meet withal, being enforced sometimes to lie in a Lousy
Al^-house; but in short time I did happily arrive at a Mansion place of good
Hospitality, being the refidence of two most Worthy The Lady Jermy, and the
Lady Waldegrave.
Ladies, the Mother and the Daughter, being both of them Widows, and there I
met with some Gentlemen that were in mine own predicament, where by these
Ladies Noble favor, and free entertainment, together with our own Royal I
discourse, we did much revigerate our spirits: And here we had Noble and Free
Quarter, for a good time, and yet ever and anon we were Alarumd with those
Trooping Spirits, that continually haunted the Country both night and day; for
there and at other places where I had formerly been, many times a Messenger
would come to the house, and inform the Servants, that if any Gentlemen were
there, that loved the King, it were best for them to look to themselves well,
for there were Troopers at hand, and upon such warning given, my custom was
still to walk out into the Fields, and ruminate; and yet once at a place where
I was, being above in a Chamber a reading, the house was filled with Troopers
before I was aware of it, and I fearing that if they should search the house,
and find me there shut up alone, they might suspect me, and take me for a prey,
did come down confidently amongst them, and talked so boldly, and yet warllie,
that the fellows not finding him they looked for, went very fairly away, and
had not me in suspicion, for ought that I perceived. But now the goodness of
these Ladies, was a main motive, to make me fearful of being the least
Instrument, to occasion them any trouble, and this I feared more then any
danger, that could accrue to my self, wherefore I though^ i^ not fit to ^arry
there too long at that time, least greater notice should be taken of me, then
my private Condition was then ambitious of. And upon this confideration my self
and a Divine of good note that was there with me, did soon withdraw our selves
to an honest Gentlewomans, that lived very privately, where allowing something
for our Die^. we lived like to Recluses, almost as Anchorites: but in a few
weeks I was weary of that, and thought it better to live like a Prisoner in my
Wifes Custody, then any where else: and therefore I drew toward home, yet not
without some ill favored affronts and dangers, too tedious here to relate.
Well in the night time I went home, and there continued about 3. Months in a
little Chamber, never going down, unless it were in the night, and then my
Wife would not suffer me to go out neither, until she had sent some
discovering Scout^ abroad before me, for indeed sometimes they had espied some
good Instruments sculking about my Yards and Orchards, to ^^y surely if they
could hear any noise of me, and therefore I was driven to speak with a more
submisse voice then I had formerly used, when I pleaded at the Bar, and yet
alas I was not afraid of such Wretches at all, but very loath to be a means to
increase their condemnation, by their treacherous murdering of me, for
otherwise I feared not the face of the proudest Rebel in England, had it been
his Oxcellence himself. But I was of a stirring Spirit, if it please your
Majesty: and could not abide to be alvvayes mued up, and therefore out I went
again, to venture another voyage, and presented my self to some, that I had
good confidence in, and that were sufficiently able to have afforded me good
comfort, but alas I did find their looks to be downward, and their courage
cold, pretending much fear to entertain such as were in my condition, and this
was most irksome to my Genius, to see people of quality more cautious of giving
offense to the Devil, and his instruments, then they were of showing any fear
toward God, or any love to their King and his Friends, and so this journey of
mine producing but little effect, besides mine own grief, travel, and trouble,
within a fortnight or thereabouts, I returned home again to mine old Cabine,
and was then again in danger to have been discovered: for being near my house,
it being late in the evening, I met in the Highway with a Cart, and 2, or 3.
men therein, and one of them bad me Goodnight, and when they were a little
past, I heard one of them say, sure this same was Mr. Wenlock, and another
answered him, perhaps in good will to me, pish, no, it is not he, for he is
quick enough of his tongue, but this man has been at the Oven lately, meaning
I think, that my tongue was baked, and so I could not speak at all; but I knew
them well enough by their speech, and smiling at it, I passed away in silence
as whist as a Mouse; and then I continued at home, shut up in solitariness for
the space of about sixteen weeks, until the dead time of Winter, and then we
had a new alarm, that a great number of Troopers were come into the Country
very near us, and because no man thereabouts was in any danger then, but my
self, therefore my poor Wise believed and was very fearful that they came to
catch or kill m^, and said, that without doubt they would search the house, and
if they found me there, perhaps destroy her, and her Children for my sake, or
to that effect; and therefore she did entreat me to depart for a time, and to
shift for my self: To ^id her therefore of these fears, about 4 of the clock in
a cold morning, I did march out, going almost up to the knees in Snow, (a good
medicine for an ancient man, that had kept so long in a close Chamber, by a
good fire) yet I went with a constant courage, to keep my Loyalty, and save my
Life, and by the mercy of God this Voyage proved more fortunate then the
former, for I now met with courteous accommodation where I came. And still my
mind did run upon going to Oxford, yet oftentimes I was informed that the New^
books thundered out Sequestrations against the Estates of all such as were with
his Majesty there, or should afterward repair thither; and this I confess
gave an occasion to a strong combat in my soul, desirous I was to do his
Majesty the best service I was able, and yet the bowels of compassion toward
my Wife and Children, did make me loath to expose them to present ruin, and
utter undoing; but ere long I understood, that my not repairing to Oxford would
not preserve my Family from danger, unless I went presently home, and took the
Scotch Covenant, paid Taxes, and gave my consent to such other Rebellions
actions; but God in his mercy toward me, would not suffer my soul to be
infected with the leaven of such Poisoned Treacheries, and hereupon I had news
too soon, that my Lands and Goods were Sequestered, and my Wife and Children
brought into a most distressed and lamentable condition; and now were our
miseries almost at the full tide, for I was not able to relieve them, nor they
to send me any help at all, upon the greatest need that could happen unto me;
for the truth is, that the smell Estate I had, was befallen me not much above
3, or 4. years before these troubles did begin, and the same having been in the
hands of a Tenant for term of life, was in a manner forlorn, and in want of
much reparation, which to rectify and make decent for my turn, I had put my
self to great costs, in respect whereof I was left very bare of Money at that
time, and yet the pitiful pinch was, that I was driven to forsake my new
dressed up Nest, before I was well warm therein; and for all this, my chiefest
trust and confidence was still in the never failing mercies of my God, and
because my case was lawful and just, I was not afraid also to plead the same
before men, that were my greatest Persecutors, and therefore I did write and
send to the Committee of Essex, these lines following.

Gentlemen,
ALthough there be many mistakes in this unhappy Kingdom, yet can Charity be
quite banished out of the h^a^ts of Christians? and shall this Gentlewoman and
her Children sta^ve for my sake, whose offense, if it were any, is but a point
of Conscience? that such hard measure has been used to Innocents, and by such
as pretend Justice, has been seldom heard of: If I write Passionately excuse
me, for Solomon says, That oppression makes a wise man mad; but there is a
time when the Lord will execute Judgment and Righteousness to all that are
oppressed: For the Lord will arise and defend their Cause, and spoil the souls
of those that spoil them. But if my Wife may not enjoy her Jointure, which is
little enough to maintain her and her Children, then I desire that you would
give her some Certificate, to send to me, whereby I may be enabled without
apparent danger, to travel the Country, either to borrow or beg of Gentlemen,
my acquaintance, some releif for them; this poor request of mine, I trust shall
not be denied, and so I pray God to give us all grace to remember our latter
ends, and last accounts.


But this Epistle could operate no effect upon the hearts and consciences of
these kind of Christians, that were so soundly seasoned with the rage and
malice of the first Rebel, and their true and undoubted Father the Devil, and
therefore my self and poor Family, could not find the least pity at their
hands: And most certain it is, if it please your Majesty, that by some secret
instinct from Heaven, and the Observations that I have noted in my reading, I
have had the hap in these times to foretell many events, that afterward came
to pass, according to my conceit and imagination; and I pray God that this
Proverb, Impunitas semper ad deteriora invitat, as I have touched before, be
not too truly verified in some of these men; for notwithstanding, that they
have so evidently seen the most admirable mercy of God toward your Majesty
and these Kingdoms, now so lately made manifest, by the most happy and
peaceable conduction of your Majesty to your Royal Throne, and lawful, and
most just indubitable Right; and by the most miraculous preserving of your
Princely Person, in the midst and labyrinth of such ineffable dangers, as
scarce ever any Prince before your time was involved in; yet many of them are
not yet sufficiently convinced in their Consciences, of the odious crime of
their late Rebellion; neither be they truly humbled for their sins, nor
stricken with a due remorse of conscience, for their profane perjuries, and
most bloody and horrible impieties, cruelties, and injustice by them committed;
neither does there as yet appear in them the least spark of grace, to kindle
their charity, and quicken them up to those good desires which Gods word, and
the truth of Religion does require at their hands, which i^, to deal by others
as they would be dealt withal themselves, and to make some amends and
satisfaction, where they have committed an offense, and wrought an injury: But
there is a Generation yet, that think they be in a very secure condition, and
still look up aloft in place, who together with their perverse accomplices and
adherents, do make as it were a mere mock of Loyalty, that it is not looked
upon, nor such as have suffered in that behalf, and do slight and undervalue
those whom they have for a long while, by their unjust power, pressed down, who
notwithstanding if their merits were once truly known, have in reality of truth
deserved far better credit and respect in the Kingdom, then any of themselves:
And now that the Wind and Tide is so happily changed, this sort of people,
howsoever they did formerly so much contemn, and to speak with reverence, even
revile and vilify your Sacred Majesty, yet now with a false shadow, to serve
their own turns, they seem so highly to honor, and superlatively to adore the
same, as their carriage and demeanor does demonstrate their belief to be, that
your Majesty's General Pardon, with an Act of Indemnity, will be availeable
for them in another World, and pleadable at the High Tribunal, before the most
Just and Almighty Judge both of Heaven and Earth, without any Repentance
toward God, for their sin, or satisfaction to their Neighbors, whom they have
so wickedly and villanously injured, and undone; and this will prove their most
doleful and deadly error in the conclusion. I beseech the Lord to humble
their stout stomachs, and to mollify and open their hard stony hearts, that
they may yet understand those things that belong to their eternal peace. And
still again in despite of all their Tyranny, your Subjects affection stood for
Oxford, and I much entreated a Gentleman, whom I knew to have a Son in the
Kings Army, to give me the best direction how I might in the safest manner get
thither, for if I were taken by the way, and bereaved of that little money
which I had, and far remote from all my acquaintance, I might hazard to lie in
a Gaol and be starved; and he certified me, that the Journey then was very
difficult, but quoth he, I do know of a very good Guide, that knows all the
shallow Fords in the Rivers, and the best ways through the Woods, and private
places, and if any man help you thither, that I know, it must be he, and when
the party comes again into the Country, I will give you notice thereof, and not
long after I received a message from this Gentleman, intimating unto me, that
the party he told me of would very suddenly be thereabouts, and therefore he
wished me to come over, for he believed that I might soon speak with him: I was
at that time, as I remember, somewhat remote off, but with as much expedition
as conveniently might be, I made repair to this Gentleman's house, where I then
had news, that my intended Guide was surprised, and taken prisoner, and so my
sport was at a nonplus for that: and further to dishearten me, I had very sad
tidings from Oxford, that my Wives most dear and loving brother, and one of the
best friends I had, was there departed this life: and likewise within a while
after, my eldest son then but a little youth came trotting alone, about the
country to find me out, and to certify me of the poor and distressed condition
that his mother remained in, and thus unda gignit undam, for one misery
succeeded in the neck of another, and yet my comfort was, that God almighty was
still the same, and continued in his full power, and to his mercy in the
merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, I did still commend the sad condition of my
poor Wife and children: indeed their case was much to be lamented, and the
rather in regard that my wife was a Gentlewoman, well and tenderly brought up,
and now in such extremity of want, as she must turn away all her servants,
being not able to keep so much as a maid, to do the ordinary work about the
house, but enforced to do all her self, and indeed far more then the weakness
of her nature was able to pass thorough: for by the means of this her great
labor and pains taking, she has gotten such infirmities, as God he knows she
must of necessity carry with her to the grave: and when she endeavored to
hire for wages a poor woman to help her, at her greatest need, she could
seldom get any, for some of the blind besotted wretches in the town, would
still dissuade them from coming at her, and cry out, Why, what will you help a
Malignant? you will be soundly punished for it, or such like words: this was the
charity of these deformers, but I believe their religion they had not yet made
choice of: Now was my Wife also thorough want compelled to keep her children
from the School, that were prompt enough for learning, and this was to her, and
to my self especially, who had tasted the fruits of knowledge, a tormenting
grief, and to them a loss irreparable, she was also enforced, to sell away a
great part of the household stuff, she had yet left her, at a mean rate, for
money to buy her self and her poor children some bread: and in a short time her
small stock being exhausted and spent, they were all so humbled and brought
low, as they did almost forget their former condition of life, and what they
had been: and according to the manner of the poor people in that Country, and
to preserve themselves from starving altogether, they were contented to learn
to handle the Wheel and Cards, such greasy Instruments, as they had never
before in their life's time, meddled with, and I have often much marvelled how
they could ever fadge withal: but necessity had then no law to help it self;
Venture non habet aures, for alas hunger is a sharp saw^e: and thus by the
Instruction and aid of an honest poor woman, that dwelled very near them, they
did begin by this their unusual and hard labor, to earn something toward a
poor living, and in this so mean and dejected an Estate, they did continue for
a long time: and yet my Wife having still good Clothes to put on, would
sometimes on the Sundaies trim up her self, and some of her Children, and go to
the Parish Church: where one day as she drew near the same, instead of
Christian and Neighbourly comforts, fit to be tendered to a G^ntlewoman in her
distress, there was a couple of the wise Townsmen, that met her upon the Church
green, and told her, that they had order from the Committees, to warn her to
depart out of her house: whereunto she answered, that the house was part of her
jointure, and she would for no man's pleasure depart out of it, upon such terms,
unless she were pulled out by force, and hereupon one of them replied, that is
well, and said to his Fellow, she will ere it be long, prove as bad a Malignant
as her Husband: and most strange it is, if it please your Majesty, to consider
and observe the more then barbarous baseness, that the Country thereabouts was
then bewitched with, and that the cursed maintaining of a treacherous and
rebellious fa^tion, should make them so blind, as to bereave them of all sense
of Religion, Reason, and Humanity: for true enough it is, that although my Wife
had then lived with me in that Town and at ^^^h^ster, for the time of about
twenty years before: and that envy it self could not allege against her, but
that she had ever approved her self to be a most harmless quiet, loving and
kind Neighbor to all sort^ of People wha^soever, and was likewise well known
to be none of the meanest breed, being the daughter of an ancient Esqui^e of
good ^ank, who had served Michaell Dalton, Esquire and Sir J^hn Dalton, Knight.
his Prince and Country in the place and ^ffice of a Justice of the Peace and
Q^orum, for the space of fifty years together, and one of the Masters of the
high Court of Chancery, and also Sister unto a noble, learned and courtly
accomplished Knight, who was his late Majesty's Servant in Ordinary, and died
at Oxford in the prime of his flourishing years, by whose means if these
distractions had not happened, your Subject, his Wife and Children might well
have ^eaped the benefit, of some thousand^ of p^unds, as he is well able to
make manifest: and yet neither the goodness and innocence of my Wife, nor the
worth and quality of her ^riends, would procure her the least ^espect* in this
time of her dejection; for there was neither Knight, Esqui^e, Gentleman, or
others of any quality in all that Quarter, that would take any notice of her
sad and helpl^sse Condition, o^ vouchsafe so much as to look upon he^ in the
way of afford^ng her the least comfort or courtesy, in this time of her want,
and great Extremity; and this was enough to kill the heart of her, that
formerly had the enjoyments of so many worthy Friends, and Allies with pleasure
and plenty* and yet by ^he mercy of God she is still alive and ^ should
heartily rejoice to live a while longer with her, if it shall ^^ please God,
that I may prove an Instrument to make her some amends, for these her great
sufferings and afflictions; and I hope that my Countrymen of all sorts, will in
time be truly sensible of their errors and failings, and learn to know their
duties toward God, their King, and their Neighbors, in remembering the good
Example of Zach^us in the Gospel: and I most heartily wish, that they were but
so willing to acknowledge and be sorry for their follies, as I am ready to
embrace them in the Arms of my Charity, for I have learned, that I must render
good for evil, and I thank God I am so much a Christian, as I would much
rejoice, in doing a true courtesy for the worst enemy that ever I had; for alas
it was then a most lamentably besotted, and blindly zealous corner, and the
symptoms of that Sickness do still cleave so close to some of them, as they be
scarce as yet sanae memoriae: besides I was then a notorious Malignant in their
reputation, but vulgaris reputatio non est veritas, and their conceits alone,
unless they now relish of some Repentance, will hardly render them excusable
another day. But some may conjecture that there had been some grand misprision
or miscarriage in my behavior, in former times, because the Country was now so
generally ^et against us, and so regardless of all our ruins: I shall
therefore most humbly present your Majesty with a brief Relation and true
account, of the Ordinary course of my life, and habitual conversation from my
Youth; (yet ever imploring the mercies of God in the merits of my Jesus for the
pardon of my humane frailties) and then let Envy it self disprove me if it can;
So soon as I had any knowledge in the Scripture and Law of God, I did much
tremble thereat, and was not bold to break and infringe the same; and when I
had attained some taste of understanding in the municipall Laws of my native
Country, I did endeavor to frame unto myself a method of obedience and
conformity thereunto, and also to the Church Government, not for fashion, but
for Conscience sake: I did always contend to be just and righteous in my
profession, and I may say to my comfort, that I never wilfully betrayed any
man's case, or craftily deluded or abused any Client, but ^as ever constant and
careful to keep my Faith, and credit with all such as have reposed any
confidence in me: and some can tell, that my Integrity therein, has procured
me more loss then gain; and considering the little practice that I have met
with, I may comparatively, and yet without offense, speak it, that for little
or no Fees, I have done as many Friendly offices, especially for the poorest
sort of people, as some others of my time: And besides that, I was otherwise
liberal, free-hearted, and open-handed to the poor and needy, rather beyond
and above my ability, then under it; and I dare say, that in love and charity
toward my poor Neighbors, in the good time of Christmas, I have frequently
spent at my house in one day, more good meat and drink, then my Wife and
Children since these times of trouble, have been partaker^ of in a whole year.
And to my Superiors and Equall^, I was ever respectfull and serviceable enough,
where I found the least good countenance; and to the Vulgar I wanted no
courtesy, but was rather too open and familiar to them, then otherwise: But I
must confess to your Majesty, that I wa^ yet inf^cted with a notorious and
insufferable infirmity, in any man of Art, that intended to flourish, or at
least to keep himself secure from danger, in these late corrupted times; for I
confess that all the Grammar and Learning I had, was not able to make a good
Construction of that old Rule, that has been lately so much practiced by too
many, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere; for still I thought the sentence
was imperfect, and that male, or injuste, or some such Adverb of the like
signification, must be added in the end thereof, to make it up a true and
perfect sentence, and therefore being so weak a Scholar in this point, and
altogether destitute of the faculty, or rather frenzy of dissimulation in
that nature, I still continued my constant and common course, in the pathetical
reproving of those Epidemical vice^ of Schism, Sedition, and Rebellion, in all
places and persons without exception, and very seldom spared any man; and this
was the cause I conjecture, that the restie and galled jades, when they had
once gotten their teeth and heel^ at liberty, did bite so venemously, and kick
so sorely against me and my distressed Family, for my sake: For as they were
still in contempt and penury at home, so was not my self oftentimes out of
danger and vexation abroad, for in many places where I came, I did perceive
that although they loved my Person, and the cause for which I suffered, very
well, yet they were still afraid of being Plundered forsooth, or to fall into
some other danger, for giving me entertainment, if my condition were once
discovered; and this sometimes did enforce me to a little more silence, then I
did believe my cause and duty required: And that was difficult and irksome
enough to my Genius, and made me many times depart soon from some houses, where
I could otherwise have been contented to tarry longer: At length I came into
some parts of high Suffolk, where I had diverse Kindred and Acquaintance, and
indeed there I found very courteous and free entertainment, for a long time,
and yet I must still meet with some rubs, for being at a Kinsmans house in the
Borough of Eye, and that was Henry Whitcroft Gent.
one of the Aldermen there, upon a time another Gentleman that was an Alderman
there also, did request me in kindness to walk with him to an Inn^, to take
some little cheerful refreshing, and we being there together in a room, wit^
some others, after a while in comes a Trooper, who being ^^^d and born in that
Town, was known to the parties, and therefore some of them did invite him to
sit down; and some discourse then happening amongst us, concerning the times, I
did stoutly vindicate and maintain his Majesty's right, and the justness of
his cause, and much inveighed against the schism and rebellion, which had so
foully infected the Nation, and bewitched so many: and thereupon my self, and
this Trooper grew at some difference in word, and yet I confess I was not
fearful of any danger from him, in regard he was known to those that were then
about me, and whom he might well perceive to be my Friends, and yet thus it
chanced, that I having some occasion to walk out into the yard, this wretch
sone followed me, and drawing his Sword, did ran full at me, when I had not so
much as ^ stick in my hand, and he might easily have killed me, if God in his
mercy had not given me the courage, and agility presently to put by his thrust
with my hand, and then nimbly getting within him, we were soon espied by some
that were near, and so were parted: and as foolish hare braind and mad as this
fellow then was, yet not long after it pleased God (to whom be the praise) so
mercifully to open his eyes, and convert him, that he laid down his arms,
utterly deserting the Rebellion, and fell to his wonted work and labor again;
and (as I have been many times told) cries out against their villainous doings
to this very day: But within a while after that I had escaped the danger of
this late event, my Kinsman was sent for by his Brethren, to come to their
Moothall, and there they did much question with him, what Gentleman it was that
then kept at his house, and what was the occasion that he tarried there so
long: and he gave them answer in truth, that I was his near Kinsman, and also
told them my name, and indeed he needed not to be very chary thereof, for most
of them did already know me well enough, but quoth he, how it comes to pass,
that I have so much the fruition or enjoyment of his good company at this time,
I do not certainly know, neither is it evil for me to demand a reason of my
Friend, why he does ^arry so long at my house; but very soon after there came a
kind of a scurvy Captain to my Kinsmans house, and made an inquiry for me, and
said, that if I continued thereabout, I would suddenly be had, and this was
only to drive me away from my friends, and so to expose me to more vexation,
travel, and trouble, for sure enough they would have laid hands upon me, and
kept me as a Prisoner, if they had known how to have gotten any thing by the
bargain, but they had heard that all was taken from me already, and so there
was nothing more to be got; and this was the principal Antidote, next to the
mercy of God, that preserved my body from the fury of their greedy and ravenous
jaws: But I took this fellows words as a fair warning, and therefore finding my
self to be thus ferritted, the next morning being Sunday, in the most private
way that I could, I soon bolted out of that Borough, and by the means of a
Gentleman of mine acquaintance, I was conducted to the house of an honest
substantial, and Gentile Tenant, belonging to that Honorable Knight of Now the
Right Honorable the Ld. Cornwallis.
Brom hall; where although I had no acquaintance, yet my condition being once
understood by him and his wise, I was as lovingly used and made welcome, as if
I had been their own Brother; and here in quiet I refreshed my self for diverse
days together, at that time, and afterward when I came into those parts
again, I did repair to the same house, and always received there the like
loving and comfortable entertainment. And now from this house I marched into
Norfolk, and there at a * Kinsmans house called Little Thorp Rebert Bog^, Gent.
Hall, that stood somewhat privately from Neighbors, I received much comfort,
and very good free Quarter for a long time, and I do truly acknowledge, that I
was much beholding to himself, and his good Wife, and Family, and to some other
Gentlemen at Dickleborough, and thereabouts: And then also I was much engaged
unto a vertu^us and generous Widow, the Relict of George Gawdie, Esquire and to
others of her worthy alliance; And further, by the means of this my Kinsman, I
was brought into acquaintance with diverse other honest Gentlemen of Quality,
from whose hands I received much courtesy, and respect; And yet ere long, if it
please your Majesty, I must undertake another venture and voyage; for being at
Blofield Parsonage beyond Norwich, where I found the Gentlewoman of the house
in desolation and danger, in regard her Husband was departed from her, and gone
to Oxford for his safety, and yet she had still good means to subsist withal;
but I observing some passages of discontent and trouble to be amongst them, the
same did the more lively and sharply represent to my understanding and
thoughts, the sad and more miserable condition of my poor wife and children,
who had very little or nothing at all, wherewith to help themselves: and yet I
think that a while before, the Committees for very shame had laid them out a
fifth part, but alas it was little benefit to them, because they had no means
to manage and stock the same. And now having not seen my wife nor any of hers,
but my eldest Son for the space of a whole year and more, I was not able any
longer to absent my self: and yet to go home amongst them, was danger enough to
me: and as their indigent condition then stood, it was but cold comfort
sufficient to kill the heart of us all, to meet together and to see that
unwonted want, and never-before known poverty and misery of one another. But
God be praised for it, I had still the testimony of mine own conscience to
comfort me, in the midst of these our sad calamities, that I had wilfully done
no wrong to any man: For indeed that very thing for which the people esteemed
me to be their worst enemy, was the truest manifestation and most infallible
sign of my sincere love, best affection, and faithful friendship toward them,
in the reproving of their gross errors: and I may truly say, that as mine
innocence was bold, so was mine affliction bitter; and yet all the sufferings
that ever I tasted of, had they been far greater, could never so much vex and
torment my soul, as it grieved me to see my (...) seduced Countrymen and
neighbors, so madly to run on hea^long to their own ruin^, destruction and
damnation: But I still prayed to the God of Heaven, desiring their tru^
conversion; and that my self and mine might obtain the grace with faith, and
patience to consider and say, with holy Job; Naked came I out of my mothers
womb, and naked shall I return again, the Lord has given and the Lord has
taken away, and blessed be the name of the Lord: and shall we receive good from
the hands of God and not evil: remembering also that it has been the portion
of my betters and superiors in all successions of ages, to be vilified and
persecuted for speaking of the truth, and yet God grant that I and all mine may
evermore be mindful of this Adage, Strive for the truth unto the death, and
the Lord shall give thee life. Now if it please your Majesty, having formerly
sent a Letter to my wife entreating her to use the best means, that she was
able, to give me a meeting in Cambridgeshire, at the house of a nobly bred
Gentlewoman, that was her mother-in-law, and a widow, where I was confident we
could not fail of a free, cordial and kind welcome, it was therefore at that
present my chiefest care and task how to conveigh my self thither, and to be o^
the place appointed within the time limited, according to my promise: I was
then diverse miles beyond Norwich, and the journey I had to take in hand, I
believe extended to threescore miles at the least, I had no horse, and my whole
stock of money which I then had, was but only a pair of single two-pences, yet
the height of my courage and confidence, would not permit me to make manifest
my necessities at that time, which if I had done, I well know that there were
some in the house, from whence I was then to begin my journey, that would
willingly to their power have furnished me with money, although they were like
enough afterward to want it themselves as the world went: for some of them
long before had afforded me friendship in that kind, upon their own accord,
without any request of mine, but now providence would not permit them to offer
me any such courtesy, perhaps because the Lord was intended to let me see, how
abundantly he was able to make provision for me some other ways beyond my
expectation: well, when I was about to depart, there being a young Scholar in
the house which in the Doctors absence was Curate of the Parrish, he most
kindly proffered his service, to go with me 2 or 3. miles onwards of my
Journey, and Sir, quoth he, if it please you to ride so far as the Ferry, you
shall have my nagg, it will ease you a little, and I will walk thither on foot,
and see you ferried over and so return, I thankfully accepted of his love, and
thus we went away together, and anon we passed the ferry, and the Scholar
generously paid the ferriman, or else the moiety of my small stock had been in
hazard, and past recovery, and then also he spent a groat more upon me, at the
house near the fer^y, and ^o we lovingly parted. Away I marched to a Gentleman's
house of good quality which had been mine acquaintance from my youth, who had
seen me lately in that Country, and invited me to his hou^e, but now when I
came there, the hardness of my happ was such, as the Gentleman and his wife
were both from home, and I being unknown to the se^vants, must be content to
pass away with a cup of beer, and a few good words: and yet before night I did
well arrive at an honest Vicars house near Norwich, where I found good quarter,
for as long time as I pleased to tarry, and then he lent me a horse, and
conducted me himself to a Gentleman's house about 8. miles further, and there we
parted, from thence I marched on foot a while after, and there was a Gentleman
then living there, that was so kind as to walk a mile or two with me, and as
we went together he asked me, if I were well monified to pass thorough my
journey, I answered him, that I had but very little money, and yet a good
courage still, for to tell you the truth, quoth I, there is but one groat about
me: alas he replied, that he was sorry that my want was not known before I
came from the house, for if it had, there would have been a supply made; but he
told me that he had but little money about him at that time, but Sir quoth he,
here is a sh^lling if you please to accept of it, this will give you a bait as
you travel; I had put up worse wrongs before, but seldom so small a fee, and
yet for the augmentation of my little stock, I was well contented to take it
and put it up, and ^o after a little further walk and discourse, we two in
loving manner did part asunder. And soon after this I did well arrive, at my
said Kinsmans house called Thorp Hall: and there resting my self for some few
days, by the love and kindness of him, and one Mr. Cartwright a Divine, that
lived near, I was freely furnished with an able horse to travel some part of
my journey, and also with other good accommodations that were very expedient
for me, at that time, and to avoid further prolixity in the relation of the
several particulars and passages of that my Voyage; so it was that it pleased
God to procure me so much favor and friendship at the hands of diverse
Gentlemen, as I passed along the Country, that I was then never destitute of a
good Horse to carry me from one Stage to another, no^ yet of any other
necessaries that were requisite for mine use: for just upon the very day that
long before I had appointed with my Wife to give her this meeting, I came
riding up the Town toward the place in this postu^e; I was bravely mounted
upon an excellent good N^g, with money jingling in my Pocket, and a complete
Footman in his Coat well accomplished ^unning by my Horse side; in this manner
I approached the house, and I dare say that I was more truly welcome, then
some Lords would have been at that time, as the case stood, and yet no Wife of
mine appeared that night: the next day I went to visit the Vicar of the Parish,
which had joined us together in Holy Matrimony above twenty years before; and
then I presented him with a brief Relation of my late Voyage, and that the
principal occasion of my coming thither at that time was to meet with my Wife,
telling him also, that I feared she was not well, in regard I did not hear of
her according to the intent and direction of my last letter sent unto her;
surely quoth he, there i^ some obstacle in the way that hinders much, but if
you please to be content Sir, you shall soon know what the matter is, for my
Brother has a good Horse, and I will send him over to your house, and he shall
bring you notice how things are there at the present, and what is the reason
that Mrs. W^nlock does not come as yet: I was much glad of his kind offer, and
so not long after the Messenger was sent accordingly, and returning the next
day he did certify me, that my Wife and Children were in good health, and that
the Cause that she came not, was for that she could not procure Horses as yet
to bring her thither, and alas she was not then so much as worth one her self,
being very loath also to trouble her Friends in Cambridgeshire so much, as to
send so far for Horses to convey her thither, but she hoped that ere it were
long, she should find a means to come and see me, and the residue of her good
Friends there, and accordingly within a week or two after she did come, and
there by the large and loving respect of that noble Gentlewoman her
mother-in-law, and another good Lady the relict of my wives brother before
mentioned, we did enjoy a free and cordial entertainment, with much solace and
comfort: but this our glimpse of happiness if it please your Majesty, did
admit but of a very short continuance, and must soon suffer an eclipse, for we
had not been thus together much above a week, but some that I fear resolved to
work us mischief, were as evidently envious that any other should do us any
good, for there was a Letter conveyed unto me, which came from my wives own
Nephew, her deceased elder brothers Son, who was then a Deputy Lieutenant of
the Shire, a Justice of the Peace, and one of the Grandees of the Committee, or
English Inquisition, intimating unto me, That he well understood, in what place
my abiding was at that time, and also how violent my ordinary and constant
discourse was against their proceedings, and therefore I must not be suffered
by any means to rest any longer in that Country; But an Order should presently
be taken to apprehend and secure me, or to this effect, with some other
passages therein very abusive and scandal^ us to my credit: a notable Nephew
and sincere Saint in the interim, thus to offer me such a reforming curte^^e in
this case of my calamity, and so Iudas-like to go about to betray, and aff^ight
his loving and harmless Aunt, (after so many bitter pills of affliction, as
she had formerly swallowed) and only upon this occasion, because she had a
Husband that durst speak the truth; a coarse complement from a true Christian,
or a generous Gentleman; and yet we were in doubt that he might prove a man of
his word, and therefore to avoid our own danger, and the detriment that might
arise to the house thereby, the next day with sorrowful hearts we went away
from thence, to shift about as well as we could; But so soon as I was gotten
out of his purlieu, I saluted his worship with a thundering Epistle, enough to
startl^ and rowse his conscience, if he had any* and I do hope that my reproof
and good Counsel, did work something upon him, for after this, I ventured
diverse times to come into that Country again, and yet I never heard of him any
more in this kind: And the truth is, as I have been credibly informed, that
upon the most barbarous assassnation, and more then hideous and horrible
Murdering of his late Sacred Majesty, this grossly seduced young Gentleman was
stricken with such terror and amazement in his soul, that he presently
deserted and gave over all his Offices and places of trust and command, and was
never after that any agent or instrument in that devilish Rebellion: and
hereupon within a while following he was in great danger himself, and had
surely been sequestered, had it not pleased God in his mercy to take him away
from his Wordly Estate here, that was fair and great, and to give him I hope
upon his true Repentance, a far more Blessed and Glorious habitation i^ the
Heavens to all Eternity. And so I trust that for our Eternal good, the Lord was
pleased to lay out for us the bitter portion to be such pitiful pilgrims; but
my Wifes condition could not long endure this manner of misery, for she of
necessity must go home again to her poor Children, where alas there was little
left but the bare walls, and their own weak labors and endeavors, to sustain
themselves withal; and I must still travel about I knew not well whither, and
my success and fortune was very various, sometimes fair and pleasant, and soon
again stormy and troublesome, and yet I confess and praise the goodness of
God, I did meet with many good Friends, whose names and charitable deeds
toward me and mine, were too tedious here to be related, but I hope they shall
not be forgotten in Heaven; and yet I should think my self guilty of
ingratitude, if I should not make mention of the many good respects and great
kindness which I received at the hands of a Noble hearted Gentlewoman then
dwelling at Hit^^am in Suffolk, who was a deep sufferer her own self; namely
Mris. Bing, the Wife of Henry Bing Esquire then a Captain in his Majesty's Army,
and the Grandchild unto that honorable and famous Father of the Law Sir Edw.
Coke Knight, late Lord Chief Justice, etc. and also from the hands of another
worthy Gentlewoman in the same parish, who was likewise a great sufferer,
namely Mistress Breton, the wife of Mr. Lawrence Breton Batchelour in Divinity,
a learned orthodox and worshipful Divine. Neither must I omit the remembrance
of the good love and favor of my noble and old acquaintance Sir William Denny
of Norfolk Baronett, nor the great kindness of Thomas Jermy of Me^^field in
Sussex Esquire Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Jermy Knight of the B^^h, and of John
Risby of Tho^p Esquire Nor the kind love of my Reverend and worthy Friends Doctor
Pierse of Wangford, Mr. Thomas Greek Rector of Carl^on, whose Grandfather I
take it was one of the Barons of the Exchequer; M^. Sendall R^ctor of
Brin^kley, and Mr. Underwood Rector of Cheving^on: and although they be l^st
here mentioned, yet meriting of me as much respect as any two friends that I
found in all my travels; viz. my loving Kinsman Mr. James Floid then of Weston
in Cambridgeshire, and Mr. Tho. Ward of Abington. Thus after a long and tedious
perigrination I came at length by the mercy of God to the Mansion House again
of the two good Ladies before mentioned, and having heard that his late
Majesty had deserted Oxford and rendered himself to the Scots, it was verily
thought and expected by many, that they would have proved more honest men then
the sequ^le declared them to be, and that by their means the* vast differences
in the kingdom might possibly have met with some mild and reasonable
reconciliation: and hereupon, and in respect of these hopes, your Majesty's
Subject after his so long absence, had animum revertendi, a mind homewards,
and therefore entreated the good Ladies that he might s^^d for his wife to have
some conference with her, whereby he might understand how the pass^g^^ went in
hiw own Country, how the people were still inclined and affected, and what was
like to be the worst proof or hazard of that his dangerous design of returning
home: to this the Ladies most lovingly accorded and agreed, and forthwith a
means was made to fetch my Wife thither unto me, where being together, I soon
perceived by her discourse, that the people having been so long pinched with
payments, and their purses so sore exhausted, were not altogether so hot and
violent in their mad humors, nor so maliciously bent against those that did
oppose their doing^, as formerly they had been, when the fire of sedition was
first blown up and kindled amongst them: And after much questioning and
discourse between us, whereby I did soon perceive the great want and penury
that both her self and my poor Children then lived in, my heart was much melted
thereat, and I told her, that the bowels of my compassion were so much moved,
as that I could no longer absent my self from amongst them, but if God gave me
leave I would very suddenly return home, whatsoever became of me; Alas, quoth
she, I fear that will not be the best way, for if they do lay you in Prison,
where can you get means to find your self sustenance? and if they do let you
alone at home in quiet with us, yet how can we possibly make any shi^t to
maintain you? for all that we have or can earn, is too little to buy our selves
Victuals, and no body thereabouts will trust us for so much as a loaf of bread:
Well, said I, let us be yet contented, and wait still upon God; thou know
that I have a faculty to help my self, and if it be once known that I am come
home again, I believe that some will repair unto me for Counsel, or to make
Conveyances* and other Writings, and so perhaps I may get something to help to
support you and my self: Alas, answered she, I doubt that the most part of the
people thereabout do still so hate you for so strongly opposing their doing^,
as they will hardly come at you upon any occasion, to do you any good: Ye^,
quoth I, they will be willing enough, to serve their own turn^; and I thank God
I have the testimony of mine own conscience, that I have deserved no man^
hatred, in the way of my profession, for I was alwaye^ diligent to deal
honestly therein, and if they be not stone-blind, my present suffering^ will
give them a greater proof and experiment of my integrity, then ever they had
before. And thus committing my self and my case to the mercy of my God, within
a few days after that my Wife was gone home, I my self followed, and with
confidence went openly home to mine own house, after sundry years absence; and
the Sunday after I repaired to the Parish Church, where I had not been in
almost four years before, and therefore might expect the welcome of a great
stranger: after the Sermon ended the Parson with admiration lifting up his
hands did salute me, and congratulated my safe and happy return to mine own
home; I thanked him, and said that I trusted in God that my return would not
redound to my detriment, in the conclusion, for I was not in the least degree
perverted in my judgment, but in the same mind that I traveled abroad in the
same I was now come home again: I could not dissemble at the first, neither
will I at the last, and howsoever this my assertion was then rellished I know
not, but both the Parson and his Curate, returned me thi^ fair answer, That it
was a good resolution not to dissemble: and yet neither of them had faith and
courage enough to follow my steps, although I had chalked them out the way:
Well in this condition I continued freely uttering my mind in the truth of my
heart, to all men upon every fit occasion: and soon after I sent my Son with a
Letter to a Knight in Essex that was then able to have done us a favor, but he
was very rigid, and told my Son that he had heard before; how I was come home,
and that a course would be taken with me ere it were long, and that he would
by no means have any conference with me, unless it were at the C^mmittee
Table, vvhither I disdained to go, except I were carried perforce; yet after a
serious consideration with my self of the great and pressing extremities, that
we groaned under, and of the true and just equity of my cause, I did deem it
not unlawful to relieve my self with mine own, if with any conveniencie I
could effect the same; and therefore not fearing the face of their tyranny, I
resolved to look upon them, and to hear what they were able to allege against
me, and by Scripture, Law and Reason to justify my doings: but first I set
forth in a Paper a Summarie Relation of our lamentable Wants and miseries, and
then desired that I might have my land in mine own possession, paying out a
tribute although it were more then the assessments did amount unto: and this I
would truly have paid with a^ good affection and devotion, as ever I should
have paid it to the Turk, if his forces had overrun this Nation: and upon the
day which the Knight had appointed to my Son, that I should come to Colchester,
thither I trotted on foot: and being become a stranger there also, by the mean^
of my long absence, I was not much ashamed boldly to inquire for the
Committees, but none I could find out, perhaps they were afraid to meet that
day, lest I should trouble their pati^nce with some parables of truth. Yet at
length I found ou^ where on^ of them wa^, but my business was out of his way,
for he came only to receive mo^ie, which the Under Publican^ did bring in
without fear or wit, and when he heard that I was in the house, he sent me word
that he would come and wait upon me; No quoth I to the Messenger, I must wait
upon him a^ the case stands: in troth the Gentleman had been my old
acquaintance and my client, and I was not jealous at all of being bold with
him, but up I went where I found him in the midst of his treasure, with mani^
Countrymen about him with their hats off, and purses ^mptie, for he was a man
of a quick receipt, and very good acceptance, and truly he received me with
more fair courtesy then I could ever have expected from any man in so soul a
function: We two withdrew a while and had some conference, I showed my paper
aforesaid and left it with him, entreating him to communicate it to the rest of
his brethren the Committees when they met, and desire them to consider of it,
and that I might soon know the result of their considerations therein: all this
he promised me faithfully to perform, but I heard no more of the Committees,
nor they of me for 3. or 4. years after. And being thus left destitute of all
manner of relief from these Religious Rebels, although I desired not so much of
them as was duly and truly mine own both in Law, Reason and Religion, yet their
wretched and perverse wills most wickedly contradicting all the sound and
perfect rules both of divinity and humanity, therefore my poor distressed
company must still continue in that irksom and greafie trade of carding and
spinning, to my no little grief and vexation, and yet oftentimes I did
encourage them to wait upon God with patience, and to remember how their
Fathers Loyalty was the occasion of their present misery: and although that
the root which they now tasted of were bitter, yet it might produce and bring
forth some better and more pleasant fruit in the end: and I did oftentimes
merrily tell them, that upon the matter, they were in truth the Kings Spinners,
and therefore people of a far better rank and quality then the base World
esteemed them to be, and thus with as much alacrity as I could, I waded
thorough a sea of miseries, continuing still in my discourse, and otherwise as
true stout and high a Royalist I believe, as ever breathed in England: insomuch
that diverse of the blind beetles would say, that I was as bad still as ever I
had been, and that it was pity that I was suffered, but I little regarded their
censure, knowing that it was my duty to speak aloud, when the Glory of my God,
the Honor and Safety of my King, and the good and quiet of my Native Country,
was in so great hazard or j^opardy. One Sunday a^ I came walking with the
Minister from Church and many others following of u^ close at the Heels, I said
unto him, that above all men I did much wonder at those of his Coat, which had
so grossly forgotten themselves; for I believe said I, that if it pleased God
to permit the Devil himself, to assume the shape of a man, and to put on a
Parsons Gown, and come up into a Pulpit to preach, yet he is so knowing a
Spirit, and does so tremble at the Judgment to come, as he never durst
entertain the impudence to utter so much Blasphemy and Treason as some of yo^
have ventured upon: Another time I told him that it behoved him to be very
cautious of meddling in such matters, for if he chanced to offend i^ that
nature, his offense would be greater then other men^, he asked me why so? and I
made him answer, the reason was aparent, for there be many shuttle braind
Fellow^ that have lately come into a Pulpit, who trusting to a confused memory
and the volubility of the tongue, do often times ex impr^vis^, and without any
premeditation, presume to vent and utter some und^cent and irreligious
absurditie^, whose rashness ^s to be pitied, and does somewhat extenuate though
not excuse their presumptuous folly and profaneness: but you it is well known
do study and write down every word in your Sermon, and make a constant use of
your papers in the Pulpit, and therefore if any vain impertinent or ^rronious
doctrine does proceed from you, it must of necessity be after your
premeditations, and so upon malice prepensed, which is a sin with a witness and
much aggravates your offense and makes it the more unpardonable; and certainly
my plain dealing did the man no harmor prejudice, for he waxed still more and
more moderate, but I could not endure to come at his Mock fasts and
Thankgivings, but ever diswaded him therefrom, with the best reasons I could
remember either out of the Scripture, or other Learned or Historical Authors;
and once I told him that I much feared I should forsake his Church, I hope not
so quoth he, yes truly said I, for I do seldom come there but I see that which
does much offend me, I pray Sir what is that quoth the Parson? I answered him,
that whenever I stood up in my Pew being so near the Pulpit, I could not
choose but espy his Directory, or Devils story lie still in his Desk, and I
could not endure to behold such an uggly and deformed Imp of schism and
sedition: and then he replied unto me, that if it offended me I might take it
away if I pleased; not so quoth I, for it is a parcel of your Churches goods,
and so I may be questioned for committing of Sacrilege, I will by no means soul
my hands by meddling with it, but if it lies there long, I will not come at the
Church: the next time I went, the babble was gone, and departed down I think to
the place of darkness where it was first hatched, for I never saw any more of
it. Now about the time that his late Majesty was brought from Holmby to
Newmarket, there was news spread about that the sad affairs of the Nation would
soon be drawn to a better pass, and that his Gracious Majesty should be
restored to his Regal rights: and we that were sufferers to our lands again,
with some recompense for our former losses; and upon these reports the
Sequestrators and their Adherents, that seldom or never thought upon God, did
begin yet to be afraid of the law and the Lawyer, and thereupon they presently
deserted and wholly gave over the possession of my Lands: and soon after
without any application to the Committees, or any of their great Masters that
set them on work; I made an entry upon the most part of my Estate, and held the
same until some were so venturous as to hire some part of the Land of me to
farm, and the rest I kept in my hands and made hay in my Meadows, and got
money for it, and took in Cattle to pasture upon my ground, for I had not*
moneys enough to buy any my self, neither durst I procure any means to have
cattle of mine own, lest the seditious should drive them away. But now by the
help of a little Country practice in my profession, and these moneys taken for
hay and pasture, our condition was much amended and our hearts so well
refreshed, as we did a little remember our selves, and so we did totally desert
the cards and the wheel, and began to appear and show our selves in a gentile
garb again, in hope that the most part of the storm had been over, but alas
the worst was yet to come. But my courage being high, and remembering the
cruelties that my poor wife had sustained, and undergone by these villains, in
the time of my absence, for one of them that had hired some of my land of the
Sequestrators, and had been a servant and retainer to my house near forty
years, and had also received many benefits and favors at my hands, did
notwithstanding deny and forbid my Wife, to take any fuel for her own use,
out of the lands of her own jointure, but selled and took what he listed for
himself: and therefore I had a great mind to ^kar^ such wretche^, and commenced
diverse actions at Law against them, for the recovering of the mean profit^ of
my Land, and for other wrongs which I had received by them, not doubting, that
the Judges who were sworn to do Justice, could either in Law or conscience
direct a Jurie to find against me, being there was no obstacle or obstruction
in my way, but only an Ordinance made by a rent piece, or patch of a prodigious
Parliament, and yet I had heard that their Cou^^ of injust indempnitie, would
surely stop my proceedings at Law, and nevertheless I had a strong Zeal to be
still an instrument to open men's ei^^, and to let the people see and learn what
the Law was, although my self ^^aped no other benefit by the bargain: and
indeed there was one which had poss^ss^d the most part of my Land, and who not
long before I had seriously reproved for his so doing, and said that I much
marvelled at him above others, for I had conceived a better opinion of him in
former times, and his excuse was only this, that if he had not hired my Land
somebody else would; ala^ quoth I if another will do wickedly, is that a
sufficient warrant for you to do the like? No surely, for if there were no
receivers, there would be but fevv Thieves, and if there had been no such
Creatures as you to hire our Lands, and to buy and embezle our goods, there
would hardly have been any such impudent and impious Wretches to deprive and
rob us of the same; and certain said I, there is a time when you shall come to
a strict and bitter account for these things, and if you chance to die soon and
so escape Justice and Puishment in this World, yet you shall be sure to hear of
it hereafter; he asked me when; and I told him at the day of Judgment: well
quoth he if I may tarry so long I do not greatly care, I was sorry to hear him
speak so like an Atheist, and said unto him, alas poor man, that time may come
before thou art aware of it, for as Death does leave thee, so Judgment shall
find thee, and therefore repent in time, this man was a pure Pretender to
Religion, a frequent hearer of Sermons at home and Lectures abroad: and this
was the only Party that after his arrest at my suite, did apply himself to
their Court of Indemnity, and there getting an Order against me, did upon a
Sunday serve it upon me in the Church Porch, I looked on it, and when I
perceived the Contents thereof, I cast it on the ground at my feet, before the
face of him that gave it into my hands: and surely I had been soundly
catechis'd for this contempt of their usurping proud Luciferian Authority,
(esteemed of me as much as a Lowse, one of the Plagues of Aegipt) if Providence
had not presently brought those Noble Lords, together with our Valiant and
Beloved Country man Sir Charles Lucas into Essex in arms, and that for a time
did mittigate my Martyrdom, and I was triumumphantly glad to hear of their
Approach: and I dare swear it for a truth, that if I had been Master of as many
men as ever X^rxes commanded, and as much Treasure as ever Croesus enjoyed, all
had been suddenly sent to their succor and assistance; but alas I had then,
but one Jewel of any worth that was fit for service, and this was my Eldest
Son, a Youth of about eighteen years of Age, whom I loved dearly, and was very
loath to loose him, and yet willing to venture him upon so good and honorable a
design, and he well perceiving my disposition, did freely offer himself, and
was so ready to embrace the occasion, as I rejoiced thereat with admiration, to
see the sparks of Loyalty so soon kindled ^^ his Youthful breast: and both he
and my self endeav^^^ed the best we could to procure some others to go along
with him, and with all expedition I furnished him for the Journey, as well as I
was then able, and away he marched on foot, with two lusty Fellows with him,
and I charged them to go the most private way, and to have a vigilant eye to
keep themselves as much as might be from being discovered and surprised by
Scout^, for I believed the Country was full of evil Spirits, but they had not
marched many miles, before that unluckily they fell into a Party of the
Rebels, that soon robbed them of all their Moneys and let them go, yet for all
this first check my Son would on still, and not long after they fell into
another part of the Enemies, where there was a Lieutenant then a Rebel, but
now I hope an honest man, that knew my Son well, and much persuaded him to
return home to his ^ather, and not expose himself to any further danger, and as
I think did procure him a Ticket for his convoy homewards, and this
notwithstanding so soon as my Son was gotten clear from him, he went still on
his intended Voyage, and with much labor and travel at length he fell in
amongst Sir Charles Lucas his companies, and so came along with them to
Colchester, where by the means of some Gentlemen of his acquaintance, he was
soon furnished with Horse and A^mes, and there continued all the time of that
^edious and troublesome Siege, and had the hap to make away 3. Horses there,
one was killed under him in fight at a ^alley made out at the East gate,
another was stolen out of pasture, and the third himself and his Comrades did
provide a Sepulture for in their hungry and half starved Bellie^; and one time
he was in danger to have been most cowardly killed by the Rebels, for being in
an out-quarter of the Town, and much wearied with watching, he like a young
Soldier ventured to go to bed, and in the interim the Guards were beaten up by
the Enemy, who entered the house where he was, and running up the stairs to
search for Cavaliers, the people of the house cried out and said, that there
was no body aloft but a Maid sick in bed, and they looking in at the Chamber
door and seeing one in the bed with a clout o^ kerchief on the head, and no
hair on the face did take it to be a wench indeed, and so by Gods mercy they
departed without doing him any harm at that time, and once as he told me a
Bullet was shot quite thorough the Hat upon his head, and yet he received no
hurt, but surely he did happily escape many wonderful danger^, for I know he
was valiant and venturous enough, and when the Town was yielded he was
barbarously stripped of all, and put in Prison, and had the honor to be
counted a considerable Prisoner, as being the son of the greatest Malignant in
the Country, and in truth I much feared, that he would be the more cruelly used
for my sake for there was a report that he with diverse other young Gent. should
be sold as slaves, and sent into the Islands beyond sea, we knew not whither,
and yet I had a f^^m hope that God Almighty would still provide for him, and
yet his poor mother was (...) perplexed at it, for can a woman forget her own
(...), or not have compassion upon the son of her womb? Away therefore she
travels to that unhappie Town of (...), venturing her self amongst that hellish
r^^t of roaring and rampant rebels, being desirous once more to behold though
with tears in her eyes and a bleeding heart, that her dearly beloved and
captivated son: and so happy was the success of her journie, that by the
means which the mercy of God provided for her, in a few days she got him off,
and brought him home with her, with a world of joy to us all. But I must not
pa^se over some passages that befell us at home during the time of that
unfortunate siege, for about the beginning thereof before the Town was begirt,
there came toward my house a great troup of horsemen, who made such a
thundering upon the ground that my wife quaked for fear, before that ever they
came in her sight: I entreated her ^^ pluck up a courage, and to be of good
comfort and fear God, and all would be well: and so our I went amongst them,
and demanded what their desire was; They answered, that they wanted quarter for
themselves and their horses. Alas Gentlemen quoth I, you have taken your marks
amiss in coming hither, for I am a poor sequestered man, and have but mean
quarter for my self, whereat they seemed to be sortie, and told me how they
were Sir Charles Lucas his men, and did wish well to all that were of my mind,
and then I called for the best Beer I had and drank unto them, which they
kindly accepted, and then I inquired of them concerning Fairfax his forces, and
they told me that some of them were come down near the Town, but had a sound
blow given them already, and we, said they, doubt not but to deal well enough
with the residue; then they asked me where any Oats were to be had, and I told
them of some Farmers houses near, where I believed there was the most
probability for them to speed, and amongst others I did nominate a Gent. then
dwelling at a Manor house belonging to the late Countess and wife of the
Right honorable the Earl of Oxf^^^ and then one of them asked me if that man
were a Round^ead or no, and I answered that he did seem to be so, but I thought
it was more for fear then for love, and this I said with an intent to procure
him some favor at their hands, but it fell out otherwise, for soon after they
went to his house and there took from him both arms and some corn: But diverse
of them did desire me much to send the^ to some of the worst Roundheads in the
Country; for said they, we have a great mind to deal with them: in truth
replied ^, so soon as you be gone from hence, you can hardly go amiss for
that, for here be Roundhead^ bad enough, to be found in every corner, the
country is too full of such; but I will accuse none of mine enemies to you
that are martial men, lest you should chance to offer them any unlawful
violence, for which I would be heartily sorry, and w^ll it was that I had the
care to be so cautious, for within a day after I learned and found out that
these were false brethren of the R^b^lla party, and then I conjectured how
they came to my house upon a mere stratagem to entrap me: Others also came the
same day, and inquired if such a troup had not been thereabouts and seemed to
be somewhat vigilant and wary of themselves, and still I discoursed with them
to feel what I could find out. Not long after a company of Foot Rascals raised
in the Parish, and thereabouts, came to my House upon pretense to search for
Cavaleers and arms, but it was chiefly to vex and molest us, and to filch
something out of my House: and many times I was troubled with Foot soldiers
that came from the Leaguer, and rambled about the Country, but indeed most of
them were more civil to me, then many of my neighbors had formerly been, and
did me less mischief, as I might instance in many particulars, if the relation
thereof were not too tedious* yet one day being in my study I heard my Maid
give a sudden shrike in the porch, and down I went in all haste to see what the
matter meant, and there I found near half a score Foot soldiers with muskets
in their hands and matches light, Why how now Sirs, said I, what is the reason
that you come hither in such a boisterous and uncivil manner, for I have not
hardly had such an affront put upon me ever since the soldiers came into the
Country; their answer was, How they were informed that I was a most dangerous
man, and kept many Cavaliers in my House, and they were sent to see, if it were
so or not, and also advised to come strong, and well provided, or else their
lives were like to be in danger: I was grieved at the folly and falsitie of
these reports, and said, that my house was not strong enough for Garrison I
thought, and therefore they need not fear any great harm there; and further I
told them, if they would be quiet and civil, they should soon see how that both
my self and they likewise had been abused with loud lies: and then I asked them
whether they were any soldiers of the Army or of the Traind-bands, they
answered, we are Traind-men, then I demanded the place of their dwelling, and
they told me in Suffo^k near unto Cambridgshire, and specified the Towns where:
and upon this I did mention diverse of the chief Gentlemen thereabouts, a^king
if they knew any such, whereat one of them replied, Sir, I see that you are
well acquainted in our Country, yes said I that I am, and there is reason for
it, because I did marry my Wi^^ from a place not ^arr remote from thence, I
pray Sir said some of them whose D^u^hter was she, I told them, then said one
of the Soldiers I know that Worcester: Gentleman well, and I did once ask his
advice whether it were my best way to go for a Parliament Soldier or not,
and his opinion was, that it were better for me to li^ in the G^ole then to
venture upon that occasion; well said I he knovv^ the law very well yes
quoth the party we believe that, and therefore I never went, but being now
in the Trained-armes I was enforced to come upon this service: and upon a
little more discourse I found that I knevv diverse of their Masters, whose
Arms they served in, and thereupon the Soldiers seemed to be sorry, that it
was their unhappiness to come to trouble me in this sort, well quoth I, it is
my portion to be thus dealt withal, but I pray tell me in good earnest who it
was that sent you hither, and they told me an old Woman, that dwelt above a
mile off, and by their description of her, I knew it was the Wise of him that
had possessed the most part of my land by color of Sequestration, and perhapps
she was content I should have been killed, lest I should live to call her
Husband to an account for his Knavery: Well, now I did invite them to come in,
and gave them some courteous accommodation, and being in discourse according to
my usual manner, I chanced to speak something against their General, whereat
one of them took great Exceptions against me, and began to prate very sawcily,
and hereupon a Corporal that was the chief amongst them, started up and wished
him to be quiet, (...), he swear that he would slash him soundly, for th^^
quoth he, is an honest worthy Gentleman that we are much beholding unto, and
most of us here will dye at his feet, before he shall suffer the least wrong,
and thus the Rascal was glad to put up his pipes and be silent: and I have
thought since that God was offended at him, for as they went back to
Colch^ster, this fellow fell sick, and went into a Barn and there died the next
day; within a while after, one of these Soldiers came alone to my house, and
being in talk with me, desired seriously to know my opinion, what I thought of
their Siege, and what was like to be the issue and success thereof: Alas said
I, the sins of this Kingdom are very great, and God only knows what doleful
events may ensue upon these troubles, but howsoever your Country was ill
advised in sending their Arms against their King; your Master knows me, and
what I am, and tell him that I say, that whenever the Wind and the Tide
turns, he may fairly be hanged for sending of thee, and thou for coming, if
you meet not with the more mercy. About this time some of their ^^^smen came to
my gate upon a Sunday, when we were sat at dinner, and being discovered our
went I amongst them: and when they demanded quarter I presently put in this
plea to their action, but I had been a great sufferer, and almost un^^^^ by the
times, and was unable to afford them that they desired, in regard I had been so
hardly used: then one of them who undertook to be the Prolocutor said, If you
have been hardly used, it is but according to your desert, for you are a
Malign^^t; How do you know that, said I? Yes very well, quoth he, for you have
a So^ in Colchester, to which I replied I hope that I had a Son there, ^^ he
were yet living: Well, said he, that is enough to make you to be wo^se used,
then ever you were yet; Gods will be do^e f^r that said I, ^or ind^ed I shall
never be ashamed of my Sons being there, and ^elping to maintain so go^d and
just a cause, in the behalf of God, (...) King, and his Country, and I am glad
that you have no worse matter to l^y to my (...), for I hope to fare the better
for that in the (...): and Friend, said I, be it known unto thee, (...) if I
(...) thousand Sour, and (...) to give to (...) would I venture them all (...),
Religious, and Honorable a Quarrel; and th^s I (...) to far outface this
(...), that suddenly he turned his (...), and gal(...) away, and the rest of
his Fellows sat still a while, and laughed ^eartily at his repuls^. S^on after
some of the Officers in the Town were at me to buy some Hay, which I had in my
(...) I asked them (...) what use? They answered, to send it to (...); Y^^,
marry said I, if it were there I should be glad, and think it well bestowed,
fa^ I believe that I have Friends within the Town that are in need enough of
it; Y^^ s^^ely, said they, but we must carry it to those that are (...) Town; I
believe so indeed, quoth I, and you are well employed in the mean time, and
therefore if you buy it for them, you shall pay sweetly for it: Sir, said they,
you (...) to let us have it a good penny worth, and we will pay y^u for it, but
if the Soldiers once know of it, perchance they will take it away for nothing.
Well, said I, if it happen tha^ (...) ro^bed of it, you shall not see my
countenance much change at the matter, I shall take it as patiently as I have
done losses of greater value, but if I do sell it, I will have my price for it,
as I think it to be worth: And soon after there came to my Gate one of the
Constables, and a Trooper with his Pole-axe in his hand, and asked for me, and
I went out unto them; the Fellow was civil enough, and told me that he
understood that I had Hay to sell, and if it were good, they would buy it of
me, and desired to see it, and so they did, and liked it very well, and asked
me the price of it, which I soon set them, it is somewhat dear said the
Trooper, well said I, so much I will have for it, if I sell it, but if you will
talk any more about the business, let us go in, and you may there taste a cup
of sequestered liquor if you please, is it sequestered beer, said the Tropper?
yes surely, said I, it has been so for many years: Well, in we went, and
amongst other discourse, the Trooper said, that he did believe their case was
good, because God did suffer them to prosper so long in it: Alas Friend, quoth
I, that is no good argument on your side, for we know that God does many times
permit wicked men to prosper in their ways, to their own destruction; and if
you were an Historian, you would know that God has suffered the Turks so to
prevail against the Christians, for many hundred years, because of their sins;
and which do you esteem to be the best Religion, either that of a Turk, or that
of a Christian? Certainl^ said the Trooper, the Christian Religion is the best;
You say very true, said I, and therefore consider well with your self, and do
not believe that you are better Servants of God then we, or that the Religion
of a Roundhead is more pure then that of a Cavalier, because God for our sins
has suffered you thus a while to over top us; for the Turks have had far
greater suc^esse against the Christians, and are still in possession of the
prime seat of the greatest Christian Emperors that ever lived in the World and
yet by your own confession, and true assertion, the Christian Religion is the
best, and is indeed being rightly professed, the only true Religion that is
upon the face of all the Earth, and therefore presume not to make your
prevalencie a pattern of your pi^ty, for these you will find to be fallacious
arguments in the end: and then I protested unto him, that if I could possibly
be made sure (by being a Rebel) to enjoy to my self, and the Heirs of my body
until dooms day, as much land as all the whole Kingdom of England contained,
yet I would be tor^ in places Limb from Limb, before I would hol^ up my hand
against my King, or any that take his part, for surely said I, the end of all
Rebels will be naught, ^^d if we look seriously in^o all Records, either Holy
or Historical, we shall find that their portion has ever been according to
their practice, and that the Wrath and Vengeance of God, has seldom ceased to
prosecute all such and their posterities, as have been Enemies and Traitors to
their Prince, and the Peace of their Country* yet for all this the Trooper and
I did agree for the Hay, and so parted in a very civil manner: Some few days
after came the Constable with his carts, to fetch away the bargain, and when it
was (...) loaded, very honestly according to his promise, ^e paid me the money
for it: but then he pulled a paper out of his pocket, and said that he had a
rate there for me to pay. What is that said I? And then he replied it was for
contribution to maintain the Army; Ha, quoth I, why thou know that I never
p^id any of these rates, since the troubles did begin, but have been robbed of
all my means, for my refusal, and a^^ likewise as loath now to yield
contribution to mine enemies, that are still so ready to destroy me and mine.
That is not the matter quoth he, you must pay it, there is no remedy; I doubt
thou art deceived, said I, for I will not, then I must return your name replied
he, for I know not else, what to do or say in the business: I will then tell
you said I what you shall say, but I prithee do not spoil the message, or
errand in the delivery thereof, I would have you certify such as shall be
concerned therein, that I am King Charles his Subject, and If I had but one
great in the world, it were at his service, but as for Sir Tho. Fairfox I
desire to have nothing to do with him, for I am loath to be his slave, neither
money will I send him upon any terms, and if he or any of his be so cruel as to
take away any thing I have, yet I shall pray for patience and so rest
contented, until it shall please God to send a remedy, and that is the sum of
my resolution. Soon after this there came to my house in a morning next my
hea^^ a creature (...)ped a Quarter master, but I rather think a fiend of
Phlege^hon, and yet I had the courage and cunning to conjure him soundly: this
fellow at (...) began to prate like a proud ^^^bell as he was, you quoth he, as
I hear will send no contribution to the Army, no marry will I said^, you will
(...) a (...) q^oth he, to be of another mind, and I wonder what is the Reason
than you seem to be so stubborn; my reply was, that the Army and their
Accomplices had undone me already* and (...) that both Religion, the King, and
the laws commanded me not to assist them; here is much ado with a King said he,
but ere long there will be a course taken with the King and you and all such,
etc. speaking such horri^le and villainous word^, as my heart abhors to
think, and my pen is ashamed to make mention of: Wretch quoth I, thou do me
too much honor, thus ignorantly and rashly, to couple and make me equivalent
with my King; and I much admire in what be^t^all Kennel thou went brought up,
for thou do savor neither of Divinity, Humanity, or good manner^, but the
W^a^h of God will meet with such cursed Shimeies as thou art: and indeed he put
me into so great a passion, that I could not well remember all that I said unto
him, but sure I am that we parted upon very bitter terms. About three or four
days after, I did epsy this Traitor at my gate again all alone, but before he
had a Trooper with him: Out I marched presently and thus encountered him, How
now said I, are you come again* are you of the same mind you were, when you
were last here? I come quoth he, to see whether you be the same man or not* Yes
surely said I, the same mind that you left me in when you last did see me, does
still continue constant, for I cannot endure to be counted a Turn-coat or
Changling, but if it be your mid to exchange a few words, you may come in if
you will, here is no body shall hurt you* the man alighted, and in we came
together, and there fell into deep discourse that was sometimes fair, and by
and by foul enoug, yet still I most highly maintained the justness of the
Kings case, and did diswade the Party from Rebellion* with all the reasons and
arguments that I could then excogitate, telling him the History and Fate of
that seditious Earl of Leicester in the time of H^n: the 3. and of that valiant
but inconstant Ea^l of Warwick in the days of Edw. the 4. and showing him
also, as briesly as I could, how fearful and dismal the destruction of
traitors had been in all ages, and countries whatsoever: but the sad result of
all our conference was, that ere it were long he must come again, either for my
body or goods: M^ body said I, will do you but little good, but rather vex
you much, for you see the manner of my discourse, and so it will continue
unless you kill me: and for my goods, I have nothing sit for your turn, but a
little corn to make us bread, and it were harsh cruelty to deprive us of that,
besides I have very little money at the present, having got nothing a great
while because of the troubles in the country; for the Law is silent within the
verge of the Camp, and therefore if you fetch me away as a prisoner, I shall be
in danger to be starved, for want of means to maintain me; it were pity said
he that a man of your spirit should starve, and if you be my prisoner you shall
not want victuals so long as I have any for my self: Gramercie Friend said I,
if you be so charitable, your coming for me will be the less formidable, but
I entreat you before that you come, either for me or my goods, to go to God
Almighty by fervent and unfeigned prayer, and to seek his grace and direction,
that you may do nothing, but what you may well answer, both in this world and
the world to come, and then on Gods name come as soon as thou will: and in this
sort we civilly parted at this time, and I never heard of my Chapman after. But
at diverse other times I had been formerly plagued with troopers, demanding of
ass^ssments and the like, and still I made them an answer, that I had nothing
for them, for I was undone already, and then their ordinary reply was, that
they must have their pay, Yes would I say to them it is fit you should, but
then you must take it of those that set you on work, and I was none of that
turbulent tribe, and then their common answer was, that the Country set them
on work and thither they must come for their wages: No said I the principal
that set you at work was the D^vil, and he will pay you all your due wages and
just arrears in the conclusion. I cannot pass over a passage without
remembrance, which happened between my self and the Parson of my Parish, during
the time of the siege: I had a small field of corn growing, and upon the day
that it was a reaping, the Parson came to demand tithe of it: indeed said I, my
opiaion ever was that tithes were justly and lawfully due ^o the Church, so
long as Churchmen did truly perform their duties, but now most of them
hereabouts have most foully forgo^ten themselves, and are much out of rule and
order, and since they have been a means to make others suffer, it is no matter
if they lick a little ^^ the same sauce; for you know that this little co^ is
the chiefest stock that we have to help our selves withal, and seeing that
you and such as you are have preached up these distractions amongst us, and so
have been the instruments to bring honest men to a low ^^b, I think that with a
safe conscience and lege talionis, we may withdraw your tithes until you
deserve them better, and surely none you shall have here as yet, unless you
claw for it: Whilst we were thus in discourse, off thundered the Ordinance at
Colchester* List yonder Parson quoth I, what do you think of this, the Sword
has raged all the Kingdom over, and it is now come home to your door, and are
ye not yet penitent for your peevishness? his answer was, that he hoped to
meet with a m^rcifull King* yes certain said I, you will find I believe, more
mercy then you e^pect, I am sure more then you deserve; for although the King
be Gods Dep^^y upon Earth, and therefore we ought to honor him above all
Creatures living, yet he is but a man, and his goodness may perswa'e him to
peace and to pardon offenses; but have you lived so long and is your Divinity
no better, then to teach you that the making of your peace with the King will
be sufficient for you, I tell you nay, for you have offended the Majesty of an
eternal God, by preaching of blasphemy and treachery, and thus abusing the
King, and seducing his Majesty's liege people into errors, and gross mistakes:
and as your offense has been public, so your contrition and satisfaction must
be the same, for as you have preached the people into errors and absurdities,
so you must endeavor to preach them out again, and to reduce them into the
right way, and so seek to make your peace with God for your great aberrations;
or else you may go to the devil at the last for all the making of your peace
with the King. Not long after the si^ge broke up, and left an odious stink
behind it, by the base and barbarous bloody assassination of those two most
loyal and valiant Knights Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle, the report
whereof did much afflict our minds, but whether with more grief and horror, or
terror of amazement, is a question: and soon after ^ report was spread abroad,
that a^l such young Gentlemen as had been for the King in that siege, should
soon again be laid hold upon, and sent beyond the seas no man knew whither and
this enforced my poor son, not yet recovered of his siege surfeit, to depart
from my house, and for his saseties sake to follow his fathers pattern of
perigrination about the Country, continuing in that pitiout posture until
after that most horrible, hideous, and for ever to be lamented murdering of his
late Sacred Majesty, and then he presented me with a letter enough to melt my
heart into a flood of sad tears, and wherein after many sorrowful sad
expressions and fears of his dear Fathers danger, he uttered this, Oh Sir^ if
they have had the execrable impudence and cruelty to cut down the high Ceda^
how may the low and si^lie Shrubs expect to be trampled upon. But he being gone
aside and so escaped out of their pinching paws, my self alone must therefore
suffer the ^ull force of their fury: for about some two months after the
siege ended there came near twenty Troopers to my house upon a Saturday
toward night, and there violently entered to search for me, but I was gone to a
neighbors house n^^ long before, and they were informed for certain that I was
not in or about the house at that time, notwithstanding they searched for me
very narrowly, and went into my barn and tumbled about my hay and corn with
candles lighted in their hand^, and with danger enough to have set my whole
house on a fire, and when they could not yet find me, they said aloud that all
this while I was shut up in my study, and if that door were not opened they
would break it open; and then my Wife protested unto them that I was not there,
neither could she open it, because I had the key in my pocket, but ye^ to
satissie your selves said she, you may have a ladder and so look in at the
window, and easily discover that he is not there; and for all this with a
strong iron they reaved open my study door, and there rifled and stole from me
diverse books and p^pers, which I am sure could do them but little pleasure, and
yet I would not wi^lingly have lost the same, for twenty times more then they
were worth, and also they plundered away diverse parc^ls of my linen and other
goods, and did strike and abuse my children, and took meat out of the powdering
^^b* and broiled it upon the coals, and after mary such pretty prancks there
played, away they went. So soon as they were gone, my Wife sent unto m^, and
certified me how the matter was, and I came presently home, ^^t some wished me
not to lodge in the house that night, Yes but I will, said I, if it please God,
and yet I believe that I shall hear of them again before the morning, but I
fear them not, for had I known of there being here before, I would have come
home amongst them; well we committed our selves to God, and so went to bed: and
soon after mid^ight we were awaked with a great rumbling at the doors, and I
did presently speak and asked who was there, telling them, that if they were
the Troopers, that were here lately, I would rise and come down unto them, if
they will be quiet but a little while, and then I called up a Servant in all
have, to light a Candle, but before it could be lighted, these blind Zealots
had broke down a wall, and yet could not see the way to get in, but my Servant
opening the doors, they rushed in, and followed the Candle up to the Chamber*
door, which I perceiving said, why Sirs, I hope you will not be so uncivil, to
come into a Gentlewomans Chamber, where she is in bed: but I pray go down into
the Hall, and so soon as I can rise, I will come unto you; And upon this, they
did return down very fairly, and my self presently followed, and when they saw
my face, and heard me speak, they were civil enough, and showed me their
Warrant, then I asked them what their will wa^, and how they intended to
dispose of me for the present, it being in the dead time of the night, then
they told me that their Commander in chief, and the rest of their company were
at an Inn about two miles off, and desired me to go thither; T^en I must go on
foot, said I, for I have no horse; Then answered they, We came up hither on
foot, and so we shall bear you company, and requested me to make my self ready
as fast^^ conveniently I could, and ^o I called for clean linen and dressed my
self, and being thus ready, they said that now they hoped I would quickly go
a^ong with them; Yes said I, but you must excuse me awhile, for howsoever you
think of us Cavaliers, yet we have so much Religion, as to commend our selves
to God twice a day in public prayer, whatsoever we do in private; but now I
have more reason then ordinary to pray with my family, being ready to depart
from them, and God knows whether I shall ever live to see them again, or not,
and you may join with us in prayer if you please, and they seemed to be
contented so to do; But, said I, the truth is that I do use the prayers of the
Church, for I esteem those to be of the best form for public use; Then they
answered, you may use your Prayers by your selves as you think fit; then I
called mine own Company into another room, and did make use of the Book of
Common Prayer, and prayed for the Kings Majesty, the Queen, the Royal Progeny
and others, as my accustomed course and manner was; and I perceived they did
^isten to what I said, but made no disturbance at all, when I had done I called
my wife a side in private, and between her and my self, I did equally part that
little stock of money that I had, which was very small God knows, and she did
earnestly desire me to take it all with me: No said I, thou shall have half of
it howsoever, for I trust that God will provide still for me, whithersoever
they carried me, and so advising her to cast her confidence upon God alone,
with a Christian courage and comfort I departed away with my Jailors, taking
one of my little Sons along with me for company, so far as the said I^^e;
when I came there amongst the c^^e of them, I was as cheerful as discretion
could admit a man in my condition to be, insomuch as they did all marvel at
it, and said, They had seldom met with such a prisoner: I answered my cause
was good, and I was not ashamed of that I had said or done in this matter, and
though affliction were bitter, yet innocence was bold, for a good conscience
did cause a cheerful countenance: and thus the time passed until it was day
light, and then we must march for all it was Sunday* the business forsooth was
so urgent, that no delay must be admitted, either in reverence to God, or
charity to Man^ but I wanted a horse, and some of the wretches were then so
base as to say that if I could not get a horse, they would make me ride behind
one of them: No surely, said I that shall not be, for I will choose rather to go
on foot; Then replied a saucy fellow amongst them, you must trott apace then
or else we must drive ye on; But some of the more civil sort of them said, That
if I would send my Son to some neighbors, they believed I might borrow one
upon such an occasion, yet I was loath to send him about upon that day, yet lest
I should exasperate these ^ellowes whose prisoner I then was, I did let my Son
go, and after some 2* or 3. hours running about he brought me a little Nag upon
which being mounted* I was c^rried away thoroug^ the street of the Town, wi^h
the sound of Trumpet in service time, and rodd so cheerly and upright, as some
cold me afterward, who took notice of it, that I could not have ridden more
comely, if I had been traveling to my Wedding, when we came near the Towns
end, my little Son and I must part, and then I craved Gods blessing upon him,
and also gave him Counsel with a Fatherly charge to remember his Creator in
the days of his youth, and to be obedient and helpful to his poor Mother that
bare him, and in so doing, it would go well with him, in the conclusion, for
God in his mercy would at length remember his, and all the rest of our
afflictions: then I pulled forth a sh^lling out of my little stock and gave it
him saying, dear Child keep this for thy Fathers sake, perhaps it is all the
portion I shall be able to give thee; yet be not discouraged at all, but
remember that the whole World is at the command and disposing of God Almighty.
Thus away these Fellows carried me I knew not whether, nor for what intent,
yet their Warrant intimated for Chelmsford, but it was muttered by some that
when I came there, I should be sent to Windsor Castle; and so they made me
travel the most part of the Sunday, until dark night, but the days b^ing
then but short, they could not fairly get me so far as they intended, and
therefore we were all driven to lodge by the way; and indeed they led me to a
very good lodging, where the people of the house knew me very well, and could
not heartily bid me welcome, coming in that posture, and upon so sad an
occasion; But here in earnest the Troopers that lodged at the same house with
me, and which were of the more civil sort of them, (whom their Commander did
pick out on purpose, as he told me) did demean themselves very fairly toward
me, and yet my discourse continued as really Royal as ever it had been, but
with some discreet moderation, and always when I gave thanks a^ meat amongst
them, I still remembered to pray for the Church, and my Sovereign, and his Royal
Consort and Progeny; and so it was that one of these Fellows, pretending some
smack of Schollarship, would sometimes seem in his discourse to contradict some
of my assertions, and to utter his mind according to the then humor of the
times, but he would presently cast his eyes upon me with a smile, and say,
Cujus contrarium verum est Domine, the residue of his Company knew not what he
meant, but his free confession gave me so much satisfaction, as the
concertation between us two was very mild and moderate, and in truth they were
favorable unto me in my expenses, for I still did intimate unto them, that I
would be generous enough if I had wherewithal, but had not the faculty as
then, to spend money before I had it, and sure they were something sensible of
my afflictions, for always when the reckoning came to be paid, they would
civilly accept of that which I laid down, and paid the residue themselves, and
when I pleased they permitted me to go to bed, where having a quiet Conscience
within me, I slept soundly without fear of danger, but some of them watched me
all night, as I well perceived the next morning; And then they made have to
convey me to Chelmsford, where they entered the Town in triumph, with the
sounding of the Trumpet, and the discharging of their Pistols: And some that
knew me did in derision rejoice at my misery, but others of a more wise and
sober temperature, did hang down their Heads, as being grieved to see honest
Gentlemen so exposed to the i^solency of Treachery and Rebellion; but to that
^nn I was carried, which was ordinarily the Common Gaol for Maleactors at the
Assizes, and here I was kept with a guard until night, and when I went to bed,
I was locked up in the Chamber, and I believe a sufficient guard was not far
off from me; Well, here I rested very quietly until the morning, when the door
being opened, I presently arose, and having notice given me, that I must be
carried before those Creatures called the Committees, I did very cheerfully
prepare my self, and when I was ready, then the chiefest of the Troopers which
had brought me to Town, was my Gentleman Usher to conduct me before them, where
several Objections and Allegations were framed against me, namely that i^
p^eading of my Clients case, I had sometimes spoken in the derogation of
Parliament Ordinances and the like, I answered, that I did not use to plead for
any Client, but for my Fee, and having received that, I was bound in conscience
not to betraie his case, but to urge on his behalf what I did conceive was most
availeable for him, so far as Law or equity did warrant me; and that it was a
rare thing to hear of, that a Counselor at Law should be called in question
for his care and industry in the lawful and honest pleading of his Clients
business, which is the true performance of the trust reposed in him: and thus
that Objection as it seemed was passed over, but the main matter which they
infisted upon, was my sons being in arms in Colchester, charging me that I
had furnished him with horse, arms and money, to go upon that design. I
answered, that indeed he had gotten a little money at a place, where it was due
unto me, but it was all taken from him, long before that he came at Colchester,
and with arms I could not furnish him, for they were all taken from me, at the
time when my house was first plundered; and horse I had none of mine own,
neither durst I keep any for diverse years before: and so at length after much
discourse and altercation the result and sum of the business was, that I must
enter into a bond of 500 l. to leave off and discontinue all such actions as I
had commenced against those, that had taken the profits of my lands by force
and color of sequestration: and this volens aut nolens, I was enforced to
yield unto, or else I must still abide in prison, and there starve, for ought
that I then knew: and when I had sealed the Bond, after some consultation
amongst themselves, some of them said unto me, that now if I would pay the
troopers that had fetched me thither, I might go home for that time, so as I
would not refuse to appear upon a new summons. I answered, that I had not money
to pay the troopers, but you Gent. said I, that did set them at the work have a
large purse, and therefore I hope that you will pay them their wages: at last
with much ado I got off, but I believe the reason was because they could not
possibly got that from me, which then I had not for my self: and so by the
mercy of God, I came well home again, to the great comfort of my poor family,
being all full glad that I had thus escaped the tirants hands, although it were
upon hard terms: and for a while after we remained in reasonable quiet, and
having by our industry gathered together a little money, we ventured to
purchase chase a Cow, which long we had not enjoyed, but there came Troopers
and took her away, for non-payment of Assessements, for indeed I had not paid
any as yet during all the time of the then fore-passed Rebellion; and now the
driving away of this Cow, which had been so hardly obtained, and so long time a
purchasing, was a sad disaster, and did more vex us then the loss of a hundred
times as much before, when we had plenty, and truly it made my little Daughter
to weep bitterly, and that cut my heart, to see that I could keep nothing for
the sustenance of my poor Children, and especially was I grieved for her sake
whom not long before I had reproved, for endeavoring to learn to spin, telling
her, that I would not have her to dirty and defile her self with such greasy
work; and her answer was as well as she could, being scarce old enough to speak
aright, that she had rather spin then starve; and these things I remembered to
my grief, but knew not how to help my self, until it pleased God to send a
remedy: And now also the Troopers threatened to come again, and fetch away our
Household stuff that was left, if they could find no other distress. These sad
troubles, and imminent dangers did much perplex me, and I was almost at a stand
how to dispose of my self, and my affairs; my Loyalty and Courage did still
prompt me to venture all hazzards, but my tender compassion toward my dear
Wife and Children, did work wonders upon my real, and almost Royal-resolution,
and they earnestly entreated me, that if I would by no means meddle in the
matter my self, yet to give them leave to use some means to pay the rates, for
without payment thereof, they well perceived they could never enjoy any thing
in quiet; and hereupon I sadly considered with my self, that for our sins our
Princely Pilot was then taken away, and we all in danger of imminent shipwreck,
and little likelihood left of that relief which we so long had hoped for and
expected; and therefore though with much reluctation, I yielded my consent unto
them, to do what they thought best; and upon this my Wife and my Son did seek a
way to redeem their Cow, but by the occasion of diverse arrears incurred since I
had last entered upon my Land, the redemption of the Cow did cost them more then
she was worth 3, or 4. times over. And now the people about us believed that we
should rest in quiet, without any further trouble, so long as we paid the
Assessements; and so as fast as we could we got some more stock upon the
ground, and lived a little more comfortably then we had done for a while
before, and yet ever and anon some would be carping at me, and wishing me to
get off the Sequestration from my Lands, telling me, that it was the only way
for us to obtain security from danger, as the case then stood: and still my
answer was to this effect, that the Devil and his Instruments brought it on,
and I was very loath to seek to any of them to be my Attorneys or Solicitors to
take it off, but resolved to submit to the good will and pleasure of God, and
chea^fully to wait for a better opportunity; and thus for a year or two we
continued, without any great trouble, and then having by mine own industry, and
the help of some Friends, attained a small quantity of money, I did begin to
intend the reparation of my houses, being very ruinous, and in great decay; but
I had not far proceeded in this so necessary a work, but there was a new Alarm
in the Diurnals of an Act made to fell away my Estate, and the common report
was, that I had now no remedy at all to help my self, but was then past all
recovery, for my Estate must be sold away, and all my company left Beggars:
Hereat my Wife did much reluct, and wished that I had never laid out any money
about the reparing of my houses, for quoth she, they were too good for the
Rebels before; Be content, Sweet heart, said I, it is for my credit to keep my
houses in a gentile manner, and those that shall enjoy them will have the
better conceit of me, and I hope without doubt to see some better days before
I dye. Soon after there came three men from London to my house to survey my
Estate, and these took notice how many Rooms there were in the house, and how
many Trees were growing upon my ground, and among much discourse, they asked me
if I had not been a Captain in the Kings Army, and rid in a Buff-coat with many
tall Fellows following me; I answered, That my fate had not been so hitherto,
but I verily believed that my mind and courage was as high, and as prompt to
embrace such a design, as some others, but that the vigor of my youth was past
many years before that occasion presented it self: Then they replied, that if I
had not been in actual Arms against the Parliament, as they called it, then
there was a Proviso in the Act for Sale that might do me some good, and so in a
civil sort they departed from me; and it is very probable, that this mischief
was hastened upon me by the practice of the Sequestrators, who pretended
friendship unto me, but intended otherwise; for although the Assessements were
paid in the Country, yet they being called upon for the Rents of my Land above,
and being also ashamed, as I think, (after such horrible wrongs as I had
formerly suffered) again to take away that little stock which I had so hardly
gotten together, did therefore to salve themselves, return into their Office
above, that I was Lunatic, and that all my Lands lay waste; and sure it is
there was some subtle drift, and villainous intention toward me therein; but
the prime of their Trade was to invent lies, for the ruin and disgrace of
honest men, that opposed the wickedness of their doings. And now there was no
remedy, but to London I must travel, where I had not been for many years
before, for at the first beginning of the Rebellion, I did wholly give over my
practice there, deserted my Chamber, and could not endure to be seen amongst
them; yet now I must venture again, or loose all my Estate for the present, and
alas I knew not the face of any of those men that I was then enforced to make
my application unto, yet the Providence of God did bring me into some little
acquaintance with one of the Commissioners at Haberdashers Hall, who was in
show a moderate man, and had some power and influence among the residue, and by
his means after long waiting and expense of money, I obtained a hearing of my
case, where none of them seemed to be so much an Enemy against me, as one that
was of mine own profession, but his expressions there had little affinity
either with Law or Conscienoe, and the whole result of this my hearing, was to
refer my case back again to the rigorous Rump of that unlucky Parliament, and
then I thought my self to be in as bad, or a worse condition then I was before,
and yet still I desired to put my trust in God, by whose mercy I did
continually meet with many comforts; and thus home I came again to mine own
house, where I had not continued a week, but I heard news that the Rump was
turned out of doors by the Soldiery, and indeed I did not grieve much at it,
but took the same for a good Omen, that such hideous Beastials began to kick
and scratch so sorely one at another, and some hope I did entertain, that now
the Rump was so dispatched, we should rest in the better quiet; but not long
after there came unto me an Agent for the State, as he termed himself, and he
said that his Errand was to take an Inventory of all the Goods which were in my
possession, that so they might be forth-comming and responsible to the use of
the State. I did know this party well, and said unto him, Your Parliament is
now quite out of date, and shall these oppressions continue still? And he
answered, That there was yet a Council of State, and that matters would pass
on in the same manner as they did before: Well, said I, the will of God must
take place, and I am heartily sorry to see thee employed upon such an occasion;
Then he answered me again, that he must do those things that belonged to his
Office; Why quoth I, if Satan sends thee upon a Message, art thou so fit for
his turn to run presently? Alas Friend, said I then to him, I did know thy
Father, and he was an honest and a Zealous Preacher in this Country, and if he
were now living, I believe he would more willingly see thee come to a shameful
end, then send thee on such an errand as thou now come about, whereat he
hanged down his head and looked ill favouredly, yet did his work, and so
departed with cold entertainment; With many such Messages and several summons
to appear and to pay rent for mine own Land, I was diverse times after sore
vexed and put to much trouble and charge: But at length by Gods mercy, and the
means of one Mr. Jannyson of Colchester, an old Sea Captain, that had ancient
acquaintance with one Mr. Winslow a Commissioner for the compounding of
Sequestrations, and did freely also without my seeking, most friendly offer me
his Love and Service in that behalf; I obtained after long suit, and twice
paying for it, a full discharge from that Office: and who would not think, but
that I had then been safe enough from that danger? and yet my Genius did still
misdoubt the worst, and could never be truly apprehensive of Security, so long
as such Hypocrites were in Power, as made the pretense of Religion and
devotion, a Cloak to cover all their Villainy and Oppression; And so unhappily
it fell out, that I took not my marks amiss, for notwithstanding my discharge
aforesaid, being as complete as they could make any, yet still I was called
upon to bring in the Arrearages of Rents for my Lands, that were due to the
State forsooth as they pretended, and when this my discharge was showed sorth,
and pleaded in the Country before their Auditors and Receivers, they could take
very little or no exceptions against it, only they said that the Rents and
Profits of my Lands would still be called in question, neither could they
surcease or forbear so doing, until such time as my said discharges were sent
up, and enrolled before the Commissioners at Worcester house: And hereupon my
self being then in Prison, by force and color of their unjust power, I was
enforced to procure a Friend, to convey it up thither, where instead of
inrolling of the fame, they took it quite away from me, and left me only a Copy
thereof, that one of my Sons had formerly written out: and afterward when the
Rump recovered their peevish power again, they made a sale and grant of all my
Estate, notwithstanding, the discharge which I had so hardly obtained, and all
the woeful miseries, that they and their forerunners had formerly so long
imposed upon me, and my poor Family, only in the despite of our Loyal
Faithfullness to his late Majesty, and because we refused to pass in the rank
of Rebels: Such was the Charity and Justice of these wretched Miscreants, and
yet for all their raging and prodigious projects against us, we had the good
hapand courage to keep the possession of our house, during all the time of the
late distractions, and this I think may be put in Chronicle for a kind of
Miracle, and if I should make a punctual Relation of all the Travels and
Troubles, that we endured and passed thorough, in and about this last recited
affliction of ours, it would produce a large volume of it self: And yet I was
as much vexed and tormented with another Hobgoblin hatched in Hell, but called
an Engagement, and for the Non-subscribing of this, I was reputed an outlaw,
and no man that owed me any thing, would pay me a penny (unless it were some
Conscientious soul that feared God) for they knew that I was disabled, to bring
any action against them: And besides I had openly declared diverse times, that I
would hazard to starve, before that I would seek the help and relief of such
Law-lesse Authority as was then in use; And hereupon some perverse and ignorant
Wretches did deride me, and were the more prompt to work me a mischief, and
sticked not to say, that if any man killed me, there was no punishment to be
inflicted for so doing; Neither could I be permitted to plead so much as in a
Corporation Court, and upon this sad occasion, I continued close and retired at
home for a good while, being loath to expose my self to disgrace or danger as
the violence of the stream did then run, ^or I did then evidently perceive,
that those hypocrites were not contented to captivate our bodies and estates
only, but that also they endeavored, so far as their power could extend, to
inthrall our souls to eternal perdition: and I soon found likewise that my
recesse from a little public imploiment, was an occasion of the greater want
of means amongst us: the consideration whereof did minister a fair opportunity
unto me, to fly unto God for counsel and comfort, in this so great an
exigencie; and having implored my Creator for his mercy and direction herein,
I began to ruminate, and resolve to venture upon a design, whereby in
probability I might be exposed, either to more eminent and notorious
sufferings, then I had formerly met withal, or else by some fair and
irreprehensible evasion to help, and quit my self out of the trapp of that
treacherous engagement, for I did conceive that few or none of the Country
Magistrates would seem to be so grossly impudent and ir^eligious, as to make
refusal of that which I intended to present and proffer unto them: and so it
fell out soon after, that there was much business at a Corporation Court near
me, and where I had frequently been in practice for above 20. years before, and
thereupon diverse came unto m^; with a purpose to retain me for their counsel at
that time, and offered me Fees, which I had need enough then to accept of,
though formerly I had refused many that were offered me in some cases, and my
memory presenting that old Verse unto me, Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum
respuat anrum. I now entertained their kind offer, but withal told them, that
I feared, that I should not be suffered to plead, but yet I would endeavor to
do them the best service I could, or else return their Fees again: Hereupon I
took a fit opportunity to rapair to one of the chief Magistrates, that were
to sit at that Court, and whom I never took for a Machiavilian of the deepest
die, and did inform him, how I was retained to come to his Court, but
believed, that I should not be heard, because I had not taken the Engagement:
His answer was, that he intended not to hinder me, but that I might speak as
freely there, as ever I had done before; Well said I, but if those I shall
plead against, or any paltrie fellovv in court will but urge the exception
against me, I doubt you dare not but enjoyne me silence: You say true, quoth
he, and therefore it were well that you would subscribe it, whereunto I replied
thus, I hope that you will not impose any thing upon me, that is contrary to
the Word of God, or the Laws of the Kingdom. No no quoth he, not by any
means; Then said I, with a reservation to that effect, I will subscribe it;
and so we went together to the house of another Magistrate not of capacity
enough to practice much mischief, and there before them two, I did subscribe
it, with this protestation, so far as it was not contradictorie and repugnant
to the word of God, and the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and this device
of mine did pass for current, though certainly I was not thereby any more
engaged then I was before: and yet I continued faithful unto them in some
sort, for I dare say, that both before and after this, I did ever as freely
reprove their villainies, as any man that lived in England: yet I most humbly
crave your Majesty's pardon for this my seeming, in the least degree to yield
unto them, I could hardly have done so, had I not learned the rule, Sicut
subditus tene^ur ad obedientiam, ita Rex teneturad protectionem: and that
safeguard I was unhappily bereaved of, my conscience likewise relucted, lest
through (...), or fear of danger, I should offend God, but I believed that in
case of extremity, it were better to fall into the hands of God the fountain
of all mercy, then into the power of wicked men, who had showed themselves
almost as void of humanity as the very bruit beasts. Not long after this I
was summoned up to be decimated, and there it was ordered again, that I should
enter another Bond of five hundred pounds, but upon what condition or cause I
knew not, yet by the means of some there that pretended some friendship unto
me, the penalty was drawn down to three hundred pounds, and such a Bond I was
ordered to enter into at Colchester before some of their Accomplices, but I had
the good hap to shufle it over, and so escaped that bondage. But
notwithstanding all these my Troubles and Perplexities, or their pretenses of
kindness toward me, yet I could never be drawn or daunted from the defense of
the truth, and the bold and free utterance of my mind therein, upon every fit
occasion. Once as I was pleading in a Court for my Client, the chief Magistrate
there, and my self began to clash a little, whereupon I chanced to say, that
some courses would never be left, until the Kingdom were quite undone, to
which, he answered me thus, you to be sure will be undone in the mean time,
whereat I clapped my hand upon my Breast, and said, Gods will be fullfilled,
but if I be undone, yet I shall have an advantage above some others, for I
shall fall with Majesty, and a good Conscience, and that too many will miss of,
at which some of the standers by were not displeased, for I heard them whisper
and say, here is a man of a rare Spirit. And when I was in the deepest danger
for the sale of my Lands, this Magistrate last mentioned, had a Son that was
interessed about Sequestrations and Sales, and I remembered that St. Paul had
taken hold of the Law of an Heathen Emperor to save himself from the lash, and
so I thought it lawful for me to use the best means I could, to preserve my
Wife and Children, from being turned out of doors: To this man therefore I
repaired, and desired him to speak to his Son on my behalf, and he presently
called for his Son, and charged him before my face, to show me all the courtesy
and service that lay in his power, and then the old man and I walked together
into the Fields, where being in discourse, he said that he was sorry that it
was so with me, for if you quoth he, would have gone the way that other Learned
men did, you should never have had need to crave a courtesy at any man's hand,
for you might have been able to do favors for all your Friends and
acquaintance, for you might have been a man of great rule and command in the
Country, and gotten what Estate you had pleased; Yes sure, was my Answer, I
might have got the Devil and all; Then replied he to me, you will never leave
these manner of expressions, but they do you no good; Yes said I, there will be
a time when the speaking of truth may stand me in some sted; and Sir, said I,
you must give me leave to tell you, that if I had gone otherwise then I have
done, I had been as arrant a stinking Knave as ever pissed against a Wall;
whereat the man started, and said, why I hope you will not say that we are all
so: No sure, said I, my modesty will not suffer me to tell you on it so
plainly, but my self had been so howsoever; And why you quoth he, more then
other men? The reason, said I, is apparent, for I had then gone against my
Conscience in point of Religion, and my Judgment in point of Law, and he that
does so, I say is an arrant Knave: But Conscience, said he, must be rectified;
Very true, said I, but how? it must be rectified indeed by the Law of God and
Man, and not by the opinions and humors of a few factious Schismatics. This
man had been a Magistrate near 30* years, and I believed that the stream of the
Times, rather then the strength of his Judgment, had now caused him to run the
course he did, and therefore I think that I gave his Worship such a pestilent
rub as he had seldom met withal before, but my intent therein was to do him
good. In the late Tyrants time, an Attorney told me of a Lawyer which I knew,
that was then called up to be a Judge in one of the Courts at Westminster,
whereunto I answered, that I was sorry for him because I feared that he had
forgot both his Law and Religion too, but alas said I, the pride of the heart
is so great, that some will hunt after, and accept of preferment, although it
be upon never so evil terms, but sure such men are quite out of their wits: I
wonder you will say so, said he, why if the Protector should send you a
Commission to be a Judge, would you not accept of it? no surely, said I, and
verily I hope that thou have not so bad a conceit on me, as to believe that I
would once entertain such an offer; and though I remembered the old Adage, which
says, That he that speaks the truth may have his head broken, yet I proceeded
on further, and said, that I should rather choose to dye at mine own Gate, then
take a place under such a power, for if ever I be either Judge or Justice, I
hope at shall be in Gods name, and not in the Devils, for all Rebels are of
the Devil, and only from him they had their first original. Once again in that
time my patience was pitiously put to it, for having occasion to be at a
Sessions, amongst other stingie stuff of cruel consequence, I heard it given
in charge to the Grand inquest, that it was High Treason to say that the
Government was Usurpt; in truth my heart did rise against such Doctrine, and
mine ears tingled to hear the people so poisoned, and their Judgments abused,
and depraved with such Devilish dissimulation, and as soon as I could I got my
self away thorough the crowd, and going out at the door, an Officer of the
Court espied me, and said, Sir, whither do you go so fast? Away said I, what
should I do here? Why quoth he, I hope you will tarry and dine with the
Justices: no surely said I, for such doctrine I have already heard amongst
them, as I am resolved neither to eat nor drink with them this day: But I hope
now such popular Temporisers will truly see their Errors, ere it be too late,
for every such Proteus or Protogenes that intends to participate of Eternal
felicity, and to be as well capable of Gods mercy, as of their Princes pardon,
must not think it sufficient to turn a new leaf with the times, but they must
be seriously sorrowful, and repentant for their former failings, and corrupt
conversations: One of the holy Fathers used to pray unto God to forgive him his
other men's sins, that is, the sins which he had occasioned others to fall into
and commit; and most heartily I do beseech Almighty God, that the whole body of
(...) may obtain the grace to be truly penitent, and pathetically pious in the
reforming of what has been amiss. God and the World too well knows who were
incentively the first founders and fomenters of the late Rebellion, and so
consequently it is to be feared of all the horrible Murders, Rapines, and other
gross and Atheistical absurdities and Deviations, both in Church and
Commonwealth, which upon the same so sadly ensued: Have not some lately
brought to a condign punishment, pretended as an excuse for their so wicked
an^* unparalled Treacheries, that they were Commissioned Officers under such
a man? and who had he all his own Commissions from? and were there not Votes
passed for Non-Addresses to his late Majesty? and was not the clause for
preservation of his Majesty's person quite left out in some of their
Commissions? Alas I touch not upon these things with a desire to rub or renew
the sore, but to give a charitable admonition, as a Christian salve to the
soul, that such as are any ways guilty thereof, may be drawn to abhor
themselves, and to repent in dust and ashes. It is most true, if it please your
Majesty, that I was ever a sore detester of Rebellion, but I was as well
pleased to endure the yoke of a single Tyrant, as of a multitude of the same
stamp, and yet I could not forbear inveighing against him, sometimes in the
presence of such as had near relation to him; and it is very strange, that I
was not destroyed amongst some others, for many silly seditious So^s would cry
out upon me, with a why you speak against the Government, but these Rurals were
^oth to trouble themselves, or travel up so far to accuse me, and certainly
next to Gods mercy, my so seldom coming at London, was an Antidote to
preserve me out of his clutches: For indeed, my constant discourse concerning
that Tyrant was, that God had raised him up as he did Pharaoh, to plague his
People for their sins, and to the in^ent, that the Lord might show his Power
upon him in the conclusion: For I never looked upon the late Rebels, and all
their Accomplices and Adherents, but as upon the Egyptian vermin of Frogs,
Lice, and Caterpillars, sent and suffered to torment this Nation, for their
rebellious offenses, and therefore I did every day continually expect their
ruin; For if the Nation repented not, then I knew that God was able to punish
us some other ways; but I could never doubt, but that the Lord in his due
time, would vindicate his own glory, and truth against such wicked wretches,
and suddenly send some strong favonian Wind, to disperse and drive them all
into the red Sea of ruin and utter destruction. I have often wondered at the
strange Hypocrisy, or strong delusions of some reputed wise ones in this
Nation, for their first pretense of taking up Arms (as they held it forth to
the People) was to depresse and beat down Popery forsooth, and yet some of
themselves afterward, when success did seem to favor their factions, did put
in practice and strive to maintain the opposing, deposing, and murder of Kings,
the absolute merit of their own Works, and the infallibility of their own dirty
decretalls, such desperate and dangerous Tenets, as no moderate Romanist will
now allow of, or yield any approbation unto; Nay, the very written Word of God,
his ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the Holy Epistles and Gospels, and the
true Christian Catholic Belief, etc. are by some sacrilegiously thrust out at
the Church doors, to the end, that ignorance and perverseness may yet be
nourished, and their own weak and near nonsensicall inventions only applauded
amongst the people, and for the pleasing and feeding the idle and obstinate
humors of a few factious schismatics. And yet whosoever in the late times,
durst but once open his mouth, to speak against such ethnical practices, was
presently branded with the odious name of a Malignant, and ill affected person
to the state: but if all had been so blockish as to be silent, and not have
spoken a word against such damnable doings, I think (as our Savior says in
another case) the very stones would have cried out: and although too many were
much offended at those that spoke their minds in sincerity, yet I believe it
was happy for the whole Nation that there were some such persons to be
offended at, for had there been no righteous Lots therein to reprove the
wickedness of others, and that were continually vexed with the unjust
conversation of such Sodomites, there might have been danger enough for fire
and brimstone to have fallen from Heaven, upon such a gross apostatizing
Kingdom; for I am sure that the sins of Sodom never mounted so high, nor
cried so loud in the ears of Gods vengeance, as the bewitched wickedness of
wretched England for many years of late has certainly done, the Lord in his
Christ be mercifully appeased with us for the same. Indeed for mine own
particular I do profess, and have diverse times formerly said as much, that
next to the great hopes, that I have for the saving of my poor soul, by the
mercies of God, in the merits alone of Jesus Christ, I did never think that my
God had afforded me a greater favor, then to preserve and keep me by his
grace, from being an agent in, or adherent to the late rebellion: for if any
thing had been amiss in the practice of religion, as was pretended by some,
yet such as were not wholly given over to a reprobate sense, might easily have
understood, that armed violence could never amend it, but rather make all worse
then it was before, it is gross ignorance to imagine, that reformation in the
Church, or Religion and Truth it self, can be settled in blood, but only in the
innocent and precious blood of Jesus Christ* and where and whenever any true
reformation has happened, it was allwaies set on, and brought to pass by the
means of a lawful Magistrate, set up and authorized of God, and not by the
dull endeavors, and injust power of a few bestial and serpentine spirits,
raised and conjured up by the madness of the people. Such prodigious devices
were not in use, until the old dragon begun to rage, because his time waxed
short: but all along the primitive times, notwithstanding those bloody, heavy
and horrible persecutions imposed upon Christians: yet those that were true
godly Saints, did never so much as dream of rebelling against their Governors,
for ever still in their strongest extremities, their sharpest weapons were
preces and lachrimae, a sure symboll of a sacred heart: but all violent courses
to protect themselves, they utterly disclaimed. There is a generation yet
amongst us, that can never be so soundly sensible of their souls solace as they
might be, if they were truly convinced of their late errors, and seriously
sorrowful and humbled for their former offenses: but so long as they meet with
pardon and preferment, they think all is well, but alas it is not so, for too
many still fare the worse for these men's late unjust and impious practices: I
wish them to remember that God is a righteous Judge, and will render just
measure in due time; for oppression will ever cry to heaven for vengeance:
there be many matters which they have had a shrewd hand in, that will be a
bitter blemish in their arms, as long as they live: and as the vulgar saying
is, may grieve them in their graves when they be dead, or at least stick sore
at their souls hereafter, if they bring not forth better fruits and effects of
true repentance, then can hitherto be seen or perceived in them by an impartial
eye: Such as seek to cover their sins cannot prosper: and some there be I
fear, whose sormer faults being now shadowed under a fair pretext, do still by
their connivancie and countenance encourage others to be more stubborn and
refractorie in the yielding unto, and performance of such things as a good
conscience will lowdly call for at their hands: and by this means also it is
probable enough that some of your Man subject^ that have evidently demonstrated
their love and loyalty to their King and country are still kept under, and
had in de^ision and contempt, being basely abused and discouraged by too many
of the late stupidicies, to the dishonor and shame of this Kingdom, both at
home and abroad, and clean contrary to your Maties good meaning, and most royal
disposition, and sore against the reputation of a righteous Cause without
question; and if old Gamesters begin once to belive and find, that there is now
a days no difference at Dice, but that cogging and cheating may as well win
the Game, and go away with the Garland as fairly as honest and square play, it
may hereafter be a means to indu^e some to be cowardly, and loath again to
venture themselves and their estates so valiantly, unless it were upon better
terms, and at such an ill consequence or event, the enemies of the truth will
be ready to rejoice, but all your Majesty's Well-wishers would be most heartily
sorry for it. In truth it is now time, under royal favor, if it so please God
and your Majesty, that your Graces poor suffering friends should be a little
looked upon, and considered of, who have been so courageously constant in their
saddest sufferings, abhorring to defile themselves, with the least tincture of
Treason, but always laboring to imprint Loyalty in the hearts of others; and
frequently and faithfully improving their best faculties for your Majesty's
service, and the good of their native Country. Some of my Opposites have said
unto me, that they believed it was impossible to turn me from the way, that I
walked in, and that although they were not of my mind, and that I was their
enemy, and did them more hurt in their Cause, than many that fought against it,
yet they could not choose but honor the memory of me, in regard that I had ever
stood so stoutly to my Principles. It was truly said of the Wiseman, that when
a man is well proved, then is his faithfullness known; and certainly I may say
to your Majesty with a safe conscience, that in the time of the late Anarchy,
my fidelity to your Grace, was sufficiently tried to the proof, for amongst all
the revolutions and alteration which happened in that slippery State, and
wherewith the most part of the people being desirous of novelty, were well
pleased in hope of some melioration thereby, yet the Doctrine that I did ever
divulge amongst all such as I conversed withal, was still to this effect, that
all those alterations could never conduce to any good, but only draw on more
and more Confusion, until all were ruined; for always my saying was, that
right must have right, and that there could never be the least expectation or
sign of any security, or settlement of peace here amongst us, until your
Majesty were restored unto all your just, and lawful rights and royalties; for
whilst that came to pass, and was happily effected, the full wrath and
vengeance both of God and man would continually prosecute these rebellious
Nations. Some factious and seditious Ignorants, would now and then be carping
at your Majesty's title to the Crown of England, and affirm that it came in
first by William the Conqueror, and being gotten by Conquest, it might as well
in the same manner be lost: but my answer to this was, that the Case is not the
same, for William the Conqueror was a foreign Prince, and by the law of Arms
might make a Conquest of this Nation, but no Subjects can ever conquer their
Sovereign; for although they do over-powre him by force and violence, yet that
is no Conquest, but a mere act of rebellion, and no ways justifiable either by
the laws of God or man: and besides I commonly said unto them, that if any of
their Ancestors had been sei^ed of an Estate in Lands for the time of about
600. years, they would then think it to be more than a sufficient prescription
to maintain a good and unquestionable Title thereunto. But ^ had a stronger
argument than this to refute that Norman fallacy, for I was so good an
Historian as to tell them, that within a few Discents after the Conquest, the
ancient royal race was again restored; and also such an apt Antiqua^y and
Herald as to derive your Majesty's pedigree ab origant, and to show them
clearly how by Gods providence, and the policy and good success of many happy
and fortunate Marriages, your Majesty was now the true undoubted Heir, unto all
those famous Princes, that ever had any lawful color of Competition, or right
unto the royal Crowns of England and Scotland. And sometimes I have related
unto them an old story of the Abissines, who bragg that their black Imperial
Prince is descended from a Child, that Solomon begot upon the Queen of Sheba,
and this they stand upon as a great and honorable Antiquity for that Nation:
but withal I did still inform these people, that your Majesty's Title to
England was full as ancient, and far more authentical: And the chief scope and
end of all these my Speeches, and Relations, was to inlighten their blind Eye^,
to inform their Judgments, to make them know and understand the Truth of your
Majesty's indubitable just and religious Rights and Authorities over this
Nation, that thereby they might be induced to have a more reverend regard and
opinion of the same, and so in time become inclinable to yield their due
obedience thereunto. On a time being at a Court Baron in a great and populous
Town, diverse of the Tenants there in open discourse, did ask me many Questions
in Law, which I gave them my Opinion in to their satisfaction: at the length a
jolly fellow there, who was a Presbyters lay elder, did say, that the tenants
were much beholding to me, for I had told them a great deal of Law; but, quoth
he, I have heard but little Gospel come from you. Friend, said I, thanks be
given to God for it, I can speak Gospel too as well as Law, but Gospel now is
not fit for your hearing, because you have cast off the practice of it. No,
sure, said he, I do make more account of the Gospel, than of your Law. You
ought indeed to do so, said I, but you have forgot your Duty then; for the
Gospel enjoynes you to give Caesar his due, and that you have quite forgotten,
and where are you now? Then I desired him to tell me, Whether he thought that
St. Peter's Epistles were Canonical Scripture or not? Yes, quoth he, they are.
Then, said I, there you fail again, for there is in them a good Document, that
you and others have slighted most shamefully. What is that? said he. It is
this, said I, Fear God, and honor the King, and that I am sure you have quite
forgotten, or little regarded these two seven years* Hereat the whole Auditorie
fell into a loud laughter, and the Elder knew not what to say for himself.
There was a rich Town not far from me, which at the first beginning of the late
Rebellion, were liberal and very free to part with their Moneys and Arms to
that purpose, but their Purses being prettily well exhausted, and some of them
not well willing, or able to spare any more Money out of their Stocks, for the
present; yet for a further ostentation, and to make their Zeal and Devotion,
though blind in it self, yet perspicuous and clear enough unto others: They
consulted therefore, and agreed together to borrow 1000 pound upon interest of
a rich Usurer, and presently they lent the same to the Parliament, upon the
Public Faith, though alas they knew not where that Utopian or imaginary
Creature did then dwell, neither from that day to this could they ever find out
the residence thereof, nor yet so happily meet with it, as to get their Moneys
again. It was my chance a few years after to enter discourse with one of the
most solid Heads in that Parish, and I said unto him, that I had seldom or
never read or heard of such a stupefied, and blockish kind of people as most of
them were. Why, quoth he, are we worse then all others? Truly, said I, there be
none that I know of, that have manifested more ignorance and perverseness than
you have done; for when you had parted with all, and lent to the Rebels so much
Money of your own, as you listed to spare, then must you forsooth take up Money
at interest, to send the same way; and so purchase to your selves a stronger
Title to the Tripletree, for that will be your portion in the end, if you meet
not with the more mercy: and was there ever known any people so sottish, as to
borrow Money upon use, to drive such a dangerous Trade; certainly a man that is
not worse then mad, would have had so much Money as he knew not what to do
withal, before that ever he durst have ventured to lay it out upon so poor an
advantage, as to buy himself a Bargain of such dead and desperate Ware. Indeed
I believe that amongst all the Wrongs and Indignities, that were put upon me,
and too tedious here to be related, there was nothing so much perplexive and
vexatious unto me, as to see my native Countrymen so readily run on to their
own ruin, and to be so secure and confident in the ways of Error and
Destruction: but still I told them, that Security was the Mother of Danger;
that they walked upon deceitful grounds; for so soon as the Wind turned,
their false Teachers would all forsake them, clap their tails between their
legs, and run away like a chidden Curre, and that those they most trusted in,
would soonest forsake them, to serve their own turns. And yet always when I
took an occasion to declare my strong hopes, of your Majesty's Restoration,
many would seem to laugh at it, and wish me to set my heart at rest, for I
should never live to see that day* to which I ever replied with a constant
courage, that I trusted in God to live and see that happy day which I had so
much prayed for, and so long expected, and continually hoped for so many years
together, and that their security was a sign, and strong Argument to me of the
more sudden approach thereof, for it would certainly come to pass when the
most of men did least dream of it; and a time of the weakest probability in the
eye of the world, is the fittest season for the Divine succor, and the most
glorious opportunity for God Almighty to bring his own purposes, and blessed
decrees to the best effect: for it was impossible for a real and true Christian
to believe, that the divine justice could any longer suffer such usurping
wretchedness to have continuance, which had so basely and injuriously
subverted the whole frame of Government, both in Church and Commonwealth,
setting up such pandarising Magistrates as were content to submit themselves to
be agents in the most heathenish and Mohammedan absurdities; and such
idolatrizing Ministers, as for Balaams wages were content to idolize every
usurping rebel, and perfidiously and perjuriously to defame, and cast off the
Hierarchy of the Church, which they had formerly sworn to maintain, and yield
their obedience unto, and stubbor^ly also to deprave and disclaim the holy
Liturgy thereof, the Book of Common Prayer, and administration of the
Sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies of the Church of England, being in
truth so holy and sacred in it self, and so consonant to Gods word, and the
primitive institution of the true Catholic Church, founded upon the faith of
the holy Apostles, and Prophets; as the most critical Phanatick can never be
able to find the least just occasion of offense therein, unless it be because
it is guilty of so much purity, piety and perfection: and if there were
nothing else to speak or plead in the behalf of it, but only this, that it was
lately abrogated by a seditious Ordinance; that alone were argument sufficient,
to prove it to be of God, for had it been antichristian and opposite to the
truth, as some most ignorantly, maliciously, and fondly did affirm; then it had
never been opposed by any that were inclinable to rebellion, but rather
promoted by them, for as it is the fierce faculty and inseparable accident to
all rebels, to pat^onize, contend and fight for the defense of falsities, and
^ies, so is it as mere natural unto them to impugn resist and depresse the
truth, to the uttermost of their power, in regard they are, and ever were the
instruments and oracles of hell, and the undoubted children of their first
Father the Devil. And yet all these wholesome instructions, reasons and
admonitions of mine did seldom or hardly work so well upon the fancies and
affections of some of the seduced ignorant and stubbo^nly conceited people, as
I desired and intended: Indeed I know not better whereunto I may resemble most
of them, then to a company of wild apes that I have read of in a Moral, who
rambling about in the nightime, to find out their prey, and being somewhat
acold, at length they espied a gloeworm lying upon the ground, and taking it to
be a coal of fire, they soon resolved to take a course to warm them elves, and
hereupon some of them gathered sticks together, and laid them over the
gloeworm, and bending down upon their knees, and blowing stoutly, they used the
means as they conceited, to make the sticks take fire, from that imaginary
coal, others of them run up to the tops of great trees that grew near, and
broke down fear boughs to increase the flame; and thus with their puffing,
cracking or crackling, they awaked a poor Poppin Jay, which had taken up his
lodging amongst the branches of those trees, who was much amazed to hear so
great a noise there, in the dead time of the night, and therefore he set
himself to peep, and spy out what the matter meant; at the last he perceived
how busy the poor Apes were, about nothing to the purpose, and how shamefully
they wronged and abused themselves, by the means of their own ignorance; and
this Bird being of an ingen^ous nature and good disposition, was sorry to see
them thus labor in vain, and strive against the stream, and therefore to draw
them out of their gross error, and friendly to inform their Judgments in the
truth, he ventured himself, and came down amongst them, and as the story tells
me, said thus unto them, Good Apes you have awaked me with the great noise that
you made, and since mine eyes were open, I have well observed your design, and
what a pitious deal of pains you have taken, to no other end or effect, but
vainly to weary your Bones, spend your Spirits, and make your selves ridiculous
to the World, and being much grieved thereat, I am now come in Charity to tell
you, wherein you are so grossly mistaken, for I conjecture, that your plot is,
to kindle yourselves a fire, thereby to warm you, and so amend your cold
Condition, but you may blow your nails long enough, and puff till your hearts
ache, before you bring your purposes to pass, for if ever you get a fire by
this means, I dare warrant you, that it will soon burn you all to Ashes: But
the Truth is, that this shining thing that you behold, is no fire at all, but a
silly worm, whose nature it is, to shine and glister in the night, and so your
senses are deluded with the glistering show of a Babble, wherein there is no
such substance, as you do vainly conceive in your opinions; And therefore I
counsel you to desist and give over, this your so foolish and fond attempt:
Hereat the Apes were much offended, and began to storm and wax angry, and one
of the principal ringleaders amongst them, got up a stick in his paws, and
went furiously toward the poor Poppin Jay and said to this effect: Silly Bird,
who made the^ so bold as to come thus impudently to reprove us? art thou so mad
or foolish as to think that we know not well enough what we do, or that we will
be taught by thee, or have our Judgment informed, by a simple babbling Bird? I
tell thee no, for we are about our business, and that we will bring to pass,
in spite of thy Teeth, and therefore it is madness in thee to admonish us, but
I wish thee to give over thy prating, and get thee hence in time, for if thou
do tarry long here, and dwell upon such a discourse, we shall go near quickly
to use a means to pull thy Skin quite over thy e^res; And in truth upon the
matter, such or worse was the good entertainment, thanks, and reward, that my
self and others ever reaped at the hand^ of the late idiotis^d Rebels, for all
the good Counsel and Exhortation we gave unto them, in sincerely seeking their
Salvation, and in laying before their eyes, the doleful consequences, that
must needs ensue upon their impious vain and desperate designs: But they
indeed did more then threaten us, for they rent our fleeces quite off from our
Backs, and would soon have had the Skin and all too, if God had not been the
more me^cifull to prevent it, and to stop the main stream of their malice
against us: There be two small Treatises the one set forth in Queen Maryes,
time and styled An Exhortation against Rebellion, and the other written in
Queen Elizabeth's days, and named Caesar's Dialogue, they be both now almost
absolete and quite worn out of use, for to the best of my remembrance, I have
seldom or never seen them in the hands of any man, but mine own: And I first
found them amongst my Fathers old Books, who deceased when I was a little
Infant, and before they came into my possession, they were somewhat lacerated,
but I did diligently peruse them over, for I was ever studious from my
Childhood, especially of such things, as my Genius taught me, were very
necessary to be known: And I am persuaded that through the Blessing of God,
they were a principal means to imprint and sow the Seeds of Loyalty in my
heart, so soon as I had the least Understanding in any literature: And it is
probable enough that if I had met with the Encouragement, that some others
have, I might well have been able long ere this time, to perform better
services for my King and Country, then my transverse and cross opportunities
would hitherto permit me to accomplish, or bring to any such a good pass or
effect as I desired; for my endeavors being deprived of their due nourishment,
the want of that made me many times the more remiss in my studies, which I am
now most heartily sorry for; But now I hope that hereafter all those that are
truly Religions, and lovers of virtue and Loyalty, will not suffer the light
thereof to go out, and be quenched thorough negligence, or disrespect, or the
vigor thereof to be utterly extinguished in Oblivion, but that they will lend
a principal eye of regard thereunto, and justly and duly encourage and advance
the same, both for the glory of God, and their own special interest and
concernment; and in truth I do believe, under favor, that if those two little
Books last mentioned were revised and reprinted by Order of Authority, and so
freshly exposed to the public view, they would do much good, and operate very
well upon the minds and affections of the youthful and vulgar people of this
kingdom, and indeed this Nation has need enough of good and wholesome counsels
and cautions to rectify their so long depraved judgments, and of such
religious animadversions, as may totally deterr them, from the practice of that
uggly, horrid and diabolical sin of rebellion, and from the least hunting
after the* track, scent or savor of such seditious and schismatical delusions
as of late they were so grossly and abominably infected withal, considering
also the lamentable and fearful consequences that have ensued thereupon, both
in Church and State, and the most horrible and prodigious tragedies, that have
been acted upon the theater of this Kingdom, by occasion thereof, being even
more bloody, vile and villainous, then the seditious Jews that Josephus writes
of* who wrought the ruin and utter subversion of their famous City and
country, did ever enterprise or intend, as I could instance in some
particular^, which are so odious, and notorious to the world, as I shall not
now need to d^file this paper ther^with. But in truth the carriage or d^meanour
of some people still, is so p^evish and perverse, as my conscience does urge me
to relate some passages that concern my self, which I would willingly omit and
pass over, were not my charity, to reform their ^rrors, greater then my
desire to defame their actions: for certainly my self and others were of a
blind belief, and stupid understanding, if we did not palpably perceive, the
doleful, and dangerous defect of contrition, and the crooked conversation that
yet remains in these men, who seem to be of the Spiders nature, sucking poison
out of the same flower, from whence the harmless Be does gather honey: and it
is to be feared that some acts of grace, which might well have served for their
present advantage, will in the end by the bad influence of their corrupt
nature, conduce and redound to their future and ^verlasting overthrow: for in
the very place where the constancy and integrity of my truth and loyalty
has been eminent enough, and where the sufferings both of my self and family
for the same have been such and so great, as many of mine enemies have had once
a little compassion upon us, yet even there have I found lately but few
Samari^ans, to bind up my former wounds, but some pass by without regard
thereof: and too many are prompt enough to make my sore the deeper, by their
peevishness and malice: for but a little time before your Majesty's most happy
access to your royal government, I was required to pay some assessments, which
for the present I did refuse to do, in regard the payment thereof was ordered
by an illegal power, and for that I was in good hope of your Majesty's sudden
approach to right and protect us: and after that your Majesty was so happily
landed, and come to London, the Collectors again did demand the same of me, and
said that if it were no^ presently paid, there must come troopers to ^evie the
same; To which I made answer, they might come if they would, but there was no
need of any such trouble, for if I could have the least notice, or intimation,
that your Majesty had commanded or consented to the payment thereof, it should
then be very soon discharged, but otherwise I would not pay it as yet, until I
heard more, and were better satisfied in the matter: to which they had little
to say, but went their way, and for diverse weeks after, whilst I remained at
home in the Country, I never heard any more of them: but the very next day
after that I was come away toward London, to petition your Majesty about my
former sufferings, these Collector^ came to my house, with about a dozen, or
more Foo^-souldiers, whereat my Wife in my absence was much affrighted, and yet
they left half of them there to quarter, until the money were paid, who
behaved themselves basely enough, and would tar^y there in spite of her teeth,
to her great disturbance, and she not having the money, was enforced to
maintain them all, until she could procure the whole sum which they demanded:
and at this the contemners of my loyalty did laugh not a little and please
themselves, to see my house thus abused, and so suddenly after my Kings
coming, which I had so long hoped for, and so much rejoiced at, a^ was
sufficiently seen and made manifest, And since the sitting of the late
Parliament, or Convention, and but a little time before your Majestie^ most
blessed access into England, there came a gallant Gentleman to my house, and
desired to speak with me, and when we came together, he civilly requested me to
excuse him, for he thought he had brought a Message that would not be very
pleasing unto me, and yet he believe^ that it would do me no great hurt, but a
friend of his had earnestly enjoined him to tell me of it, and to hear my
answer thereunto: Well Sir, said I, what is the matter I pray? It is quoth he,
a Rump business: How so, said I, is not the Rump Plag^e over yet? what is the
news with them now? Why said he, this Gentleman that entreated me to do this
Errand, has laid out moneys about the Purchasing of your Land, and I think
that he would willingly learn how he may come in to his moneys again: Yes
marry, said I, that were well, for as yet there is a Fool and his money soon
parted, for if it be laid out upon such terms as you do intimate, then your
friend if he meets with his lawful and due desert, may very fairly totter for
his pains; for in truth had there not been such sottish and covetous
Contractors, for the purchasing of honest men's Estates, there had never been
such unjust and impious wretches, as would once have offered to make Sales of
the same; But I pray tell me, said I, who is this your friend that has made
such a blind bargain for himself? he is, said the Gentleman, a Barrister at
Law, and has a place in the present Parliament, and he has sent down Letters
of Attorney to one here in the Country, to demand the Rents of your Lands, and
to fore-warn your Tenants from paying you any more Rent; Indeed said I, he is a
pretty Lawyer, and has proceeded well; does not he deserve to be degraded, or
worse, that thinks Gentlemen can forfeit their Estates for refusing to be
Traitors? the Law tells him, That it is the committing of Treason, and not the
disclaiming or refusal thereof, that brings men within compass of the
forfeiture either of their Lives or Estates, and therefore surely his Learning
in the Law, or rather ignorance therein, does deserve far more punishment, then
preserment: Yet truly, quoth the Gentleman, he is an honest man, and was drawn
in to lend money, and to obtain the same again, he was offered, and enforced to
take a grant of your Lands, but he desires to do ^ou no wrong, but will gladly
accept of a reasonable composition: Then I asked him, how much money his friend
had disbursed about the bargain, and his answer was with a specification of
many hundred pounds: Well, I am sorry for him, said I, for the truth is, that I
will never give him so much as the skin of a Lowse, and I much marvel that any
man now dares be so impudent as to talk of any Rump businesses, considering
that we hope the Kings Majesty will be amongst us, ere it be long: Yes, it may
be so, said he, if this Parliament will allow of him: They allow of him, said
I, why is that the chief point to the purpose? I trust these will approve
themselves to be wiser then some of their Predecessors, or else they must look
to find the like fortune, for his Majesty's Motto is, Dieu and mon Droit, and
that in Gods good time will bring him to his Crown, in spite of all opposition:
Thus I so lectured my Gentleman, that he much commended of my resolution and
discourse, and said that he was of my mind, and so we parted in a very friendly
manner. And yet these and other numerous pranks of the like nature, that for so
long a time together have been played upon me, were sufficient to penetrate the
patience of a more patient, and less passionate man then my self, but it
pleased God to make me remember, Qui patitur vincit, patientia sola triumphat.
And I most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, and be confident, that all
your Loyal and Loving Subjects, that have been constant sufferers in the late
unhappy times, will never in the least degree go about to nourish or flatter
themselves in the repining against that which is your Majesty's good will and
pleasure, for we are well content still to endure any thing that may truly tend
to your Majesty's safety and advantage; and we do fervently desire, and
incessantly invocate the Almighty Majesty of Heaven, in whose hands the hearts
of Kings are, that he will be pleased in his abundant mercy and goodness, so
graciously to direct and dispose of your Majesty's Councils and Affairs, as may
be most requisite and pliant to the performance of his blessed will, revealed
in his word; and for the maintenance and upholding of the true Doctrine and
Discipline of the Orthodox Church of England, as the same was settled and
established at the Reformation thereof, by regal lawful Authority: And I doubt
not but that your Majesty is well pleased with us, in these our good desires;
for alas it is too manifest, that the late counterfeit, though specious show of
Reformation, and the crying down of the Churchgovernment was a great instrument
to beget and breed up that furious and giddy generation of Scismaticks, that
have so long troubled, and almost confounded the whole Nation. And it is to be
feared, that some will think it now scarce consonant to distributive Justice,
that such as have been so much hindered and almost undone for their Loyalty* in
the late times, should still be oppressed in their Purses, to help to bear out
other Men's misprisions, and perversities: or that constant Loyalty, and his
inveterate opposite and antagonist, though in a changeable colored Coat,
should yet walk together in aequipage, and be equivalent in countenance, and
respect; And yet notwithstanding we are content, and do rejoice only in
submitting to your Majesty's good will and pleasure therein; and though perhaps
for some serious considerations of State, not yet well known or apprehended by
us, we are at present debarred from something, which the benefit of the Law,
our birthright, might very fairly have afforded us, yet we gain this honor
and satisfaction thereby, that it is now manifest to all the world, that can
see, and will not be wilfully blind, that all the Rapines, Wrongs and
Oppressions, so lately imposed upon us, were utterly illegal, and that we had a
good and just right of recompense for the same, both in point of Law, Equity,
Reason and Religion, and especially such of us, as had been constantly loyal,
and wrought no detriment to others; or else to what purpose was there any new
Law made to deprive us, but pro tempore, of that legal Legacy, and inherent
Inheritance, which the great Charter of England, the continued will of so many
famous Kings and Parliaments, for so many hundred years had in lawful manner
bequeathed to our Ancestors, and in them to us, and our Posterities. But I
touch not upon this string to any other end or intent, then only to restifie,
how I do believe that some others as well as my self have met with occasion
clad or dressed in a more discontented habit, then was expected, for none of
us, are so deficient in understanding, but that we are apprehensive enough, not
only of the greatness of the grievances we have endured, but also of the
smallness of the regard, and countenance, which at some men's hands we have
received for the same: and yet as we cannot but be sorely sensible of our
Sufferings, and slightings, and the slender notice that is taken thereof: So we
will not at any time be emulous to accomplish the right of our desires, not so
much as in thought, otherwise than the correspondent good will and pleasure of
your Sacred Majesty, and the known Laws authorized by the same, shall give us
free liberty and we are sufficiently confident, that upon the true resenting of
our Loyalty and Losses, and the due consideration of the nature, and of other
passages thereupon, now so fast knit to our Obedience, your royal Majesty will
soon conceive, that in point of honor and conscience, your Grace is the more
engaged to look upon us, and without that favorable aspect, we not only fear,
but find it too evidently hitherto for a truth, that the Chamelions of this
age, who feed upon the Utopian air of their own frothy inventions and
conceits, will never come near us, and so be adapted to turn themselves into
our colors and constitution, but rather with reproach abandon us, and so
totally deprive themselves of that good, which our Council and Conversation
might minister amongst them: and were it not great pity, that so worthy
Qualities and Faculties as Loyalty, and Courage, should unhappily prove and
become the Ushers in of Obloquy and Contempt; or that so rare and precious a
prise as Virtue, for want of a few external Ornaments and Additaments, should
be in the least danger to be despised in its own Country, or Family. In truth
for my own part I have had the trial, to meet with more abuses, and sarcasmical
scoffs of late, then I intend to regard, or mean to mention; but as touching
any kindness, favor or furtherance to refresh me, after my long oppressed and
indigent Condition, I can gather up that but very thinly, although there is as
much reason for me now to expect practice, and as much faithful industry, and
ability to perform my undertakings, as there is in some others, that reap a
more plentiful harvest of their endeavors, yet there is such an antipathy
between most of the Country, where I live, and some of my best Qualities, as
the greatest part of the people are much averse to be acquainted with me,
remembering how sharply in former times I did reprove their Follies, and laid
open the deadly dangers they were in, of which esteming themselves now to be
secure, and indempnified, they look still somewhat strange upon me, and will
hardly come near me: manet alta mente rep^stum judicium Paridis: and therefore
I begin to believe, that it is my best thriving Physic, to change the air,
when I thought it would have best agreed with my complexion; And yet if my fate
were propitious, and my fortune not a stepdame unto me, I am strongly
persuaded, that by your Majesty's indulgent grace, and favor, I might soon
attain unto a very competent, and comfortable livelihood by the means of my
Profession; for there be three necessary incidents to the well being of a
Lawyer, Favor, Learning, and Integrity; and if I were so happy but to attain a
small portion of your Majesty's favor, I doubt not then to find as much of
other men's, as shall well serve my turn; And for my Learning, though it be but
little, yet with use and improvement, it may soon prove to be as much as some,
that have met with better Fortunes and Preferments then my self, may with a
safe Conscience confess themselves to be guilty of; And for my Integrity, I
dare venture to lay my Life to gage, without any haesitation, of which
Integrity, Faithfulness, and Sincerity of mine, both toward my Sovereign and
Fellow Subjects, I hope this Treatise has made some evident demonstration: and
yet I may safely say, that the sum of all inserted herein, is but an Epitome
of what I have done, said and suffered on the behalf of the Royal right and
interest, and I pray God preserve your Majesty from reposing too much credit or
confidence in such as have already been, and therefore may hazard again, to
prove Praevaricators, whenever the opportunity of their own advantage, or the
fear of danger shall draw them thereunto. And now I must calculate to a
Conclusion, most humbly imploring your Sacred Majesty to pardon my Zealous
presumption, in thus adventuring and contending to expatiate, and make my
selfknown to your Grace: it is the vigor of my Genius has urged me, and
without yielding thereunto, I could never subsist, tranquillo animo; for the
prime intention thereof, is to minister good to others; and if by the means of
your Majesty's gracious acceptance, and benign interpretation, any benefit
shall befall to me or mine, the glory and praise be given to God alone, who
has already afforded me, the greatest temporal blessing, that ever so
earnestly, I had longed after, I mean your Majesty's most blessed access, to
the rightful possession of your Royal Crowns and Dignities; for as your
absence was most i^ksome, so is your Princely power and presence, most
acceptable, to all ingenuous Natures, and loyal and royal Dispositions: I was
in the fresh flower of my days, when the bright star of your Majesty did
first appear, and having now doubled mine age, yet when after so long dark and
dismal aspects, I did so happily behold the illust^ious brightness and
glorious splendour of your Majesty's ^adiant sunshine begin to show it self upon
the late lowering face of our Horison, I did seem to wax young again, I was in
an exstasie of joy, beyond my self, and did believe the beak of my Misfortunes
was fallen away, and that with the soa^ing Eagle, I should now renew both mine
age, and strength; such pleasant Phansies did possess my Spirits: and yet
still I cannot conceive, that I do truly live, unless I participate some
better warmth and influence by those nutritious and majestical Beams, then is
expected from them naturally to descend and be infused upon the rural pecora
campi: But I am far from doubt and despair, and will never so much fear the
frustrating of my own hopes, as that your Majesty's Royal fame, and honor, and
Pious and Princely endowments, so highly renowned in foreign parts, and so well
experimented here amongst our selves, should suffer the least eclipse, or
aspersions, in permitting any of your Majesty's well-meriting Subjects, to be
quite neglected and forgotten, to the future discouragement of Truth and
Loyalty in the least degree. But now the glorious and calm Ocean of your
Majesty's rare and transcendent Imperial Virtues and Graces, so replete with
Royal Bounty and Benignity, is abundantly more than sufficient, not only to
wash away the discontents, that have a little obnubilated the countenances of
some honest and upright men, but also to quench and satisfy the thirst and
appetite of all your l^yal, loving, and reasonably disposed Subjects; and the
Lord in his mercy ever defend and deliver your Grace, from wicked vain and
unreasonable men; And I most humbly beseech and invocate that Almighty Majesty
and Power of Heaven, that for the advancement of his own glory, the good of his
Church, and the felicity, peace and happiness of these Kingdoms, he will be
pleased graciously to grant your Majesty so blessedly and religiously to reign,
rule and govern; and your Subjects in general, so christianly, cordially and
faithfully to submit and obey, as that after the many vicislitudes of this
transitory life, we may altogether attain the most blessed habitation of glory
and salvation, in the highest Heavens, to all eternity, by and thorough the
merits alone of Jesus Christ, our only most blessed Lord and All-sufficient
Savior, to whom, with the Father and Holy Spirit be rendered all honor and
glory, dominion, obedience, power and praise from henceforth, for ever and
evermore. Amen.

Your Majesty's most Loyal, Faithful, and Obedient Subject, most humbly devoted
to Your Royal Service, J. Wenlock.

A Short Caution for those that help to Written in 164^.
maintain this rebellious war against the KING.
I May take heaven and earth to record, that I have written this, not with any
^inister intent, or prejudicate opinion; but partly for the love that I bear
generally to my country, partly for the desire I have to confirm such as in
these times of wilful blindness, are not altogether led away with the error
of the wicked: but especially in the discharge of my conscience, and duty
toward God, whose command i^, when thou art converted, strengthen thy Luke 22,
32.
brethren.

That Subjects owe obedience to their Sovereign, the whole consent of Scripture
does agree: The Psalmist resembles Kings to Gods upon earth: and indeed they
have their rule and Ps. 82. 6.
power by Gods appointment: Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings reign: and therefore to
such as rebel against them, it may be said, as God said to Samuel touching the
Israelites, They have not cast ^ Sam. 8. 7.
thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not reign over them.

I hope none are so impudent to compare our King to Saul, rejected of God, but
if any such be, had they any touch of the grace in David's heart, then would
they yet pray with him: Lord keep me from laying mine hands upon the Lords
anointed; let me entreat them with a single eye and humble spirit, to read ^
Sam. 26
the history of David's carriage toward Saul, and to remember the wise
counsels of Solomon: My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given to change, for their calamity shall rise suddenly. The
fear of a King is as the roaring of Prove. 20. 2. 3.
a Lion, who so provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul: it is an
honor for a man to cease from strife, but every fool will be meddling: an evil
man seeks only rebellion, therefore a cruel messenger Pr 17. ^^
shall be sent against him. The wrath of a King is as the messenger Prove. 16:
14. and 15^
of death, but a wise man will pacify it: for in the light of the Kings
countenance is life, and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain. And again
in Eccl. I counsel thee to keep the Kings commandment, and Ecc. 8. 3. ^. and
4. ^
that in regard of the Oath of God: be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand
not in an evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him: where the word of a
King is, there is power, and who may say unto him what do thou?

Let us never forget that divine precept of our Savior, the King of Kings, set
down in three of the Evangelists; Give unto Caesar, the thing that are Caesar's:
Remember the Apostle of the Circumcision; Fear God, Honor the King, and submit
your 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 17.
selves to all manner of Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the King, as unto the Superior, or unto the Governors, as those that are
sent of him. Observe the decree of the Doctor of the Gentiles writing to the
Romans, then governed by Nero a most cruel Tirant: Let every Soul be subject
to the higher Powers, Romans 13. ^. 2.
for there is no power but of God, whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
Condemnation. And in the Marginall Notes upon the old Translation, it is well
observed, that because God is the Author of this Order, therefore Rebels must
know, that they make war with God himself, and cannot but purchase to
themselves great misery and calamity: For though the King has not Power over
the Conscience of man, yet seeing he is Gods Minister, he cannot be resisted by
any good Conscience. And in his Epistle to Ti^us, he gives a special memento:
Put them in mind, that they be subject to the higher Powers, and that they Tit,
3. 1.
be obedient, and the like in diverse places of his Epistles.

The King of England, is an absolute Imperial Monarch by the Law, yet he is to
govern his Subjects by the Laws and Ancient Customs of his Kingdom; But the
King is the only supreme Power next under God, and so acknowledged by all
Parliaments, and the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance do prove as much; And by
a Statute made in 1 of Elizabeth, any man is disabled to sit as a Member in the
house of Commons, until he has taken a solemn Oath upon the Evangelists,
whereby he does acknowledge the King to be the only Supreme Governor of these
Realms in all Cases whatsoever; And also promises, that he will to the best
of his Power, assist, and defend, all his Majesty's Royal Privileges,
Pr^heminences, and Jurisdictions granted or annexed to his Imperial Crown,
and yield his Obedience thereunto. Which Oath how faithfully some do now
observe, I leave to the Judgment of God, and their own Consciences.

It is confessed by all knowing men, that a Parliament truly understood, is a
Court of the highest Nature, and Authority in this Kingdom, and that it has
power to make and alter Laws: And that matters there in question are to be
decided or agreed on by the Major part of Voices; But it must not be a
Parliament without a Head, not a Parliament rent in pieces, that has power to
do this: For to make any Obligatory Act to bind the Subject absolutely, either
in Life, Liberty, or Goods, there must be a concurrence of the Major part of
both Houses, with the Kings Royal Assent added thereunto, in whom the
Legislative power does alone consist; And therefore I know not how any such
thing can now be done at Westminster, the King being absent, and the far
greater part of both houses, nay almost all the Lords, being also departed, and
now joining themselves with the King in all his designs.

But it will be objected, that many things may be done by Ordinance of
Parliament; I will not deny, but that both Houses of Parliament jointly
assembled, may possibly have power to make Ordinances, for the present good of
the Common wealth; And that these Ordinances may be binding, during the time of
that Session: Provided, that they ^e no ways contradictory to the known Laws
of the Land; For the Subject enjoys his Life, his Liberty, his Lands, by the
ancient Customs and Statutes of this Kingdom, which are indeed the
fundamental Laws thereof: And therefore the Subject cannot be deprived of
these rights, but by a Law of as high a nature, and that must be a Statute Law
at the least: How then can any man by an Ordinance contradictory to Law, be
legally dispossessed of his Liberty, or Goods, which he does enjoy by the Power
of the Law: But some say that these things may be done by Privilege of
Parliament; And if there be such a Privilege come to light, that does overtop
all Law, Reason, and Religion, then much may be done. But I beeleeve that if
any such Privilege be now found out, that it is as new as the inventers
thereof, for venerable antiquity: their betters in learning and knowledge,
never yet heard of any such matter:

It is known to all that have but smelt of the Law, that both by the Common and
Statutes Laws of this Kingdom, it is high Treason to levy Arms against the
King, or to be Adherent, or Assistant to the Kings Enemies, and these Laws,
when they be once again armed with power, will have a very large construction
by the Judges of the Law.

There is a Parliament to be found in history that did seem to wage war
against a King in this Realm, but what ill success it had, I had rather the
Historian should tell you then my self: sure I am, there is an ignominious
brand laid upon is to all posterity, for it is still styled Parliamentum
insanum.

Let no man hate instruction, nor be too wise in his own conceit, be Prove. 3.
not high-minded, but fear; a prudent man, says Solomon, foreseeth Prove. 27.
12. Numb. 16.
the evil, and hides himself, but fools pass on, and are punished: forget not
what became of Korah, Dathan and Abiram that rebelled against Moses: yet were
they no obscure persons, but princes of their families, and men of great
estimation amongst the vulgar: remember what was Absolons portion for rebelling
2 Samuel 18. ^ Sam 20
against David: and what became of Sheba the son of ^ichri that lifted up his
hand against the King, and many such examples in holy Writ? Nay look but into
our Chronicles here at home, and observe how Gods judgments have still
prosecuted all them and their posterity, that have had any hand in the
deposing or opposing of Kings, upon any fair pretense whatsoever.

To abuse the picture of an earthly King, has been taken to be a great
indignity* how then shall the God of heaven take it at the hands of such as
despitefully use and contemn the King himself, a good King that is Gods image
and Vicegerent upon earth; but the times are come, that the Apostles foretold,
that ^ Tim. 3. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 10 Jude 8.
many in the latter days would be traitors, headie and high-minded,
presumptuous, and stand in their own conceit, despise Government, and not fear
to speak evil of them that are in dignity. But some say, that this war is not
against the King, neither do they intend him any wrong: indeed they ought not
to wish him the least hurt, for God commands us not so much as to think an evil
Eccl. 10* 20.
thought of the King, but these men do more then think, for they openly reviled
the King, by reproachful and scandalous speeches, saying, that he is led by
bad counsel, and intends to set up Popery, and can there be any greater
aspersion laid upon a Prince, for Solomon says, A divine sentence is in the
lips of the King, and his mouth transgresses not in judgment. And it is Prove.
16. 19, 20.
abomination to Kings to commit wickedness, for the throne is established by
righteousness. It is the part of a Christian to judge charitably both of King
and of people; but where the subjects go about in hostile manner to invade
their Sovereign and his friends and forces under his command; and also use with
extreme cruelty, such of the Kings faithful subjects and friends, as they can
get into their power, and yet will aver and maintain, that they war not
against the King, neither intend him any wrong; What to make of their reason or
argument, I know not, but a mere solecism; yet the late Oaths imposed upon
such, as had so little Grace to take them, do make the meaning both of the
matter and manner of their evil intentions of proceeding to be somewhat more
plain to be perceived.

It is most true, that the King and many of his true Subjects are much abused,
for truth is hid in darkness, and it is the misery of miseries that men are so
wilfully blinded and besotted, as their ears are stopped to all good Counsel:
Wise men that know the truth of things, are much discouraged to impart the same
to others, because they see many are so wedded to their wilful Errors, that
he which in charity goes about to advise them for the best, may sooner himself
fall into a snare for his good will, then pull any of them out of the danger
that hangs over their heads: for he that now a days dares venture to speak the
truth, is presently snapt at for a Malignant. But God that knows all things,
knows that the Kings Majesty has raised his Forces, and does maintain this
War, only for the beating down o^ Faction, Schism, and Sedition, and for the
upholding of the true Protestant Religion, established in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and under which this Kingdom has long flourished, and for the setting
and maintaining of the true and genuine Laws of this Kingdom: But some dream of
a great Reformation now in hand, I am sure there is already a great
Deformation, both in Church and Commonwealth; I wish these Reformers would in
time un-hoodwink themselves, and see what success they have had, and learn ere
it be too late to be obedient to God and their Prince, following the counsel
the Angel gave to Hagar, Return to thy Mistress, and Genesis 1^. 9.
humble thy self under her hands; and let them ende^ vour the due Execution of
the good Laws that are now in force, lest while they fondly presume to amend
that which is well already, they make the word Parliament have an ill savor,
and open a gap to greater desolation, and so mar all. Indeed it were to be
wished there were a more general Reformation from sin, and God when it
pleases him will afford us that happiness, and incline the Kings heart to all
occasions pliable thereunto: For the Kings heart is in the hand Prove. 21. 1.
and 25. ^5.
of God as the Rivers of Water, he turns it whither soever he will. And by
long forbearing a Prince is persuaded; we must therefore wait the Lords
leisure, and seek no Reformation by unlawful means, for we must not do evil
that good may Romans 3. 8.
come thereof: But some will now be wiser then Gods word, or at least take Gods
power upon themselves; they will have the Kings heart in their hands, and the
Government in Church and State must be turned upside down at their beck; and
the most deserving bodies in the Kingdom left without heads, at their command
and pleasure, or else to Arms they must, forgetting the counsel of the wise,
With good advice Prove. 24 6. Exodus 7. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9* Prove. 21. 30.
shall thou make War: Alas these men may a while resist the King, and in the
King, Gods Ordinance, but it will be to as little purpose, as Jannes and
Jambres resisted Moses, for there is no wisdom, power, nor policy against the
Lord of Hosts. And if God for the sins of this Nation should lay that heavy
scourge upon us, to take away the Kings Majesty's life, and the lives of all
his posterity and alliance, (which the Lord in his mercy forbid) then may these
men have some likelihood to prevail in their purposes, or otherwise never.

Beloved Countrymen, delude not your selves any longer, the Kings Majesty has
sent forth many Declarations, to open the eyes of your understandings, and to
inform you in the truth and equity of his cause; And many Proclamations against
your Lives and Estates, for to reclaim you from persisting in your Errors, and
also many general pardons, to win you by Love and Clemency: But these are
dishonestly hidden, from the sight of many places in this Kingdom, that so the
People might still be kept in a cloud of Ignorance and Error; Yet who is so
blind? that observes not the beginning, continuance, and success of these
Wars against the King; First, set on by petitions in the names of whole
Counties, and none of the understanding part, ever made acquainted
therewithal: then by borrowing of Plate, and Money to be repaid with interest,
but I doubt not while after doomes day: Then by sending forth voluntary
Soldiers, who should make an end of the business presently without
resistance, but failing herein then continued by pillaging, plundering, and
imprisoning, many of the best rank, and soundest integrity, then by notorious
Lying Pamphlets, Diurnalls, and Ridiculous reports, invented by the Devil; and
now at last by pressing and compelling men to turn Rebels, against the Law
both of God and Nature; and by killing some to terrify others: If this
murdering, and robbing of honest men, (for their distraining of men's goods is
no better) and if the leaving of whole Families destitute of comfort and
maintenance, that have a long time relieved others, if the skaring of men from
Gods Church, from their Wives, Children, Estates, and Professions, because they
will not go against their Conscience, be Christian charity, Righteous dealing,
and love one toward another, let any upright man judge, if it be not, then let
them mark what St. John says, In this are the Children of God known, and the
Children of the Devil, John 3. 10.
whosoever does not love righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves
not his Brother.

Beloved, let us make Gods word the ground of our Actions, we know some
general Counsels have erred, and the great and Learned Assembly of the Jewish
Rabbis, were much mistaken in Crucifying the Lord of Life. And there be some
now that are esteemed Gods Messengers, but they Jude ^. 10.
are ignorant and seditious Hypocrites, and false Prophets, that speak evil of
that they understand not, and by their deluding of the People have wrought and
fomented much mischief; They have forgotten, That he that turns away his
Prove. 28, 9, 10.
Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be Abomination: And he that
causes the righteous to go astray in an evil way, be shall fall himself into
his own Pit; And indeed without great repentance, the lowest pit of Hell, will
be a just reward for such Wretches, I fear it; I give but a glimple of these
things, and yet speak as plainly as I can to the understanding of the the
meanest; let him that shall cast his eye hereon, do as the Act. 17. 11.
men of Berea did in Acts 17. 11. search narrowly whether these things be true
or no; and if he reaps any good hereby, I have my desire, Consider what I say,
and the Lord give you understanding 2 Timothy 2. 7.
in all things.

Amen.
UPON THE Rumps Eclipse. Written in Febr: 1659.
ALL Royal Loyal Christian hearts rejoice
And chaunt Hosanna with a cheerful voyc^,
Extol that happy Planet does Presage
A Tragy-Comedie on our English stage;
Let all the Muses in our Hemisphaere
Loud Echoes ring with an harmonious cheer,
And celebrate with sage Apollo's lips,
The gladsome Omen of the Rumps Eclipse.
Truth's Mathematics ever sung the Story,
That God at length would vindicate his glory*
And give the proudest Rebels late so jolly,
The Sodom's fruit of all their frantic folly,
And make that Tribe intoxicate in brain
The symbol of our Liberties again.
Methinks the Constellations make us smile
And leap for joy this present Bissextile*
Babel will down, the Nurse of all Confusions,
Which fed Illiter^tes with such damned delusions*
For Justice strikes, and Vengeance cries aloud,
When Sinners grow most obstinate and proud,
When wicked men do flourish most secure,
Their sins a sudden deluge do procure.
Besotted England feels the curble pinch,
And like to Aesops horse does kick and winch,
And being ridden till their backs do break,
Like Baalams Ass at last begin to speak.
Poor apish Zealots now they see too late
The sad effects of mad Sedition's fate;
Rebellion is the Devils bosom sin,
And he at first that Witchcraft did begin*
Which ruined all, by force of Faction foster*
And jugglings of Schismatical imposters;
But now the vulgar see with clearer eyes
And these deforming Hypocrites despise
Their long dear bought experience sadly feels
A Government that madly runs on wheels;
Now down, then up, then tottering like to fall,
How can it stand that has no legs at all?
That Body's witched with some fatal charms,
That loves to rest on nothing but his arms,
With Head recurved, as ashamed to see
The Heaven* to blush at stolid Treachery;
When lower parts mount higher than the Crown,
That Structure needs must headlong tumble down.
A proper Project likely to prevail,
That sets the Head beneath the stinking Tail:
Such Policy was used herefull often,
And this advanced the rampant Rump aloft.
The Heads erection yet the Poet sings,
And Learning true declames for lawful Kings.
Amongst the Wise it is a Maxim sure,
Usurping Tyrants never long endure;
And what more pleasant Theme to English Slaves,
Than manumission from a pack of Knaves:
No higher Trophies can this Nation raise,
Nor ever merit more renowned praise,
Nor yet secure on our backs their fleeces,
But by the rending of this Rump in pieces.
And let no simple Soul remain perplexed
In doubt or fear what Government comes next.
No fowler Monster can afflict this Age,
Unless the Devil himself comes on the stage;
But if he should, he knows his doom so well,
He durst not act such Villainies out of Hell,
His proper Center, where he is yet a King,
Though here his rump can challenge no such thing*
For were they not of all the World the shame,
The Sons of Wrath, and ignominious Fame?
Had they not been from Mothers womb accursed,
They would have known their Sovereign Charles the first,
And were they Christians, and their Oaths of force
They must confess the second comes in course.
For what can hellish Instruments invent
Against so just a legal true descent,
Confirmed by nature, law, religion, reason,
Opposed by none, but the Imps of Schism and Treason;
A generation of degenerate Spirits
That fear destruction for their foul demerits,
Yet rather seek to damn both Body and Soul,
Than Regal justice should their Acts control,
That patronized their perjuries and lies
With all the shifts the Devil could devise.
What streams of Blood have barbarously been spilt
To shield and cover the infernal guilt
Of Monsters mad? whom Nature may deplore
Beyond all Tyrants ever bred before:
Pilate an Heathen urged by the Jews
To judge to death Christ Jesus did refuse,
Upbraiding them for craving such a thing,
With Ecce, shall I crucify your King?
And had he dreamed the Godhead was his Father,
Then shed his blood he would have perished rather;
But these did know the Father and the Son
Were lawful Monarchs of this Region
By just succession, and did make the Oath
Of true Allegiance, often to them both
And their Successors; yet they martyred one,
And forced the undoubted Heir from his Throne,
By which injustice they contend in vain
To rob and kill their Sovereign once again;
A President beyond abomination,
And never heard of since the Worlds creation.
The Turk and Pope may lay the Bucklers by,
Scarce conscious yet of such base cruelty:
And therefore these flesh s^ends without compare
In Antichrist may claim the greater share;
Such Cacodemons scarce were ever found
In Afric, India, or the Welk^ round,
Whose bloody base enchantments, with outcries
Proclaims their guilt to all posterities,
Whose iron stony hearts shall feel the fates
Of all their sins, as holy writ relates;
Whose Tyrannies shall tumble down and lie
Prostrate on earth, sans hope or remedy*
No rout nor rabble runs unto their aid,
The People will no longer be betraide
With vizard* false; for now the time is come
That Athal^ah's shall receive their doom,
That David's tribe ^iumphantly may reign,
And Aarons sacred rod may bud again;
Yet let us only praise Johovah's power,
Who now in merry does begin to shower
His grace and love on such an Ethnic land,
So long has stooped to the usurpt command
Of Idols base, with filth so overgrown
Whom neither nature, art, nor law can own.
Whose treasons and exactions sprung from thence
Renders them Tyrants void of common sense,
Whose damned projects and profane desires
May fear a doom as fierce as Sodom's fires,
Who^e horrid barbarous measure by them dealt
Deserves more plagues than ever Egypt felt;
Whose scourge the Devil would hardly undertake,
Were he not forced their Process for to make;
And who^e Religion, had they power alone,
Would quite divest the Almighty from his Throne.
No sin to Satan can be so coherent
As murder of their King the Lords Vicegerent:
But these have far endeavored to excel
In all their plots the Beelzebub of hell,
They outvied Lucifer, whose highest aim
Was with the Godhead but a share to claim:
But here their Sovereigns Kingdoms were too small
To gorge these kites, they must have life and all*
Because his Christian conscience was so loath
To violate his Coronation oath,
And yield consent with wolvish Tyrants power
The Church to rob, and Commonwealths devo^^
That painting proud Zidonian (...),
Just Naboth from his Vineyard did expel,
Spilling his blood, and yet upon pretense
He had blasphemed his God, and Sovereign Prince;
But these o^e* flowed in their outrageous spleen
Accursed Ahal and his bloody Queen,
Enforcing most their freedoms to redeem,
Because they would not God and King blaspheme,
And made all feel their Tyrants raging rod
That would not fight against their King and God,
Yet after all these bloudy-dy'd distractions,
This spawn of hell would justify their Actions*
O horror never heard of, damned Crew,
Can ever earth afford them vengeance due?
No sure there is decreed for such men
A mansion dark in the infernal den,
Where they shall strongly guarded be about,
And dwell secure from being turned out.
Their Guardians there will constant be, and ring
In their sad ears the murder of their King
And loyal Nobles, Gentry, and the rest,
Devoured and to^n by that prodigious beast
Be^^^ in hell, where Justice shall re^ound
A just reward to every member round,
Where damned oppression of our royal race
May spout sulphurious blood into their face,
Where all the hellish mischiefs they have wrought
Shall be revealed, and to Judgment brought,
And execution as befits their sin,
Where torments endless ever more begin;
And where for all their jealousies and fears
They shall have payment of their full arrears:
And yet if Grigg should miss of them his meed,
Tyburn again would wear a mourning weed,
Should it but I ose the guerdon of such Elves,
As would have all men Traitors like themselves,
That robbed all Subjects of their goods and lands,
That durst withstand their devilish commands,
Who merit far more solid hempen frumps,
Than the poor senseless sheeps, and bullocks Rumps
Hung up in figure, where they pine, until
The Saints they cipher do their rooms up fill.
O Lord that true repentance may prevent
The just deserts of that mock Parliament,
Has caused that name to scent as bad as hell,
Which yet in former Ages rellisht well;
And Oh that others might be struck with terrors,
And humbled for their sordid sottish errors.
The Lawyers purse deserves a sharp incision
For acting Justice by Jack Cades Commission:
It Is tenter'd law, too rigid and too brief,
A lawless Traitor to condemn a Thief.
They Are none of Plowdo^s kindred, nor of Cokes,
Such Doctrine's neuter unto all the books?
The Country Just ass, Mayor and Recorder
How retrograde have they been out of order?
Intruding with the basest adulations,
To court Rebellion in her several statious.
But who at first refined these rural Wits?
Metropolis of all our frenzy fits.
The Apostate Clergy needs must have remorse,
That used Religion like a stalking horse,
To drive on Faction, with a dull design
The settled Hierarchy to undermine.
I hope they see that Schism and fond division
Has made them emblems of the Worlds derision,
Deserve they not more than a moderate mulct
That forged for Rome a season to insult
On our Religion, that was well before
That hair-brained Rebels it in pieces tore?
When Presbyters nor Independents name
Were no such pillars in our Churches frame,
All innovations both in Church and State
Spring up too soon, repented are too late*
A monstrous horrid wonder it is to see,
That such as dare profess Divinity
Should be with such a Lethargy beset
The principle foundations to forget.
Such in a dark some labyrinth are lost
As ^light the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The Decalogue, Lords Prayer, and the Creed,
These new-come Teachers cannot say nor read.
Why? do not these the word of God remain
Beyond the fancies of a crazy Brain?
Has not St. Paul such fantasies forbod
As please the People, and dishonor God?
Yet mock fasts and prophaner gratulations
Were cried up within these mole-eyed Nations;
To these the vulgar with devotion flocked,
Not once remembering God would not be mocked,
Or that their zeal of knowledge so bereft
Was but a loathsome sacrilegious theft,
Robbing of God of his divine applause
To set a varnish on the Devils Cause;
For Truth did never yet approve it good
To render thanks for shedding Christian blood,
Or when the wicked were resolved to sin,
They should with fasts and prayers first begin;
These were the Devils subtle sole inventions,
To mask and color the obscaene intentions
Of all his perjured agents, plunged in woe,
For temporizing and blaspheming so,
For calling darkness light, and bitter sweet,
For blazing Treasons without all regreet:
Who did not Conscience nor Allegiance tender,
But Judas-like betrayed their Faith's defender,
Whom next to Jesus Christ they did dilate
A Supreme Governor in the Church and State.
Are they not void of true Religion's sense
That dare not preach against that foul offense?
What Christian heart that does not sore lament,
Who lives on earth that needs not to repent?
Our crying sins from Gods impartial hand
Have pulled these Plagues on this unhappy Land;
But God will lend a more propitious eye,
If we this Rebel-devil do defy,
And frame our practice by St. Peter's tenor,
To fear our God, and earthly King to honor;
For if in truth we long to take delight,
We must relinquish all Rebellion quite,
And to the Laws both Humane and Divine,
Our Hearts estranged obedience must incline:
And if we wish good days, and happy chance,
Our Second Charles his Name we must advance*
Gloria Deo Soli.
In honor of the Birth day of his Royal Majesty King CHARLES the Il. With an
Encomium upon the Lord General George Monk. Written in May 1660.
YOu mournful Muses of these British Isles,
Now cast off care, and deck your face in smiles;
Advance your tones with melody to sing,
And celebrate the Birth of CHARLES our King:
Let Bon-fires burn, let Princely music play,
This Halcy on happy twenty ninth of May,
When God these Nations with a Prince did bless,
Virtue and true Religion to profess:
Whose Valor and endowments to rehearse,
Would daunt the Monarchs of this Universe;
And whose decreed as my fancy rings,
To place his Throne above all Earthly Kings;
And give Religion a bright luster, far
Beyond the force of any English Star;
And Christian Faith that is Orthodox, defend,
So far as Phoebus shall his beams extend.
It Is for some high design, that this brave Prince
So long has been preserved by Providence;
A chosen shaft in the Almighties quiver,
To pierce the Pope, and make the Turk to shiver.
Then let us salute his Grace with state and glory,
And not forget to sing the famous story
Of him who has so instrumental been,
To welcome King and Government again:
That brave old Hero that has shined forth
So rarely from that late unlucky North;
And let no loyal Scot his Bag-pipes lay
Obscure, so long as he has breath to play;
Let English, Scottish, Irish sound his praise,
Give holy Monk a Crown of Sacred Bays*
Were I but of the Romish Churches dition,
I sure should dote on Monkish Superstition;
Howsoe'er the name I needs must honor still,
With a true genius and officious quill,
And will no more account St. George a fiction,
Since George is Englands Champion in affliction;
The first with courage stout, did once repair
To succor Sabra, Ethnic Aegypts Heir;
With Sword and Lance he did the Dragon quell,
But this has quenched the firebrarnds of Hell;
Such Hydra Monsters, as his labor's more
Then Hercules had e're performed before,
And by his prudent valor made a way,
To dump our darkness, and to spring the day
Of all our hopes, and made us bold to render
Our true Allegiance to our Faiths Defender.
What Subject lives in all our English quarter,
That merits more to wear the George and Garter?
In honors Emblems he may share a part,
Has born so much their Motto in his heart;
Our Sovereign sure will have regard to such,
As have adventured and deserved so much,
And may his offspring to perfection come,
And prime their Fortunes till the day of Doom;
And may they flourish with renown, the rather,
As Branches of so just a Loyal Father:
May the just Guerdons of such Royal Ideroes,
Confound the projects of all bloody Neroes;
May showers of grace descend with Heavens amends,
On our brave King, and all his faithful Friends;
And Christian mercy, and true justice meet,
Reciprocal in every public street:
And that these blessings may these Realms befall,
Let Us cry to God Creator of us all.
Let City, Town, and Country ring*
With Echoes loud, GOD SAVE THE KING.
John Winlock.

Written by the Author about the year 1644* and sent to his Wife, when she and
his Children were in great want and calamity together.
DEarest Companion of my blooming years,
The memory of whose Virgins love appears
Still fresh and pleasant in my constant mind,
As when my thoughts to love were first inclined;
Accept this kindness I thee gently pray,
A Token true my Love does not decay:
Religious Love is constant firm and sure,
Grounded on Truth that ever shall endure.
When frail affection by each slender Crime
Shall blemished be, and quite outworn by time.
But think not loving Soul, that time or trouble
That change of Fortunes or Afflictions double,
That Youths decay, that frustrate hopes or losses,
Domestic jarrs, or all such wedlock crosses,
Or all thy Feminine frallties ever can,
Make me to thee a false unconstant man.
No, I resolve in love to live and dye,
And leave Memorials of my Constancy
To my Posterity, which may them guide
An honest Wife to honor like a Bride.
Upon her Nuptial day, when Friends agree
To Crown her Fortunes with felicity.
Even so I wish (God knows) with all my power,
To cause thy true content each day and hour
That I shall live, and what has been amiss
Between us, Love, let us quit our selves in this,
That for thy failings thou shall pardon have,
And the like grace at thy sweet hands I crave:
This Christian course will make affection truer,
Sweeten our Sorrows and Gods love procure.
If we endeavor our defects to mend,
And for relief on Christ alone depend;
This will us arm against the Worlds assaults,
And sweetly cover all our former faults.
This will a comfort to our Conscience be,
What better blessing in Extremity?
No refuge here like Faith, no stay so sure,
No feast on Earth without a Conscience pure*
But having that, Gods Angels all agree
To guard our Tents, and we shall blessed be;
Inspite of Enemies of degenerate mind,
Inspite of Fortunes frown or Friends unkind;
Inspite of all Oppression fraud or guile,
Inspite of rapine schism and treason vile:
Though Satan rage and all that hellish rout,
From all afflictions God will help us out.
Afflictions cup our Savior drank before us,
And he again to comfort can restore us:
If we with Faith, and patience wait his will
As he has done he will protest us still;
Which grace Jehovah grauut us to our end,
So prays thy Spouse, thy Loyal Faithful Friend.
J. Wenlock.

Written to a Gentlewoman about the year 1643. from whom the Author had then
received a Letter of some very harsh news.
Vl^tuous and Honored Lady, if my quill
Had Virtue to express my hearts good will,
Not all the Worlds distractions could prevent
My Muse from flowing to your sweet content;
In high strained Poem^, which in spite of Fear,
Might lend you courage to abandon care:
And force a sweet smile from that lovely face,
That Emblem true of Modesty and grace;
But these sad noises in the Lawyers Skull,
Do make his Poets fancy wondro^s dull;
Yet to tell truth, there is no reason why
This dull brained Fellow should not versi^ie:
For to a private Friend it is known full well,
H^ has dwelt these three Months in a Hermits Cell:
Where the sole disport of his desert placing,
Is though a Nuptial yet a stole embracing;
And time he has (God wot) to ruminate,
Concourse of business early, not yet late:
Do trouble him, whose practice is so small,
No Angel Client, vexes him at all;
The Coins impression he does hardly know,
He ^k^rns Temptation by that golden show:
The Wisdom of the State breeds this contrition,
Pictures, and Crosses, now are superstition:
This makes him smile at all his former crosses,
So long as Rebels meet with greater losses;
And that their malice makes his soul incline,
To Faith more firmer in the Powers Divine:
For this I publish to my comfort great,
When the Worlds Fortunes did me best entreat;
I never had of Sin so much conviction,
Never such joy in Christ as in affliction:
I never was of Grace, of Heaven, so sure,
Oh the blessed Banquet of a Conscience pure!
My fancy now frames to the Scriptures tone,
Coele^tiall raptures ravish me alone:
Yet when I saw those quick conceited lines,
Of your respect and worth the sugared signs,
Those Symptoms of a disposition sweet,
Where Bounty, Wit, and Courtesy, do meet;
Those indeed relics of more sacred merit,
Then can deciphered be by my dull Spirit;
How did my thoughts, my heart, my fancy skip,
How often I kissed them with adoring lip:
And least my rude neglect should give offense
To you the type of Natures excellence,
My frolic mu^e was pressed at your command,
That my devoted verse might kiss your hand;
And that to you a faintlike Friend so dear,
His loyal thankful heart might still appear,
That scorns with Ladies to remain uncivil,
In spite of Vulcan, Prickear, or the Devil:
But hopes long to be that happy man,
To laugh with you and Noble Mistress Anne:
That Virgins virtuous pattern whom I honor*
So off^'s, my winged thoughts reflect upon her;
And leap I shall at liberty and truce,
To see my kind Physician Mistress Luce:
To all that Worthy house I live a debtor,
Ever more thankful as my Fortunes better*
To your sweet self a truer Friend to try,
Then Prose or Poems pen can testify,
Living, your Loving Kinsman, servant sure,
In what his Life, and Fortunes can procure.
J. Wenlock.

Upon his late Majesty's (...). 1649.
THis Enchiridion to the Public, brings
A Crystal Mirror for all Christian Kings.
Here may they see Religions truth and Iustre,
All Royal Virtues crescent on a cluster;
Here may they learn their Judgments to incline,
To what is Prince-like, Moral, or Divine.
Conscience and Nature by a mutual strife,
Have Grace and Goodness pictured to the life:
Such faith, such hope, such love is not excelled,
Such perfect patience who has paralelled?
Such Zealous care for Subjects, so ingrate,
Conquers his sufferings, kills his Enemies hate:
A pious Prince his passions sole Commander,
Transcends in worth Victorious Alexander;
He got but Greatness, earthly Kingdoms, dross,
This, Glories Crown to recompense his loss.
His Sacred memory still shall draw its breath,
In spite of Malice, Faction, Devil, Death:
Let none in suffering for his sake be sorry,
But live ambitious of his Heavenly Glory.
J. Wenlock.

The Authors ACROSTICHIS UPON THE LATE TROUBLES. Written in 1643.
JN measure here the Universe may find,
Of these distracted times, this Authors mind;
His Vote is all for peace, but force of Hell,
Never shall blind his Conscience to Rebel.
Wisdom esteems all falsehood and Sedition,
Even as the spawn of Envy, Pride, Ambition;
No wholesome fruit from a pernicious Tree,
Let fond deluded wights expect to see.
Oh guide me therefore, Sacred power Divine,
Can Death affright me if my soul be thine?
Knows not a Christian that his sufferings small,
Endears himself to Christ, his all in all?
Upon Prince RUPERTS Tears pretended to be shed at MARSTONE MOOR. 1644.
BRave high Heroic Germane Prince, shall I
The true admirer of thy Valor, spy
A mournful tear bedew the undaunted Face
Of Honors dearling, and of English race?
The second Hector; and shall then my Muse,
As thunderstruck, oblivious or abstruse,
Want her Allegiance to that Royal Stem,
Whence sprung thy Noble self, thou Princes Gem?
Oh no it cannot, it will rather dye,
And deluge hopes in dull obscurity:
For whilst my breath does last, or verse has vent,
To sound those honors is my clear intent;
Though now in sable weeds I sympathise,
With that condoling dew fell from thine eyes:
But was it Tears; Oh tell me gentle Prince?
Let love interrogate without offense;
Or if your Grace be pleased to grant this same,
That I the Asker may an answer frame,
I Will soon obscure those Tears, and make a Vow,
'Twas valors Dew, that hung upon thy browe:
And made thy Royal face with wet abound,
Whilst thou like Mars did thunder* beat the ground;
For can a Tear oppress that Princely eye,
The sprightfull fire whereof's enough to dry
Up all those melancholic mists that now o're-run
Those darkened Dens bereft of Englands Sun:
But were they tears did from thine eye distill,
'Twas not for fear of Rebels force, or skill:
But thy religious Soul might mourn to see
So brave a Nation dote on misery,
Foment their ruin, and in such a rout,
As Vipers gnaw their Mother's bowels out:
A pious heart where Virtue's lodged within,
Must needs condole, lament, and weep for sin;
This was the Cause if thou did shed a tear,
Nothing but this can make thee mourning wear:
Thou art too highly built, too bravely bred,
At sad* Disasters to hold down thy Head:
Thy valor does out-dare them, thee they shu^,
Their eyes thou dazlest like a glorious Sun:
I hope ere long to feel thy pleasant rays,
And see thee Crowned with victorious Bays.
Animadversions upon the wild Satyrs that ramble about our English Forest.
Written in 1641.
IF Libels be allowed by Law,
How great ones need to stand in awe?
Who is so high, so stout and jolly,
But Poets pens will paint his folly?
Earls, Bishops, Judge and Counselor of State,
Are subjects now to every riming pate.
If these be pillars of the Land,
When they for Truth and Justice stand,
That State must needs to ruin fall,
When such as these grow worst of all;
The Body's sure at a doleful point,
When such great Members are so out of joint.
None can be void of errors here,
Though carefully his course he steer,
But he deserves a hempen twist,
That does in malice still persist,
In Church or State his poison to infuse,
His native Prince, and Country to abuse.
Such hearts I wish the Lord would turn,
Before hell fire do them burn,
Though Policy escape Justice rod,
Vengeance it must expect of God;
Who in this life, or in the World to come
Will render all a just reward and doom.
Then let not men in frantic fits,
So rashly exercise their Wits,
And be so hateful or uncivil,
To damn Delinquents to the Devil,
Before their faults they perfectly do know,
Or what contrition in their hearts they show*
It argues but a Judgment raw,
To judge sans censure of the Law,
For he that grossly has offended,
Must not be hanged before condemned;
And for my part I know no reason why
Men should be hanged in lines of Poesy.
And yet some things have been amiss,
And by experience I have learned this,
That when the flesh begins to blister,
It Is time the Body had a glister,
And would to God our State were purged of such
As fancy pomp, and self-conceit too much.
Though some have been advanced high,
And little good has come thereby,
But to themselves a shameful fall,
Yet let us not rashly censure all,
Or hold a sacred office in contempt,
Though some therein have been of Grace exemp^.
A godly Bishop I ado^e
I wish of these we had good store;
But he that smells in opinion,
Of Romish Caiphas, or Arminian,
In Tyber flood I wish his Barge a swimming,
Or el^e o^ Tower-^ill his Head a trimming.
A loyal Peer that leads the Land
Religious laws to understand,
That ventures Honor, Life and Blood
In Truth'^ behoof, and Countrie's good*
If honors wait not on him night and day,
Injustice wrongs Desert the World may say*
But he that is trusted by his Prince,
And makes no Conscience by offense
At home, or else in foreign places,
To breed distractions and disgraces.
On Irish earth I wish the Serpent lay,
Till's bowels burst, and poison ran away.
An upright Judge I dearly love,
And Truth will ever such approve,
Because they help the poor oppressed,
And succor lend to the distressed;
In Common wealth they are a peerlesse Gem,
True Subjects therefore still will honor them.
But if that any of that Tribe,
Corruptly loves to take a bribe,
Or does for favor fond outface
An honest man, or honest Case,
I wish their hides in hands of Leather-dressors,
That they might Cushions line for their Successors,
Were Favorites false exiled the World,
Projectors to the Devil hurled,
Or had a taste of Tyb^rns check,
With Monopol packets on their neck,
Industrious spirits then would look to thrive,
And thus the State their safety might contrive.
But things so out of order are,
And coin and favor stretch so far,
Ingenuous men of worthy parts,
Must needs have discontented hearts:
And naught more dangerous to the State we find
Then coffeehouse in the Subjects mind.
But what makes troubles to begin?
What brings afflictions? only sin.
It Is not the Mitre, Hood, or Gown,
That does alone pull Judgments down:
Some nicer Heads that wish them little health,
Are as ill Members in the Commonwealth.
A Garment white the Conscience pricks,
The Service Book in Stomach sticks,
Yet he that does the same deprave,
I never knew him but a Knave.
The Cross command in Baptism stifleth some,
And these they think awaked the Sco^^sh Drum,
No crying sins of young and old,
Make Judgments hot, and Mercy cold,
In Schism and self-conceit men wallow,
They fly a gnat, and Cammels swallow:
At Ceremony now more Stomachs rise,
Then against all sins the Devil can devise.
In Church we have so many Sects,
They will produce some strange effects;
The Anabaptists 'gins to brave,
And so will each fantastic Slave.
If some in power do not rowse themselves,
And send to hell in time such peevish Elves.
To rise and stand in this our gap,
We need no Pope, nor Cardinal's cap;
Our Sovereign's heart the Lord up raise,
Josiah-like to mend our days.
And when we see that blessed Reformation,
Glory and peace shall crown our English Nation.
Certain News when these Wars shall have an end. Written in 1643.
WHen God will vouchsafe to open men's eyes,
That Gospel and Law they leave to despise:
When all the degrees of age and of youth
Will learn to obey and honor the Truck:
When Gods holy Word is right understood,
And that which is naught, no longer thought good:
When men are ashamed of Folly and Treason,
And bow to the rules of Religion and Reason,
When Scripture is made the ground of men's actions,
In spite of peevish schismatical Factions:
When Rebels and Traitors are laid in the lurch,
And there is not a lie more told in the Church:
When Pulpits to good men are void of offense,
And are no more Theaters of railing Nonsense:
When proud prick-ear'd Rascals, sent from the City
To cant to the Roundheads a devilish ditty,
Are whipped for Rogues, and marked in the Faces,
And honest Divines restored to their places:
When Cade and Jack Straw, proud Parry and Kett,
With Powder and Bullets have gotten the freet;
Or when they be hanged on Gibbets like Slaves,
Then Peace will appear in spite of the Knaves:
When men will no longer dissemble with God,
But stand to the Truth, for all the black rod:
And boldly declare it in every place,
Not fearing the looks of a treacherous face:
When Conscience awakes men out of a Trance,
And Justice and Truth, her Head does advance*
When true Subjects get of Valor a smack,
And fear not the Threatenings of every Jack;
But ^ouse up their courage, and boldly disdain
In bondage to Skums any more to remain:
When Traitors are made a scoff and a scorn,
And never a Rebel dares put out his Horn:
But keep within compass of duty: and then,
When Fools are no longer esteemed Wise men:
When Constables learn to understand Law,
And leave to serve Warrants not worth a straw;
And when they sup no more dangerous Broth,
But mark and beware, and remember their Oath:
When they be no more deluded by I yes,
But Treason appears as clear as the skies:
When People no longer lick poisoned Honey,
To surfeit their Hearts, and forfeit their Money;
But learn to abstain from damned Abuses,
And spend their Estates on lawful good uses:
When every man seeks peace to his power,
And will not continue a Tray^or an hour;
But hate and detest these damnable Jarrs,
The Devil's the Author of tray terous Wars,
When People no more run out of their Wits,
But blush at their foolish Ph^natical fits:
When rich men are wise, and take modest course^*
And give not a penny to Parliament forces;
But let the good Spirit that set them on fire,
Both cherish their zeal, and pay them their hire:
When he that ^ cause their malice so rage^,
Has license from Heaven to pay them their wages*
Then shall we deride their practices vain,
And Peace and the Gospel shall flourish again:
When royal King Charles dispense with pity,
To curb in good earnest the treacherous City,
Of peace and of quiet there were a good token,
So soon as that nest of Harpies be broken:
Or if the old birds were fled and departed,
The young ones perhaps might prove better hearted:
When God of his goodness vouchsafes to send them
His spirit of Truth and Grace to amend them:
When Faith and Obedience in England do dwell,
And Faction and Treason are damned to Hell:
Then shall we have Peace, that blessed good thing,
If men would be subject to GOD and their KING.
Upon our Royal Queens Majesty's most Happy Arrival, the most Illustrious Donna
Cathar^na, sole Sister to the High and Mighty King of Portugal.
The Princely ^^ses do my Fancy move,
To consecrate a Verse to that blessed Love,
That Royal Queen of Grace, and great command
Espoused to Charles Le Bon, and Charles Le Grand,
Prophetickly by him so well designed,
Who was with Heavenly knowledge so refined:
Heaven guard them Both together, and reflect
That influence of Favor, to protect
That S^cred Nymph, whose Passage did so please
The ^ternal God of Heaven, of Earth, and Seas,
To welcome Her with Complemental Ditties,
Echoes of Joy rebound in Court and Cities:
And lest the lowest place true love should want,
Or we be deemed of Devotion scant;
Lo I presume alone from Country Caves
To come and honor those Neptunian waves
Have brought us home with such propitious gales
A Princely Mother to a Prince of Wales;
Who may (my Genius thinks) in time outvye,
The richest Gems of Glorious Chivalry:
And equalize in worth, if not exceed
The bravest Heroes of our British breed:
And with Pegasean Frigates lowdly roar
At the proud banks of that Iberian shore:
And with triumphant Valor once again
Set up his Standard in the Realms of Spain:
And with a Crown of Fortune there resume
A Trophee, like the brave Bohemian plume;
And by victorious Virtue still advance
That Princely House of Portugal, Bragance:
To Englands High renown; and in despite
Of all such Foes as dare against them fight,
May our Imperial Lion rampant stand,
With the blessed Unicorn at his command,
Who by his secret Virtues may confound
All Poisons in the Springs of English ground:
That being Crowned at home with perfect Peace,
His glories through the world may still increase:
Great Princes shall adore his Royal word,
And Nations tremble at his conquering sword;
Then Foreign parts will fear our force; and then
Our Sovereign shall be styled, The King of Men;
And may his Dearest Consort blessed be,
With all rare fortunes of Felicity;
The grace of Heaven, the prime delights of Earth,
Make Her the Mirror of Content and Mirth,
C^l^stial Angels guard her free from harms,
Sweetly embraced in our Sovereigns arms;
Heaven guide her grace, and make her truly seen,
Of Beauty, Wit, and Majesty the Queen,
A sit Consort to please the good desires
Of such a Prince, whom all the World admires;
And may this Princely pair rest in Love,
More firm and constant than the Turtle Dove;
Gods grace their Lives both prosper and protect,
And in the end Their souls to Heaven direct;
And grant them here that Quintessence of glory,
Was never read in any CAESAR'S Story;
That After-ages may of them rehearse,
A glorious Wonder to the Universe.
By John Wenlock of Lincolns Inn Esquire.

FINIS.

