THE PRESENT MISERIES AND Mischiefs of Sin.

Discoursed in A SERMON Before the late Lord Mayor of London.

At Guild Hall Chapel.

By Robert Wensley, Vicar of Chesthunt in Hertfordshire; and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable JAMES, Earl of SALISBVRY; Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. M. DC.
LXXXII.

To the Honored Lady THE LADY REBECCA LYTTON; Relict of Sir ROWLAND LYTTON,
Late of Knebworth in Hertfordshire, Knt. And to her most Hopeful Son, Mr.
Playters Lucy.
IN Obedience to your desires (which by reason of my many Obligations to you
both, ought by me to be esteemed as Commands) having perused my Discourse, and
added to it what I thought expedient, and considering in what manner I should
(in Answer to your Request) present it to you; after some consideration I have
chosen to do it in the most public manner that I could.

Not only for that common reason, (though I think that may be sufficient to
acquit me from Ostentation) viz. That I might publicly acknowledge how much I
am obliged to you: But because by my long Acquaintance with your Virtues, I am
fully assured that this Sermon can scarcely meet with any Readers who have less
need of it than either of you. Wherefore I concluded, that since you were
pleased to think it useful for your selves in private, it might be much more
beneficial to others in public.

For as for your Ladyship, I must beg pardon of your modesty to say that your
great Prudence and Piety, is a sufficient guard against all Temptations to
those Sins which in this following Discourse are proved Guilty of all the
Miseries and Mischiefs of Mankind.

And as for that Worthy Gentleman your Son (whom I cannot but be proud to call
my Pupil) all that have had the happiness to have been acquainted with him from
his Childhood, (as I have) cannot but Love and Honor him for his Virtues,
which seem innate in him, being so constantly Visible in all his Actions. For I
should be unjust to him, if I should not say that I always knew him of that
sweetness and evenness of Temper, as though he had no Passion in him, but a
desire to oblige all Persons with whom he conversed, nor any excess but an
excess of Kindness; and this joined with such a ^^ickness of Apprehension, and
business ^f Action, that I may (I think without any Complement) say of him that
he seems so made by Nature, as if God had on purpose framed him to demonstrate
the Beauty and Loveliness of Virtue to all those of his Quality in this
Degenerate Age.

For so naturally is he inclined to all Good, and averse from anything that is
Evil, that one would almost think that he alone was exempted from that general
Corruption and Depravity of Nature, which all other Men derive from Adam. So
that since I so fully know that this Sermon could be of no great use to either
of you, and since I should be ungrateful should I have denied your Request, I
hope you will Pardon me, if I perform it in such a manner as it may be useful
to such, to whom it is most necessary; in confidence of which, (wishing to you
both all the Happiness of this World, and that which is to come) I take leave
to Subscribe my self.

Your most obliged humble Servant. Rob. Wensley.

PROVE. 11. v. 19. last part. He that pursues Evil, pursues it to his own
Death.
IF ever Words were worthy of our utmost Attention, surely these may lay a just
Claim to it; whether we respect the Author of them, or the matter contained in
them.

As for the Author, he is no Melancholy, Monastic, or humorous Book-Worm, that
takes things upon trust, as he finds them in his reading, or as he fancies them
in himself; no interessed Priest that rails against Sin, because he lives by
such Declamations; no malicious or envious Cynick that barks at the Pleasures
of others, because he himself is not in a Capacity to enjoy them, (as the
little Wits of our Age, are apt to Object) but the greatest of Princes, and the
Wisest of Men: One, who had in Possession the greatest Riches, and was endued
by God with the greatest Wisdom, to know how to enjoy them; who was the best
Experimental Philosopher that ever was, or ever will be in the World: For (as
he himself tells us) he gave himself to try all things, and denied himself
nothing to that end. For (says he) so great Eccl. (...)
was I, and so much did I increase in Riches and Pleasures above all that were
before me in Jerusalem; (and lest we should Object that he had by these
Pleasures lost his Understanding, he tells us) and my Wisdom remained with me:
And how he employed his Wisdom he also tells us, Whatsoever mine Eyes desired,
I held not from them, I withdrew not my Soul from any Pleasure, etc, and an
Account of all things he there gives us, I looked upon all the Works which my
hands had wrought, and behold all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. This is all
the sad Account that his Experience gives him of all his Glory and Delights;
but, a much sadder Account he gives us of the Pleasures of Evil in the Words of
the Text. He that pursues Evil, pursues it to his own Death. And this leads
me to consider the matter of them which may much more recommend them to our
most serious Consideration.

For they contain in them the most forcible Argument to prevail with all Men to
forsake their Sins.

For though some may be so senseless as to put the Evil Day far from them; or
so stupid as to think it may never come upon them, and to doubt of a future
State; or though some may be so foolish to glory in their present shame; yet
none (one would think) who has any Reason left in him, (if he does duly
consider that the Prosecuting his Evil Courses, will certainly be his utter and
immediate Ruin) can be so mad to pursue his own Present Misery, or to Labor
for his Immediate Death, and Destruction.

The words are so plain, that they need no further Explication, only we may
take notice, that by Death in Scripture Language, is meant, not only the
Dissolution of our Bodies, but all kind of present Afflictions and Miseries. So
St. Paul 2 Corinthians. c. 11. ^. 23.
says, that he was in Deaths often, (that is) often under the greatest
Miseries and Troubles, for it is certain he could Die but once.

And in this Sense I shall take the words of the Text, and endeavor to
manifest to you, by an Induction of Particulars, this general Proposition
contained in them, viz.

That any one Sin being cont^ined in, and pursued, does (by its direct
Consequence, and by a Chain of Natural Causes) lead us into such Actions and
Dangers, as tend to our present Misery and Destruction. This, we have the
experience of Solomon to confirm to us: And our own experience (if we will but
give our selves time to consider it, and to take a view of the most common
Sins) will be sufficient to convince us of their most dangerous and fatal
Consequence.

And first if we take a View of the Sins against 1. The Sins against God.
God, we cannot but see that Danger and Misery are the natural effects of them.

For (besides that, they provoke God to pour down the Vials of his Wrath upon
us) by so much as we are Remiss in our Duties to God, by so much we loosen the
Reins to all Sin; by how much we fail in Religion, by so much we fail of any
tie upon our Lusts, which being let loose would soon hurry us into all Misery
and Ruin.

For, he that is not governed by Principles of Religion, can reasonably be
supposed to have no other Law to himself, but that of his present Satisfaction
and Interest; and that is nothing else, but his own Fancy. For, if he thinks
it his greatest Interest or Pleasure, to satisfy any Lust whatsoever, though it
be never so foolish or brutish; then that particular Lust which is his Delight,
is the only Rule by which he governs his whole Life; nor can any thing restrain
him from any Act, (though it be never so fatal to himself, or to all Mankind) so
it be not contrary to his beloved Lust. For, as for Shame or Disgrace, where he
is not sensible of any Fault, he can never be capable of any Shame.

And so far will he that has no Religion be from thinking it a Fault to
gratify his Pleasures, that he will esteem all others Fools, that do not act
like himself, in endeavoring by all means, to satisfy his reigning Appetites.

For, with him nothing is good and commendable, but what tends to the
Satisfaction of his predominant Lust: nor can any thing therefore be thought
ill or blameable, that does any ways promote his present Designs, though they
be never so destructive to himself, or all other men.

And as for fear of Laws, that indeed might oblige him, for his present
Preservation, to act his Villainies privately, but not at all to avoid any of
them, though they are never so wicked and horrid: Nay, it would not oblige the
most of men, if they had cast off all Ties of Conscience, so far as this: For,
if they are under any kind of Discontent or Necessity, their Lusts having
ruined them in this Life, and they expecting nothing of Reward or Punishment in
that which is to come, they can look upon Death it self (which is the utmost
penalty of Humane Laws) as no such frightful Monster, but rather, as their best
Friend; i. e. as a final End of all their Miseries and Troubles. So certain it
is, that those that profess themselves Atheists, are to be looked upon by all
considerate men, as the plague of the World, and universal Enemies to all
Mankind. For, they that have little else to loose but their Lives, and value
not them, (as the irreligious man is taught by his Principles of Atheism, not
to do) are Masters of the Lives and Fortunes of all other men; for nothing can
restrain them from taking away either of them, when their Lusts or Necessities
prompt them to it.

This I am heartily sorry to think, that the Wickedness of this Age has made
too apparent to need any other proof; wherein we may have seen some grown
shameless in their Crimes, (and Thanks be to God, that after Religion was so
shamefully abused, and drawn in, to countenance the most horrid Crimes in the
last Age, we have not more Atheists in this) yet a sad Sight it is, how small
soever the number may be, to see any such Factors for the Devil, and Hectors
for Sin, that are ready to fight their Quarrels against all Opposers, that are
grown so impudent in their impious Facts, that they are ready to deride and
affront all others that are not as wicked as themselves; and to account them
men of low and mean Understandings, whose Villainies do not extend as high as
Heaven it self. Such as pride themselves in their infamous Debaucheries, and
cry down other men, as persons of a base Spirit, who dare not make Sport with
Religion, and bid Defiance to the Sacred Name of God, by profane Oaths and
Blasphemies.

Neither do they stop here, but proceed to all kind of Mischiefs to themselves,
and Injuries to others: For, no sooner have they laid aside Religion, but they
are ready for all kind of Perjuries and Forgeries; for Fire, Poison, or
Poniard, or any thing else that may any ways contribute to the Satisfaction of
their Lusts. Neither Pity to others, nor Care of themselves, can restrain them
from either Theft or Murder, or any other Wickedness, that may tend to the
Gratification of their reigning Appetites.

How do they offer up their own Bodies a burnt Sacrifice to Venus, and destroy
their Health, by their Oblations to Bacchus? Nay, rather than they will want a
Supply for their Lusts, How do they forfeit their Lives to the Laws, and offer
up all things that can be dear to them, to their own Humors? to obtain which,
How do they give up their Souls and Bodies even to the Devil himself?

These, by breaking the Bonds of Religion, and casting away its Cords from
them, do destroy all Society, and not only involve themselves, but all Mankind,
in Misery and Ruin, by the direct Consequence of their Atheistical Principles.
For, if there be no God, then there can be no such thing as Right or Wrong,
Just or Unjust; and, by consequence, nothing but Confusion. And this brings me
to consider the Danger and Mischief of the next sort of Sins. Viz.

Secondly, The Sins against our Neighbor. 2. The Sins against our Neighbor.


These are of these two sorts, Injustice and Uncharitableness; which (if we
consider them) will manifestly appear of the most dangerous and fatal
Consequence to all Mankind. For, Justice and Charity are the main Pillars of
the World; so that he which pulls down these, ruins all Society, and renders
the World a mere Heap of Rubbish.

The love of the Company of their own kind, seems a Principle ingrafted in the
very Nature of all living Creatures, it is so universally visible amongst them.
He therefore that casts off the Love of his Neighbor, is worse than the Brute
Beasts, and more unnatural than any of them.

But where this Charity to all Mankind is rooted in the Heart, it shows it self
in such blessed Effects, as (if they were universal) would change men into
Angels or Gods, continually doing all Good to one another; and this Earth into
Heaven. For, Charity ( 1 Cor. 13. from v. 4. to v. 8.
as St. Paul describes it) suffers long and is kind, Charity envieth not,
Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self
unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no Evil, etc.

Now, if these were universally practiced amongst men, how happy should we be?
What a blessed and uninterrupted Peace and Kindness? What an immutable
Happiness would mutually bless us? But on the contrary, Injustice and
Uncharitableness would turn the World into a Desert, and men into Wolves and
Tigers; and make them act one against another with more Cruelty and Fierceness,
than the most Savage Beasts.

These, if they should once be universal (which God forbid) would change humane
Friendship into a State of War; in which, every man's hand would be lift up
against every man.

Property would be an empty Name, and no other Right or Title would hold good,
but that of the longest Sword: And, in a Word, nothing but Horror and Confusion
would overspread the World: the Kingdoms of the Earth would be like the
Kingdoms of Darkness, filled with nothing but Rage and Howling; and men would
be changed into Devils, continually tormenting one another, and being tormented
one by another.

For, they that have cast from them all the Ties of Charity, which is the Bond
of Perfection, and all the Laws of Equity, the only Cords of a man, (that can
bind those furious Philistims their headstrong Passions) are given up to be
mutually tortured by those implacable Furies of Impatience and Anger, Pride and
Covetousness, Envy and Malice, the natural Parents of all Misery, and of all
Mischief, as well to themselves, as to all others with whom they converse.

And this now directly leads me to discourse the miserable Effects of the next
sort of Sins. Viz.

Thirdly, The Sins against our Selves. 3. Sins against our selves.


These may be reduced to these two sorts.

First, Those of Intemperance, or Excess of Riot.

Secondly, Those of Excess of Passion.

Both of them may most properly be called Sins against our Selves; for they are
of most fatal consequence, most commonly, to their own Authors.

Of the first sort, viz. the Sins of Intemperance, Sins of Intemperance.
are these two, Drunkenness and Gluttony.

What Words are sad enough to express, or 1. Drunkenness.
what Tears are sufficient to bewail the Miseries that men bring upon
themselves by these Sins?

What Diseases are there so fatal, what Crimes so black and horrid, or what
Accidents so dangerous, to which Drunkenness does not expose us?

He that is possessed with this Vice, is in his case who was possessed with the
Devil, of whom we read in the * Gospel. He is mad and tormented, Math. 17. 15.
and oftimes he falls into the Fire, and oftimes into the Water.

Nay indeed he is in a much worse Condition, for Strong Drink does so much
inflame him, that it burns up his Vitals with a scorching Fever; or so fires
his Spirits, that they are exploded in the deadly Stroke of an Apoplexy: nay,
too often it has a quite contrary effect, and raises such a Flood of Filth
and Water in his Body, that it buries him alive in a Lethargy, or else drowns
him in a Dropsy.

But if by a constant Practice, or by the particular Constitution of a man's
Body, it be sometimes prevented from making a man become his own Murderer; yet
it too often raises such Heats and Quarrels, as make his chosen Companions to
become his Executioners; for often times if he does not kill his best Friends
with his own hands, he dies by theirs; and so Murders himself by the hands of
his Friends, and kills them too by the hand of Justice.

To this purpose, the Prove. 23. v. 29, 30, 31.
Wise Man discourses, (possibly from his own Experience) Who has Woe? Who
has Sorrow? Who has Contentions? Who has Wounds without cause? etc. They
that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixed Wine: Therefore (says
he) look not thou upon the Wine when it has its right color and sparkleth in
the Cup; and the reason he gives I wish all Men would constantly remember, viz.
For at the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. (i. e.)
However we may escape for some time, yet at length it will certainly destroy us.

But suppose that by God's Providence none of the too common, though Mortal,
Diseases or Fatal Quarrels be the effects of Drunkenness upon our selves; yet
it may have some of these fatal Consequences upon our Friends and Companions,
and so our very kindnesses may become their Murderers, or else at least it
exposes a Man to the most shameful and odious Actions. Thus it exposed Noah
(though a Preacher of Righteousness) to be the scorn and shame of his own
Offspring: And it made Lot (a Man so good that God sent his Angels to deliver
him from the Flames of Sodom) to commit Folly and Incest with his own
Daughters: And no wonder it should hurry us into Folly or Mischief, when it
deprives us of our Reason; and and (for the present) leaves no more of Man
visible in us than there is in the Ridiculous Ape whilst he plays his
Monkey-tricks, or in the Filthy Swine, whilst it wallows in the Mire; so fully
evident is that Saying of Solomon. Wine is a Prove. 20. 1.
Mocker; Strong Drink is rageing, and whosoever is deceived thereby is a Fool.

And for that other excess of Riot, viz.

Secondly, Gluttony.

It is no less dangerous than the former: Nay 2. Gluttony.
it is by so much the more Fatal, by how much it is deadly Operations are less
perceived; for this Vice steals upon us insensibly and kills us (as it is said
of white Gunpowder) though with no noise, yet with more certain Execution, and
at a far greater distance.

Drunkenness (indeed) blows up a Man on a sudden, and so apparently, that all
that are near must needs see it: But Gluttony though it is slow, yet it is sure
in it is Execution.

It proceeds by insensible Degrees, and too often is not perceived in it is
Acts, till it appears in it is incurable effects.

By silent Motions it corrupts the Stomach, and fills it with Crudities; and by
consequence stuffs up the Body with indigested Food, and ill fermented Blood;
and thus renders a Man (like a Living Hospital) full of nothing but Filth, and
all manner of Diseases.

For notwithstanding (too commonly) we are not aware of it; yet I am confident,
it is true, that Luxury has short'ned more Men's Days, and destroyed more of
our Lives, than those three grand Destroyers of Mankind, War, Famine, and
Pestilence, put altogether. And if we should compare these two Sins together,
which I have last mentioned, it may (I think) be too truly said of them which
was sang of Saul and David. Drunkenness has slain it is Thousands, and Gluttony
it is Ten Thousands. Neither are these the only dangerous Excesses. For the
Excess of any Irregular Passion, renders a Man, no less miserable than either
of the former. Nay so like they are, that even in the Sacred Scriptures they
are sometimes expressed by Drunkenness.

Thus we read of the House of Israel, that Isaiah 51. 29.
they are Drunken, but not with Wine: And St. John tells us in his Revelat. 17.
6.
Revelations. That he saw the Woman Drunk with the Blood of the Saints. And
(indeed) when any Irregular Passion does possess our Souls, we may too truly
be said to be Drunk with it: And this kind of Drunkenness is no less
Destructive to our present Happiness, than the former.

To instance in some of the most common of them. As,

First, Anger. 1. Anger.


He that is intoxicated with Anger, is no less besides himself than he that is
Drunk with Wine; and is exposed, like him, to the same Fatal Diseases, Crimes,
and Dangers. For Anger is a present Madness: And only differs from it not in
it is Degree, but in it is Duration. It so strangely heats our Blood, and puts it
into such violent Fermentations, that it is to me a wonder it does not at least
break our Veins, if not our Hearts. It so much fires our Animal Spirits, and
puts them into such strange, and such violently disturbed Motions, that it
naturally ends in Tremblings and Swoonings, together with all those Mortal
Diseases that arise from the disturbance of the Nerves, and the Indisposition
of the Brain.

A Dreadful Example the Valor. Max. Lib. 9. Sect. 8.
Historian gives us of Sylla the Roman General, at Puteoli, who being delayed
in his necessary Supplies of Money, fell into such a Rage, that with a Furious
Noise, and Violent Convulsions, he vomited up his Soul, mixed with Blood and
Threatenings; and this so suddenly that it was a question (says my Author)
whether Sylla or his Anger was first Dead?

This Passion if it be in Excess, so disorders our Stomachs, that it turns our
very Nourishment into sharp Humors. For whatsoever we Eat or Drink in Anger,
turns into Choler; and so Nourishes not our Bodies, but our Diseases. Neither
can he that gives himself up to this Fury, be secure from falling into the most
Deadly Crimes, or the most Fatal Dangers. For having quite lost his Reason, and
being governed whilst his Passion lasts, by nothing but his Rage, it is more
the Care of others, or God's Providence, than his own, that keeps him from
Imbruing his Hands in his own Blood, or in the Blood of his nearest Relations,
or dearest Friends.

Thus Vid. Notas. Oliogri in Valor. Max. fig. 5. page 775.
Alexander the Great, in a Drunken Fury, with his own Hands, killed one of his
best Friends, and most Valiant Commanders, the Generous and Aged Clytus; and
afterward with the Horror of the Fact, he fell into so great a Rage against
himself, that had he not been prevented by the Care of his Friends, the same
Hand and Weapon that hat had killed Clytus, had dispatched Alexander.

To add no more concerning Anger, so Mad and Rageing; so Cruel and Bloody is
this Passion, that had not God made it as short as it is Violent, it would long
before this time have turned the World into a Desolate Wilderness, and have
made Mankind more Savage and Bloodyminded one toward another, than the worst
and cruellest of the Wild Beasts.

And what I have said of Anger, is, for the most part, true, of any other
immoderate Passion that seizes upon our Souls.

I shall give some few Instances more of the most common Lusts of Mankind, and
the Miseries they bring along with them, viz. Uncleanness, Covetousness,
Voluptuousness, Envy and Ambition; every one of which upon an Impartial View,
will be found no less guilty of all kind of Mischiefs than the former.

For First, as to Vncleaness or Lustfulness. ^. Uncleanness or Lust.


What Diseases are so nauseous, or what more destructive, than those that are
the Effects of Lust? So filthy they are; that they are not fit to be named; and
so Painful and Mortal, that he that is infected with them, suffers even an Hell
upon Earth, and Dies by Piecemeal; living to see some of his Members turned
into Rottenness, and his whole Body changed into a Walking Sepulcher, filled
with nothing but Stench and Corruption within, however it may be adorned and
painted without.

To this purpose Solomon most probably from his own Experience, tells us, (and
who can we better believe in this case than he that had such an Army of Wives
and Concubines?) That he that follows a strange (i. e. an Adulterous) Woman
Proverbs c. 7. v. 22, 23.
goes after her straightway as an Ox goes to the Slaughter; or as a Fool to
the Correction of the Stocks: Till a Dart strikes through his Liver: as a Bird
hastes to the Snare and knows not that it is for his Life. Wherefore in the
following Words he gives us this most excellent Advice, grounded upon the
firmest and most forcible Reason. * Hearken unto me therefore O ye Ibid. v. 24,
25, 26, 27.
Children, and attend to the Words of my Mouth. Let not thine Heart decline to
her ways; go not astray in her paths. For she has cast down many wounded: yea
many strong Men have been slain by her. Her House is the way to Hell, going
down to the Chambers of Death.

Why should I farther mention the particular dangers and mischiefs that this
Vice exposes us to? For what Danger can be so great to which this Sin does not
oblige him who has given up himself to it? Or what Crimes are so horrid, to
which it does not expose it is Followers to prevent the Discovery of their Shame?

It forces even Mothers to be more Cruel and Bloody than the most Ravenous
Wolves, or the most Savage Tigers, in taking away the Lives of their most
Innocent Offspring, when (by the mere Instect of Nature) the worst of Beasts
will defend their young ones, even with the hazard of themselves.

What Dangers does not a man venture at in the very Act of this Sin, whilst he
commits his Life into the hands of such persons, whom he knows are false to all
Ties of Religion, Honor, or Honesty.

What Murders, and what Desolations has not this Sin been the Cause of, either
through the Jealousy and Revenge of the Friends of the injured Party, or from
the immediate hand of God?

I need seek no farther than the Holy Scriptures for the most visible Examples.

For, (as the Wise Man tells us) Prove. 6. 34.
Jealousy is the Rage of a man, and is no less Cant. 8. 6.
cruel than the Grave, sparing none that comes in its way.

Vid. 2 Samuel chap. 13.
Amnon had no sooner defiled his Sister Tamar, but his Death is immediately
designed, and soon after, treacherously executed by his Brother Absalom.

The Sechemites having deflowered Dinah, are all (under the show of Friendship)
butchered by her Brethren, who think their Blood little enough to wash off that
Stain they had brought upon their Family. For, all the Excuse they make for so
many and so bloody Murders, is only this; Should he deal with our Sister as
with an Harlot? Genes. 34. 31.


But, suppose nothing of this should happen from men, yet what Punishments may
not be expected from God, who has told us, by St. Paul, Hebr. 13. 4.
Whore-mongers and Adulterers he will judge? For God has given us most
dreadful Examples of his Vengeance upon unclean persons in Genesis 19. 24.
Sodom and Gomorra. When nothing else would extinguish their Flames of Lust,
God pours down Showrs of flaming Brimstone upon them, and utterly destroys
them. But, though no extraordinary Judgment from God should follow this Vice, yet
he has made it ordinarily a sufficient Punishment to it self. For, what with
the Filthiness and Folly that accompanies it, together with the Loathings and
Shame that certainly follow it, how does every Act of this Sin become a Torture
to it is silly Votaries?

The lustful Amnon was sick for love of Tamar, but, no sooner had he committed
Folly with her, but he is sick with loathing her: 2 Samuel 13. 15. and 16.
For, the Text tells us, He hated her exceedingly; so that the Hatred wherewith
he hated her, was greater than the Love wherewith he had loved her. And his
Actions demonstrate it; for he that but just before could not live without her
Company, cannot now endure her Sight, but is glad to use as much Violence to be
rid of her, as he had before made use of to enjoy her.

Lastly, How is the man of Uncleanness exposed to all sorts of Crimes and
Dangers, either to gratify his Paramour, or to find Fuel for the unquenchable
Fire of his Lust?

For having hereby consumed his Estate, (which was it as great as the Indies,
would be little enough to spend upon this one Lust) for, (as the Prove. c. 6. 26.
wisest of men tells us) by means of an Adulterous Woman, a man is brought to a
Morsel of Bread. How is he forced, by the worst of means, to supply the
ever-craving, but never satisfied Desires of his Minion, or himself.

In a word, so much does this one Vice besot Mankind, that it has rendered the
strongest of men so weak and inconsiderable, that he became the Scorn of the
meanest of his Enemies.

It has robbed the man after God's own Heart, of his Justice and Religion, and
drew him into the worst and most unnatural of all Sins, even Murder it self;
and (to say no more) it made a Fool of the wisest of men, and rendered him (
Josephus Antiquit. Judai^.
as the Jewish Historian tells us) contemptible to his own Subjects, who had
been famed and reverenced through the World for his former Wisdom.

But secondly, Covetousness is no less dangerous, 2. Covetousness.
and mischievous than the former.

For, if we will believe the Apostle St. Paul, he tells us, They that will be
rich, fall into Temptation, 1 Timothy c. 6. v. 9. and 10.
and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown men in
Destruction: for the love of Money is the Root of all Evil; which while some
coveted after, they have pierced themselves through with many Sorrows.

And this is fully visible to any one, whose Eyes the God of this World has
not blinded. For he that has given up his Soul to Covetousness, has condemned
himself to the worst of Punishments; that is, to a Labor, which, as it never
cease, so it, is ever vain and fruitless: For, to satisfy a covetous Mind
with Riches, is as impossible, as to fill a Sieve with Water, which empties as
fast as it is poured in.

How does the man of Covetousness rob himself of all Quiet and Content, in
enjoying what he has, by his constant and violent Desires after that which he
has not? What incessant pains does he undergo in getting his Wealth? How is he
macerated with continual Care and Trouble in keeping it? How is he wracked and
tortured with the anxious Fears of losing it? Or lastly, How is he exposed to
all Crimes and Dangers in the Pursuit of it; and often times, to Death it self;
if not in the Pursuit of it, yet in the parting with it?

Thus Josh. 7. 20.
Ptolomy, King of Cyprus, having, by his Vid. Oliveri not. in Valor. Max. p.
778. fig. 5.
vast Riches, invited the Romans to pillage him, not being able to outlive the
loss of his Treasure, put an end to his miserable Life, by a dose of Poison. So
truly-may it be said of the covetous man's Gold, that it is like Achan's Wedge,
An accursed thing, that too often cleaves his own Heart. For, if his own
restless and insatiable Desires do not execute him, oftentimes he meets with
Achan's Fate, his Theft is discovered, and the hand of Justice becomes his
Executioner.

For, whoever gives up his Soul to the Love of Money, can never be secure from
any other Crime, though he endangers not only himself, but sacrifices whole
Nations to the God of this World, the only Deity that he worships.

A memorable Example the Lib. 3. de finibus bon. and mal.
Roman Orator gives us of the rich General Crassus, who having, for no other
cause, but his own Covetousness, waged War against the Parthians, lost not only
his own Life, but the Lives of many of the Roman Legions: And when he was
slain, his Enemies made sport with his Corpse, and pouring melted Gold into his
Mouth, they thus justly reproached his covetous Life; saying, Aurum sitisti,
Aurum bibe. Thou have thirsted after Gold, drink now thy Fill of it: thereby,
plainly intimating that there is no other ways to satisfy a covetous man's
Mind with Gold, but by filling his Mouth full of melted Or.

So great a Temptation is the Insatiable Love of Money to all kind of evil,
that it would be infinite to Relate all the Injustice, Murders, Treasons,
Rebellions, and Sacriledges; that it has been the cause of: But the Poet has
done all this in one question, when in Detestation of the horrid Murder of King
Priam's Son, for the sake of the Gold left for his Maintenance, with King
Polymnestor his Father in Law, he cries out.

-- Virgil Aeneid. lib. 3. page 374. not Varior. fig. 49.
Quid non Mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames? -- What Dangers or what
Mischiefs are so great, to which the wicked Love of Money does not force
Mankind?

I need add no more than this one Instance out of the Holy Scripture; viz. That
of Ahab, King ^ Kings c. 21.
of Israel, of which we read in the first of Kings. c. 21.

How did his Covetous Desire of Naboth's Vineyard torment him, and rob him of
all the Pleasures that a Court or a Crown might else have afforded him? How did
this plunge him into the worse of Crimes, the false Accusation and Murder of
his innocent Neighbor? And lastly how did that Crime bring utter ruin and
Dostruction, not only upon himself but his whole Family and Posterity?

Thirdly, Neither is Voluptuousness, or the love of Pleasure, less Pernicious
than the love of Money. This is the Natural Parent of all Crimes and Mischiefs.

To this purpose St. Paul brings in the Lovers of themselves as leading the
Van, and the Lovers of Pleasures as bringing up the Rear of all Wickedness.

For describing to 2 to Tim. 2. 1. 4. 5. 6.
Timothy the horrid Crimes of the last Times ( i. e.) of the Times immediately
preceding the Destruction of the Jews; he tells us, that in the last Days
Perilous Times shall come, and the Reason he gives us in the following Words:
For Men shall be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud,
Blasphemous, Disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy, without Natural
Affection, Truce Breakers, False-Accusers, Incontinent, Fierce Despisers of
those that are good, Traitors, High-minded; Lovers of Pleasures more then
Lovers of God. And * St. Peter tells us, the Mischief and Misery they bring
upon themselves: for speaking of such as take pleasure in Riot and Sport
themselves in their 2 Pet. 2. 12, 13.
own Deceivings; he says, These, as Natural Brute Beasts, are made to be taken
and destroyed, and shall utterly Perish in their own Corruption, and shall
receive the Reward of Unrighteousness. And indeed our own Experience may too
sadly demonstrate all this to us. For what Wickedness is there so abominable,
or what Misery so intolerable, to which he that gives up himself to the
persuit of any one Pleasure, is not necessarily exposed?

What Crime does he bauk that stands in his way betwixt him and his beloved
Pleasure?

How does the Voluptuous Prodigal destroy his Health, disturb his Reason, and
ruin his Estate in the too eager Persuit of his beloved Delight?

How does he (like the Prodigal in the * Gospel) run away from his best Friends
and Luke 15. 11. 17.
nearest Relations, spend all his Portion, and waste all his substance in
Riotous Living; till having brought himself to the Extremest Necessity, and
having made himself more like a Swine than a Man, he is at length turned out to
their Company, and is glad to feed upon the Swines husks?

How has the Love of Pleasure conquered the most Glorious Conquerors,
destroyed the most Invincible Armies, and ruined the greatest Monarchs of the
World?

Hannibal, that could not be subdued by all the Roman force, lost the most
Valiant Army by the Pleasures of Capua. So that Seneca says too truly of him
( Epist 11.) that he was Armis invictus, vitiis victus; not overcome by others
Arms, but Vanquished by his own Vices.

Xerxes whose Army in Forraging, destroyed whole Countries, and drank up whole
Rivers as it went; who was the greatest Monarch then in the World, as well as
the Richest; when he had so far given up himself to his Delights, that (as *
Cicero tells us) by a public Edict he proclaimed Cic. Tuscul. Quest* lib. 5.
a Reward to any that could find out any new sort of pleasure, how suddenly did
he lose that vast Army, and his greater Empire? So that the * Historian might
well conclude; What can Valor. Max. not. Varior. page 750. lin. 7.
be more filthy than those Vices, or what more hurtful, by which all Virtue is
defaced, Victories languish, Glory is buried in Infamy, and all the Powers both
of Soul and Body are utterly destroyed? For they that are possessed with the
inordinate Love of Pleasures seem to be like the Swine into whom the Legion of
Devils had entered; they run headlong with the greatest Violence, to their own
Destruction. Their beloved Pleasure so imploys all the Faculties of their Souls
and all the Members of their Bodies, till they are fit for nothing that becomes
a Man, and take care of nothing more than the present satisfaction, like the
Brute Beasts; and then this their Prodigality reduces them to the most
miserable necessity, and thence into the worst of Crimes; till public Justice
(if no other private Accident has done it before) brings them to the most
unnatural and most shameful ends. This I am confident we shall find too true,
by our own sad Experience. For if we enquire the Causes of all their Crimes,
who suffer by the hands of the public Executioners of Justice, we shall find
that the immoderate pursuit of unlawful Pleasures has most commonly hurried
them to their own ruin. For few or none of such miserable Wretches but in their
last and dying words are forced to confess, that their own Lusts and inordinate
Passions, have brought them to all their Shame and Misery.

Amongst which none can be more exorbitant than that* concerning which, I am
next to discourse of* Viz. 4. Envy or Malice.


Fourthly, Envy, Malice, or the Love of Revenge.

For neither is this a less Foolish or less Fatal Passion than any other: For
whoever gives up himself to this Lust, does (as it were) stretch himself upon
the Rack, and become his own Torturer. He pines himself away in the midst of
all abundance, and starves whilst he possesses the greatest plenty. He is his
own Vulture, and Preys upon his own Bowels.

For, so deadly a Disease of the mind is this of Envy, that scarcely any thing
the envious man eats or drinks, can give him any suitable Nourishment; but the
most delicate Viands, are, by this Passion, turned into Gall and Bitterness.

It so fires, or, at least, so soures the Blood, and so burns up, or corrodes,
the Vitals, that it soon dissolves the best-temper'd Body beyond all the help
of Art or Nature.

To what fatal Miseries is the man of Malice necessarily and incessantly
exposed? If his malicious Designs take, they are commonly so bloody, that his
own Darts being cast back upon him by the hands of Justice, do slay himself:
and if he misseth his deadly Aims, the Arrows that he shoots at others (like
those that are shot directly upwards) fall down again upon his own head, and
wound him, even unto Death.

He is in a much worse condition than any other Malefactor: For, he not only
suffers for the Crimes he has committed, but for those which he cannot act,
this being one of his greatest Tortures, that he cannot do them.

A dreadful Example of this nature, the immortal * Dr. Harvey gives us of a
Noble man, Libr. de Circulat. Sanguin.
who having received some Affront which he was not able to revenge, took it so
much to Heart, that his Passion swelled him like Poison, and as soon destroyed
him; for, in a short time after, he dyed of a malignant Fever: and being
dissected, his great Artery was found as big as the jugular Artery of an Ox.
So virulent a Venom does accompany this Passion; and so certainly true is that
of the holy Job. Wrath kills the Job. 5. 2.
Foolish-man, and Envy slays the Silly one.

Why should I mention the public Calamities that it brings along with it,
since they cannot but be visible to all Observers?

What Murders has it not acted? What Schisms in the Church* or Seditions in
the State, has it not raised and carried on? In a Word, what Mischief, or what
Villainy, can be so great which it has not accomplished? All Histories are too
full of sad Instances of this kind.

What unspeakable Mischiefs, what shameful Vid. Optatum Milv.
Schisms, what abominable Seditions, Murders, and Treasons, overspread all
Africa, through the Envy of Donatus and his Party, because others were
preferred before them? And how did their Animosities continue to divide them,
till they lost their Country and Christianity both together; and are now so
overrun with Heathens, that scarcely any Appearance of the Christian Religion
is left amongst all the African Churches, which were, before these Divisions,
as glorious for their Profession of, and constancy in the Christian Faith, as
any Churches in the whole World.

What miserable Calamities did the Malice of the Leaders of three Factions or
Sects, bring upon the Jews, when they were besieged in Jerusalem? Vid. Josephum
de Bill. Jud.
No less than the sharpest Famine, the mo^^ unnatural Murders, the highest
Profanations of all things sacred; and, in a Word, the utter desolation of
their City and Temple, and the final Extirpation of their Government and
Religion? So that they who were the most glorious People in the World, are
becomemere Vagabands, and the Scum and Derision of all Nations.

I wish to God we had not too near Examples in the Divisions amongst our
selves, proceeding from the same Cause, and that our Magistrates would take
Care to suppress them, lest they proceed to the same sad Effects; viz. the
utter Ruin of the best constituted Church and State in the whole World.

To add but one Instance more out of common Vid. Livii* Decad. Histor. Romans
History. How did the Envy of Hanno, and his Faction against Amilcar, ruin all
the Affairs of Carthage, and laid the glorious City in the Dust, which
otherwise had not failed of being the sole Empress of the whole Earth?

If we look into the Sacred Writings, we shall find that Cain's Envy spared not
his own Brother, but made him become his Murderer. And the Envy of Korah and
his Company, was the cause of the first Schism and Rebellion that we read of,
even against Moses and Aaron; those very persons, who, by a mighty hand and
miraculous Power, had delivered them from their Egyptian Bondage; and drew
upon themselves the most signal Punishment.

For God created a new thing, and made the Earth divide it self, that they
might pass down quick into Hell who were the Dividers of Israel. What should I
add more? Lest there should be any Evil too great to be the Effect of this
Vice, Envy and Pride were the Causes even of Hell it self. And this now leads
me to take notice of the last irregular Passion which I mentioned, that too
often proves fatal to it is Followers, viz.

Fifthly, Pride, Ambition, or the immoderate 5 Pride and Ambition.
Love of Honors.

And indeed, this may well follow Envy, for they are inseparable Companions, it
being almost impossible for a man to be proud, unless he be envious; and
altogether impossible to be envious, unless he be first proud and ambitious:
and as ambitious and envious men are (like Simeon and Levi) Brethren in
Iniquity, so they are no less nearly allied in Misery: For, as their Sins are
much the same, so they suffer much the same Punishments.

Whatsoever Crime, Danger, or Disease, is the effect of Envy, may be also
reckoned in the number of the miserable (though natural) Consequences of Pride
and Ambition. For, as for public Calamities, what Schisms, what Factions, what
Wars, what Rebellions, what Desolations ever were in the World, in which
Ambition had not an hand? For, as though there were no other Cause of these
Mischiefs, Solomon says, * Only by Pride comes all Contention. Prove. 13. 10.


And as for private Mischiefs, What Miseries can be so great, into which the
proud man does not involve himself and all his Partners? If he miss of his
Designs in climbing up on high, he most commonly breaks his Neck in the Fall:
But, if he prospers a while, this encourages him to proceed unto such Crimes,
the due Sense and Horror of which, are enough to break his Heart. For, from
this Crime of Ambition (when it has once got the absolute Dominion over a man)
as from the Lyon's Den, in the Fable, we can see no Footsteps backward; but if
any man be so silly a Beast to be plunged into it, he seldom, or never, escapes
with Life. For, if we will believe the Experience of the wisest of men, he
assures us, * That Pride goes before Destruction. Prove. 16. 18.


But, suppose the utmost that can be thought on for the proud man's advantage,
viz. that he reaches his highest Aim and Design, and attains, by his Crimes,
the highest honors; yet, the Crown he has placed upon his Head, by wicked
hands, though it be of pure Gold, sits as uneasy upon him, as a Crown of the
sharpest Thorns; and not only wounds his Head, but his Heart too, with restless
Cares and endless Fears. For, the Sense of his own Perfidiousness makes him so
jealous lest all other men should be like himself, that he can trust no man;
and the thoughts of his own Crimes makes him in Cain's Condition, to think
every man he meets will certainly kill him; and these terrible Fears raised
from without, together with the amazing Horrors of his Conscience within him,
will scarcely let him sleep or eat, or enjoy any thing in quiet. So that whilst
he sits upon a Throne, he is really more miserable than he that makes his Bed
upon a Dunghill. For, besides the danger of Treachery from his Friends, (whose
Wickedness he too well knows to have any just cause to trust them) and besides
the continual Dreads of his own Soul, lest the Almighty Providence should
overturn him; how mortally is he hated, and how continually is he baited by his
Enemies, and pursued even to Death by the best of men, whom he has injured,
whose very Virtues engage them (for the sake of the public Safety, as well as
of their private Security) in the most vigorous and bloody Designs against him?
For, most commonly we see it true, that ambitious men that cannot be contented
with their own state, (like the proud and rebellious Absalom, that was hanged
by his own hair, in which was his main glory) are executed by their own Pride.

For, whilst by Schism and Rebellion they pull down the Pillars of the Church
and State, often times they bury themselves in the Ruins that they make. Of
this, I need give no other Instance than that of our late miserable Times
amongst our selves. For, what profit had we from all that War and bloodshed
amongst us? We only brought upon our selves worse than what we feared. We made
our selves Slaves to the basest of men, because we could not be contented to be
Subjects to the best of Princes; and for fear of bringing in Popery, we had
well nigh destroyed Christianity. Nay, when the men of Schism and Rebellion
were so prosperous, that they carried all before them, and had in the most
barbarous manner, murdered the best of Kings and destroyed the best of
Churches; and not only killed but had taken Possession too of all their Power
and Estates; how did the all-wise and just Providence of God, by the most
unexpected means, even in an Instant, turn the Wheel over them, and bring down
their Pride to the greatest Shame?

Neither is the proud man's Grandeur and Promotion his only miserable
Condition; for, his whole Life is not only the greatest Vanity, but the
greatest Misery and Vexation of Spirit. For, how does some little thing which
he cannot have, rob him of all Content and Quiet, in enjoying what he has?

Mordecai's stiff Knee takes from the ambitious Haman the relish of all the
Honors of the greatest Court in the World; nay, the Power and Glory of a Crown,
could afford no Rest nor Pleasure to the proud and envious Ahab, when once
Naboth's Vineyard had appeared in his sight. To describe the pround man's Life,
were to represent unto you an exact Copy of all kind of Folly and Misery. For
what with his continual Plots and Contrivances, and his incessant Cares and
Business; How does he Sacrifice his Health to his Ambition, for want of due
Repast, or of quiet Repose? What with his Envy at others that are higher than
himself, and his eager Desires after Preferment, together with his continual
Fears lest he should miss of it, how is he racked with endless Tortures?

What with the baseness and durtiness of the way to his proud Designs; what
with the many affronts and denials; what with his great hopes and sometimes his
greater despair, a mixture of all which, he cannot but meet with in it; not to
say any thing of the envy and scorn of others that attend his advancement, or
the little satisfaction that he himself meets with in it; how is he fooled and
cheated with a Cloud instead of a Deity? In a word, how do the several Passions
raised in him by these Causes, constantly torture his Mind and disorder his
Body, till at length they bring upon him Misery, Diseases, and Death? I need
not remind you of the many mischiefs this Vice exposes us to: It threw down
the Angels from Heaven, and cast our first Parents out of Paradise; it was the
cause of the first Sins that ever were committed, and by consequence is the
Mother of all Mischief, and of all Miseries: Nay, it still continues actually
to produce these sad effects; for where Pride is, there is Strife; and every
evil work.

Give me leave to add two or three practical deductions from what has been
said. If Misery and Death be the natural effects of every one of these Sins.
Viz. Pride, Envy, Voluptuousness, Uncleanness, Anger, Gluttony, Drunkenness,
Incharitableness, Injustice, Profaneness, and Irreligion, what then remains?
But that

First, We should all keep Watch and Ward against The first Deduction.
these Destroyers of Mankind. We are careful enough to keep our Houses from
Fire, our Goods from Thieves, and our Bodies from Infection of the Plague; and
shall we be so foolish to hug these Enemies of our Lives, and to follow these
Sins which are no less destructive to us, than all those other dangers which we
so much fear, and so earnestly endeavor to avoid? To this end let every one of
us consider seriously what has been said against that particular Sin to which
he finds himself most inclined; let every one of us endeavor to mend himself,
more than others, especially more than our Magistrates: let them alone to take
care to amend the Public by the Execution of those wholesome Laws which are
established in our Church and State; and let us, who are private Christians,
study to be quiet, and do our own Business (i. e.) to work out our own
Salvation with fear and trembling, by avoiding our sins which we know will no
less destroy our present than our future safety and Happiness.

Secondly, If we are, or have been guilty of The second Deduction.
any of these Sins, or have seen others pursuing them with greediness, and yet
neither we nor they have felt any of those Miseries or Mischiefs that are the
natural effects of them, let us not from thence conclude, that the Preacher is
deceived; but let us thank God for his Care and Providence over us, which only
has preserved us from being our own Murderers by pursuing our own Sins: and
let this Patience and Long-Suffering of God, prevail with us, as we love our
Lives to hate our Sins, and to break off from them by Repentance, lest by
continuing in them, we provoke God Almighty to give us up to be destroyed by
them. The third and last Deduction.


Thirdly and Lastly, If our Sins are destructive to our present Happiness, then
if we have any care for our health, or safety, for our ease, quiet, or
contentment, or for our Lives themselves, let us not any longer delay our
amendment; but let us immediately cast off all our Sins which are so dangerous
and so hurtful to us. Delays (we know) can never be prudent when the danger is
great and imminent. He that sees his House on Fire will not be so mad to
squander away the present opportunity of quenching it; he that descerns some
mortal disease arising in his Body, will lose no time in applying such Remedies
as may prevent their danger. Why then are we so unreasonable and senseless to
trifle away our time and opportunity of quenching the Fires of our Lusts, and
of preventing the fatal dangers of our Sins? Especially since we know not if we
neglect the present, whether God will give us any other opportunity in the time
to come. For he himself has told us, that Genesis 6. 3.
His Spirit shall not always strive with Man. The only show of Reason, by which
the Devil cheats too many of their Eternal Happiness, is this. Viz. That it is
time enough to repent, when they are past their Pleasures, because there is
some reason to hope that a Death-Bed-Repentance may be sincere and acceptable
with God to the saving of our Souls. But though this Pretense is most
Presumptuous and groundless, yet the tempter could not have so much as this
against us, if we did but consider that our Sins are as hurtful to our Bodies
as to our Souls, that they as much prejudice our present Happiness, as they do
our future; and therefore, that though it was possible (which we have no grounds
at all to suppose, that a dying Repentance might come time enough to save our
Souls, yet it (...) absolutely too late (when Sin has already destroyed us) to
prevent the Miseries of our Bodies.

If therefore we have any care of our Lives or Happiness, if we have any
concern either for our own good, or the good of the World; and to sum up all in
one Word, if we would not add SELF-MVRDER to the rest of our Crimes, let us put
in practice that most necessary Exhortation Heb. 3. 13.
of St Paul, Exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of
you be hardened by the deceitfulness of Sin; and to this purpose, let us
seriously consider those Words of our Blessed Savior; and sedately ask our
selves this Question of his, Luke 9. 25.
What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole World and lose himself,
or bring upon himself his own Destruction? For, since we are assured, that as
Righteousness ^endeth to Life, so he that pursues Evil, pursues it to his own
Death. Surely, Common Prudence should persuade us no longer to hazard our
present Welfare, by running on in such sinful Courses as may bring upon us
swift Destruction, but to pursue the ways of Righteousness; that so we may
avoid the miseries that follow the Pursuit of Evil.

To this End, I shall conclude all with the most divine, and most useful Words
of St. Peter, (which are so beneficial to all Mankind, that I could wish they
were written upon every man's Soul, in indelible Characters) viz. He that will
love Life, and 1 Pet. 3. v. 10. to v. 14.
will see good Days, let him refrain his Tongue from Evil, and his Lips, that
they speak no Guile: Let him eschew Evil, and do Good, let him seek peace, and
ensue it. For, the Eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his Ears are
open unto their Prayers; but the Face of the Lord is against them that do Evil,
and who will harm you (or who is he that shall harm you) if ye be Followers of
that which is good.

Now, that all of us may so follow that which is Good, and so eschew that which
is Evil: that we may live happily in this Life, and be eternally happy in the
Life to come, God of his Infinite Mercy grant, for Jesus Christ his sake; to
whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed (as is most due) all
Power, Dominion, Praise, and Glory, now and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

