Numb. 5.

Westminster Projects: OR, The Mystery of Iniquity OF Darby-House Discovered.

A Plot, a Plot, our Saviors cry,
But dare it not declare,
Because alas! they know full well,
Themselves the Traitors are.
Yet though they think themselves secure,
And juggle with the City,
(Who are deluded once again,
And cheated, more's the pity;)
Yet yet them know, their knavery shall
To all the world appear:
For, I Will not keep their secrets, I,
For flattery or fear.
Printed, no body knows where; licensed, no body knows when; and sent into the
world by the appointment of the said Committee, because they could not help it,
in this year of their vexation, 1648.

Westminster Projects.
IT is strange, that in a time of Reformation there should be so much
wickedness, and in high places too: that Westminster should after all its
seeming sanctity, become such a Den of Devils, such a Cage of unclean Birds;
but what remedy? what is past cure, must be past care also.

But yet it is requisite that they should be known; for Knaves unknown pass
for honest men, and there is not such a subtle deceiver in the world, as an
Angel of light: a Devil in the shape of a Saint, (especially at Westminster)
has done more mischief, then all the honest men there can ever do good: I
confess it a wonder there is no more hurt done, considering honest men are so
scarce there, and knaves so plentiful; for you can scarce peep into a
Committee, but you shall find ten, if there be eleven in the number, two in a
Committee is a miracle; nay, if you find one in the Committee of Derby, I Will
give you leave to hang him, though my Lord Say himself be there: But now I
talk of that Committee, I will tell you strange news, they have done the
Kingdom good service; and is not that a wonder in a Committee? And if you ask
how, I must tell you they have discovered a Plot, and well they might, if you
knew all, you would say so; for as sure as I live they made it, the Fox is the
finder, and for fear others should discover it, they did it themselves, you
know it is good to cry Whore first; but you may observe the knavery of the
Baker: They tell us of a Plot against the Kingdom, Parliament and City, but by
whom they know not, not one actor or contriver is discovered; and why think
you? because the Earl of Northumberland, the Chaire-man of the Committee
thinks it not convenient, for fear he should be troubled to purchase the life
of another Waller to secure his head from the Block: But because you shall not
be kept in ignorance, know their Proverb is verifified, there is seldom much
smoke, but there is some fire; so you shall find, that there is not only a talk
of a Plot, but such a plot indeed, as tends to the ruin and destruction of all
honest men in the Kingdom: The particulars thus.

1 For the several Counties of Essex, Surrey and Kent, the ground and growth
of their late Petitions proceeded and had their births from a party in the
Houses of Parliament, being Members of the Committee of Derby-house, with other
of their creatures, the Earl of Warwick was the first promoter of Essex
Petition, Sir Arthur Anstoe of Surrey, and Sir Simpleton Walsingham, with other
of his Adherents were drawn into the present engagement of Kent.

2. For London and the parts adjacent, there has been a design of listing
many thousands, and putting them into Arms, which design has had its rise
and birth from the treacherous brain of Algernon Percy, whose name and family
never were found to be faithful, either to God or their Country; and it may
be boldly averred, that he was never other then a Traitor to the Kingdom since
the late War, witness the plot for which Tompkins and Challenor were
murdered, wherein the Earl of Northumberland was a chief Actor with Waller,
and therefore though Waller was the greatest offender, as having engaged
others, yet he must be sold to the Earl of Northumberland for some thousands of
pounds, and by him conveyed into France, not only to conceal his Knavery,
but to be his Agent, to keep up his credit with the Queen, and give him
intelligence what the Queen desires should be effected. This is the reason why
you have no further discovery of this dangerous plot, whereas had the finders
been free, you should have had them proclaimed the Authors names, imprisoned
them, seized their estates, etc. and had a day of Thanksgiving, whereas now you
see them rather desire a day of Humiliation for sorrow that they were so soon
discovered.

Neither is this honored Gentleman without other accomplices, for there is a
Cabinet-Councell of them, to wit, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, the
Earl of Holland, the Countess of Carlisle, Doctor Fraper a Scot, Sir Peter
Killigrew, cum multis alus, all which receive constant intelligence from the
Queen, and act accordingly, and by their designement are all these commotions
and troubles which threaten the Kingdom; to that end is the Earl of
Northumbealand Chaire-man of the Committee of Safety at Derbyhouse, to the end
he may be enabled to retard proceedings, especially if they cross the ends
they aim at: But because you shall see that I speak more then probabilities,
(although my near relation to them would hinder) yet I will clearly discover
unto you the very bottom of their design.

In order to which give me leave to inform you, that the quarrel betwixt the
Factions in the Houses, is now not whether the King shall be brought in, but
who shall bring him in, and who shall be the Princes of the People under him,
when brought in. The Royal Presbyterian and Independent, (for there are such
of both sorts, as Northumberland, Warwick, Say, Crumwell, Ireton, Vane, Senior,
Vane Junior, etc. they would bring in the King upon their account, and make
such an agreement with him, as might not only secure them with safety, but
advance them to honor also: The real Presbyterian and real Independent, they
are willing to bring in the King, but they would first have the King secure
unto them Religion, Law, and the Liberties of the Nation, but alack they are
but a few, and their tale cannot be heard, for the cry of others is, Let us use
the best means we can to satisfy the King, no matter what becomes of the
Kingdom: And to this end have they underhand promoted and procured these
tumults, so that thereby they might force the House to an adjournment, which is
the chief thing they desire, and if procured, then all the power will reside
in that Committee.

And because they will be sure to do their work, they have endeavored to
bring in seven Lords more, into them, namely, their whole House, which if
effected, we shall be troubled no more with a House of Peers, or Parliament,
but must be governed by a Committee of Estates, and by the power of the Army,
(which by the assistants of their Grandee Janisaries, to wit Sultan Cromwell,
Bashaw Ireton, etc. they doubt not but to quell all their opposers, and make
such a peace with the King, as shall secure their power or set up another,
which shall be but a Cipher, to bear the blame of their misgovernment, and
please the people withal, who they say, would be quiet, if they had any thing
like a King, though never so powerless or witless.

And now give me leave to pity those Gentlemen and others who so freely enter
into an Engagement upon such slender grounds, and never weigh the consequence
of such endertakings. Did the Gentlemen of Essex, Surrey, and Kent, with other
the Freeholders but conceive how these men hug themselves with the sweet
apprehensions of their accomplishing their designs by their actings, yea, I
say, did they but as I do, hear and see with what contentment of spirit they
receive the tidings of such their tumultuous approaches, and endeavors to
terrify and dissolve the Parliament, and with what undervaluing words they
speak of them, as knowing themselves able when they please to crush them and
bring them under the lash; and did they (I say) but which me know, that all
their delays therein, is but to give time to the Parliament to chew upon their
fears, (which they by their creatures endeavor to heighten) that so they might
be necessitated to adjourne, and look for their own security, they would more
suddenly have manifested their spleen, and by the power of the sword destroyed
those that have thus ignorantly prosecuted what they themselves so cunningly
designed.

Neither can I choose but pity the Kings friends, when I consider into what a
snare they have run themselves: I make no question but that they did cordially
intend their assistance for the Kings restoration, but by these actings (as
these Politicians have ordered it) they have contributed assistance to the
Kings ruin: for they must know, that if the House adjourne, and these seeming
storms be once blown over, if the King will not grant what they desire, these
actings (though by themselves designed and promoted) shall be charged upon the
Kings account, and brought as arguments to justify their future dealings with
him.

Thus you see the wits of the time outwitted, and the proverb verified, All is
not gold that glisters. Here you see a whole Kingdom abused, and in danger to
be inslaved to advance the interest of four and twenty K --. O that Englishmen
would be wise, and at last, before it be too late, by an happy union seek the
establishment of justice and freedom.

Can you ever expect happiness from extremes? can you find certainty in
uncertainties? or do you ever look to get peace by war, order by confusion?
certainly no rational man can be so besotted as to imagine, that certain rules
of government could be a burden to him, seeing only uncertainty has
occasioned all our trouble? Had the Kings power and the Parliaments Privileges
been limited and declared, the exercise of the Militia could never have caused
such a bloody dispute: And I do conceive it is not our work now to contest for
preserving the now-established Laws, since we have experimentally found many
of them to be burdensome and destructive in themselves, none of them (by
reason of abuse and corruption) a protection to us in our liberties or
properties: but to labor for such an establishment for the future, as may be a
certain and safe rule for Kings, Parliaments and People to walk by, since
neither in reason ought to be absolved from obedience to all just Laws; or
left to govern, or be governed, by the dictates of lust, will or pleasure.

This rule must make us happy, this must be
The happy means to make this People free:
Laws just and equal, now, can only bring
Peace to the Nation, honor to the King.
Unite then quickly; it is your union must
Force your oppressors to be truly just:
And without you unite, you strive in vain,
Justice or Freedom ever to obtain.
Strike hands then boldly, yield not to be slaves
To cruel Tyrants, nor to subtle Knaves.
FINIS.
Numb. 6.

Westminster Projects OR THE Mystery of Iniquity OF THE Committee of Darby
House DISCOVERED.

Plot on great Wharton and contrive
to save the House of Peers;
For if the King do but survive
He Will pull them by the ears.
Pray send for Say, and St. John's too,
and study some device,
To cheat the Kingdom once again:
You Have done it neatly twice.
The Proverb is, beware the third;
For if you make a blort
It Is ten to one, you lose your heads;
and then you will spoil the sport:
For I should very sorry be,
you should such honor have,
A Halter I could well afford,
the portion of a knave.
Printed no body knows where, licenced no body knows when, and sent into the
world by the appointment of the said Committee, because they could not help it,
in the year of their vexation. 1648.

Westminster Projects.
WHat a strange age are we fallen into? where nothing but knavery is practiced,
and nothing but Religion professed; seeming holiness has caused our
unhappiness, and we are cheated into slavery, by fair promises of Freedom and
Liberty: O tempora! O mores! O times! O manners! whom shall we believe or
trust, if not those that are seemingly clothed with righteousness; who with
such zeal dare call the God of Heaven to evidence the sincerity of their
hearts, in that they had no other end or intention then the advancement of His
Majesty, and the Peace of the Kingdom?

But alas, alas, Great men are subject to forgetfulness, especially when their
honor and promotion stand in competition with their Religion; witness our
ambitious Lords, and oppressing Grandees, who seven years ago preached a
doctrine, that the King might not oppress, but now they tell us they may: A
King might not impeach, imprison, fine, etc. but now they may, and have;
witness their unjust dealings with the seven impeached Lords, eleven impeached
Commons, and the four Aldermen: (for the fifth he proved a Cullion, and
acknowledged himself a Traitor, and so became capable of mercy, and the
enjoyment of fourteen hundred a year, by the excise, which if he had not
submitted, and kissed sultan Cromwels great Toe, he had surely lost: and
therefore all things considered, Alderman Cullum was the wisest man, for what
are all the Liberties of England worth in comparison of his office? Alas money
will buy him a good name, and so long as he is free, no matter who are slaves:)
But on the contrary I must commend the valor, honesty, and innocence of those
worthy Patriots of their Country, Sir John Maynard, Sir John Gear, Alderman
Adams, Alderman Langham, and Alderman Bunce, who for their own Vindication, and
the securing the Liberties of England out of the jaws of those devouring
Harpies the Lords, (who study nothing more than to make the people slaves,)
have so nobly entered the Lists, and notwithstanding so many disadvantages (in
respect of custom, presidents, power and persuasions to the contrary) have
continued the combat, and come off, not only unfoild, but with honor, having
thrown the Lords Jurisdiction (by them usurped over Commons) on its back; so
that unless Englishmen prove the worst of cowards it will not be possible for
the Lords ever to dare to take the impudence to adjudg, fine, or imprison a
Commoner more, for which noble act of theirs they deserve to have their names
engraven in Marble with this memorial.

Maynard, Gayer, Adams, Langham, Bunce, did save
Our English Freedoms from the very grave
Of dire destruction; cause they phainly saw,
The Lords usurp a Power above the Law,
They took the Laws part; and the Lords resist,
And having choked them with a Scottish Mist
Bravely retreated, for which Fame intends
To crown them with the name o'th Peoples Friends.
Which to their Generations shall remain
A badg of honor, Time shall never obtain
To have forgotten, but shall make them be
But for Cullum this shall be his memorial.

Here lies a man did Law and fame despise,
Betrayed his cause, for an office in the Excise:
Confessed himself a Traitor, which is more,
For profits sake did kiss great Cromwels Toe:
Twelve hundred pounds per annum, for to save,
He sold his Faith, and proved a fawning knave.
But now I talk of twelve hundred pounds, give me leave to tell you that it is
no wonder that we are slaves to the Grandees, nay, that we are no more slaves
then we are, for you must know, that there are in the City but 24. Aldermen,
and at least fourteen of them have fourteen hundred a year by their places,
which they enjoy by the favor of the ruling party of Lords and Commons: and
wherefore think you is it that they confer such places on them? is it not to
the end that they may give them assistance to enslave and ride you when they
please. Have they not all along made use of their power and interest in the
City, to raise what sums of money they pleased? and if a demand was made for
the loan of ten or twenty thousand pounds, would not these men always appear
the promoters thereof, and to draw others on, make proffers to lend a thousand
pounds a man, which they knew well enough how to pay themselves again, out of
the Treasury; but for you, you must be content with the public Faith; nay,
Hay, have they not by this means had such an influence upon the Councels and
Government of this City, that we have not had liberty to choose our own
Governors or Officers, nor dispose of our own Militia, or indeed do any thing,
but what corresponded with the sense of the Grandee Faction, but it should meet
great opposition in debate at our Common Councels; and if they could not carry
things there as they desired, then presently the power of the Parliament must
be made use of to forbid the prosecution of that, which they by their interest
could not hinder: Thus are you notwithstanding all your struglings for Freedom,
involved in slavery, and yet know it not, for it cannot be imaginable that
these men which get so much by the Grandee Faction, as Gibs, Woolaston, Foulk,
etc. should ever carry on any other interest then their Masters; and unless you
be wise, and force all such Pentionary Aldermen to disgorge, give up their
places, or throw off their Gowns, which would be best of all, and choose
honester in their rooms, and also make provision for the future, that no
Alderman or other Magistrate shall take upon him any such employment, as the
receiving and disposing of the public Treasure: It is impossible for you to be
other slaves, and so to be liable to be oppressed, taxed and cheated: for if he
that has a sword in his hand shall have power to dispose of the public
treasure, he will not fear to be his own carver, and who shall dare to call him
to an account?

But I have found so much knavery in the City, that I had almost lost my way to
Westminster, which is the very fountain of fallacy; where in the first place I
met with a Committee of Condemnation, alias, a Committee of Indemnity, where I
found them robbing Peter to pay Paul: There was a great controversy, and the
debate was desperate and dubitable, whether the Keeper of Newgate Mr Woolaston
should be protected for his knavery, or Colonel Lilburne punished for his
honesty: I was loath to stay to see the issue, for fear it should have stunk,
for it is ten to one but the knave Jailer had the most of the Committee on his
side, because there was a knave Lord or two to overlook them, for fear they
should do justice and suffer the Rogue to be hanged for his knavery, and then
they be put to the trouble to send a reprieve to hell for him, knowing it is
impossible on earth to find so fit an instrument to execute their infernal
commands.

From thence I went to the Committee of safety at Darby House where I found
them as safe as a Cat in a Cubbard, hugging themselves for joy at the success
of their Plot, which was as follows:

I told you the last time how and by what means the tumults in the several
Counties were occasioned, namely by the underhand designements of this Grandee
Faction, sitting at Darby House: Give me leave now to tell you further, that
all these appearances by Goring etc. for the King, are but delusions, and by
design, thereby to perfect their work of perpetuation of their power.

It is certain that Goring is employed by these juggling knaves, only to engage
as many as he can in the name of the King, thereby to give them an opportunity
to crush and bring the Kings party so low, that it shall not be possible for
them to rise again, which, if effected, say they, it will bring such a terror
upon all other parties in the Kingdom, that do what we will, we shall not need
to fear any: And then shall the King be necessitated either to accept of such
conditions as we shall afford him, or else we shall be in power to depose him,
and either keep the power in our own hands, or set up the Duke of Gloucester,
which will serve but as a Cipher to please the people withal.

Suitable to this design was the late answer to the Counties Petitions, That
they would maintain a Government by King, Lords and Commons etc. And that in
due time they would take into consideration how to settle the Kingdom. Which I
am confident they are resolved of, if this work they have now in hand be but
effected, which is as follows; They will offer to the King such terms of
Agreement as shall serve to secure the power and places of honor and preferment
of the ruling party of the Parliament and Army; And if the King will join with
them upon such an account, they will bring him in; but if he will not, then,
they say, they have ground enough to lay him aside, and to set up the Duke of
Gloucester, who shall only have the title, but they will exercise the power as a
Committee of Estates: such a Committee as now sits at Darby House; and if this
should be effected, (which will without all question, if the people speedily
interpose not,) all our seven years sufferings have served but as an Induction
to a greater bondage and slavery, then what we either found or fear in the
King, though without all question if in this way he should prevail, it would be
to the peoples extreme prejudice.

Therefore my friends seeing we are betwixt two extremes, and that whoever
rules we are designed to slavery, let us at last act rationally and show
charity to our selves, as well as loyalty to the King or affection to the
Parliament and Army, for certainly it is possible for a King to be happy, and
yet a people to be both safe and free; for a Parliament to be free and
powerful, but not unlimited, or unbounded, either in its actions or
privileges, and for an Army to be an useful servant, and not an insulting
tyrannical master.

But without the peoples union upon common and just principles for the
preservation of all just interests, it is impossible to keep a King from being
a Tyrant, a Parliament from being oppressive, or an Army from being abusive.

Therefore seeing the quarrel on all hands is, whose interest shall be secured;
The King for his, The Parliament for theirs, The Army for theirs; And in all
these contests you are only destroyed, and yet no security sought or
endeavored for you; As if your lives estates and children were given you only
to be made use of to support the Ambition of a few men, who by flattery and
dissimulation have gotten titles of honor and places of profit, which they are
loath to part with, or give an account for; And therefore you must be made their
Properties, and by them be enforced to spend the fruits of your labor, hazard
the lives of your selves, children and servants, only to keep your selves from
being slaves to one, that you may be slaves to another.

O therefore dear Countrymen, if you have the hearts of Englishmen, before you
again endeavor to drown the Kingdom in a deluge of Blood, consider wherefore
you fight, and what will be the fruit of it; and at last consult your own
safety, which ought to be the supreme Law both to King and Parliament. The
people safety is the supreme Law: then without controversy the Kings power,
and the Parliaments too, was conferred upon them for that end, namely to
preserve the People, and not as they have done to destroy them.

It is your interest now to consider, what power the King may have that is
consistant with your freedom, and what power Parliaments may have also, that
may enable them to do the work for which you chose them, and that they be
bounded, as to what you empower them, and what not, let them have a rule of
certainty, for we see apparently uncertainty has occasioned all our trouble.

It Is this must make us happy, this will bring
Peace to the Nation, Freedom to the King.
The Peoples Interest being thus secured,
Oppressive taxes will not be endured.
Just Peace shall be your portion: but till then
You must be vassals to the lusts of men.
Take then your choice, be freemen, or be slaves?
If you will support the interest of knaves,
They Will knavishly reward you, you shall see
Oppression linkt to your posterity.
Tyrants, and fawning sycophants shall reign,
Justice or Right you never shall obtain.
But if you will be wise, and straight combine
To stan^ for Freedom, peace and truth shall shine
Throughout your Borders, you shall surely see
All power employed for your security:
King, Parliament and Army shall declare,
You are supreme, and they your servants are;
When you give limits to their lawless wills,
Then, not till then, shall you be free from ills.
FINIS.

