Thursday the 13th of October, 1692. By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
Parliament Assembled.

Ordered, THat the Lord Bishop of Cork do Preach in Christ-Church on the Twenty
Third Day of this Month of October. before the Lords of this House.

Gerard Bor, Cler. Parl.

Monday, the 24th of October. 1692. By the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in
Parliament Assembled.

Ordered, THat the Thanks of this House be given to the Lord Bishop of Cork,
for his Sermon Preached yesterday in Christ-Church: And that the Earl of
Drogheda and the Lord Viscount Blessinton do accordingly give the Thanks of
this House to the said Lord Bishop of Cork, and desire him to cause his Sermon
to be Printed.

Gerard Bor. Cler. Parl.

A SERMON Preached October. 23. 1692. Before His EXCELLENCY the LORD LIEUTENANT
AND THE LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL. And diverse of the Commons: In
CHRIST-CHURCH, DVBLIN. By Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross.

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray on College Green, for William Norman Bookseller
in Dames street. 1692.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Particular Service for the Day, according to the Order of Church of
Ireland, being somewhat long, the Preacher was forced to contract his Sermon,
by Omitting, in several places, some parts thereof. But the Passages omitted in
the Pulpit, are inserted in the Print: Yet so, as that what was omitted, is
distinguished from what was delivered: If of any length, by being shut in thus:
** [ ] ** If smaller, only thus, [ ].

A SERMON Preached October. 23. 1692.
2 Cor. I. 9, 10. We had the Sentence of Death in our selves, that we should
not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the Dead.

Who has Delivered us from so great a Death, and does Deliver; in whom we
trust that He will yet Deliver us.


OF my Choice of these Words on this Occasion, I hope there needs no other
Account, than that it is more our Churches than mine.

The Time, when our Apostle, and his Brethren in Tribulation as well as Faith,
had this Sentence of Death in themselves, was in the Trouble which came unto
them in Asia, (verse. 8.) and the History whereto this is supposed to refer, we
have Acts xix.

The Honor of the great Goddess Diana, whom all Asia and the World then
worshipped, and of the Image which fell down from Jupiter, had now received a
Deadly Wound: Her Temple was likely to be despised, and her Magnificence
destroyed: for that This Paul had persuaded and turned away the People, saying,
That they are no Gods which are made with hands: A Pestilent Doctrine indeed!
For it had this effect at Ephesus, that Demetrius's Silver Shrines ((...) They
were [most probably] pretty Medals with Diana's Image, and her Temple's, upon
them; much Finer, and more Valuable than our Neighbor's Agnus. Dei's) and such
like Trinkets, would not go off as they had done: The Craft, by which the
Silver-Smith and his Fellow Workmen got their Wealth, was in danger to be set
at naught: and now 'twas time for the Craftsmen to act at least the Zealots, to
cry out two hours together, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, to raise no small
stir; to put the City in Confusion, and Country in an Uproar; to lay hold on
Paul's Comparions, and him too, if they could catch him; and to rush with one
accord into the Theater, there to feed the Wild Beasts with the Bodies of Gods
Saints, and their own Eyes with the Spectacle of them torn in pieces and
devoured. At this Juncture, We had, says the Apostle, the Sentence of Death in
our selves.

The History indeed matches not the Bloodiness and Barbarity of this Day.

Greece was a Civiller Country though Bigoted enough by Prophets of their own,
Poets and ^^yars. One Wandering Jew, our Apostle, and a Couple of poor
Macedonian Travelers, Gaius and Aristarchus his Companions, would have
satisfied the Fury of that Conflux of Idolaters from all the World, then at
Ephesus. One thousand two hundred eighty three persons a day, for an hundred
and twenty days together (or one with another) that is, This is the Account in
Sir John Temple's Book; and as it was given in to the Parliament in England.
But if from October. 23. on which Morning the Rebellion broke out, we reckon to
March 1, which is somewhat more exact, There were 9 days above the four
Kallendar Months, that is 129 Days. And then there fell only, one Day with
another, 1193 Persons a Day, and 103 over in the whole.
An hundred fifty four thousand Souls, Men Women and Children, in four Months
time, as the Account was given in by the Actors themselves, lest they should
have been thought to have been more bloody than they were, was a Sacrifice,
which none but Irish Priests and Popish Votaries could ever have thought of, or
attempted.

Nay, Diana's Priests in the Acts, were yet more reasonable than we think of:
For their People having got two Persons to make an Example of, (...) verse. 31.
certain of the Asiatic Priests, (such in all likelihood they were) stood so
much Paul's Friends, as to preserve even him, though Principal, from the
Theater, and being there a real Tragedy. Admit then the Irish Priests in a
certain Sacrifice to be no Idolaters, yet in Humane Sacrifices they have far
exceeded all the Idolaters in the World.

But however the History will not in all Circumstances come up to our Case, the
Habit of Mind, or Temper here avowed by the Apostle in himself and Brethren,
will be most seasonable, and intimately becoming all, whose Condition at any
time may have answered theirs, by having had a Sentence of Death in themselves.

We will therefore view, First, Their Outward Condition, and Gods Design upon
them thereby, ( verse. 9.) Then the Faith our Apostle Avows, ( verse. 10.) which
are the main Considerables in these two Verses.

1. We had a Sentence of Death in our selves: That was their Condition. That we
should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the Dead: That was
Gods Design upon them and us -- God in his Providence many times sees fit to
bring his faithfullest Servants into such Plunges of Misery, and Difficulties,
whence none but an Almighty Unseen Power can Retrieve them: And this, to the
end he may teach them, and others by them, dependence on himself alone. They
are so reduced, as that they must trust to Invisible Omnipotence or Nothing; As
in the Text, To God that raises the Dead: For their Condition is in effect
such as that of men in the Grave, or under the Power of Death.

2. He Avows, God had Delivered, and even still to the instant in which he
spoke, did Deliver, and that they trusted he would yet Deliver them -- When in
Deplorable or Desperate Circumstances, by an Almighty Hand, People have been
delivered, they ought, into whatsoever Condition they shall thereafter be
reduced, for ever to trust to that Deliverer. However low the Faith of any
other persons, at any time, may run without sin, the least Diffidence in those
who have been thus Delivered, is high Ingratitude.

These two Observations are the proper Result of the Words, as far as from a
Singular Instance any General Rules can be drawn; and the Consequence of both
is so strict, that neither much need a further proof: I shall therefore but
touch on what I had prepared.

And the first, being Matter of Fact, through several long continued Ages, the
properest proof of it would be Historical Records, both as to Particular
Persons, and that great Public Body the Church.

** [As to Particular Persons. The Holy Ghost singling out some of the most
Faithful Men, and greatest Favorites of Heaven, under the Old Testament,
Names, especially Three, who were in their Days Wonders of Danger and Misery,
and yet obtained as wondrous Deliverance, through the Faith which they Learned
and Practiced in their most desperate Circumstances. The Three were Noah,
Daniel and Job, Ezekiel. xiv. 14, etc. The Lives of each of These, are so many
Exemplifications or Precedents of the Case before us.

What could Noah Trust to, or whence could he hope for (shall I say, or
imagine) any Help possible, but from a Power superior to Earth and Air, (from
Him that dwells in Heaven) when he saw the Fountains of the Great Deep broken
up, and the Windows of Heaven opened, and continued mighty Rains for forty
Days and forty Nights? As far as Flesh and Blood can see, he had a Sentence of
Death in himself; at least could trust in nothing but the Living God, to
survive that Flood by which all Mankind, except himself and his, perished: And
according to the Growth of his Dangers, no doubt was that of his Faith. By
Dreadful Discipline he proceeded from Faith to Faith. By Faith, says the
Author to the Hebrews, Noah prepared an Ark for the Saving his House. And by
that Faith continued, and advancing still, may I say, he saved both the Ark,
Himself, and all with him in it. For no more could he and his have lived in the
Ark without a kind of Miracle of Faith, than the Ark in such a Deluge, without
a Miracle of Power.

Again: What could Daniel trust to in the Den of Lions, by Nature and Hunger
merciless? What Power below God's, that made them, could have changed their
Natures, or sent an Angel to have shut their Mouths? But, Through Faith, says
the now mentioned Author, He stopped the Mouths of Lions, Hebr. xi. 33. He was
taken out of the Den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because he
believed upon his God, says he himself, Dan. vi. 23.

Further: What could Job trust to, when besides his being, from the Height of
Wealth and Plenty, reduced to Nakedness and Nothing; besides his being bereaved
of his Children in an instant, and no Relation left him but one who seems to
have sided with the Devil against him; forsaken too of all Friends, save those
Miserable Comforters, who with one Mouth told him the Cause of all his Misery
was his Hypocrisy; when besides such unheard of and united Calamities, his very
Body was smitten with sore Boils, from the Sole of his Foot to the Crown of his
Head; and he sitting down among the Ashes, took a Potsherd to scrape himself
withal: What could this Mirror, shall I say, or Miracle of Constancy and
Patience, have recourse to, but Him that kills, and makes alive; Him that
brings down to the Grave, and brings up? And to him he resolutely applies,
Chap. xiii. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.

To this Great Triumvirate, we will only add the Man after Gods own Heart; Into
what frequent Gulphs of Misery was he cast? The Waters came in unto his very
Soul; He sunk in the deep Mire, where there was no standing, and in the deep
Waters, where the Floods over flowed him; He was weary with his crying, and his
Eyes failed him while he waited on God, Psalm. lxix. 1, 2, etc. Yet on God he
waited, verse. 3. And, At what time I am afraid, I will trust in God, Psalm lvi.
3.

Finally, This has been all along verified, not only in Particular Saints, but
in the great Body of them, the Church. For Brevities sake, let one instance
thereof suffice.

God had placed the Children of Israel, his then only visible Church, in the
best part of Egypt, in Goshen; under the happy Government, at least Prime
Ministry, of their Brother Joseph: He could here have made them a Numerous and
most Flourishing People; But this would not have brought them to the
Acknowledgment of his Works, nor Dependence on his Power. They must therefore
first be brought into Bondage, in Mortar, Brick, and all manner of service,
(even to make Brick without Straw) under Taskmasters which made them serve with
Rigor. Their Male-Children must be decreed to the River, cast thereinto and
destroyed; insomuch that they must groan by reason of their Bondage. In this
Condition they learn to cry unto the Lord, the God of their Fathers; and their
Cry came up unto him, Exodus ii 23. But even yet they are not by sufficient
Misery ripe for Deliverance. Pharaoh and the Host of the Egyptians must be
Armed, all the Horses, and Horsemen, and Chariots of Egypt must be drawn out,
against them, and in pursuit over-take them: They must be shut up in the
Wilderness, in the Straits of Pihahiroth, with the Sea before, and their
Enemies behind: And now they must stand still, and see the Salvation of the
Lord, that they Exodus xiv. 9, 10, etc.
may learn, It is the Lord that fights for them, and from Him alone comes
their Help. But they did not all Learn this, and therefore the Carcasses of
them that believed not fell in the Wilderness, (though neither by Pharaoh, nor
in the Red Sea, lest their Enemies should Triumph.) Those few who did believe,
Received the Promise, and were led into the Promised Rest, by that Mighty Arm,
which brought them out of their Bondage.

By these Personal Instances of Noah, Daniel, Job and David, Saints undoubtedly
of the first Magnitude, and by the National Case of Israel, the People whom God
had Chosen to Himself out of all People, it appears, as to the Matter of Fact,
That God often reduces his faithfullest and most beloved Servants to such
Critical Depths of Misery, whence none but an Almighty hand can Retrieve them;
and wherein they must either trust in Him, or give up all Trust, and be lost.]
**

But why should God make any Peoples Course of Life so uneven? And why such
Peoples especially?

In Answer hereto: Though we who in our own Deliberations and Consults, scarce
many times know what it is, which most sways and lastly determines us to a
Resolution, may not presume to say, where God has not said it first, This or
that moved God thus to Act; yet with humble Reverence we may say in general, He
does it undoubtedly for most holy and wise Reasons in the Government of the
World. The Particulars we shall fully know at the Day of the Revelation of all
things. Mean while, As in Giving Rain and Fruitful Seasons, and thereby filling
our Hearts with Food and Gladness, so sometimes in changing his hand, and
sundry wise giving us a Sentence of Death in our selves, whence yet, as he sees
fit, he grants Reprieves; In all these he leaves not himself without a Witness.
Did all Humane Affairs move in one constant, even, regular sort, as Fixed Stars
in an Orb whither no Clouds or Storms arise, some would say, It is good for us
to be here, and never think of another World, or of True Happiness: Others
perhaps would cry out, All things come to pass of course; There Is no such thing
as Providence. Now, that we see such Eccentrical Motions and Epicycles, we must
acknowledge there is an Hand that agitates, governs and overrules the Whole
Frame: And those who demand Miracles, that they may believe, may find them in
and upon themselves, in that they, among others, are now alive.

But it will be said, The Faithful need not these Testimonies; for according to
the Hypothesis, they are already Faithful. True; they need them not to beget
the first Faith, but they need them to quicken and confirm the Faith they have.

But still that part of the Challenge recurres, Why should God pitch upon his
most Faithful Servants thus to exercise? It seems fitter such Examples should
be made on those, who have more deserved such Severities.

The Answer may be, Wicked Men in such Difficulties would not trust in God,
apply to Him, or glorify Him at all: They would rather turn Impatient and
Desperate. Let Saul be at a loss, and he will seek to the next Witch or Devil,
instead of submitting all to God. And those in the Revelations, on whom some of
the last Plagues came, gnawed their Tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of
Heaven, but repented not of their Deeds, to give him glory, Rev xvi. 9, 10, 11.
Wherefore to such who exercise no Faith, who apply not to God, or acknowledge
Him, there is most justly no Deliverance: Out of one Misery they fall into
another; out of a Temporal, into an Eternal Abyss.

But when Holy Mensuffer, yet suffering submit with Meekness to Gods Hand, call
upon Him out of the Deep, and in the Deep still trust in Him, and are
Delivered, God is glorified every way: His Almighty Power and Veracity is
glorified in their Deliverance; And the Power of his Grace in them, is
glorified in their Adhesion to Him, and Dependence upon Him, even while He
delayed to Deliver, and seemed not to succor them. The Devil and Wicked Men
must see and acknowledge to their own Confusion, God has such Children, who
though He frown and chastise, [though he let loose Wicked Men and Wicked
Spirits upon them, which may vex them till they are tempted to Curse God and
dye] yet they will still hold fast good Conscience, trust their God, love Him,
and wait his time. They believe, and therefore will not make haste; will not by
Impatience put that God out of his own Methods, who has Delivered them from so
great a Death, and does Deliver them, [even at the very (...) or instant of
their greatest Oppression and Anguish, in that under that very Anguish they
subsist] and in whom they trust, that He will yet Deliver them.

From whence we deduced our second Note; That when by an Almighty Hand People
have been Delivered from the Extremity of Danger, into whatever Difficulties
they shall afterward be brought, they ought for ever to trust to that
Deliverer.

** [For such Persons have the same Reasons in common with others to trust God,
and they have besides Personal Reasons peculiar to themselves.

The Reasons which Christian People in common have to trust God, are his
infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, by which He seems as it were in Honor
bound to provide for, and preserve, whom he has put into being and dependence
upon Him, while they own this dependence begging and trusting to Him, that by
his Visitation He will preserve the Spirit which He gave: And besides all this,
His Word and Promise so to do. These Considerations make it Injustice in any
who Know God, to Distrust Him.

But besides these common Motives, such Persons whom God has more Signally
Delivered, have had experience of his Loving Kindness and Good Will,
Particularly to themselves; and this last, is all that Christians may, or that
perhaps most of them are apt to doubt. That God is Able enough, and Wise enough
to help us, none (who believe the Being of a God) can question; But whether He
Will or no, by reason of our guilt, is the matter to be doubted. Now such
Persons having had experience of God's good Will in Particular to them, as
well as of his Power, Wisdom, Veracity and Goodness in general, are more
exceedingly sinful, if Diffident. This makes it in them Ingratitude to Distrust
Him.] **

But is it then the Duty of all Christian People, when in Danger, simply to
trust in God for Deliverance? Or is it not truly said, That Trust in God for
such Particular Mercies as we want, is not (like Repentance, and the Faith of
Assent, and some like Particulars) absolutely every Man's Duty who hears
thereof, but the Duty only of some who are qualified; and of them to, with
certain Cautions, and under certain Conditions?

The Answer shall be very brief, plain, and distinct, in Four Conclusions.

1. Particular Trust in God, being required to be proportionate to Gods
Promises, and there being nothing that the Faithful can want, which God has not
promised, there is nothing that they can want which they may not trust to Him
for: The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that Psalm. xxxiv. 9, 10
fear the Lord shall not want any good thing: Only we must be careful, our
Confidence take in all the Promise; That is,

2. They who would Acceptably, or according to the will of God, trust in Him,
must take heed they be not without the inward Qualifications which bring Men
within the compass of the Promise. The Promise is to such who fear the Lord;
not to them who lightly esteem Him. And again, Every Man, says the Apostle,
who has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as He is pure, 1 John iii. 3.
There is nothing more deplorable than to hear loose, impenitent, carnal Persons
(by Carnal, I mean such who are without a sense of Godliness, or Religion, upon
their Hearts) say upon every Exigent, I trust in God: You trust in God! What
have you to do to trust in Him? Hear what God says to you, What have thou to
do -- that thou should take my Covenant in thy Mouth, seeing thou hate
Instruction, and castest my words behind thee, Psalm. l. 16, 17. Cleanse your
Hands, ye Sinners, and purify your Hearts, ye Double minded; and then draw
nigh to God, and He will draw nigh to you, James iv. 8.

3. Because God has no otherwise promised particular outward Blessings to us,
than as He sees them good for us ( They that fear the Lord shall want nothing
that is good) In our trust to God for such things, we must always intermix
submission to his Wisdom and Will. We need not doubt but He will certainly give
the outward Goods we would have, if He sees us fit for them; and there is
nothing fits us more, than Purity, or Universal Holiness, which we urged in the
former Particular; and Humility, or perfect Submission to God, which we press
in this.

Lastly, Inasmuch as God is without Variableness, or Shadow of Changing,
constant unto Himself, and works not extraordinarily but upon extraordinary
Occasions, inasmuch as He alters not the Course of Nature by the usual Acts of
his Providence, but Nature and Providence sweetly agree; they therefore, who
trust in God to any Particular Purpose, must with such Holiness and Submission
as directed, mix Diligence and the use of Means proper, in order to their End.
He was, it is true, no very good Man, in whom I am about to instance; but in
this point he seems to have been very Exemplary for a right Procedure in his
trusting in God. When Joab saw that the Front of the Battle was against him,
before and behind, he chose of the choice Men of Israel, and put them in Array
against the Syrians. And the rest of the People he delivered into the hand of
Abishai his Brother, that he might put them in Array against the Children of
Ammon. And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help
me: And if the Children of Ammon be too strong for thee, than I will come and
help thee. Be of good Courage, and let us play the Men, for our People, and for
the Cities of our God: And the Lord do that which seems good to Him, 2 Samuel x
9, 10, 11, 12. Here Is a Man now, supposing him otherwise Virtuous, that trusts
for Deliverance from his Enemies, as he ought to do. He uses all the Conduct,
and all the Courage he could, and then like a Brave Person, calmly submits the
issue to God.

Prayer, in the Name of Christ Jesus, for the obtaining what we trust to God
for, is but an Act of true Christian Trust, or as I may say, the Venting of it;
and therefore I say nothing particularly touching it: But supposing all the
Conditions before set down (namely, That our Trust grounds it self upon Gods
Promise, That we honestly endeavor the Inward State and Temper required by the
Promise, That we trust for Outward Blessings with Submission to God's Will, And
that we be diligent in the use of Means proper to the designed Benefits, and
particularly of Prayer) supposing, I say, these things observed, the Rule is,
Trust in Him at all times, O ye People; pour out your Hearts before Him: God is
a Refuge for us. On these terms to trust in God at all times, is our Duty as
well as Interest.

** [And for us, who have been Delivered in such sort as both our selves and
Predecessors have been, not to trust in our Deliverer, would be the vilest
Ingratitude as well as Injustice -- He has delivered us from so great a Death,
(from all the Attempts of our Enemies) He does still Deliver us (from their
present Malice:) Would it not now be the most abominable Requital, not to trust
Him, that He will yet Deliver us (from all their Machinations] **

I am yet obliged by the Duty I owe the Day, and this Great Audience, to a more
Particular Application: And I beseech You to continue Your Patience, on this
more than common Occasion, a little space.

First then, As to matter of Partiuclar Self-Reflexion -- We have had a
Sentence of Death in our selves. This matter of Fact, as to our selves, I
presume we are sensible is true. -- That we should not trust in our selves, but
in God which raises the Dead: That this was God's Design upon as many of us,
as He saw Faithful Adherents to Him, we have seen to be no less certain. The
only Question is, Whether this Design have taken effect? Whether we, by our
Dangers and Miseries, have learned to lay aside Carnal Refuges and Confidence,
and duly to trust in Him that raises the Dead. To go over the Particulars.

We have had, I say, A Sentence of Death in our selves. WE, that is, our
Ancestors and Predecessors, this time was One and Fifty Years; and as many of
us in our own Persons, as were then of Judgment. It was then, instead of a
Confession, the Remorsless Boast of a Principal Conspirator, when apprehended,
That their Design was so far Advanced by that time, as it was not possible for
the Wit of Man to prevent it. So proud of themselves, of their own Wisdom,
Counsels and Strength, so arrogant against God, so contemptuous and implacable
against us, was (I wish I could not say, is) the Malice of the Irish Papists,
and especially of their Priests, who then had (God grant they still have not)
Charmed that People out of all Reason and Bowels. And truly all who then judged
as men do, might justly have been of the Conspirators minds. For the Irish had
the generality of the Castles, Forts, Seaports and strong Holds of the Kingdom
in their Possession. England was then as good as in Blood by their Arts, and so
unable to help us; the Scots some while abused into a Neutrality; and Foreign
Countries ready to pour in Succors to them So that most reasonably, in Forty
One, had our Parents, Brethren, or We in our own Persons, a Sentence of Death
in our selves.

Again, WE lately, in the End of Eighty Eight, and in the years -- 89 and 90,
(a Second Rebellion in little more than Half an Age; which yet if any will not
allow to be another Irish Rebellion, we will, to gratify them, at present
style The Irish Tyranny; and perhaps more properly, for that Tyrants choose
Methods of slow and lingering Murders, Sentiat se Mori) We, I say, who were in
this Kingdom during those years, had really a Sentence of Death in our selves.
For we knew ourselves in the hands of Bloody Enemies; Enemies by Nation,
Manners, Religion, and Interest; Enemies Insolent, (and some few excepted)
Barbarous and Brutish; Enemies who never yet kept Faith, nor can it be
presumed ever will. We were Naked even as to Defensive Weapons; Deprived of all
manner of Refuge or Security; yea, many of us, often times of the very
Necessaries of Life. We were most causelessly either under Imprisonment, or
Restraints: And not seldom drawn out, and set forth as Men appointed for
immediate Death. Our Surrounding Guards (not long before our Servants) standing
ready with their Arms, and calling for, The Word, The Word; and sometimes the
Commander in Chief Damning himself, that upon the first sight of the Enemy, he
would sacrifice all our Heretic Souls to the Devil. Thus stood it with many of
us, who are thought to have fared best. Others, and those not a few, in several
Places were under Formal Sentence of Death; Gallows and Executioners prepared
and appearing. It was worse yet with those Forlom Numbers driven before the
Walls of DERRY, of whom God alone knows how many perished. And even those Brave
People within DERRY, and their Immortal Brethren of ENNISKILLIN, cannot but be
esteemed, with our Apostle, to have been pressed out of measure, above
strength, insomuch as oftentimes to have despaired of Life; only resolving in
those desperate Circumstances, to fall into the Hands of God, and not of Men;
not to sell Life with Dishonor, or to be made the Scorn of Foreigners and
Faithless Men. These things are so manifest, that to use the words of our Town
Clark in the Acts, They cannot be spoken against. It admits not Contradiction
that we of late had a Sentence of Death in our selves.

Now as to the Point Questionable, and to be Examined. Has this Sentence of
Death, according to Gods Design thereby, brought all of us, either us of Forty
One, or us of Eighty Eight, off from our Carnal Refuges, and Carnal Life or
Sense of things? Do we now not trust in our selves, but in God which raises
the Dead? Are we all of us, as Men ought to be, who have had so long the
Sentence of Death in themselves, prepared for Death? Have we in good earnest
persuaded our selves, that God will raise the Dead; Ay, and bring them to
Judgment too? Are we resolved to live as Men only Reprieved a while? For our
Condition is at best no better. We are perhaps delivered from a violent Death;
but tomorrow or next day, (at least we know not how soon) may we dye a Natural
one. Behold (as Genesis xxvii. 2.
good old Isaac said) I know not the Day of my Death. Now are we ready,
Brethren? Has this Sentence of Death mended us? Can we each look up to Heaven,
and say, I trust in God that raises the Dead? If so, such Men's Miseries have
made them Happy. But God knows, if we may judge by what appears to Humane.
Eyes, by the face of things, by People's Manners, Talk, Habits, Air, and like
Symptoms, the generality of us are as lewd, carnal, worldly, proud, vain and
santastick as ever. Some, I will hope, remember the Vows of their Misery, and
will never forget them: And to such mainly belongs The second part of my
Application, the Exhortation and Advice following.

God has delivered you from so great a Death: He does Deliver: Wherefore trust
to Him that He will yet Deliver you.

1. He has Delivered.

'Twas His Hand, and His alone, in the Irish Rebellion; which that any
Protestants did, or do here survive, is little less then a Miracle. The Nation
was Confederate, and as one Man against us. They had every where prepared the
Instruments of Death, of all sorts; and they as barbarously diverse Months
employed them; even till glutted with Blood, if English Blood could have
glutted them. That they left us a Remnant, was Gods overruling Act, not at all
their Intent or Will. Their Design, Attempt, and diligent Endeavor was, to
have cut off Root and Branch, the Mother with the Child: And least our Ashes
should have been a kind of a new Seedness of Protestants to the Land, they had
forbid us so much as Burial.

Again, 'Twas Gods Hand, and His alone, that in the Irish Tyranny delivered us
the Posterity, Brethren, or Successors of those who fell in the Irish
Rebellion. Their Priests indeed are said this time not to have given such
Bloody Instructions as in the former day. Alas good Natured Men! They only at
high Mass (that is at their most sacred Office, and in the highest pitch of
their Charity) bid all their People Arm, at least with Rupperies and Bagonets
(pretty innocent Weapons!) and what other Arms they could get. They only
interdicted them, under pain of Suspension from Mass, to be seen again after
such a short day, unarmed. Their Orders for Action only were, Plunder and Strip
all Protestants, Spoil and Burn what you cannot possess; but spare Blood. That
is, Kill not the Protestants, but starve them with Cold and Hunger. O Merciful
Priests! Quid refert, ferro pereamne ruina? But even this their Mercy lasted
not long: When many of our Brethren had saved themselves by timely retiring out
of the Kingdom, how frequent Consults were held, to have put to Death us the
poor Remainder? And herein the Irish Papal Clergy were constant and importunate
to this bloody purpose, and their People (no doubt too many of themselves) as
ready for acting it. Now how a Clergy, and a head strong, blind, abused Nation,
who denied even to their own King, as they called him, his Power, as often as
he would use it in favor of Protestants; how, I say, both these came to be
restrained from executing their own Will, we to this hour are at a loss. It was
not, as some have thought, a care of Preserving the English Roman Catholics,
which swayed them; for they had no regard to them; And those of them whom they
had in their Army or Councils, they scorned, hated, and to their power turned
out of Place, little otherwise than they did English Protestants. It was not
fear of an After-Reckoning: For by this means only they accounted they would
have prevented all After-claps. Sometimes I have thought it was our Paucity:
They scorned us, and esteemed us too Few, considering their own Numbers, for
them to sacrifice. And really upon After-thoughts herein, I believe those, who
left the Kingdom, did a Public Service: For had the whole Body of the English
stayed, so that our Number had made us Formidable, I question not but there had
been a Second General Massacre: Which what prevented, as to us, who were in
their hands; especially at that Critical Point of Time, when our Blessed
Deliverer, and their Conqueror, appeared; cannot, as far as I am able to see,
be assigned; except we say, It was Gods Almighty Hand. He disheartened them;
and as in the case of those Cities, through which Jacob and his Family
journeyed ( Genesis xxxv. 5.) The Terror of God was upon them. He perfectly
amused them, so that their Men of Might found not their Hands, nor their Wise
Men their Counsels. He (then) Delivered us from so great a Death. And,

2. He does Deliver.

How we have subsisted, even since the Reduction, especially in the Country,
where for the most part both Towns and Fields were in a manner totally desolate
and waste; where Houses and Stock, and, in many places, even Trees and Hedges,
were destroyed; so that we might have rationally despaired of Food and Shelter;
is to me next door to a Miracle. But when the Bush burns, and burns, and
continues still burning, yet consumes not, it is plain God is in it. He does
Deliver us.

3. Let us therefore trust in Him that He will yet Deliver us.

It Is sure, only the Power of our Enemies is abated, not their Malice or bloody
Minds; I may add most justly, not their Pride or Expectations. Their very
common People stick not to our face to tell us, They will yet have a Day for
it; and they are as confident of an Army from France, as ever they were. It
vexes, no doubt, the considerative part of their whole Nation, that they should
have been able from the Rebellion in Forty One, to maintain a War of Twelve
Years, and yet that this much more an Universal Effort of their whole Nation to
have shaken off for ever the English Yoke, of which they had such assurance,
should be fruitlesly over in so few years. They are therefore without question
busy to retrieve our Confusions; and that, amongst themselves, with their
usual Confidence. But let our Confidence be in God that raises the Dead, from
whence in a figure we have been Raised.

Only let us Remember, Trusting in God is, as said, a kind of Conditionate
Duty; and we must take care, First, that we be duly qualified to trust in God
for the Deliverance we desire; Secondly, that we do not contravene, or in our
Actions contradict such Trust.

For our being duly qualified to trust in God in any respect, we have heard, we
must Cleanse our Hearts; repent of all known, or even by us suspected Evils,
allowing our selves in neither: If our hearts condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God, 1 John iii. 21.

And particularly for qualifying our selves to trust in God for Deliverance
still from our Irish Enemies, we must take care we repent of, and live not in
those sins for which we may rationally conclude God gave us of late into
Subjection and Oppression under them. I will not enter into particular men's
particular sins. I leave that to their own Consciences, which will easily tell
them, Such and such a Sin has God visited upon me and mine. Instead of that
Attempt, I will only touch such Public Sins which were open and barefaced
amongst us; and not all of them neither, for time will not permit. As principal
ones then, I must tax

1. A cursed Conjunction of Worldliness, Sensuality and Haughtiness, with mere
Formality in Religion; most of us contenting our selves with the Name of
Reformed, without any Real Practical Reformation, or Zeal for promoting it. We
were intent on getting Estates, on raising Families, on living in Plenty, on
having all stoop to us; and we in heart regarded not Him that had set us up,
and both put, and so long kept, our Enemies under our Feet. In plain terms, had
we Protestants been as industrious, first, our selves to have lived according
to the Truth and Power of the Reformed Religion, and then to have instructed
the Irish therein, as we were to secure our selves the Irish Lands; had we been
as careful to make them knowing good Christians, as our selves rich and great;
we had, in all probability, never seen the Rebellion of Forty One, nor the
Tyranny of the late Eighty Eight, and following years. I must but name things.

I tax, (2) Frequent Oppression of, or Squeezing, our poor Brethren, and making
our English Tenants Vassals. Many of us, to this day, much more affect and
court the Irish, than our own Country men; and will sell these at any time for
Twenty Shillings a year: I say nothing of the Imprudence herein, and Public
Detriment hereby; But such Landlords sure remember not, that though we ought to
do good unto all, yet especially to those who are of the Household of Faith.

I cannot forbear, Lastly to tax the Notorious Excess of all Degrees in their
Habit, Tables, Furniture and Equippage, considering the Rank of each. We have
been, many of us, reproached for this, of late, in England; yet we are at it
again, as fast as may be. These and the like Evils we must repent of, and take
care we return not to, if we would be qualified to trust in God, that He will
yet Deliver us.

Secondly, As we must be qualified for such Trust, so if we would, that our
Trust for Deliverance from Irish Papists should be successful, we must beware
we do not practically contradict that Trust. Now that All do,

1. Who mix with them. either in Sin, Society, Blood, or Religion.

Those who mix with them in Sin, must expect to be Sharers in their Vengeance,
and to perish one day With them; therefore By them, at least by such Mixture.

Those who mix with them in Society, will soon mix with them in sin; and in its
fore mentioned Consequents, Vengeance and Ruin.

Those, who mix with them in Blood, are thereby most intimately mixed in
Society, and consequently cannot avoid mixture in Sin. Nor is there any
Probability, but that such should especially mix with them in Religion; at
least, if they themselves do not, the Posterity of such will. For in all such
Compositions, the Production does usually Sequi Deteriorem partem; partake most
strongly of the Ill Leaven.

2. It is another Practical Inconsistence in this Case, to Trust God, that He
should Deliver us from our Irish Popish Enemies; and yet to Trust Them. It Is
very true, we ought to be such good Christians as to keep Faith with them, (and
God forbid we should do otherwise) but we ought not to be such Fools, after so
many Trials of them, as to believe they will ever keep Faith with us. Our Lord
Jesus indeed has taught us to forgive our Enemies, and that even in Repeated
Wrongs, Luke xvii. 3. If thy Brother trespass against thee -- if he repent,
forgive him. The same is repeated, verse 4. If he turn again to thee saying I
repent, thou shall forgive him. In which regard, it would be considered,
Whether the Body of the Irish (I speak not of particular Persons, but whether,
I say, the Body of the Irish Nation) even by the Letter of the Evangelical Law,
be so qualified for Forgiveness, that we are obliged thereto. God himself
forgives not Impenitents. But let the matter of a Public Forgiveness of them
stand how it shall; Christ no where commands us to Trust our Enemies. Praying
for Enemies, and Trusting them, are two very different things. The former, we
acknowledge our Duty, and we hope with pure Consciences, (Hearts purged from
all Malice) we daily practice it to all the Enemies we have in the World: To
the latter, as no Obligation can be pretended, either from Scripture or Reason,
so neither can the Inveterate Hatred of the Irish toward us be denied, or even
fairly palliated. And to make it more notorious, they are now become, as one
Man, sworn Votaries to our most Potent Enemy, the Grand Enemy of West
Christendom; having by this means a separate Interest from most of the Roman
Catholics of Europe; and so not to be trusted by us, for that very reason, for
which we trust diverse Nations of the Roman Communion. Further, What must make
them Eternally False to us in any seeming Reconciliation, is, That as their
Priests are the Vilest of Men, so they are most absolutely at the Command of
their Priests; and perhaps no Nation under Heaven so much as they. And the
Falseness and Irreconcileableness of Irish (indeed I may say of any) Popish
Priests to us Protestants, is most Constant and Necessary. For however sundry
of the Layity may be, and are, too much Gentlemen, to practice all the
Consequents of so Corrupt a Religion; yet as to their Clergy, let all men say
what they will, they are both Sworn to the very worst Principles of the Roman
Faith, and True to them in all those Ill Practices which such Ill Principles
draw with them.

For instance: There is not a Romish Priest in the World, who has not, in their
Creed, as much sworn to Believe and Teach that Point, -- Ecclesia Romano
Catholica extra quam non est salus, (That no Person out of the Roman Catholic
Church can be saved) as that Christ Jesus Dyed for our Sins. And how far they
practice it, in pursuance of, and agreeably to such Faith, judge from that
passage of no less a Man than the Great Cardinal Baronius; who being to put an
end to his Paraenesis to the State of Venice, (which yet never sorsook the
Roman Faith, only disobeyed the Usurpation and pretended Laws of the Church, in
punishing with the Temporal Sword an Ecclesiastic Miscreant or two) concludes;
( Doleo vehementer quod absque valete) I am very sorry I must end this Letter
without Farewell. For, says he, St. John the Apostle, and with him all the
Church, justly adjudgeth those unworthy of Salutation, who not communicating
with the Roman Church Omnis penitus salutis sunt expertes) have altogether
forfeited all Salvation.

Now from him, whom I know so certainly to believe me Damned, that he cannot in
Faith or Duty allow me a Good Wish, I am unjust to my self if I expect a Good
Office, that is, if I trust him: And consequently, if I trust any that will
generally be governed by him.

Thirdly, It is another Inconsistency for us to trust God will Deliver us from
our Irish Popish Enemies, and yet to maintain them in a Capacity to hurt us.
It Is to desire (for Trust includes Desire) God should bestow upon us, what we
employ the most likely means we can to defeat. Believe it, the Irish Papists
will mischieve us as soon as they can, and if they are one moment innocent,
it is as with some Kindred of theirs of another World) so^e against their Will,

O let us not err again our Old Error. Let us not provide that still once in
Thirty or Forty Years, Thirty or Forty Thousand fresh English men must come
over hither to find Untimely Graves. Is there no Manure for the Land of this
Kingdom, but English Blood? Do we find the Soil so Fertile as to answer the
Cost of being so often thus fatned? Pity, ye Princes and Nobles of our Israel,
ye Heads of our Tribes and Cities, as many as are here present; Pity your Brave
Countrymen; Pity your Selves; Pity your Ladies and Children; Pity your Babes
which are yet Unborn; Pity All, and Secure All. Resolve on Effectual Counsels;
Counsels and Provisions which may bear just Proportion, not only to the
Christian Trust which We Profess, but to the Opportunity we Now Have. Never
must we of This Age expect the like Opportunity will recur to us. And if a
Price be put into our Hands, and we have no Heart for it, Remember what
Character the Holy Ghost sets on us, Prove. xvii. 16. It Is known, I need not
name it.

Lastly, It is inconsistent to Trust in God for Deliverance from our Enemies,
(that is, for Preservation of the English Interest here) and to Neglect the
Proper Means of such Preservation. Now when I speak of Proper Means, I would be
understood in a Moral Sense (for as to Politic Means, they are out of my
Element.) Proper Moral Means hereto, I take to be especially these following
Virtues: Public Spiritedness, Public Sobriety, and Zeal for the True Reformed
Religion; or if you please, for the truly Old Religion, namely, the Holy
Scriptures (or the Sum of the Faith in them, the Apostles Creed) and Holy Life.

As to Publick-Spiritedness, Let this Mind be in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus: Look not every Man Philip. ii. 4, 5.
at his Own Things, but every Man also on the Things of Others. And remember it
is the Character of the worst of Men in the Latter Days, 2 Timothy iii. 2.
That they should be Lovers of Themselves. Now Lovers of Themselves can never
preserve a Public Interest. Dum singuli pugnant emnes Vincuntur: Which I am
content to English, While each looks but to One, All are lost.

As to Public Sobriety: Let each of us be careful to maintain a Serious and
Considerative Temper; Attentive to all our Concerns of Soul and Body;
Abandoning the Airy, Thoughtless, Revelling, Negligent Humor of the Age. Take
heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be over charged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness. Luke xxi. 34.
Be Sober and Vigilant; your Adversaries of all 1 Pet. v. 8.
kinds daily walk about, seeking to devour. Let Luke xii. 35.
your Loins be girt about, and your Lights burning. Remember the Inhabitants of
Laish. The Judge. xviii. 7.
People dwelt careless, after the manner of the Sidonians, quiet and secure;
and so they became an easy Spoil to Six Hundred Danites; a Party perhaps not
much more considerable, than so many of our Choice and Well-Appointed Rupperees.

Finally, As to Zeal for simple plain Christianity (for in the Appendages and
Circumstantials of it, in fine Scholastic improved Notions, Charity, Peace and
Meekness becomes us, not Zeal) It is needful (says St. Jude, verse. 3.) to
exhort you, that you earnestly contend for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints: Once, namely, by Christ to his Apostles, and by them and their
Direction, now extant in Holy Scripture. Holy Scripture is the True Reformed,
the Truly Old Religion. And I need not tell you what Enemies the Irish are to
your Bibles. Only give me leave to demand of the World a Reason, Why Christian
Communion should not be left at that Latitude, at which Christ and his Apostles
in Holy Scripture have left it? [ Strictness in Manners, and a
Scripture-Latitude as to the Conditions of Church Communion, will contribute
more to the strengthening the English Interest in this Kingdom, than all the
Laws we can make without them. And being that these soon resolve themselves
into Holiness and Universal Christian Charity, I must be bold to say, We shall
not easily find better Preservatives of our Church] To this, if Men Men would
addict themselves, (And why should they not? All Schisms would soon be at an
End.

To Conclude, I see not but these Virtues, duly Practiced, would Unite, and so
Secure us. In the Practice then of them, Let us Trust in that God who has
Delivered us from so great a Death; who does Deliver, and who, on these terms,
will yet Deliver.

And be Thou, O most Mighty God, evermore the Deliverer of the English Nation.
Preserve all its Dispersed Colonies, wheresoever upon the face of the Earth.
Unite us all to fear Thy Name. Purge and Refine us to that degree, That we may
shine to Thy Glory, and the Adorning the Gospel of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

