A SPECIMEN Of some ERRORS and DEFECTS IN THE History of the Reformation OF THE
Church of ENGLAND; Wrote by GILBERT BVRNET, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Sarum.

By ANTHONY HARMER.

LONDON, Printed for Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1693.

A SPECIMEN of some Errors and defects in the late History of the Reformation
of the Church of England.
IT ought not to be esteemed any Disrespect to the Author of the late History
of the Reformation of the Church of England, now advanced to an eminent station
therein, nor any Indignity offered to the Work it self; if the Errors and
Defects of it be discovered and published by others. To examine the Truth of
things proposed, is a privilege common to all men: Nor can this Great Historian
justly take it ill, if the title of Infallible, which he with so great strength
of reason opposes in others, be denied to himself, especially since himself
has laid down this excellent Rule, Hist. Reform. p. 1. p. 264.
that ingenuous persons ought not to take things on trust easily, no not from
the greatest Authors.

At least it will be allowed, that when a Forreigner (however eminent and
learned) undertaketh to write the History of any Nation, or part of it; the
Natives have more than ordinary right to examine the truth, and discover the
mistakes of it; lest otherwise the honor of their Country should suffer any
prejudice by a false Relation of its Transactions. This examination will be so
much the more necessary and serviceable, by how much the History has obtained
the greater reputation in the World: since where any History acquireth (as this
has most deservedly) such an universal reception, as to be read, and esteemed
by all at home, to be translated into other Languages abroad, to be accounted
by all most perfect in its kind; that universal reputation will the more
effectually contribute to the propagation of the Errors contained in it: and
further since (as the Author himself not vainly imagins) it is a Work that may
live some time in the World; Par. 2. in Praf. p. 13.
those Errors, which tend to the prejudice of truth and dishonor of the
Nation, will be perpetuated, unless this remedy, of a public detection of
them, be allowed.

I do not hereby pretend to detract from the honor due to this History; nor do
I presume so much as to insinuate, what the Historian himself is pleased to
own, Par. 1. in Pref. p. 8.
his unfitness for such a work, by reason of his unacquaintedness with the Laws
and Customs of this Nation, not being born in it; however the desire and
encouragement of Great Persons did herein overruled his Modesty. I am not so
vain as to imagine, that I can in the least blast a reputation so firmly and so
deservedly established; nor is that any part of my design. On the contrary, I
should give to this History those praises, which are due to it; could I induce
my self to believe, that my suffrage could add any thing to that great opinion,
which the World has already entertained of it. The only reasons which have
drawn me to this Undertaking, are the love of truth, and concern for the honor
of the Reformation of our Church; which will receive at least some small
advancement by the discovery of any errors committed and believed in the
History of it.

If Varillas, Le Grand, and others have been successfully triumphed over, and
baffled by the Historian, who have already published Reflections,
Animadversions, or Corrections of this History, being mere strangers to our
Nation, and the History of it; and designing not in the least the discovery of
truth, or restoration of History, but only to gratify their private passions,
and to vilify the honor and justice of our Reformation: if their attempts have
succeeded so ill, that will not discourage me, who do not altogether labor
under the same disadvantages with them, and am not conscious to my self of any
sinister design. Or if they have given to the Historian just occasion to treat
them with some scorn and contempt, I do not much fear the same treatment, which
yet if it should happen, will not affright me; nor yet deterr me from enquiring
further into the truth of things, especially those relating to our Church; as I
shall have leisure and opportunity.

It ought not, nor can it be supposed, that I have discovered, and in these
Papers published, all the Errors committed in this History: I have indeed read
the whole, but have not had opportunity to examine the truth of a third part of
it. In that small part which I have examined, I have detected all the following
mistakes, (for which reason I call it a Specimen) so that if I had present
leisure and means to pursue the examination throughout; I could scarce hope to
find the remaining part free from Errors. But I would not bestow too much time
upon it; nor if I would, do I enjoy yet fit opportunity. The Reflections of
Varillas, Le Grand, or any others upon this History I have not read since they
were first published; and then I had entertained no thoughts of such a design:
so that if any observation of mine be common to them, it is by chance. But I do
not much fear it, having for the most part drawn my Observations from Books and
Records which they never saw.

As for Mr. Fulman's Corrections, which the Historian has published in the end
of his second Volume, I have not insisted on any mistakes observed by him;
unless where he has either mistaken himself, or not sufficiently cleared the
matter. In the whole I have made use of the second Edition of the History,
which (as the title bears) has been corrected.

Pars Prima.
Page 4. Line 38. Cardinal Wolsey in the mean while was put in hopes of the
Archbishopric of Toledo.


THE Historian seems to have been ignorant, that the Cardinal did for several
years receive a very large Pension out of the Archbishopric of Toledo. Not
many weeks since I saw an Original Letter writ with the Cardinal's own hand to
Dr. Lee, his Agent in the Emperor's Court; wherein, among other things, he
commanded him to expostulate with the Emperor's Ministers for the non-payment
of the Pension reserved to him out of the Archbishopric. The exact sum due to
him is therein inserted: but having not then taken any minutes of the Letter,
not so much as the date of it, I will not affirm any thing particular of the
sum. Yet to do justice to the memory of the Cardinal, lest he should be
thought to have been bribed by any Foreign Prince to act against the interest
of his Master, I will add, that when Tournay was delivered by K. Henry to the
French, Lettere di Cardinal Bibiena enter Lettere di Principi, lib. 1. p. 33.
in the year 1518, the Ambassador of the K. of Spain did privately offer to
the Cardinal 100000 Crowns in the name of his Master, if he would cause the
Citadel of Tournay to be demolished before the delivery of it: which offer the
Cardinal generously refused, because contrary to the Articles agreed between
his Master and the French King.

Page 8. lin. 1. Cavendish's Life of Cardinal Wolsey is cited out of a
Manuscript, ex MSS. Nobilis Viri, etc.


This Life has been twice printed: So that it need not to have been cited with
so much pomp out of a Manuscript: Or if the written differs from the printed
Copy, that should have been observed. If that long passage, giving a character
of the Cardinal, which the Historian here transcribeth, be taken Verbatim out
of the Manuscript: We have just reason to suspect, that the Life contained in
this Manuscript was not written by Cavendish, but by some other, who enlarges
on his words. For in the printed Copies, that passage is not to be found;
although somewhat like to it, in much fewer words, may be read therein. Yet I
have seen a fair Manuscript Copy of Cavendish's Life, written above a hundred
years since, agreeing in all things with the printed Copy.

Page 8. lin. 38. in marg. Cardinal Wolsey exchanged the Bishopric of Duresm
for the Bishopric of Winchester, and had restitution of the Temporalities of
Winchester 4 Maii, anno 20 H. 8.


Par. 2. Append. p. 411.
The day here assigned for the restitution of the Temporalities of Winchester,
viz. 4 Maii, falls into the year 1528. To which Mr. Fulman justly objects, that
the Sea of Winchester seems not to have been void before the 9 th of September
this year, Ibid.
for that Fox's Register reaches so far. To this the Historian answers, that
he took all these dates from the Rolls and must add that he has often seen
cause to question the exactness of Clerks in enrolling of dates. To put the
force of Mr. Fulmans objection beyond dispute, I will add that Fox died not
till the 14. of Sept. 1528. So that it cannot be avoided, but that either the
Record or the Historian must be mistaken. The Historian charge it on the
Record, and not content with this, brings the same charge of falsity against
many other Records. He who seeks to overthrow the Testimony of Records, in the
truth of which the honor of a whole Nation is so much concerned, ought to be
very sure. Notwithstanding his asseveration, I examined the Record, and upon
search found, that not it, but the Historian, is mistaken. For the Record truly
says, that the Cardinal received the Temporalities of Winchester 6 April 20 H.
8. Pat. 20 H. 8. rot. 43.
Which falls in the year 1529, and agrees very well with the time of Fox's
death, and Wolseys installation, which was performed by Proxy 1529. April 11.

Mr. Fulman had also questioned the date of the restitution of the
Temporalities of Lincoln, assigned to be 4 Martii, 5 H. 8. because Wolsey was
not consecrated till the 26. of March. I know not, whether the answer
subjoyned, That this might be to give him a right to the mean profits by
restoring the Temporalities before Lady. day, though he was not consecrated till
the 26 th. belong to Mr. Fulman, or to the Historian. But it proves, that
neither of them knew the true state of this matter. For whereas the restitution
of the Temporalities of Lincoln to Wolsey before his consecration, is here
represented to have been (if true) an extraordinary case, owing to his great
favor and power at Court: The truth is, that at that time, and for several
Ages before, Bishops received their Temporalities from the King immediately
after their Confirmation, even before Consecration; and at their Confirmation
did of course take out a writ from the Archbishop to the King, signifying their
Confirmation, and in virtue of it desiring restitution of their Temporalities
to be granted to them. Regist. Warham.
Wolsey therefore being provided to the Bishopric of Lincoln by the Pope on
the 6 th of Febr. no wonder, that as soon as his Bulls came into England, and
had been allowed by the Archibshop, he should immediately receive his
Temporalities before consecration.

Page 9. lin. 1. Even after Wolsey was Cardinal, Warham as Lord Chancellor took
place of him, as appears from the Journals of the house of Peers, 7 H. 8. and
afterward (viz. after that Wolsey was made Lord Chancellor) gave him place; as
appears on many occasions, and particularly in the Letter written to the Pope
1530. which the Cardinal subscribed before Warham.


Many mistakes and false consequences are contained in these lines. For 1. if
Wolsey in the quality of Lord Chancellor, took place of Warham; it would follow
that the Lord Chancellors, as such, ought to precede the Archbishops of
Canterbury: The contrary of which is known to be and to have always been true.
2dly. If Warham, when Lord Chancellor, took place of Wolsey, when Cardinal, in
the house of Peers; it does not follow, that at that time he took place of him
elsewhere, as the Historian would insinuate. For in the House the Chancellor
precedeth all other Peers, and even the Archbishop of Canterbury among the
rest, as being in virtue of his Office Speaker of the House. Nor, could Wolsey
be so extravagantly vain as to desire the Great Seal only that he might precede
Warham in the Parliament. For, Page 8.
as the Historian observes, he affected to govern without Parliaments. And
accordingly for many years after he obtained the Great Seal, had no
Parliaments. And even after the Seal was taken from him, he still took place of
Warham in the house of Peers. 3dly. If in the Letter wrote to the Pope 1530.
The Cardinal subscribed before Warham; he could not do this in the quality of
Lord Chancellor, as the Historian imagins. For the Great Seal had been taken
from him in the preceding year 1529, October 17. So that some other reason of
Wolsey's precedence must be enquired. And that reason is very obvious. For
Wolsey took place of Warham, even before and after he was Lord Chancellor, as
being Cardinal. This is confirmed by the relation of Cavendish: Who in his Life
says, Cap. 4.
that Warham checked him for his presumption in carrying himself as his equal;
but that shortly after Wolsey obtained to be made Cardinal, and thereby got the
better of Warham in that point.

Page 9. lin. 4. We have nothing on Record, to show what a speaker he (Cardinal
Wolsey) was.


If the word Record be here used in the Law-sence of it; we grant it to be
true: But then it is not very pertinent* But if it be used in an Historical
sense, it is a mistake. For to pass by the many Letters, Dispatches,
Instructions, etc. Which remain of the Cardinals own writing, and which
manifest that he had a great command of words as well as knowledge of things:
We have the assurance of one who (as the Historian himself elsewhere observes)
knew him very well, and would not flatter him, that he was much famed for his
Eloquence. Cavendish (...)n his Life (...)ap. 2.3.
His sentences in the Star Chamber were ever so pithy and witty: that upon all
occasions they assigned him, for the fluent eloquence of his tongue, to be
their expositor in all proceedings, -- he had an especial gift of natural
eloquence, and a fyled tongue to pronounce the same: That he was able therewith
to persuade and allure all men to his purposes. From hence it may appear how
unhappy the conjecture of the Historian is; who detracting from the praises of
the Cardinal, supposes that he was no better a Speaker than the preceding
Chancellors, whom at the same time he makes to have been very sorry Orators.

Page 11. lin. 57. When any See was vacant, the King recommended one to the
Pope; upon which his Bulls were expedited at Rome; and so by a Warrant from the
Pope he was consecrated, and invested in the Spiritualities of the Sea.


The Historian here undertaketh to describe the way and process of making
Bishops in England, received for above 300 years before the Reformation. In his
description of it he has committed several mistakes. For, first, this method
was not much used in England, until within less than 200 years before the
Reformation. Secondly, It was not even then always used: For sometimes within
that term Bishops were elected, confirmed and consecrated, without consulting
the Pope in the least, or expecting any Bulls from him. Thirdly, Even after the
method of expecting Papal Bulls, and proceeding in virtue of them was fully
settled: the King did not always recommend, nor did the Pope always grant his
Bulls to the person recommended. But sometimes the Pope staid not for his
Recommendation, but granted his Bulls to whom he thought fit: or after he had
received the King's Letters granted his Bulls to some other, whom himself liked
better, or whom the Archbishop or some powerful Nobleman had recommended.
Indeed for about sixty years before the Reformation our Kings had got the
better of the Popes in this matter, and drawn the disposition of Bishoprics to
themselves, yet not altogether (for the Popes by their authority and pleasure
disposed of Worcester at least three times together within that term) and after
all, 4thly, the Bishops were not first consecrated and then invested in the
Spiritualities of the Sea. But the practice was all along contrary. For they
received the Spiritualities of their Sees, immediately upon Confirmation; and
the sentence of their Confirmation was ever accompanied with a decree for their
being put in possession of their Spiritualities, and a mandate directed to the
Guardian of the Spiritualities to deliver them up to them.

Page 11. lin. 35. Rome; yet that Court always gained their designs in the end.


Not always: For if that were true, our Nation had indeed been very tame: But I
hope the English are not descended of such a dastardly generation. Our
Ancestors had before the Reformation got the better of the Court of Rome, in
many points controverted between them, and those of the greatest moment.
Further not only two or three of our High-spirited Kings had given some
interruption to that Court. Of all our Kings since the Conquest, Richard II.
and Henry VI. were the farthest from being high-spirited. Yet very great, if
not the greatest, interruption was given in their Reigns. Not to say, that the
interruption under Edward III. was not made till the latter end of his Reign,
when he was nothing less than high-spirited.

Page 12. lin. 5. But when this began ( viz. That Bishops receiving their
Temporalities from the King, should renounce the benefit of the Papal Bulls in
relation to them, or any Claim to them, to be derived from thence.) I leave to
the more Learned in the Law to discover.


I do not pretend to be Learned in the Law: Yet my small knowledge in the
Antiquities of my Country, enableth me to discover this, if it is to be called
a Discovery. This Custom began in the Year 1272, when a like Renunciation was
required of Robert Kilwardby, collated by the Pope to the Archbishopric of
Canterbury. And shortly after the Papal Bulls of Provision increasing, the
matter was fully settled about the Year 1300.

Page 21. lin 45. In the Days of King Edgar, most of the Secular Clergy being
then married, and refusing to put away their Wives, were by Dunstan, etc.
turned out of their Livings.


The Historian here, and in the following Lines, seems to have been Ignorant
of the ancient English History. Dunstan, Ethelwald, and Oswald, ejected the
married Secular Clergy only out of two Cathedral Churches, and some few
Monasteries (if the then Possessors of Monasteries may be called Seculars).
They endeavored indeed to eject them out of other Cathedrals and Monasteries;
but could not effect their Design. As for the great Body of the Secular Clergy,
the Parish Priests; Dunstan and his Accomplices were so far from turning most of
them out of their Livings, on account of their Marriages; that they never
attempted it: They declaimed indeed furiously against their use of Marriage, as
sinful, and would have persuaded them from it; but never forbad it to them by
any solemn Sanction, much less deprived them of their Livings upon it. All this
the Historian might have learned from the Writings of our eminent Divines, at
the time of the Reformation; if he thought himself not obliged to read the
ancient Histories of our Nation. For Bishop Poynet in his Defense of Priests
Marriages, maintains, that Marriage of Priests was not forbidden in England
before King Henry the First. Cap. 13.
And when Dr. Martin in his Answer to Poynet, exclaimed against his Assertion
as false; the Annonymous Author of the long and learned Defense of Priests
Marriages, published by Archbishop Parker, defended it, Page 214. Page 215.
and showed the truth of it from the ancient Histories; proving that Dunstan,
Ethelwald, and Oswald, expelled Secular married Priests, only out of some
Cathedral Churches. Page 280. etc.
All which is more largely and accurately proved by the Archbishop in his
Additions to that Treatise.

Page 21. lin. 49. There is in the Rolls an Inspeximus of King Edgar's,
erecting the Priory and Convent of Worcester -- signed by the King, two
Archbishops, five Bishops, six Abbots (but neither Bishopric nor Abbey are
named) six Dukes, and five Knights; but there is no Seal to it.


Had this Historian been acquainted with our English Antiquities, he would have
known; that this very Charter has been often and long since published in the
Monasticon, in Spelman's Councils, and elsewhere; and would not have imagined
himself to have discovered some rare Secret in this Inspeximus. Or if he had
been acquainted with our Rolls, he would not have expected to find in an
Inspeximus, the Seal of an Original Charter, enrolled in it: Or if he had been
conversant in our ancient Records and Charters made before the Norman times, he
would have spared his Observations of the want of a Seal to this Charter
(although he had seen the Original Charter, and observed this in it) and of the
not naming either Bishopric, or Abbey therein. For they who know this to be
the Case of the far greater part of the Instruments and Charters of those
times; would no more have made such an Observation; than after having said that
they had seen a Man named Titius, they would have added that he had a Nose on
his Face.

Page 22. lin. 10. The Monks being thus settled in most Cathedrals England. ( So
also p. 187. lin. 20.) King Edgar converted most of the Chapters into
Monasteries.


This surely was wrote at adventure. Par. 2. Append. page 412.
Mr. Fulman had before observed, that the Monks were not settled in half the
Cathedrals of England. To which I may add, that they were then settled in no
more than two Cathedrals, viz. Winchester and Worcester: Nor were any more
Chapters converted into Monasteries, in the time of King Edgar. The married
Clergy were then indeed ejected out of Ely, and Monks planted in their Room.
But that Church was not a Cathedral until near 140 years after. Afterward
indeed, about the end of the eleventh Age, Monks were settled in some other
Cathedrals, or Episcopal Sees fixed in Monasteries: to omit, one Cathedral, (
viz. that of Canterbury) in which Monks were introduced in the beginning of the
same Age. But after all, far from being settled in most Cathedrals, they were
settled in no more than Nine, viz. Canterbury, Winchester, Duresm, Worcester,
Rochester, Ely, Norwich, Bath, and Coventry. The Church of Carlisle indeed was
possessed by Regulars; but those were Canons, not Monks.

Page 22. lin. 10, 15. The Monks being thus settled, gave themselves up to
idleness and pleasure, having in their hands the chief Encouragments of
Learning, and yet doing nothing toward it: but on the contrary decrying and
disparaging it all they could.


This is a very hard Censure to pass upon a whole Order of men, who were once
very honorable, but always serviceable in the Church. On the contrary, after
they were thus settled ( viz. by Dunstan, Ethelwald, and Oswald, in the Reign of
Edgar) they set themselves in with great Industry to restore Learning, and root
out that universal Ignorance which had then prevailed in England: and
effectually performed it. Insomuch, as whereas before that time scarce any
Secular Priest in England, Praef. ad Grammat-Saxon.
could read or write a Latin Epistle; within few years (as Elfric a learned
Disciple of Ethelwald boasts) the face of things was so changed by the
endeavors of Dunstan, and his Master Ethelwald, that Learning was generally
restored, and began to flourish. At that time, and long after, the Monasteries
were the Schools and Nurseries of almost the whole Clergy, as well Secular as
Regular: For the Universities (if there were any) were then very mean
Societies; and the whole Learning of the Nation was then in a manner confined
to their Cloisters. As the Universities increased, they gradually decreased:
yet still retained and cultivated Learning, till about the middle of the 13 th
Age; when the Mendicant Orders arose, who by their Hypocrisy, juggling Tricks,
and extraordinary Industry, ran down both them and the Secular Clergy. Within
two hundred years the Mendicants became contemptible; and then both the Monks
and the Seculars began to recover their ancient Credit, and long before the
Reformation, had made great progress in the Restoration of Learning. They had
all along brought up their Novices in Learning; every Great Monastery having
for that purpose a peculiar College in one of the Universities; and even to
the time of their Dissolution, they continued to bring up great numbers of
Children at School at their own Charge for the Service of the Church: and
immediately before the Reformation, many of the great Monasteries were so many
Nurseries of Learning; and the Superiors of them very Learned themselves, and
Promoters of Learning in others. Such were Kidderminster Abbot of Winchelcomb,
Goldwell Prior of Canterbury, Voche Abbot of St. Austins, Wells Prior of Ely,
Holbeach Prior of Worcester, Islip Abbot of Westminster, Web Prior of
Coventry, and many others. I do not hereby Apologize for the Laziness of the
Monks in the middle Ages; but maintain, that both in the time of Edgar, and
some time after, and immediately before the Reformation, they deserved a
contrary Character to what the Historian gives of them; and that even in the
worst times, they were far from being Enemies, and Opposers of Learning; as he
would have it believed.

Page 22. lin. 31. To suppress some Monasteries was thought as justifyable, as
it had been many Ages before, to change Secular Prebends into Canons Regular.


This is not so accurately expressed: the conversion of Secular Prebendaries
into Canons Regular the Historian supposes: to have been made often, and in
many Churches. But it was never done save in one Cathedral Church of England,
that of Carlisle. Secular Prebendaries had in several Churches been changed
into Monks. But Monks are a distinct Order from Canons Regular*

Page 23. lin. 12. Wickliffe was supported by the Duke of Lancaster -- the
Bishops could not proceed against him, till the Duke of Lancaster was put from
the King; and then he was condemned at Oxford.


It might have become Varillas very well to have wrote this of Wickliffe; but
such a mistake is unworthy of an accurate and Reformed Historian, who ought
especially to take care of doing justice to the Memory of that Great man. Far
from being condemned at Oxford during his own Life, or the Life of the Duke of
Lancaster, his Person was had in great Esteem and Veneration at that University
to the last, and his Writings, for many years before and after his Death, were
as much read and studied there, as of Aristotle, or the Master of the
Sentences: Nay, so much concerned was that University for his Reputation; that
near twenty years after his Death, hearing that false Reports had been spread
abroad in foreign Parts, Vide opera Joannis Huffi in calce.
as if Wickliffe had been convicted of Heresy in England, and his Body
thereupon disinterred and burnt: the Chancellor and Senate of the University
published a Manifesto; wherein they gave to him a great Character of Learning
and Piety, called him a valiant Champion of the Faith; and declared that he had
never been convicted of Heresy, nor his Body disinterred, Absit enim, quod
tantae probitatis virum, etc. Indeed four years after this, the Authority of
the Pope and King concurring with the restless Endeavors of Archbishop
Arundel, several of his Writings were condemned and burnt at Oxford; and
eighteen years after this his Body was taken up and burned.

Page 23. lin. 13. Many Opinions are charged upon Wickliffe; but whether he
held them or not, we know not, but by the Testimony of his Adversaries.


It seems the Historian knew not any certain means of gaining Information of
Wickliff's true Opinions; but when he would include all others in the same
Ignorance of them, we must desire to be excused. We have as many of the Works
of Wickliffe yet extant, as (if Printed together) would make four or five
Volumes in Folio. And whether so many Books be not sufficient to teach us his
Opinions, let the Reader judge.

Page 23. lin. 16. Wickliffe translated the Bible out of Latin into English,
with a long Preface before it; in which he reflected severely on the
Corruptions of the Clergy, condemned the worshipping of Saints and Images, etc.


This Preface indeed was published at London, 1550. under the name of
Wickliffe, and has generally passed for his. But after all, Wickliffe did not
write it, but the Author of the other old English Translation of the Bible. For
we have two Translations of the Bible made about that time, one by Wickliffe,
the other by an unknown Person. In the Preface the Author gives several
Specimens of his Translation of many difficult places of Scripture, which agree
not with Wickliff's, but with the other Translation. Further, the Author of the
Preface inveighs sharply against the Discipline and Members of the University
of Oxford, which it is certain Wickliffe would never have done for Reasons
before mentioned. That Wickliffe condemned praying to Saints, we have only the
Testimony of his Adversaries. I will not affirm any thing at this time; but I
have reason to suspect the contrary.

Page 25. lin. 27. John Braibrook Bishop of London, then Lord Chancellor, viz.
26 Maii, Anno 5. Ricardi 2.


His name was Rober Braibrook, and he was not Lord Chancellor until the Sixth
Year of King Richard.

Page 35. lin. 28. The two Prelates that were then (in the Year 1503, between
February and December) in greatest esteem with King Henry the 7 th were Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Fox Bishop of Winchester.


Warham was not translated from London to Canterbury, till 1504. January, 23.

Page 88. lin. 10. This (the small Allowance made by the King to Crook his
Agent in foreign Universities) I take notice of, because it is said by others,
that all the Subscriptions that he procured were bought. ( So page 89. in imo
Margin.) No Money nor Bribes given for Subscriptions. ( This is endeavored to
be farther proved, page 90.)


However it might be then thought necessary, or useful to procure the
Determinations of foreign Universities, in favor of the Divorce of King Henry,
thereby the better to satisfy the Clergy at home, and to justify the Divorce
abroad, yet to those who know very well, that this National Church had
sufficient Authority to determine such a Controversy without consulting
foreign Universities, it will not be accounted a matter of any moment, whether
these were bribed or not. I will not therefore scruple to set down the
Testimonies of two undeniable Witnesses, who lived at that time; and could not
but know the truth of the whole matter. The first is of Cornelius Agrippa, of
whom the Historian himself gives this Character. Part 1. page 95.
Cornelius Agrippa, a man very famous for great and curious Learning, and so
satisfied in the Kings Cause, that he gave it out that the thing was clear and
indisputable, for which he was afterward hardly used by the Emperor, and died
in Prison. If this Great Person then had any partiality in this Cause, it lay
on the side of the King: yet in one of his Books he has these words. Sed and
quis credidisset Theologos in rebus fidei and conscientiae, non solum amore
odio, invidia perverti, sed nonnunquam etiam flecti conviviis, and muneribus
abduci a vero; nisi ipsi illius sceleris fidem fecissent in Anglicani
Matrimonii damnatione? Who would have believed, that Divines in matters of
Faith, and Conscience are not only perverted by Love, Hatred, or Envy, but also
sometimes bribed by Banquets, or drawn from the truth by Gifts, unless
themselves had given evident Proof of this Vileness, in condemning the Marriage
of the King of England. The other is Mr. Cavendish an honest, plain Gentleman,
first a Servant of Cardinal Wolsey, afterward highly obliged by King Henry. He
in writing the Life of his Master the Cardinal, Cap. 15.
gives this account of the whole matter. It was thought very expedient, that
the King should send out his Commissioners into all Universities in
Christendom, there to have this Case argued substantially, and to bring with
them from thence every Definition of their Opinions of the same, under the Seal
of the University. And thereupon diverse Commissioners were presently appointed
for this Design. So some were sent to Cambridge, some to Oxford, some to
Lovain, others to Paris, some to Orleance, others to Padua: all at the proper
Costs and Charge of the King, which in the whole amounted to a great Sum of
Money. And all went out of this Realm, besides the Charge of the Embassage to
those famous and notable Persons of all the Universities; especially such as
bare the Rule, or had the Custody of the University Seals, were fed by the
Commissioners with such great Sums of Money, that they did easily condescend
to their Requests, and grant their Desires. By reason whereof all the
Commssioners returned with their Purpose, furnished according to their
Commissions, under the Seal of every several University.

Page 107. lin. 5. For then (about the time of Edward I.) the Popes, not
satisfied with their other Oppressions, did by Provisions; Bulls, and other
Arts of that See, dispose of Bishoprics, Abbeys, and lesser Benefices, to
Foreigners, Cardinals, and others that did not live in England.


This is a very wide mistake: For the Popes did not then dispose of
Bishoprics, and Abbeys, to Foreigners, Cardinals, and others that did not live
in England. The Popes did not give any Bishopric of England, to any Foreigner
that did not live therein, till about Thirty years before the Reformation; when
it was not done without the Kings good liking, and in Virtue of some secret
compact between them. As for Abbeys, from the first Foundation to their
Dissolution, the Popes never gave any one to a Foreigner, not residing. For
Cardinal Abbots, there never was any besides Cardinal Wolsey, and of him it is
well known, that he had his Abbey from the gift of the King, and lived in
England. The matter therefore complained of in the Preamble of the Act of
Parliament, 25 Edw. I. which the Historian inserteth, was this: That whereas,
Bishops and Abbots ought to be Elected by their several Chapters, and Convents,
and these Elections to be confirmed by the King; the Popes had taken upon them
to Annul the Elections of Chapters, and then to substitute whomsoever
themselves pleased, without a new Election; or to dispose of them without
expecting any Election (yet still none of these were granted to Cardinals, or
to Foreigners, not residing in England.) And whereas the Popes had usurped the
Presentation of, and given to Aliens, although not residing, other Benefices,
as Deanries, Prebends, and Parsonages, which ought of right to belong to their
proper Patrons; against these Encroachments, a Remedy was desired and provided
in this Act. Several Foreigners had a little before this time been preferred to
Bishoprics, such as Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, Adomarus de Lesignan
Bishop of Winchester, Petrus de Aqua-blanca Bishop of Hereford. But these came
in by the Election of their several Chapters, overawed thereto by the Power and
Authority of King Henry III, to whose Queen they were related by near Kindred,
and after all resided upon their Sees, unless when diverted by Employment in
the business of the King or Church. But as for Deanries, Prebends, and
Parsonages, the Usurpation of the Popes in the disposal of them was
intolerable. These they granted to Cardinals and other Aliens, not residing,
without all Shame. Insomuch, as I remember to have seen an Epistle of the
Bishop of Salisbury to the Pope, wrote about that time; wherein complaining,
that the Advowson of his Benefices was taken from him by Papal Provisions, he
sends to him a List of all the Prebends, and Prebendaries of his Church of
Salisbury; and adding to the name of every one by the Presentation of what
Bishop, or by the Provision of what Pope they obtained their several Prebends,
demonstrates that more of the then Prebendaries, had come in by Papal
Provision, than by the Presentation of the Bishop the proper Patron: that so,
if possible, he might shame the Pope out of the like Usurpation for the future.
Nor was the case of other Churches, particularly of York and St. Paul's, unlike
at this time.

Page 108. lin. 46. When Henry the 4th had treasonably usurped the Crown, all
the Bishops ( Carlisle only excepted) did assist him in it.


Many accusations of the Bishops of England may be sound in Prynn: But I dare
affirm, that a falser cannot be found in him. That all the Bishops were
assisting to the Treason of Henry IV. except Carlisle, the Historian has no
other evidence than this, that none of them, except Carlisle, had the courage
to protest in the house of Lords against a wicked design, then contriving
against the Person of the late King Richard. But it does not hence follow that
all the other Bishops consented to this wicked design, because they made no
protestation against it; which would have done no service to their injured
Sovereign, and only exposed their own persons to the fury of an enraged
multitude. It is not to be doubted that many of the Bishops of that time
retained their Allegiance to King Richard as long as the iniquity of the time
would permit them, although they cared not to become Martyrs in the cause. At
least it is certain that the interest of Walden Archbishop of Canterbury was so
closely linked to his, that there could be no suspicion of his acting against
his Prince; and accordingly the Treason of Henry the 4th obtaining success,
they were both deposed together. It is also well known, that Scrope Archbishop
of York immediately after took up Arms against King Henry, published a bold
Declaration of his Treason and Injustice; and his forces being dissipated lost
his head in the Quarrel. We are farther assured, that both these Archbishops,
with the Bishops of London, Exeter, Litchfield and Landaffe, attended King
Richard faithfully in his Marches, after Henry of Lancaster had landed and
declared against him; and assisted him to their utmost; until the Commonality
running into the Duke of Lancaster on all sides, and the King fleeing for his
safety, they were forced to give way to the violence of a rapid Revolution.

Page 110. lin. 22. and ult. The first Letter is to Henry Chichley Archbishop
of Canterbury -- it bears date the fifth day of December 1426. -- then follows
the Appeal of the Archbishop dated the 6 th of April 1427. -- There is also
another Letter dated the 6 th of May, directed to the Archbishop. -- But the
next Letter is of an higher strain. It is directed to the two Archbishops --
this is dated the 8 th day of December, the 10 th year of his Popedom


The History of the proceedings between Pope Martin and Archbishop Chichley in
the matter of Provisoes would have been very acceptable had not the Historian
marred all for want of a little Chronology. He has here disposed matters in a
fair Historical series. But most unhappily those two Letters which he makes to
have been wrote at so great a distance of time from each other (I mean the
first and last of those here mentioned) were wrote within very few days of each
other. This with a little care might easily have been perceived. For the 8 th
day of December in the tenth year of the Popedom of Martin, falls into the year
1426. By this mistake the whole contexture of this narration is overthrown. But
farther, both these Letters were wrote upon the same day: And the Historian in
transcribing the Popes first Letter to the Archbishop, (which he has published
in the Collection of Records Page 98. has given a false date of it. For
whereas it is truly dated Quinto Id. December. He has changed this into quinto
die December. The other Letter also which he says to have been wrote the 8 th
of December, is in the Manuscript Copy dated as the former, quinto Id. Decembr.
anno Pontificatus nostri decimo viz. 1427. December 9.

Page 111. lin. 2. Then follow Letters from the University of Oxford, the
Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London, Duresm and Lincoln to the Pope --
bearing date the 10 th and the 25 th of July.


I did many years since transcribe out of an Authentic Register all the
Instruments of this contest between the Pope and the Archbishop here mentioned
by the Historian, and as many more relating to the same matter, which seem to
have been wanting in his Manuscript; so that I am thereby enabled to correct
the mistakes of the Historian herein. From the words of the Historian any
Reader would imagine that the Letter of the University was dated on the 10 th
and that of the Bishops on the 25 th of July. But on the contrary the Bishops
Letter is dated July 10 th and the Universities July 25 th. Then whereas the
Historian names only the Archbishop of York and three Bishops; in truth that
Letter was written in the name of fifteen Bishops, that is, of all the Bishops
of England except three who were then absent. For Salisbury and Chichester were
at that time void.

Page 111. lin. 27. The Letter of the Pope to the Parliament is dated the third
of October decimo Pontificat. But I believe it is an error of the Transcriber,
and that its true date was the 13 th of October.


The Historian imputes this mistake to the viciousness of the Copy. But I fear
it ought to be imputed to the negligence of the Transcriber. For in my Copy
it is truly dated Tertio Id. Octobris. Instead of which the Historian renewing
his former error has in his transcript of the Instrument substituted tertio
die Octobris. To proceed and join all the mistakes of this matter together, and
transcript of the Archbishops speech in the House of Commons, which he gives
to us, is also false. For it reads die Veneris, 30 Ianuarii Anno Domini
millesimo quadringentesimo decimo septimo, Indictione sexta, Pontificatus
Martini Papae Anno Undecimo. All the concurrent notes added to the year of our
Lord show that it should be ann. mill. quadr. vicesimo septimo, and so I doubt
not the Manuscript has it. Lastly (to say no more of this matter) the
conclusion of the Archbishops Appeal, as it is by him published, manifests with
how little care these public Instruments have been transcribed, for thus it
ends: praesentibus discretis viris. M. W. Lyn. Curiae Cant. officii, and Thoma
B. Archidiacono sanctarum in Ecclesia Line. Utriusque Iuris Doctoribus. Now to
mistake and report falsely the dates of public Instruments is not a matter of
light moment. For these will necessarily betray both Writers and Readers into
infinite other mistakes, while they endeavor to adapt things, and the
circumstances of them to the supposed, but mistaken time of other Actions.
Besides all this it diminishes the credit of any History, so that in all other
matters the Reader cannot safely rely upon it, when he knows the negligence of
the Historian in any part of it. And as for the Collection of Records, which
make up one half of each Volume of this History, they will be of little value,
if once there appears just reason to suspect the care or fidelity of the
Transcriber. I have not had opportunity or a curiosity to examine one half of
the dates of times either in the History it self, or in the Collection of
Records; but do assure the Reader that of those which I have examined, I found
near as many to be false as true.

Page 112. lin. 4. The Popes Usurpations still increasing, those Statutes (of
Proviso's and Praemunire) lay dead among the Records, and several Cardinals had
procured and executed a Legantine Power, which was clearly contrary to them.


A competent knowledge of the History of the English Church, would have
prevented so large a mistake. No Cardinals before Wolsey, had procured and
executed such Legantine Power in England since those Laws were made. Cardinal
Beaufort of Winchester indeed had procured it, but could never execute it,
being inhibited by King Henry VI, by the advice of Archbishop Chichley, and
forced to renounce his pretended Power: As for the Legantine Power of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, which was claimed and exercised by them in Quality of
Legati nati; that was not in the least contrary to these Laws, nor ever was so
accounted; being annexed perpetually to the Sea of Canterbury, ever since the
Year 1200, and always belonging to them, without any new or distinct Bulls.

Page 121. lin. 33. The old Cardinal of Ravenna was so jealous, that the
Ambassadors of the King were forced to promise him the Bishopric of Chester
(one of the new Bishoprics, designed to be erected in the Year 1532.) with
which he was well satisfied.


If in the Promises made by the Ambassadors to the Cardinal, the Historian
found express mention of the new Erection of the Bishopric of Chester promised
to him we must submit: Otherwise it is more probable, that the Bishopric
desired by him, and promised to him; was the old Bishopric of Lichfield, which
was then commonly called the Bishopric of Chester, and which was then likely
to be void very shortly, by the Death of Dr. Blithe an extreme Old man, who
died the following Year.

Page 128. lin. 34. Cranmers Bulls for the Archbishopric of Canterbury, bear
date the 21st of February, 1533 -- By a tenth Bull dated the 2d of March, the
Pall was sent to him -- when these Bulls were brought into England, Thomas
Cranmer was on the 13th of March consecrated.


We have here another Instance of the little Exactness of the Historian in the
dates of time. I will not take Notice that the first Bulls in the the Original
bear date the 21st of February, 1532. For that is indeed 1533, to those who
begin their Year on the first day of January. But the tenth Bull sending the
Pall to Cranmer, is dated the 3d of March, and he was consecrated the 30th of
March.

Page 129. lin. 42. The most Learned Sir Henry Spelman, has in no place of his
Collections of our Counsels, considered the Constitution of the two Houses of
Convocation; and in none of our Records have I been able to discover, of what
Persons they were made up in the time of Popery: and therefore since we are
left to conjecture, I shall offer mine to the learned Reader. It is that none
sat in the lower House, but those who were deputed by the inferior Clergy; and
that Bishops, Abbots, mitred and not mitred, and Priors, Deans and Archdeacons,
sat then in the upper House of Convocation. To which I am induced by these
Reasons, etc.


Sir Henry Spelman completed only the first Volume of his Councils which
reaches to the Conquest. Therein he had no opportunity to treat of this
matter. For we do not inquire of the Constitution of Convocations in the Saxon
times, but in the time immediately preceding the Reformation. As for the second
Volume of Councils, which reaches from the Conquest to the Reformation, the
Collection of it was only begun by Sir Henry Spelman, but completed and
published by others, without any tolerable Care or Skill. No doubt Sir Henry
knew very well the Constitution of our Convocations before the Reformation, and
so do all inquisitive Persons of our Nation; however the Historian may think a
discovery herein to be necessary, to the Information of the Learned Reader. If
he knew it not, he may be excused, as a Foreigner: Or if in none of our Records
he were able to discover it, that also may be excused. For neither are all our
Records kept at the Rolls, nor did the multiplicity of business permit the
Historian to attend long to the search of them; but that he should proceed to
offer his Conjecture, and such a Conjecture, as, if he had industriously sought
to do it, he could not have made one more Erroneous. We cannot but wonder since
he had sufficient means of better Information. Mr. Fulman has observed, Par.
2. in Addend. p. 413.
that the Conjecture here proposed by the Historian, does not agree with what
he had before delivered, that Pole as Dean of Exeter was a Member of the lower
House of Convocation. This demonstrates the Error of the Historian, but does
not Correct it. It may be Corrected, and the truth of the whole matter fully
discovered from the Subscriptions of the Convocation held in the Year 1536.
published by the Historian himself in the Addenda of this first part of his
History: P. 315.
wherein all the Members of the upper House subscribe apart; and then all the
Members of the lower House subscribed by themselves. The Instrument of their
Subscription is an Original, (which I did many years since transcribe) and may
be infallibly relied on.

Therein it appears, that the Bishops, Abbots and Priors, constituted the upper
House; and that all Deans, Archdeacons, Proctors of Clergy, and Chapters of
Cathedral Churches, sat in the lower House of Convocation. The Historian
himself there summeth up all the Members of the lower House, P. 316.
who then subscribed in this manner; 24 Archdeacons, 4 Deans of Cathedrals,
three Deans of Collegiate Churches, 17 Procurators for the Clergy, and one
Master of a College, ( viz. Provost of a Collegiate Church.) Such an Error
could not easily have been committed by so accurate an Author, after he had
seen and published such an Instrument; if himself had vouchsafed so much as to
read the Records, which he has published in his Collections, and not left them
to be perused and transcribed by some Under-workmen. I should have thought that
he saw not this Instrument, until he had Composed and Printed of this part off
the History; if he had pleased in his Addenda to have owned and amended a
mistake of so great Consequence, or if in the Second part of his History, P.
48. and 49.
he had not repeated and confirmed this his erroneous Conjecture touching the
Constitution of our Convocations before the Reformation.

If it should be suspected, that however it might be in the Convocation of the
Year 1536, when the frequent and great Changes preceding and accompanying it,
might disorder and change the method and order before received, yet that it was
otherwise in precedent times; I answer, that it might be undeniably
demonstrated from the Acts of many Convocations, for above 200 years before the
Reformation, until that very time, that the Constitution of Convocations was
all along in this respect the same. For although the Registers of the
Convocations be lost; yet the Acts of many of them remain, and may be found
elsewhere. I will give but one Proof of this, but that out of an Authentic
Instrument. In the Convocation held in the Year 1462, the lower House wanting a
small Sum of ready Money for some slight occasion, resolved to raise it by
imposing small Mulcts upon all the absent Members. To this purpose a List of
the names of all the absent Members of the lower House was brought in, and they
were these: the Deans of Sarum, Lincoln, Windsor, Wells, Chichester, the
Archdeacons of Colchester, Winchester, Surry, Taunton, Dorset, etc.

So then the Matter of Fact is put beyond all doubt; that all the Bishops,
Abbots and Priors, sat in the upper House; all Deans, Archdeacons, and
Proctors of the Clergy; in a word, all the Secular Clergy beneath Bishops, sat
in the lower House of Convocation. But I will farther enquire, how it came to
be settled in this method. It is notorious that for some time after the present
Constitution of Parliaments, was introduced in the Reign of Henry III. great
numbers of Abbots and Priors were summoned to Parliament by particular Writs
directed to every one. I will not now dispute, whether the second and third
Estates, the Lords and Commons, then sat together: but most certain it is,
that the Pares, Proceres and Baronies Regni, were those who were summoned to
Parliament by particular Writs: At first, the King summoned by particular Writs
all the Ecclesiastics ( viz. Bishops, Abbots and Priors) who received their
Temporalities from the Crown. At least the King summoned as many of them as he
pleased. Some Abbots and Priors were perhaps excused from attendance by reason
of their Poverty. Thus Anno 49. H. 3. there were summoned Abbots and Priors
102. Anno 35. Edward I. there were summoned 47. Anno. 1. E. II. there summoned
56. Anno. 4. E. III. there were summoned 33. Now all the Abbots and Priors,
thus summoned by particular Writs, sat inter Pares, Proceres and Barons
Regni; and were held a part of the second, as well as of the first Estate of
the Nation represented in Parliament. They were a part of the first Estate as
Ecclesiastical Prelates, and a part of the second Estate, as receiving their
Temporalties, and holding their Baronies of the King* For such Abbots and
Priors the King was wont to summon, as received their Temporalties from him.
Afterward in the Reign of Edward III. the number of Abbots and Priors summoned
by particular Writs was much reduced; and so continued till the Reformation;
only some of the greater Abbots being wont to be summoned. The number of them
was never unalterably fixed, but received Addition, or Diminution even till the
time of Hen. VIII. But from the Reign of Edw. III. till the Reformation, their
number always exceeded twenty, and fell short of thirty. When the Kings
therefore ceased to summon particularly the lesser Abbots and Priors, they lost
their place in the second Estate of Parliament, but still continued to be
summoned to the Convocation by their several Bishops in obedience to the
Mandate of the Archbishop, commanding them to summon to Convocation, to be held
at such a time all within their Diocese, having Right to sit therein: When
these came up to Convocation, as many of them as received their Temporalties
from the King, and had been wont formerly to be summoned by him inter Barons
Regni, and to sit among them, claimed still their former place in the
Convocation, which was to sit with the Bishops, whether yet they sat in one
House with the inferior Clergy, or whether they had by this time separated
themselves into a distinct upper House, as most certainly they did afterward.
This Claim could not reasonably be denied to such Abbots and Priors, and this
gives a clear Account, how all such Abbots and Priors came to obtain a place
in the upper House of Convocation.

But the great difficulty consists in the Case of Priors of Cathedral Churches.
For I find that some time before the Reformation, that they also sat in the
upper House; although none of them received their Temporalties from the King,
except the Prior of Coventry. They were of so great Account, that some of them
had been summmoned by the King to Parliament, although they owed to him no such
Service upon the account of their Temporalties, which they received not from
him.

Thus the Prior of Norwich was summoned Anno 1293. but the Prior of Canterbury
several times, as Anno 49. Hen. 3. Anno 35. E. 1. Anno 21. E. 2. and in the
Years, 1399, and 1401. This the King might do, either upon extraordinary
occasions with a Salvo to their Rights, or pretending to the immediate
Superiority of their Temporalties; as he sometimes did, but was cast therein,
and at length forced to renounce that Claim. However, after the Year 1300, I
find none of them summoned by the King, but the Prior of Canterbury, and him no
more than these four times. But when these Priors came to Convocation, summoned
by their Bishops, they could not but conceive some Indignation; that when so
many Abbots and petty Priors sat in the upper House, themselves should be
thrust down to the lower House, who in revenue and interest were equal to the
greatest Abbots. So that no wonder if they tried all possible methods to raise
themselves into the upper House, which they at last effected; at least some of
them did. At what time, and by what Pretenses they did effect it, I cannot
certainly affirm. But I suppose, that whereas some of them had gained of the
Pope, the privilege of wearing the Pontifical Habit at solemn times, viz.
Mitre, Pastoral Staff, etc. and had thereupon assumed to themselves the name of
Prelates; they claimed in virtue of that privilege, and were admitted to sit
in Convocation among the Prelates: Or that whereas it was thought very
indecent, that the Prior of Canterbury, in whom the Arch-Episcopal
Jurisdiction, during a vacancy, was invested, and by whom the Convocations was
summoned in that Case, should sit in the lower, and was thereupon removed to
the upper House; his Example might facilitate Admission to the Priors of other
Cathedrals, and open the way to them.

Page 158. lin. 5. Suffragan Bishops were believed to be the same with the
Chorepiscopi in the Primitive Church; which continued in the Western Church
till the ninth Century; and then they were put down every where by degrees, and
now ( Anno 1534.) revived in England.


If the Historian had pleased to acquaint himself with the State of the Church
of England before the Reformation, he could not have been Ignorant, that for
about 200 years before the Reformation, Suffragan Bishops had been frequent in
England, Par. 2. Append. p. 414.
not only in large or neglected Diocesses (as Mr. Fulman imagines, who has in
part noted the Error of the Historian) but also in smaller Diocesses, such as
Wells, and in those wherein the proper Bishop did generally reside in Person:
insomuch that in many Diocesses, whose Records are preserved, there appear a
continued Series or Succession of Suffragan, as well as proper Bishops; and at
the time of making this Act ( Anno 1534.) there seems to have been a
Suffragan Bishop in every Diocese of England, save Carlisle, Rochester and the
Welsh Diocesses; and in several Diocesses more than one. That they were not by
this Act revived in England, after the discontinuance of so many Ages, the
Historian might have learned from the very Preface of it, Page 157.
which himself relates to begin thus: Whereas Suffragan Bishops have been
accustomed to be had within this Realm, etc.

Page 161. lin. 3. Chancellor More was the most zealous Champion the Clergy
had; so he answered this Supplication (of the Beggars) by another in the name
of the Souls that were in Purgatory, representing the miseries they were in,
etc.


Sir Thomas More wrote this Supplication of Souls, before he was Lord
Chancellor, in the Year 1529, as the Title of it witnesses, being then Privy
Councellor. He was then indeed Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; but in
this Sense, I suppose, the Historian did not here call him Chancellor: Since
the Historian has mentioned this Supplication of the Souls, and has given an
Abstract of it, whereby he would seem to have read it; I beg leave to represent
to him, that it would have been very fair in him, if when he related the
Tragical Story of the Murder of Richard Hunne, Page 14. and 18.
so much in prejudice of Fitz-Iames Bishop of London, and his Chancellor Doctor
Horsey, he would have acquainted the Reader, that notwithstanding the general
and violent Suspicions of their foul dealing therein, Sir Thomas More, who was
then an eminent Man, and had certain opportunities of knowing the whole truth
of the matter, has in this Treatise largely defended both the Bishop and his
Chancellor, and acquitted them from all manner of guilt or injustice therein.

Page 182. lin. 6. In Oxford, the Question being put ( Anno 1535.) Whether the
Pope had any other Jurisdiction in England, than any other foreign Bishop? it
was referred to certain Delegates, who agreed in the Negative; and the whole
University being examined about it man by man, assented to their Determination.


I fear that the Historian had conceived some displeasure against the
University of Cambridge, for that he allows not to them, the Honor of having
asserted betimes the Independency of our National Church upon the Sea of Rome;
nor thinks fit to take any notice of them in this matter. I am not bound to
engage in the private Quarrels of the Historian, and therefore shall think my
self at Liberty to do Justice to the University of Cambridge, and to publish
their Determination herein, which I have done: Collect. numb. 1.
To which I will here add, that the like Determinations seem to have been then
made by particular Colleges in the University apart, and to have been
subscribed by the Masters and Fellows of them. For I have seen such an original
Instrument of one College.

Page 186. lin. 28. What the ancient British Monks were; and by what Rule they
were governed must be left to Conjecture. But from the little that remains of
them, we find they were very numerous, and were obedient to the Bishop at
Caerleon; as all the Monks of the Primitive times were to their Bishops.


This is not accurately said. The British Monks were subject not only to the
Bishop of Caerleon, but to their several Bishops, in whose Diocesses they
lived. Indeed after that the Britains were driven into Wales, and settled there,
all their Bishops were subject to the Archbishop of Caerleon, and so by
consequence were all the Monks also ultimately subject to him. But the
Historian speaks here of their immediate Subjection. Besides, that in this
place he treats of the ancient British Monks, which were before the
Confusions of the Gothic Wars in Italy, and before the times of Benedict; when
the Britains were not driven into Wales, nor all their Bishops subjected to him
of Caerleon. But there were at that time several other Archbishops in Britain,
to whom the Bishops of their Provinces were as much subject; as the Bishops of
the Province of Caerleon were to him.

Page 186. lin. 43. This Exception of the Abbey of St. Austins from the
Jurisdiction of the Archbishop and his Successors, was granted, that they might
have no disturbance in the Service of God. But whether this, with many other
ancient Foundations, were not later Forgeries, which I vehemently suspect, I
leave to Critics to discuss.


That this and all other Charters of Exemption from Episcopal Jurisdiction,
granted to Monasteries in England before the Conquest, were mere Forgeries, is
an undoubted truth to all those who are not engaged by Interest to defend them.
But it is somewhat extraordinary in any Writer to lay down Principles
confessedly false or dubious, and then to build upon them, and raise
consequences from them, as if they were indubitably true. This seems to be
done by our Historian in the following Page; where he lays down the Exemption
of Monks in the ancient Foundations from Episcopal Jurisdiction, as one
Foundation of their Corruption in Discipline, and increase in Riches. The first
Exemption of this kind, really granted to any Monastery of England, was that
given by William the Conqueror to Battle Abbey, newly founded by him; the
Example of which prompted the Monks of other places to counterfeit the like
ancient Exemptions, or to purchase new ones from the Court of Rome.

Page 187. lin. 7. About the end of the eighth Century, the Monks had possessed
themselves of the greatest part of the Riches of the Nation. (So also Par. 2.
Praefat. page 9. lin. 1.) the best part of the Soil of England being in such
ill hands, it was the Interest of the whole Kingdom to have it put to better
uses.


Such high Figures of Rhetoric and Hyperbolical Expressions are better
reserved for Harangues, and do not well agree with History. The end of the
eighth Century was the Year of our Lord 800, at which times very few
Monasteries had been yet founded; nor had the Monks then in all appearance
gained Possession of the hundredth part of the Riches of the Nation. Afterward
indeed they increased exceedingly in Number, Riches, and Possessions,
especially in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Centuries; but after all, upon a
just Account, they will not be found even in Title to have possessed above a
fifth part of the Nation: and considering that long before the Reformation,
they were wont to Lease out their Lands to Laymen, for easy Fines, and small
Rents, as Bishops, and Deans, and Chapters now do; it may be truly said that
they did not in reality possess the Tenth part of the Riches of the Nation.
Then for that other Charge, that the best part of the Soil of the Nation being
in such ill hands, it was the Interest of the Nation to have it put to better
uses, it is altogether Erroneous. From the beginning to the end, none ever
improved their Lands and Possessions to better advantages, by Building,
Cultivation, and all other methods, than the Monks did, while they kept them in
their own hands: And when they Leased them out to others, it was the Interest
of the Nation to have such easy Tenures continued to great numbers of Persons
who enjoyed them. To this may be added, that they contributed to the public
Charges of the Nation equally with the other Clergy; and the Clergy did always
contribute in proportion above the Laity. So that we cannot find, to what
better uses these Possessions have been since put; save only that
inconsiderable part of them, which remains to Bishoprics, Cathedrals, and
Schools, founded by King Henry VIII.

Page 189. lin. 1. The Monks became lewd and dissolute, and so impudent in it,
that some of their Farms were Let, for bringing in a yearly Tribute to their
Lusts.


God forbid, that any Professors of Christianity, much less the greatest
Pretenders to it, should be guilty of such monstrous wickedness, or that any
others should believe it of them without evident Proof. This Accusation is
taken from Fuller's Church History, Page 318.
who relates no more than one Example of this kind, and that of a Convent, not
of Monks, but of Canons Regular (of Waltham) not upon his own knowledge, but
the single Testimony of a most notorious lying Villain, Stephen Marshal; and
after all is so ingenuous, that he professes himself to dis-believe it. On the
contrary our Author suppresseth his Authority, and brings no other Testimony;
raises the number from one to many, and delivers a dubious matter as a Truth
most certain. Surely if the Monks had been guilty of any such thing, it could
not have escaped the knowledge of their Visitors, who searched and divulged all
their Faults with the utmost Industry; nor would it have been unknown to Bale,
brought up among them, nor omitted by him in his English Votaries, wherein he
has set himself to defame the Monastic Order, and the unmarried Clergy with
insatiable Malice; nor would Instances of it be wanting in those many
Leiger-Books, of the Monasteries still remaining, wherein they Registered all
their Leases, and that for their own private use.

Page 189. lin. 10. The Orders of Begging Friars at first would have nothing,
no real Estates but the ground on which their House stood. But afterward
Distinctions were found, for satisfying their Consciences in larger Possessions.


Hereby it is insinuated, that the Begging Friars, gained to themselves and
possessed other real Estates, besides the Site of their Convents. But no such
thing was done. To the very last they had no other real Estates in England.

Page 194. lin. 47. The use of the Scripture in the vulgar Tongue continued for
several Ages, till the state of Monkery arose; and then it was not consistent
with their Designs, nor with the Arts used to promote them, to let the
Scriptures be much known.


The Order of Monks is now extinct in England, so that whatsoever may be said
against them, there is no danger of a Reply from them. Yet still so much
respect is owing to the Readers, as not to impose any thing upon them, which
has not at least the appearance of truth. That, this Accusation will not have
to those, who know with what Industry the Monks in many Nations, but more
especially here in England, translated the Scriptures into the Vulgar Tongue.
We have the Names left of seven English Monks, who before the Conquest
translated the Scriptures, or some part of it into the Saxon Tongue. After the
Conquest we do not find so many Translations made; but of those which were
made, as many were owing to the Monks as to the Secular Clergy.

Page 215. lin. 17. Nix Bishop of Norwich died the former Year, though Fuller in
his slight way, makes him to sit in the Convocation, held in the middle of the
Year 1536.


The Historian could not have blamed Fuller's slight way of writing at a more
unlucky moment. For himself has here committed three mistakes within the
compass of six Lines. The first of them is this concerning the time of Bishop
Nix's Death, who died not the former Year, but on the 14th of January in this
Year; nor will the difference in Computation in beginning the Year salve the
mistake. For this Historian always begginneth the Year on the first of January.
The other two mistakes follow.

Page 215. lin. 13. Nix Bishop of Norwich had offended the King Signally, by
some correspondence with Rome, and was kept long in the Marshalsea, and was
convicted and found in a Praemunire.


I fear, that this also was wrote at adventure. Norric. p. 184.
The Historian finding the Bishop in a Praemunire, and in the Marshalsea,
without further Enquiry, would suppose, that the Crime was some correspondence
with Rome, and so gave his Conjecture for History. But had he known the
Character of this Bishop, he would not have thought this so much as probable.
Alexander Nevyl, who knew him well, describes him to have been the most
vicious Clergyman of his time. So that no remaining scruple of Conscience, or
supposed Sense of Duty could prompt him at this time to hold any Correspondence
with Rome: Nor yet could the hope of advancing his Fortune by it, in Case the
Papal Power should be restored in England, induce him to it. For he was then an
extreme old Man, and had been blind many years: But the true Cause of his
Conviction and Imprisonment was this, which I shall deliver out of a Record.
Term Hilary 25. H. 8. coram Rege rot. 15.
The Town of Thetford in Norfolk, had made a Presentment upon Oath before the
Kings Judges, touching their Liberties; namely, that none of the said Town
ought to be Cited into any Spiritual Consistory, but only into the Court of the
Dean of Thetford; and that if any Person cited any of that Town into another
Spiritual Court, he should forfeit Six shillings and Eight pence for the same.
With this the Choleric old Bishop being enraged, cited Richard Cockeral, Mayor
of Thetford, and others, into his Spiritual Court, and enjoined them under pain
of Excommunication to call a Jury of their Town before them, and forthwith to
revoke and cancel the former Presentment. For this the Bishop was attainted in
a Praemunire, put out of the King's Protection, his Person imprisoned, his
Lands, Goods and Chattels forfeited to the King, by a Sentence in the King's
Bench Court, in the beginning of the Year 1534. With part of the Bishop's Fine
and Forfeiture upon this Attainder, the Glass-windows of Kings-Colledge Chapel
in Cambridge are said to have been bought and set up.

Page 215. Line 18. By the 17th Act of the last Parliament (begun 1536, June
8th, and ended 1536, July 18th) it appears that the Bishopric of Norwich being
vacant, the King had recommended William, Abbot of St. Bennets to it, but took
into his own hands all the Lands and Manors of the Bishopric, and gave the
Bishop several of the Priories in Norfolk in exchange, which was confirmed in
Parliament.


This Act was made in the preceding Parliament, begun 1536, February 4th, and
dissolved April 14th, and gave to the Bishopric of Norwich in exchange only
the Abbey of St. Bennets in the Holm, the Priory of Hickling in Norfolk, and a
Prebend in the Collegiate Church of St. Stephens in Westminster.

Page 235. lin. 20. The Abbot of Farnese in Lincolnshire, with thirty Monks,
resigned up that House to the King on the 9th of April 1537.


The Abbey of Furnes was seated in Lancashire.

Page 241. lin. 45. Battle Abbey was represented to be a little Sodom, so was
Christ-Church in Canterbury, with several other Houses.


The Historian does not tell us, by whom they were thus represented. For that
would have marred all the History, and have relieved the reputation of these
Monasteries. Not by the Visitors surely; for the Acts of their Visitation of
these places do not remain. The credit of the whole matter rests upon the
authority of a vile Pamphlet published soon after without a Name, pretending to
relate the enormous wickednesses discovered in the Monasteries of England at
their suppression. Page 317.
From this Pamphlet Stevens transcribed these Stories into his Apology for
Herodotus, and from him Fuller took them into his Church History, from whom our
Historian received them. But Fuller is so ingenuous, as to own from whence he
took them; and to add, that he thinks it not reasonable to believe such heinous
accusations upon so slender testimony. We have some reason to reflect upon the
complaint which our Historian brings against Dr. Heylin, that benever vouched
any authority for what he writ, Praef. p. 2.
which is not to be forgiven any who write of Transactions beyond their own
Times. I fear that upon computation it will not be found, that our Author has
vouched any Authority for so much as the third part of his History; and is
especially deficient in those passages which tend to defame the Memories of
other men; in which above all others Justice and Charity would require that
sufficient, or at least some testimony be produced.

But to return to Battle Abbey and Christ Church in Canterbury; I am not much
concerned for either. Yet being willing to do Justice to all men, I will not
conceal that the accusation appears very improbable to me as far as Christ
Church Canterbury is concerned in it; since I am well assured, that Dr.
Goldwell the Prior of it, who had governed it for 23 years before the
Dissolution, was a learned, grave and religious Person* and that when it was
founded anew, it is not to be supposed, that Archbishop Cranmer, employed by
the King therein, would have taken into the new Foundation any persons so
scandalously wicked, yet twelve Monks were taken into it, which exceeds the
number of just persons to be found in Sodom at the time of its Destruction.

Page 248. lin. 37. Edward Fox Bishop of Hereford died the 8th of May, that
year, viz. 1538.


Bishop Godwin indeed says that Fox died that day. But our Historian pretends
not to take things on trust easily, no not from the greatest Authors. The
Archbishop of Canterbury did that day take into his hands the Spiritualties of
the Sea of Hereford, void by the death of Fox. But his death might, and not
probably did, happen several days before this.

Page 263. lin. 8. The new Bishopric of Chester was erected before any others.
For I have seen a Commission under the Privy Seal to the Bishop of Chester, to
take the surrender of the Monastery of Hamond in Shropshire, bearing date the
24th of August this Year, viz. 1539. So it seems the Sea of Chester was erected
and endowed before the Act passed (which was in May 1539.) though there is
among the Rolls a Charter for founding and endowing it afterward.


From this Passage it may appear, how necessary it is for any one who
undertaketh to write the History of our Reformation, to be well acquainted with
the State of things before the Reformation. Had this been done, many mistakes
would have been escaped, and other Contradictions, which accompany them, would
have been avoided. It is here said, that the Commission to the Bishop of
Chester, for the taking the surrender of Hamond, was dated the 24th of August;
Page 148.
but in the Collection of Records it is dated the 31st of August. It is
somewhat unlikely, that a Commission should be given to the new Bishop of
Chester to take the surrender of a Monastery in Shropshire, no part of his
Diocese. Who should this new Bishop be? It is incredible, that we should have
altogether lost the name and remembrance of a Bishop, who acted in such a busy
time. The first Bishop of the new Bishopric of Chester, which we can find, was
John Bird, translated thither from Bangor. And of him we know, that the Sea of
Bangor was not void by his Translation to Chester, Regist. Cranmer.
until the beginning of the Year 1542. He therefore could not be that Bishop of
Chester, to whom the Commission was granted in 1539. I cannot sufficiently
wonder, that Mr. Fulman should be led into the same mistake; Par. 2. in Append.
p. 415.
who allows the new Bishopric of Chester to have been erected before the
making of this Act, but to have been afterward surrendered, and founded anew.
For from the Historian's Collection of Records it appears, that the Monastery
of St. Werburge in Chester, (in which the new Bishopric is founded) was not
surrendered till 1540. Page 149.
January 20th, which alone overthrows all the Conjectures of the Historian and
Mr. Fulman. In truth the first Charter for erecting the new Bishopric of
Chester, was dated 1541. July 16th, but there being some mistake committed
therein, a new Charter of Foundation was granted 1541. August 5th. (The
Historian is mistaken when he puts afterward August 4th.) and Bird the first
Bishop took Possession in the beginning of the following Year. Page 300.
The Commission therefore granted to the Bishop of Chester, for taking the
surrender of Hamond was directed to the Bishop of Lichfield (in whose Diocese
it was Seated) which Bishop, until the Division of his Diocese and Erection of
a new Bishopric at Chester, was in writing and in common Speech as often
called the Bishop of Chester, as of Lichfield; as is well known to those who
are acquainted with the State of the English Church before and at the
Reformation.

Page 267. lin. 1. The Popish party used all the Arts possible, to insinuate
themselves into the King. And therefore to show how far their Compliance would
go, Bonner Bishop of London took a strange Commission from the King on the 12th
of November this Year 1539. Whether the other Bishops took such Commissions
from the King, I know not. But I am certain, there is none such in Cranmers
Register; and it is not likely, if any such had been taken out by him, that
ever it would have been razed. -- After he had taken this Commission, Bonner
might well have been called one of the Kings Bishops.


When the Historian wrote this, Par. 2. in Append. p. 90.
surely he little thought that he should publish in the Second part of his
History, a like Commission taken from King Edward VI. by Cranmer. For whosoever
compares the two Commissions, will find that they are not only alike, but the
very same, mutatis mutandis, only with this difference (as the Historian
himself, Par. 2. p 6.
forgetting what he had here wrote, is forced to own) that there is no mention
made of a Vicar General in the Commission of Edward VI. to Cramner, as was in
that of Henry VIII. to Bonner, there being none after Cromwell advanced to that
Dignity. Now it is very injurious to the Memory of Cranmer, first to represent
this Action of Bonner, as a vile unworthy Compliance, and then afterward to
say, that Cranmer did the same thing. For what difference is there between
taking such a Commission from King Henry, and taking the like from King Edward;
unless it be that it seems somewhat more colorable, to take it from a Man
than from a Child. Nor can any excuse be raised from the necessity imposed by
the Act of Parliament made 1547, Page 43.
December 20th, of which an Account is given afterward. For Cranmer had taken
out his Commission on the 7th of Frebruary preceding. But neither is it true,
that Cranmer did not take such a Commission from King Henry VIII. Page 6.
For the Order of Council, related by the Historian to have been made in the
beginning of the Reign of King Edward VI. plainly implies the contrary,
requiring the Bishops to take out new Commissions of the same Form, with those
they had taken out in King Henry's time; in obedience to which Order Cranmer
took out his Commission before mentioned. If no such Commission taken by
Cranmer from King Henry be now found in his Register, it does not thence
follow, that none was taken by him. For his Register is imperfect in many
places. Indeed he took out such a Commission from King Henry long before
Bonner. For in the Collections of Dr. Yale (who could not but know the Truth
herein, having been in the time of Cranmer, an eminent Advocate in Doctors
Commons, and afterward principal Registrary and Vicar General to Archbishop
Parker) I find a Transcript of this Commission, agreeing exactly with that of
Bonner published by the Historian, mutatis mutandis; and this note subjoyned,
Tales licentias acceperunt Thomas Archiepiscopus Cantuarmense Octobri 1535.
Edwardus Archiep. Eborac. Johannes Episcopus Lincoln. 13. Octobr. 1535.
Johannes Episcopus London. 19. Octobr. 1535. Stephanus Episcopus Winton, eodem
Anno, Cuthbertas Episcopus Dunelm. 10 November. 1535. etc.

Page 268. lin. 9. I will not presume to determine so great a Point of Law,
whether the Abbots sat in the House of Lords, as being a part of the
Ecclesiastical State, or holding their Lands of the King by Baronages.


It is the known and avowed Constitution of our Nation, that the Convocation of
the Clergy does constitute the first Estate therein. This being premised, it is
manifest, that Bishops, and consequently Abbots also, sat in Convocation as a
part of the Ecclesiastical State; and must therefore sit in the House of Lords
under some other Quality, which can be no other than that of their Baronage.

Page 268. lin. 21. Generally Coventry and Burton ( viz. the Coventry, and
Abbey of Burton) were held by the same man, as one Bishop held both Coventry
and Lichfield, though two different Bishoprics.


I will not take notice of the Historians oversight in making Coventry and
Lichfield two different Bishoprics: for that Mr. Fulman had before observed;
but of his Error in affirming Coventry and Burton to have been generally held
by the same man. He might with as much truth have said, that the
Archbishopricks of Canterbury and York were generally held by the same man.
What gave occasion to this enormous mistake, I cannot conceive. Burton and
Coventry were no more related, than any other two Abbeys; neither was one a
Cell of the other; nor had the one any Dependence upon the other. At the end of
the Annals of Burton, Printed some time since at Oxford, may be found an exact
List of the Abbots of that House from the first Foundation to the Dissolution
of it. In Dugdale's Antiquities of Warwickshire, may be seen a like Catalogue
of the Priors of Coventry. If these two be compared, it will be found that from
beginning to end, they are made up of different Persons, not so much as any one
name of the one Catalogue occurring in the other.

Page 300. lin. 25. Two years after this ( viz. after September 1541) the Abbey
of Osney in Oxford, was converted into a Bishopric, a Deanery, and six
Prebends. And the Monastery of St. Austins in Bristol, was changed into the
same use.


The Cathedral Church of Osney was founded by the King's Charter, dated 1542.
September. 1. And Paul Bush Bishop of Bristol was consecrated 1542. June 25th.
So that the Historian is mistaken, when he refers the Foundation of both
these Bishoprics to the end of the Year 1543.

Page 300. lin. 49. Then the Priories at most Cathedrals, such as Canterbury,
Winchester, Duresm, Worcester, Carlisle, Rochester, and Ely, were also
converted into Deanries and Colleges of Prebends.


If by most Cathedrals are to be understood most of the Cathedrals of England,
that is not true. For if to those he had added Norwich, he had named all. But
if by that Term are to be understood most of those old Cathedrals, which were
founded anew at this time; then it is trifling. For in all the old Cathedrals
which were then founded anew, the Priories were thus changed.

Page 301. lin. 43. In England when the Bishopric of Lincoln being judged of
too great an extent, the Bishopric of Ely was taken out of it; it was done
only by the King with the Consent of his Clergy and Nobles. Pope Nicholas
indeed officiously intruded himself into that matter by sending afterward a
Confirmation of what was done.


The Erection of a new Bishopric at Ely, was never thought on till the Year
1106, and was completed in the Year 1109. Pope Nicholas II, died in the Year
1061, and Pope Nicholas III, obtained the Papacy in 1277. We desire to know,
which of these two the Historian means. Not the former surely. But neither
did the latter, any more than the former, concern himself in a matter done so
long before his time. It was Pope Paschal II, whose Bulls of Confirmation were
pretended to have been sent immediately after the Erection of the Bishopric.
But even those seem to have been forged.

Page 316. lin. 44. In the time of Popery there had been few Sermons but in
Lent.


If he speaks of the ancient times of Popery, it may be true. But for some time
before the Reformation Preaching seems to have been more frequent, in England.
For Dr. Lichfield Rector of All Saints in Thames Street, London, who died in
the Year 1447, left behind him 3083. Sermons wrote with his own hand, and
preached at several times by him. All these Sermons could not be preached in
Lent. After him we have the Examples of Bradley the Suffragan Bishop of
Norwich, who died in the Year 1492. after he had spent many years in traveling
about that Diocese, and Preaching in it: of Dr. Colet Dean of S. Paul's, who
constantly preached or expounded the Scriptures either in his own, or in some
other Church of the City; of Dr. Collingwood Dean of Lichfield, who preached in
that Cathedral every Sunday for many years together. The Practice seems not
to have been unfrequent long before this time, and in some places to have been
commanded to all the Parish Priests. For in the Constitutions of John de
Thoresby Archbishop of York, made about the Year 1360. I found a Command to all
the Parochial Clergy to preach frequently to their People, and explain to them
the Articles of Faith in the English Tongue; and an Exhortation directed to the
People, to here Goddys Service every Soneday with Reverence and Devocioun, and
seye devowtly thy Paternoster, etc. and here Goddys Law taught in thy Modyr
Tongue. For that is bettyr than to here many Massys.

Page 328. lin. 37. Dr. Lee Dean of York, was brought up about All-hallow-tide
in the Year 1543. and sent into Kent. (So also Append. page 292. lin. 38.)
Leighton brought in Lee to be a Visitor of the Monasteries, but they were of
the Popish party, and Lee was Cranmer's Friend. He was in Orders, and soon
after (the Visitation of Monasteries performed by him) was made Dean of York.


Lee was never Dean of York. For Higden who was made Dean in 1516, died in
1537. To him succeeded Dr. Layton (for so his name is to be wrote, not
Leighton, for he was no Scot) who died in the Year 1544, and was succeeded by
Dr. Wotton, who died in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Page 333. lin. 24. Bell, that was Bishop of Worcester had resigned his
Bishopric, the former year ( viz. in the Year 1544) the Bishop of Rochester,
Heath, was translated to that See. -- And upon the Translation of Sanepson from
Chicester to Litchfield, Day was made Bishop of that See.


Regist Cranmer.
Bell had resigned his Bishopric in the Year 1543. For Heath was Elected to
succeed him December 22. 1543. Sampson's Translation preceded even that of
Heath; for Day was Elected to Chicester void by his Translation, April 24. 1543.

Page 337. lin. 14. None of the Preachers were either Actors or Consenters to
the murder of Cardinal Beaton. -- I do not find that any of them justified it.


Knox gave a violent Suspicion of his consenting to it, and justifying it; when
the Murderers, being immediately after the murder committed besieged in the
Castle, he conveyed himself in among them, and became their Chaplain. The
Author of the History of the Church of Scotland, which passes under Knox his
Name, extolls the murder, as a Noble and Heroical Action. If Knox were not, yet
at least one of the Scotch Preachers was, the Author of this History. There is
no Villainy of this kind, so black, which may not be believed of Scotch
Presbyterians; since they have in our days as inhumanely murdered another
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and justified it, and commended it as a meritorious
Action.

Page 349. lin. 35. This leads me to discover many things concerning the Will
of King Henry VIII. which have been hitherto unknown. I draw them from a Letter
written by Maitland of Leithington, Secretary of State to the Queen of
Scotland. The design of it is to clear the right his Mistress had to the Crown
of England. -- Therein he proves King Henry's Will to be a Forgery, because it
was not signed with the King's own Hand, but those about him put the Stamp to
it, when they saw his Death approaching. For this he appealed to the Deposition
of the Lord Paget; and desired the Marquess of Winchester, etc. Dr. Buts, and
some others, might be examined. Thus it appears what vulgar Errors pass upon
the World.


Here the Historian makes great Ostentation of his own performance, imagining
that he has entirely overthrown the Credit of all our English Histories, and
convicted the English Nation of a blind credulity. But we beg leave to put in
our Exceptions. Maitland, as Secretary to the Queen of Scotland, might do well
to urge any Argument tending to the Service of his Mistress, whether true or
false. But what is allowable to a Statesman herein, is not to an Historian. It
is manifest, that Maitland was ill informed in one Circumstance; and if so, all
the rest may be suspected, as being received from the same Authority. For he
affirms Dr. Buts, the Kings Physician, to have been present at his Death; when
the Stamp was set to the Will. Par. 2. Addend. p. 416.
Now Dr. Buts died 1545. 17th. November, as his Epitaph in the Church at Fulham
testifies. But King Henry died not till the 28th January 1546/7 (not 1547/8,
as the Inscription under his Picture, prefixed to this History bears.) So
that the whole Story alleged by Maitland, may be as much a Forgery, as King
Henry's Will is by the Historian said to be.

Page 353. lin. 37. But if he ( Fisher Bishop of Rochester) had kept his
opinion of the King's Supremacy to to himself, they could not have proceeded
farther. He would not do that, but did upon several Occasions speak against it:
so he was brought to his Trial. The Historian does more than once insist upon
this.


I am very unwilling to deliver any thing without present Evidence, yet I do
very well remember, that some years since I saw in writing a Complaint of
Bishop Fisher's, declaring the unhandsome dealing of those, who from time to
time were sent by the King to discourse with him in Prison: how that having
urged him to declare his Reasons against the King's Supremacy, and assured him
that in so doing he should receive no prejudice; they obtained of him to do it,
and then made use of such his Declaration to his Destruction; grounding their
Testimony of his Recusancy upon it.

Page 358. lin. 8. Thus died John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, in the 80th. Year
of his Age.


George Lilly, who knew him well, and wrote his Life, says that he was born in
the Year 1459. He was beheaded in the middle of the Year 1535. so that his Age
did not then exceed 76 years.

Page 356. lin. 49. Makerel the Monk, that first raised the Lincolnshire
Rebellion, was with Sixteen more indicted of High Treason.


Dr. Makerel might have deserved some higher Title than that of plain Monk. For
he was Abbot of Barlings, and had been many years Suffragan Bishop in the
Dioces of Lincoln.

Page 361. lin. 48. This Year, (1540.) Sampson Bishop of Chichester was put in
the Tower, upon Suspicion of Correspondence with the Pope.


The Historian would have done well to have produced his Testimony, when he
charged the Bishop with this Crime. Godwin says, that he was imprisoned for
relieving with money the necessities of some poor Prisoners, who had been
imprisoned for denying the King's Supremacy. The same also Fabian, Hall, and
Stow, affirm in their Histories. Now great difference is to be made between
holding Correspondence with the Pope, and relieving others imprisoned for it.
The first would have been unpardonable Treachery, after so many Pretensions and
Engagements to the contrary. But the latter might only have been an effect of
his Charity to distressed Persons.

Addenda. page 291. lin. 1. Sanders had said, that the King ( Henry) made many
write Apologies for what he did; which some did willingly, being tainted with
Heresy; others unwillingly, and for fear, as Gardener, and Tonstall. For this
the Historian is angry with Sanders, and says, that indeed Gardener was a man
like enough to write any thing that might please the King; but Tonstall was a
man of greater probity, than to have done to unworthy a thing upon any Account
whatsoever.


When Sanders speaks in favor of the Reformation, he is not rashly to be
disbelieved. I esteem it no small Honor to our Cause, that so excellent a
Person as Tonstall once wrote in defense of it. I much desired therefore that
it might be true; and upon search found it to be so. De Scriptor. Brit. p. 714.
For to omit the Testimony of Bale, who reckons amongst Tonstall's writings, a
Book against the Supremacy of the Pope, I have seen and read a long Sermon of
Tonstall's, preached before K. Henry on Palm-Sonday, and Printed London, 1633,
in 4 to, in which he inveigheth largely against the Primacy of the Pope, and
the Treason of Reginald Pole then Cardinal. It should seem that this Sermon was
published even in the time of Tonstall's Life. Page 193. and 214.
For I find it cited by the Author of the Defense of Priests Marriages wrote in
the Reign of Queen Mary. The Author of Athonae Oxonienses says, that it was
Printed in London 1539. who farther adds, that he wrote a Letter to Cardinal
Pole against the Supremacy of the Pope, Printed at London 1560, and 1579.
Quarto.

Page 316. lin. 15. The Abbots writ generally so ill, that it is very hard to
read their Subscriptions: Some of them I could by no means know what to make of.


If the Historian intended hereby to Arraign the Abbots of Illiterature; let it
be remembered, that himself had before said of King Henry, Par. 2. p. 10, 11.
That he was the most learned Prince, that had been in the World for many Ages,
and yet that he never wrote well, but scrawled so that his hand was scarce
Legible. But not to make Inferences for the Historian; let us only consider his
own Words. He complains that he could not read all the Subscriptions of the
Abbots by reason of the badness of their hands. We are willing to allow any
excuse to him, unless wherein he reflects upon the Memory of others. For that
is not fair. Any one who compares his Transcript with the Original, would
judge, that neither could he read the Subscriptions of the Secular Clergy of
the lower House of Convocation. For in his Copy many of their Names are
miserably corrupted, and mistaken. The truth is, all of them might without much
difficulty have been read, and exactly transcribed; if the Historian had not
read, as well (as others say he wrote) in Posthast. I will therefore conclude
this First Part, with subjoyning the Names of those Abbots and Priors, whose
Titles the Historian could not read.

Henricus Abbas de Gratiis,
Thomas Abbas de Gerendon,
Johannes Prior de Newenham,
Richardus Abbas de Bruera.

Pars Secunda.
Page 10. lin. 36. Alcuinus, a most learned Countreyman of ours.


IF by Countreyman is here to be understood a Scot, the Historian would never
have asserted Alcuinus to be his Countreyman, had he not presumed very much
upon the ignorance of the English Nation, and supposed that in knowledge of
Antiquity we were got no farther, than we were in the time of Hector Boethius,
when such Fables as this, (that Achaius King of Scotland sent Alcuinus, Rabanus
Maurus, etc. to Charles the Great,) might be securely vended. Alcuinus himself
in his Epistle to the Emperor Charles, calls York his Country; and says,
that he was educated there under Egbert the Archbishop: Date mihi exquisitioris
eruditionis Scholasticae libellos, Malmsbur. de gest. Pontif. fol. 153.
quales in patria habui, per bonam and devotissimam magistri mei Egberti
Archiepiscopi industriam: And in his Poem concerning the Archbishops and Saints
of the Church of York, has these Verses, Patriae quoniam men's dicere lauds
Page 703.732.

Et veteres cunas properat proferre parumper,
Euboricae gratis praeclarae versibus urbis.
Utpote quae proprium sibi me nutrivit alumnum,
Imbuit and primis utcunque verenter ab annis.
When equal Evidence shall be produced, that Alcuinus was born or bred in
Scotland; we shall allow him to have been the Historian's Countryman.

Page 24. lin. 35. By an Act made in King Henry the 8th's time, none might hold
two Benefices without a Dispensation; but no Dispensation could enable one to
hold three.


The contrary of this appears from the Register of Faculties granted by
Archbishop Parker: wherein may be sound very many Dispensations of triality of
Benefices with cure of Souls, enabling the Grantee to hold any third Living
with two, or any two with one, already possessed; or to hold any three,
hereafter to be obtained.

Page 24. lin. 39. While the Abbeys stood, the Abbots allowed those, whom they
appointed to serve the Cure in the Churches that belonged to them, a small
Stipend, or some little part of the Vicarage-tithes.


The case of Vicars was not so bad before the Reformation, as after. Before it
the Fees of Sacraments, Sacramentals, Dirige's, etc. were very great, since
very inconsiderable. Before the Reformation, Bishops could from time to time
increase their Allowance out of the Tithes of the Benefice, in what proportion
they pleased, even beyond the first dotation of it. The Bishops indeed have the
same right still, Vicar's Plea.
as Dr. Ryves has fully proved; but the interposition of the Common Law would
now hinder the execution of it. The Vicars then were not left to the pleasure
of the Abbot or Religious House, to whom the Church belonged. But the Bishops
endowed the Vicarages with what proportion of Tithes and Emoluments they
thought fit; in many places reserved to the Vicar one half of all manner of
Tithes, and the whole Fees of all Sacraments, Sacramentals, etc. in most places
reserved to them, not some little part of, but all the Vicarage-tithes, and in
other places appointed to them an annual pension of Money. In succeeding times
when the first Endowments appeared too slender, they increased them at their
pleasure. Of all which our ancient Registers and Records give abundant
testimony. This was the case of all Vicarages. As for those impropriated
Livings, which have now no settled Endowment, and are therefore called not
Vicarages, but perpetual or sometimes arbitrary Curacies; they are such as
belonged formerly to those Orders, who could serve the our of them in their
own persons, as the Canons Regular of the Order of St. Austin; which being
afterward devolved into the hands of Laymen, they hired poor Curates to serve
them, at the cheapest rate they could, and still continue to do so.

Page 25. lin. 28. Ridley elect of Rochester, designed for that See by King
Henry, but not consecrated till September this Year 1547.


If King Henry designed Ridley to be Bishop of Rochester, he could not do it by
any actual Nomination, but only by Prophetical foresight of Longland's Death,
and Holbeach's Translation. For the King died 1547, January 28th. Longland of
Lincoln died 1547. May 7th. Holbeach of Rochester was elected to Lincoln 9th.
August. So that until August there was no room for Ridley at Rochester.

Page 30. lin. 17. The Form of bidding Prayer was used in the times of Popery,
as will appear by the Form of bidding the Beads in King Henry the 7th's time;
which will be found in the Collection.


The Form published by the Historian out of the Festival, Printed Anno 1509.
seems by the length of it, and comparing it with another undoubtedly true
Form, to have been rather a Paraphrase or Exposition of the Form of bidding
Beads. I have therefore presented to the Reader a much shorter and ancienter
Form, Collect. numb. 2.
taken out of an old written Copy.

Page 32. lin. 13. Tonstall searching the Registers of his See, found many
Writings of great consequence to clear the Subjection of the Crown of Scotland
to England. -- The most remarkable of these, was the Homage King William of
Scotland made to Henry the Second, by which he granted, that all the Nobles of
his Realm should be his Subjects, and do Homage to him; and that all the
Bishops of Scotland should be under the Archbishop of York. -- It was said,
that the Monks in those days, who generally kept the Records, were so
accustomed to the forging of Stories, and Writings; that little Credit was to
be given to such Records, as lay in their keeping. But having so faithfully
acknowledged what was alleged against the Freedom of Scotland, I may be
allowed to set down a Proof on the other side, for my Native Country, copied
from the Original Writing yet extant under the Hands and Seals of many of the
Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom. It is a Letter to the Pope, etc.


The ancient and allowed Laws of History exclude Partiality, yet this
Historian's great Concern for the Honor of his Country cannot well be called
by any other name; which has induced him to publish and Instrument of the
Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, not at all relating to the History of our
English Reformation. If he thinks that this Liberty ought to be allowed to
him in recompense of the great Obligation he has laid upon the English Nation
for having so faithfully acknowledged what was alleged against the Freedom of
Scotland; we pretend, that all Persons conversant in the History of our Nation,
did before this very well know all these Allegations, and ten times as many of
no less weight; and that either he did not perfectly understand the
Controversy, or has not so faithfully represented the Arguments of our side.
For King William did not herein make any new Grant to King Henry, but only
confirmed and acknowledged the ancient Dependence and Subjection of Scotland to
England; nor did he then first subject the Bishops of Scotland to the
Archbishop of York, but engaged that hereafter they should be subject to him,
as of right they ought to be, and had wont to be in the time of the former
Kings of England. The Bishops of Scotland had been all along subject to the
Archbishops of York; but having about Eleven years before this obtained an
Exemption of this Jurisdiction by a Bull of Pope Alexander; the King of
Scotland now undertook, that they should not claim the benefit of that
Exemption, but be subject to the Church of England, as formerly; and the
Bishops of Scotland also then present concurred with the King, and promised for
themselves: although within a short time after they broke their Faith, and
procured a new and fuller Exemption from the Pope; which Dempster places in
the Year 1178. The Charter of King William before mentioned was made in 1175.
But after all the Bishopric of Galloway continued to be subject unto the
Archbishop of York, until toward the end of the Fifteenth Century, when it was
by the Pope taken from York, and subjected to Glasgow, then newly erected into
an Archbishopric. Now, whereas the Historian would invalidate the Authority of
this Charter, insinuating that it may justly be suspected to have been forged
by the Monks, because taken out of their Records, and coming out of their
Custody; he may please to know, that this very Charter may be found entire in
the Printed History of Roger de Hoveden; who was no Monk, but a a Secular
Clergyman, a Domestic of this King Henry, attending him in all his
Expeditions. As for the pretense of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, in
their Letter written to the Pope Anno 1320. and published by the Historian; it
is not to be wondered, if their minds being elated with unusual Success against
our unfortunate King Edward II. they enlarged their Pretenses, and affected an
independency from the Crown of England, which their Forefathers never pretended
to, nor had themselves at any other time dared to arrogate. All the principal
Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, had in the Year 1291. made as ample and
authentic an Instrument of the Subjection of the Crown of Scotland to England,
as could be conceived, before Edward had either Conquered, or invaded their
Country: which Instrument Tonstall takes notice of in his Memorial; and this
was indeed the most remarkable of all the Testimonies produced by Tonstall; at
least accounted by King Edward to be of so great moment, that he sent a Copy of
it under the Great Seal, to every noted Abbey and Collegiate Church in England,
that it might be safely preserved, and inserted into their several Annals. It
may be seen at length in the Printed History of Matthew Westminster. Therein it
may be observed, that it was subscribed by some of those very Noblemen of
Scotland, who subscribed the Letter to the Pope, published by the Historian;
who may be thought therein to have done no great Honor to his Country, by
publishing such an Authentic Testimony of the Infidelity of it.

Page 47, 48, 49. When the Parliament was divided into two Houses, then the
Clergy made likewise a Body of their own, and sat in Convocation, which was
the third Estate -- Whether ever the Clergy were a part of the House of
Commons, is a just doubt. -- Upon the whole matter, it is not certain, what was
the Power or Right of these Proctors of the (inferior) Clergy in former times.
Some are of opinion, that they were only Assistants to the Bishops, but had no
voice in either House of Parliament. -- But as the Clause Praemonentes in the
Writ, seems to make them a part of the Parliament; so these Petitions suppose
that they sat in the House of Commons anciently. -- In a matter so perplexed
and dark, I will presume to offer a Conjecture, which will not appear perhaps
improbable. In the 129th Page of the former Part, I gave the Reasons that made
me think the lower House of Convocation consisted at first only of the Proctors
of the Clergy. It is generally believed that the whole Parliament sat together
in one House before Edward the Third's time; and then the inferior Clergy were
a a part of that without question. But when the Lords and Commons sat apart,
the Clergy likewise sat in two Houses. -- So that it seems to me most
probable, that the Proctors of the Clergy were both in England and Ireland, the
lower House of Convocation.


I will not here enter into an exact Enquiry concerning the ancient
Constitution of Parliaments in England. A question, which has already
exercised so many Learned Pens, cannot be dispatched in few words. I will only
observe, that the Historian has succeeded very ill in his Conjectures. In the
first place it is a wide mistake to affirm, that after the Division of the
Houses, and perfect Settlement of the Constitution of Parliament, the
Convocation was the third Estate. For it was anciently accounted, and was
really the first Estate. Then his Conjecture concerning the ancient Seat of the
Proctors of the Clergy in Parliament, deduced with so much Labor, so many
previous and concomitant Observations, is unhappily founded upon two false
Suppositions. The first is, That formerly the lower House of Convocation
consisted only of the Proctors of the Clergy. The contrary of this was fully
proved in the preceding Papers; wherein it was shown, that Deans also, and
Archdeacons, did sit in the lower House of Convocation. The second false
Supposition is, that until Edward the Third's time, the whole Parliament sat
together in one House, and consequently that the several Estates of Parliament
were then alike summoned by the Kings Writ. Now the contrary of this appears
from an ancient Remonstrance of the Clergy in Convocation in the Year 1314.
found in an Authentic Register, the sum and occasion of which I will
represent in few words. The King had issued out a Writ to Walter Archbishop of
Canterbury, Die 27. Martii, Anno Regni Septimo, in this Form. -- Vobis
mandamus, quatenus sitis in propria persona vestra apud Westmonasterium in
crastino Ascensionis Domini proximo futuro, coram fidelibus nostris ad hoc
deputandis, ad tractandum cum eisdem fidelibus nostris super competenti auxilio
a Clero Provinciae vestrae Cant. nobis impendendo, pro utilitate Reipublicae,
etc. prout in proximo Parliamento apud Westmonasterium habito, tam per Clerum,
quam per Communitatem regni nostri extitit concordatum; and prout per
praedictos fideles nostros eritis requisiti. Et ad eundem diem venire faciatis
coram dictis fidelibus nostris Suffraganeos vestros, Decanos, Abbates, etc. and
Clerum cujusque Diocesis ejusdem Provinciae per duos Procuratores sufficientes;
ad tractandum and consentiendum una Vobiscum his quae in praemissis ibidem
contigerit ordinari. In obedience to this Writ, (which is Entitled Litera de
Convocatione Cleri apud Westminster.) the Archbishop sent a Mandate to his
Suffragans, etc. in such Form, as repeating at length the Kings Writ, he
subjoyned: Quocirca vobis ten^re praesentium injungimus and mandamus; quatenus
vos dictis die and loco intersitis, etc. From hence it appears, that the Clergy
were even before this called immediately to Convocation by the Archbishops
Writ; and that in the preceding Parliament the Clergy and Communitas Regni sat
apart. But this is not all. When the Clergy met upon this Mandate of the
Archbishop, they presented to him a Remonstrance, excepting against the form of
the King's Summons and his Mandate. Contra formam hujusmodi citationis Clerus
Cant. Provinciae proposuit rations subscriptas die Lunae in crastino S.
Dunstani apud Westminster. etc. Imprimis, That whereas the Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury had not been wont nor ought to be called by the King's Authority:
This Mandate of the Archbishop proceeded in virtue of the King's command, as
appeared by the Form thereof, which had never before been done. That if this
Precedent were allowed without any Contradiction, the King might send out
hereafter like Writs, to the great prejudice of the Church and Clergy. That the
King might by the same reason summon them to meet at some place out of the
Province, which would be prejudicial to the Clergy of the Province, and had
been hitherto without Example. That they were herein summoned to meet at
Westminster, locum videlicet exemptum auctoritate Ordinarii, ad quem Clerus
Cant. Provinciae ante haec tempora vocari nullatenus consuevisset. That whereas
Laymen had nothing to do to intermeddle with Ecclesiastical causes and
persons, this Writ summoned them to appear coram dilectis and fidelibus Domini
nostri Regis nulla authoritate ecclesiastica fulsitis, contrary to the usage of
all former times. For these and many other Reasons, they desired that this Writ
should be revoked, and themselves dismissed, and be summoned again in the usual
and legal form. Accordingly they were dismissed on the Wednesday following, and
were summoned by a new Mandate of the Archbishop dated June 6. in such Form as
was wont to be heretofore used, to meet at the Church of St. Paul's London, on
the 8th of July. Page 6.
Which Form, mutatis mutandis, agrees exactly with the Form used immediately
before the Reformation, and published by the Historian among the Memorials of
the first Part. On the first day of December the same year the King summoned
another Parliament to meet at Westminster in the Octaves of Hilary, and
directed a Writ to the Archbishop to summon the Clergy to meet dictis die and
loco: which the Archbishop did. When the Clergy were met, they protested
against the Form of the Summons, because cited ad curiam Saecularem, puta
Domini Regis Parliamentum, quod in camera ejusdem Domini fuit inchoatum; that
this was contrary to the ancient Form, and that therefore they would not
proceed to act, unless they might be assured, that this should not be drawn
into a President, and that for the future the old Form should be observed.
Which assurance being given to them, the Clergy granted a Subsidy apart to the
King, upon Conditions by them mentioned. From this it should appear, that
before the time of Edward III. the Convocations of the Provinces of Canterbury
and York were not held out of the several Provinces, and consequently that the
Clergy of both did not meet together, and with the Laymen constitute one Body
in one House of Parliament; that the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury were
then summoned by Writs of the same Form as afterward; that not the King, but
the Archbishop, appointed the time and place; that they never sat at
Westminster, where the other Estates of Parliament were at that time wont to
sit; that they permitted not Laymen to entermeddle in their Consultations, but
sat apart from them, and granted Subsidies apart; and all this, as themselves
allege, had been done, a tempore cujus memoria non existit.

Page 56. lin. 8. The Clerks of Council did not then enter every thing with
that Exactness that is since used.


It had been more cautious in the Historian to have said, that he could not
find such exact Entries made by them. For I find an Order of Council made 1550.
April 19th, and entered in the beginning of a large Original Book containing the
Acts of Council for the last four years of King Edward 6th, that there shall be
a Clerk attendant upon the said Council, to Write, Enter, and Register all such
Decrees, Determinations, and other things, as he should be appointed to enter,
in a Book to remain always as a Ledger, as well for the discharge of the said
Counselors, touching such things as they shall pass from time to time, as also
for a Memorial unto them of their own proceedings. Unto which Office William
Thomas was appointed by the Kings Highness, with the advice of his aforesaid
Council, and in Presence of the same Council sworn. Accordingly all the Acts of
Council are therein entered largely and with great exactness, the Original hands
of the Privy Counselors then present being added to the Acts and Orders of
every several day. This Book I shall often mention hereafter.

Page 71. lin. 1. and 36. The next thing Cranmer set about, was the compiling
of a Catechism, or institution of young Persons, in the Grounds of the
Christian Religion -- a work which was wholly his own, without the Concurrence
of any others.


In truth Cranmer only translated this Catechism out of Dutch (at least
translated it from the Latin Translation of Iustus Jonas, who had translated
the Dutch Catechism) as both the Title and the Preface of it might have
informed the Historian. The Title says, it was overseen and corrected by the
Archbishop; and Cranmer himself in another Book speaks of this Catechism in
these words -- a Catechism by me translated and set forth. Treatise of the
Sacrament, f. 100.
He added indeed a large Discourse of his own to the Exposition of the Second
Commandment, and inserted some few Sentences elsewhere.

Page 89. lin. 29. The people had been more prejudiced against the Marriage of
the Clergy; if they had not felt greater Inconveniences by the Debaucheries of
Priests; who being restrained from Marriage, had defiled the Beds and deflowred
the Daughters of their Neighbors, etc.


As for Adulteries and Rapes (which the Historian insisteth on) it is
charitably to be hoped, that they were not so frequent in the Clergy before the
Reformation. But the greatest Scandal arose by keeping Women in their Houses
under the Name and Notion of Concubines, and being Licensed by their several
Bishops to do it: which abuse obtained generally, and was practiced openly,
throughout the whole Western Church immediately before the Reformation. Yet in
any case to cover the faults of the Clergy, and to excuse them where the cause
admits any excuse, not only the respect due to the sacred Order, but common
Justice also requires. Had all these Women, thus generally entertained by the
Clergy, been no other than their Concubines; it would indeed have been
inexcusable. But in truth, they were for the most part their Wives; whom they
married secretly, and kept under the name of Concubines: since the Laws and
Canons then received, forbad them to Marry openly, or to entertain Women under
the name of Wives. This the Bishops very well knew: and from time to time gave
them Licenses to do it, and tolerated them in it; not allowing them thereby to
violate the Divine Laws of Chastity, but only in secret to neglect the
Ecclesiastical Laws of Celibacy. Now that this was the case of the Western
Clergy, we are assured by Alvarus Pelagius, Planet. Eccl. l. 2.
Consultat. 23.
Cassander, and others. And lest we should imagine the Clergy of England in
this practice to have Acted, either with less Wit or Conscience than the Clergy
of other Nations; we find several Constitutions of our latter Provincial
Councils directed against the Clandestine Marriages of the Clergy. These
Constitutions were made for show; but were seldom or never executed. But the
most express Testimony, that can be desired herein, is given by Archbishop
Parker; who publishing a large and accurate Defense of Priests Marriages, wrote
by an Anonymous Layman in the Reign of Queen Mary; has toward the end of the
Book, in some Copies of it, inserted ten Sheets of his own Composition, wherein
he gives a full and learned History of the Marriage and Celibacy of the Clergy
of England, from the first Reception of Christianity to the Reformation. In
this History he affirms the practice of the Clergy in Relation to Concubines
before mentioned, Page 329.
to have continued all along in England, concluding thus, -- And so lived
secretlye with their Friends, not openly vouched for Wives, but in affectu
sororio, amore uxorio, and fide conjugali, as they use the Terms. In which
kind of Life there be no small Arguments, that some Bishops, and the best
of the Clergy, lyvyng within the Memory of man, did continue. And in another
place: Page 334.
For as many of the Clergy lyved in Adulteries, and some in Vices
Sodomitical; so did diverse, whose Consciences were better, and in knowledge
more wise, lyved secretly with Wives, and provided for their Children under
the Names of Nephews, and other men's Children. -- In which manner lyved
Bonifacius Archbishope of Canterbury, and other Bishopes of old days; but some
also of late days did lyve, though all the World did not bark at the matter.

Before I dismiss this matter, I will add somewhat concerning the Attempt made
for the open Restitution of Marriage to the Clergy in the times of Henry 8th,
of which our Historian is altogether silent. The Anonymous Author of the
Defense of Priests Marriages before mentioned, Page 173.197, 198.
relates, that after it had been enacted by Statute 27 H. 8. That all
Licenses, Dispensations, and Faculties obtained of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, in matters not repugnant or contrary to the Holy Scriptures and
Laws of God, should stand in full Authority and Strength, without any repeal to
be hereafter had of any such Licenses; diverse Priests obtained Dispensations of
Marriages; some of which were corroborated by the King's Broad Seal, and some
by the Archbishop's Seal only. Afterward the King understanding, that certain
in his Realm were married, as well Regulars as Seculars, without Authority and
Common Laws, Number. ^.
did (through the instigation of the Popish party) make an open Proclamation
(which may be found in the following Collection) in the 30 th Year of his
Reign; wherein he did but for afterward charge, that no man should attempt the
same again; and did not dissolve those Marriages being so privately contracted.
In the following year indeed (the Popish party still prevailing more at Court)
the Six Articles were enacted; by which such Marriages were dissolved, and many
Persons so married were divorced. But after all the King knew by Information of
a good number from time to time; and yet did both tolerate the same, which were
used secretly; and such as were openly known did not separate them, but
commanded them to be reputed as Lay-Persons, -- and would have granted Liberty
to all in his days, but for some certain zealous Counselors; as was not
unknown to diverse, who heard him often speak of that matter.

Page 90. lin. 13. Many great Bishops in these times (the fourth and fifth
Ages) lived still with their Wives, and had Children by them; as namely
Nazianzen's, and Basil's Fathers; and Hilary of Poictiers, when very old,
writing to his Daughter Abra, bid her ask her Mother, etc.


Nazianzen's Father was certainly a Bishop, and begat him after his
Consecration. But that Basil's Father was a Bishop, appears not. Some later
Writers indeed have affirmed it, without any ground from ancient Writers; but
that he still lived with his Wife, and had Children, neither later nor ancient
Writers mention. The like may be said of Hilary. The Epistle to his Daughter
Abra, the only foundation of his supposed Marriage, is generally allowed by
Critics to be spurious. The Historian may here perhaps defend himself by
alleging, that he does not in this place propose his own arguments, but only
the reasons upon which our Reformers proceeded in restoring Marriage to the
Clergy. I do acknowledge, that these mistakes are found in most of their
Writings concerning the Marriage of the Clergy published at that time. But then
we have just reason to complain, that it is injurious to the Honor of our
Reformers to choose, from among so many irrefragable arguments and authorities
proposed and urged by them in this cause, such as are mistakes, or at least
liable to exception.

Page 90. lin. 21. Heliodorus Bishop of Trica did first move, that Clergymen
should be obliged to live single.


The Historian is too well conversant in the History of the ancient Church, not
to know, that (long before the time of Heliodorus) some Bishops moved in the
great Council of Nice, that Bishops, Priests and Deacons should be obliged to
perpetual continence, and had succeeded in it, had not Paphnutius vehemently
opposed the motion, and shown the unreasonableness and danger of such an
imposition. This is related by all the Ecclesiastical Historians of that time,
and is a matter well known, however impudently denied by some Writers of the
Church of Rome. Even before the Council of Nice, Eustathius Bishop of Sebastea
had endeavored to impose the like necessity of perpetual continence upon the
Clergy; which endeavor of his was condemned in the Council of Gangra. About
fourscore years after the Council of Nice, Heliodorus introduced a total
abstinence of the Clergy from their Wives in the Province of Thessaly, where he
was Bishop. The Historian seems to have believed, that he first made the motion
in the Council of Nice. This mistake (as far as I can find) is purely his own.
For although I have read all the Treaties in Defense of Priests Marriage,
published by our Reformers; I do not remember to have observed this in any of
them.

Page 90. lin. 38. It is true, that in (the fourth Age) they began to make
Canons against the Marriage of those who were in Orders, especially in the
Roman and African Churches.


It was forbidden to those who were in Orders to contract Marriage, by the
Apostolical Canons and Constitutions, received in the Eastern Church long
before. It was forbidden also by the Council of Neocaesarea, and in part by the
Council of Ancyra. But if by Canons made against the Marriage of those in
Orders, the Historian understands the Use or Enjoyment of Marriage, whether
contracted before or after Ordination; he has then committed a great mistake
in joining the African to the Roman Churches. The Church of Africa did all
along signally oppose and baffle the Attempts of the Popes of Rome for the
Establishment of Celibacy therein; and retained to her Bishops the use of
Marriage long after it had been generally disused by other Bishops both of the
Eastern and Western Churches: insomuch as the Quinisext Council in the Year
692, imposing perpetual continence upon all Bishops, Can. 12.
in pursuance of the Custom which had long since generally prevailed in the
Church, took notice of the different practice of the Bishops of Africa herein,
and by a particular Clause obliged them to conform themselves to the practice
of the rest of the Catholic Church in this matter. This mistake also is
peculiar to the Historian; I do not find any Footsteps of it in the Writings of
our Reformers.

Page 91. lin. 6. Restitutus Bishop of London lived openly with his Wife.


Whether Restitutus were married or not, we know no more, than whether the Wise
Men of the East were married. Bale indeed affirms it; and from him Parker,
Godwin, Spelman, and others have taken it. But Bale is scarce to be believed
when he relates a matter upon his own knowledge, much less when he delivers
any thing at 1200 Years distance without any Authority. The like may be said of
Richard Bishop of Chicester, who in this same Page is affirmed to have been
married. The false Opinion of his Marriage seems to have arose, either from
the hasty Inadvertency of that Reformed Writer, who first reported it; or from
a double Error of the Press, substituting Richard Bishop of Chicester instead
of Robert (Peche) Bishop of Chester.

Page 91. lin. 17. Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury did not impose Celibate on
the Clergy in the Villages, but only on those who lived in Towns and on
Prebendaries.


This mistake is wholly the Historians own. Our Reformers understood the
History of the English Church too well, to lead the way in such an Error.
Lanfranc imposed Celibacy on Prebendaries; but allowed to the Clergy living in
Towns and Villages the use of their Marriage already contracted. His
Constitution was conceived in these words. Nullus Canonicas uxorem habeat.
Sacerdotum vero in Castellis and in vicis habitantium habentes uxores non
cogantur ut dimittant, non habentes interdicantur ut habeant. Our Reformers who
wrote of the Marriage of the Clergy, represented this Constitution aright. So
Archbishop Parker, Page 279.
who having related his prohibition of Marriage to Prebendaries, adds, But yet
he moderated so the matter, that he made a Decree that such Priests as dwelt in
Towns and Villages, being married, should not be separated, but continue with
their Wives in their Ministration Ecclesiastical.

Page 92. lin. 13. The Legate, that in King Henry the Second's time got that
severe Decree made, that put all the married Clergy from their Livings, was
found the very Night after in Bed with a Whore.


This mistake also is altogether owing to the Historian. Our Reformers,
consonantly to the Testimony of all our ancient Histories, relate this
misfortune to have happened to Johannes de Crema, the Pope's Legate in the Year
1125. in the Reign of King Henry the First. And the Annals of Winchester, Angl.
Sacr. Vol. 1. p. 298.
lately published, relate another like miscarriage of the same Legate in the
same Year.

Page 93. lin. 13. I have seen no Remains of this Convocation (which restored
Marriage to the Clergy in the Year 1548.) or of any other Convocations that
came afterward in this Reign.


Archbishop Parker, who was a Member of, and present at this Convocation, has
in his Additions to the Anonymous Defense of Priests Marriages published by
him, Page 351.
given a short Relation of the Transactions and Determination of the
Convocation in this Affair; which (because the Book is very scarce) I have
transcribed and put into the following Collection. Numb. 4.
To it the Archbishop subjoyned the Opinion of Dr. Redman, which (however
published by the Historian in his Collection) I would not disjoyn; especially
since the Historian, or his Scribe, has omitted and changed many words of
moment in it.

Page 128. lin. 3. Bonner was looked on generally as a Man of no Principles.
All the Obedience he gave either to the Laws, or to the King's Injunctions, was
thought a Compliance against his Conscience extorted by Fear.


The Historian perhaps may be able to reconcile these two Periods; although it
be generally supposed that where no Principles are, there can be no Conscience;
since Conscience ever proceeds upon some Principles, either true or false. But
it seems after a strict Enquiry he has discovered one Principle in Bonner, to
which he constantly adhered: that was his Love of Pears and Puddings; a matter
which will, no doubt, reflect as great Infamy upon the Memory of Bonner, as
Honor upon the Historian for the Acuteness of the Observation. He was aware
that it would be thought disingenuous to Print such Letters, being the
Privacies of Friendship which ought not to be made public; but forgot that it
was beneath the Majesty of History to insert such trifles in it.

Page 149. l. ult. Ridley, was pitched on to be the man who should fill the Sea
of London. So on the 21. of February (1550) he was writ for, and on the 24th he
was declared Bishop of London and Westminster.


It might then be resolved to make Ridley Bishop of Westminster upon the
intended Translation of Thirleby: But he could not then be declared Bishop of
that See, since it was not void till April following, Regist. Cranmer.
in the beginning of which Month Thirleby was translated to Norwich. King
Edward's Journal therefore says, that Ridley was made Bishop of London on the
3d of April, and Thirleby translated the same day from Westminster to Norwich.

Page 150. lin. 35. The Lord Treasurer, etc. were sent to Gardener ( Fox says
that this was on the 9th of July, but there must be an Error in that -- it must
have been in November the former Year.) They brought him a Paper, to which they
desired he would set his hand.


In the Original Council-Book of King Edward the Sixth, beforementioned, all
the Orders, Messages, Papers, Articles and Answers relating to Gardener, are at
length inserted. From thence I shall correct the Historians Account. On the 8th
of June 1550. it was resolved in Council, Considering the long Imprisonment the
Bishop of Winchester has sustained, that he should be spoken withal; and
agreed, that if he repented his former Obstinacy, and would thenceforth apply
himself to advance the King's Majesty's preceedings, his Highness in this case
would be his good Lord, and remit all his Errors passed. Otherwise his Majesty
was resolved to proceed against him as his Obstinacy and Contempt required. For
the Declaration whereof, the Duke of Somerset, Lord Treasurer, etc. were
appointed the next day to repair unto him. June 10 th. Report was made by the
Duke of Somerset, and the rest sent to the Bishop of Winchester, that he
desired to see the King's Book of Proceedings, upon the sight whereof he would
make a full Answer; seeming to be willing in all things to conform himself
thereunto, and promising that in case anything offended his Conscience, he
would open it to none but the Counsel. Whereupon it was agreed, that the Book
should be sent him, to see his Answer, that his Case may be resolved on. And
that for the mean time, he should have the Liberty of the Gallery and Garden in
the Tower, when the Duke of Norfolk were absent. June 13 th. the Lieutenant of
the Tower, who before was appointed to deliver the King's Book to him, declared
to the Counsel, that the Bishop having refused it, said unto him, He could
make no direct Answer, unless he were at Liberty; and so being, he would say
his Conscience. Whereupon the Lords, and others, that had been with him the
other day, were appointed to go to him again, to receive a direct Answer; that
the Counsel hereupon might determine further Order for him. July 8 th the
Bishop of Winchester' s Case was renewed. Then was the Lord Treasurer, etc.
sent to him with the Message, of which the Historian here speaks. Together
with the Articles, the Council sent a Letter to him, blaming his Obstinacy, and
persuading him to conform. Fox gives a true Account of the Articles, and his
Answer to them. Only has erroneously put the 9th for the 8th of July. Although
he might mean, that the Commissioners went to him on that day: which seems to
have been true. For on the 10th of July the Commissioners reported his Answer
in Council, related by Fox, and from him by the Historian. And that these
Commissioners went indeed to the Bishop on the 9th of July, King Edward
testifyeth in his Journal, published by the Historian himself.

Page 151. lin. 7. Herbert and Petre came to him some time after that, but how
soon it is not clear* and pressed him to make the Acknowledgment without
Exception.


The Council-Book fixes the time of this Message, and clears a mistake of
the Historian. July 11th. This day the Bishop of Winchester' s Case was
debated; and because it appears that he sticks upon the Submission, which is
the principalest Point, considering his offense that the now goes about to
defend, to the intent that he should have no just cause to say that he was not
mercifully handled; it was agreed, that the Master of the Horse, and Mr.
Secretary Petre should repair unto him again with the same Submission:
exhorting him to look better upon it; and in case the words seem too sore, then
to refer unto himself, in what sort, and in what words he should devise to
submit him; that upon the acknowledging of his fault, the King's Highness might
extend his mercy and liberality toward him, as it was determined. On the 13th
of July, his Answer was reported in Council, which was, That he stood precisely
in Justification of himself, that he had never offended the King's Majesty:
wherefore he utterly refused to make any Submission at all. For the more surety
of which Denial, it was agreed, that a new Book of Articles should be devised;
wherewith the said Master of the Horse, and Mr. Secretary, should repair to him
again; and for the more Authentic proceeding with him, they to have with them
a Divine and Temporal Lawyer, which were the Bishop of London and Mr.
Gooderick. The Historian names only Ridley. Then follows a Copy of the
Articles sent to the Bishop of Winchester; the Sum of which is truly related
by Fox and the Historian. July 15th, the Bishops Answer was reported in
Council; whereupon it was agreed he should be sent for by the Council, and be
examined before them; which being done July 19th, and the Articles read to him,
and his Subscription peremptorily required, he made this short Answer: That in
all things that his Majesty would lawfully command him, he was willing and most
ready to obey. But forasmuch as there were diverse things required of him, which
his Conscience would not bear, therefore he prayed them to have him excused.
Whereupon the Sentence of Sequestration was read, and Denunciation of
Deprivation, in case he did not conform within three Months. Nevertheless upon
diverse good Considerations, and especially in hope he might within this time be
yet reconciled, it was agreed, that the said Bishops House and Servants should
be maintained in their present Estate, until the time of this intimation should
expire; and the matter for the mean time to be kept private. There is some
little difference between the Council-Book and King Edward's Journal, in fixing
the days of these two Messages.

Page 152. lin. 32. July this Year (1550.) Hooper was by Letters Patents
appointed to be Bishop of Gloucester.


The Council-Book says, on the 15th of May, Mr. Hooper was constituted Bishop
of Gloucester: King Edward's Journal says, July 20th, Hooper was made Bishop of
Gloucester: The first may relate to his Nomination, the second to the Signing of
his Patent.

Page 153. lin. 19. Cranmer wrote about this difference, (raised by Hooper
about wearing the Episcopal Vestments) to Bucer, reducing it to these two plain
Questions, Whether it was lawful to use those Garments, etc. -- And whether he
that affirmed that it was unlawful, or on that Account refused to use those
Vestments, did not sin against God.


The latter part of the Question put by Cranmer was this, An is qui
affirmaverit nofas esse, aut recusarit, his vestibus uti, peccet in Deum, quia
immundum esse dicit quod Deus sanctificavit, and in Magistratus, quod violet
ordinem Politicum. The Historian therefore has negligently translated it, and
in part changed the State of the Question, by adding these words on that
Account, which make the refusal to proceed wholly upon a Supposition that the
Thing commanded was unlawful by the Law of God, whereas Cranmer put the
Question more genenerally in those words aut recusarit, so as to include a
refusal to obey the Command of the Magistrate out of wilfulness, or for any
other cause, beside pretense of unlawfulness by the Law of God, which is taken
away by the answering to the first part of the Question.

Page 154. lin. 29. Cranmer wrote back, that he could not dispense with the use
of Episcopal Garments at the Consecration of Hooper, without incurring a
Praemunire. So the King was moved to write to him, warranting him to do it. But
though this was done on the 4th of Aug. yet he was not consecrated till March
next year, and in the mean while he was suspended from Preaching.


The King and Council rejected the Puritanical niceness of Hooper 's
Conscience, much further than all this amounts to: which Affairs I will relate
from the Council-Book. In Council 1550. October 6th. A Letter to the Bishop of
London, that where there has been some difference between him and the Elect
Bishop of Gloucester, upon certain Ceremonies belonging to the making of a
Bishop, wherein their Lordships desire is, because they would in no wise the
stirring up of Controversies between men of one Profession, did send for him,
willing him to cease the occasions thereof; who humbly desired that he might
for Declaration of his doings put in writing such Arguments as moved him to be
of the Opinion he held; which thing was granted, and was by their Lordships
commanded to be at the Court on Sunday next, bringing with him, that he shall
for an Answer have thought convenient 1551. January 13th. Mr. Hooper Bishop
Elect of Gloucester, appeared before the Council touching his old Matter, of
denying to wear such Apparel as other Bishops wear; and having been before
commanded to keep his House, unless it were to go to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Bishops of Ely, London, or Lincoln, for satisfaction or Counsel of
his Conscience in that matter; nor further, neither to Preach, nor Read, until
he had further License from the Council: it appeared both that he had not kept
his House, and that he had also written and Printed a Book, wherein was
contained matter that he should not have written. For the which, and for that
also he persevered in his former Opinion of not wearing the Bishops Apparel, he
was now committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury's Custody, either there to be
reformed, or further to be punished as the Obstinacy of his case required.
January 27th. Upon a Letter from the Archbishop of Canterbury, that Mr. Hooper
cannot be brought to any Conformity, but rather persevering in his Obstinacy,
coveteth to prescribe Orders and necessary Laws of his head, it was agreed, he
should be committed to the Fleet upon the occasion aforesaid. A Letter to the
Warden of the Fleet, to receive the said Mr. Hooper, and to keep him from
Conference of any Person, saving the Ministry of that House. On the 8th of
March following he was consecrated. Now all this was done after the King's
Letter wrote in his behalf to Cranmer; so that in all appearance he was forced
to reconcile his squeamish Conscience to the Episcopal Habit, in order to
obtain his Bishopric.

Page 154. lin. 36. and 48. This Summer John a Lasco, with a Congregation of
Germans, was allowed to hold his Assembly at St. Austin's in London -- Polidor
Virgil desired leave to go out of England, which was granted to him on the 2d
of June this Year 1550.


To this I will add, that on the 19th of November 1551. the Council ordered a
Reward of an 100 Pounds to be given to John Alasco. And that Polidor Virgil
went not out of England before the end of the Year 1551. For I find an Order of
Council 1551. October. 14. to deliver to Polidor Virgil, in way of the King's
reward, the Sum of One hundred Marks, and another Order 1551. Nov. 9. to pay
to to Plidor Virgil in way of the King's Majesty's reward the Sum of 300
Crowns, after Five shillings the Crown.

Page 155. lin. 2. On the 26th of June 1550. Poynet was declared Bishop of
Rochester.


The Council-Book says, that 1550. May 11th, Mr. Poynet was appointed Bishop
of Rochester. King Edward's Journal, June 30th. John Poynet made Bishop of
Rochester, and received his Oath. This latter is to be understood of the
reception of his Temporalties from, and doing Homage to, the King. For he was
consecrated June 29th.

Page 156. lin. 19. Bucer wrote a Book, Entitled, Concerning the Kingdom of
Christ. In it he complains much of Pluralities and Non-Residence, as a
Remainder of Popery, so hurtful to the Church, that in many places there were
but one or two, or few more, Sermons in a whole Year.


The Historians affection to the present Constitution of our Church in relation
to Plurality of Benefices is well known. Page 12.
He had before said in his Preface, that the present use of Pluralities of
England was a Relic of Popery, a scandal of a crying Nature, which may justly
make us blush. But he will never be able to adapt Bucer's words to such
Pluralities, as are now allowed and practiced in this Church.

Do Regno. Christi, l. 1. c. 19.
The words of Bucer are these, Quot reperias, qui licet manifesto and horrendo
Sacrilegio plurium Parochiarum emolumenta absumant tamen ne uni quidem debitum
impendere ministerium, vel per suos mercenarios, taceo per seipsos, dignetur?
Si enim by inlocis Splendidis and frequentioribus unam and alteram vel paulo
plures in anno conciones habuerint, existimant se suo munere proeclare esse
defunctos; reliquum omne tempus otio, luxui, pompae mundanae impendunt. Wherein
he blamed those who received the Profits of many Benefices with Cure of Souls,
and yet served not the Cure of any one of them, either by Curates or their own
Persons, whereas it is notorious, that at this time none is permitted to hold
above two Benefices, and both are constantly supplied by the Beneficiary either
personally, or by Curates; and Sermons preached in either every Sunday: whereas
also those, whom Bucer complains of, thought they satisfied their Duty if
they preached two, three or more Sermons in a year, in some populous and
eminent places, which the Historian by mistake interprets of their own
Parishes. I find but one remarkable thing concerning Pluralities during the
whole Reign of Edward VI. and that is an Order of Council 1550. June 28, That
upon Consideration Mr. Poynet now Elect Bishop of Rochester has no House to
dwell on* and his Living small, it was agreed he should enjoy his Benefice in
Commendam. But from henceforth it is decreed, that no Bishop shall keep other
Benefice than his Bishopric only.

Page 160. lin. 18. The Duke of Lunenberg had offered the King 10000 men to his
Assistance, and desired to enter into a Treaty of Marriage for the Lady Mary.


The Council-Book says it was the D. of Brandenburgh who proposed to treat of
a Marriage with the Lady Mary, and that the Ambassador, who came to propose it,
had Two hundred pounds given to him by way of Gratuity. King Edward's Journal
indeed relates it of the Duke of Brunswick.

Page 165. lin. 3. Gardener was soon after ( February 1551.) put out. There was
a Commission issued out to the Archbishop, etc. -- He put in a Compurgation. --
Upon this many Witnesses were Examined. -- His Judges on the 18th of April,
gave Sentence against him, by which they deprived him of his Bishopric.


I find in the Council-Book, that the Bishop of Winchester's Case was first
renewed after the Sequestration, 1550. Nov. 23. when it was agreed in Council,
that the Bishop of Ely, Secretary Petre, Dr. May, and Dr. Glynn, should confer
on the matter, and on Tuesday following should certify to the Council, what
was to be done by the Order of Law in that case. What was their report does not
appear. But December. 14. the Council ordered, that the Lieutenant of the Tower
should carry him to Lambeth, before the Archbishop and other Commissioners
constituted in his Cause on Monday following, and after that, when and as often
as he shall be by them required. December. 16. The Commissioners having allowed
Council to Gardener, this was approved by the King's Council, and the Persons
by him named were Licensed to repair to the Tower to him, and that although one
of them was the King's Chaplain. January 19th. Two of his Servants came to the
Privy Council, and desired that certain of them might be sworn upon certain
Articles, as Witnesses in behalf of the Bishop. The Privy Counselors offered
to Answer to those Articles upon their Honor, but would not be sworn. February
15th. It was ordered in Council, That for as much as the Bishop had at all times
before the Judges of his cause, used himself unreverently to the King's
Majesty, and very slanderously toward his Council, and especially yesterday
being the day of his Judgment given against him (so that he was deprived on the
14th of February) he called the Judges Heretics and Sacramentaries, these
being there the Kings Commissioners, and of his Highnesses Counsel, he should
be removed from his present into a meaner Lodging in the Tower, and have but
one Servant to wait on him; that his Books and Papers be taken from him, and
that from henceforth he have neither Pen, Ink nor Paper, but be sequestered from
all Conference, and from all means that may serve him to practice any ways.
King Edward's Journal says, that the Bishop after long Trial was Deposed,
February 13th.

Page 165. lin. 47. Eight days after, (on the 26th of April) Poynet was
translated from Rochester to Winchester.


That the Sea of Winchester was void by the Deprivation of Gardener, before the
18th of April, the Historian might have learned from King Edward's Journal
published by himself; Page 24.
wherein it is said, that April the 5 th, Poynet Bishop of Rochester received
his Oath for the Bishopric of Winchester, viz. then he received the
Temporalities of Winchester. The Council-Book says that February 8th. This day
by the King's own Appointment Dr. Poynet Bishop of Rochester, was appointed and
admitted Bishop of Winchester. And April the 9th, A Letter was writ to the
Treasurer of the First fruits in favor of Mr. Skorie appointed Bishop of
Rochester.

Page 166. lin. 1. Veysey Bishop of Exeter did also resign, pretending extreme
old Age; but he had reserved a Pension yearly for himself during Life, out of
the Lands of the Bishopric, and almost all the rest he had basely alienated,
taking care only for himself, and ruining his Successors.


The Memory of Veysey suffers upon this Account on all hands. The case of his
Bishopric indeed was very deplorable, which from one of the richest in his
time, became the poorest of all the old English Bishoprics. But had any Bishop
of England sat at Exeter at that time, he must have done the same thing, or
have been immediately deprived. For Veysey alienated no Possessions of his See,
but upon express Command of the King, directed to him under the Privy Seal in
favor of certain Noblemen and Courtiers. All the Bishops at that time were
subjected to a like Calamity. Even Cranmer was forced to part with the better
half of the Possessions of his See, and Ridley soon after his Entry into
London, was forced to give away the four best Manors of his See for ever in
one day. These two were the greatest Favorites among all the Bishops in that
Reign. Others were yet more severely dealt with. The common Pretense was to
exchange some Lands of their Bishoprics with others of Religious Houses
remaining in the King's hands since their Suppression. Even then it was such an
exchange, as Diomedes made with Ajax. But to Veysey no other recompense was
made, than the Promise of the Kings Good Will and Favor, assured to him in the
conclusion of all those Mandates, in case of Compliance with them; the effect
of which Promises was, that after he had complied with them to the ruin of his
See, he was forced to resign it, per metum and terrorem, as himself afterward
alleged. All he could do was to Enregister at length all those Privy-Seals for
the Vindication of himself to his Successors for ever; which he has carefully
done.

Page 166. lin. 4. Miles Coverdale was made Bishop of Exeter -- the business of
Hooper was now also settled; so he was consecrated in March 1551.


The Historian has inverted the true Order of their being made Bishops. For
Hooper was consecrated 1551. March 8th, and Coverdale on the 30th of August
following, Regist. Cranmer.
being nominated on the 27th of August, according to King Edward's Journal.

Page 171. lin. 34. This Year 1551. there were Six eminent Preachers chosen out
to be the Kings Chaplains in Ordinary, two of these were always to attend the
Court, and four to be sent over England to Preach in their Courses, -- These
were Bill, Harley, Pern, Grindal, Bradford, the Name of the Sixth is so dashed
in the King's Journal, that it cannot be read.


It might be guessed from some Passages in the Council-Book, that the Sixth
Preacher was Knox. For 1552. October 21. A Letter was sent from the
Privy Council to Mr. Harley, Bill, Horn, Grindal, Pern, and Knox, to consider,
certain Articles exhibited to the Kings Majesty, to be subscribed by all such
as should be admitted to be Preachers or Ministers, in any part of the Realm,
and to make report of their Opinions of the same. Shortly after to Mr. Knox
Preacher in the North, Forty pounds were given by way of Gratuity. And 1552.
December 9th. A Letter to the Lord Wharton in recommendation of Mr. Knox. And
1553. February 2. A Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury in favor of Mr.
Knox, to be presented by him to the Church of All-hallows in Breadstreet
London. Lastly 1553. June 2. A Letter to the Lord Russel, and the Justices of
the Peace in Buckinghamshire, in favor of Mr. Knox the Preacher. The Author
also of the History of the Church of Scotland ascribed to him, relates, that
he was first appointed Preacher to Barwick, then to Newcastle, and was at
length called to London, and to the South part of England. To the Life of
Bernard Gilpin, wrote by Bishop Carleton, is added a Letter from him to his
Brother, wherein he says of himself, that Secretary Cecil obtained for him
from King Edward a License constituting him a general Preacher throughout the
Kingdom, so long as the King lived. But after all, I rather think, that the
Name of the Sixth Preacher was Thexton. For I did near Twenty years since see,
in the hands of a worthy Clergyman descended from him, an Original Commission
under the King's Seal, given to him, whereby he was Authorized by him to Preach
in the North-East parts of England. I do not at so great distance of time fully
remember the Contents of the Commission, but I think it to have been such, as
agrees well with the Time and Office of these six Preachers.

Page 171. etc. The Business of the Lady Mary, was now taken up with more heat
than formerly. -- The Council finding that her Chaplains had said Mass in one
of her Houses, they ordered them to be proceeded against. Upon which in
December the last Year ( viz. 1550.) she writ earnestly to the Council to let
it fall. -- The Council writ her a long Answer. -- So the Matter slept till the
beginning of May 1551. -- In July the Council sent for Three of her chief
Officers, and gave them Instructions to signify the Kings Pleasure to her, and
to return with an Answer. -- In August they came back and said, that she
charged them not to deliver their Message to the rest of the Family, in which
they being her Servants could not disobey her -- Upon this they were sent to
the Tower. The Lord Chancellor, etc. were next sent to her with a Letter from
the King, etc


There being some mistakes in this Relation, I will amend them, and add some
farther light to the account, out of the Council-Book. The Emperor's
Ambassadors pressed the Council 1551. Febr. 16. to observe their promise made
to him for permission to the Lady Mary of the exercise of her Religion, till
the King should come to age, Page 23.
March 18. The King relates in his Journal, that he sent for her to
Westminster, and told her he could not any longer bear her practice. Upon this
next day the Emperor's Ambassador declared War to the King, if he continued
not to her the liberty of her Religion. Thereupon Mar. 22. Cranmer, Ridley, and
Poynet discoursed with the King about the lawfulness of the permission. And
March 23. the Council decreed to send Wotton to the Emperor (who was not
dispatched till the 10th. of April) and in the mean time to punish the
offenders, first of the King's Servants that heard Mass, next of hers, March
24. Sir Anth. Brown, and Sergeant Morgan were sent to the Fleet for hearing
Mass. Thus King Edward's Journal, which I have observed to be often false in
the days, and especially in this place. For in the Council-Book it is said
March 18th. the Emperor's Ambassador had access to the Council. What was said
by him, or answered to him does not appear; it being probable that for more
secrecy the Clerk was then excluded, March 19. Sergeant Morgan was committed to
the Fleet, and March 22. Sir Anth. Brown for hearing Mass in her company, when
by the King's order he attended her from Essex to London. Now all this,
relating to the Emperor's denunciation of War, to the King's Consultation with
the Bishops, to the Councils debate thereon, and the sending of Dr. Wotton, is
erroneously placed by the Historian before December 1550. It is also a mistake
that the prosecution of the Chaplains kept from December 1550, to May 1551. For
it was not begun till December 15, and March 23. (according to the King's
Journal, I think rather the 18 th.) it was resolved to punish her Servants
hearing or saying Mass: Accordingly in the Council-Book, I find that March 22.
her Comptroller Mr. Rochester was examined how many Chaplains she had, who
answered, four, viz. Mallet, Hopton, Barker and Ricardes, April 29. (the King's
Journal says falsely the 27 th.) Dr. Mallet was brought before the Council, and
being examined, what he meaned, that after he had been once forgiven, he would
again wilfully offend the King's laws in saying of Mass, and other like, could
not deny but he had done evil in so doing -- He therefore was committed to the
Tower. So that Mallet was now imprisoned for a second offense, not (as the
Historian says) because he could not be before this apprehended since his
first prosecution. May, and Brown, and Morgan, upon their submission were
discharged from their imprisonment. Nothing further was done in this matter
till Aug. 9. when it was resolved in Council to send for the chief Officers of
the Lady Mary's House, and to give them in charge not to permit Mass to be said
in her House, or to hear it, and to give the same charge to her Chaplains and
other Servants. The same day it was resolved not to permit the use of Mass to
the Emperor's Ambassador, since he would not permit the English Ambassador
resident in his Dominions the use of our Liturgy. So that now the Council began
to be less in fear of the Emperor, not before the End of the last Year, as the
Historian has it. Aug. 11. a Warrant was signed for the appearance of the Lady
Mary's Officers. Aug. 14. there appeared Robert Rochester, Edward Malgrave, and
Sir Francis Englefield, her three chief Officers, and were strictly charged,
not to signify the King's pleasure to her to have the new Service in her
Family, and to give the like charge to her Chaplains and all her Servants, (as
the Historian relates) but only to charge the Chaplains not to say Mass in her
House, or elsewhere, and the Servants not to hear it, and themselves to conform
to the same Order, and to take care that the others did it. Aug. 22. (the
King's Journal says the 23d.) the Officers returning reported to the Council,
that having first related their Instructions to her Grace (which they had not
been commanded to do) she had absolutely forbidden them to deliver their charge
to the Chaplains and Servants. They also brought with them a Letter wrote by
her to the King, which I have inserted in the following Collection. Upon which
the Officers were (not immedidiately sent to the Tower, Numb. 5.
as the Historian writes, but) called before the Council next day, and
reproved for not having executed their former Instructions, but troubling her
Grace with the opening their Message to her contrary to the Order and Charge
prescribed to them; wherefore each of them by himself, and a part was commanded
to return to her Graces House, and execute the said Charge apart, in such sort
as the Order was given to them on the 14th. Aug. The which thing they all
refused to do; albeit they were enjoined to do the same in virtue of their
Allegiance. Thereupon they were commanded to attend continually, till they
should know the Councils farther pleasure. It was also decreed that the Lord
Chancellor, Secretary Petre, and Sir Anth. Wingfield should repair to the Lady
Mary with a Letter from the King, and large Instructions from the Council,
which were sent to them being then in Essex. The Letter I have put into the
Collection. The Instructions contained a Command, Numb. 6.
to declare to her the King's peremptory resolution, not to permit to her any
longer the use of the Mass, the reasons which induced the Council to send a
Charge to her Chaplains and Household by her own Servants (which she had
extremely resented) the negligence of her Officers in not executing that
Charge, to justify the King's proceedings to her, and lastly calling her
Chaplains and Servants before them, to charge them strictly not to say or hear
Mass. Aug. 29. the Commissioners being returned, made report in Council of the
Execution of their Charge, and of the Lady Mary's Answer, whom they had
attended on the 28th. The Report is large, the substance of which is rightly
given by the Historian. When their Report was ended, an Order was made that
Rochester, Inglefield and Walgrave should be conveyed from the Fleet, (to which
they had been committed the day before) to the Tower: Next year on the 14 th.
of April they were set at liberty, and commanded to return to their Lady, and
attend her Service as she had requested.

Page 177. lin. 32. The English Ambassadors in France 1551. moved for the
Daughter of France (to be given in marriage to King Edward) yet this never
taking effect, it is needless to enlarge farther about it, of which the Reader
will find all the particulars in King Edward's Journal.


This Treaty of Marriage had a considerable Effect, not mentioned in the King's
Journal. For it is said in the Council-Book, that 30. Dec. 1551. This day the
Lord Admiral being returned out of France, delivered to the Lords the
Ratification of the Marriage, between the King's Majesty and the Lady
Elizabeth, the French Kings Daughter, under the Great Seal of France. And it
was accorded that the same Treaty should be delivered to the Lord Treasurer, to
be by him reposed in the Treasury of the Exchequer, to remain there of record
in safe keeping.

Page 194. lin. 43. Tonstall Bishop of Duresm was, upon some complaint brought
against him of Misprision of Treason, put into the Tower about the end of
December last year, viz. 1551. What the particulars were I do not find.


King Edward's Journal places his Imprisonment on the 20th. of December 1551.
and so does the Council-Book, which relates the Cause of it in these Words.
Whereas the Bishop of Duresm, about July in Anno 1550, was charged by Ninian
Menvile to have consented to a Conspiracy in the North, for the raising of a
Rebellion; as by the same accusation in writing, the Bishop's Answer thereunto,
and Menvile 's Replication to the same, may at length appear. For as much as
for want of a Letter written by the said Bishop to Menvile, whereupon depended
a great Trial of this matter, the Determination thereof was hitherto stayed,
and the Bishop only commanded to keep his House, until he should be called to
further Answer; which Letter being lately come to light, found in a Cask of the
Duke of Somersets after his last apprehension; the Bishop was now sent for, and
this day made his appearance before the Lords, by whom being charged with this
matter, and his own Letter produced against him, which he could not deny but to
be of his own hand, and unable to make any further Answer thereto than he had
done before by Writing, he was, for that the same seemed not a sufficient
Answer, committed by the King's Commandment to the Tower of London, to abide
there, etc. He had been accused by Menvile before 1550. Angl. Sacr. Par. 1. p.
782.
For the History of the Bishops of Durham, lately published, affirms, that
Dr. Whitehead Dean of Durham, being together with the Bishop and his Chancellor
Hindmarsh accused by Menvile, was forced to go to London where he died in
1548. Whosoever succeeded him in the Deanery, seems for some time to have been
an Adversary of the Bishop. For in the Council-Book it is said 1551. May 20.
The Bishop of Duresm upon hearing the matter between him and the Dean of
Duresm, was committed to his House. On the 8th. July following, the Council
ordered the Dean of Duresm to Answer in Writing unto Matters as he was charged
with at his being before the Council, and in such sort as he will stand to at
his peril, Aug. 2. The Bishop had License granted to him to walk in the Fields.
October 5. A Letter was wrote by the Council to the Lord Treasurer, Lord
Chamberlain, Secretary Cecil, and Mr. Mason, to hear and examine the Bishop and
Dean of Duresme 's Case, and to make them report of the same; and if they shall
so think convenient, to send for them and their Accuser, together or apart, as
shall seem best unto them. So that by this time the Bishop and Dean were
involved in the same Cause. November 3. The Dean of Durham was bound by the
Council in a Recognizance of Two hundred Pounds to appear before the Council on
the first day of the next Term. He was then very sick and seems to have died
within few days after. Athen. Oxon. Par. 1.
For the King granted the Deanery to Dr. Horn 1551. November 20. The name of the
Dean intervening between Whitehead and Horn, I cannot recover, and am ready to
suspect, that the time of Whitehead's Death is falsely related in the History of
Durham; and that the Order of Council of the 20th of May was not well worded by
the Clerk. For Horn is by many affirmed, to have succeeded immediately to
Whitehead, and to him the Council 1552. February 18th. granted a Letter
directed to the Prebendaries of Durham, to conform themselves to such Orders in
Religion and Divine Service, standing with the Kings proceeding, as their Dean
Mr. Horn shall set forth; whom the Lords require to receive and use well, as
being sent to them for the weal of the Country by his Majesty. To return to
Tonstall; while he lay in the Tower in the Year 1551. he wrote his Book De
veritate corporis and sanguinis Domini in Eucharistia, in the 77th. Year of his
Age, which was Printed at Paris, 1554.

Page 196. lin. 28. On the First of November last Year ( viz. 1551.) a
Commission was granted to Eight Persons to prepare the Matter (a Reformation of
the Ecclesiastical Laws) for the Review of the Two and thirty.


On the 6th of October 1551. the Council had directed a Letter to the Lord
Chancellor, To make out Commission to Thirty two Persons, (viz. Eight Bishops,
Canterbury, London, Winchester, Ely, Exeter, Gloucester, Bath, Rochester: Eight
Divines, Tailor of Lincoln, Cox, Parker, Latimer, Cook, Martyr, Cheek, Masco:
Eight Civilians, Petre, Cecill, Sir Tho. Smyth, Tailor of Hadley, May,
Traheron, Lyell, Skinner: Eight common Lawyers, Justice Hales, Justice Bromley,
Gooderick, Gosnald, Stamford, Carrell, Lucas, Brook,) To authorize them to
Assemble together; and to resolve upon the Reformation of the Canon Law: Eight
of these to rough hew the Canon Law, the rest to conclude it afterward. On the
9th of November 1551. a new Commission was ordered to those Eight Persons
mentioned by the Historian, For the first drawing and ordering the Canon Law,
for that some of those before appointed are now thought meet by the King to be
left out. The Commission was Sealed November 11. as appears by the Reformatio
legum Eccl. Printed at London 1571, 1640. Next Year, viz. 1552. February 2. it
was ordered that the Lord Chancellor make out a Commission to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and other Bishops, Learned men, Civilians and Lawyers of the Realm,
for the Establishment of the Ecclesiastical Laws, according to the Act of
Parliament made the last Sessions. The granting of this Commission King Edward
places in the 10th of February, and gives a List of the Commissioners Names:
but among the Civilians has omitted Hussy, principal Registrary of the Sea of
Canterbury, whose Name I find added to this List, in some Papers of Archbishop
Parker, wherein also instead of Mr. Red.... the Name of Holford occurs.

Page 203. lin. 3. This Year 1552. Day of Chichester, was put out of his
Bishopric. -- Whether he refused to submit to the new Book, or fell into other
Transgressions I do not know. -- His Sentence is something ambiguously
expressed in the Patent that Story had to succeed him, which bears Date the
24th of May.


The Council-Book gives a large account of this matter 1550. October 7. The
Council ordered Dr. Cox to repair into Sussex, to appease the people by his
good Doctrine, which are now troubled through the seditious preaching of the
Bishop of Chichester and others, November 8. The Bishop of Chichester appeared
before the Council, to Answer the things objected to him for Preaching. And
because he denied the words of his Accusation, he was commanded within two days
to bring in writing what he preached. November 30. The Duke of Somerset
declared in Council, that the Bishop of Chichester, coming to him two days
before, had showed him, that whereas he had received Letters from the King and
Council (a Copy of which may be found in the Council-Book) commanding him to
take down all Altars in the Churches of his Diocese, and in lieu of them to set
up Tables in some convenient place of the Chauncels, and to cause the
Reasonableness of it to be declared to the people in Preaching, He could not
conform his Conscience to do what he was by the said Letter commanded, and
therefore prayed to be excused. Upon this the Bishop was commanded to appear
the day following, which he did, and being asked, what he said to the King's
Letter, he answered, that he could not conform his Conscience to take down the
Altars in the Church, and in lieu of them to set up Tables, as the Letter
appointed, for that he seemed for his Opinion, the Scripture, and the Consent
of the Doctors and Fathers of the Church, and contrariwise did not perceive any
strength in the Six Reasons, which were set forth by the Bishop of London, to
persuade the taking down of Altars and Erection of Tables. And then being
demanded, what Scriptures he had, he alleged a saying in Esaias, which place
being considered by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London's, and
the Lords in the Council, was found of no purpose to maintain his Opinion. Then
the Archbishop and Bishop of Ely argued the Lawfulness and Reasonableness of
the thing, after which he was commanded by the Council to conform, which he
still refusing, because contrary to his Conscience, he was ordered to resort to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Ely and London, to confer with
them for satisfying his Conscience and to appear again the 4th of December.
When he then appeared, being demanded, he stuck to his former Resolution, and
entered into a Dispute with the Archbishop about the merits of the Cause, and
alleged the former place out of Esaiah, and a place out of the last Chapter of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. Which the Archbishop and Bishop of Ely answered,
and show from Origin, that in the Primitive Church Christians had no Altars,
and urged the necessity of reforming the abuses of Altars: But touching the
naming the Table an Altar, it was left indifferent to him, so to name it
because ancient Writers sometime call that Table an Altar. Notwithstanding the
Bishop persevering in his Resolution, although he was now again commanded on
his Allegiance to comply, the Council ordered him to appear again on Sunday,
and then to give his final Answer. Which he did, and answered that plainly he
could not do it saving his Conscience, and that he determined rather to lose
all that ever he had. Hereupon two days more were given to him to deliberate.
But on the 11th of December, persisting and praying them to do with him what
they thought connevient, for he would never obey to do this thing; thinking it
a less evil to suffer the Body to perish, than to corrupt the Soul, he was
committed to the Fleet. On the 9th of June 1551. an Order was sent to the
Warden of the Fleet, to suffer the Bishop of Chichester to have such number to
attend on him, and to be ordered at those who attend on the Bishop of
Worcester. In September a Commission was given to examine and judge him. On the
24th of October 1551. an Order was made for seizing into the Kings hands the
Temporalties of the Bishoprics of Chichester and Worcester, lately given to
his Highness by the Judgment given by the Commissioners, lattely appointed for
the hearing of the said Bishops Causes 1552. June 15. A Letter was wrote to the
Lord Chancellor; Signifying to him, that Dr. Day late Bishop of Chichester, is
sent to him by the Kings Appointment, to be used of his Lordship, as in
Christian Charity shall be most seemly. A like Letter was then sent to the
Bishop of London, for the receiving of Dr. Hethe late Bishop of Worcester, and
an Order to the Warden of the Fleet to deliver them both to the Bishops
appointed to receive them. The Archbishop seized the Spiritualties of the Sea
of Chichester, void by the Deprivation of Day 1551. November 3. St^w says,
that the Sentence of his Deprivation was pronounced 1551. October 10. King
Edward's Journal places it on the 5th of October.

Page 203. lin. 3. This Year 1552. Heath Bishop of Worcester was put out of his
Bishopric. He had been put in Prison for refusing to Consent to the Book of
Ordinations. He was afterward deprived.


The Council-Book reports, that at a Council held at Chelsey 1551. September
22. Nicholas Bishop of Worcester was sent for, to whom was repeated the Cause
of his Imprisonment to be for that he refused to subscribe to the Book devised
for the form of making Bishops, Priests and Deacons, being authorized by
Parliament. At the time of which refusal, being not only gently required to
subscribe, but also being manifestly taught by diverse other Learned men, that
all things contained in that Book were good and true, and that the Book was
expedient and allowable; the said Bishop declared himself to be a very
obstinate Man, and for that his doing it was now showed to him, that he
deserved longer Imprisonment. Nevertheless he was now offered to recover the
Kings favor, if he would subscribe to the Book. He answered, Confessing he
took the Cause of his Imprisonment to be as was alleged, and that also he was
very gently used, rather like a Son than a Subject. Nevertheless that he
remained in the same mind, not willing to subscribe it, although he would not
disobey it: And although he was reasoned withal by every of the said Council
(there were present only Six Laymen) in disproving his manner of Answer; being
every thing in the said Book true and good, and being devised by Eleven other
Learned men, to the which he was joined as the Twelfth, and received of all the
Realm; agreeing also that he would obey it, but not subscribe it, which
contained a Contradiction of Reason. Yet he still refused to subscribe it.
Whereupon he was offered to have Conference with Learned men, and to have time
to consider the matter better: Whereunto he said, That he could have no better
Conference than he had heretofore, and well might he have time, but of other
mind he thought never to be. Adding, that there be many other things, whereunto
he would not Consent, as to take down Altars, and set up Tables. He was then
expressly charged to subscribe before Thursday following, before the 24th of
September, upon pain of Deprivation. Next follow the Orders of the 24th of
October 1551, and 15th of June 1552. related in the preceding Article. King
Edward in his Journal notes, that he was deprived for Contempt 1551. October
5. The Register of Archbishop Cranmer, affirms him to have been deprived
1551. October 10. which is chiefly to be relied on, as being a Record with
which also Stow agrees, adding that the same day he was committed to the
Fleet. He had been imprisoned in the Fleet before this Day. For the
Council-Book after the Relation of his Examination, and Answer on the 22d. of
September adds, that as a man incorrigible he was returned to the Fleet.

Page 203. lin. 16. This Year the Bishopric of Gloucester was quite suppressed,
and Hooper was made Bishop of Worcester. In December before Worcester and
Gloucester had been united. So they were to be ever after one Bishopric with
two Titles. But now they were put into another method, and the Bishop was to be
called only Bishop of Worcester. (So also Page 396. lin. penult.) Hooper had
not two Bishoprics, but one that had been for some years divided into two. He
only enjoyed the revenue of Gloucester; for Worcester was entirely suppressed.


The Historian would have obliged us, if he had pleased to acquaint us by what
Authority all this was done. It should seem that Hooper had Possession of the
Revenues of Worcester (I mean as much of it as the greedy Courtiers thought fit
to leave to it) as well as Gloucester. For in the Council-Book is found this
Order, made 1552. May 29. A Letter to...... to make a Book to the Bishop of
Worcester and Gloucester of discharge of the First Fruits, and Tenths to be paid
for the same, in Consideration that he has departed with certain Lands to the
Kings Majesty. Now Hooper had been Consecrated Bishop of Gloucester in the
beginning of the Year 1551. and therefore could now in 1552. be called Bishop
Elect only in respect of Worcester. Nor could he now be charged with
First Fruits, and Tenths, on any other Account, than of the Temporalties of
Worcester newly received by him. Nor could he have passed away any of the Lands
of Worcester to the King, if he had not once Possession of them. But to put the
matter past all Dispute: I will allege an Order of Council fully proving, that
Hooper did enjoy the Revenue of Worcester. For 1552. September 24. the Council
directed a Letter to the Dean of Worcester, to cause the Rent-Corn of the
Bishopric to be reserved to the Bishop, notwithstanding Hethe 's Claim to the
same.

Page 216. lin. 15. How Tonstall Bishop of Duresm was deprived I cannot
understand. It was for Misprision of Treason, and done by Secular men (in the
Year 1553.)


What was done in the Case of Tonstall till the end of the Year 1551. was
before related out of the Council-Book. I will here add out of the same Book,
what afterward occurs relating to him 1552. September 21. A Letter unto the
Chief Justice, signifying unto him, that there is presently sent to him the
Commission addressed to him, and others, for the Limitation, and Determination
of the Bishop of Duresm 's Case; with also eight Letters, and other Writings
touching the same, which he is willed to consider, and proceed to the hearing
and ordering of the Matter, as soon as he may get the rest of his Colleagues to
him. By these Commissioners Tonstall was deprived on the 11 th. of October
1552. according to King Edward's Journal. On the 31. of Oct. following it was
ordered in Council, that Sir John Mason should deliver to the use of Dr.
Tons^all remaining Prisoner in the Tower such Money as should serve for his
necessities, until such time as farther Order shall be taken touching the
Goods and Money lately appertaining to him; and that the Lord Wharton cause the
Accounts of the Revenues of the Bishopric of Duresm, as well for the second
and third Years of the late Bishops entry into the same, as for two Years last
past, to be searched for, and sent hither with speed.

Page 216 lin. 8. Ridley, as himself writes in one of his Letters, was named to
be Bishop of Duresme, but the thing never took effect.


It so far took effect, that Ridley was actually translated from London to
Durham. For in the Instrument of the restitution of Bonner to the Sea of London
in the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, it is alleged that the Sea of London,
was then void by the Removal of Ridley to Durham, made by King Edward after the
Deprivation of Tonstall, and Bonner was thereupon re-instated in London without
pronouncing Ridley deprived of the Sea of London; but on the contrary Ridley is
in the Register declared to have been deprived of the Bishopric of Durham, for
Heresy and Sedition.

Page 242. lin. 39. June 1553. the Seal was on the 13th. of August given to
Gardener, who was declared Lord Chancellor of England.


Stow, who is very exact in denoting the times of things falling within the
compass of his own observation, says that the Seal was delivered unto Gardener
on the 23d. of Aug. His Patent for the Office of Lord Chancellor bears date on
the 21st. of September, according to Sir William Dugdale's accurate Catalogue
of the Chancellours, Chron. p. 88.
etc. of England. With Stow agrees Grafton herein.

Page 247. lin. 5. Page 248. lin. 35. The Commission for restoring Bonner,
bearing date the 22d. of Aug. was directed to some Civilians -- who pronounced
his former Sentence of Deprivation void. Thus he was restored to his See on the
5th. of September 1553.


Stow, and Grafton affirm, that Bonner was restored to his Bishopric in the
beginning of August, and that he caused the use of the Mass and other Roman
Ceremonies to be renewed in his Cathedral Church on the 27th. of August.

Page 249. lin. 17. P. 314. l. 36. P. 348 l. 38. Cranmer protested that the
Mass was not set up at Canterbury by his Order, but that a fawning hypocritical
Monk (this was Thornton Suffragan of Dover) had done it Anno 1553, without his
knowledge -- Thornton Suffragan of Dover resolved to show his zeal (for Popery,
Anno 1555.) This Thornton had from the first Change made by King Henry, been
the most officious and forward in every turn -- In the Month of June 1557.
Fourteen Protestants were destroyed in two days by Thornton and Harpsfield.


There was but one Suffragan Bishop in the Diocese of Canterbury, of the Name
of Thornton. He was Suffragan to Archbishop Warham in the Year 1508. and had
his Title not from Dover, but in partibus Infidelium, and died long before
Cranmer's time. The Suffragan under Cranmer and Pole was Richard Thornden,
sometimes Monk, afterward upon the Suppression of the Priory, first Prebendary
of the Church of Canterbury. He died in the end of year 1557, or rather in the
beginning of 1558.

Page 250. lin. 8. On the 13th. of September, Latimer and Cranmer were called
before the Council, Latimer was that day committed, but Cranmer was respited
till next day, and then he was sent to the Tower.


If Stow may be believed Latimer was sent to the Tower on the 14th, and Cranmer
on the 15th. of September 1553.

Page 250. lin. 17. and 24. There was an Order sent to John a Lasco, and his
Congregation to be gone. Alasco after a long and hard passage arriving at
Denmark, was ill received there. From thence they went first to Lubeck, then to
Wismar and Hamburgh, and at last planted themselves in Friseland.


A most exact account of the Foundation and Dissolution of this German
Congregation in England, with their subsequent Removals, was written by
Utenhovius one of the Ministers, at the desire of the Congregation, and is
printed at Basil 1560, 86. with this Title. Simplex and fidelis Narratio de
instituta and demum dissipata Delgarum aliorumque Peregrinorum in Anglia
Ecclesia, per Iohannem Utenhovium Gandavum, being approved by John a Lasco, and
the rest, as a true account. From this Narration it appears, that although some
of the Company went to Hamburgh, Lubeck, Wismar, etc. Yet that Alasco himself
went not thither with them. He left Denmark on the 19th. of November, passed
through Holsatia, and arrived at Embden the 4th. of December. He was
accompanied with a Servant of the King of Denmark, by whom he sent back a
severe or rather unmannerly Letter to the King. In this same Relation of
Utenhovius is printed at large the Charter given by King Edward to John a Lasco
and his Congregation; Page 154.
which the Historian had before mentioned, and put it into his Collection, for
the Curiosity of the thing, as himself says: It was also published by Mr.
Prynn in his Trial of Archbishop Laud. Page 394.
I will further add, that it is more correct in Utenhovius, than in the
Transcript; which is the Case of all the Instruments and Memorials published by
him, which I have had occasion to compare either with the Originals, or with
other Copies.

Page 251. lin. 2. Cox was without any good color turned out both of his
Deanery of Christ-Church, and his Prebendary at Westminster. He was put into the
Marshalsea, but on the 19th of August 1553. was discharged.


Cox had no Prebendary (the Historian would have said Prebend) at Westminster,
but besides his Deanery of Christ-Church Oxford, was Dean of Westminster, and
Prebendary of Windsor; of all which he was deprived about this time. The cause
of his Deprivation, was probably supposed to have been, that he had acted in
favor of Queen Jane. For being a considerable Person in King Edward's Court at
the time of his Death, and having been much employed even in State Affairs, he
could not well avoid to be concerned in that matter, if he were then present at
Court. He was married indeed at this time. But I do not think that was alleged
as a Cause of his Deprivation. For they did not yet proceed to deprive the
married Clergy, until some Months after this.

Page 252. lin. 28. On the Fourth of October 1553. Holgate Archbishop of York
was put in the Tower, no cause being given, but heinous Offenses only named in
General.


I fear that Holgate by his imprudent Carriage, if not by worse Actions, had
brought a Scandal on the Reformation. Most, if not all the Persons highly
instrumental in the Reformation, were eminent for Virtue, but the probity of
Holgate may justly be suspected. For in the Council-Book of King Edward, I find
this Order made on the 23d. of November, 1551. A Letter to the Archbishop of
York, to stay his coming up hither till the Parliament. Also a Letter to Sir
Tho. Gargrave, and Mr. Chaloner, and Dr. Rouksby, to search and examine the
very truth of the matter between the Archbishop of York, and one Norman, who
claims the said Archbishop's Wife to be his Wife, to which end the
Supplication of the said Norman is sent to them enclosed. It is to be lamented
indeed, that such occasions of Scandal were given by any eminent Persons of our
Church (although to say the truth Holgate acted very little in the Reformation)
but when they are given, they ought not to be dissembled by an Historian, out
of favor or affection to any Party. To represent only the laudable Actions of
men, is to write an Elogy, or Apology, or Panegyric, or whatever other Name it
may assume, the name of History it ought not to claim. And after all such
Scandals (if indeed this were justly so) are no more prejudicial to the Honor
of the Church of England, at and since the Reformation, than the scandalous
Impurities of Walter Bishop of Hereford, Stanly Bishop of Ely, and many others,
were to the Honor of the same Church before the Reformation. I know whither
the learned Author of the Defense of Priest-Marriages, published by Archbishop
Parker intends the Case of Holgate, Page 190, 191.
when he says, I mean not to justify the universal sort of the married
Bishops, and Priests in all their light and dissolute Behavior; whatsoever it
has been in any of them from the highest to the lowest. -- I think that I may
speak it of the Conscience of some married Bishops and Priests in England, that
they do as much lament the light Behavior, showed and escaped by some of them;
in the Libertee that was granted them of Law and Parliament, as they that be
most angry and out of patience with them. -- and beside forth bewail the
dissolute Behavior of a great meany of their best beloved, and wish as heartily
all Offendicles and Slanders rooted out both sorts of the Clergy. It should
seem that in the Imprisonment of Holgate, this was alleged as one of those
heinous Offenses, which were the pretended cause of it. For in the Instrument
of his Deprivation it is said, that he was for his Marriage committed to the
Tower and deprived.

Page 257. lin. 16. On the 3d. of November 1553. Archbishop Cranmer, with
others, were brought to their Trial.


He was Arraigned and Condemned of Treason at Guild Hall London, on the 13th of
November, according to Stow and Grafton.

Page 257. lin. 28. And now, (after his Attainture) Cranmer was legally
divested of his Archbishopric, which was hereupon void in Law. -- But it being
now designed to restore the Ecclesiastical Exemption and Dignity to what it had
been anciently, it was resolved, that he should still be esteemed Archbishop,
till he were solemnly degraded according to the Canon Law (which was done in
the middle of February 1556.) So that all that followed upon this against
Cranmer, was a Sequestration of all the Fruits of his Archbishopric; himself
was still kept in Prison.


This, if true, would be a matter of great moment, and make a considerable
change in the History of our Church. But really it is a mere Fiction. For
immediately after his Attainture, the Sea of Canterbury was declared void, and
the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury thereupon assumed the Administration of the
Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Archbishopric, as in other Cases of Vacancy. The
Attainture was completed in the middle of November 1553. and on the 16th of
December following, the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, gave out Commissions to
several Persons for the Exercise of the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction in their
Names, and by their Authorities. The Chapter continued in Possession of this
Jurisdiction, till the Publication of Cardinal Poles Bulls of Provision to the
Archbishopric; viz. till the beginning of the Year 1556. and during that time
gave Commissions to the several Officers and Judges of the Courts of the
Archbishopric, had the spiritual Jurisdiction of all vacant Bishoprics, gave
Institution to all Benefices in them, and in the Diocese of Cunterbury, gave
Commissions for the Consecration of Bishops, etc. of all which Acts done a
peculiar Register was made, Entitled, Vacatio sedis Metropoliticae Christi
Cantuar. post depositionem Thomae Cranmer nuper Archiepiscopi Cantuar. primo de
crimine laesae Majestatis Authoritate Parliamenti convicti, and deinde ob
varias haereses Authoritate sedis Apostolicae depositi, degradati, Seculari
brachio traditi, and post remo in alma Universitate Oxoniensi igne consumpti,
sub anni Domini, 1553, 1554, and 1555. regnorum vero Philippi and Mariae Regum,
etc. During this time, all Acts and Instruments begin with these words:
Nocholaus Wotton utriusque juris Doctor. Decanus Ecclesiae Cathedralis, and
Metropolitices Christi Cantuar. and ejusdem Ecclesiae Capitulum, ad quem, and
quos, omnis and omnino da Iurisdictio Spiritualis and Ecclesiastica, quae ad
Archiepiscopum Canturiensem, sede plena, pertinuit, ipsa sede jam per
Attincturam Thomae Cranmer, ultimi Archiepiscopi ejusdem, de alta proditione
attincti and adjudicati, vacant, notoriae dinoscitur pertinere. Thus in
particular begins the first Instrument of the Register, Dated 1553. December
16. Long before his Degradation also, the Pope had solemnly Excommunicated and
Deposed Cranmer for Heresy: for it did not concern him to take notice of the
Pretense of High Treason. In the Bull of Provision to Cardinal Pole, to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, dated 1555. December 11. Pope Paul says, that he
had by a solemn Sentence, Excommunicated and Deposed from the Sea of
Canterbury, filium iniquitates Thomam Cranmer, olim Archiepiscopum Cantuar. ob
notorias haereses. This Bull sufficiently disproveth the Historians relation.
But that which is chiefly to be regarded herein, is the Register of the Vacancy
before mentioned, which puts it beyond all doubt, that the Sea of Canterbury
became void immediately upon the Attainture of Cranmer, and was at least in
England so accounted.

Page 267. lin. 25. The last thing I find done this Year 1553. was the
restoring Veysey to be Bishop of Exeter, which was done on the 28th of
December. In his Warrant for it under the Great Seal it is said, that he for
some just troubles both in Body and Mind, had resigned his Bishopric to King
Edward, to which the Queen now restored him.


The Register of Canterbury beforementioned records, that Veysey was
restored to his Bishopric, because he had been induced by fear to resign it in
the time of King Edward. Part 1. Page 582.
The Author of Athenae Oxon. says, that he was forced to resign pro corporis
metu 1551. August 14. and was restored by the Queens Patent bearing date 1553,
September 28.

Page 275. lin. 1. Thus were seven Bishops all at a Dash turned out (in the
Year 1554.) It was much censured, that there having been Laws made, allowing
Marriage to the Clergy, the Queen should by her own Authority, upon the
repealing those Laws, turn out Bishops for things that had been so well
warranted by Law. -- And even the severest Popes, who had pressed the Celibate
most, had always before they proceeded to deprive any Priests for Marriage,
left it to their Choice, whether they would quit their Wives or their Benefices.


In the Commissions given by the Queen for the Deprivation of these Bishops,
and related by the Historian; it is ordered to proceed against Four of them
only for Marriage ( viz. York, St. David's, Chester, and Bristol) but against
the other Three ( viz. Lincoln, Gloucester, and Hereford) for other pretended
misdemeanors. Now in aggravating the Queens injustice, in depriving them
Summarily for their Marriage; the Historian plainly mistaketh the Case. For
they were not ordered to be deprived simply for their Marriage, but for having
broken their Vows of perpetual Celibate, and having married after a solemn
Profession of Chastity. This the Historian might have observed from the very
Commission for the Deprivation of the Four first (published by himself) the
words whereof are these. Quia comperimus Robertum, Archiepiscopum Ebor.
Robertum Menev. Iohannem Cester. and Paulum Brostol. post expressam professione
in castitatis, express, rite, and legitime emissam, cum quibusdam mulieribus
nuptias de facto, cum de jure non deberent, contraxisse. The Secular Clergy of
England had never indeed made any Profession of Chastity at their Ordination.
But that all the Regulars did, is notorious. And however the severest Popes
had, before they proceeded to deprive any Secular Priests for Marriage, left it
to their Choice, whether they would quit their Wives or their Benefices; yet no
such favor was ever allowed to the Regular Priests who had contracted
Marriage, but their Marriage was accounted an heinous Crime, by reason of the
Violation of their Vow included in it. It may be therefore observed, that the
Queen giving Commissions at the same time, for the Deprivation of the Four
first, and of the Three last Bishops, orders the former to be deprived for
their Marriage, the later for their pretended misdemeanors, having taken Grants
of their Bishoprics from King Edward the Sixth with this Clause, quamdiu been
se gesserint, although two of the Three later Bishops were married, and all the
Four former Bishops had taken Patents from King Edward with the like Clause.
The reason of this diversity of proceeding was because the first Four were
Regulars, and the other Three were Seculars. That the later were Seculars is
well known: and of the others Holgate of York had been Provincial of the Order
of St. Gilbert of Sempringham, Ferrar of St. David's had been a Canon Regular of
the Order of St. Augustine, Bush of Bristol had been Provincial of the Order of
Bon-hommes, Bird of Chester had been Provincial of the Carmelites. Of the three
Secular Bishops (viz. Lincoln, Gloucester and Hereford) the two later were
indeed married, but of that the Queen takes no notice in her Commission for
their Deprivation; although their Ecclesiastical Judges in depriving them,
thought fit to allege their Marriage, as one Cause of their Deprivation, not
in Virtue of the Queens Commission but of the Canon Law, which upon repeal of
the Statutes for the Marriage of the Clergy, recovered its former force in this
Case.

Page 275. lin. 24. For the Archbishop of York, though he was now (in March
1554.) turned out, yet he was still kept Prisoner, till King Phillip procured
his Liberty: But his See was not filled till February next; for then Heath had
his Conge d'elire.


The Historian dateth the Queens Commission, by Authority of which he supposes
Holgate to have been deprived, on the 16th of March 1554. Reg. Ebor.
But the Sea of York was void before this. For the Dean and Chapter of York
assumed to themselves the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction (void by his Deprivation)
on the 8th of March 1554.) He was discharged out of the Tower 1555. January 18.
His See was not filled till June or July of the Year 1555. For however the
Conge d'elire might issue out in February, Heath had not Possession of the
Archbishopric, until his Election was confirmed at Rome, and his Bulls were
published in England, which Bulls were not dispatched till the 21st of June
1555.

Page 275. lin. 28. On, or before the 18th of March this Year (1554) were those
other Sees (St. David's, Chester, Bristol, Lincoln, Gloucester, Hereford,)
declared Vacant.


The Register of Canterbury, in which all these Deprivations are recorded,
testifies, that on the 20th of March 1554. the Bishops of Winchester, London,
Chichester, and Durham, by Virtue of the Queens Commission directed to them,
pronounced the Sentence of Deprivation upon John Tailor Bishop of Lincoln, Ob
nullitatem consecrationis ejus and defectum tituli sui quem habuit a Rege
Edwardo Sexto per literas patentes cum hac clausula dum been se gesserit, upon
John Hooper Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, Propter conjugium, and alia mala
merita, and vitiosum titulum, ut supra, upon John Harlowe Bishop of Hereford,
Propter conjugium and Hoeresin, and ut supra, upon Robert Ferrar Bishop of St.
David's, Propter causas supradictas, upon John Bird Bishop of Chester, Propter
conjugium. No Sentence of Deprivation was pronounced at that time upon Bush
Bishop of Bristol. Whether he evaded it by renouncing his Marriage, or by any
other Submission, is uncertain. But he was never deprived. However, willingly
or unwillingly, he resigned his Bishopric in June following. For in the same
Register, the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, assumed the spiritual
Jurisdiction of the Sea of Bristol void; per spontaneam resignationem Pauli
Bushe 1554. Iunii 21.

Page 275. lin. 32. Gooderick Bishop of Ely died in April this Year 1554.


He died in May, either on the 9th, or 10th day of the Month.

Page 275. lin. 41. Hopton was made Bishop of Norwich. But Story, that had been
Bishop of Chichester, though upon Day's being restored he was turned out of his
Bishopric, did comply merely. He came before Bonner, and renounced his Wife,
and did Penance for it, and had his Absolution under his Seal, the 14th of
July this Year 1554.


Day was restored to the Bishopric of Chichester, before the 16th of March
1554, (when the Queens Commission was directed to him and others, in Virtue of
which he with his Colleagues deprived several Bishops on the 20th of March,)
whereas Hopton of Norwich was not consecrated till the 25th of October.
following. Besides it is not certain, that Story was turned out of his
Bishopric. The words of the Register are somewhat ambiguous, but seem to
insinuate, as if he voluntarily restored to Day the Bishopric of Chichester,
from which he had been ejected. I will not omit here to add, that his Penance,
if he performed any, was not imposed so much for his Marriage contracted after
Priests Orders, as for the violation of his Vow. For although it be not known
of what Order he was, we are assured from Archbishop Parker (in the Catalogue
of the Bishops of his time, prefixed to his History of the Archbishops of
Canterbury) that he was a Regular.

Page 276 lin. 1. The Bishop of Bath and Wells, Barlow, was also made to
resign; as appears, etc. though elsewhere it is said, that the Sea was Vacant
by his Deprivation. But I incline it truer that he did resign.


It is most certain, that Barlow did resign. For in the aforesaid Register is a
Commission granted to certain Persons by the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, to
Act during the Vacancy of the Sea of Bath and Wells, which is there said to be
void, Per liberam and spontaneam resignationem Domini Willielmi Barlowe ultimi
Episcopi and Pastoris ejusdem. This Commission was giving between 20th.
December 1553, and 25th. March 1554

Page 276. lin. 16. Barlow never Married.


A more unhappy mistake could not possibly have been made. For so remarkable a
Marriage never happened to any Clergyman of England, as to Barlow. He he had
Five Daughters, afterward married to five Bishops. The first, Fraunces was
married to Matthew Parker Son to Archbishop Parker. After his Death, (which was
in the end of the Year 1574.) she was married to Dr. Matthews Archbishop of
York. A second Daughter of Barlow, was married to Wickham Bishop of Winchester,
a third to Overton Bishop of Lichfield, a fourth to Westphaling Bishop of
Hereford, a fifth to Day Bishop of Winchester: All this is declared at length
in the Epitaph fixed to the Monument of Fraunces, who dying in 1629. Aged 78
years, was buried in the Church of York. So that Fraunces was born in 1551. in
the Reign of King Edward, when her Father was Bishop of Wells. Besides these
Daughters, Reg. Faad. Parker.
Barlow had a Son of his own name, who was Prebendary of Wyvelescomb in the
Church of Wells in the Year 1571. being then in Deacons Orders. It appears
farther, that Barlow's Wife was alive, after that her Daughter Fraunces had
married to Matthew Parker; so that notwithstanding the Historians reasons it is
to be feared, that Barlow made some dishonorable compliance in the Reign of
Queen Mary.

Page 276. lin. 31. When this was done ( viz. after the old Bishops were
deprived in the Year 1554.) the Bishops went about the executing the Queens
Injunctions. -- In this Business none was so hot as Bonner. He set up the old
Worship at St. Paul's on St. Katherines day. And the next day being St. Andrews,
he did officiate himself, and had a solemn Pocession.


Bonner had restored the Mass in the Church of St. Paul's on the 27th. Aug.
1553. as was before related out of Stow and Grafton. If St. Andrews day be the
next day to St. Katherine, our English Calendar indeed wants great Reformation,
which places it five days after St. Katherine. But it may be presumed, that if
the Calendar can retain any Friends to plead its cause, it may in this Case get
the better of the Historian.

Page 276. lin. 46. The Clergy were now fallen on for their Marriages. Parker
estimates it, that there were now about 16000 Clergymen in England; and of
those 12000 were turned out upon this Account. Some, he says, were deprived
without Conviction, some were never cited, etc. They were all Summarily
deprived.


The Historian would have obliged us, if he had pleased to acquaint us, in what
Book or Writing Parker has delivered this Account. The Testimony of so grave,
and so worthy a Person would have excluded all doubt. In the Defense of Priests
Marriages, wrote by an unknown Layman, and published by Parker; this Passage
may indeed be found. Fol. 6.
Is thus the Honor of the Clergy preserved, to drive out so many, twelve of
Sixteen thousand (as some Writer makes his Account) to so great a Peril of
getting their Livings, and this just at the Point of Harvest? Here it may be
easily observed, that this Author will by no means vouch for the Truth of this
Computation. It would in truth be a very extraordinary matter, if 12000
Clergymen should have married between the end of the year 1548, and the middle
of 1553. I cannot affirm of my own knowledge that the account is extravagantly
false, but am very apt to believe it. And in this belief I am confirmed; for
that having had the Curiosity to compute how many Clergymen were deprived for
Marriage in this Reign, in the Diocese and Peculiars of the Sea of Canterbury,
I found the proportion far short of this account. For whereas there are
contained therein about 380 Benefices, and other Ecclesiastical Promotions, no
more than 73 Clergymen therein were then deprived for Marriage, or any other
Cause; which far from the proportion of 12 to 16, scarce bears the proportion
of 3 to 16. Yet Thornden and Harpsfield were as vigorous in prosecuting the
married Clergy of that Diocese, as any Zealots in any part of England. Page
13.269.
As for the severe and unjust proceedings against some of the married Clergy,
related by the Historian; the Author before mentioned attesteth the same thing.
Fol. 5.
But when the Historian says, they were all summarily deprived, I fear this is
an Addition of his own. For this Author on the contrary says, that a years
time was allowed to the Clergy to abjure their heresy, and put away their
Wives: although in some places their enemies were so zealous, that they
dispossessed many of them before the year expired. The first deprivation, which
I find to have been made on this account, was in the Church of Canterbury, by
Thornden then Vice-Dean: who on the 16th of March 1554, deprived six
Prebendaries (one of them the Archbishops Brother, Archdeacon also,) six
Preachers, and two minor Canons of that Church. In the Register of the Vacancy
may be found many Processes against, and Deprivations of married Clergymen;
from whence it appears plainly, that the usual forms of proceeding were, at
least in many Cases observed, and that all were not summarily deprived.

Page 277. lin. 2. Nor was this all; but after they were deprived, they were
also forced to leave their Wives: Which piece of severity was grounded on the
Vow, that (as was pretended) they had made; though the falsehood of this Charge
was formerly demonstrated.


It is true that the Secular Clergymen had made no Vow. But it cannot be denied
that as many of the Clergy, as had formerly been Regulars, had made solemn and
express Vows. Now the Number of these was very considerable among the beneficed
Clergy of that time; by reason that all Priests who had been ejected out of
Religious Houses, were enabled to hold Benefices; and that the King also, and
other Patrons did more readily give Benefices to them, that so by that means
they might discharge themselves from the obligation of paying their Annual
Pensions any longer to them. These therefore were all forced to leave their
Wives, unless they evaded it by any base compliance, by Connivance, or by the
Favor of any great Person. But that any of the Seculars were forced to leave
their Wives, I do no where find. Indeed it was necessary to all, who would
continue in their Benefices, to renounce their Wives; but we now speak of those
Clergymen, who had been already deprived of their Benefices. Against many of
them Processes were formed for their Marriage, which may be found in the
Register often made; but therein I cannot find any beside Regulars, to have
been deprived by the Sentence of the Court, or their Marriages to have been
annulled. And accordingly in the Articles of Enquiry or Interrogatories to be
administered to every married Clergyman, formed in March 1554. (when the
persecution of the married Clergy began in the Diocese of Canterbury) the first
is, Whether he had been a Religious, and of what Order, and in what Monastery
or House? A Copy of these Articles I have given in the following Collection.
Number. 8.


Page 292. lin. 6. What Cardinal Pole's Instructions were, I do not know, nor
is it falsely understood by Learned men, what was the Power of a Legate a Latere
in those days. But I found the Original Bull of Cardinal Beacon's Legatine
Power in Scotland, and have given it a room in the Collection, though it be
large, since, no doubt, Cardinal Pool's Bull was in the same form.


We have no such necessity of borrowing light from Scotland. The Bull of
Cardinal Pole's Legatine Power is entered in the beginning of his Register (kept
at Doctors Commons) which ought in the first place to have been consulted. I
have caused it to be thence transcribed, Number. 9.
and have put it into the following Collection. From thence it will appear, how
false the Conjecture of the Historian is, that Pole's Bull was in the same form
with Beacon's Bull, which he pronounces to be without all doubt. For in truth
they differ altogether both in matter and form.

Page 292. lin. 39. The Queen was falsely believed to be with Child. Notice was
given of it to the Council, who that Night wrote a Letter to Bonner about it,
ordering a Te Deum to be sung at Paul's, and the other Churches of London.


The Council wrote and sent such Orders not only to Bonner, but to other
Bishops of the Nation, on the same day. I have in the Collection subjoined the
Letter wrote by the Council to the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, Number. 7.
who had then the Spiritual Jurisdiction in that Diocese in the Vacancy of the Sea.

Page 297. lin. 33. Upon Cardinal Pole's being called over, there was a
Commission sent him by the Great Seal, bearing date 10. Nov. 1554. authorizing
him to exercise his Legatine Power in England.


This License bears date on the 10th of December. that year, as may be seen in
the Cardinals own Register, wherein it is enregistred. In like manner Pole
afterward obtained a License from the Queen 1555. Nov. 2d. to hold a
Convocation (as the Historian relates, page 324) in virtue of which License he
sent his Mandate to Bonner on the 8th. day of the same Month to summon a
Convocation. In obedience to which, Bonner summoned the Clergy to meet on the
2d. of December following. Which I observe, because the Historian in speaking
of this Convocation, has not fixed the time of it.

Page 313. lin. 1. John Kardmaker, that had been Divinity-Reader at St. Paul's,
and a Prebendary at Bath, was burnt in Smithfield on the 30th of May 1555.


There had been Monks in the Church of Bath, until the Dissolution of the
Monastery. But since that time, neither Monks nor Prebendaries had any place
therein. Kardmaker had been really Prebendary of Wells, and in King Edwards's
Council-Book I find ordered 1551. Febr. 18. A Letter to the Chapter of Wells,
in favor of Mr. John Kardmaker, Chancellor of that Church.

Page 320. lin. 45. Gardener Bishop of Winchester was believed to be the base
Son of Richard Woodvil, that was brother to Queen Elizabeth, Wife to King
Edward IV.


Bishop Godwin delivers a more probable relation (which he affirms to have
received from a Kinsman of Gardener) that he was the base Son of Lionel Woodvil
Bishop of Salisbury: which Lionel was the Son of Richard Woodvil mentioned by
the Historian. Page 1117.
With Godwin agrees Mills in his Genealogical Catalogue of the Nobility of
England.

Page 321. lin. 44. Heath Archbishop of York had the Seals in Febr. after, viz.
in 1556.


Hethe received the Great Seal on the first day of January 1556. according to
Stow. Dugdale also writes, that he was constituted Chancellor on that day,
alleging undoubted authority, Claus. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. Orig. Iur. page
90.


Page 339. lin. 3. The Chief of these (faithful Shepherds, who were willing to
hazard their Lives in feeding this Flock committed to their care, privately)
were Scambler and Dentham, etc.


Had none of the old deprived Bishops then, who were at liberty, courage
sufficient to do their duty herein? That would indeed reflect upon their
Memory. I doubt not, that some of them performed their duty. At least I am
sure, that Harley late Bishop of Hereford did; of whom Dr. Humphreys (sometimes
his Scholar, Vita Iuelli page 70.
afterward his intimate Friend) relates, that under the Reign of Queen Mary,
he instructed his Flock in Woods and secret Places, as a faithful and holy
Shepherd, preaching to them, and administering the Sacraments; and for this
purpose lurking up and down in England, at last died like an exile in his own
Country.

Page 327. lin. 25. It was thought, that Pole himself hastened the Execution of
Cranmer (who was executed in March 1556.) longing to be invested with that See:
which the only personal blemish I find laid on him.


I am very unwilling to believe, that a Person of such eminent virtue, as
Cardinal Pole is by all allowed to have been, could be guilty of so base an
Action. The truth is, he could have no such design. For it was before showed,
that the Sea of Canterbury had been actually voided immediately upon the
Attainture of Cranmer in the end of the year 1553. After his Attainture at
home, and deposition and excommunication pronounced at Rome (of which I spoke
before) he was dead to the Canon as well as Common Law. His natural Life could
be no obstacle to the advancement of Pole to the Archbishopric. Register. Pole.
And accordingly that very Pope Paul (of whom the Historian makes Pole to have
been so much afraid, lest he should defeat his hope of the Archbishopric, (if
Cranmer's Life were not quickly taken away) had by a Bull dated 1555. December.
11. collated or provided Pole to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, constituting
him Administrator of the Archbishopric till he should be ordained Priest, and
after that, appointing him Archbishop with full Power and Jurisdiction. Upon
the reception and publication of these Bulls in England (which was about the
beginning of the following Month) Pole was to all intents and purposes fully
possessed of the Archbishopric, although he was not consecrated till the 22d
of March following, the day after Cranmer's Martyrdom. The Historian renews
this Charge against Pole, page 340, but there urges the same argument only,
namely, his choosing the next day after Cranmer's Death for his Consecration,
which is of no moment, since Cranmer had in his account, and in Canon and
Common Law, ceased long since to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and himself had
been possessed of the Archbishopric above two Months.

Page 326. lin. 38. Although Cardinal Pole had an only Brother David, that had
continued all King Henry's time in his Archdeaconry of Darby, he did not
advance him till after he had been two years in England; and then he gave him
only the Bishopric of Peterborough, one of the poorest of the Bishoprics.


Cardinal Pole had three Brothers; and this David was not his Brother.
Bacatelli who wrote his Life, had been his Secretary and Domestic Servant, for
near twenty Years before his Death. He had reason therefore to know the
Cardinals Kindred; and he affirms, that the Cardinal had three Brothers,
Henry (Lord Montacute, condemned of Treason, and executed in the year 1538.)
Arthur, (condemned for Treason in 1562.) and Geofry, (condemned in 1538, but
neither executed) and two Sisters. Then whereas David Pole is said by the
Historian to have been preferred to Peterborough, one of the poorest of the
Bishoprics; in truth Peterborough was at that time none of the least
Bishoprics in England, having been endowed by King Henry, far above any of the
new erected Bishoprics, and made equal in revenue to most of the ancient
Bishoprics; and so continued, until Scambler, the Successor of this David
Pole, did by a Simoniacal Contract, convey away the better part of the
Possessions of it to a Noble Person of the Neighborhood; that he might thereby
make way for his own Translation to the Bishopric of Norwich, to do the like
Mischief there.

Page 340. lin. 20. On the 28th of March, Pole came in State through London to
Bow-Church; where the Bishops of Worcester and Ely put the Pall about him.


He received, and was solemnly invested with his Pall at Bow-Church, on the
25th of March; as his own Register testifies; which is confirmed by Stow.

Page 340. lin. 22. This was a Device set up by Pope Paschal the second, in the
beginning of the twelfth Century, for the engaging of all Archbishops to a more
immediate dependence on that See; they being, after they took the Pall, to act
as the Popes Legates born (as the Phrase was) of which it was the Ensign. But
it was at first admitted with great Contradiction, both by the Kings of Sicily,
and Poland; the Archbishops of Palermo and Gnesna, being the first to whom they
were sent, all men wondering at the Novelty of the thing, and of the Oath which
the Popes required of them at the Delivery of it.


I cannot sufficiently admire, that any learned Man should commit so great a
Mistake. None, conversant in the History of the Church, can be ignorant, that
the Custom of sending Palls from Rome to the Archbishops owning any Dependence
upon that See, or Relation to it, began many hundred years before Pope Paschal
the Second. Pope Gregory the First had sent a Pall to Augustine, the first
Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the Archbishops from him to the Reformation
did singly receive Palls from Rome, if sudden Death did not prevent them before
the Reception. In like manner all the English Archbishops of York from the
beginning (if we except two or three, who for that reason claimed not
Archiepiscopal Privileges) received their Palls from thence; and so also all
the Archbishops of the Western-Church, which held any Communication with the Sea of Rome. When they were first sent to Archbishops, and for several Ages
after, no Oath of Obedience to the Sea of Rome was exacted at the Delivery of
them. Thus the Historian is found to have erred in fixing the time of their
beginning, and in affixing a constant Oath to them. But farther he has widely
mistaken the Design of them: which was not to constitute those, who received
them, Legati Nati, to the Sea of Rome. For if that were true, all the
Archbishops of Canterbury from the first Foundation of the Sea, almost all the
Archbishops of York, and the other Archbishops of the Western Church, would
have been Legati Nati to the Pope: whereas in truth, the Number of Legati Nati
in Christendom is very small, not exceeding four or five; the Archbishops of
York never were Legati Nati, nor the Archbishops of Canterbury, till about the
Year 1200. When Archbishop Herbert first obtained that Privilege to himself
and Successors. Lastly, whereas the Historian makes the Archbishop of Gnesna
to have been one of the first, to whom the Title and Privilege of Legatus
Natus was conferred, and that by Pope Paschal: the contrary of it is so far
true, that Andreas Olzowski Archbishop of Gnesna in his Letter wrote to Dr.
Sheldon Archbishop of Canterbury in the Year 1675. (wherein he requests of him
to send to him an account of the Privileges of Legatio Nata belonging to the Sea of Canterbury) begins to propose his requests in these words. Concessum
olim erat Anno 1515. Privilegium Legationis nata a Leone X. Papa Archiepiscopis
Gnesnensibus Primatibus Poloniae tali verborum contextu, Concedentes, ut
omnibus Privilegiis, etc. quae ad Legatos Natos pertinent, and quae alii Legati
Nati, praesertim vero Legatus Cantuariensis in suis Provinciis, utuntur, libere
and licite valeat uti, etc.

Page 360. lin. 17. The Parliament was opened on the 20th of January 1558. In
the House of Peers the Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of St. John of
Jerusalem, took their places according to their Writs. Tresham was now made
Prior.


Thomas Tresham had been made Prior of St. John of Jerusalem by the Queen on
the 30th of November 1557, as both Stow and Fuller witness.

Page 378. lin. 45. In the beginning of the next year, ( viz. 1559.) the
Bishops of Norwich and Gloucester died.


They both died before the end of this year, 1558. For in the Register of Pole,
I find that the Sea of Gloucester was void by the Death of James Brooks, 1558.
Sept. 7. And in the Register of Canterbury, the Dean and Chapter of the Church,
are said to have seized into their hands, 1558. December. 24. the Spiritualties
of the Sea of Norwich, void by the Death of John Hopton.

Page 378. lin. 44. Those now void, were the Sees of Canterbury, Hereford,
Bristol, and Bangor. It was of great importance to find men able to serve in
these Employments, chiefly in the Sea of Canterbury. For this Dr. Parker was
soon thought on. He was writ to on the 9th of December, 1558. to come up to
London.


From this Relation any Reader would conclude, that the Sea of Bristol was void
before the first Designation of Parker to the Archbishopric, viz. before the
9th of December. But that does not appear. For the Spiritualties of the Sea of
Bristol, void by the Death of John Holman, were not seized by the Chapter of
Canterbury, until the 18th of December.

Page 293. lin. 48. Thus I have given the Substance of their Speeches (of Heath
and Fecknam, made in Parliament, in behalf of Popery) being all that I have
seen on that side.


Besides these, I have seen a long Speech of Scot Bishop of Chester, delivered
at the same time in the same cause.

Page 396. lin. 7. It does not appear, how soon after the Dissolution of the
Parliament (dissolved 1559, May 8.) the Oath of Supremacy was put to them (the
Clergy and Bishops.) For the last Collation Bonner gave of any Benefice, was on
the 6th of May this Year.


It cannot be imagined, that Bonner was deprived before the Dissolution of the
Parliament. On what days the several Bishops of the Province of Canterbury were
deprived, may be determined from the times of the Seizure of the Spiritualties
of their Bishoprics made by the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury; who then
possessed and exercised the Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction in the Vacancy of the Sea. These I will here present out of the Register of that Church. The
Spiritualties of the Sea of London, void by the Deprivation of Edmund Bonner,
were seized 1559, June 2. The Spiritualties of Winchester, void by the
Deprivation of John White, 1559. July 18. of Lincoln, void by the Deprivation
of Thomas Watson, 1559. July 2. (these two Bishops had been committed to the
Tower on the 5th of April preceding.) The Spiritualties of Ely, void by the
Deprivation of Thomas Thirleby, 1559. Nov. 23. of Lichfield, void by the
Deprivation of Ralph Bayne, 1559. June 24 (he died before the end of the same
Year.) The Spiritualties of Exeter, void by the Deprivation of James Turbervil,
1559. Nov. 16. Of Worcester, void by the Deprivation of Richard Pates, 1559.
June 30. of Peterborough, void by the Deprivation of David Pool, 1559. Nov. 11.
of St. Asaph, void by the Deprivation of Thomas Goldwell, 1559. July 15. When
the Sea of York was first voided by the Deprivation of Heath, I shall relate
hereafter. The certain times of the Deprivation of Tunstall of Durham, of
Oglethorp of Carlisle, and of Scot of Chester, I cannot find. In all 14 Bishops
were deprived; to whom may be added one Suffragan, viz. Pursglove of Hull. The
whole Number of the Clergy deprived at this time, is thus described by a Romish
Dissenter, Author of A sincere modest Defense of English Catholics that
suffer, etc. Published in 1583. He says that in England were deprived 14
Bishops, besides 3 Bishops Elect, the Abbot of Westminster, 4 Priors of
Religious Houses, 12 Deans, 14 Archdeacons, above 60 Canons of Cathedral
Churches, not so few as a 100 Priests of good Preferment, 15 Heads of Colleges
in Oxford and Cambridge, and above 20 Proctours of diverse Faculties therein. No
great Number, to be deprived at a time of so great a Change in Religion. I am
willing to believe the Computation of this Author to be exact; because I find
it to be so in the Number of Bishops and Deans deprived. The 14 Bishops we have
named already. The Names of the 12 Deans follow. Cole of St. Paul's, Stuarde of
Winchester, Robertson of Durham, Ramridge of Lichfield, Goodman of Wells,
Reynolds of Exeter, Harpsfield of Norwich, Holland of Worcester, Daniel of
Hereford, Salkel of Carlisle, Ioliff of Bristol, Boxal of Peterborough, and
Windsor. Of the three Bishops Elect, who are said to have been deprived, I can
recover the Names but of Two, Viz. Thomas Rainolds Elect of Hereford, and
Thomas Wood.

Page 396. lin. 11. Page 397. lin. 7. The Oath being offered to Heath
Archbishop of York, Christopherson Bishop of Chichester, they did all refuse to
take it. -- They were upon their refusal deprived and put in Prison. --
Christopherson chose to live still in England.


This is a fair Story. De Scriptor. Angl. page 755.
But what if after all, Christopherson died before Queen Mary? This is affirmed
by Pits. At least it is most certain, that he died within six Weeks after her.
In which time, Queen Elizabeth, far from depriving any Bishops, had not
declared her Resolution in matter of Religion on either side. The Dean and
Chapter of Canterbury seized the Spiritualties of the Sea of Chichester vacant
per mortem naturalem Iohannis Christopherson ultimi Episcopi, Registr. Canto.
and Pastoris ejusdem, 1559. Ian. 2. Now although he should have died some few
days before Queen Mary (as Pits says) it is not to be wondered, if amidst so
much Confusion, as attended the Death of the Queen, and Cardinal Pole, the
Chapter of Canterbury neglected for some time to seize the Spiritualties of
Chichester.

Page 402. lin. 33. On the 8th Day of July 1559. the Conge d'Elire (for Matthew
Parker) was sent to Canterbury. On the 22 of July a Chapter was summoned to
meet the first of August; where the Dean and Prebendaries meeting they all
elected him.


The Conge d'Elire was sent to the Chapter of Canterbury, Registr. Parker.
not on the 8th, but on the 18th of July; in virtue of which, Parker was
elected on the first of August by the Dean and four Prebendaries, then present
in Chapter. The other Canons were either absent, or refused to appear. But the
Election was not thereby the less Canonical. For they had been all cited in due
form to appear, and give their Votes.

Page 403. lin. 25. Some time after this, in February 1561. Young was
translated from St. David's to York; there being now no hopes of gaining Heath
to continue in it; which it seems had been long endeavored, for it was now two
Years that that See had been in Vacancy.


The Historian finding, that the Sea of York lay void from the enacting the
Oath of Supremacy two Years (not strictly accounted) and not knowing the Cause
of it, has invented a plausible Reason, and believed it as a matter of equal
Certainty with any other Occurrence related by him. To assign proper and
plausible Reasons to every Action, may add Beauty to a History; but if liberty
be taken to do this without any ground or warrant, little difference will be
left between a History and a Romance. Hethe was actually deprived long before
this. For on the 3d. of February 1560. ( viz. in the beginning of the Year
1560. Registr. Ebor.
) the Dean and Chapter of York assumed the Exercise of the Spiritual
Jurisdiction of that See, void by his Deprivation: On the 12th of August 1560.
William May Dean of St. Paul's, London, was elected Archbishop of York. But he
dying before his Confirmation and Consecration, Thomas Young, Bishop of St.
David's, was finally elected to that Archbishopric on the 27th of January 1561.
and confirmed on the 25th of February.

Page 403. lin. 23. Parker being thus Consecrated himself (1559. December. 17.)
did afterward Consecrate Bishops for the other Sees, Cox Bishop of Ely, etc.
and Par Bishop of Peterborough.


There never was any Bishop of Peterborough of that Name. To David Pole
succeeded immediately in that See Edmond Scambler; who was consecrated by
Archbishop Parker, on the 16th of February, 1561.

Page 404. lin. 35. Some excepted against the Canonicalness of Parker's
Consecration, because it was done by all the Bishops of the Province, and Three
of the Bishops had no Sees when they did it, and the Fourth was only a
Suffragan Bishop: But to all this it was said, That -- a Suffragan Bishop being
Consecrated in the same manner that other Bishops were, though he had a limited
Jurisdiction, yet was of the same Order with them.


When I first observed, that in the Arms of Archbishop Parker under his
Effigies over against page 402. the Keys were inverted (which he ever bore
erect) I began almost to fear, that the Historian would deny the Regularity of
his Consecration. But since he is pleased to do Justice to the Archbishop
herein; I will add in Confirmation of what is said concerning the equal
Authority, which Suffragan Bishops have to consecrate with others; that the
practice of the Church of England, before the Reformation will clear all doubts
of this Nature. For the Archbishops in taking other Bishops to their Assistance
in the Consecration of Bishops, or in giving Commissions to other Bishops to
consecrate in their stead, made no difference between Suffragan and Diocesan
Bishops: So that I could produce above twenty Examples of the Consecration of
Diocesan Bishops in England, within Two hundred years before the Reformation,
performed with the Assistance of Suffragan Bishops, and that when the Canonical
number of Consecrators was not complete without them.

Appendix; page 386. lin. 3. Saunders says, that the Heads of Colleges were
turned out (under Edward the Sixth) and the Catholic Doctors were forbid to
Preach. The Historian answers. I do not find that one Head of a College in
either University was turned out.


I find somewhat relating to the Heads of Houses in King Edwards Council-Book,
1550. 13th. October. A Letter to the Fellows of New College in Oxford,
forbidding them to choose a Warden in Mr. Coals stead, without License from the
King, 1551. 29th. January, Commissioners appointed to examine and try the Case
of Dr. Cole, upon certain Objections made by the Fellows of New College in
Oxford against him, 1551. March 25th. White Warden of Winchester College
committed to the Tower, for receiving Letters and Books from beyond Sea, and
particularly from one Martin a Scholar there, who impugneth, etc. 1551. June
15th. Dr. Morwent, President of Corpus Christi College, Oxon, with some of the
Fellows of that House, committed to the Fleet, for using upon Corpus Christi
Day other Service than that is appointed in the Book of Service. A Letter to
the said College signifying the same, and appointing Mr. Juell to govern the
said College in the absence of the said President, 1551. December 22. Dr.
Tresham committed to the Fleet. Or if express Instances of the Ejection of any
Heads be required, I will produce one in each University. In Oxford, Dr.
Richard Smith, Regius Professor of Divinity, and Principal of Alban Hall, was
ejected in the Reign of King Edward. In Cambridge, Dr. George Day, Bishop of
Chichester, and at the same time Provost of Kings College, was deprived about
the same time.

Page 390. lin. 2. Day Bishop of Chichester was judged by Lay Delegates; so it
is like his offense was against the State.


I before gave an Account of the Deprivation of Day out of the Council-Book;
from whence it appears that he was deprived for a matter of Religion.

Page 396. lin. 15. Coverdale was put in the Sea of Exeter, upon Veyseys free
Resignation, he being then extreme old.


The Record of Veyseys Restitution to Exeter says, that metu olim eidem
Episcopatui cesserat. His Patent of Restitution alleges, that he had forced
to resign pro corporis metu.

Page 396. lin. 17. Ridley and Harley were never married.


The Historian hence has taken an occasion to reproach Sanders for his little
Exactness, because he had reckoned these among the married Bishops. But himself
also is no less mistaken. Harley was indeed married. For the Record of his
Deprivation, says, that he was destitutus Episcopatu Herefordensi ex conjugio
and haeresi. Vol. 3. Page 19.
His Marriage is further attested by Fox.

Page 403. lin. 43. The Historian denies, that the whole Clergy, who had
engaged in, or submitted to the Reformation under King Edward were formally
reconciled to the Sea of Rome under Queen Mary.


This is a mistake. The Clergy were singly reconciled by formal and solemn
Acts. To which purpose Cardinal Pole, the Popes Legate, gave Commissions to the
several Ordinaries; one of which I have published in the Collection. Numb. 10.
And not content with this, he prescribed to them a form, by which they should
be reconciled. Numb. 11.
This also I have subjoyned in the Collection.

Page 403. lin. 1. Sanders had said, that William Thomas, Clerk of the Council
had conspired to kill the Queen; for which he justly suffered. The Historian
answers, of this I find nothing on Record; so it must depend on our Authors
credit.


If the Historian had pleased to have read our English Histories of these
times, composed by Grafton, Stow, and others; he might have discovered somewhat
of this matter upon Record. I before reported the Order of Council,
constituting William Thomas Clerk of the Council, in the beginning of the Year
1550. King Edward's Journal mentions it on the same day, viz. the 19th of
April. Soon after, in reward of his Attendance, the Prebend of Cantleury in St.
Paul's Church (lately conveyed to the Crown) and the Parsonage of Presthende in
South Wales, were by the King given to him, when Queen Mary came to the Crown
he was stripped of his Office, and perhaps of his Rewards also. In revenge of
which he designed the Murder of the Queen: for which he was sent Prisoner to
the Tower of London, 1554. February, 20. On the 26th of February, he
endeavored to murder himself, in Prison by a Stab: but the wound not proving
Mortal, he was Arraigned and Condemned at Guildhall on the 9th of May, and
executed at Tyburn on the 18th of May. Scriptor. Brittan. Par. 2. p. 110.
Bale endeavoring to extenuate the matter, says, that he was condemned and
executed for designing to kill Stephen Gardener. But all other Historians
agree, that it was for conspiring the Queens Death.

THese are the Errors and Defects, which I have observed in this History. For
my performance herein, I expect not either praise or thanks from the present
Age; much less from the Historian: yet I thought it a Duty owing to Posterity,
not to permit it to be led into mistakes in any thing, relating to the
Reformation of this Church, by Errors contained in an History published in our
times, with Pomp, and seeming Authority. I do not suspect any Person to be so
disingenuous, as to raise hence an Argument of my disaffection to the
Reformation: or if any shall be so base, I shall slight the Calumny. The
Reformation of our Church was begun and carried on with so much Piety, Wisdom,
and fullness of due Authority; that a faithful and exact Account is the best
Vindication, and Defense of it: nor should I ever have taken so much pains to
rectify the History, if I had not been fully persuaded of the Justice of it.
If some favorable Passages in this History are by me disproved; the cause of
our Reformation will not be really injured thereby, as not needing the
Patronage of false or erroneous Relations. We were sufficiently able to defend
the Justice of it, before any Forreigner undertook to deliver the History of
it; and shall be so still, although the Reputation of his History should suffer
any Diminution.

Lest it should be imagined, that I have examined this History so curiously, as
to have discovered all the Errors and Defects of it, and to have left no room
to after diligence, or the Enquiry of others; I do protest, that I never formed
any Design of this nature until about a Month since. I have noted, what my
Memory and present Collections suggested to me. But it may be easily observed,
that I have considered only that part of the History which is purely
Ecclesiastical, and not all that. If any one should take the Pains to examine
in like manner, the Civil History intermixed therewith; it may be feared, that
not a few Errors and Defects may be discovered in that part of it.

In the last place, if the Historian, or any for him, shall ask why, in
Compliance to his Desire, expressed in the Conclusion of his History, I did not
first Communicate the Papers to himself; I refer him for an Answer to the
Athenae Oxonienses, par. 2. page 625.

An Additament to Par. 2. Sect. 14.
In the place referred to I thought it sufficient to observe, that there
appears no certain ground of the Marriage of Richard Bishop of Chichester
reported by the Historian: But upon revising of the place, I think it not amiss
to add, That we have undoubted certainty, that he never was married. For Ralph
de Bocking, a Dominican Friar, who had been his Confessor, and wrote his Life
at large, has these words of him. Testis est Frater, qui haec scripsit, cui
ante paucos dies transitus sui ex hoc mundo idem sanctus vitam and Commissa sua
Denudavit, quod ipsum sic carnis florem repperit custodisse, ut in eorum numero
censeatur, qui cum Mulieribus non sunt Coinquinati. And afterward passing
through the several parts of the Episcopal Office described by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. A Bishop must be blameless, etc. and applying them to Bishop Richard,
when he comes to that part of the Apostolic Charge: The Husband of one Wife,
he says, Ipse autem Richardus, Matrimonium Omnino refutavit. Consonant to this
Pope Urban IV. in the Bull of his Canonization, among other Arguments of his
supposed Sanctity, makes use of this. Carnalis Conjugii voluptates,
appetentibus anxius, Satiatis plenitudine plenas, abhorruit; ut immaculati
thori delicias Desiderantibus suaves and placidas, fruentibus gratas and
avidas, obtineret.

A COLLECTION Of some few Records, and other Instruments, of which mention is
made in the preceding Papers.
I. The Determination of the University of Cambridge, against the Supremacy of
the Pope.
Invictissimo ac Potentissimo Principi ac Domino nostro, Clementissimo Henrico
Octavo, Angliae and Franciae Regi, Domino Hiberniae, etc.


QUod faelix and faustum sit, and huic florentissimo Regno tuo, and universo
orbi Christiano, Invictissime Princeps ac Domine Clementissime, en scripto
prodimus, ac palam dicimus sententiam nostram in quaestione illa famosa de
Romani Pontificis potestate; cujus quaestionis veritatem post maturam and
sedulam examinationem, ac varias ea de re non uno tempore collocutiones,
diligenti tandem Scripturarum collatione, and perpensione (ut nobis videmur)
eruimus, and erutam, and Syngrapho quodam expressam, quod sententiae nostrae
and facti certissimus testis fuerit, Majestati tuae una cum literis istis nunc
mittimus.

Atque hanc sane provinciam, Serenissime Rex, abs tua sublimitate nobis
impositam, libenter suscepimus, partim ob eam quam Majestati tuae debimus,
fidem and obedientiam, quibus ullo loco aut tempore de esse nefas maximum
putamus, partim ipsius veritatis amore ac studio, quam discere ac praedicare,
quoties e Christi Gloria, and Reipublicae Chrstianae salute atque commodo esse
videatur, cum omnium intersit qui Christo nomen dederunt atque in illius verba
jurarunt, tum nostra multo magis refer interesseque videtur, qui quotidie in
illius Scripturis versamur, quotidie illius verba and voces legimus, qui est
ipsa via, veritas and vita; quique veritatem custodit in Saeculum saeculi.
Hujus favorem ac gratiam semper tuae Celsitudini adesse precamur; optamusque ut
nos, ut Academiam nostram, quae tuae semper voluntati fuerit obsequentissima,
vicissim Sublimitatis tuae favore prosequi, fovere atque ornare digneris.
Christus Servator Serenissimam Majestatem tuam Diutissime servet.

Universis sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis, ad quos praesentes literae
perventurae sunt, caetus omnis Regentium and non Regentium, Academiae
Cantabrigiensis salutem in omnium Salvatore Jesus Christo.

Cum de Romani Pontificis potestate, quam and ex Sacris Scripturis sibi
vendicat in omnibus Christianorum provinciis, and in hoc Regno Angliae longo
jam temporis tractu exercuit, hisce nunc diebus quaestio exorta sit, ac nostra
ea de re sententia rogaretur, videlicet, An Romanus Pontifex habeat a Deo in
Scriptura sacra concessam sibi Majorem Authoritatem ac potestatem in hoc Regno
Angliae, qua quivis alius externus Episcopus: nos equum esse putavimus, ut ad
dictae quaestionis veritatem eruendam omni studio incumberemus, ac nostram ea
de re sententiam ac censuram tandem orbi proferremus; nempe ad hoc potissimum
Academias a Principibus institutas fuisse persuasi, ut and populus Christianus
in lege Dei erudiatur, and falsi errores (si qui exorirentur) cura and
sollicitudine doctorum Theologorum penitus convelli ac profligari possint.
Quamobrem de praedicta quaestione deliberaturi more nostro convenientes ac
matura deliberatione consilia nostra conferentes, quo modo and ordine ad
investigationem veritatis certius procederetur, atque omnium tandem suffragiis
selectis quibusdam ex Doctissimus Sacrae Theologiae Professoribus, Baccalauriis
ac aliis Magistris, ea cura demandata, ut serutatis Diligentissime Sacrae
Scripturae locis, illisque collatis, referrent ac renuntiarent, quid ipsi
dictae quaestioni respondendum putarent; quoniam auditis, perpensis, and post
publicam super dicta quaestione disputationem natura deliberationem discussis
his quae in questione praedicta alterutram partem statuere aut convellere
possent; illa nobis probabiliora, validiora, veriora etiam ac certiora etiam,
ac genuinum ac Sencerum Scripturae sensum refer visa sunt, quae negant Romano
Pontifici talem potestatem a Deo in Scriptura datam esse. Illis igitur
persuasi, in unam opinionem convenientes, ad quaestionem praedictam ita
respondendum decrevimus, ac pro Conclusione verissima asserimus. Quod Romanus
Pontifex non habet a Deo in Sacra Scriptura concessam sibi majorem authoritatem
aut jurisdictionem in hoc Regno Angliae, quam quivis alius Episcopus externus.
Atque in fidem and Testimonium hujusmodi nostrae Responsionis and
Affirmationis, his Literis Sigillum nostrum commune curavimus apponi. Datum
Cantabrigiae in Domo nostra Regentium secundo die mensis Maii, anno ab Orb per
Christum redempto Millesimo Quingentesimo Tricesimo Quarto.

II. The Bedes, or the ancient Form of bidding Prayer.
YE shulle stand up and bydde your Bedys in the worshepe of our Lord Ihesu
Crist, and his Mother Seynte Marye, and of all the holy Company of Hevene. Ye
shulle also bydde for the Stat of holy Cherche, for the Pope of Rome and of his
Cardinalis, for the Patriach of Jerusalem, for the holy Land, and for the holy
Croys, that Ihesu Crist sendt it out of Hedne mennys hand, into Cristin mennys
hand. And ye shulle bydde for the Erchebischop of Canterbury, for the Biscop
of Worssestre our Gostlie Fader, and all odir Biscopis, ye shulle bid for
Abbotis, for Priouris, for Monkis, for Chanonnis, for Frieris, for Ancris, for
Heremytis, and for all the Religiouns. Ye shulle bydde for all the Prestis
and Cleerkis that he rinne serit, and haugty servit. Ye shulle bid for the
Pees of the Land, that Ihesu Crist holdit that it is, and sendyt that it nys.
Ye shulle bid for the King of Engeland, for the Queen, and for all
Childryne; for Prince, for Dukis, for Yerles, for Barronnis, and for the Knytis
of this Land, and for all her good Counsale and and her true Servauntis. Ye
shul bid for hem, that the Stat of holy Church, and of this Land be well
meinteined. Ye shull bid for the wederyng, and for the cornis, and for the
frutys, that beet, ikast on herd, and on enthe growing, and for all the
true earth tylyaris, that God send swic wederinge fro Hevene to Earth, that
it be him to convenynge and mankende to help of Lif and Savacioun of hour
Sawles. Ye shulle bid for the Persowne of this Church and for all his
Parischons that been here othere else war, in Land othere in watre; that our
Lord Ihesu Crist ham shilde and ward from all Mysowneris, and grauntte hem
part of all the Bedys and good Deedis that been deed in holy Church. Ye shulle
bid for hem that in gwode way beet iwent, odir wendyt, odir thenkit, to wen
the here sennys to bote, that our Lord Ihesu Crist would ward and shilde from
all Mysauntrys, and gronte han so goon and comen that it be him to worshipe,
and ham in remissioun of here Sennys, for ham and for oos and all Christine
solke. Pater noster, Deus misereatur nostri, Kyrie eleison, etc. Also ye shulle
bid for the gwode man and the good wife, that the Charity hider broche to day,
and for ham that it furst voondryn and longist holden. Ye shulle bid for ham,
that this Church honor with bok, with belle, with vestiment, with twaile,
odir with ligt, odir with any odir ournement to roof odir to ground, with
land, odir with rent. Ye shulle bid for all thilke, that bet in good lyve,
that God the reinne ham hold long, and for thilk that bet in evele lyve,
other in dedliche Sin ybounde, that our Lord Ihesu Crist ham out brenge, and
given ham Forgevenesse of har Sennes. Ye shulle bid for thilke that to God
and to holy Church trewliche tethegeren, that God tham Wite and Ward from al
Misaintre; and for all thilke that evyl tethegeren, that God ham geve Grace of
Amendment, that him ne fall naght in the great Sentence. Ye shulle bid for
all the Seek of this Parische, that our Lord hem gyve sive heel and help of
Bodi ann of Soul for ham, and for us, and for all Christmen, and Wymmen for
Charity, Pater Noster, etc. Ye shulle Knelen adoun, and bid for Faders Sawle,
for Moders Sawle, for Godfaders Sawle, for Godmoders Sawle, for God Childrens
Sawles, and for all the Sawlys of our Bredryn, and Soofters Sawles, and for
all the Sawles, that we bet in Debt for to bid de fore, and for all the
Sawlys that beet in Purgatoree; that God ham brenge the radyr out of Harpeynys
thorg the Byseching of our bone. Ye shulle bid for all the Sawlys hwos bonys
restin in this place; for all Sawles hwos Mendeday beet yholde in this
Church, other ein other by the Year. De Profundis, Kyriei eleison, Peter
noster, etc. Amen.

III. A Proclamation of King Henry the Eight against the Marriage of the Clergy.
THe Kings Majesty understandyng, that a few in number of this his Realm,
being Priests, as well Religous as other, have taken Wives and married
themselves, etc. His Highness in no wise mindyng that the generalitee of the
Clergy of this his Realm should with the Example of such a few number of
light Persouns proceade to Marriage without a common Consent of his Highness and
his Realm: does therefore straightlye Charge and Command, as well all and
singular the said Priests, as have attempted Marriages, that be openly knawen,
as all such as will presumptuously proceade to the same, that they, ne any of
them shall minister any Sacrament, or other Ministry mystical; ne have any
Office, Dignitee, Cure, Privilege, Profit, or Commoditee heretofore accustomed,
and belongyng to the Clergy of this Realm; but shall be utterly, after such
Marriages, expelled and deprived from the same. And that such as shall; after
this Proclamation, contrary to this Commandment of their presumptuous mind take
Wives and be married, shall run into his Graces Indignation, and suffer
further Punishment, and Imprisonment at his Graces Will and Pleasure. Given
this 16th Day of Novenber in the Thirteenth Year of our Reign.

IV. An Account of the Proceedings in Convocation about the Marriage of the
Clergy, wrote by Matthew Parker.
IF ye list to understande what was done and subscribed unto by the Clergy
meeting in Synod together, and after debatement concluded* ye shall hear what
the Lower House did affirm in this case of Continence, John Tailor Doctor of
Divinity, bein then Prololocutor, and William Say being Register, to accept
the Voices and Subscriptions of them that were present, to whose Consciences
was this Proposition propounded, either to be freely affirmed, or to be freely
denied by them, Videlicet.

That all such Canons, Laws, Statutes, Decrees, Usages, and Customs heretofore
made, had or used, that forbid any Person to contract Matrimony, or condemn
Matrimony, by any Person alredie contracted, for any Vow of Priesthood,
Chastity or Widohood, shall from henceforth be utterly void and of none effect.

The Affirmantes of this Proposition were almost treble so many as were the
Negantes. Amongst which Affirmantes, diverse were then unmaryed, and never did
afterward take the Liberty of Marriage, as Doctor Tailor the Bishop, Doctor
Benson, Doctor Redman, Doctor Hugh Weston, Master Wotton, etc. Of them that
denied it (notwithstanding their Superscriptions to the contrary) as few they
were, yet some of them took upon them the Liberty of Marriage not long after,
as Doctor Oken, Master Rayner, Master Wilson. Now if any Man may fortune
doubt of the Judgment of that notable learned Man, and commonly reputed of
grave Judgment, I mean, Doctor Redmayn Doctor of Divinity, he shall hear his
very Judgment, which he uttered in the self same Convocation, written in a
Paper severally by his own Hand, yet extant to be showed, and subscribed with
his own Name, and thus he says.

I think, that although the word of God do exhort and counsel Priests to
lyve in chastity, out of the cumber of the flesh, and the world, that thereby
they may more wholly attend to their calling; yet the band of conteynyng from
marriage does only lie upon Priests of this Realm by reasons of Canons and
Constitutions of the Church, and not by any precept of Gods word; as in that
they should be bound by reason of any vow, which, (in as far as my conscience
is) Priests in this Church of England do not make. I think, that it stands
well with Gods word, that a man which has been and is but once married, being
otherwise accordingly qualified, may be made a Priest. And I think that
forasmuch as Canons and Rules made in this behalf, be neither universal nor
everlastyng, but upon considerations may be altered and changed: therefore the
Kings Majesty and the higher powers of the Church may upon such reasons as
shall move them take away the clogge of perpetual continency from Priests,
and grant that it may be lawful to such as cannot, or will not contain, to
mary one Wife, and if she dye, then the said Priest to mary no more, remaynyng
still in his ministration.

Thus this Learned man, in such credit universally in decydyng questions of
Conscience.

V. Letter of the Lady Mary, to King Edward the Sixth.
MY Duty most humbly remembered unto your Majesty, it may please the same to be
advertised, that I have received by my Servants your most honorable Letters,
the Contents whereof do not a little trouble me, and so much the more, for that
any of my said Servants should move or attempt me in matters touching my Soul;
which I think the meanest Subject within your Highnesses Realm could evil bear
at their Servants hand; having for my part utterly refused heretofore to talk
with them in such matters, and of all other persons least regarded them
therein; to whom I have declared what I think, as she which trusted that your
Majesty would have suffered me your poorest humble Sister and Bedeswoman to
have used the accustomed Mass, which the King your Father and mine, with all
his Predecessors did ever more use, wherein also I have been brought up from my
Youth, and thereunto my Conscience does not only bind me, which by no means
will suffer me to think one thing and do another; but also the promise made to
the Emperor by your Majesty's Council was an assurance to me, that in so doing
I should not offend the Laws, although they seem now to qualify and deny the
thing. And at my last waiting upon your Majesty, I was so bold to declare my
mind, and conscience to the same; and desired your Highness, rather than you
should constrayne me to leave the Mass, to take my Life. Whereunto your
Majesty made me a very gentle Answer. And now I most humbly beseech your
Highness to give me leave to write what I think touching your Majesty's
Letters. Indeed they be signed with your own hand, and nevertheless in my
opinion not your Majesty's in effect, because it is well known (as heretofore I
have declared in the presence of your Highness) that although, our Lord be
praised, your Majesty has far more knowledge and greater gifts than others
of your years; yet it is not possible that your Highness can at these years be
a Judge in matters in Religion. And therefore I take it that the matters in
your Letters proceeds from such as do with those things to take place, which
be most agreeable to themselves; by whose (doings your Majesty not offended) I
intend not to rule my conscience. And thus without molesting your Highness any
further, I humbly beseech the same even for God's sake to bear with me as you
have done, and not to think that by my doings or ensample any inconvenience
might grow to your Majesty or your Realm. For I use it not after any such
sort. Putting no doubt, but to time to come, whether I live or dye, your
Majesty shall perceyve, that mine intent is grownded upon a true love toward
you, whose Royal Estate I beseech Almighty God long to continue; which is and
shall be my daily prayer according to my dewty. And after pardon craved of your
Majesty for these rude and bold Letters, if neither at my humble suit, nor for
regard of the promise made to the Emperor, your Highness will suffer and bear
with me, as ye have done, till your Majesty may be a Judge herein your self,
and right understand their proceedings (of which your goodness yet I despair
not) otherwise rather than to offend God and my Conscience, I offer my body at
your will; and death shall be more welcome than life with a troubled
conscience. Most humbly beseeching your Majesty to pardon my slownesse in
answering your Letters. For my old disease would not suffer me to write any
sooner. And thus I pray Allmighty God to keep your Majesty in all virtue and
honor, with good health and long life, to his pleasure. From my poor house at
Copped-Hall the XIX of August,

Your Majesty's most humble Sister, MARY.

VI. A Letter of King Edward the Sixth, to the Lady Mary.
Right dear and right entirely beloved Sister, we great you well, and let you
know that it greveth us much to perceave no amendment in you of that which we
for Gods cause, your Souls health, our conscience and the common
tranquyllytie of our Realm have ^o long desired. Assuring you, that our
Suffraunce has much more demonstration of natural love, than contention of our
conscience, and foresight of our savety. Wherefore although you give us
occasion, as much almost as in you is, to deminishe our natural love; yet be
we loathe to feel it decay; and mean not to be so careless of you, as we be
provoked. And therefore meaning your weal, and therewith joining a care not to
be found in our conscience to God, having cause to require forgiveness, that
we have so long for respect of love toward you omitted our bounden dieuty; we
do send at this present our right trusty and right well-beloved Counsalour, the
Lord Rich our Chancellor of England, our trusty and right well-beloved
Counsailour Sir Anthony Wingfield Knight, Comptroler of our Household, and Sir
William Peter Knight oon of our two Pryncipal Secretaries, in message to you,
touching the order of your house, willing you to give them firm creditt in
those things they shall say to you from us, and do therein in our name. Geven
under our Signet, etc.

VII. An Order of the Privy Council for a Thanksgiving for Queen Mary's Great
Belly.
AFter our hearty commendations unto your good Lordships, Whereas it has
pleased Almighty God among other his infinite benefits of late most graciously
poured upon us, and this whole Realm, to extend his benediction upon the
Queen's Majesty in such fort as She is conceived and quick with Child, whereby
her Majesty, being our natural Liege Lady Queen, and undoubted inheritour of
this Imperial Crown, good hope of certain Succession in the Crown is given unto
us, and consequently the great Calamities which for want of such Succession
might otherwise have fallen upon us and our posterity, shall by God's grace be
well avoided, if we thankfully acknowledge this benefit of Almighty God
endeavoring our selves with earnest repentence to thank, honor and serve him.
There be not only to advertise you of this good news to be by you published in
all places within your Diocese, but also to pray and require you, that both
your selves do give God thanks with us for this special grace, and also give
order that thanks be openly given by singing Te Deum in all Churches within
our Diocese; and that likewise all Priests and other Ecclesiastical Ministers
in their Masses and othar divine Services may continually pray to Almighty God
so to extend his holy Hand over her Majesty the King's Highness, and the whole
Realm, as this thing being by his omnipotent power, graciously thus begun, may
by the same be well continued, and brought to good effect to the glory of his
Name. Whereunto albeit we doubt not ye would of your selves have had special
regard without these our Letters, yet for the earnest desire we have to have
the thing done out of hand, and diligently continued, we have also written
these our Letters to put you in remembrance, and to bid your Lordship most
heartily well to fare.

From the Court at Westminster, the 27th Day of November, 1554. Your Lordships
assured loving Friends,

S. Winton. Cancel. Fr. Shewsbury. Tho. Eliens. Tho. Wharton. H. Arundell, H.
Sussex, R. Rich, Richard Southwell, Ed. Darby, Io. Bathon.

To our loving Friends the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, and all other having
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction during the Vacation of that See.

VIII. Articuli ministrati Presbyteris conjugatis, Mense Martio, 1554.
IMprimis an fuerit Religiosus, cujus Ordinis, and in quo Monasterio sive domo!

Item ad fuit promotus ad Sacros Ordines, dum erat in Monasterio?

Item in quo and quibus sacris, and an ministravit in Altaris ministerio and
quot annis?

Item an citra professionem suam regularem conjunxit se mulieri sub
appellatione matrimonii?

Item cum qua, and in qua Ecclesia fuit matrimonii solemnizatio, and per quem?

Item quam duxit, erat resoluta an vidua?

Item an cohabitavit cum ea in una and eadem domo, ut vir cum uxore?

Item an prolem vel proles ex ea suscitaverit necne?

Item an post and citra matrimonii bujusmodi solemnizationem assequutus fuit
and est beneficium Ecclesiasticum habens curam animarum, and quot annes illud
obtinuit?

Item an officio Sacerdotis post and citra assertum matrimonium hujusmodi
contractum in Altaris ministerio se immiscuit, ac Sacramentis, and
Sacramentalibus ministrandis se ingessit?

Item an praemissa omnia and singula fuerunt and sunt vera?

IX. A Bull of Pope Julius costituting Cardinal Pole his Legate in England.
Julius Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, dilecto filio Reginaldo Sanctae Mariae
in Cosmedin Diacono Cardinali Polo nuncupato, ad charissimam in Christo filiam
nostram Mariam Angliae Reginam illustrem, and universum Angliae Regnum, nostro
and Apostalicae sedis Legato de latere, salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem.
Si ullo unquam tempore licuit, nunc certe expositissime licet dicere, dextra
Domini fecit virtutem. Hanc inquam laetissimam vocem licet omnium piorum
gaudiis atque acclamatione celebrare. Quid enim aliud dicamus, quin dextram
Domini hanc tani inopinatam rerum conversionem fecisse, ut florentissimum
Angliae Regnum, ab Henrico Octavo in dissidium ab Ecclesia Catholica
secessionemque seductam, ac deinde Edwardi ejus nati successione in paterno and
haereditario errore corroboratum and firmatum, in eum nunc statum repent
devenerit, ut ad sanctum ovile atque ad Ecclesiae Catholicae septa revocari
facillime posse videatur. Profecto hoc nihil aliud est quam mutatio dextrae
Excelsi. Defuncto enim vita supradicta Edwardo, adnisisque illius sectatoribus
qui rerum habenas, qui arces, qui exercitum, qui classem obtinebant Regnum
alicui ex sua secta defer, exclusa legitima haerede, charissima in Christo
filia Maria Angliae Regina, illustri tunc Principe, praefati Henrici and Regis
nata, quae semper in Catholicae fidei unitate permansit, atque ut eis
videbatur, voto jam potitis; Ecce ille Dominator Dominus, and terribilis qui
aufert Spiritum Principum, cuncta iniquorum commenta disjecit, and repentina
animorum totius Regni inclinatione atque motu, ea quam ipsi constituerant Regia
potestate dejecta, ut ipsa Maria una omnium voce Regina salutaretur, effecit.
Gratiae Domino Deo nostro, qui non obliviscitur suo; qui and huic
illustrissimum praemium fidei suae invictaeque constantiae, paternum Regnum,
quod jam humanitus amiserat, divinitus detulit and hanc non parvam gregis sui
partem, a recta semita jam pridem ab actam, and per deserta dispersam,
respicere dignatus est. Quam and non dubitamus eodem divino favore
perseverante, postquam Catholicam Principem nacta est, etiam ipsam in
Catholicae fidei viam facile conversum iri and communioni Ecclesiae restitutum.
Cui quidem spei sanctaeque fiduciae, quam habemus in Domino, nos pro pastorali,
quae nobis est ab illo commissa, universalis Ecclesiae cura, and pro ea
charitate qua erga Anglicam gentem proprie debemus affici, tamque hujus
sanctae, sedis, cui sine meritis ullis nostris, sed sola summi Dei Providentia
praesidemus, peculiarem filiam, procurata olim ab ipsius sede divini illic
verbi disseminatione generatam deesse nec volumus nec debemus. Cum igitur super
hujusmodi tractanda re, negotioque divina open conficiendo and potissimum cui
hanc provinciam demandare possemus, assiduos nostrae mentis cogitatus
effunderemus; Tu semper nobis non tamen primus, sed solus omnium, occurristi,
quem omnino prae caeteris huic curae praeficere debemus. Unde habita super his
cum venerabilibus Fratribus nostris Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinalibus,
deliberatione matura, de illorum unanimi assensu and consensu, te ad eandem
Reginam Mariam and universum Angliae Regnum nostrum and Apostolicae sedis
Legatum delegimus. Sive enim nos natalis terrae tuae, and omnium charitatem,
quae in te summa esse debet, and certe est, seu linguae ejus gentis and morum
sensuumque notitiam, sive ob deductum a sanguine regio genus autoritatem and
gratiam, seu singularem in omni genere prudentium and eloquentiam, seu (quod
capu est) flagrantissimum tuum erga Deum and Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum
ejusque sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam amorem atque observantiam, multis jam in
rebus cognitam atque perspectam, spectaremus; Personem tuam, quam his quas modo
commemoravimus, and pluribus aliis, virtutibus, omnium munerum largitor
Altissimus exornavit, ad hanc Legationem aptissimam judi^avimus. Quamobrem
Circumspectioni vestrae per praesentes Litteras mandamus: ut munus istud pro
eadem tua erga Deum pietate erga nos and sanctam hanc sedem reverentia, erga
Christianam Rempublicam studio atque amore, suscipiens, id pro tua fide,
diligentia, dexteritate exequare; nihilque praetermittas, quo minus Deo been
juvante optatum Legationis fructum assequare, in errorem lapsos consolando,
atque in Dei gratiam and suae sanctae Catholicae Ecclesiae communionem
restituendo. Cujus rei, maxim scilicet in ipsius Dei elementia, secundum Deum
autem cum iu fludio, prudentia and virtute tua, tum ipsius Mariae Reginae in
Deum pietate, sapientia and devotione, spem ponimus. Dat. Romae apud sanctum
Marcum, anno Incarnationis Dominicae millesimo quingentesi^o quinquagesimo
tertio, Nonis Augusti, Pontificatus nostri anno quarto.

X. A Commission given by Cardinal Pole for the reconciliation of Clergy and
Laity.
Commissio Reginaldi Cardinalis Poli Legati de Latere.


REginaldus miseratione divina sanctae Mariae in Cosmedin sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae Diaconus Cardinalis Polus nuncupatur, sancti Domini nostri Papae and
Sedis Apostolicae ad serenissimos Philippum and Mariam Angliae Reges and
universum Angliae Regnum, de Latere Legatus, venerabilibus ac nobis in Christo
dilectis Decano and Capitulo Ecclesiae Metropolitices Christi Cantuar, ad quo^
omnis and omnimoda Iurisdictio spirituatis and ecclesiastica quae ad
Archiepiscopum Cantuar. sede plena pertinuit, ipsa sede jam va^ante notorie
dinoscitur pertinere, seu eorum in spiritualibus Vicario Generali, salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Cum sanctissimo in Christo Pater Dominus noster Dominus
Julius divina providentia Papa tertius, inter abias facultates pro hujus Regni
omniumque personarum in eo existentium sanctae Ecclesiae reconciliatione
facienda, necessarias nobis in hac nostra Legatione concessas, hanc specialiter
indulserit, ut quoscunque in haeresium and Schismatis errores lapsos ab eis and
a quibuscunque, censuris and poenis propterea incarsis absolvere, and cum eis
super Irregularitate praemiss. occasion contracta dispensare, and alia multa
ad haec necessaria seu quomodolibet opportuna facere, and hoc idem munus
Catholicis locorum Ordinariis and aliis personis Deum timentibus, fide
insignibus, and literarum scientia praedictis, demandere possimus; prout in
ejus literis tam sub plumbo quam in forma Breves expeditis before continetur.
Cumque Dei benignitate and Serenissimorum Regum pietate Regnum hoc in
universaliter and omnes Domini Spirituales and Temporales, aliaeque personae
communitatum in eo quod proxime celebratum est Parliamento congregratae,
singulariter prima, and deinde universum corpus Cleri Provinciae Cantuariensis,
and omnes fere personae singulares dictum corpus representates, coram nobis
existentes, aliaeque pleraeque fuerint Sanctae Ecclesiae Catholicae per nos
ipsos reconciliatae; speremusque fore, ut omnes aliae, quae reconciliatae adhuc
non sunt, reconciliari debeant, defficileque and potius impossible sit ut tam
numerosa multitudo per manus nostras reconcilietur; ideoque vices nostras in
hoc locorum Ordinariis and aliis personis ut supra qualificatis delegandas
duximus. Circumspectioni igitur vestrae, de cujus probitate and charitatis zelo
plenam in Domino fiduciam obtinemus, auctoritate Apostolicae nobis per literas
ejusdem Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae and per nos vobis nunc impensa, omnes
and singulos utriusque sexus tam Laicas quam Ecclesiasticas, singulares and
quorumvis Ordinum Regulares, vestrae, civitatis and Diocesis personas
Saeculares, in quibusvis etiam sacris Ordinibus constitutas, cujuscunque status
and qualitatis existant, etiamsi Capitulum, Collegium, Universitas seu
Communitas fuerit, quarumvis Haeresium, aut novarum Sectarum Professores, aut
in eis culpabiles vel suspectas, ac credentes receptatores atque fautores
ipsorum, suos errores agnoscentes, ac de illis dolentes, and ad Orthodoxam
fidem recipi humiliter postulantes, cognita in ipsis vera and non ficta aut non
simulata poenitentia, ab omnibus and singulis Haeresium, Schismatis, and ab
orthodoxa fide Apostasiarum and Blasphemiarum and aliorum quorumcunque similium
errorum, etiam sub generali sermon non venientium, peccatis, criminibus,
excessibus and delictis (de quibus tamen non inquisiti, vel accusali, seu
condemnati non fuerint) and quibusvis Excommunicationis, suspensionis and
Interdictorum and aliis Ecclesiasticis and temporalibus censuris and poenis in
eas praemissorum ac infra Scriptorum occasion aut jure, vel ab homine latis
vel promulgatis, etiamsi eis pluribus annis insorduerint, and earum absolutio
dictae sedi, etiam per literas in die caenae Domini legi consuetas, reservata
existat in utroque, conscientiae and contentioso foro; eos vero, qui jam
inquisiti vel accusati aut condemnati fuerint, vel ut praefertur, ad cor
revertentes, in foro conscientiae tantum plenarie absolventes and liberantes,
necnon cum eis super irregularitate per eos occasion praemissorum contracta
etiam quia sic Legati Missas and alia divina Officia, etiam contra ritus and
caeremonias hactenus probatas and usitatas, celebraverint, aut illis alias se
immiscuerint, contracta; quodque irregularitate and aliis praemissis non
obstantibus, in suis Ordinibus, etiamsi ab Haereticis and Schismaticis
Episcopis, etiam minus rite, dummodo in eorum collatione Ecclesiae forma and
intentio sic servata, per eos susceptis, and in eorum susceptione etiam
juramentum contra Papatum Romanum praestiterint, etiam in altaris ministerio
ministrare, ac quaecunque, quotcunque and qualiacunque, etiam curata, invicem
tamen se compatientia, Beneficia Saecularia vel Regularia (Dignitatibus in
Collegiatis Ecclesiis principalibus and in Cathedralibus etiam Metropolitanis
post Pontificalem Majoribus exceptis) etiam Schismaticis Episcopis, seu aliis
Collatoribus, etiam laicalis potestatis praetextu habita, auctoritate
Apostolica retinere, dummodo alteri jus quaesitum non sit, and non prometi ad
omnes, etiam sacros Presbyteratus Ordines, a suis Ordinariis, se digni and
idonei reperti fuerint, rite and legitime promoveri, ac Beneficia
Ecclesiastica, etiam Curata, si eis alias canonicae conferantur, recipere and
retinere valiant, qualitate temporis, Ministrorum defectu, and Ecclesiae
necessitatibus, utilitatibusque ita poscentibus, dispensandi and indulgendi ac
omnem inhabilitatis and infamiae maculam, sive notam, ex praemissis
quomodolibet insurgentem, penitus and omnino abolendi, necnon in pristinum and
eum quo antae praemissa quomodolibet erant, statum, ita ut omnibus and singulis
gratiis, privilegiis, favoribus and indultis; quibus caeteri Christi fideles
gaudent and gaudere quomodolibet possunt, uti and gaudere valiant in omnibus
and per omnia, perinde ac si a fide Catholica nunquam in aliquo defecissent,
restituendi reponendi and redintegrandi; ac eis dummodo cord cortriti, sua
errata and excessus Circumspectioni vestrae; seu alicui alteri, per eos
eligendo Catholico Confessori Sacramentaliter confiteantur, ac poenitentiam
salutarem eis pro praemissis injungendam omnino adimpleant) omnem publicam
confessionem, abjurationem, renuntiationem, and poenitentiam, jure debitas,
arbitrio vestro moderandi, vel in totum remittendi; Necnon quoscunque Regulares
and Religiosos, extra eorum Regularia loca absque sedis Apostolicae licentia
vagantes, ab Apostasiae reatu aliis que censuris and poenis Ecclesiasticis per
eos propterea, etiam juxta suorum Ordinum instituta incursis, injuncta eis pro
modo culpae poetentia salutari, pariter absolvendi, and super qua cunque
irregularitate propterea per eos contract, aut cum eis, ut alicui Curato
Beneficio de illius obcinentis consensit, etiam in habitu Clerici Saecularis,
habitum suum Regularem sub honesta toga Presbyteri Saecularis deferentes,
deservire and extra eadem loca Regularia remanere ad been placitum nostrum
libere and licite possint, eadem auctoritate Apostolica, ob defectum
Ministrorum and alias praedictas causas, dispensandi, ac quoscunque qui in
sacris Ordinibus constituti, Matrimonia, etiam cum viduis and corruptis
mulieribus, de facto contraxerint, postquam mulieres sic copulatas rejecerint
illisque abjuraverint, ab hujusmodi excessibus and Excommunicationis sententia,
imposita eis pro modo culpae poenitentia salutari, in forma Ecclesiae consueta
absolvendi, ac cum eis postquam poenitentiam peregerint and continentur ac
laudabiliter vivere cogniti fuerint, super bigamia propterea per eos contracta,
ita ut ea non obstante in suscipiendis Ordinibus etiam in Altaris Ministerio,
Ministrare, ac alicui Beneficio Ecclesiastico, de illius obtinentis consensu,
deservire, extra tamen Diocesin in qua fuerint copulati, eisdem de causis
dispensandi, necnon Parochialium Ecclesiarum tuae Diocesis Rectores sive
Curatos, de quorum fide, probitate, Circumspectione and Charitatis zelo plena
fiducia concipi possit, ad quarumcunque utriusque sexus sua Parochiae
personarum Laicarum tantum Absolutionem and Ecclesiae Catholicae
reconciliationem (ut praefertur) auctoritate Apostolica faciendam, and si qui
ex Curatis praedictis ad id idonei non fuerint, in eorum defectum alias idoneas
and sufficientes personas, quae eorum vicem suppleant, nominandi and deputandi;
quos sic per vos nominatos and deputatos in locum nostrum in praemissis
Absolutimibus and Reconciliationibus Substituimus, eisquevices nostrus
Subdeligamus, plenam and liberam auctoritate Apostolica nobis (ut praemittitur)
concensae tenore Praesentium concedimus facultatem; vosque in praemissis
omnibus in nostrum locum Substituinus: praemissis ac Regula de Insordescentibus
edita, and quibusvis aliis Constitutionibus and Ordinationibus Apostolicis, and
omnibus, illis quae in Literis praedictis Sanctitas sua voluit non obstare,
contrariis non obstantibus quibuscunque; praesentibus in praeteritis casibus
locum habentibus, and ad been placitum nostrum duraturis. Dat. Lambethi prope
Londinum, Wintoniensis Diocesis, anno a Nativitate Domini Millesimo
quingentesimo, quinquagesimo quinto, Idibus Februarii, Pontificatus Sanctissimi
in Christo Patris and Domini nostri Iulii divina Providentiae Papae tertii anno
quinto.

Reg. Card. Polus Leg. XI. Instructions subjoyned by Cardinal Polo to the
foregoing Commission.
SInguli Domini Episcopi, necnon Officiales Ecclesiarum, quae nunc vacant, pro
executione eorum, quae a Reverendissimo Domino Legato sunt eis demandata,
ordinem, qui infra scriptis est, poterunt observare.

Primum, vocatum ad se totum singularum Civitatum, quibus singuli praesunt,
Clerum de his quae sequuntur instruere procurabunt.

De paterno amore and charitate, quam Sanctissimus Dominus noster Julius Papa
tertius erga Nationen Anglicam declaravit, qui ut primum cognovit serenissimam
Mariam Reginam declaratam, Reverendissimum Dominum Reginaldum Cardinalem Polum
de suo latere ad has parts Legatum misit, ut Regnum hoc tot jam annos ab
Ecclesia Catholica separatum ad ejus unionem reducere, and in errores lapsos
consolari, atque in Dei gratiam restituere studeret.

De ejusdem Domini Legati adventu, quanta laetitia and honor is acceptus fuit,
tum a serenissimis, tum ab aliis omnibus.

De his quae in proximo Parliamento acta and conclusa sunt, scilicet de omnibus
Dominis de Parliamento and universo Regno a Schismate and censuris incursis
absoluto, and Ecclesiae Catholicae reconciliato, de omnibus Legibus, quae
contra auctoritatem sedis Apostolicae and Romani Pontificis fuerunt per
Henricum Octavum and Edwardum sextum latae and promulgatae, revocatis and
abolitis; de restituta sanctissimo Domino nostro Papae and Ecclesiae Romanae
eadem obedientia, qua ante hoc pernitiosissimum Schisma praestabatur.

De authoritate Episcopis restituta, and maxim ut possint contra Haereticos
and Schismaticos procedere, and eos juxta Canoni^as sanctiones coercere and
punire.

His itaque expositis, veniant ad Facultates sibi ab eodem Reverendiss. Domino
Legato concessas, quae recitentur and hic omnes, qui in Schisma vel alios
errores lapsi sunt, invitentur ad absolutionem, and conciliationem humiliter ex
toto cord petendam; necnon dispensationes tam super Ordinibus quam super
Beneficiis necessarias and opportunas postulandas. Deinde praefigatur dies,
intra quem dict de Clero humiles and poenitentes compareant ad petendam
suppliciter absolutionem, reconciliationem and dispensationes praedictas. Idem
vero Domini Episcopi, postquam illi omnibus suis erroribus renunciaverint, and
promiserint sacramentaliter ipsis aut alteri Sacerdoti Catholico confessuros
esse errores suos, and poenitentiam sibi injungendam adimpleturos, eos
absolvent and Ecclesiae reconciliabunt; and cum ipsis juxta formam Facultatum,
pro petentium necessitatibus, prout sibi visum fuerit, dispensabunt, adhibendo
semper convenientem distinctionem inter eos, qui solum in Schisma and Haereses
inciderunt, and eos qui eas etiam public docuerunt, and alios ad peccandum
induxerunt.

Eodem die constituetur dies Festus and solennis, in quo, astente in Ecclesia
populi multitudine, Domini Episcopi and omnes Curati in Ecclesiis suis omnia
eadem, quae Clero jam exposita fuerunt, populo quoque insinuabunt and omnes
invitabunt pattern and cum omni affectu ut agnitis erroribus suis ad Ecclesiae
Catholicae gremium revertantur, promittendo fore, ut omnibus praeterita crimina
omnia condonentur, and remittantur modo eos ex animo illorum poeniteat and
illis renuncient. Praefigatur atem terminus, ut puta tota Paschatis Octava;
intra quem terminum omnes Ecclesiae reconcilientur, alioquin ^o lapso contra
ipsos and eos etiam qui post reconciliationem ad vomitum reversi fuerint,
severissime procedetur. Dicatur de Facultate concessa a Reverendissimo Domino
Legato Episcopis and aliis, ut absolvere possint omnes, quicunque ad cor
reversi fuerint.

Iidem Domini Episcopi and Officiales nominabunt and deputabunt Ecclesiarum
Parochialium Rectores, seu alias personas idoneas, quae Laicos ab Haeresi and
Schismate and quibuscunque censuris absolvant, juxta Facultatum formam and
tenorem, data per Episcopos formula, qua in absolutione and reconciliatione uti
debeant.

Eadem poterunt cum Clero totius Diocesis observari, prout commodius visum
fuerit.

Domini Episcopi and Officiales praefati, neenon omnes Curati seu alii ad id
deputati habeant librum, in quo nomen and cognomen and parochiam omnium
reconciliatorum inscribantur; ut postea sciatur, qui fuerint reconciliati and
qui non.

Iidem Domini Episcopi and Officiales Octava Paschatis elapsa poterunt facere
visitationem, Civitatis primo, deinde Diocesis, and si qui non fuerint
reconciliati, poterunt ad se eos vocare, and cognoscere caufas propter quas ab
erroribus suis nolunt recedere, and si in eis obstinate perseveraverint, tum
contra eos procedant.

In hac facienda visitatione attendant diligenter quae in hoc Brevi Compendio
sunt notata, and maxim faciant, ut omnes Ecclesiasticae personae ostendant
titulos suorum Ordinum and Beneficiorum; ut si in eis aliquis alius defectus
notetur, illis provideant; and omni studio procurent, ut errores, quibus
Dioceses eorum sunt infectae, extirpentur, and veritas fidei tum in
concionibus, tum in Confessionibus doceatur, deputando personas idoneas ad
Conciones faciendas and Confessiones audiendas: Id etiam curent, ut sacrorum
Canonum instituta in omnibus observentur, and nomen Divi Thomae Martyris,
necnon sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, ex libris dispunctum, in illis
restituatur, and pro eo secundum morem Ecclesiae; ut ante Schisma fiebat,
oretur.

In publicationibus hujusmodi erit ante omnia facienda commemoratio miseriarum
and infelicitatis praeteritorum temporum, and magna gratia quam nunc Deus pro
sua misericordia populo huic exhibuit, hortando omnes ad hac grato animo
cognoscenda, and infinitas gratias divinae ipsius bonitati assidue agendas.

Hortandi etiam sunt omnes, ut devote orent Deum pro salute and faelici statu
horum Serenissimorum, and de hoc Regno optime meritorum ac merentium, Regum,
and specialiter pro faelici partu Serenissimae and piissimae Reginae.

Facultas Curatis and aliis Ecclesiasticis personis per ipsos idoneis cognitis
and nominatis per Dominum Legatum concessa est infra Scripta.
UT ipsi omnes and singulas utriusque sexus Laicas suae Parochiae personas,
quarumvis Haeresium, aut novarum Sectarum Professores, aut in eis culpabiles
vel suspectas, ac credentes, receptatores and fautores eorum, suos errores
agnoscentes, and de illis dolentes, and ad Orthodoxam fidem recipi humiliter
postulantes; cognita in eis vera and non ficta aut simulata poenitentia, ab
omnibus and singulis Haeresium, Schismatis and ab Orthodoxa fidae Apostasiarum
and Blasphemiarum, and aliorum quorumcunque errorum, tiam sub generali sermon
non venientium, peccatis, criminibus, excessibus and delictis, de quibus
inquisiti, vel accusati, seu condemnati non fuerint and cum his etiam in foro
Conscientiae tantum, and quibusvis Excommunicationis Suspensionis, and
Interdictorum, and aliis Ecclesiasticis and Temporalibus censuris, sententiis
and poenis, in eo^ Praemissorum occasion a jure vel ab homine latis vel
promulgatis, etiamsi in eis pluribus ^^tis insorduissent, and earum absolutio,
Apostolicae Sedi and in die Caenae Domini per literas legi consuetas, reservata
existat, injuncta eis pro modo culpae poenitentia salutari, auctoritate
Apostolica in forma Ecclesiae consueta absolvere, and illos unitati Ecclesiae
Catholicae restituere; ac omnes Solemnitates, quae in hujusmodi absolutionibus
de jure vel consuetudine solent adhiberi, ratione multitudinis, arbitrio suo in
partem vel in totum remittere, secumque super quacunque irregularitate
praemissorum occasion contracta dispensare possint and valiant: Praemissis ac
Regula de Insordescentibus edita, and quibusvis aliis Constitutionibus and
Ordinationibus Apostolicis, etiam in die Caenae Domini Legi consuetis,
caeterisque contrariis quibuscunque non obstantibus.

Formula Absolutionis.
DOminus noster Jesus Christus, summus Pontifex, per suam piissimam
Misericordiam and Clementiam, vos cruore suo pretiosissimo redemptos, de
ineffabili sua pietate, ab omnibus peccatis per vos commissis misericorditer
absolvat. Et ego auctoritate Apostolorum Divi Petri and Pauli ac Sedis
Apostolicae mihi Comissa, vos and vestrum quemlibet ab omnibus peccatis,
criminibus, excessibus, and delictis; atque ab omni Haeresi, Schismate,
Apostasia, irregularitate and quocunque errore vestris, necnon a juramento
contra Papatum Romanum per vos praestito, and a quibusvis Excommunicationis,
suspensionis, and interdictorum and aliis Sententiis, censuris and poenis
Ecclesiasticis, a jure vel ab homine latis, per vos ratione praemissorum
incursis and contractis, absolvo, ac communioni fidelium and Sacrosanctae Dei
Ecclesiae Sacramentis restituo, reduco, and redintegro; in nomine Patris, and
Filii and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

Additament to Par. I. to be placed between Sect. 19. and 20.
Hist. of Reform. Par. I. page 105, 106. Now the Session of Parliament came on
the 16th. of January 1531. and there the King first brought into the House of
Lords the Determination of the Universities, etc. (touching his Marriage with
Queen Catherine.) After they were read and considered there, the Lord
Chancellor on the 20th. of March* did with other Lords go down to the House of
Commons; and showed the same to them. -- The Matter was also brought before the
Convocation, and they having weighed all that was said on both sides, seemed
satisfied, that the Marriage was unlawful, and that the Bull (dispensing with
it) was of no force; more not being required at that time.

The Historian could not safely conclude, that no more was then required,
because he could find no more. Much more was then required of, and done by, the
Convocation in this affair. I have seen an authentic Instrument of their whole
proceedings herein, drawn up by a Public Notary at the King's command, and
attested by the President and other eminent Members of the Convocation, wherein
this account is given. Two Questions were by the King propounded to the
Convocation, to be dicussed and determined by them: The first, which was to be
considered and determined by the Divines of the Convocation, was conceived in
these words: An ducere Uxorem, cognitam a Fratre, decedente sine prole, sit
prohibitio juris divini, indispensabilis a Papa? At the discussion and
determination of this were present personally in the Convocation Divines 75, by
Proxies 197, in all 272. The Names of all are inserted at length with great
accuracy in the Instrument before mentioned. Of these 253 determined the
Question in the Affirmative; and 19 only held the Negative. The second
Question, which was to be considered and determined by the Professors of Law,
(Canon, or Civil, or both) Members of the Convocation, was conceived thus: An
carnalis eopula inter Illustrissimum Principem Arthurum and Serenissimam
Dominam Catherinam Reginam, ex propositis, exhibitis, deductis, and allegatis,
sit sufficienter probata? At the Examination and Decision of this Question were
present personally Canonists and Civilians 44, by Proxy 3, in all 47. Of these
41 determined the Question in the Affirmative, and only 6 maintained the
Negative. I will subjoyn the Names of those who held the Negative in each
Question.

Divines. Personaliter praesentes.
Johannes Episcopus Roffen. Georgius Episcopus Landaw. Ricardus Abbas de
Winchelcomb. Robertus Prior Ecclesiae Cath. Eliensis. Ricardus Prior de
Walsingham. Willielmus Prior S. Gregorii Cantuar. Hugo Abbas de Reading.
Nicolaus Wilson. Robertus Shirton. Ricardus Fetherstone. Edwardus Powell.
Nicolaus Metcalfe. Gilbertus Smith. Thomas Wadilowe. Ricardus Ducke. Thomas
Bough.
Per Procuratorem suum, Abbatem de Peaeding.
Johannes Abbas de Shirbourne. Johannes Rector de Edingdon. Johannes Abbas de
Parshore.
Canonists and Civilians. Personaliter praesentes.
Johannes Episcopus Bath and Wells. Adam Travers. Petrus Ligham. Ricardus
Harrison. Robertus Clyff. Laurentius Woodcock.
Additament to Par. II. Sect. 76.
I have there said, that besides the Speeches of Heath and Fecknam, made in the
House of Lords against the Alteration of the Liturgy, (mentioned by the
Historian) I had seen a Speech of Scot Bishop of Chester, made at the same time
in the same Cause. Since that, I find, that the Historian has also seen it,
and gives an Extract of it with the others: which, being by his Printers fault
joined to the Extract of Heath's Speech in the same continued Section, and only
a few Syllables Intervening, I overlooked. But to make amends for this
oversight, I will here correct several mistakes committed by the Historian in
relating the Transactions of that Sessions of Parliament: which I am enabled to
do, having carefully perused the Journall of the House of Lords in that
Session. The Historian says, That the Bill concerning the New Service, was
sent up by the Commons on the 18th of April, Par. 2. p. 393.
and debated in the House of Lords (in which Debate the several Speeches,
before mentioned, were made) and at length passed. On the contrary, the Lords
Journall testifies, That on Monday the 17th. of April the House of Lords sat,
and after having read several Bills, was adjourned by the Lord Keeper to
Wednesday, April 19th. So that on the 18th. the House sat not; and even on the
19th. nil actum, to use the words of the Journall, but was then adjourned to
Saturday the 22d. Then also nil actum, but was adjourned to Tuesday the 25th.
of April; on which day (and not before) this Bill was sent up from the Commons,
with 8 other Bills. It was not immediately debated; but was read the first time
on Wednesday the 26th the second time on the 27. It was read the last time, and
concluded, on Friday the 28th. It was debated on the two last days. Scot spoke
his Speech on the last day, and therein undertook to Answer the Speech of a
certain Nobleman, made in the House on the day before in favor of the Bill,
wherein that Nobleman had reflected on the blindness of our Forefathers. From
whence it appears to have been debated on the 27th. on which day I suppose
Fecknam to have made his Speech. For he was not present in the House on the
28th. when the Bill was concluded. For the Historian mistaketh when he places
the Abbot of Westminster among the Dissenters at the conclusion of the Bill;
for the Journall has not his Name. He has also farther mistaken herein, in
leaving out the Bishops of Landaff and Exeter: whom the Journall reports to
have dissented with the rest there named. A like mistake is committed by him in
relating the conclusion of the Act for the Restitution of the First Fruits and
Tenths to the Crown. He says, It was agreed to by the Lords on the 4th. of
February, p. 383.
the Archbishop of York, Bishops of London, Worcester, Landaff, Litchfield,
Exeter, Chester, and Carlisle, protesting against it; but that the Bishops of
Winchester, Ely, etc. were then absent. Now the Journall of the Lords
affirms, that the Bill was concluded, Dissentientibus Arch. Ebor. Episcopis
London. Winton. Wigorn. Landavan. Coven. and Litch. Cestrien. and Carliol.
there being that day no more or other Lords Spiritual there present. So that
indeed Winchester was there, and Exeter was not. But after all, the Bill was
not now ultimately concluded; but being sent back from the Commons with an
Amendment, was read and agreed to in the Lords House on the 15th. of March;
when dissented from it, besides the former Prelates, the Bishop of Exeter, and
Abbot of Westminster: p. 386.
but London was not then present. In the next place, whereas the Historian
relates, That upon the ultimate reading and conclusion of the Bill for the
Supremacy, after it had been sent back by the Commons with an Amendment; it
passed in the House of Lords with the same dissent, as before, when it was read
on the 18th. of March, and sent down to the Commons, it is a mistake; for on
the 22d of March, when it was ultimately read and concluded, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the Viscount Montacute, and the Bishop of Worcester, are not said
in the Journall to have dissented; all whom the Historian (therein agreeing
with the Journall) makes to have dissented on the 18th. Lastly, when the
Historian, relating that the Bishop of Ely was absent at the passing of this
Act: p. 387.
For though he would not consent to it, yet having done all that was prescribed
by it so often before, he thought it more decent to be absent, than either to
consent to it or to oppose it: We cannot but except against his familiar Method
of proposing such like conjectures as assured matters of History, and
delivering them as peremptorily, as if he had been of Council to the several
Persons. If for this reason the Bishop of Ely had absented at this time; he
ought for the same Reason to have absented himself on the 26th. of April, when
was read and concluded in the Lords House An Act Restoring to the Crown the
Ancient Jurisdiction over the State Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and
abolishing all Foreign Power Repugnant to the same, the Bishop of Ely being
then present, and with other Bishops, and Viscount Montague, and Abbot Fecknam,
dissenting from it; as the Journall of the Lords testifies.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to correct the following ERRATA of the Press.
PArs I. Page 1. Line 15. ab imo, for the read that. P. 17. l. 14. for Rober r.
Robert. In margin, P. 18. l. 8. ab imo, set these words, Apol. adv. Theologos
Lovan, cap. 2. In margin, P. 19. l. 3. ab imo, for XIX. r. XX. P. 24. l. 17.
and 18. for December r. Decembris. P. 26. l. 4. for the r. these. Ibid. l. 30.
dele a. P. 27. l. 18. for Archbishop r. Archbishops. P. 32. l. 26. for Baronies
r. Barons. P. 33. l. 3. aft. there add were. P. 34. l. 16. dele that. P. 35.
l. 24. for Arch-Episc. r. Archiepiscopal. P. 40. l. 6. ab imo, for times r.
time. P. 44. l. 2. ab imo, for Norric. r. Norwic. and place it in the margin of
p. 45. over against l. 5. P. 46. l. 5. ab imo, for Farnese r. Furnese. P. 48.
l. penult. for probably r. improbably. P. 53. l. 10. for Baronages r. Baronage.

PArs II. P. 68. l. 18. after and add by. In marg. P. 76. l. 5. set Page 6.3
lines lower. P. 90. l. penult. for the r he. P. 93. l. 17. dele the. P. ibid.
l. 4. ab imo, for Affairs r. Affair. P. 96. l. 9. ab imo, for of r. in. Ibid.
lin. penult. in marg. for 19. r. 15. P. 97. l. 1. for dignetur r. dignentur. P.
105. l. 13. for kept r. slept. Ibid. l. penult. for May and r. May 4th. P. 106.
l. 17. for Malgrave r. Walgrave. P. 107. l. 12. for 14th. Aug. r. 14th. of
August. P. 110. l. 14. aft. him add and..... Ibid. l. 17. aft. unto add such.
P. 112. l. 1. for Masco r. Alasco. P. 114. l. 15. for London and the r. London
and other. P. 117. l. 25. for before r. being. P. 121. l. 2. for June r. Anno.
In marg. l. 12. for Chron. r. Chron. Ser. P. 123. l. 16. for Delgarum r.
Belgarum. P. 124. l. 4. aft. Transcript add of the Historian. Ibid. l. 20. for
was r. may. P. 126. l. 6. for I know r. I know not. P. 128. l. 18. for anni r.
annis. Ibid. l. 22. for Nocholaus r. Nicholaus. Ibid. l. 30. for notoriae r.
notorie. P. 129. l. 7. for iniquitates r. iniquitatis. P. 130. l. ult. for
Cester. r. Cestr. P. 131. l. 1. for professione in r. professionem. P. 135. l.
13. aft. incline add to believe. Ibid. 23. for giving r. given. P. 136. l. 16.
in marg. for Faad. r. Facult. P. 139. l. 2. aft. Brother add and. P. 140. l.
24. for falsely r. fully. Ibid. l. 27. for Beacon r. Beaton. P. 141. l. 8. for
Beacon r. Beaton. P. 143. l. 23. for Denrham r. Bentham. P. 144. l. 13. for
which the r. which is the. P. 148. l. 21. for Herbert r. Hubert. Ibid. l. ult.
for nata r. Natae. P. 149. l. 4. ab imo, for the r. that. P. 150. l. 15. for
Holman r. Holiman. P. 152. l. 5. aft. sincere add and. Ibid. l. 13. for
Proctours r. Doctors. Ibid. l. 25. for Salkel r. Salkeld. P. 154. l. 18. for
believed r. delivered. P. 155. l. 18. for was done r. was not done. P. 158. l.
8. aft. had add been. P. 159. l. 22. for Cantleury r. Cantleurs. P. 162. l. 4.
ab imo, for anxius r. anxias. P. 164. l. 4. for debimus r. debemus. Ibid. l. 6.
for discere r. dicere. Ibid. l. penult. for qua r. quam. P. 165 l. 14. for
Doctissimus r. doctissimis. Ibid. l. 18. for natura deliberationem r. matura
deliberatione. P. 166. l. 10. ab imo, for he rinne serit r. heerinne servit.
Ibid. l. 5. ab imo, aft. all add her. Ibid. before Prince add the. P. 167. l.
4. for enthe r. earth. Ibid. l. 4. ab imo, for the reinne r. thereinne. P. 168.
l. 3. for tethegeren r. tethegeven. P. 173. l. 18. for with r. wish. Ibid. l.
28. for to time r. in time. P. 175. l. 3. for contention r. contentation. P.
176. l. 15. for There r. These.

The Author has not been able to correct the mistakes of the Piess committed
in the Sheets N. and O. having not yet seen them since they were wrought off.


