A Second NARRATIVE OF THE Late Parliament (so called.) Wherein, after a brief
Reciting some Remarkable Passages in the former Narrative, is given an Account
of their Second Meeting, and Things transacted by them; As also, how the
Protector (so called) came Swearing By the living God, and dissolved them,
after two or three Weeks Sitting. With some Quaeries sadly proposed thereupon.

Together with an Account of three and forty of their Names, who were taken out
of the House, and others that sat in the Other House, intended for a House of
Lords, but being so unexpectedly disappointed, could not take Root, with a
Brief Character and Description of them.

All humbly presented to Public View By a Friend to the good Old Cause of
Justice, Righteousness, the Freedom and Liberties of the People, which has
cost so much Blood and Treasure, to be carried on in the late Wars, and are not
yet settled.

Josh. 6. 26. Cursed be the man before the Lord that rises up and builds the
city Jericho, he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his
youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.

Job 5. 3, 4. I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed his
habitation: His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate,
neither is there any to deliver them.

Job 5. 12. He disappointeth the Devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot find their enterprise.

Job 18. 14. His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it shall
bring him to the King of Terrors.

Printed in the Fifth Year of Englands Slavery under its New Monarchy, 1658.

Courteous Reader,
THere was formerly a Narrative published, giving thee an Account of the
Choosing, Coming together, Secluding of some, and Sitting of the rest of the
late Parliament (so called,) as also of the things that did attend them, and
the Acts that were passed by them: The goodness of which Acts, with their
tendency to Enslave and Oppress the Nation, is sadly experienced (to the Cost
and Sorrow) of not a few; For instance, First, that Wicked, Unjust, and
Oppressive Act for New Buildings, under which many a Soul has groaned; some
though having in the last 16, or 18 Years past, paid twice the value of their
Houses in Taxes, have thereby been forced, unless they will be plundered or
cast into Prison, to pay a Years Rent more; in the cruel prosecution of which
Act many sad Cases have fallen out. Secondly, the Act for the Excise, imposing
it for ever (with the Customs) as a standing Revenue to the Crown, and letting
it out to Farm, to the horrible Oppression of the People, setting up Patentees
to Rule them at pleasure. Thirdly, An Act for a three Years Tax to pay the
Soldiers, where the Great ones get all, and the Inferiors very little, but
are behind near a year; many of them living on Tickets, whilst their great
Leaders ruffle in their Gallantry: And as if that were not enough, did then
Order a Three Months Tax to be paid twice over. And to name but one more (for
brevity sake) Fourthly, an Act for a High Court (so called) of Justice, for the
Preservation of the Protectors Person, as if the Law and Soldiers were not as
sufficient to protect him now, as when he was General, but an Arbitrary and
Illegal Court must be erected in a time of Peace, to take away the Lives of
persons at their pleasure.

There is likewise in that Narrative a Catalogue, or an Account given of One
hundred eighty two of the Members of that unworthy Assembly, who were Sons,
Kinsmen, Servants, and otherwise engaged unto, and had Places of Profit,
Offices, Sallaries, Which amounts unto in the whole, one million sixteen
thousand three hundred and seventeen pounds sixteen shillings and eight pence
per An. according to the favourablest computation by the former Narrative, or
Book of Rates. As it was said there, so here: If there be any mistakes, they
are desired who best know, to rectify them; if not, then what is here
mentioned may be taken for granted. Nehemiah did not eat the bread of the
Governor; why must so great Sallaries be continued to them who have gotten so
much already. The Taxes raised from the people to pay this, does ruin
thousands.
and Advantages under the Protector, (so called) whereby it does appear, what
fine Suckers they are of the Riches and Fatness of this Commonwealth, and how
unlikely they were, being so packed for his Interest, and so well seasoned with
the Salt of his Palace, (Ezra 4. 14.) to bring forth the so much Prayed,
Engaged, Fought, and Bled for Rights and Liberties of the People. After some
Queries proposed thereupon, follows a Catalogue of the Kinglings, or the Names
of those Seventy persons, (most of them being the Protectors Kinsmen, and
Sallary-men) that voted for Kingship, with the Counties for which they served,
that so they may be remembered, and called to an account hereafter. After this,
there is mentioned, how that the Now Government, of the Humble Petition and
Advice, pretended by them to be then settled, was carried in the House but by
three Voices, fifty three against fifty; as also that it was contrary to the
Desires of the good People of the Nation, but not being able at that time to
get the Names of those fifty three persons, who also highly deserve to be taken
notice of, they were not therein mentioned*

You have also those Members of that Assembly, who though they gave not their
Vote either for King-ship, or the then Government by the Humble Petition and
Advice, but protended to be against, and dissatisfied with both, sharply, and
justly reproved, for betraying the Trust committed to them by the People.
First, for being so Sneaking, and Cowardly in their Spirits, as to suffer their
Fellow Members to be Secluded from them; and the Council, who had nothing to do
with it, so to entrench upon their Privileges, as to let none sit but whom
they approved of. Secondly, For being so ready to comply to Sit, or Adjourn at
the Protectors pleasure, as if they were his Servants, and not he theirs.
Thirdly, That when they saw the Liberties of the People endeavored to be
violated afresh by the Kinglings, and also really given away by the
aforementioned fifty three persons, who petitioned and advised the Protector
(so called) to take the Government upon him, and to choose his Successor; they
did not Cry out; Protest, Declare against, and withdraw from them, which being
their duty they ought to have done; in doing whereof, those unparalled
wickednesses would of necessity have fallen to the ground: but instead thereof
went on with them, stifeling their own Consciences, and endeavoring to
satisfy their oppressed Brethren, by saying, He had not the Title of King; as
if all the Evil, Oppression, and Arbitrarinesse lay in that; when as at the
same time, he has the same, and no less power, then if he had the Title, and
were called King. Yea, a far greater Power then what cost so much Blood and
Treasure, to oppse in the late King; and that these slight Pretenses would not
be Plea sufficient to excuse them, in the day of their Account for so doing.
After which, some general Queries being soberly proposed as a close to the
whole, is the Conclusion of that Narrative.

Now here thou will find related some of the most remarkable Passages which
occurred in their second Session, with the end, and dissolution of the whole,
after two or three Weeks sitting. As also something of another House, (though
Namelesse yet) covertly intended for a House of Lords, with a Description of
forty three of them, by all which thou may be able in some measure to
resolve thy thoughts concerning the change of the Cause and Principles, which
these great Masters formerly carried on, and profess to do so still. It is
notoriously known how even the chief of them sometime said, It would never be
well, neither should we ever see good Days, whilst there was one Lord left in
England, nor until you (speaking so to him) my Lord of Manchester be called
Mr. Montague: yet now new Lords must be made by the dozens. What Declaring,
what Fighting has there been, and how much Blood and Treasure spent against a
Negative Voice, in the King and Lords? Yet now, not only the Protector
himself, forsooth, but all his new upstart Lords, such as were our equals, or
it may be below us, must Lord it over us, with their No, to our I. Is not the
world grown mad? were there ever such wonders before? To fancy what after Ages
will think of these men, who pretend to be of the Saints of these times, will
never make a person melancholy that shall be serious in it. Not to trouble thee
further, eye God more, and Men less, and that will stay and quiet thy Spirit:
and say to thy self as the Psalmist did, (Psalm. 62. 5, 9.) My soul wait thou
only upon God, for my expectation is from him. Surely men of low degree are
vanity, and men of high degree are a lie.

A Second Narrative of the late Parliament (so called) giving an Account of
their Second Meeting, and the things transacted by them; as also their
Dissolution after two or three weeks Sitting. With an Account of three and
forty of their Names, who in the interval of the Adjournment were taken out of
the House, and others that sat in the Other House, so greatly designed for a
House of Lords: with a Brief Character and Description of them.
THe late Parliament (so called) having made their new Model of Government,
called The Humble Petition and Advice, before they had well licked their Golden
Calf, or given the Brat of their Brain a Name, were called upon to Adjourn, and
break up: And so making more haste then good speed, they left things very raw
and imperfect, which afterward occasioned great Contests, and in fine, their
Dissolution.

According to the time they Adjourned unto, they Assemble again, being January
23. 1657. where after the usual Solemnities of Devotion performed, they repair
to the House, where they found some of their Number Commissioned, and empowered
by the Protector, to swear them. The Copy of which Oath here follows.

The Oath.
I do in the presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, Promise and Swear, That
to the utmost of my power in my place, I will uphold and maintain the true
Reformed Protestant Christian Religion in the Power thereof, as it is contained
in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and encourage the
Profession and Professors of the same: And that I will be true and faithful to
the Lord Can those be faithful to the Rights and Liberties of the People, who
swear to be faith full to the Government in a single Person, which our too sad
experience tells us so, naturally tends to destroy them? Do not those who so
swear, undertake to uphold that in the Protector which cost so much Blood and
Treasure to oppose, as Antichristian and Tyrannical in the King? Or is that a
lawful Authority which contrary to all Presidents and Privileges of
Parliament, was carried but by three Voices of them that was permitted to sit,
there being at the same time at least 80. of the Members purposely kept out
till that Act was past? Ought not things to be searched into, and set right
upon this account: for that (Mat. 6. 24.) No man can serve two masters.
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, as Chief Magistrate thereof: And
shall not contrive, design, or attempt any thing against the Person, or
lawful Authority of the Lord Protector; and shall endeavor as much as in me
lies, as a Member of Parliament, the Preservation of the Rights and Liberties
of the People.

Which having taken, and coming into the House, they find not only some of
their Fellow To the other House they were gone for greater preferment.
Members, but their old Servant and Clerk, Mr. Scobell, gone, and a new one put
in his room whose name is Smith, which with biting a little the Lip, and
something in way of Complement, as with a Salvo of their Rights and
Privileges, they for quietness sake Vote him (so put upon them) to be their
Clerk, and then settled themselves in a posture for their future work. And the
first thing they undertake, is to keep a Day of Prayer in their House, which
accordingly they did; and with great prudence, plowing with an Ox and an Ass
together, the Presbyters and Independents being both called to Officiate.

The Other House, who would fain have the Honor to be called Lords, or rather
a House of Lords, did likewise in their House pray at the same time with much
Devotion, and did afterward agree to send to the Parliament, (or as they would
have them again called, the House of Commons) by Baron Hill and Sergeant
Windham, (after the manner of the House of Peers formerly) to declare their
Message, viz. That the House of Lords, or the Lords of the other House had sent
unto them, to desire their joining with them in a Petition or Message to the
Protector, That a Day of Prayer In nomine Domini incipe om*ne malum.
and Humiliation might be appointed through the whole Commonwealth.

Which Message begat very high Debaets, and sharp Speeches from many that were
not at the making this lame and imperfect Model, so as the aforesaid
Messengers were fain to wait a long time; but at length got this Answer, viz.
That they would return an Answer by Messengers of their own.

The House filling daily, and many of those that had been secluded in the
former Session coming in, the Face of things in the House were in a great
measure changed, another Spirit appearing in them then before, insomuch, that
many made question of the things that were formerly done; some speaking at a
high rate in behalf of the Rights of the English Free People, and against the
Wrongs and Injuries that had been done unto them. This being done day by day,
and the House not agreeing what to call that Other House, which was as it were
a namelesse Infant, and fain would be named the House of Lords, was the
greatest part of their work, save that now and then, some little Matters came
under Debate, as the Reviving and perfecting their Committees, and Reading some
former Bills. The Lord Cravens Case also was taken in, and the Council on both
parts heard at the Bar of the House, with some other little Matters that
passed; but the greatest part of time that was spent in the House, (whilst
sitting) was in Considering and Debating what they should call the Other House.

Toward the end of their sitting, there came another Message from the Other
House, after the same manner as before, Desiring their joining with them, in
moving the Protector to Order, that the Papists, and such as had been in Arms
under the late King, might be exiled the City, and put out of the Lines of
Communication, etc. This Message being also designed as shooing*horn, to draw
on their owning of them, received a like Answer as did the former.

As for the Other House (who called themselves the House of Lords) they spent
their time in little Matters, such as choosing of Committees, and among other
things, to consider of the Privileges and Jurisdiction of their House, (good
wise souls) before they knew what their House was, or should be called.

About which time also, a Petition was preparing, by some faithful Friends to
the good Old Cause, in, and about the City of London, which was afterward
Printed, and signed with many thousand Hands: which Petition makes mention of
the several Particulars that were the Grounds of Contest between the late
King, and Parliament, and the good People of the Nation. And prays, The
settling those good things fought for, as the Reward and Fruit of the Blood and
Treasure so greatly expended in the late Wars, etc. This Petition was ready to
be presented to the Parliament (in a peaceable way) by the hands of about
twenty in the name of the rest, desiring to submit the issue thereof to God,
and the Wisdom of that Assembly. The Court hearing of it, were so affrighted,
as they began to consider how they might quell and put a stop to that honest
Spirit, which so appeared against them; the Protector (in the mean while)
calling them Traitors, and Seditious persons, etc. Threatening to cut their
Sculls, and to tread them down as mire in the streets, etc. And turned out As
Major Packer, Mr. K^ffin, and others, by endeavoring to promote the Apostasy
at its first Rise, has occasioned many baptized persons, and others, simply to
wander after the Beast. They now seeing their Error, ought they not to declare
it to the people as also to stir them up to keep close with more refinednesse
in their Spirits to the good Old Cause, and to be for no single Person
whatsoever, till he comes, whose Right it is, Ezekiel. 21. 26.
Major Packer, and most of the honestest Officers of his Regiment of Horse, for
refusing to serve his Lust therein. And apprehending that nothing could do it,
but a speedy dissolving the Parliament, they put on Resolutions accordingly,
only waited for a convenient opportunity. But something happening that
morning, that put the Protector into a Rage and Passion, near unto madness,
(as those at White Hall can witness) he gets into a Coach, and to the Other
House he comes, and sends for his son Fleetwood, Mr. Nathaniel Fines, and some
others, acquainting them what his Purpose and Resolution was, and what he came
to do, (who as its said) earnestly endeavored to dissuade him from it; but he
refused to hearken, and in great passion swear By the living God he would
dissolve them. And so going into the House, and sending the Black Rod with a
Message, to call the Parliament to come unto him, He with laying great blame
upon them, and charging them with great Crimes, and Magnifying of himself (as
his manner is) dissolved them. And this was the fourth Parliament broken by him
in five years.

Thus the Two Houses fell, and perished together; their Father, their good
Father, knocking his Children on the Head, and killing of them, because they
were not towardly, but did wrangle one with another; but what has he gained
thereby? Solomon the wise says, Prove. 14. 1. Every wise woman builds her
house, but the foolish plucketh it down with her own hands.

Upon the whole, it is Humbly Queried as follows, viz.
First, Whether there may not very plainly be read and perceived, a Hand of
Displeasure from the Almighty, blinding the eyes, and infatuing the
understandings of those unworthy persons, who ( 1 Kings 16. 34.
Hiel like (would have built Jericho again, (to wit) fallen Monarchy in a
single Person and a House of Lords, with their Negative Voices over the good
people of these Lands) so as to cause, or suffer them to do their work by
halves? and to rise, and leave so Lame, Namelesse, and Insignificant, their New
Model of the Humble Petition and Advice, (alias Instrument of Bondage to the
English Nation.) Let the Curse of Confusion that attended the Builders of Genesis
11. 7. 9.
Babel be considered of.

Secondly, Whether those so very wise Gentlemen, who saw it so necessary, and
ventured so high, and took so much pains, to bring in again, and anew restore
fallen Monarchy and Kingship in these Lands, could according to the rules of
common reason and understanding of men, imagine and conclude, That the
Gentlemen who had formerly been so wronged, abused, and exasperated by them, in
being kept out of the House, would be so easy and tame, as presently, without
any more ado, address themselves to lick their new Golden Calf, and nurse up
that Babylonish, Antichristian Brat, they had no hand in, but were against the
begetting of? And whether it does not speak out a very great weakness in their
Councels, and a mavelous shallowness in the Protector, his Council, and
whole number concerned in that Design, in making no better provision
beforehand, and seeing no further into the ensuing Danger, so likely to attend
their whole Device, and the namelesse Infant of the Other House, which they
would have to be Christened, and Called by the Name of Lords.

Thirdly, Whether the good people of this Nation have not cause for ever as to
abhor the Memory of the aforementioned backsliding persons, so that
Parliament (so called) in the first Session of it before their Adjourning, that
of their own Heads, and contrary to their Engagement to the The first
Instrument is not hereby owned, but abhorred as much as the latter, though I
thus speak.
Instrument of Government; by virtue whereof they sat at first, and without
consulting the respective Counties for whom they served, or so much as one
Petition delivered to them for that purpose, changed the Government, and made
one worse, harder, and more grievous to be born, then that they put away; so
fastening their new Iron yoke upon the Necks of the good People of this Land,
settling great Taxes, with the Customs and Excise for ever, to keep this Yoke
upon them?

Fourthly, Whether those Gentlemen kept out in the first Sitting, when those
hard things were transacted, and afterward coming in, and being present in
the second Meeting, notwithstanding the so great Reproach and Dirt cast on them
by the Court, are not highly to be honored and esteemed, for appearing and
standing so far as they did, for Right, and Freedom, and against the Bondages,
which contrary to Engagements, Covenants, and Promises, were put upon the good
People of this Land? As well as to be blamed, not only for not declaring at
their first Seclusion, to inform the People of the wrong and injury done unto
them; But also, when afterward they whre so Arbitrarily and Tyrannically
dissolved, with the rest of their unworthy Brethren, they took it so patiently,
and went so tamely home, and did not in the very time of the Action, Protest
and Declare against the Tyrant, and then retire into their places, (from whence
they ought not to have stirred at first) and call him to the Bar, or otherwise
proceeded against him for so doing? Had it not been suitable to, and well
becoming that noble Commonwealth Spirit (so much pretended to) thus to have
assayed, though they had fallen in it? And whether the Army in Honesty,
Conscience and Duty, their former Declarations and Engagements considered,
ought not to have assisted them therein, as well as they did the long
Parliament against the King and his Courtiers, upon the like account? Does not
the loud Cries of the Souls of the Saints Rev. 6. ^, 10.
under the Altar, slain for the Testimony which they held in their Day, as also
the Blood of the Saints and others slain in the late Wars, and the Sufferings
of our dear Brethren in Prisons and Banishment, call for this their Testimony
also? If so? Ought not this honest word of Reproof for what is past, and of
excitation for the future to take place?

Fifthly, But since things were as they were, and as it seems could be no
better, Whether all good People in these Nations, have not great cause
exceedingly to bless and praise the Lord? (though they owe little to the
Instrument) who (Ashur-like had other ends) that the late Parliament (so
called) was dissolved; who were many of them, such Mercenary, Sallary, and
self-interested men, as in all probability, had they continued much longer,
would have over-voted the Lovers of Freedom, and so have perfected their
Instrument of Bondage, and rivetted it on the Necks of the good People for ever
by a Law, and thereby made them Vassals and Slaves perpetually. But hitherto
the Lord has in a great measure frustrated their wicked Device, blessed be his
holy Name.

Sixthly, Whether the Protector (so called be not a great destroyer of the
Rights and Liberties of the English Nation? For has he not in grossed the
whole power of the Militia into his own hand? The Right also of Property? Power
of judging all matters of the highest and greatest Concernment? And does he not
take on him to be sole Judge of Peace and War, of Calling and Dissolving
Parliaments? Raising Money without Consent in Parliament? Imprisoning persons
without due form of Law, and keeping them in Durance at pleasure; using the
Militia in his own hand against the good People, in these forenamed things,
and aginst their Representers in Parliamenr.

Seventhly, Whether the Protector, and the Great men his Confederates, be not
rather to be termed Fannattick, Whimsicall and Sickbrain'd, then those, (who
remaining firm to, and being more refined in their former, good, and honest
Principles, and will upon no account be drawn to desert the good Old Cause)
they account and call so? And whether this unsettlednesse in their Government,
and changing both it and their Principles, in so short a time; and going so
diametrically contrary to their former honest Protestations, Declarations,
Sermons, and Actings, does not in the view of all the world, Declare them so to
be?

Eighthly, Whether the Protector (so called) be not that himself which he
untruly charged upon the Members turned out of the Little Parliament (so
called) viz. A destroyer of Magistracy and Ministry? Of Magistracy, in
breaking four Parliaments in five Years; and pulling up by the roots, what in
him lies, the very Basis and Foundation of all just Power, to wit, the
Interest of the good People of this Commonwealth; making himself, and his own
Will and Lust, the Basis and Foundation thereof? And does he not at his
pleasure suppress and destroy all Military and Civil Power, and Governors
that submit not thereunto? Is he not likewise a great destroyer of Ministry,
in taking from them their Religious, or Divine Capacities, putting them into
that of Lay or Common? and accordingly, in a professed way, preferring them to
places of Advantage by the Tryers?

Ninthly* Whether the Protector be so wise and understanding, so tender and
careful of the Common Interest (as is pretended to) above all others
whatsover? yea, above and beyond the four Parliaments he has dissolved? And
may it not be enquired how he came to this great height of Knowledge and
absolute understanding, seeing there are very many worthy Patriots, sometimes
his Equals (at least) of as high a Descent, of as good breeding, of as great
Parts, of as fair an Interest, as also as well versed in Government as himself?
Whether it may not be wondered at, that he should be so exceeding wise, and
tender above all, even above Parliaments themselves.

Tenthly, Whether Sir Henry Vane, Major General Harrison, the late President
Bradshaw, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Lieutenant General Ludlow, with hundreds more
of worthy Patriots, that have ventured far in their Countries Cause, for
Justice and Freedom, may not rationally be thought to be as careful and tender
of the good of their Country as the Protector?

Eleventhly, Whether it does not rankly savor of high Pride and Arrogance in
the Protector (so called) to set up his Sense and Judgment, as the standard
for the whole Nation, even Parliaments themselves? And whether thus to do, be
not the sad fruit of Enthusaisme, one of the great Errors of this day and time?

Twelfthly, Whether the Potector being so highly conceited of his own
understanding, so changeable and uncertain in his Principles and Resolutions,
so given up to his Passion and Anger, as against all Advice and Counsel, in a
condition near unto Madness, to swear by the living God he would Dissolve the
late Parliament, and accordingly did so, though the doing of it tended to the
hazard of the Commonwealth? Whether he according to Reason, can be thought a
person capable, and fit to Rule and Govern this so Great, so Wise, and Noble a
People?

Thirteenthly, Whether since the Protector assumed the Government, the state
and condition of this Nation be not very greatly impaired? Their Land Forces
wasted and consumed at Hispaniola, Jamaica, Mardike, and elsewhere? Their
Shipping lessened and diminished; their Stores and Provisions for Sea and Land
expended and consumed without profit; their Magazines emptied; their Treasures
wasted; their Trade in a great measure lost and decayed; and very great new
Debts contracted, little of Old being satisfied? And whether all this be not
the bitter fruit of Apostasy and Treachery, and setting up a single person, as
Chief Magistrate, contrary to Engagements: And the casting away of that
Righteous Cause of Freedom, Justice, and Righteousness, this Land was so
engaged in?

Lastly, Whether the Protector (so called) will not in all likelihood dissolve
the next Parliament also, if they begin to question and make Debates of former
Transactions, and do not presently without any disputing, proceed to perfect
the new Model, of the Humble Petition and Advice? What assurance shall be
given to the Countries and Cities that shall choose, or to the Gentlemen chosen,
that they shall not be served as those before were? And whether, if the honest
Citizens shall begin to make ready their former sober, and very worthy
Petition, or one of the like nature, it will not be looked at again, as a Crime
little less then Treason at the Court, and become a means of sudden
Dissolution to the next Parliament also? Alas for poor England! What will
become of thee in the end? How have thou lost thy self and thy good Old Cause?
And whither will these Masters of Bondage carry thee?

A List of their Names who were taken out of the House, and others, (being All
of them, but four, are salary men, sons, kinsmen, and otherwise engaged to the
Protector, and allied to his Confederates.
forty three in number) that sat in the Other House, so greatly designed for a
House of Lords; with a brief Description of their Merits and Deserts: whereby
it may easily appear, how fit they are to be called (as they call themselves)
Lords; as also being so very deserving, what pity it is they should not have a
Negative Voice over the free People of this Commonwealth.
1. Richard Cromwell, eldest Son of the Protector (so called;) a Person of great
Worth and Merit, and well skilled in Hawking, Hunting, Horse-racing, with other
sports and pastimes; one whose Undertakings, Hazards and Services for the
Cause, cannot well be numbered or set forth, unless the drinking of King
Charles's, or (as is so commonly spoken) his Fathers Landlords health; whose
Abilities in Praying and Preaching, and Love to the Sectaries, being much like
his Cousin Dick Ingoldsby's, and he so very likely to be his Fathers
Successor, and to inherit his noble Virtues, in being the light of the Eyes,
and breath of the Nostrils of the old Heathenish Popish Laws and Customs of the
Nation (especially among the Learned) the University of Oxford have therefore
thought fit (he being also no very good Scholar) to choose him their
Chancellor. And though he was not judged meet (not having a Spirit of
Government for it) to have a Command in the Army when there was fighting, or
honest and wise enough to be one of the little Parliament, yet is he become a
Colonel of Horse now fighting is over; as also taken in to be one of the
Protectors Council, and one of the Other House, and to have the First Negative
Voice over the good People of this Commonwealth, being in so hopeful a way to
have the great Negative Voice over the whole after his Fathers Death.

2. Commissioner Fiennes, Son of the Lord Say, a Member sometime of the Long
Parliament, and then a Colonel under the Earl of Essex, had the command and
keeping of Bristol, but gave it up cowardly, (as it is said) for which he had
like to have lost his head; he being a lover of Kingship and Monarchy (as well
as his Father) was taken in by the Protector at his first setting up, to be one
of his Council, and made Commissioner of the great Seal, as also Keeper of the
Privy Seal, whereby his Interest and Revenue is raised from two or three
hundred per annum, to two or As says the Book of Rates, or former Narrative.
three thousand, and more: And for his Merits and Greatness, (being after the
old mode) he was taken out of the late Parliament, to be the Mouth of the
Protector in that Other House, and so is fit, no question, to have the second
Negative Voice over the good People of these Lands.

3. Henry Lawrence, a Gentleman of a Courtly Breed, and a good Trencher Man;
who when the Bishops ruffled in their Pride and Tyranny, went over to Holland,
afterward came back, and became a Member of the Long Parliament* fell off at
the beheading the late King and change of the Government, for which the
Protector (then Lieutenant General) with great Zeal declared, That a Neutral
Spirit was more to be abhorred then a Cavaleere Spirit, and that such men as he,
were not fit to be used in such a day as that, when God was cutting down
Kingship root and branch; yet came in play again (upon design) in the Little
Parliament, and contributed much to the dissolving of them, as also setting up
the Protector, and settling the Instrument of Government and a single Person,
affirming, That other foundation could no man lay. For which worthy Services,
and as a Snare or Bait to win over, or at least quiet the baptized people,
(himself being under that Ordinance) he was made and continued President of the
Protectors Council, where he has signed many an Arbitrary and Illegal Warrant
for the carrying of honest faithful men to Prisons and Exile without cause,
unless their not apostatizing with them from just and honest principles. His
Merits are great and many, being every way thorough-paced, and a great Adorer
of Kingship; so as he deserves, no doubt, and is every way fit, to be taken
out of the Parliament, to have the third place of Honor, and Negative Voice in
the Other House over the people of these Lands.

4. Lieutenant General Fleetwood, a Gentleman formerly of the Long Parliament,
and a Colonel of their Army; then Lieutenant General, afterward married (honest
Iretons Widow) the Protectors eldest Daughter: Major General Lambert being put
by, by the Parliament from going over to Ireland as Lord Lieutenant, it
savouring too much of Monarchy, and being not willing to accept of a lower
Title, he was sent over thither under the Title of Lord Deputy in his room,
where he continued about three years; and to put a check upon those godly men
there, who are no Friends to Monarchy, he was sent for over again, and cajoled
in to be one of the Protectors Council, as also Major General of diverse
Counties in England: his Salary supposed worth See the former Narrative.
6600 l. per annum, by all which he is become advanced to a princely Interest
and Revenue: he is one of good principles, had he kept them, and of good words
like his Father-in-law, whereby he has deceived many an honest man, and drawn
them from the Good Old Cause, and by that way has greatly served the
Protectors Designs. His Merits therefore are such, as he, no question, also,
deserves to be taken out of the House, and made a Peer, and to have a Negative
Voice in the other House when it shall be named Lords; notwithstanding he so
helped in the Army and Long Parliament to throw down the House of Lords, and to
destroy their Negative Voice, and did fight against it in the King.

5. Colonel Disbrow, a Gentleman or Yeoman of about sixty or seventy pounds per
annum at the beginning of the Wars; who being allied to the Protector by
Marriage of his Sister, he cast away his Spade, and took a Sword, and rise with
him in the Wars, and in like manner upon the Principles of Justice and Freedom,
advanced his Interest very much: if he were not of the Long Parliament, he was
of the Little One, which he helped to break. Being grown considerable, he cast
away the Principles by which he rise, and took on Principles of Violence and
Tyranny, and helped to set up the Protector, for which he was made one of his
Council, and one of the His Salary 3236 l. per annum. See Former Narrative, or
Book of Rates.
Generals at Sea, and has a princely command at Land, being Major General of
diverse Counties in the West, as also one of the Lords of the Cinque Ports. His
Interest and Greatness being so far advanced, his Merits must needs be great,
and he every way fit to be taken out of the House, and put into the Other
House, with a Negative Voice over the good people, for that with his Sword he
can set up that again in the Protector and himself, which before he cut down in
the King and Lords.

6. Lord Viscount Lisle, Eldest Son of the Earl of Leicester, he was of the
Long Parliament to the Last, and at the change of Government, and making Laws
of Treason against a single persons Rule, and, no question, concurred with the
rest therein: he was also of the Little Parliament, and of all the Parliaments
since; was all along of the Protectors His Salary 1000l. per annum
Council, and was never to seek; who having learned so much by changing with
every Change, and keeping still (like his Father-in-law the Earl of Salisbury,
and Peter Sterry) on that side which has proved Trump, nothing need farther be
said of his fitness (being such a man of Ask his late Wifes Sister, the Lady
Sands.
principles) to be taken out of the Parliament, to have a settled Negative Voice
in the Other House over all the good people of these Lands, he being a Lord of
the old Stamp already, and in time so likely to become a Peer.

7. Sir Gilbert Pickering, Knight of the old Stamp, and of a considerable
Revenue in Northamptonshire, one of the Long Parliament, and a great stickler
in the change of the Government from Kingly to that of a Commonwealth; helped
to make those Laws of Treason against Kingship, has also changed with all
changes that have been since: he was one of the Little Parliament, and helped
to break it, as also of all the Parliaments since; is one of the Protectors His
Salary 1000l. perannum, besides his other places.
Council; and, as if he had been pined to his Sleeve, was never to seek; is
become high Steward of Westminster; and being so finical, spruce, and like an
old Courtier, is made Lord Chamberlain of the Protectors Household or Court; so
that he may well be counted fit and worthy to be taken out of the House, to
have a Negative Voice in the Other House, though he helped to destroy it in the
King and Lords. There are more besides him, that make themselves transgressors,
by building again the things which they once destroyed.

8. Walter Strickland, sometime Agent or Ambassador to the Dutch in the low
Countries from the long Parliament, and a good Friend of theirs; at length
became a Member of that Parliament; was also of the little Parliament, which he
helped to break; was of the Parliament since, and is now of the Protectors
Salary 1000 l per annum, besides other places.
Council: he is one that can serve a Commonwealth and also a Prince, so he may
serve himself and his own ends by it; who having so greatly profited by
attending the Hogan Mogans, and become so expert in the Ceremony Postures, and
thereby so apt like an Ape (with his brother Sir Gilbert, and the President) to
imitate or act the part of an old Courtier in the new Court, was made Captain
General of the Protectors Mag-pye or Gray-Coated Foot-guard in White Hall (as
the Earl of Holland formerly to the King:) who being every way of such worth
and Merits, no question can be made, or exceptions had against his fitness to
be taken out of the Parliament to exercise a Negative Voice in the Other House
over the people of this Commonwealth.

9. Sir Charles Ousely, a Gentleman who came something late into play on this
side, being converted from a Cavaleere in a good hour. He became one of the
Little Parliament, which he helped to break, and to set the Protector on the
Throne; for which worthy service, he was (as he well deserved) taken in to be
one of his Council; was also of the Parliaments since: a man of constancy and
certainty in his principles, much like the wind; and although he has done
nothing for the Cause whereby to merit, yet is he counted of that worth, as to
be every way fit to be taken out of the Parliament, to have a Negative Voice in
the Other House over such as have done most, and merited highest in the Cause,
(the Protector and his fellow Negative Men excepted) and over all the
Commonwealth beside.

10. Mr. Rouse, one of the Long Parliament, and by them made Provost or Master
of Eaton College; he abode in that Parliament, and helped to change the
Government into a Commanwealth, and to destroy the Negative Voice in the King
and Lords, was also of the Little Parliament, and their Speaker; who when the
good things came to be done which were formerly declared for, (and for not
doing of which, the Old Parliament was pretendedly dissolved) being an old
Bottle, and so not fit to bear that new Wine, without putting it to the
question, left the chair, and went with his fellow old Bottle^ to White Hall,
to surrender their power to the General, which he as Speaker, and they by
signing a Parchment or Paper, pretended to do. The colorable foundation for
this Apostasy, upon the Monarchical foundation, being thus laid, and the
General himself (as Protector) seated thereon, he became one of his His Salary
for both places 1500 l. per annum.
Council, (good old man) and well he deserved it; for he ventured hard: he was
also of the Parliaments since; and being an aged Venerable man, (all exceptions
set aside) may be counted worthy to be taken out of the House to have a
Negative Voice in the Other House over all that shall question him for what he
has done, and over all the people of these Lands besides, though he would not
suffer it in the King and Lords.

11. Major General Skippon, sometime called The honest English Captain in the
Netherlands, was afterward Captain of those of the Artillery Ground in London;
who refusing to attend the King at York when he sent unto him, and adhering to
the Parliament, was by them made Major General under the Earl of Essex, under
whom many an honest man lost his life in fighting for the Cause of Freedom and
Justice, and against the Negative Voice of the King and Lords, whose blood
surely will lie at some bodies door, and cry. He was of the Long Parliament,
and helped to change the Government, and make the Laws of Treason against a
single persons Rule, and was outed with them. After the Little Parliament (for
endeavoring to bring forth what the old Parliament was turned out for not
doing) was dissolved, he was brought in play again by means of Philip Nigh
(Metropolitan (h) His Salary for both places 1666l. 13s. 4 d.
Tryer of White Hall) and made one of the Protectors His Salary for both places
2000 l. per annum.
Council, and Major General of the City in the decimating business; has been of
all the Parliaments since: who being so grave and Venerable a man, his error
in leading men to fight against the Kings Negative Voice, may be forgiven him,
and he admitted as fit to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in
the Other House himself, not only over those who have fought along with him,
but all the people of these Lands besides; the rather, for that he is very
aged, and not likely to exercise that power long.

12. Colonel Sydenham, a Gentleman of not very much per annum at the beginning
of the Wars; was made Governor of Melcomb Regis in the West; became one of the
Long Parliament, and has augmented his Revenue to some purpose: he helped, no
question, to change the Government, and make those Laws of Treason against
Kingship; was also of the Little Parliament, and of those that were since; one
also of the Protectors (k) Council; has a Princely command in the Isle of
Wight; is one of the Commissioners of the Treasury: by all which he is grown
very great and considerable: and although he has not been thorough-paced for
Tyranny in time of Parliaments, yet it being forgiven him, is judged of that
worth and merit as to be every way fit to be taken out of the House to have a
Negative Voice in the Other House over all his Dependants, and all the people
of these Lands besides, hoping thereby he may so be redeemed, as never to halt
or stand off for the future against the Protectors Interest.

13. Col. Mountague, a Gentleman of Huntingdonshire, of a fair Estate, a
Colonel formerly in the Association Army, under the Earl of Manchester, where
he for some time appeared (whilst Colonel Pickering lived) to be a Sectary, and
for Laymens preaching, as also a lover of the Rights and Freedoms of the
People, rather then of the principle he now acts by; but that honest Colonel
dying, some other things also coming between, he became of another mind: he
gave off being a Soldier about the time of the new Model, it is likely upon the
same account with Colonel Russel; did not greatly approve of beheading the
King, or change of the Government, or the Armies last march into Scotland, as
the Protector (then General) may witness; yet after the War was ended at
Worcester, and the old Parliament dissolved, he was taken in (though no change
appearing from what he was before) to be of the Little Parliament, which he
helped to break, and to set up Monarchy anew in the Protector, which he
designedly was called to do; for which worthy service he was made one of the
Council, His Salary 3095 l. per annum.
a Commissioner of the Treasury, and one of the Generals at Sea; he was of the
Parliaments since: all which considered, none need question his fitness to be a
Lord, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the Other
House, not only over the Treasury and Seamen, but all the good people of
these Lands besides.

14. Colonel Philip Jones, his Original is from Wales; at the first of the Wars
he had about 17 or 20 l. per annum, and improved his interest upon the account
of the cause; first was an Agent for some Parliamenteers to London, where
gaining acquaintance, and making good use of them, he became Governor of a
Garrison, then a Colonel, as also Steward of some of the Protectors Lands in
Wales, and one of the Long Parliament; after of the Little Parliament, which he
helped to break, and to advance the General his Master to be Protector; for
which goodly service, himself was advanced to be one of his Council, afterward
Comptroller of his Household or Court: he made Hay whilst the Sun shined, and
has improved his Interest and Revenue in Land (well If part of the purchase
money was not paid with the great bribe of about 3000 l. for which (as it is
credibly reported) he has been privately questioned, he would do well to clear
himself, being very much suspected, having gotten so great an Estate in so
short a time
gotten, no question) to 3000 l. per annum, if not more: he is also very well
qualified with self denying principles to the Protectors Will and Pleasure, so
as he is fit, no doubt, to rise yet higher, and to be taken out of the House to
be a Lord, and to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over all the good
people in Wales, (if they please) and over all the Commonwealth beside, whether
they please or not. All have not lost by the cause, though some have.

15. Commissioner Lisle, sometime a Counselor in the Temple; one of the Long
Parliament, where he improved his interest to purpose, and bought State Lands
good cheap; afterward became a Commissioner of the Great Seal, and helped in
Parliament to change the Government from Kingly to Parliamentary, or of a
Commonwealth; changed it again to Kingly, or of a single person, and did swear
the Protector at his first installing chief Magistrate, to the hazard of his
Neck, contrary to four See these Acts in a Book called The Looking-Glass, page
43, 44.
Acts of Parliament, which he helped to make, with others, that make it Treason
so to do. He has lately retired for Sanctuary into Mr. Rows Church, and is
still Commissioner Salary 1000l. per annum.
of the Seal; and being so very considerable in worth and merit, is also fit to
be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over the
good people, and all such who shall any way question him: he is since made
President of the high Court (so called) of Justice.

Treason never prospers; what is the reason?
For when it prospers, none dare call it Treason.
16. Chief Justice Glyn, sometime a Counselor at Law, and Steward of the
Court at Westminster, formerly one of the Long Parliament, and that helped to
bait the Earl of Strafford, and bring him to the block; was Recorder of London,
and one of the Eleven Members impeached by the Army of He helped to raise the
Crey against the Army, and made the Speak^r flee to the Army for shelter, and
chose another Speaker in his room in the Kings behalf; and a great deal more.
His Salary 1000l. per annum
Treason, and by that Parliament committed to the Tower: the Protector (through
Apostasy) assuming the Government, took him up, and made him a Judge; and
finding him so fit for his turn, did also make him Chief Justice of England: so
that of a little man, he is grown up into a great Bulk and Interest, and of
complying principles to the life, who being so very useful to advance and
uphold the Protectors great Negative Voice, is thereby, questionless, in his
sense fit to be taken out of the House, and to have a Negative Voice himself in
the Other House, not only over the people, but over the Law he is to be chief
Judge of, and in a capacity to hinder that no good Law for the future be made
for the ease of the people, or hurt of the Lawyers Trade.

17. Bulstrode Whitlock, formerly a Counselor at Law, one of the Long
Parliament, profited there, and advanced his interest very greatly; became one
of the Commissioners of the great Seal; one that helped to change the
Government, and make Laws against a single persons Rule: in the time of the
Little Parliament, he went Ambassador to Sweden in great State; that
Parliament being dissolved, he agitated there for the Protector, then came
over* and when some Alteration and pretended Reformation was made in the
Chancery, he stood off from being any longer a Commissioner of the Seal, and
became one of the Supervisors of the Treasury at 1000 l. per annum See Book of
Rates.
Salary: he is one who is guided more by Ask George Cockain.
Policy then by conscience; and being on that account the more fit for the
Protectors service, there is no question to be made of his worth and merit to
be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over the
people there, though he helped to put it down in the King and Lords.

18. William Lenthal, a Counselor at Law, made Speaker of the Long Parliament
by the late King; sat it out in all Changes, weathered many a Storm and high
Complaint made against him, and was too hard and weildy for all his Opposers:
his policy and good hap carried him on so, as he ended his being Speaker, with
the ending of that Parliament. For the time of his fitting, he advanced his
Interest and Revenue very much; became Mr. of the Rolls; purchased Lands in
others names as well as in his own, for fear of the worst; he was (to be sure)
at the change of the Government from Kingly or of a single person and a House
of Lords, as being useless, See two Declarations of Parliament; one against the
Lords, the other against Kingship.
chargeable and dangerous: As likewise at the making those Laws of Treason
against a single person for the future (not yet repealed.) The Little
Parliament (where some of his Law Judicature was questioned) being dissolved,
and the Protector taking the Government upon him, he adventured to comply with
the rest, notwithstanding the danger, that so he might keep his place and
interest, and avoid a new Storm or Frown from the present Power. Men need not
seek far* or study much to read him, and what principles he acts by. All things
considered, he may, doubtless, be very fit to be Lord of the Rolls, being
Master already, and to be taken out of the Parliament to be made a Lord, and to
have a Negative Voice in the Other House over the people, as well as over the
causes in the Rolls, being so thoroughly exercised in Negatives at his own will
and pleasure, as too many have sadly felt.

19. Mr. Cleypole, Son of Mr. Cleypole in Northamptonshire, now Lord Cleypole,
he long since married the Protectors Daughter; a person whose qualifications
not answering those honest principles formerly so pretended to, of putting none
but godly men into places of trust, was a long time kept out; but since the
Apostasy from those principles, as also the practice brake in, and his
Father-in-law (the head thereof) came to be Protector, he was then judged good
enough for that dispensation, and so taken in to be His Salary is not well known.
Master of his Horse; (as Duke Hamilton to the King.) Much need not be said of
him, his Relation, as Son-in-law to the Protector, is sufficient to bespeak him
every way fit to be taken out of the House, and made a Lord; and having so long
time had a Negative Voice over his Wife, Spring Garden, the Ducks, Deer, Horses
and Asses in Jameses Park, is the better skilled how to exercise it again in
the Other House over the good people of these Nations, without any gainsaying
or dispute.

20. Lord Faulconbridge, a Gentleman whose Relations are most Cavaleeres, (his
Uncle formerly Governor of Newark for the King against the Parliament) was
absent over the water in the time of the late Wars; a Neuter at least, if not
disaffected to the cause; came back, the Wars being over, and has lately
married one of the Protectors Daughters, and was in a fair way (had things hit
right) to have been one of his Council, as well as his Son-in-law; however,
(suitable to the times) he is lately made a Colonel of Horse: his Relation both
to the old and new Monarchy, may sufficiently plead his worth and merits, not
only to have his Daughter, but also a Negative Voice in the other House, over
all that adventured their lives in the cause formerly, and over all the people
of these Lands besides.

21. Colonel Howard, his Interest (which is considerable) is in the North; his
Relations there are most Papists and Cavaleeres, whom he has courted and
feasted kindly, and served their And one^ man told some of the Council worse
things of him then these.
Interest to purpose, it is no matter who lost by it: in favor to Sir Arthur
Haslerigg, was made Captain of the Generals Lifeguard when he was in Scotland,
wherein he continued for some time in England after he was Protector; but not
being a Kinsman, or a person further to be consided in, in that place, was
shuffled out from thence; and to stop his mouth, made a Colonel, and, as the
Book says, a Major General, and had power of Decimation, as also made Governor
of Barwick, Tinmouth, and Carlisle; has also tasted with the first, of that
sweet Fountain of new honor, being made a Viscount: he was of the Little
Parliament, and all the Parliaments since; is a Member of Mr. Cockains Church,
and of very complying principles (no question) to the service of the new Court,
from whence he received his new honor; and having with his fellow Lord
Cleypole so excellent a spirit of Government over his Wife, Family and Tenants
in the Country, to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the
Other House, might seem of right to belong unto him, being also lorded before
hand.

22. Lord Broghil, his Rise and Relation for means, is Ireland, a Gentleman of
good parts and wit, able to make Romance, but was not looked on formerly by
those of the Good Old Cause, as a person fit to be trusted with the command of
one Town or Castle in Ireland; yet is he now, by this happy change, become a
goodly Convert to be confided in, and is made His Salary 1474 l. per annum.
President of the Protectors Council in Scotland: he was of the Latter
Parliaments; a great Kingling, and one that in the Last Parliament (so called)
put on hard that way; wherefore it were great pity, he being also a Lord of the
old Stamp, and so well gifted, if he should not be one to have a Negative Voice
in the Other House over the people of England and Scotland, as well as of
Ireland, it being a good while since, and almost forgotten, that the Protector
said, It would never be well, and we should never see good days, whilst there
was one Lord left in England, and until the Earl of Manchester was called Mr.
Mountague.

23. Colonel Pride, then Sir Thomas, now Lord Pride, sometime an honest Brewer
in London, went out a Captain upon the account of the Cause, fought on, and in
time became a Colonel, did good service in England and Scotland, for which he
was well rewarded by the Parliament: with cheap Debenters of his Soldiers and
others, he bought good Lands at easy rates; gave the Long Parliament a Purge,
fought against the King and his Negative Voice, and was against the Negative
Voice of his Brethren, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being unwilling to
have any in the Land; but has now changed his mind and principles with the
times, and will fight for a Negative Voice in the Protector, and also have one
himself, and be a Lord, for he is a Knight of the new Order already, and grown
very bulky and considerable: it is hard to say how the people will like it.
However, his worth and merits rightly measured, will, no question, render him
fit to be taken out of the House to be one of the Other House, and to have a
Negative Voice not only over the Bears, but all the people of these Lands,
though he did formerly so opppose and fight against it: and the Noble Lawyers
will be glad of his company and friendship, for that there is now no fear of
his hanging up their Gowns by the Scottish Colors in Westminster Hall, as he
formerly so greatly boasted and threatened to do.

24. Colonel Hewson, then Sir John, now Lord Hewson, sometime an honest
Shoemaker or Cobbler in London, went out a Captain upon the account of the
Cause, was very zealous, fought on stoutly, and in time became a Colonel, did
good service both in England and Ireland, was made Covernour of Dublin, became
one of the little Parliament, and of all the Parliaments since, a Knight also
of the new Stamp. The world being so well amended with him, and the sole so
well stitcht to the upper Leather, having gotten so considerable an Interest
and Means, may well be counted fit to be taken out of the House to be a Lord,
and to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over all of the gentle Craft,
and Cordwayners Company in London, (if they please:) but though he be so
considerable, and of such Merit in the Protectors, as also in his own esteem,
not only to be a Knight, but also a Lord; yet it will hardly pass for current
with the good people of these Lands, it being so far beyond the last; neither
will they think him fit (saving the Protectors pleasure) to have a Negative
Voice over them, though he formerly fought so stiffly against it in the King
and Lords, in order to set them free.

25. Colonel Barkstead, then Sir John, now Lord Barkstead, sometime a Goldsmith
in the Strand of no great rank, went out a Captain to Windsor Castle, was
sometime Governor of Reading, got at length to be a Colonel, then made
Lieutenant of the Tower by the old Parliament. The Protector (so called)
finding him fit for his turn, continued him there, and also made him Major
General of Middlesex in the Decimating business, and assistant to Major General
Skippon in London: he is one to the life to fulfill the Protectors desires
whether right or wrong, for he will dispute no commands, or make the least
demur, but (in an officious way) will rather do more then his share: his
principles for all Arbitrary things whatsoever being so very thorough, let
friends or foes come to his Den, they come not amiss so he gets by it; yea,
rather then fail, he will send out his armed* men to break open honest men's
Houses, and seize their persons, and bring them to his Goal, and then at his
pleasure turns them out: he has erected a principality in the Tower, and made
Laws of his own, and executes them in a Martial way over all comers; so that he
has great command, and makes men know his power: he was of the latter
Parliaments; is one of the Commissioners (like the Bishops Panders in the Kings
days) for suppressing Truth in the Printing-Presses, an oppression once the
Army so greatly complained of; is for Sanctuary gotten in to be a Member of Mr.
Griffiths Church; is also knighted after the new Order: and the better to carry
on the Protectors Interest among the ear-boar'd slavish Citizens, is lately
become an His Salary 2000l. perannum.
Alderman: so that he has advanced his Interest and Revenue to purpose. His
Titles and Capacities emblazoned, will sufficiently argue his worth and merits,
and speak him out fully to be a man of the times, and every way deserving to be
yet greater, and (Haman-like) to be set higher. All which considered, it would
seem a wrong not to have taken him out of the House, and made him a Lord of the
Other House with a Negative Voice there, as well as where he is; the rather,
for that he knows so well how to exercise the same, having used it so long a
season, as likewise that he may obstruct and hinder whoever shall question or
desire Justice against him for his wicked doing.

26. Colonel Ingoldsby, a Gentleman of Buckinghamshire, allied to the
Protector; he betook himself to the Wars on the right side as it happened, and
in time became a Colonel: a Gentlem^n of courage and valor, but not very
famous for any great exploits, unless for beating the honest Inne-Keeper of
Alisbury in White Hall; for which the Protector committed him to the Tower, but
was soon released: No great friend of the Sectaries (so called) or the cause of
Freedom then fought for, as several of his then, and now Officers and Soldiers
can witness; and although it be well known, and commonly reported, That he can
neither pray or preach, yet complying so kindly with the new Court, and being
in his principles for Kingship, as also a (y) Colonel of Horse, and the
Protectors Kinsman, he may well be reckoned fit to be taken out of the House
and made a Lord, and to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over the good
people of this Land; the rather, for that he as a Gentleman, engaged and fought
only for money and honor, and nothing else.

27. Colonel Whaly, formerly a Woollen-Draper, or petty Merchant in London,
whose Shop being out of sorts, and his Cash empty, not having wherewithal to
satisfy his Creditors, he fled into Scotland for refuge till the Wars began,
then took on him to be a Soldier, whereby he has profited greatly; was no
great Zealot for the cause, but happening on the right side, he kept there, and
at length was made Commissary General of the Horse: he was of these latter
Parliaments, and being so very useful and complying to promote the Protectors
designs, was made (y) Major General of two or three Counties: (p) His Salary
1141l. 3 s. 3 d.
he is for a King or Protector, or what you will, so it be liked at Court; is
with his little Brother Glyn, grown a great man, and very considerable, and
wiser (as the Protector says) then Major General Lambert; who having with his
fellow Lords Cleypole and Howard, so excellent a spirit of Government over his
Wife and Family, being also a Member of Note that man for what you may read in
the Postscript.
Thomas Goodwins Church, no question need be made of his merit of being every
way fit to be a Lord, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice
in the Other House over the people, for that he never (as he says) fought
against any such thing as a Negative Voice.

28. Colonel Goff, (now Lord Goff that would be) sometime Colonel Vaughans
Brothers Prentice, (a Salter in London) whose time being near or newly out,
betook himself to be a Soldier instead of setting up his Trade; went out a
Quartermaster of Foot, and continued in the Wars till he forgot what he fought
for; in time became a Colonel, and (in the outward appearance) very zealous,
and frequent in praying, preaching, and pressing for Righteousness and Freedom,
and highly esteemed in the Army on that account when honesty was in fashion;
yet having at the same time (like his General) an evil Tincture of that spirit
that loved and sought after the favor and praise of Man more then that of God,
as by woeful experience in both of them has since appeared, he could not
further believe or persevere upon that account, but by degrees fell off: and
this was he who with Colonel White, brought Musquetteers and turned the honest
Members left behind in the Little Parliament out of the House. Complying thus
kindly with the Protectors Designs and Interest, was made His Salary 1141l. 3
s. 3 d. besides Major-Generalship.
Major General of Hantshire and Sussex; was of the late Parliament, has
advanced his interest greatly, and is in so great esteem and favor at Court,
as he is judged the only fit man to have Major General Lamberts Place and
Command, as Major General of the Army; and having so far advanced, is in a fair
way to the Protectorship hereafter, if he be not served as Lambert was. He
being so very considerable a person, and of such great worth, there is no
question of his deserts and fitness to be taken out of the House to be a Lord,
and to have a Negative Voice in the Other House; the rather, for that he never
in all his life (as he says) fought against any such thing as a single person,
or a Negative Voice, but only to put down Charles, and set up Oliver, and has
his end.

29. Colonel Berry, his Original was from the Iron Works, as a Clerk or
Overseer, betook himself to the Wars on the Parliaments side, profited greatly
in his undertaking, and advanced his interest very far; who though he wore not
the Jesters Coat, yet being so ready to act his part, and please his General,
in time he became a Colonel of Horse in the Army, afterward a Major General of
diverse Counties, a command fit for a Prince, wherein he might learn to lord it
in an Arbitrary way beforehand at his pleasure; that he is of complying
principles with the Court, his preferment sufficiently speaks out (neither
ought any other be believed of him, or any of his brethren, without a real
demonstration to the contrary) so that he may well pass for one to be a Lord,
and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice over the people,
being so far advanced and gotten out of the pit above them; and if he did
formerly fight against a Negative Voice, and lording it over the people, it may
be forgiven him.

30. Colonel Cooper, sometime a Shopkeeper, or Salter in Southwark, a Member
of Thomas Note him for the goodly speech he made to his new Protector.
Goodwins Church, one formerly of very high principles for common Justice and
Freedom, like his brother, Tichborn. The Army then in Scotland, sending into
England for faithful praying men to make Officers of, the honest people in the
Borough recommended him to the General, in order to have a command; who
accordingly went down, but left his Principles behind him, and espoused other;
was made a Colonel at the first dash; and though he began late, yet has so
well improved his interest, as he has already gotten as many hundreds per
annum, as he had hundred pounds when he left his Trade: he has a Regiment of
Foot in Scotland, and another in Ireland, where he is Major General of the
North in Venables Room, and Governor of Carrickfergus, so as he is in a very
hopeful way to be a great man indeed: he was of the Latter Parliaments, and
there is full proof that he is every way thorough-paced and true to the new
Court-interest: so that upon the whole, he also may be counted fit to be a Lord
of the Other House, and to have a Negative Voice over the good people in
Southwark, if they please, and all the people of these Lands beside, it being
the Pretectors pleasure; the rather, he being the Mirror of the times for
thorough change of principles, Alderman Tichborn and O. P. excepted.

31. Alderman Pack, then Sir Christopher, now Lord Pack; his rise formerly was
by dealing in Cloth, near the beginning of the Long Parliament, was made an
Alderman, was then very discreet, and meddled little, more like a Neuter or
close Malignant, then a Zealot for the cause; was a Commissioner of the
Customs, also Sheriff, and Lord Mayor of London next after Alderman Viner: the
Protector taking on him the Government, the Sunshine of the new Court pleased
him, and brought him in full compliance: he was one of the Last Parliament, and
zealous to re-establish Kingship in the person of the For which good service,
upon his Petition to the Protector, he discharged him from an account of
16000l. which he and others were liable to make good to the Treasury of the
Customs.
Protector, and judged the only meet man to bring the Petition into the House,
praying him to accept of, and take it upon him; which though he then refused,
yet (as is reported) has since repented his then refusal. However, the now
Lord Pack deserves well at his hands for that good service, who being a true
Kingling, and of right Principles to the Court-interest, hving also been a Lord
(to wir, Mayor) once before, may upon the whole be counted very worthy to be
again so called, and to have a Negative Voice in the Other house over London,
and all the people of these Lands beside.

32. Alderman Tichborn, then Sir Robert, (Knight of the new Stamp) now Lord
Tichborn; at the beginning of the Long Parliament, when a great Spirit was
stirring for Liberty and Justice, many worthy Petitions and Complaints were
made against Patentees, the Bishops, and the Earl of Strafford: he being the
Son of a Citizen, and Young, fell in and espoused the good cause and principles
then on Foot, and thereby became very popular, and was greatly cried up by the
good people of the City, etc. His rise was first in the Military way, where he
soon became a Colonel, and by the Parliament made Lieutenant of the Tower of
London; and though he was a Colonel, yet never went out to fight, but became an
Alderman very timely, and then soon began to cool and lose his former Zeal and
Principles, and left off preaching (as his Pastor Mr. Lockyer did the Church)
to his brother George Cockain. He was afterward Sheriff* and Lord Mayor in his
turn; was also of the Committees for the sale of States Lands, whereby he
advanced his Interest and Revenue considerably: out of Zeal to the public, he
offered the Parliament to serve them freely as a Commissioner of the Customs,
whereby he supplanted another, and planted himself in his room, and then with
the rest of his brethren, petitioned the Committee of the Navy for a Salary,
and had it; notwithstanding he was so well rewarded for his pains (after he had
pretended to serve them for nothing) yet with his bro her Col. Harvy and
Captain Langham came off blewly in the end: He was of the little Parliament,
and helped to dissolve it; one of the late Parliament also: he has by degrees
sadly lost his Principles, and forgotten the Good Old Cause, and espoused and
taken up another, being so very officious for the new Court-interest, and such
a stickler for them, he is become a great Favorite: it is not hard to read his
change, it being in so great Letters. All things considered, he is (no
question) fit to be called Lord Tichborn, being also so willing to receive and
resolve to own that Title whoever maligns it, as also of the Judgment that
whatever passes from him in any other name, will be void in law: wherefore to
have a Negative Voice in the Other House over London, and all the good people
of these Lands, is very suitable to him; and what though he was so great an
Opponent to those things formerly? it is no matter; then was then, and now is
now.

33. Sir William Roberts, a Gentleman who in the time of the Bishops ruffling,
went into Holland, and lived there for a season; the Parliament ruling, and in
war with the King, came over again, and after the then mode, found favor,
having upon the forementioned account been out of the Land, and was made a
great Committee-man, and in much employment, whereby he well advanced his
interest, and is grown a great man. He was of the little Parliament, and helped
to break it, and then (according to Rev. 11. 10) rejoiced and made merry with
the rest of his brethren in Colonel Sydenhams Chamber, etc. as the Lawyers and
other vild persons made Bonfires, and drank Sack at the Temple and elsewhere:
but if ever a spirit of Life from God (which is not far off) comes in to raise
up that honest Spirit by which some of them were acted, will not he, his
brethren, and the rest of that earthly rout, (the false Spirit of Magistracy
and Ministry) be tormented and afraid? He was of the Parliaments since, and no
doubt of right principles to the Court interest, wherein his own is bound up:
Is one that helps on the bondage in diverse great His Salary 900 l. per annum,
though he has a good estate.
Committees where he sits; and is therefore, no question, the more fit to be
called Lord Roberts, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice
in the Other House over the people, being so greatly experienced in that way
already, having continued in the aforesaid Committee so long.

34. Colonel John Jones, a Gentleman of Wales, one of the Long Parliament, was
a Commissioner in Ireland for governing that Nation under the Parliament. One
of good principles for common Justice and Freedom, had he kept them, and not
fallen into temptation; he helped to change the Government, and make those Laws
of Treason against a single persons Rule; has a considerable Revenue, and it is
likely did not lose by his employment: he is Governor of the Isle of Anglesey,
and lately married the Protectors Sister, (a Widow) by which means he might
have become a great man indeed, did not something stick which he cannot well
get down: he is not thorough paced for the Court-proceedings, nor is his
conscience fully hardened against the Good Old Cause; but there is great hope
(no question) that in time he may be towardly: however, (for Relation sake) he
may be counted fit (with his Namesake and Countryman Philip) to be called Lord
Jones, and to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the Other
House over the people; and all his being against such things formerly, may be
forgiven, and not once remembered against him.

35. Mr. Edmond Thomas, a Gentleman of Wales, of considerable means, a Friend
of Philip Joneses, and allied to Walter Strickland, (both of the Council) and
brought in upon their account; and of complying principles, no question, to say
no more of him, (not having been long in play) being none of the great Zealots
or high Sectaries (so called) in Wales, may doubtless be counted wise and good
enough to make a simple Lord of the Other House, and to be called Lord Thomas,
and to have a Negative Voice over all the good people in Wales, with his
Countrymen John and Philip, and over all the people of these Lands besides.

36. Sir Francis Russel, Knight Baronet of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of
Cambridgeshire, of a considerable Revenue: in the beginning of the Wars was
first for the King, then for the Parliament, and a Colonel of Foot under the
Earl of Manchester; a man (like William Sedgwick) high flown, but not serious
or substantial in his principles: he continued in his Command till the new
Model, then took offense, and fell off, or laid aside by them: no great Zealot
for the cause, therefore not judged honest, serious or wise enough to be of the
little Parliament, yet was of these latter Paliaments: Is also Chamberlain of
Chester at about 500 l. per annum; he married his eldest Daughter to Harry
Cromwell, second son of the Protector, then Colonel of Horse, now Lord Deputy
(so called) of Ireland, another to Colonel Reynolds, a new Knight, and General
of the English Army in France, under Cardinal Mazarine, since (with White, Who
assisted Col. Goff to turn the honest Members left behind in the little
Parliament out of the House. Let Goff look to it.
Colonel White and others) cast away coming from Mardike; there is no question
but his principles are for Kingship and the new Court, being so greatly
concerned therein: wherefore it were great pity if he should not also be taken
out of the House to be a Lord of the Other House, his Son-in-law being so great
a Lord, and have a Negative Voice over Cambridgeshire, and all the people of
these Lands besides.

37. Sir William Strickland, Knight of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Yorkshire,
and brother to Walter Strickland, was of the Parliament a long time, but has
now it seems forgotten the cause of fighting with, and cutting off the late
Kings head, and suppressing the Lords, their House and Negative Voice: He was
of these Latter Parliaments, and of good compliance, no question, with the new
Court, and settling the Protector anew in all those things for which the King
was cut off: wherefore he is fit, no doubt, to be taken out of the House and
made a Lord; the rather, for that his younger brother (Walter) is so great a
Lord, and by whom in all likelihood he will be steered to use his Negative
Voice in the Other House over Yorkshire, and the people of these Lands, to the
interest of the Court.

38. Sir Richard Onsloe, Knight of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Surrey, of
good parts, and a considerable Revenue; he was of the Long Parliament, and with
much ado (thorough his policy) steered his course between the two Rocks of King
and Parliament, weathered some fore Storms: was not his man taken in his
company by the Guard in Southwark, with Commissions of Array in his Pocket from
the King, and scurrilous Songs against the Roundheads? Yet by his interest rode
it out till Colonel Pride came with his Purge, then suffered loss, and came no
more in play till about Worcester fight; when, by the help of some Friends in
Parliament, he was empowered to raise and lead as Colonel, a Regiment of Surry
men against the Scots and their King, but came too late to fight, it being
over: being popular in Surry, he was of the Latter Parliaments; is fully for
Kingship, and was never otherwise, and stickled much among the 70 Kinglings to
that end; and seeing he cannot have young Charles, old Oliver will serve his
turn, so (d) His s^lary 900 per annu^ though has a g^ estate.
he have one; so that he is very fit to be Lord Onsloe, and to be taken out of
the House, to have a Negative Voice in the Other House over Surry if they
please, and all the people of these Lands besides, whether they please or not.

39. Mr. John Fiennes, Son of the Lord Say, and Brother to Commissioner
Fiennes, brought in, it is likely, for one upon his score, is in a kind such a
one as they call a Sectary, but no great stickler; therefore not being redeemed
from the fear and favor of man, will, it is probable, follow his brother, who
is (as it is thought) much steered by old Subtilty, his Father that lies in his
Den, (as Thurloe by his Mr. St. John's) and will say No with the rest, when any
thing opposes the interest of the new Court, their power and greatness; and may
therefore pass for one to be a Lord, and to have a Negative Voice in the Other
House over all in Oxfordshire (the University men only excepted) and over all
the people of these Lands besides.

40. Sir John Hubbard, Knight Baronet of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Norfolk,
of a considerable Estate, part whereof came lately to him by the Death of a
Kinsman: he was of these latter Parliaments, but not of the former; had meddled
very little, if at all, in throwing down Kingship, but has stickled very much
in helping to re-establish and build it up again, and a great stickler among
the late Kinglings, who petitioned the Protector to be King; his principles
being so right for Kingship and Tyranny, he is in great favor at Court as well
as Dick Ingoldsby, and, no question, deserves to be a Lord, and to be taken out
of the House to exercise a Negative Voice in the Other House over all the good
men in Norfolk, and all the people of these Lands besides, being become so very
tame and gentle.

41. Sir Thomas Honywood, Knight of the old Stamp, a Gentleman of Essex, of a
considerable Revenue; he was a Committee-man in the time of the Long
Parliament, and also a Military man, and led as Colonel a Regiment of Essex-men
to the fight at Worcester; came in good time, and fought well against Kingship
and Tyranny in the House of the Stewarts; was of the last Parliament: he is not
so wise as Solomon, or so substantial and thorough in his principles for
Righteousness and Freedom as Job, (chap. 29.) but rather soft in his spirit,
and too easy (like a Nose of Wax) to be turned on that side where the greatest
strength is: being therefore of so hopeful principles for the New Court
interest, and so likely to comply with their will and pleasure, no doubt need
be made of his fitness to be a Lord, and to be taken out of the House to have a
Negative Voice in the Other House over all the good men in Essex (the now Lord
of Warwick, the Protectors Brother-in-law excepted) and all the people of these
Lands besides.

42. Lord Ewre, a Gentleman of Yorkshire, not very bulky or imperious for a
Lord; he was once well esteemed of for honesty, and therefore chosen to be one
of the Little Parliament; has also been of all the Parliaments since: the
Yorkshire men happily may like his being new Lorded, and that he should have a
Negative Voice over them; the rather, because they never chose him to any such
thing: the Protector being so well satisfied with his principles, and easiness
(like his fellow-Lord Honywood) to be wrought up to do whatever their will and
pleasure is, and to say, No, when they would have him; it is very meet he also
pass for one to be taken out of the House to have a Negative Voice in the Other
House, not only over Yorkshire, but all the good people of the Commonwealth
beside, being a Lord of the old Stamp already.

43. Mr. Hampden, (now Lord Hampden) a young Gentleman of Buckinghamshire, son
of the late Colonel Hampden, that Noble Patriot and Defender of the Rights and
Liberties of the English Nation, of famous memory never to be forgotten, for
withstanding the King in the case of Ship Money, being also one of the five
impeached Members, which the said King endeavored to have pulled out of the
Parliament, whereupon followed such feud, war and shedding of blood. This young
Gentleman, Mr. Hampden, was the last of sixty two which were added singly by
the Protector after the choice of sixty together; it is very likely that
Colonel Ingoldsby, or some other Friend at Court, got a Cardinals Hat for him,
thereby to settle and secure him to the Interest of the new Court, and wholly
take him off from the thoughts of ever following his fathers steps, or
inheriting his noble virtues, as likewise that the honest men in
Buckinghamshire, and all other that are lovers of Freedom and Justice, that
cleaved so cordially to, and went so cheerfully along with his Father in the
beginning of the late War, might be out of all hopes of him, and give him over
for lost to the Good Old Cause, and inheriting his Fathers noble spirit and
principles, though he does his Lands. He was of the latter Parliament, and
found right, saving in the design upon which he was made a Lord after all the
rest, and the Protectors pleasure. It is very hard to say how fit he is to be a
Lord, and how well a Negative Voice over the good people of this Land, and his
Fathers Friends in particular, will become the son of such a Father; and how
well the aforesaid good people (now called Sectaries) will like of it: but
being it is as it is, let him pass for one as fit to be taken out of the House
with the rest to have a Negative Voice, and let him exercise it in the Other
House over the good people for a season.

Sir Arthur Haslerigg. Lord? No; stop there! not Lord Haslerigg, a Knight of
the old Stamp, a Gentleman of a very large Estate and Revenue, was one of the
Long Parliament, and one of the five impeached Members whom the King
endeavored to have pulled out of the House with the other, but was hindered
from doing of it; was a Colonel in the Army, and adventured far in the Wars,
continued of that Parliament till the dissolution thereof; was also chosen of
these latter Parliaments, but not permitted to sit at the first; he was by the
Protector (as may be seen in the printed List) cut out for a Lord of the Other
House, and to have a wooden Dagger (to wit, a Negative Voice, with the rest;
but he missed his way, and instead of going into the Other House among the
simple Negative men, the Sea Armies Declaration in Looking-Glass, p. 5. (say
they) the first ground and rise of Tyranny over the free people of this Nation,
did proceed from the Bastard of William the sixth, Duke of Normandy, who to
prevent the English of all relief by their Parliaments, created Lords by his
Patent and prerogative to sit by Succession in the Parliament as Representors
of his Conquest and Tyranny over us, and not by Election of the people as the
Represeators and Patrons of the Commonwealth; and to make his usurpation firm
and inviolable, he subdued the Lawgiving power of the free p ople in Parliament
to the Negative Voice of himself and posterity; and under the yoke of this
Norman Captivity and Vilainage, we have been held by that Succession to this
very day, etc. See large Petition, Page 11, 12. of that Book.
Offspring of the Bastard of William the sixth Duke of Normandy, he went into
the Parliament House among his fellow Englishmen, and there spoke freely,
bearing a good witness in behalf of the Good Old Cause, the Rights and
Liberties of the people of England; at which the Court were vexed and sore
displeased. However, for all this losing of his way, and the loss sustained by
it, his Fame and Name amongst all true English spirits, will be higher and more
honorable then the simple Title of a New Lord could make him: and instead of a
Negative Voice in the Other House, he will be honored by after Ages as a rare
Phoenix, that of forty four was found standing alone to his principles and the
Good Old Cause so bled for: Oh sad and wonderful! but one of forty four to be
found standing firm to so noble a Cause as ever was on foot since the world
began? Let all true English Spirits love and honor him, and that will be
better then a Feather in his Cap, or a wooden Dagger. His Name for ever in the
Chronicles will live, as one that was a true Patriot of his Countries
Liberties; which noble action (if he persevere and be more refined in that
honest spirit) may deservedly obliterate all humane frailties and mis-carriages
of his, during the sitting of the Long Parliament, and the free people of
England may (doubtless) for ever bury them in oblivion. No question the
Protector found he was mistaken in him, and that he was not fit to be a Lord,
or to have a Negative Voice, being of no more complying principles to his
interest and Designs, and the then New Model of Government, and will scarcely
adventure to give him a second invitation to that great Honor and Dignity he
so ungratefully and disdainfully slighted.

There was one or two more of the new Champions, that with their wooden Daggers
went into the Other Horse to fight against the Rights and Liberties of the good
people of these Lands; but their Names being wanting, and not worthy the
enquiring after, nothing can be said of their noble Virtues, save that in all
likelihood they were of such worthy principles as their fellows were of, and
such as would concur to carry on any design or interest they should be put
upon, and would say No with the rest, when any thing came in question that
seemed to be against the Protectors height and absoluteness, or interest of the
new Court; which he that has but half an eye may see, was the only design of
calling them thither, as a Balance of Government to the Parliament, so greatly
(though falsely) pretended for the good of the people.

There were also of this chosen number of Sixty two, some of the old Earls and
Lords called Peers, which stood off, (viz. three Earls, Warwick Musgrave and
Manchester, and two Lords, Say and Wharton) and sat not at all, disdaining, as
some thought, to sit with these new Up-start Lords; though others again
apprehend that this their forbearance was only out of their old State Policy,
till they saw whether a House of Lords formerly so abominated and thrown down
(by the consent and desire of the good people) would again be resented and
established, and then intended to come in; but I shall leave it: Some werein
Scotland, viz. General Monk, Earl of Cassils, Lord Warriston, and Sir William
Lockhart; which persons may also discover to him that has but half an eye,
what a pitiful carnal low design they are carrying on. Some in Ireland, viz.
Harry Cromwell Lord Deputy, (so called) Recorder Steel, and Colonel Tomlinson:
some it may be had no great mind to it, to wit, Colonel Popham, Mr. Peirpoint:
others it is probable were let by political or State-illness, or other
occasions, viz. Chief Justice St. John's, Mr John Crew, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, so
as they also appeared not, there being not above forty four or forty five of
that worthy choice of Sixty two, that appeared and sat there; and it is very
likely some think there were too many of them.

Thus far the Description and Narrative. Three or four General Queries are
further proposed for a Close to the whole; and it is humbly offered to all
ingenious people, and queried,
First, Whether if it should come to pass (as how soon we know not) that that
noble spirit should (like a Lion raised from sleep) rise again in the English
people, such as it was in forty one or forty two, or about that time, whether
these Champions with their Feathers in their Caps, and their Wooden Daggers,
and those fifty three persons who pretended to settle the Government by the
Humble Petition and Advice, would be able to fight with, stand against, and
overcome the same any otherwise then their Predecessors the Lords Temporal, and
the Bishops the Lords Spiritual did then? And whether it would not in all
likelihood fare with them and their Dependents the Patentees of the Excise, and
all others employed by them, that so oppress and impoverish the Nation, as
formerly it did with them, if not far worse? They may please to think of it at
their Leisure.

Secondly, Whether in these five years now past of the Protectoral Government,
that blessed Reformation which the Protector (then General) and other Grandees
of the Army so often promised, and for not bringing forth of which they pretend
they dissolved the old Parliament, has so been set upon as to make any the
least proceed therein? Or rather, has there not been a gradual and an apparent
relapsing into those very Evils and Enormities formerly so greatly shaken, and
in some degree broken, but now healed again of their wound, and flourishing
afresh with open face; the spirit of wickedness and profaness being risen very
high, even among Professors, like the unclean spirit cast out, and entering
again? And in particular, that abominable corruption and abuse in the Law, and
Administration of Justice, touching which the Protector (so called) sometime
said, It was not to be endured in a Christian Commonwealth, that some should so
enrich and greaten themselves in the ruin of others. So likewise that often
complained of Grievance of Tithes, touching which he also said, (as was lately
attested in an open Court of Judicature, several standing by to witness the
truth thereof, to whom the words were spoken) That if he did not take away
Tithes, by the third of September next, (to wit, 1654) or such a time, they
should call him the greatest Juggler that ever was, and would juggle in all
things else. Yet is there any thing done in either of these? or any thing gone
about tending thereunto, now in these five years? as if it were so, that no
fruit would ever grow upon such a tree, (viz. the Monarchical Foundation) which
the Lord has pulled up and cursed, as the barren Fig Tree was: only there is
one goodly amendment, to wit, a confirmation of the Act for treble damages, to
the undoing of many an honest man that upon conscientious grounds do scruple
the payment of them. And as for the Law and the Lawyers, they are as before, if
not much worse; and is there any ground of hope that the next five years
(should he continue so long) will produce any better fruit then the five that
are already past?

Thirdly, Whether this Calculation of these ignoble Lords of the new Stamp,
being of several complexions, and standing in the aforementioned Capacities and
Relations, having also such dependence upon, and lying under so great
Engagements unto the Protector, (so called) as his Sons and Kindred, Flattering
Courtiers, corrupt Lawyers, degenerated Sword*men, and a sort of lukewarm
indifferent Country Knights, Gentlemen and Citizens, most of them
self-interested Salary-men, be not likely (according to the very specious
pretense) to prove a brave Balance of Government? And whether the good people
of this Land are likely to have their just Rights and Freedoms, or religious
men the Liberty of their Consciences by this Constitution, any otherwise, then
according to the pleasure of the Protector and the Court? Or then they had in
the time of the late King? And whether this Calculation were made to any other
end then so?

Lastly, Whether all things soberly weighed and considered, the times be now so
happy and blessed as some do londly bespeak them to be? And whether for the
future we are likely to have such prosperity, success and good days as some so
largely promise themselves? and others it may be expected? Or whether such
smiling upon old wickedness, and frowning and turning the back upon
Righteousness, suppressing its growth, be any comfortable ground of such hope
and expectation? Or whether upon the whole Series of things, as they now
appear, there be not rather to be expected some sadder matter, if the LORD in
mercy prevent not? Let the wise in heart consider.

THE END.
Reader, if thy patience be not quite worn out, read the following Postscript,
which makes mention of the late flattering Adresses, etc. it may concern you.
As also a Vindication of that faithful Friend to the Cause of God and his
people, Mr. John Portmans, (late Secretary to the Fleet under General Blake)
now Prisoner for Truth in the Tower, whom that lying Court-Pamphleter Nedham
has falsely aspersed and reproached in the late Diurnals.
A Postscript to the Reader.
THe foregoing Narrative was composing and preparing to have come forth (like
apples of gold in pictures of silver) in the fittest season, during the life
time of Oliver the late Protector (so called) and calculated for that end,
among other, that as in a Glass he might clearly see his Mutability and
Changeableness in his principles, as also his Judas-like Treachery and Deceit,
and how wickedly he had dealt with the Lord, his people, and the Nation, and
the righteous cause on foot therein; but the Lord having in answer to the
earnest desires and prayers of some of his faithful remnant, and in great mercy
to the Nation and the good people therein, and the righteous cause, removed and
taken him out of the way, it was thought fit however to publish it for the sake
of his associates and confederates he has left behind him, who may happily
make some use of it; as also that the standers by, yea, the whole Nation, might
likewise see and judge of what has lately fallen out in this our day.

It is said of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, That he not only sinned himself, but
made Israel to sin; and there were those of his confederates that then sinned
with him, and after he was dead and gone, of whom it is recorded, 1 Kin* 15. 34
compared with 2 Kin. 17. 21, 22.
That they walked in the ways, and departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat who made Israel to sin.

The parallel hereof we have in England in this our day: Oliver the late
Protector (so called) who (Jeroboam*like) so greatly appeared with the people
for Justice and Freedom against Oppression, highly professing and declaring for
the same, has sinned in the breach of those Protestations and Declarations, in
building again those things he had been so greatly instrumental to destroy;
therein surpassing not only the deeds of the wicked who were cut off upon the
like account, but also of Jeroboam, who never made such Professions and
Declarations as he had done.

There also are of his confederates (as the confederates of Jeroboam) that
sinned with him in his Apostasy and Revolt, and do yet continue in those sins,
and walking in his steps now he is dead and gone, as if they took no notice of
the displeasure and wrath of God revealed from Heaven against him, in cutting
him off for his unrighteousness. Israel smarted sorely for their evil, and at
last were carried away Captive: England has likewise suffered, and is brought
very low, as tradesmen of all sorts, shopkeepers and others both in City and
Country find by such sad and woeful experience as they never did before, nor in
the memory of man was the like ever known or heard of; and what may further
suffer, the Lord (who will not be mocked) only knows.

For how unworthy are the people of this Generation, not only the more dark
and sordid, but too many who profess to be Saints, and are Pastors and Members
of Churches, nay, some who are Mercurial and more high flown, that once spoke
the Language of Zion, and highly appeared for the Good Old Cause, who
notwithstanding they have seen the mighty Arm and Power of God displayed, in
bringing down the unrighteous, oppressive, high and lofty ones (with their
foundation) for their unrighteousness and oppression, yet have so far forgotten
the Good Old Cause so signally owned from Heaven, and are so besotted and
degenerated, into a self-seeking, slavish and enslaveing spirit, as they not
only justify, but strengthen their hands, who (instead of pressing forward
mith more refinedness in that work and cause, leading to what it shall be when
the promises and prophesies relating to the Kingdom of Christ and Zion shall be
fulfilled) have made a Captain or Protector, and are gone back to Egypt, (to
wit, the old wicked foundation and things of Monarchy that have been destroyed)
and thereby under a new name upholding and keeping the people under the old
Oppressions: And do say of In their Addresses to his son Richard his worthy
Successor.
Oliver their late Egyptian Captain, who hatched this Cockatrice Egg, and
brought forth all this wickedness, and thereby did more hurt to the Nation then
ever he did it good, and for which his Memory will deservedly for ever stink in
the Nostrils of the Lords faithful people, That he was a Moses, the great
Father and Protector of his people, our late most worthy Prince that used all
means to deliver us from Bondage, by whom we enjoy Freedom in Spiritual and
Civil Concernments, etc. most excellent Prince of happy Memory, the famous
Champion of our Liberties, etc. the Father, Protector and Buckler of these
Nations, and the people of God, who res^ned, procured and maintained our just
Liberties to us, etc. the great Assertor of the Liberties of Gods people, and a
Lover of their Civil Rights, etc. who well deserves to be a pattern to all
succeeding Princes, etc. our gracious Benefactor, a nursing Father to his
people, by whose hand the yoke of Bondage has been broken both from the Necks
and Consciences of good people, etc. an instrument of unspeakable Blessings,
all whose great Enterprises the Lord constantly prospered with high success,
etc. the great Protector of our Peace and Joy, who admirably got and Have you
forgot Hispaniola and the war with Spain?
never lost, but left three Nations in Peace, etc. We cannot but deeply resent
that sad stroke of Providence that took away the breath of our Nostrils, and
smote our head from off our Shoulders, your Highnesses most gloriously renowned
Father. Our Elijah, etc. your most illustrious, accomplished, most glorious,
heroical, most renowned, blessed, most holy, serene, princely Father, that
sacred Person, the delight of our Eyes, our glorious Sun is set, that
unspeakable loss, the light of our Eyes, and the breath of our Nostrils, etc.
But alas! this our Moses the Servant of the Lord is dead; and shall we not
weep? If we weep not for him, yet we cannot but weep for our selves; we cannot
but look after him, crying, Our Father, our Father, the Chariots of Israel and
the Horsemen thereof, etc. Falsely and wickedly alluding to Moses and Elijah,
those two, for ever to be honored, faithful Servants of the Lord: with many
other the like fawning, blasphemous, lying Expressions, have they, in those
wicked Addresses, wherein they lie and flatter: for the Lord and his faithful
Remnant know he was not so, especially in his latter days, but was rather acted
by the back sliding spirit of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, as also the famous and
renowned Princes of the Congregation; yea, the Congregation it self, who
rebelled against the Spirit of the Lord in Moses, Caleb and Joshua, etc. and
would not press on to Canaan, (the work of that day) but said, Let us make a N^
Captain, and return into Egypt, and would have stoned Caleb and Joshua because
they would have had them gone forward: As also by the Spirit of Ahab, Jehu, and
the rest of the back sliding wicked Kings of Israel and Judah: The spirit of
the Beast and false Prophet in the former and present Monarchs of this and
other Nations, which the Lord has, and will disown and curse; but not the
Spirit of Elijah, Moses, Caleb and Joshua, the Lords faithful persevering ones
of old, as by what is before and afterward mentioned does too plainly and
sadly appear; for he not only endeavored to establish himself in this
Tyranny, but before his departure, when he scarce had his senses, or could
hardly speak, appointed (as some report, though some think otherwise) his
forementioned eldest son Richard, to succeed him in the Government to support
and maintain that Apostasy and Wickedness which himself and Thurlo, etc. had
been the first Contrivers, and then Actors of, thereby to hold us perpetually
under the old Monarchical Egyptian Bondage; which was no sooner effected, and
he proclaimed, but the aforementioned Addressors, as they blasphemously and
flatteringly speak in way of honoring his Father, so in the same Adresses do
they speak of him, falsely and wickedly alluding to good Joshua, Solomon and
Elisha, who succeeded Moses, David and Elijah, after their death, saying to
this purpose: We humbly beg, That though your renowned Father, who as a
designed instrument, helped us out of Egypt (having Canaan in his Eye) was even
then called to Mount Nebo to dye there; yet you as another Joshua with his
spirit re-doubled upon you, may by the efficacious conduct of the Captain of
the Lords Host, lead us into a more full possession of Truth and Righteousness,
etc. In times of old, when God took away Moses from his people, in tender Mercy
he gave them a Joshua to succeed him: Such are our hopes of your Highness. Gods
aim and end in taking away his Moses, was to usher you in, his Joshua, etc. But
since it was the Will of God our glorious Sun should set, and that even whilst
he was ascending, we ought to submit unto it: it is no little Alleviation to
our sorrow, that though our Sun be set, no Night has followed, but our Evening
has been light, by raising your Highness into your Royal Fathers Seat, etc.
You are our great Master, the person designed by God and Man to reign over us,
etc. It begets no little joy in our spirits, when we behold the Son of that
Father by a divine Providence succeed him in the Throne by his own appointment,
given us as a most choice Legacy and his last Blessing, etc. A Pledge of Divine
Love and Goodness to these Nations, etc. Some saying, if his Father had not
appointed him to succeed him, the common interest and peace of the Nation,
without Gods Assistance, had perished together with him, etc. Happy successor,
in whom we shall be able to say, Mercy and Truth are met together, under whose
Government Righteousness and Peace has kissed each other, of whose exceeding
Virtues and Endowments we have had experience, etc. God has been pleased in
the midst of Judgment to remember Mercy, in appointing your Highness to succeed
your Father; your most excellent serene Highness, a branch of that princely
stock, on you our hopes rest, Richard by the Grace of God Lord Protector; your
most serene Highness, our Sovereign and General, the noblest branch of that
renowned stock: and desire that he might build up unto perfection upon that
(wicked) foundation which his Fathers blessed hand had laid. And pray that the
spirit of their departed Elijah, even the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel might
rest upon him, etc. And a great deal more of this blasphemous flattering stuff,
which would be too tedious to relate: which Addresses, The Humble Petition and
Advice, being so often mentioned, and their desiring him to keep the Sword
Military in his hand, the design in them, and strain of expressions so like to
other, begets a shrewd suspicion, they were rather hatched at the Court by
Secretary Thurlo, and the old malignant Pamphleter, lying, railing Rabshakeh,
and defamer of the Lords people, Nedham, alias Mercurius Pragmaticus, who
formerly writ for the King against the Parliament; and by their Mercenary
Emissaries and Agents suggested to, and forced upon the simple people (as the
Addresses to his Father were formerly upon the Army and elsewhere rather then
in their first motion naturally flowing from the Addressors: which the Lord in
due time will discover: And not only these, but also that great Independent
Doctor (so called) Thomas Goodwin, he (Aaron- like) comes in as a Leader or one
of the first among them, to encourage the rejoicing and dancing about this new
Golden Calf; and in the speech that he made (pretendedly in the name and by the
appointment of the Pastors and Messengers of above 100 Congregational Churches
from several parts of the Nation (as says the Pamphlet) says he, We come with
hearty acknowledgement of the best Liberties enjoyed under your Highness now
blessed Father, etc. all which have been continued to us through the Protection
of the great Mordecai that sought the Weal of his people, and spoke Was
imprisoning the Lords people for their faithfulness to the Good, Old Cause and
leaving them there when he dyed, a Mordecai's spirit, and a speaking peace?
Well said Doctor
peace to all his seed: blessed be God for his unspeakable gift, etc. which we
are here come jonyntly to acknowledge to your Highness, etc. We also come full
of rejoicing, blessing God for so happy and quiet a settlement of the Nation
and Government in your person and succession: Solomon, though he had his name
from peace, yet was not his first entrance so peaceable as this of yours, etc.
And after mentioning about what they met at the Savoy, and that his Father knew
of the meeting beforehand* and approved of it, and of a Declaration they had
drawn up to clear themselves from the aspersions laid upon them, and laying
down therein what the principles of the Independents were, etc. And now (says
he) we present to your Highness what we have done, and commit to your trust the
common Faith once delivered to the Saints, the Gospel, and the saving truths of
it, being a national endowment bequeathed by Christ himself at his Ascension,
and committed to some in the Nations behalf; committed to my trust, says Paul,
in the Name of the Ministers; and we look at the Magistrate as To wit, Keeper
of both Tables.
Custos utriusque tabulae, and so Do not these several Churches by their
silence hold forth that they consent to what their Pastors and Messengers have
done heroin? and so are fallen in with, and Abettors of the Apostasy of this
day? And if it be not so, ought they not to declare against it?
commit it to your trust as our chief Magistrate, etc. and we bless you out of
Zion, etc. Which practice and speaking, especially considered as the Case now
stands, and as to the person to whom it is spoken, having also (according to
the Doctors sense) xo footing in Scripture, is the practice and Language of
Babylon, and not of Zion, and greatly discovers that the poor Doctor never had
a true Tincture within him, or taste of sweetness in Communion with God in the
discovery of that Glory of Zion, and Kingdom of Christ, he so largely has
spoken and writ of, but had it from Books and hearsay; for it is impossible
that one who has truly tasted of that Glory, except he be desperately
infatuated, or holds falling away, should bring forth such cursed untimely
fruit, so contrary to the true light and spirit of Zion, as this is. Was not
the Bishops, and the simple Clergy, who were acted by their fear or favor,
formerly condemned by him and others for stiling the late and former Kings,
Defenders of the Faith, and supreme Head of the Church under Christ; so
generally acknowledged in its original to proceed from Harry the 8. who for
self*ends, not the glory of God, dethroned the Papal power in England, and took
the Popes (usurped) Supremacy and Title of Defender of the Faith, as well as
the Tithes and First Fruits, upon and to himself. Is it not the general
received principle of Independents and other Sectaries (so called) who are
clear sighted (and not without ground) to plead against such a Tenent? But
these things declare that Mr. Goodwin sucks such sweetness from the great
Sovereignty, Honor and Profit of Magdalen College in Oxford, and has
therewith drawn in such a Tincture of that spirit which naturally and usually
breaths in persons inhabiting those places as he is loath to be weaned from it;
and therefore will right or wrong turn in and comply with any thing, so he may
keep his interest there: It will be well for him if I am mistaken. But I leave
what may further be spoken to this Subject, to a better Pen, who may take it in
hand when his Book comes forth in print. And together with him, that cringing
Court*Chaplain Peter Sterry, that also bows to what ever is uppermost, speaking
higher then all this, as is credibly reported by several godly men that heard
him to their astonishment: holding forth his Bible in the Chapel of
White Hall, he spoke to this purpose: That if that were the Word of God, then
as certainly that blessed holy spirit (meaning the late Potector) was with
Christ at the Right Hand of the Father; and if he be there, what may his Family
and the people of God now expect from him? for if he were so useful and
helpful, and so much good influenced from him to them when he was here in a
mortal State, how much more influence will they have from him now he is in
Heaven? the Father Son and Spirit thorough him bestowing gifts and graces, etc.
upon them. And a great deal more to this purpose: and as he spoke thus
blasphemously of his Father, so the same spirit running in the aforementioned
flattering Addresses, breathed from him to his son (the now Protector so
called) which also greatly discovers within what walls he breaths: But I shall
let the Father pass, and speak a little of the Son his Successor, and in
short, a little answer to those flattering, blasphemous, ungodly expressions,
couched in the late Addresses to him, as if he were a second Solomon, Joshua or
Elisha. Oh you blasphemous, lying, flattering Cycophant Addressours in City,
Country, Army, etc. or offspring of Thurlo and Nedham the Pamphleter, who are
so ready to cry up Adonijah the false, and to cry and keep down Solomon the
true spirit of Magistracy! give me leave a little to reason with you: What
eminent appearing work of grace or of the image of God did you ever experience
in and upon him, or heard of from others not acted by a self-seeking, fawning,
servile spirit, but truly fearing the Lord? What eminent Action for God, his
Cause or people did you ever see or hear he did either in his fathers life time
or since his death, that you so highly speak? and allude as if he had a Joshua,
Solomon, or an Elisha 's spirit? Is Hawking, Hunting, keeping Race-horses, and
riding Horse-matches to the endangering of the lives both of Horses and Men;
wherein, for the most part, the most carnal of Professors, and the worst of men
are oftenest exercised, and must therefore of necessity be his Companions, such
a demonstration of those noble virtues and high endowments you so speak of to
be in him? Pray bear with me, that I thus reason with you; for my spirit is
grieved when ever I read or think of these your late Addresses; and it is fully
settled in my heart, and I can believe no other, but that it is a carnal,
unbelieving, selfish, filthy spirit by which you are acted, and which the Lord
by his spirit in his people has already, and will further discover, blow upon,
and consume. Does the following words and action declare him to be what you so
speak of him? I will tell you what is commonly reported among honest men, which
I had from a good hand, and am fully satisfied is very true, yea, and more then
I shall here relate: One Cornet Sumpner in Colonel Ingoldsby's Regiment,
knowing the wickedness and naughtiness of Major Babington (Major thereof) to be
such as to dis-own and brow-beat the honest men in the Regiment, and to
countenance drunkards, liars, swearers and haters of goodness and good men,
being for a long time grieved thereat in his spirit, at length (by the advice
of some eminent in the Army) drew up several Articles to present to a
Court Martial, or elsewhere against him; which your most illustrious, serene
and renowned Protector, the inheritour of his Fathers noble virtues, hearing
of, sends for the Cornet to come unto him* who when he was come, the Major and
Colonel Ingoldsby, etc. being also present, your Joshua, Solomon and Elisha
spoke after this manner to him: Josh. What? have you Articles against your
Major? Corn. Yes. Josh. What are they? Corn. A pretty number of them. Then the
Major began to answer to one, but nothing to the purpose; but before the Major
had done, your most serene Protector or Joshua unjustly takes part with the
Major to help him out, saying to the Cornet, You Article against your Major
because he is for me? you are a Meaning the officers who often met to seek the
Lord, and bewail their Apostasy from the Good Old Cause.
company of Mutineers, you deserve a hundred of you to be hanged; and I will
hang you, and strip you as a man would strip an Eele; you talk of preaching and
praying men, they are the men that go about to undermine me. And clapping his
hand upon Colonel Ingoldsby's shoulder, said, Go thy way, Dick Ingoldsby, thou
can neither preach nor pray, but I will believe thee before I will believe
twenty of them. And says he to the Cornet, You never owned my Father; you have
lost your Commission, and shall never ride more in this Army, etc. and a great
deal more to this purpose, which I leave to Pragmaticus (formerly the old, now
the new Court-Pamphleter) more perfectly to relate. Is this speaking or action,
the righteousness and peace kissing each other, that you so speak has been
since he took the Government upon him? Or would Joshua, Solomon or Elisha thus
take part with wickedness and wicked men, and do so unrighteous and wicked an
Action, and speak thus profanely and wickedly? Surely no: Wherefore
acknowledge your iniquity, and lie low before the Lord for these your
blasphemous, lying, flattering Expressions in your wicked Addresses, whereby
you have so reproached and wronged good Joshua, Solomon and Elisha, in making
such undue Comparisons: wherefore repent, you flattering Courtiers, Peter
Sterry, and ye other Court-Chaplains: Repent, repent, Thomas Goodwin, and ye
Pastors and Messengers of (as it is said) above an hundred Congregational
Churches in England: Repent you Apostate Army; Repent you Mayor, Aldermen,
Common Council, and Militia of London, whose Principles are so base and
mercenary, and like a Beast looking downward, as to side with (whether right or
wrong) whatever is uppermost, like your Sword Bearer and Officers, who cry
Grace, grace, and bow to one Lord Mayor to day, and do the same to the next the
morrow. Repent also you Presbyterian Classical Ministers of the City, etc. who
by the persuasion of three or four eminent self-interested Cycophants among
you, were drawn in against your Light and Consciences to carry your bodies to
White Hall (leaving your hearty good will at home) to address your selves to
this new Golden Calf, as an owning of him, and this from unbelief and slavish
fear of being frowned upon, or losing your Parish*places. Will such a practice
as this stand good before the Lord in the day of your account? Repent also all
of you for your spending 50 or 60000 l. about a Heathenish Popish Funeral pomp,
not only wicked in it self, but at a time when so many tradesmen and others
break and are ready to starve; and when you had done, then following an image
of wax to Westminster as if it had been a dead man's body; wherein you lied
unto, and mocked both God and man. Repent also you Country professors and
others, of these flattering, blasphemous, lying Addresses, and speak nor do no
more so wickedly, lest the Judgments of the Lord break in upon you, as upon
back sliding Israel of old, and your carcasses fall in the wilderness. etc. as
theirs did, for making, and then dancing about the Moulten Calf, and their
desiring to make a Captain to return into Egypt, and opposing the Spirit of the
Lord in Moses, Caleb and Joshua, and his work in that day. And take heed, Oh
you Parliament, that you do not say or do as these have done: whom I so call,
if you keep close to, and endeavor the promotion of the Good Old Cause, and
cast out the false sp rit of the Egyptian Bondwoman, the Protector (so called)
and his Lords* and make way for, and bring in the Spirit of Zion, the
Freewoman, the true spirit of Magistracy, by Judges and Counselors as at the
beginning, men fearing God, and hating Covetousness, and faithful with all the
saints. If you thus proceed, my self, and the Lords faithful people will love,
own, live and dye with you; if not, we shall abhor and dis-own you as we did
the former and now Protector and his Lords; and shall trust God with our
Liberties, and not fear your Frowns.

And now a word for your encouragement, my Friends, who remain faithful to the
Lord in this evil day; and are, as it were, in the Clefts of the Rocks, (Cant.
2. 14.) and secret places of the stairs, in pain, crying and praying night and
day, giving the Lord no rest (Isai. 6 ^. 6, 7.) till he revive the Good Old
Cause, and cause the Righteousness of Zion to go forth as brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns, and until he make Jerusalem a praise
in the earth: whose voice, in his account (going forth in the power of his
spirit from the sweetness you have tasted in communion with himself in the
discovery of this glory) is sweet, and countenance is comely, and unto whom he
will in the best time say, Rise up my love, my fair one, and come away; for lo,
the winter is past, the rain is over and gone. Isa. 26. 20. The flowers appear
on the earth, Isai. 35. 2. chap. 51. 3. The time of the singing of birds is
come, Isa. 35. 6. And the voice of the turtle is heard in our land, Zach. 12.
10. And will rejoice over you as the Bridegroom over the Bride, with joy and
singing, and will rest in his love, Zeph. 3. 17. compared with Isa. 62. 5.
Wherefore be not dampt or discouraged in your spirits at the hearing and sight
of the late Addresses, nor at the great Cloud of VVitnesses therein seeming to
own the present and former Governor: What though many of them are men of such
raised gifts and parts, and appearing grace, which to such as have not their
eyes in their heads, and look not within the vail, may have an appearance the
Lord does own them, and approves of what has been formerly and lately done?
for though they are so great a Cloud of VVitnesses, yet they are but VVitnesses
in the Clouds, whose Testimony, Carnal Wisdom, Policy and Arm of Flesh, will
pass away like the morning Cloud, or early dew: for the spirit of the Lord in
his people, like the waters, Isa. 28. 17. has overflown and looked into their
hiding place, abhorred and blown upon them, therefore follow not a multitude to
do evil. What though there be so many Prophets, great Scholars, learned
Astrologers, and wise men among them? yet know, that amongst almost 400
Prophets in the days of Ahab and Jehosaphat, but one Micaiah, a true prophet
that had the mind of God, among all the congregation that were going from Egypt
to Canaan; among whom were many renowned Princes, Priests and famous men, yet
only Moses, Caleb, Joshua, etc. that truly followed God, Numb. 14. Among all
the wise men in Babylon, but one Daniel a true Prophet, Dan. 2. 19 But one Noah
a Preacher of Righteousness, and faithful in his generation before the Flood,
Genesis 7. 1. One Lot in Sodom. Among the seven Churches, Rev. 2. 3. but two, to
wit, Philadelphia and Smyrna, whom the Lord approves of; but the other so
carried it, (except a few among them) as he said it should be manifested they
belonged rather to the Synagogue of Satan, then to the Churches of Christ. When
the great destruction comes upon wicked men, a little before or upon the call
of the Jews, but a handful, or as the gleaning grapes when the Vintage is done,
shall lift up their heads, and rejoice and glorify God in the fires, Isai. 24.
They only who speak often one to another when wickedness is set up, and they
that tempt God are delivered; alluding to Israel, who would have made a Captain
to return again to Egypt, or rather the Apostasy of this our day, that the Lord
owns as those who fear him, and have the promise of the Sun of Righteousness to
arise upon them, Mal. 3. The false spirit of Magistracy in Adonijah aspiring to
the Government, had the assistance of the Kings sons, Abiathar the Priest, Joab
the General, and all the Captains of the Host, etc. who with slaying of Oxen,
etc. eating and drinking, said, God save Adonijah, and carried it for a time
against Solomon: but the spirit of Solomon, Nathan the Prophet, etc. who had
the true spirit of Government and Prophecy, approved not of, or consented to
it, but were for the true spirit to rule, 1 King. 1. and so it is at this day;
and blessed be the Lord that our eyes do see a people crying, longing, and will
not be at rest till the earthy selfish spirit of Magistracy be brought down,
and the self-denying spirit of Magistracy or Horn of David now budding in Zion
come in its room, Psalm. 132. Wonder not, neither be turned aside because of
that great multitude on the one hand, or smallness of the number on the other,
that truly and indeed appear for and own the cause of God; but stand close, and
be more refined in the light and spirit of Zion, and keep your ground; for the
Lord has so appointed, That the foot shall tread it down, to wit, the meanest
of the saints; for it is very probable that many of the great and wise saints,
ascording to Rev. 18. 4. shall be found in the borders, and supporting the
things of Babylon, and casting out their Brethren (Isa. 66. 5.) saying, Let the
Lord be glotified; and having the mist of Babylon before their eyes, shall say,
The Lord delays his coming, and will be beating their fellow servants, only
the feet (to wit, the upright conversation) of these poor ones who desire to
keep close to God, and not to touch with Babylon; and steps, to wit, the faith,
prayers, and honest endeavors of these needy ones, who long for, and cannot be
at rest, till judgment, so visibly, return unto righteousness, that all the
upright in heart may follow it: These shall trend down the lofty City, Isai.
26. The least of the flock shall draw them out: the people that shall bring
down the enemies of God in the latter days, are a very small and feeble
remnant: when the Lord comes to destroy Babylon, and to build up Zion, he will
find but a few upright ones, and those very destitute, helpless, and some of
them prisoners too, for their witness to the true Magistracy and Ministry of
Zion, whose prayers he will hear, and not despise, and bring forth to declare
his glory in Zion, who shall in a holy triumph and rejoicing say, O Lord, thou
art our God: we will exalt thee, we will praise thy Name, for thou have done
wonderful things, thy councels of old are faithfulness and truth, etc. Lo, this
is our God, we have waited for him, he will save us, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Trust in the Lord for ever, etc.
Isai. 25. 1, 9. chap. 26. 2, 3. Which good and comfortable words shall
certainly be made good, for heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one
tittle of the word shall pass till all be fulfilled. I the Lord will hasten it
in its time, Isa. 60. 33. with Jer. 33. 25, 26. Hab. 2. 3. Read these
Scriptures. Wherefore strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble
knees, etc. Isa. 55. 3, 4.

And you, my dear Friends, Commonwealths-men (so called) who so greatly seem to
press for righteousness and freedom, labor to bring forth this righteousness,
not by a commonmoral spirit and principle, but by the spirit of Zion, a lively,
spiritual, active frame of spirit, to wit, that frame mentioned 2 Samuel 23. (not
to be pulled and haled to do the good that lies before you, that is more
suitable to the unjust Judge) but be as ready to help and refresh, and therein
be as suitable to delight the oppressed that come unto you, as the light of the
morning when the Sun rises without Clouds, is to those who have lost their way
in a dark night, and as the tender grass springs out of the earth by clear
shining after rain: this is the Spirit of the Horn of David that shall bud in
Zion, Psalm. 132. The consideration whereof in the first man festation and
declaration of it by the spirit unto and by David, having thereby a taste of
that glory upon his spirit, made him to break forth into a holy triumph and
rejoicing, saying, And this is all my salvation and all my desire, although he
make it not to grow, (to wit, in his day.) Leave no stone unturned, no means
unused to let the people who come unto you speedily know one way or other what
they shall trust to; say not, Go, and come again to morrow, if you can do it to
day; delays are burdensome and chargeable. Job, from the secret of God being
upon his Tabernacle, and the precious dew of the spirit compassing his root,
and lying all night upon his branch, had much of this blessed frame upon his
spirit, He put on and clothed himself with righteousness; and had more love to
judgment then to the robe and diadem; and upon that account, he was eyes to
the blind, feet to the lame, a father to the poor, and the cause which he knew
not he searched one, chap 29. it concerns you, and is w rth your reading. This
will be the frame of the handful of corn in the earth, Psa. 72 (or mountain
established upon the top of the mountains, Mich. 4. 1, 2.) the fruit whereof
shall shake like Lebanon, they shall not be shaken by others, but themselves
wilshake off their fruit: then will you be and do according to the heart of God,
and having this excellent spirit so freely, to make it your meat and drink to
execute judgment, and therein to make your shadow as the night in the midst of
the noonday to the oppressed, you will abhor to bewray (to wit) give up their
right and freedom into the hands of Tyrants and Spoylers Tole to the oppressed
as a hiding place from the wind, a covert from the tempest, as the shadow of a
great rock in a weary land, and as rivers of water in a dry place, standing
open ready to refresh those that are thirsty, will be the frame of Christ and
the Saints (the Horn of David) that shall reign in righteousness, etc Isa. 31.
1, 2. Then those that dwell under your shadow shall return, (from their
oppression) revive as the corn, and grow as the vine, and your savor among
both good and bad concerned in you, will be as the wine of Lebanon, Hos. 13.
and shall say, The Lord bless thee, thou habitation of Justice, etc. and wait
for, (to wit* desire after you) as (the dry ground) for the rain, and open
their mouths wide as (the mowed parched ground) for the latter rain, Job 29.
23. The foundation of the eternal welfare of your souls being fi st laid
thorough faith in Christ, and an holy unblamable conversation, (without which
you cannot attain unto the other) it will then be your crown and rejoicing to
forget the things behind, and to come up hither; for herein does the Lord
delight, (as also will be the great glory of the latter days:) and as you are
in the power, glory and sweetness of his spirit herein exercised, will he
delight in, and rejoice over you, and you will live as it were in heaven while
you are upon the earth, and he will be for your protection, as a place of broad
rivers and streams, wherein shall go no gally with oars, or gallant ship pass
thereby, etc. Isa. 33. Yea, your bow (as Jobs) renewed in your hand, to shoot
at your enemies upon all occasions. The presence of God being thus with you,
your terror will be upon all both at home and abroad that have a mind to hurt
you, according to Psa. 48. God is known in^er palaces for a refuge: for lo, the
kings were assembled, they passed by together, they saw it, and so they
marvelled, they were troubled, and hasted away: fear took hold upon them there,
and pain as of a woman in travel* thou brakest the ships of Tarshish, etc. This
salvation and forementioned righteousness, is the righteousness and salvation
of Zion, spoken of Isa. 62. 1. which those who understand and taste the glory
and sweetness of, cannot, will not hold their peace, or to be at rest, till it
go forth as brightness, or as a lamp that burns. This is the true spirit ^ Be
growing up in your light, and in the frame of your spirit to these things: in
order to which, pray for the dawnings of that measure of the spirit which the
Lord has promised to pour forth in the latter days. The ordinary measures of
the spirit relating only to the work within, will not do it; therefore is it
that so many saints at this day turn in with the spirit and things of Babylon.
Do not (like Alderman Tichborn) pretend to serve your Country freely, and
afterward take great Salaries; the people are poor, and it is your duty that
have Estates, to take nothing from them except they freely give it: so ought
also the Ministers of Christ to do. With other Scriptures read Micha 3.

A word on the behalf of that faithful servant of the Lord, Mr. John Portmans,
now close prisoner under lock night and day in the Tower of London, so that
none may come with freedom to visit him. Prove. 31. 8. Open thy mouth for the
dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to destruction.
THe Reader may take notice, That Mr. Portmans (formerly Secretary to the Navy)
could not in conscience continue his employment under this Apostasy, though it
were worth more then 300 l. per annum; and for his faithfulness to the cause of
God, his people and the Nation, has (amongst others) been a sufferer unto
Bonds in the Tower this 17 of the 11 month 1658, a year wanting 3 weeks, never
hearing what was laid to his charge, or that there was any to accuse him of
evil: having demanded of Col. Barkstead his Jailer (when first brought in by
his Soldiers) what his Crime was, could get no answer, neither was there any
expressed in the Warrant by which he was apprehended; the substance whereof was,
That he should be brought into the Tower to be kept until the further pleasure
of the late Tyrant, whom the Warrant blasphemously styled his Highness the Lord
Protector: who being lately dead, Mr. Portmans took notice of it in a Letter to
Col. Barkstead, delivered to his hand by two faithful Brethren, meekly
demanding, If he had any further Warrant to continue him a prisoner: if he had,
that then he might have a Copy, or at least the sight of it; which if he had
not, in some short time, he must conclude there was none; and therefore his
occasions to go forth for the well-being of his Family urging him to it, he
should assay to attend upon them; but if upon Trial he found the force
continued, he must consider what might be his further duty. This for substance,
but with more plainness was intimated in the Letter, and accordingly a week
after, not hearing from him, about three in an afternoon, not disguised, but in
his constant habit, he went to the gate, expecting to be stopped rather then
otherwise; but finding the passage free, went forth to his Brother-in-laws
house, not with an intent to conceal himself; from whence he was again taken
within an hour. This is briefly and truly the matter of Fact, and may, it is
hoped, justify him in his attempt not to be left to any thing unbecoming a
sober Christian; yet was he the rather induced thus to do, upon words not long
before spoken by Col. Barkstead, viz. That he might go out if he would, asking
some friends If there were no way to persuade him to it, etc. There needs
nothing be said to such as know that foul-mouthed Malignant Nedham, to wipe off
the reproach he has raised in his Pamphlet, that Mr. Portmans should say, He
would not go out if the gates were open, until he was satisfied for his
imprisonment; to go about to do it, were to imply that the Pamphletter did
sometimes speak truth; which should he do, he would be utterly disabled to
serve his Masters, who make lies their refuge, and hire him at no small charge
(as a means to uphold their own reputation) to asperse the faithful in the
Land; yet considering the report may come to those that know him not, such may
be assured, That Mr Portmans never spoke any such thing, but has ever
declared, That he should not continue there, were the force he is under
removed. But by all the noise has been made of this matter in the News Books,
they only declare how grateful it would be to have any thing to color over
their unrighteous proceedings, and justify themselves in their hard and more
then Heathenish usage of such as dare not say, a confederacy with them in their
Apostasy, for unto this hour, after now almost a years imprisonment, and at
this time, so close, as that he is locked up night, and day, can he not hear of
Accusation or Accuser, or so much as a VVarrant for his Detension other then as
is beforementioned, That he should be taken and kept during the pleasure of the
deceased Tyrant: which may become every true Englishman to be sensible of; for
who knows whose lot it may be next, to feel the like oppression when it shall
please our Taskmasters to impose it?


