AN ASTROLOGICALL JUDGMENT Upon His MAJESTY'S present Martch: Begun from
OXFORD May 7. 1645.

Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus. By GEO: WHARTON.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall for Will. Sheares. 1645.

TO THE FREINDLY and judicious Readers.
YOU have here (at the request of some Honorable Personages) An Astrologicall
Judgment, upon the future success of His Majesty's present Martch begun the 7
of May Instant. It is delivered in General Terms, for I neither will nor
dare descend to Particulars: That would require the knowledge of many things,
besides His Majesty's Nativity, which I may not presume to meddle with; It
being in it self both unlawful and very dangerous to publish any thing
concerning the particular fortunes and Destinies of Princes. For in this
Thrasybulus, Ascletarion, and Gauricus, were much to blame; the first whereof
foretold the Destruction of Tiberius the Emperor, the second, of Domitian, the
third, of Bentivoli in Bononia: So likewise the Priest that caused the Rumor
of the future Murdering of Galeacius Sfortia Duke of Millaine, who were all of
them worthily rewarded for their folly. And so ought Master Lilly and Master
Booker to be for their pernicious Pamphlets, wherein their sole endeavor has
hitherto been by most disloyal and ambiguous Phrases to animate and hasten on
the Rebels and other Conspiratours to plot and attempt Mischief against His
Majesty, whereas an honest and discreet Artist ought not to divulge any thing
(especially of Princes) that may any way tend to endanger their Persons, but
either not to meddle at all, or else to deal privately with the Prince
himself; and then also to adhere to Cardanes Rule in his Book De Astrologicis
Interrogationibus: Principi ne magnum malum firmiter unquam praedixeris, sed
Periculum. Howbeit Cardane himself dealt more plainly, and therefore more
dangerously with Edward the Sixth, as appears in the Judicials of his
Nativity given out in the beginning of his Duodecim Illustres Geniturae.

But neither Cardane (notwithstanding he was a man of extraordinary credit) nor
any other personal example can warrant any other private men to intermeddle
with the Nativities of their Princes, otherwise then is before limited, or upon
the Princes special command. And yet if in this respect or any other the Art
happen to be abused by some Spurij (non very filij) Artis, it has but the same
fortune that other Arts and Sciences have: And the Lawyers Rule is, That Abusus
non tollit usum. The bounds of which limitation I presume I have not any way
exceeded in this Discourse, which be pleased to accept as follows.

A Celestial Scheme, or Figure, setting forth exactly the true position, and
state of the Heavens at the time His MAJESTY began His Martch.
Anno. Mense. Die. Hor. Min. 1645. Maii. 6. 22. 30. T. M. 42. T. A.


Post Meridiem.

Positio Coeli ad Latitudinem 51. 46.

Dominus Diei Hor.




Suum cuique integrum esto judicium.

A Table of the several Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets according to
their Situation in the Figure
Saturn's Fortitudes by reason of his Being in his Term 2 Situation in 9th
House 2 Direct Motion 4 Swift Motion 2 Orientalitie 2 Freedom from Combust. 5
17
Debilities by reason of his Fall 4



Jupiter's Fortitudes by reason of his Being in in his term 2 Decade 1 Scit in
the tenth house 5 Direct Motion 4 Swift Motion 2 Freedom from combust. 5 19
Debilities by reason of his Detriment 5 Being under the Sunbeams 4 9



Mars his Fortitudes by reason of his Direct Motion 4 Swift Motion 2 Fredome
from combust. 2 8
Debilities by reason of his Peregrinitie 5 Being in the 12 house 5
Occidentalitie 2 12



The Sun's Fortitudes by reason of his Being in the 10 house 5 5
Debilities by reason of his Peregrinitie 5 Slow motion 2 7



Venus her Fortitudes by reason of her Triplicitie 8 Being in the 10 house 5
Direct Motion 4 Swift Motion 2 Freedom from combust. 5 Orientalitie 2 2^
Debilities by reason of his Being in with Cap. Alg. Being under the Sun beams
9



Mercury his Fortitudes by reason of his Being in his own house 5 Triplicitie
3 Being in the 10 house 5 Direct Motion 4 Swift Motion 2 Freedom from Combust.
5 24
Debilities by reason of his Occidentalitie 2 2



The Moone's Fortitudes by reason of her Freedom from Combust. 5 5
Debilities by reason of her Perigrinity 5 Being in the 6 house 4 Slow Motion 2
Decreasing in Light 2 13



AN ASTROLOGICALL JUDGMENT UPON HIS MAJESTY'S MARCH.
BY this distribution the Fortitudes and Debilities of every Planet in the
precedent Celestial Scheme are easily gathered: It follows then that we
likewise confer them amongst themselves according to the respective Numbers
of their Fortitudes and Debilities; that it may yet more manifestly appear,
which of them are most strong and fortunate; which most weak and unfortunate,
and accordingly how they succeed one another in strength and Power.

First then, the Planet Mercury of all the rest is simply most strong and
fortunate in the Scheme. For if the number of his Debilities be deducted from
the sum of his Fortitudes there still remains 22 Testimonies of strength,
which no other Planet obtains in the Figure.

The next in dignity is Saturn who has 12 Testimonies; Then Venus, and
Jupiter, who are both very powerful; the first of them being endued with 17,
the latter with 10 Dignities: Mars and the Sun are both but weak in respect
of their Essential Dignities: yet for some Circumstances very considerable in
this case, the Sun may be said to be the stronger, which being generally
taken is a good and laudable token.

The Moon of all others is the most debilitated her Detriments exceeding her
Fortitudes, by 8 which, will prove very advantageous to His Majesty, as
hereafter shallbe noted. And thus much generally touching the constitution of
the Planets in the Figure.

Now to descend more particularly to the present matter; We are (in this case)
principally to consider 4 things.

First, the Ascendent of the Scheme, which is the Significator of the City from
whence his Majesty began his Martch: From which house we are to collect the
condition and State of this City during his Majesty's absence.

Secondly; The 10 House, which (according to Haly) is the Significatrix the
journey: And from this we are to deduce our judgment of his Majesty's success
during the time of his March.

Third thing to be considered is the 7 House by which we are to judge how his
Majesty is likely to be received in those Parts where his Army shall pass,
and of his success against the Enemy.

Lastly the fourth House; whereby we are to inform our selves of his Majesty's
success in the return.

Vnde si quis istorum locorum melior, and fortunatior fuerit factus, significat
bonitatem in illa sua significatione: Et si quis fuerit male afflatus and
nocens, significat damnum in illa sua significatione. Vid. Haly Page 328. As
concerning the first, we find the 22 degree of the Regal sign Leo at that
instant ascending our Horizon, Cor Leonis in the Ascendent. And the Dragons
Head in the very Cuspe thereof: And the Sun (Lord of the First House) not
unfortunately posited in the South Angle of the Heavens: Which is the house of
Empire, Rule, Dignities, Offices, and Arts, etc. And he environed with the two
Benign Planets Jupiter and Venus, who likewise behold the Ascendent and are
free from any configuration with the Malevolents. These are evident and
undeniable Testimonies of the Honor and safety of this famous University and
City of Oxford; And of the care and vigilance of those that are entrusted by
his Majesty with the government thereof: Of the Fidelity, Courage, Industry,
and necessary Expense of her Inhabitants for the Defense of it: And of their
conformity to such wholesome Orders, as either are or shall hereafter be made by
the Wisdom of the Counselors for the good and Benefit of the City.

In a word, All the good our hearts can wish for is promised us by the Scheme.
I hope the seasonable care taken, and the Directions already given for
prevention of the Sickness will add much to our happiness: Some strange
kind of Mortality must be expected this year in most Cities and great Towns,
throughout the South, South-East, and South-West parts of this Kingdom: But
especially let London be forewarned of her misery: She is much (and that
deservedly) threatened. You may hear more of her after the 23 of May instant,
for from thence does the Influence of Saturnes Transite out of Aries into
Taurus begin to operate.

As touching the second thing here considerable, which is the Tenth House; we
may observe the ninth Degree and 31 min. of Taurus Culminating, which is the
House and Triplicity of Venus; wherein also she is most fortunately seated
within 3 Degrees of the Cuspe thereof, beholding the Ascendent, free from
Combustion, or any configuration with the Malevolent Planets; being Direct and
Swift of Motion, and Oriental of the Sun: To her (therefore) may we justly
attribute the signification of his Majesty's Martch: Who being (by nature)
Benevolent, by her Essential and Accidental Position so fortunate: We cannot
pronounce less to his Majesty, and his whole Army, then a wonderful happy,
prosperous, and successful Martch, And contrarily exceeding much Fear and
Terror, dissipation, and utter Ruin to his Enemies:

The Dragons Head in the Cuspe of the Ascendent tells us, Quod habebit bonum
antequam se inde moveat, and in principio Itineris, Haly Par. 3. Page 108. This
was verified in part by that Gallant Encounter with the Enemy performed (with
so good success) by the Right Honorable the Lord Goring near Newbridge the
same seventh day; occasioned upon his Majesty's Motion hence.

The Generality of this good to his Majesty and his Army, is further confirmed
by the Powerful presence of Jupiter, the Sun; and Mercury in the South-Angle;
And the unfortunate Positure of the Moon in the Figure etc.

Artabari dixit: Si quando Rex, vel alius voluerit capere inimicum qui sit
valoris minoris eo; statuat in, aut; vel in via combust. ant cum, vel, etc. Et
sol sit salvus and purus ab infortuniis and in medio coeli sint fortunae; Etiam
si quando magis infortunata fuerit erit pejus and majus damnum pro illo
inimico, quia est significatrix Populi, etc. ac servorum. Haly Page 340. We
have here (as before we noted) the Sun, both the Fortunes, and Mercury safely
seated in the Midheaven; And the Moon (who naturally, (and in this case
especially) signifies the many-headed-monster Multitude, (such persons as in
January 1641. tumultuously assembled themselves (to the hazard of his Majesty's
Royal Person) to cry for Blood in the Terms of Justice; those who through
their pretended zeal to I know not what, have brought the curse of God upon
themselves and the whole Kingdom, first by slaying the Innocent in cold Blood,
and ever since by Engageing their Persons and estates in this most unnatural
and Bloody War against his Majesty) The Moon (I say) who is the natural
significatrix of such meane-Capacities is in the 6 House very sick (Master
Lilly) and nigh to the Dragons Tail. These Positions will puzle and stupifie
the misguided-Commonalty, and make them know there is such a thing as Allegiance.

More particularly; the Sun thus posited, and also Mercury being free from
Combustion and the Infortunes; And the Dragons head so near the Cuspe
Ascending; Salvationem corporis, agilitatem, and gaudium in Itinere
significant, bonamque fiduciam, and applicari ad id quod vult. Haly Page 324.
Jupiters Position in the 10 house confirms the same. Haly Page 328.

The Moon Lady of the 12, and moving betwixt the 8 degr. 34 min. and 21 degr.
26 min. of Aquarius, gives us to understand that His Majesty shall receive much
contentment by certain Messages brought him from Foraigne Parts; And that he
shall receive some sudden and unexpected supply of -- by the means of some
that assimulate the condition of his Enemies: And withal this comfort; That
His Majesty shall be exceeding successful in beseiging of Towns, Castles, or
Forts, and in pursuing the Enemy. See Haly Page 346.

Mars his Sextile to the Sun Lord of the Ascendent, (which happens the 18
day of May) will encourage our Soldiers to advance with much Alacrity and
cheerfulness of spirit; and to show themselves gallant in the most dangerous
attempts.

The Ascendent and Tenth House being both Fixed Signs tell us, That the Martch
shall not be so speedy as is expected; but with great deliberation and care of
settling the Affairs of the distracted Counties through which His Majesty
passes. Yet the great dominion of Mercury does intimate quick Action about
the latter end of June, and the most part of July. O! what snaffling there will
be amongst the Zelots before the middle of November? How many days of
Humiliation? what Fears? what Jealousies? what Discontents and wranglings?
what Murmurings? how many Lies and Forgeries raised and dispersed to quicken a
Dull and Dying Faction?

The next thing (in Order) which we are to consider is the Sign and Degr. of
the 7 house, which in this Scheme is the 22 degr. and 21 min. of Aquarius, the
house of Saturn, but Term of Jupiter: Saturn being in the 9 house of the
Heavens in the end of Aries, and in a Sextile with the Cuspe of the 7 house,
and in a Quartile with Mars.

Si gradus 7 domus fuerit dignitas timebitur and honorabitur and credetur eius
verbu a gente illius Terrae ad quam vadit, and erit dilectus, and receptus a
Gente Terrae ad quam vadit cum gaudio, et latitia. Here by the word Gente we
must understand the County or Counties principally aimed at by His Majesty. And
this happy Reception is further attested by the propinquity of Venus to the
Sun as he is Lord of the Ascendent, and in the House of Kings, etc.

Aquarius being a fixed Sign tells us that he shall not quickly remove thence,
but remain there some convenient time for the settling of some important
Affairs, and a full reducing of those Counties to their obedience.

If any man would be satisfied to what Quarter of the Heavens the design is
intended, although he may guess something by the Motion which the Army has
already made, yet he may inform his Judgment best by considering the Signs of
the 4 Angles, viz. Leo, Taurus, Aquarius, and Scorpio, (which he shall find to
be the one half Northern, the other Southern; and also the Signs wherein
the Planets are, viz. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Leo, and Aquarius, which are all
of them (except the last wherein the Moon is) Sententrionall. Which will
assuredly determine that the Progress and principal Actions of this Army or
the greatest part thereof are like to be Northerly, inclining sometimes to the
East, otherwhiles to the West, as the Occasions of War requires.

The 4 and last thing to be examined is the 4 house: The Cuspe whereof is the 9
degr. and 31 min. of Scorpio, the most viperous sign of the Zodioque; where
Mars has the Dignities of Triplicity and Decade; But is unfortunately
collocated in the 12 house of the Figure. This position of his ought to
forewarne our Commanders to take heed of some Disaster immediately before His
Majesty betake him to his Winter Quarters: It seems to be the beating up of an
Outquarter, and the surprisall of some few of our Men, who value their ease
more then their safety: I Will say no more: But I hope the Diligence and
vigilance of our Commanders may prevent the danger.

And now to sum up all; It is most apparent to every impartial and ingenuous
Judgment; That (although His Majesty cannot expect to be secured from every
trivial disaster that may befall his Army, either by the too much presumption,
ignorance, or negligence of some particular persons, which is frequently
incident and unavoidable in the best of Armies) yet the several Positions of
the Heavens duly considered and compared amongst themselves as well in the
prefixed Scheme as the Quarterly Ingresses, do generally render His Majesty
and his whole Army unexpectedly victorious and successful in all his
Designs: Believe it (London) thy miseries approach, they are like to be many,
great and grievous, and not to be diverted, unless thou seasonably crave
pardon of God for being Nurse to this present Rebellion, and speedily submit to
thy Princes mercy: Which shall be the daily prayer of,

Geo: Wharton.

FINIS.

