APOTELESMA: OR, THE NATIVITY OF THE WORLD, AND The Revolution thereof, with
Astrologicall Judgments thereupon.

By GEORGE WHARTON Esquire.

Cardan. Seg. 1. Aph. 20. ASTROLOGIA altissima scientiarum est, tum quiae de
Coelestibus, tum quia de futuris, quorum scientia non solum Divina est, sed
etiam Vtilissima.

LONDON, Printed for Tho: Vere at the Angel without Newgate, and Nath: Brook at
the Angel in Cornhill. 1655.

Of the Worlds Nativity, and the Revolution thereof, with Astrological
Judgments thereupon.
I Will not trouble my self, or the Reader, with the various Opinions of Men or
Nations concerning the 'lapsed years of the World's Creation, some being
utterly lost in Conc^ipts that repugne Philosophy, others swayed with
Philosophical conjectures destructive to Divinity; and the rest miserably
varying one from another: For, the Heathens afford us no satisfaction [Epicurus
and Aristotle will not allow it had any beginning.] The Jews are wretchedly
dissenting in their accounts [Philo and Ios^phus irreconcilable.] The
Samari^ans differing from the Jews, and indeed all others, the Jews from the
Christians, and they amongst themselves, Scaliger and Petavius of the Latins,
Clemens Alexandrinus and Nicepborus among the Greeks.

It Is true, Longomontanus (a most learned modern Astronomer) with a ^ilere
ampli^s ^eque^, takes boldly upon him to discover this grand secret from the
motion of the Sun's Apogaeum, supposing the Sun's Eccentriciti^ immutable, and
the Apogaeum a yearly motion of 1. 1. 50. 14''''. stiling it Illustre
testimonium de Mundi exordi^, and duratione hactenus. For, by positing the the
Sun's Apogaeum in the beginning of Aries at the Creation, and his Perigaeum in
the opposite point Libra; He concludes of 4000. years (within a half) betwixt
the Creation and the Passion of our Savior; and till the 1588th. year of his
Incarnation 5554. (allowing 33. whole years for our Saviors age, with addition
of the time intercepted betwixt his Nativity and Passion.) And this, this
learned Author grounds on the accurate Observations of his learned Master Tycho
Brabe, (who indeed concluded the progress of the Sun's Apogaeum, (S. S. S.)
till that year 95. 30.) And to the end we might compare the same with the
Observations of sundry old and late Astronomers, throughout the respective Ages
they lived in* exhibits to our view the following Table of The Place of the
Sun's Apogaeum, from the beginning of the World, and the true Vernall Equinox.
In the several Ages of Years of the World. Deduct. Observat. Differ.
Hipparohus Rhodius 3810 65 16 65 30 14 C. Ptolomeus Alexand. 4099 70 3
Albategnius Maham 4849 82 53 82 16 37 ^ualterus Nor^nberg. 5454 93 43 94 15 32
-- Nicolaus Copern. Tur. 5492 94 23 95 8 45 -- Tycho Braheus Dan. 5554 95 30 95
30 0



Whereby it appears that the moved Apogaeum of the Sun proportionably deduced
(according to the Annual motion here allowed it) throughout the respective
ages of their Astronomers, differs no where more then 45. from what it was
observed by them, Ptolomy excepted, who (as says Longomontanus) too
confidently maintained that Hipparchus's supposition of the Su^s Apogaeum had
continued invariable until his time: his observations being without all
question violently fitted to such a purpose.

And (to say the truth) were it that we had the Sun's Apogaeum precisely and
uncontrollably so determined by Longomontanus, or otherwise by any other; very
well it might be called Illustre testimonium of the worlds Original. But for
so much as later Authors do all or most of them differ (more or less) from him
in the Annual motion of the Sun's Apogaeum, and consequently in the place
thereof, (for instance Bullialdus, who makes it this year much less then he,
viz. 3^. 6. 26. 27. by abating 5. Seconds of what Longomontanus allows for its
Annual Motion;) I dare not confidently build upon this Foundation: which would
(this year 1655.) compute of above 5621. years since the Creation, yet that
far short of what arises from Bullialdus, whereby the Age of the World should
now be no less then 6091. years: both of them exceeding (but the latter by
far) that Account which the latest and best of Chronologers sit down with. So
that hence (also) we receive very little or no satisfaction.

But let be the Age of the World what it please: the Season of its Birth I
undoubtedly take to be the Spring, the particle of time in which that mighty
Giant (the Sun,) began his unwearyed Course (according to appearance from the
first scruple of Aries in the Meridian of Mesopotamia, where Paradise is by men
very learned both in Divinity and Geography affirmed to have stood, unless we
admit of such Allegories as make Paradise to signify a place of Pleasure, and
the four Rivers Four Cardinal virtues: or hoist it up in the Air under the
Moons Orbit, fancyiny those rivers to fall down^ from thence, and running
under the Ocean to rise up again in those places where now they are found: the
one Opinion being as unwarrantable, as the other is ridiculous.

For, it is as true as Truth it self, that God instituted the beginning of the
Ecclesasticall year at the Vernal-Equinox: whereby he restored to the People
the Beginning of the year which the Patriarchs had observed before them, and
which they by their long Conversation with the Egyptians had discontinued;
whence the soundest, both Divines and Historians conclude, that God restored to
the Israelites the ancient account of the year and the true beginning thereof,
partly to the end it might be a memorial of their departure out of Egypt,
partly that the Worlds Creation might be recorded, and partly that it might be
a Prophecy of Christ, who was to suffer at this time. So that the Creation, the
Celebration of the Passover, and the Redemption of the World (by the death of
Christ) do all of them fall out at the same time.

Now that the Patriarks had this beginning of the year, who can doubt it? They
had the most natural account of the year, and such is that which fixes its
original at the Vernall Equinox. For seeing the mode of perfection is twofold*
one cum res sit, the other cum facta est; the consummate perfection does in no
wise appertain to the birth of the thing, but the Inchoate, and (as i may say)
vernant. For illustration whereof is may be added, That the Spring is the most
beautiful and pleasant time of all the year, and the most proper for
generation of things: which Moses not obscurely implies, where he says,
Terram g^rminasse herbam virentem. Neither is the Objection of Adams plucking
fruit from off the forbidden tree available, it being very w^l known that in
some Eastern Countries (yea elsewhere) they have frui^ growing twice a veare:
the Poma aurea of Spain, both at Spring and Autumn. No^ does the great volume
of Heaven but confirm this opinion; whilst the Dodecatemorle of Aries
commences the natural year, wherein the first conversion, or change of these
sublunary things is caused.

To conclude this point. The Chaldaeans had their learning and wisdom from the
Hebrews: Now forasmuch as they appointed the beginning of the year at the
Vernal Equinox, as did also the Persians; it is very probable they borrowed this
account of the year from the Hebrews: And therefore says Scaliger Exerc. 257.
Mundum vere ortum primo, and autumant sapientes and credere par est. So runs
(also) the sentence of pious Antiquity.

Hac est illa dies quinta and vigesima Marti,
Qua verbo Domini mundi textura peracta est:
Mortuus hac Adam: Mortem hac devicit Jesus:
Hac est caesus Abel: fuit hac mactandus Isaacus:
Hac Pasoba indictum: Hac David Rex dicitur unctus.
Which is thus much after my rude version.

This is (of March) the five and twentieth day,
Whereon God finished the Heavens, Earth and Sea,
And all therein: when the first Adam di'd:
And when the Second [JESUS crucified.]
When Abel's blood was by his Brother shed,
And Isaac's ready to be offered,
The Passover proclaimed to begin,
When holy David was Anointed King.
Of the Worlds Revolution.
IF this then be the season of the year, wherein the World had its Birth, as
the most learned Divines, Chronologers, and Astronomers have unanimously
concluded. It follows next, that we consider the Revolution thereof this
present year 1655. and from thence derive our Judgments Astrologicall; Non
aliter ac in Nativitatibus quid nato per subsequentes annos eventurum fit,
pronunciari solet ex thematibus Revolutionum, quae eriguntur ad locum Solis qui
est in Radice. Orig. Part. 3. cap. 3.

Now to find out this temporary moment of the Sun's Revolution to the first
scruple of Aries (where he was in the Radix of the Worlds Creation) has been
by some accounted impossible; by others a task very difficult and uncertain.
And (to say the truth) such has been the wide difference herein amongst
Astronomers, until of late days, that the Calculations (how nice and curious
soever) made from the several Tables they published, howbeit every man with
equal confidence and commendation of the verity and exactness of his own, have
wanted that precise concurrence which is requisite to raise thereon so complete
an Astrologicall structure, as might withstand the tempestuous storms that
frequently arise from the turbulent Sea of Ignorance and Malice. Whereof
Cardanus was so sensible, that (because he would not run the hazard of his
credit, so great in the World) he rather wholly neglected the (then so)
doubtful Cusps of the Houses in these revolutional Figures, saving thereby the
labor of erecting Schemes, then from such incertainties to raise alike
uncertain judgments: In which respect he prescribes a regard only to the
places and Aspects of the Planets. And indeed should we grant the Tables
Astronomicall (what as yet we find not in them; I mean) the exactness aimed at
and coveted by all men: yet, till the long-sought for and hitherto unfound
certainer way of a^taining the true Longitude be discovered, some discrepancies
(more or less) will be always occurring.

In the mean while, I could wish, that some ingenious Artists would ayply the
Directions of Daniel Santbeck, (Probl. Astronom. and Geom. Sec. 1. Prop. 10.)
who by the help of a Geometrical Quadrant there described, sets down the
manner of observing the true time of the Equinoxes, whereby they may discover,
not only how far the Calculations made by the Tables differ from (but also
which Tables come nearest) Observation; and by this means make choice of the
best, whereon to ground their Judgments Astrologicall.

But forasmuch as all, or the most of our Annual Prognostiques, are commonly
extant before the Vernall Equinox, on and about which day those Observations
ought to be made, it cannot be expected that we should here proceed upon those
grounds, the Birth of what now we present you with, anticipating its Fortune in
the Press not less than Four Lunar Revolutions: Wherefore all we can here do,
to do fairly, will be to make choice of the best Astronomicall Tables, in which
Number ^ rank the Philolaick, as solving the Phenomenon nearest exactness, when
handled by a skilful Artist, and reduced (not upon the bare credit of every
prostituted Catalogue of the Difference of Meridians, but) with regard had to
Ecliptical Observations, determining (so near as may be) the true Longitude:
otherwise great Errors may ensue, especially in the time of the Solar
Ingresses, Eclipses, and other Lunations, and yet the Tables excusable.

These things well considered, I cannot see with what show of equity we should
be derided, or Astrology exploded, in case we arrive not at such preciseness
in our Annual Judgments as is looked for from us, by those which know not the
handling of a Science, whose subject is so remote, whose paths be so variously
winding and intricate. Or why Astrology should be contemned or slighted for
want of Perfection more than all other Arts or Sciences, since really there are
none without some defect or other; not any one that can truly say, it is free
from every scrupulous exception: For, (omitting Physic, and the rest, which
cannot justly boast of nigh so much perfection) what Geometrician can stand up
and truly tell me, he has found out the exact Quadrature of a Circle, or the
Duplication of a Gube? What Algebraist can resolve the so long sought for
Equation of three discontinued Numbers in Algebraique proportion? And should
therefore those noble Sciences be rejected as vain and foolish, and the
Professors be no better accounted of than Impostors; when nevertheless we
cannot but confess the most excellent and daily use made of Geometry, both of
Sea and Land, very well knowing that the Geometrician can Square a Circle,
(though not precisely, yet) so near exactness, as leaves the issue of his
endeavors without any sensible Error? In like manner, because the Astronomer
determines not precisely the true places of the Planets, (howbeit very near the
same, and the Eclipses of the Luminaries, to admiration) the Astrologer
sometimes strayes a little in the Species and Times of the events thereon
depending, shall we therefore (altogether excusing Astronomic) lay the whole
blame and weight of our indignation on Astrology, whose Effata suppose the
Planets true places, which are Scientiarum apices, the perfection of Sciences,
that God (in his wisdom) would not have known ab initio, but reserveth only to
some peculiar Men and Ages?

I confess it is but too true, that (like as in all other Sciences, so) in
this, as there are and ever have been some Heretics and Miscreants, who rail
and exclaim against Astrology, (for no other reason, but) because they
apprehend it not, so there are a ^ort of loose and ignorant pretenders, (Spurii
non very filii Artis:) who expose to sale their Lying Oracles, do ^xceedingly
blemish and disparage the Science, administering thereby great advantage for the
malicious to inveigh and rail against it both from the Press and Pulpit, and to
bespatter the more able and hon^st Professors thereof with the Titles of
Figure-Flingers, Cheats, Impostors, and (I care not what) other abusive
Epithets.

But should we (which my very soul abhors) set light of the Deity, because
Caligula and Lucian would not grant any? or suspect the Regiment of the World,
because Sardanapalus, Epicurus, Lucretius and Nero denied Gods providence? or
esteem of humane things more than sacred, because the Machivelists teach that
Polity might consist without Religion, accounting it nothing but an empty
name, and the Bond or Give of Polity? Or should we condemn the whole Catholic
Church, because of the many Ravenning Wolves and Subtle Foxes crept into (and
now so miserably despoiling) her? Or, decrying all the Clergy, because some
Time-buggering Changlings have dishonored the Function, seduced their
Auditori^, and preferred their worldly interests and carnal ends of Pride,
vainglory, strife, covetousness, and desire of pr^hemin^nce above their
brethren, to the Truth and Peace of the Gospel? Should we (I say) for the
incredulity of some, cond^mn^ what (for doing so) might damn^ us? Or for the
impiety and hypocrisy of a few, cast dirt in the face of a whole Covent of
Learned and Religious Men? let the enemies of Urania themselves be Judges, if
we might not be justly taken for fools or knaves, or knaves and fools in Folio?
And let all rational men say, whether they be less, or any other, that have
causl^sly and publicly so derid^d and railed at us.

But e diverticulo in viam, to return into the road again, (for I cannot crave
pardon for this digr^ssion, so pr^ssing is the cause thereof!) The Arieticall
Ingress reduced to K^ndale is this year (by Ismael Bullialdus) at 1h. 58. 41
Apparent-time, in the afternoon of the 10th. day of March (Old Style) unto
which I erect the following Scheme of the Worlds 5063d. Revolution, according
to the (generally received for) true Account, the Vulgar and Dy^ui^ian being
one year more.

The Scheme.
26

18

2 0

11 52

8. 36

4. 50

^

14. 32

19. 40

0. 0

9

5. 0 ^

9

9. 37

19 40

14. 32

^

2 0

18

28. 40

26

Revolutio Mundi 5603a.

Ad Annum CHRISTI 1655. Ingressum in Ariet^m. Sublimitatem Poli 54. 50.
Longitud. Candal. 18.00. constructa.



Favent. Deo Ter-Opt. Max. ad em is.



Behold! We have here the 19. degr. 40. of the Lion ascending, the second of
the Bull culminating, Cynthia separating from Conjunction with Saturn, and
hastening to the Quartile of Mars, He to the Trine of Saturn, and about ten
days after to the Square of Jupiter, who is in Conjunction with the Sun,
Venus, and Mercury in the beginning of the Equinoctial Sign Aries:

The preventionall New-Moone in the 17. 44. of the Fishes:

The postventionall Full-Moone in the 1. 33. of the Balance:

Mars Almuten (or Lord) of the Revolution, as exceeding the rest in number of
Essential Dignities, free from combustion, and Rays of the Sun, Oriental,
swif^ in Motion, and just upon entering the Goat, wherein he is exalted.

All which (with much of what more was requisite to be) considered, I conclude:
That the year will be generally inclined to drought: For, besides that
Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury be all of them near the Sun in the Ram (a Sign of
the fiery Triplicity) unto whom also the Sun succ^ssively d^fluxeth, Mars
continues for the greatest part of the year in the cold and dry Houses of
Saturn, who is now got to the Virgin (a Sign of the same nature) where the
Moon likewise resid^th: More particularly, that the Winter shall be
temperately cold and dry, the Spring moderately warm, but ^xceedingly dry:
the Summer cooler than usual, but the Autumn intemperately cold. Whence it
naturally follows,

That the Winter shall prove very seasonable: but the Spring not adorning the
earth so plentifully as moderate minds could wish for, neither the fruits
thereof so good or gorgeous. The Summer (and consequently the remainer of the
year) very healthful, but the fruits thereof serotine: Loss and hurt to the
fruits of Autumn, in uantity, taste, and comeliness, Omne nimium Naturae
inimicum est.

The moisture that will be is signified by the uncertain nature of Mars,
according to that of Haly, Est Mars natura quidem ^ic^us, sed valde mutabilis,
etc. Mars (says he) is indeed of a dry nature, but withal very changeable:
so that sometimes he is of a moist, another while of a dry nature. Humectatur
vero and minuitur calor ejus, quando descendit versus terram, and tun^ signat
infi^mitat^s and dolores ex* occasion sanguinis provenic^^is: His heat is
moistued and diminished so often as he d^sc^nds toward the earth* and then he
portends infirmities and griefs proceeding of blood.

Moreover, In conjunctione vel opposi^ione Luminarium, quae pr^^edit
revolutionem anni, si Mars locum Luminarium a^pic^at, erunt f^lgura, tonitrua
and lampades: If at the new or full Moon preceding the years revolution, Mars
beholds the place of the Luminaries, lightning and thunder, with lamps or
leamos of fire succeed the same. And commonly* th^se are accompanied with
showers.

Mercurius in Ariete multitudinem ventorum fortium, sucorumque: Mercury in the
Ram foreshewes a number of strong and dry winds: and I have often observed,
that when Mercury is sub radiis, the weather is very tempestuous and blustering.

But i^ in judgments of this nature I should give the reasons of all my
predictions, '^would surfeit the Reader* and swell my Pam^hlet to a Book.
However, to satisfy the ingenious on what grounds we proceed; and to convince
a sort of people, who reflecting on Marlianus his Rule [Si vis divinare, totum
contrarium ad unguem dicito ejus quod Astrologi pollicentur,] suppose we do but
guess at the weather, and believe that if They should say rain, when the
Astrologer writes fair and dry weather; or calm, when he foretells wind, they
should hit the mark as often as the Astrologer: I will (once for all) hint a
few of the many causes, which either are, or should be considered, by all such
as aim at credit or truth in their predictions.

First (then) you must know, that when the Sun (according to appearance) wheels
to a Star of a hot nature (as to Mars or Jupiter) it argues a hot or warm
disposition of the air: if to a Star of a cold nature (as Saturn or Mercury)
a distempered air through the extremity of cold. And the mutual conjunction
of Stars that be of one complexion augments the same quality: As the
conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, by the twofold virtue of their heat, make the
lower region of the air more fervent.

Many Planets (especially the superior) in Northern Signs, a hot Summer, or a
temperate Winter: The contrary when many Planets (the three superior chiefly)
are in Southern Signs: for so they signify a cold and moist Peristasis of the
air, and a colder Winter.

Saturn in Southern Signs, and especially in Capricorn and Aquary, terrible
Winters of frost and cold; Summers remiss in heat, a famine, an evil increase
of wine, and of all such fruits as delight in the Sun.

Moreover, when the cold nature of Saturn is duplicated by the presence of
Mercury, it makes the quality of the season colder: but if such a Conjunction
or Aspect of the Planets falls out at the new or full Moon, or at any other
Aspect of the Luminaries, the virtue thereof shall appear much more
effectually; nay, if within three days preceding a New Mood, it adds vigor
to the virtue of such a Planetary Conjunction, or Aspect.

But when Stars of a contrary nature be united by commixture of mutual Aspect,
then shall a temperate affection of the air attend the same. The like you may
judge, if there happen at the same time Constellations of different natures,
whereof one produces frost and cold, the other heat, or if one of them bode a
dry air, the other a moist; for so of necessity a mean is produced: the
influences of contrary Constellations mutually impeding and mitigating one
another: As the Conjunction of the Sun, and Jupiter or Mars, (when both in
Fiery Signs) brings with it greater heat, than if one were in a cold Sign and
the other in a hot.

Furthermore, the full and new Moons that be celebrated in Angles (the
Horoscope especially, or Angle of the Earth) are usually accompanied with rain
the same day they happen. But here you must note, that the Effects of the Stars
do oftentimes show themselves before they come into partile Configuration, that
is to say, during the time of their Access or Application one to another; and
sometimes in their defluxion or separation, which the Ancient Grecian
Astrologers named Epichemasin and Prochemasin.

There are some, who (not altogether without reason) erect Schemes to the
Apparent times of the Conjunctions of the Luminaries: and (having found the
Almuten of the Figure, and observed what Planets be Angular) direct the
Horoscope of the Conjunction (allowing one day for every 13. 11. the mean
motion of the Moon in one day:) for, that when the Horoscope comes by such
direction to any Planet that was then Angular, or to the Lord of the Lunation,
some change of air, to rain or snow, or wind, at least a dark and cloudy air,
succeeds.

Consider likewise the Position of the Lord of the Lunation, in the Figure, and
the Latitude of the Moon; for, from thence come the winds that occasion
Tempests.

Take notice also, when the Moon comes within the beams of the Lord of the
Figure, or the Angular Planets, for then principally does she manifest her self
according to the nature of the Planet.

The Conjunctions of the Planets with fixed stars not far distant from the
Ecliptique, produce a notable alteration of the air: And when the Stars leave
one Sign and enter into another, they betoken showers. Yet still a regard must
be had to the Qualities of the Signs and Seasons. As if the Mutation be in a
Watery Sign, and in the Winter or Spring, then may rain or snow be safely
denounced [snow in Winter, if so be a cold Peristasis is impending:] The
general Rule is, Grandines in Aprili and Octobri, Nives in Hyeme, in Aestate
tonitrua.

A special regard must be also had to the nature of the Earth and Air peculiar
to the Horizon you live in, or write for, because that in all places they are
not of a like nature: And no less to the Winds that agree to the particular
season of the year: forasmuch as they blow not alike in all places, some being
Topicall and peculiar to one place; others Chronical, which come at a certain
time of the year: Wherefore Cardan. 7. Aph. 29. Oportet Coelum ^ognoscere
Regionis, and quo tempore Anni sit tempestuosum, tum etiam cui signo Regio
magis conveniat, si veritat^ni in judicando assequi velimus.

In the next place, let the Interval of the Sun, Moon, and Planets be observed,
which consists of the Aggregate of the Sun and Planets Orb upon the access or
deflux thereof, and especially in the corporal conjunction of the Planets: As
in the Suns Application to Conjunction with Saturn, because the Suns Orb
consists of 12. and Saturn of 9. therefore so soon as the Sun shall be distant
from him, not more than 21. degrees (which number is produced by the Addition
of 12. and 9. degrees) the cold commenceth, and lasts for the most part, until
the Sun have separated himself 21. degrees from conjunction with him.

In like manner the Planets, which have their houses opposite, when they behold
one another by a forceable aspect, as the Opposition or Quartile, or Trine, do
introduce a memorable change to rain, or cold, or heat: As, if the Sun be in
aspect with Saturn, a cold Peristasis of the air, especially if either of them
be in watery Signs: In the Summer time frequent showers, but in Winter cold and
snow. So also the configuration of Mars and Venus do bring for the most part
heat and warm showers, Jupiter and Mercury vehement blasts of wind. And these
Configurations of the Sun with Saturn, Venus and Mars, Jupiter and Mercury, are
(by the ancient Mathematicians) called, Portarum seu valvarum Apertiones.

Nor must you neglect the rising and setting of the 15. fixed Stars of the
first, and the 15. of the second magnitude, recorded by Ptolomy in his
Calendar: For, if upon the days that those Stars rise or set with the Sun,
there be a new or full Moon celebrated, or that some Planet of a conformable
nature with those fixed Glories shall rise or set with him, or some other
memorable Constellation that day happen, then may you safely predict a notable
change of air. And this is confirmed of Cardan 7. Aph. 71. Oportet and exortus
and occasus Heliacos clariorum syderum observare, vix enim fiet, ne sub ortu
Caniculae siccitatis, morbi non vigeant; and sub Arcturi occasu imbres. And
indeed unless the rising and setting of the fixed Stars did operate something,
we should hardly have rain at one time more than another: For (as says the
same Author, 7. Aph. 72.) Incertus est Planetarum contursus.

Observe also, when the Moon or any other of the Planets transits the Angles
of the Worlds Revolution, or the Angles of the new and full Moons: for then be
sure some change of air ensues, according to the nature of those Planets.

Moreover if upon a Conjunction or Opposition of the three superior Planets,
either amongst themselves, or with the three inferiors, the Moon soon after
apply unto them by an opposite or quartile Configuration, be assured of rain,
or winds, according to the nature of the Planets so conjoined or opposed.

Consider too, the Eclipses, Comets, and other general Constitutions, for
oftentimes they augment or mitigate the special: I presume it is not forgotten
yet, what vehement and mighty winds we had in January and February following
the first appearance of the Comet in December 1652. And what incredible tempests
were the two last years, on the coasts of England, France, Spain, Holland and
Germany, in the Atlantique Ocean and Baltique Seas, the Owners of the Navies
thereby scattered, and of the many ships, goods and men that were lost, and
therein miserably perished, have cause to remember.

Neither do ye wholly neglect the Rule of Eudoxus, which Pliny tells of (lib.
2. chapter 47.) viz. That in the space of four years, not only the winds, but all
other tempests (for the most part) return to what they were before. For,
although that Rule of his depends only upon this foundation, [That at the end
of four years next following the Leap-yeare, the Political year agrees
almost with Astronomicall, in respect of time, the rising, setting, and
mediation of the fixed Stars with the Sun; howbeit the motion of the Moon, and
the other Planets be far different:] yet because the power of the Sun and fixed
Stars is so great in stirring up of tempests, and the Moon not far distant
from the place opposite unto that wherein she was 4. years before, it is
probable, that almost the same tempests may return: I confess I never observed
it. But touching the Mansions of the Moon, I do not regard them, as remembering
what Cardan admonishes 7. Aph. 57. Mansiones Lunae ne inspicias, est Lunae vis
a loco suo* a loco in signifero, a Lumine, Planetis, and Fixis.

And these are the Rules I thought fit to communicate, concerning the change of
the Weather.

Of the Diseases this Year.
NOw as touching the Diseases of this year, although it be true, That a dry
year is wholsomer than a moist, yet according to Cardan, 3. Aph. 7.
Praedominante siccitate, Febres acutae generantur: when siccity prevails,
acute Fevers are generated: Excitantur etiam morhi tabisici, Opthalmiae,
Capitis and Articulorum dolores, difficultates Intestinorum, and Urinae. 3.
Aph. 10. Diseases also are excited that lead to Consumptions, Inflammations of
the Eyes, griefs of the Head and Joints, Diseases and pains of the Entralls,
with stoppage of the Urine. More particularly, the Winter shall abound with
Headaches, Coughs, Hoarsness and Rheums, (which according to Gallen) be
symptoms of a full head. The Spring with diseases and death of aged men: The
Summer with Abortive births and dissenteries, or bloody flixes, amongst such as
be of a Phlegmatic complexion: Nevertheless, a Summer colder than usual is very
favorable to them that be melancholic or ch^llerike, though to such this
Autumn will be very obnoxious; for it brings with it dry diseases of the Eyes,
acute and durable Fevers, Compressions of the Breast, and Exuberances of Black
Cholar, yet shall it be beneficial to women, and such as are of a Flegmatike
complexion.

Moreover, I greatly fear that England will this year suffer by the Plague or
Pestilence: Howbeit we cannot (I confess) judge thereof by the face of the
heavens, only as Cardan himself affirms, 2. Aph. 132. and therefore (says
Origanus) Ex Histori^s and experientia petendum erit, quibus periodis Regionem
aliquam inficiat: We must gather from Histories and Experience, in what number
of years it is usually wont to infect any Nation, Country or City; it being
certain, that in some places there are set times and periods in which the
Plague rages: For, the same Origanus tells us; how at Francofurt they have
found by experience, that about every ten years the seeds of the Pestilence
has showed it self: As in 1506. being the first year of their Academy, when
Saturn was in the Lion, in 1516 when he was in Sagittarie, and in 1526. when in
the Ram: the like he proves of other years. Peucerus also informs us, that
whenever Saturn was in the Lion, or in Aquary, the country of Wirtenberge
has been infested with Pestilent diseases, and moreover, that the same have
been intended of exasperated by the Conjunction or Opposition of Mars unto him.
And I remember, it was the observation of our learned Countryman Mr. Cam^den,
That Saturn never passes through a Sign of the Fiery Triplicity, but be
afflicts the City of London with a Plague or Pestilence, or some other
Epidemical disease: And I willingly agree therein with him; for (having
consulted History for the years, in which any great Mortality or Plague
afflicted us) I find* That Saturn at or about the beginning thereof in London
was ever in Aries, Leo, or Sagittary (Signs of the Fiery Trigon.) I will
instance a few for better satisfaction.

He was in Aries when that universal Pestilence first began in London, in the
22. of Edw. 3.

He was in Sagittary, when the sweating sickness began in the first year of
Henry 7. and in Leo when that other sweating sickness began in the 22. of his
Reign.

He was again in Sagittary upon that third sweating sickness in the 9 of Hen.
8. and in Aries at the beginning of the fourth, in the 20. of Hen. 8.

He was also in Sagittary in the 36. of Hen. 8. when that great plague began in
London, which adjourned the Term to St. Albanes.

He was in Leo, when in the 6. of Eliz. the Pestilence began in London after
the return of the Army from Newhaven: And again in Leo in the 36. of her Reign,
whilst that great Plague raged in London, which caused the Term to be again
holden at St. Albanes.

He was in Sagittary in the first year of King James, when that great Plague
began in London, which devoured so many thousands.

And was he not again in Leo in the first of King Charles, when that other great
Plague began in London, which removed the Parliament to Oxford?

Was he not in Sagittary in the eighth, nineth, and tenth years of King Charles,
when the Pestilence again raged in so many parts of England?

What strange and unheard of Pestilential diseases reigned i^ London, Oxford,
and other places of the Narion, during Saturn's progress through Aries, in the
nineteenth and twentieth years of the same King? And have we had other or less
the most part of the three years he was last in Leo?

Many more I could have instanced (for I have them all by me) but I suppose
that these few may satisfy the intelligent Reader, if therein he be but half
so impartial, as I have been curiously inquisitive.

But the chief Celestial Causes (or Signs) threatening the Pestilence (or other
violent diseases) this year, are the Comet in December. 1652. and the great
Eclipse of the Sun in August last, whose point Deficient was within 3. scruples
of the Revolutional degree and minute ascending this year 1655. the dire
effects whereof began on S. Andrews day (the last of November, 1654) this being
the 120th day from that of the Eclipse (agreeable to 4h. 57. the Interval or
space of time betwixt the Sunrise on the second of August, and the middle-time
of the then visible conjunction of the Luminaries:) and continue in force two
whole years, four months, and four days (proportionable to 2. hours, 19 the
time that Eclipse lasted) that is to say, till the Annuntiation of our blessed
Lady commencing the year 1657. according to the Ecclesiastical Account.

Cardanus (Lib. 15. cap. 78. de Rer. var.) enumerates other signs of the
Pestilence, which be very considerable, as the Murrain amongst Cattle, who
(because their mouths are inclined downward) do quicklier attract or draw unto
them the impure vapors of the earth, and are therefore more and sooner
offended, especially those of a moist nature, as sheep, Oxen and swine; for,
Goats and Horses are not so subject thereunto, and much less Dogs. For, when it
continues amongst such creatures, Men are easily infected So likewise an
unspeakable multitude of creeping creatures of Frogs or Flies, are a sign of
future Pestilence. In the 12. year of Rich. 2. and in the month of July,
whilst the King was at Sheene (now called Richmond) there swarmed in his Court
such a multitude of Flies and Gnats, skirmishing one with another, that in the
end they were swept away with brooms by h^aps, and bushels filled with them;
after which (says the Story) there followed a great Mortality.

Moreover, the Plague is signified by Fires wandering in the air, especially if
it be soon after the Spring: so also by a cloudy and scorched summer without
winds: by much rain that is followed with great heat (for this putrifies the
Water, by which the Plague is generated:) By a multitude of Locusts dying, (for
they endanger not a little the corruption of the Air.) And the Countries or
Cities infected do frequently transmit it to their Neighbors, specially those
that lie Westward off them 1 Solet enim Pestis quasi motu Coeli diurno, ab
Orient in Occidentem procedere: The Plague or Pestilence follows the diurne
Motion of the Heavens from East to West. The like is portended by confused
sounds in the Night, by Earthquakes and Inundations, which are both the Causes
and Signs thereof, as I could manifest by History, if I feared not the want of
Paper.

Now (lastly) as touching the Continuance of the Pestilence, Cardan tells us 7.
Aph. 121. Pestis quatuor annis durar^ nunquam potest: The Plague or Pestilence
can never last fully out 4. years; Which Aphorism must be understood not of
diverse places, but of one; Experience teaching us, that it never lasts longer.
For example: the contagious uiniversall Pestilence (before mentioned) in Edw.
3. time, although it began in the East and South parts Ao. 1348. and continued
till 1357. (above 9. years) yet we read not that (in all this time it
continued wholly out 4. years in any one Province, County, or City,
notwithstanding it spread it self all Christendom over. The Reason whereof I
could give you, but that I would avoid tediousness.

Of War and Peace.
FOr War or Peace, I cannot say otherwise, then I have already in my
Hemeroscope^on for the last year 1654, from the Place, Motion, and Nature of
the Comet therein treated of: something I may Enlarge, something I may (in
effect) reiterate: and the rather because my Book for that year has come to
the hands but of a few, being seized on and stifled in the very Birth, by those
malicious Monopolizing Stationers before mentioned, and a simple lying
Counterfeit dispersed by them under my Name, in stead thereof, throughout the
Nation.

Si magnae sint Causae, eviam ab his inter Homines magni effectus provenient,
and a diuturnis dui ^urni, and a feris atque s^vi^ savi atque diri. If there
happen great Causes (says Cardan) great effects shall befall men proceeding
from such Causes. And if those Causes continue long, and with all be fierce and
terrible, so shall the effects be. Great and formidable Causes never wanted
proportionable events to succeed them. Now forasmuch as this Comet appeared in
the 8th Period of the greatest of Climactericall Conjunctions celebrated since
the Creation, can it otherwise be^ then the Forerunner of a mighty Catastrophe
in Humane Affairs? Ney, observe if it introduce not another Administration of
Politic and Religion, in most of the places unto which it was vertical, or
through whose Ascendent it passed. For, although it was not exactly vertical
to any part of England, yet so close it comes to us, as I presume no wiseman
will deny, bus we have felt the furious effects thereof in a more then
ordinary Measure already. To instance the Dissolution of Parliaments, and the
Change of Government here in England, were but needless, it is known (and
wondered at) all the World over. Other Vicissitudes and Changes are approachin^
and can such be, were they ever, without War and Bloodshed? Tristis Cometae
facies, quid ui^i magnorum Principum fata? Color plumbeus, quid ui^i mortalibus
Bella and Pestem denunciat? The sorrowful face of a Comet, what else denounces
it, but the calamities of great Princes: What the leaden, dull and duskie
color thereof but wars and Plagues to Mankind? -- But there are who rail
and exclaim against us for Prognosticating of Wars or Plagues, or Famine, etc.
from the color of Comets, etc. And let them so: Perhaps they may at God
himself (for what is it they dare not do?) who in the 6th. of Rev. describes
unto us by the different colors of Horses; victory, Bloodshed, Famine, and
Death or Pestilence? Peruse the scrutinously learned Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase,
and Notes upon this Chapter: it is full of Mystery. -- Death, mischiefs, and
miseries unto Kings and Princes, etc. For why else did this Comet so hastily
ascend the Chair of Cassiopea, and vanished in that Constellation? (...)
Cassiopea sedens in solio Regali Personas illustres and potentes,
Gubernaculaque Rcipublicae moderantes: Cassiopea sitting in a Royal throne,
denotes Persons that be illustrious and powerful, and such as steer the
Commonwealth: to the first of which Death is portended; to the later
Depression or Destruction, Horrid Treasons and Exiles. And this not always in
the same or the subsequent year (to that wherein the Comet first appeared) but
oftentimes in some proportionable time after, when the Comet cuts the degree
Ascending, or some other of the Hylegiacall places in the Genitures of such
persons.

Again: Changes and Calamities of Empires and Kingdoms, etc. For, seeing that
Comets are not contrary to, but over and above the ordinary Nature of Heaven,
unto what else should they be referred then Empires, which are nearest
thereunto of all greatest Humane things, and in which the welfare of all men
consists? Quod in Coelo novus Cometa discurrens, hoc est in terris novus
aliquis Homo, qui seu Magnitudine* Imperii, seu Armis, seu dogmate, praecipuam
aliquam de se famam concitet, and ut Cometa terrore, sic iste vi illata, seu
alia calamitate magnam generis humani partem exagitet. Forasmuch as there is in
heaven a new Comet wandering, that signifies upon Earth some new or strange
Man, who shall either by the greatness of his Empire, or his Arms, his
determination or decree, raise up some excellent Fame of Himself: and as this
Comet by the Terror thereof, so He by his Power brought with him, or some other
Calamity, shall disquiet and trouble a great part of Mankind* Now who this new
or strange man is, or whether he be (yet) in the number of Mankind, I shall
not take upon me either to discuss or determine. Only this, there is at hand a
Direction of the Sun to the Trine of Jupiter, which I recommend to the judgment
of the learned and honest Astrologer: (for if otherwise; he cannot, or will not
understand it.)

Locus Solis in 13. 30 Locus Jovis in 11. 34 Latitudo ejus M. D..1. 0^ Ascentio
Recta Solis 76. 24 Asc. Recta M. C. 85, 9 Distantia Solis a M. C..8. 45
Declinatio Solis Septentr. supra Terram 22. 54 Circulus Positionis 7. 9
Descentio obliqua Significatoris 108. 34 Descentio obliqua Promissoris 133. 49
Arcus Directionis 25. 15 Tempus Directionis (secundum Naibodoe Institutum) Anni
25. Di. 2^6. Hor. 12 Quod incidit in Annum 1655/6 Ianuar. 11.

Tartareae fugiunt volucres, fugit at^^ Calig^:
Et metus atque Horror, Sole Ori^nte fugit.
A te ( --) Radiis sic pulsae, recedat,
Inque suam fugiat Ge^s inimica Stygem.
Te nascence, Gomes Phoebo, Stella aureae fulfit,
E^^luc^ insolita splenduit aucta Dies.
Vim geminam Flammae praestes, Tu ( --) sa
Ure Hosts! Populum Lumine restituas!
When that ferall and fatal Comet appeared in (...) year 1618. it was the
judgment of Keple^ (a great Mathematician and Astrologer) that because there
were two other Comets preceded it the same year, and the last was dissected or
separated into two parts, Imperium Turci^um dilataci^s futurum, and quasi in
duo dividendum, quorum alterum Orbem Meridionalem, alterum Septentrionalem
esset amplexurum. That the Turkish Empire should be enlarged, and in a manner
divided into two: one of which should comprehend the Southern, the other the
Northern parts of the world. And there is an ancient Prophecy translated out
of the Hebrew into Latin, by one Be^echobus (a learned Bishop) which runs to
this purpose, viz.

Deus tradet nos, etc. God shall deliver us into the hands of Barbarians and
Sarazens, Persia and Cappadocia to captivity and slaughter, Syria He shall
drive into a Wilderness, and the People thereof into Bondage: Cilicia shall
perish by the sword, Greece and Afric be destroyed: the Egyptians and People
(inhabiting the East parts) of Asia shall pay a grievous Tribute. Spain,
France, and Germany shall be devoured by often Wars of the Romans, some shall
be slain, the rest put to flight. And so the sons of Jsmael with their
entrance shall obtain the North, East, South and West. All Nations shall be
under their yoke and tribute: They shall possess and become Lords of all the
rich Ornaments, Gold and Silver of rich Men, and of the sacred Temples: Then
shall there be great Tribulation, and the Passage of the Sarazens shall be from
one Sea to another, and their Country not to be travailed through: Their way
shall be called the way of anguish and sorrow.

Melanchton also writes, that he was told by a Nobleman Ambassador at
Constantinople of a Prophecy among the Turks, which says, they should conquer
Hungary, Poland, and some part of Germany: and that afterward their Empire
should declin^* Neither was Melanchton himself of other opinion, inasmuch as
it was his usual saying, Quando T^^ea veniet in Germaniam, veniet per
Polonia^: When the Turk invade^ Germany, he shall come through Poland: Nor is
it otherwise, if we judge thereof from the Tail of the Comet in 1652. (as
Philip Lantgrave of Hassia did the coming of the Spaniard) which threatens the
mischiefs thereby signified from the North-East; that is, by the way of Poland.

Learned Men (also) there are, who by no contemptible Arguments of Scripture,
prove, That yet there is a notable Calamity to be brought upon the Christians
by means of the Turks, before the last day: And (to go no farther then
common Reason) what signify those notable appearances of them every where,
especially after the sight of this Comet Ao. 165^ in Silesia, and against the
Hungarians, yea (which is more) the Emperor himself? The manifold
preparations and excursions made but the last year against all Defenders of
the Christian name, and particularly the King of Poland: who was then also
invaded by the Muscovites, and thereby made less able to withstand that only
common Enemy of Christendom.

Much more might be added to inculcate the danger Christendom is in, by means
of the Turk pointed at by this Comet^ But a people there is will think I have
writ too much, if at all any thing of this Nature: However let such know, they
may i^ time have more reason to repent their ingratitude to God in neglecting
such Ostenta, then I shall for my reverend regard thereof, and the diligent
search I have made thereafter.

It is recorded of Charles the Great, that (beholding and dreading the
New-starre which presaged and preceded his Death) he was very inquisitive what
it portended. Eginard^^ (who writ his History) returns the words of the
Prophet Jeremy (cap. 10. 2.) for answer, Et a signis Coelorum ne co^sternemi^i,
quia consterna^tur Gentes ab illis. Fear not the Signs of Heaven, though the
Heathen be afraid of such. Unto which the prudent Emperor replies, Ne quidem
metuere ^jusmodi Signa, sed Signorum opisiccm Cau^a^^: He did not indeed fear
any signs of that Nature, but the Maker (Cause,) of the signs. A most wise
saying, and fit to be written in Letters of Gold. For, as Herodotus tells us,
Cum Deus pu^iturus est Gent^m vel Orbem, prodigiis id solet prius significare:
when God is about to punish a Nation, a Country, or City, he is first wont to
give warning thereof by Prodigies. And shall we dare to flight or contemn such
warnings? Medina (also) in the 2d. book of his Paraenesis cap. 1. declares
himself of the same mind, Loquitur Deus (says He) cum hominibus non modo
humana lingua per sacros Vates, ut a peccatis avocentur, et resipiscant, sed
nonnunquam ipsis Elemen^is in Formas and Imagines diversas ad corundem terrorem
compositis* God speaks unto Men, not only with the Tongues of the Holy
Prophets, that they might be reclaimed from sin and amend their lives, but at
sometimes by the Elements themselves disposed into several shapes and images,
thereby to affright and terrify them. And such was the Fiery Spheres seen in
the Air, before the Sabins invaded the Romans. Such were the images and signs
of armed men in the Air at the conflict of the Greeks with the Persians Such
was the sight of the Ravens in the Air before Alexander the Great his passing
from Media into Babylon: such were the Prodigies precurring and concurring the
death of Caesar. And such were all those published by Garibus in his Book de
Phaenomenis ostentis, from the year of Christ 1641. to the year 1650. amongst
which the second Systeme observed in the East Febr. 24. 1642. under the
Constellation of Orion, concerned this Nation* not a little, as has been
found by long and woeful experience.

Johannes Tackius (a German Doctor of Physic, and a learned Astrologer now
living, in his Coeli Anomalon) informs us, that in the Earldom of Arctois,
this Comet extended forth an arm, and brandished a flaming sword, toward the
North and West parts of the Earth.

He says likewise, there were seen in Germany many other Prodigies, and some
he instances, viz. Horrible Winter-Thunders, and the pregnant soil laboring
of a Dropsy, (i. e.) an indundation. The miraculous sudden rising of a
Fountain. A Mountain cleft asunder in the Country of Thuringia (in the
Province of Saxony) and which (one part severing from the other) removed to
another place. In another Territory: Chasmata, or Disruptiones, that is, great
gapings or openings in the Heavens: In some places terrible flames of Fire: Jn
others, Voices were heared in the Air. And that to such as dwell near the
Mountains of Wetteravia, a Star was seen, which showed at the first with
very bright Beams, but soon after assumed the shape of the bowed Moon (but
greater then she is wont to be) casting out Flames from the middle cavity
thereof a sad spectacle, and hurtful to the eyes of those that beheld it. And
that although the face of this mock moon was fiery* yet it cast so clear a
light upon the Earth, that the hedges were perceived to be waxing green. At
last (says he) it took the shape of a ^ithe or sikle destitiute of a handle,
and without any flames; in which manner it vanished. And this (he says
happened on the 12. Calends of Febr. 1653. Luna fer^ silente.

The same Tackius likewise instanceth Letters he received from Persons of
credit, wherein he had notice given of a Rainbow that appeared about the same
time, the night being cloudie, and a great murmuring or noise heard in the
Clouds, which Rainbow was not of sundry colors, as it usually appears, but
exceeding white, and projecting a clear light upon the Country of Alsfeld:
which that it was not the light of the Moon, being so near the time of the New
moon, may be safely, concluded without any more ado. Other Prodigies (he
says) there were every where observed almost throughout all Germany, but that
for brevities sake he omitted them.

Now what else should this Sickle signify, but the excision of Men and
Nations, who in respect of their sius, are as a field of Corno ready for
Harvest? see Rev. 14: v. 14. and so to the end.

What the renting and removing of Mountains, but the Discords of Kingdoms,
and the Minds of great Personages departing or differing one from another? ^ot,
what are Mountains, but Great men, set in the Highest places, and lifting
their Heads above other Mortals?

What else signify Inundations or the Overflowing of Rivers, but the entrance
of strange People into the Land ^ [The waters which thou saw, where the
Whore fitteth, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues. Rev.
17-15* See the learned Hammond's Paraphrase upon the Text.

And* the Appearance of a decolored Rainbow, what is it, but a token of the
wrath of God?]

This Author further tells us, That in Autumn 1652* they had a monstrous
growth of Mast or Acorner in many places of Germany, resembling the Heads and
Teguments of the Turks. That the Comet was attended with great and destructive
Fires in many places, as at Paris, Constantinople, and elsewhere^ so also, that
Jserloo (a town in the County of Marchia) and the Prison at Rudels^ad, with
many other Houses* perished by Fire. I could wish no honest Men had cause to
complain of the like here in England.

But that which I read in him with greatest admiration, is that he reports out
of Gaspar Lib. 3. viz. That in the year 1554. not far from the City of
Harmstad in Transylvania, this following writing was observed in Heaven, in
fair, and legible Characters; I. N. R. I. M. D. L. V. I. I. A. R. E. I. N. E.
N. D. E.

D. I. S. E. S. R. E. I. C. H. S.



And that at Freiburge the same year, on a very fair day, Dn. nostrum Jesum
Christum Iridi insidentem conspectum fuisse: Our Lord Jesus Christ was beheld
sitting upon a Rainebow, as if upon his Tribunal, to denounce the universal
Judgment.

Now what I pray you should such signs (beheld 100, years ago) signify, but
that like as our Fathers before the Flood (whom God had indulged or respited
120. years for their conversion, and doubtlesly no less forewarned by
Prodigies) we might be exhorted to repentance and amendment of li^e, and with
pious lamentation and mourning unto God, divert or extenuate the calamities
approaching upon the World?

But to draw somewhat nearer our own times, it may here be not unworthy our
notice, That within the space of 55. years last past (this present being
included) there have been no fewer then 212. Eclipses of the Luminaries, viz.
125. of the Sun, and 87. of the Moon: whereof 71. we (the Inhabitants of
Europe) the other 141. they of Asia, Africa, India, and about the Antartique
Pole (not without great Horror) have observed: Besides, two great Conjunctions,
two now Stars, and six Comets.

And what signified those Clashings and strange Apparatio^s in the Heavens, and
those gapings of the Clouds Anno 1644. those Parelii or Mock-suns the same and
the 3 following years here it England, but the troubles and changes which have
since followed?

What that irruption of Waters at Amsterdam in the beginning of the year 1650?

What that Inundation at Bilbo in Spain the following year, 1651. but
Populorum et Gentium bostilium adventum? The Inroades of People and Nations
(their Enemies) into those parts? Cardan Lib. 14. de Rer. var. page 703.

What the unseasonable antedated growth of Apples and other Fruits? The
breeding of Rooks three Months before their accustomed time (which my self
can testify upon my own knowledge, three years ago in the Place where I
dwell,) but the too soon and untimely access of mean and unworthy persons
(such were many of the last dissolved Parl.) to Nests or Places of Honor and
Trust: and the abortive issue of their too too prominent Designs and Actions?

What the three years last past, whilst the Heavens were as Brass, and the
Earth as Iron (Deuteronomy. 28. v. 23.) but Inopiam and diram Necessitatem, A Dearth
and dire Necessity to ensue? Card. lib. 11. de Rer. var.

What the warm-blood that rained at Poole in Dorsetshire June 20. 1653. and
those dreadful claps of Winter-Thunder and Lightning, December. 19. 1653. and the
fiery Leamings soon after the following Spring (observed in the Heavens for
several nights together,) but that -- which I must be silent in?

I find recorded in Suetonius a very memorable Accident occasioned by a Flash
of Lightning, which struck out the first Letter of Caesar Augustus (his name)
inscribed upon his Statue: whereupon the Augures divined, Centum solos dies
posthac victurum: That he was to live but just 100. days after, which number
the Numerall Letter ^. betokened: and that it would come to pass, that he
should be registered among the Gods, because AESAR (the residue of the Name C
AESAR (in the Tusean Language) signified God. -- But to proceed,

What else should be portended by that Prodigy seen in March 1654* in the
Northern parts of England, viz. Two Armies encountering one another, but the
Wars, Bloodshed and Slaughter that has and is to succeed within these
Dominions of England and Scotland?

Not fearing to get up, not falling down,
Diverts the thoughts of c^^ming to a Crown:
[Great things, and things incredible are they
That Catalin attempts, to* make His way,
The greatest Evils He can, the blackest Sin,
What not, to make Him more then Catalin?]
Nor shall gray hairs (despairing of success)
Repose in quiet, or adventure less:
Galba's stiffe-Limbs (when aged seventy three,
And buckled up in warlike Armory)
To gain an Empire, stoutly durst withstand
The treacherous bl^wes of Otho's bloody hand.
And lastly, (but not the least to be taken Notice of) what the two prodigious
Swarms of Bees (those Monarchical Creatures) that came murmuring through the
Air, (as if offended at all Governments but their own;) one, the 13. of June
the last year 1654. in London (the Metropolis of England*) where it fixed upon
a man as he passed the streets in Covent Garden: The other (upon the 21. of the
same Month and in the same City) which clung to the end of a Cart* near
Somerset House in the Strand, but what these times will never endure to hear
of?

Such Conjectures (for more they must not now be called) as have anciently been
passed upon the like Prodigies and their Issue, Virgil informs us of, Aeneid.
lib. 7.

Of the State, or Condition of Man.
AS touching the Condition of Man, forasmuch as we daily see some Men (of all
Qualities) to flourish at one time, and at another time to be pressed with
misfortunes and adversities: yet this not always through their own
circumspection or evil doings, but by a celestial cause and inclination (not
obvious to all) I say, that the persons signified by Mars (Lord of the
Revolution) are they that shall this year wear the Feather: namely, the
Princes (and others) ruling by Tyranny and Oppression, new-Conquerors and
Usurpers, Generals of Armies, Colonels, Captains and Commanders, all manner of
Soldiers, Physicians, Apothecaries, Chirurgions, Alchimists, Gunners,
Marshals, Sergeants, Balli^^s, Smiths, Armourers, Cutlers, and the like. See my
worthy friend M. Lilly's Introduction Page 67.

Those signified by Jupiter (Combust of the Sun) shall be (as Haly says) like
to Captives, Quorum vires sunt vinctae and ^gatae, whose strength is in chains
and fetters. Such be even all Judges and Senators (in the worst sense)
Churchmen, Bishops, and Priests (in the best sense:) Also those that call
themselves Ministers or Teachers (of Nonsense:) Chancellors, Counselors and
Civilians; all manner of Lawyers and young Students, etc. But let some of these
be of good cheer -- The time is at hand: and it is but waiting the leisure of
Heaven for every one to have His Right either in Person or by Proxy.

In Anni Revolutionibus, si Luna debilis and peregrina applicuerit infortuniis
Saturno vel Marti potentibus, denotabitur Popul^ infaelicitas, depressio,
impedimentum, in negotits; defectus victus and lucri, multaeque infirmitates
Populum affligent. If in the years Revolution, the Moon being weak and
peregrine apply to either of the unfortunate Planets, Saturn or Mars, in a
powerful Positure: then shall Infelicitie, Depression, Impediment in their
affairs, want of Provision and Gain, be denoted to the People, and many
infirmities will afflict them. And this the rather, because of the Proximity of
the Dragons Tail to the Cuspe Ascending, which has likewise signification
upon the Common People, or general state of the Nation.

For, the Head and Tail of the Dragon, although they be not Stars, but only
Intersections of the Eccliptique, yet have they the virtue of Stars, and
sometimes greater then they. The reason is; because that in these
Intersections, the Eclipses of the Luminaries always happen, by means whereof
they do marvailously contribute in the Changes of things, when joined with the
Planets especially, and accordingly alter the Quality of the year, as has
been observed by long Experience. Therefore not now to be questioned.

Thus far have we briefly touched what I judged necessary or safe to be
taken notice of in this Revolution, and the Causes or Signs preceding and
concerning it: (I know much more may be read in the Figure; but this I Am
resolved shall suffice: for,) now it is high time we reflect upon

The Eclipses 1655.
PTolomy and the Ancients very seldom (or never) gave judgment upon Eclipses,
Great Conjunctious, or the like, before they happened: and that first they had
observed by Instrument the precise times thereof. Nor indeed could they very
well the contrary, wanting the many curious Observations later Ages have made,
and the benefit of those excellent Tables Astronomicall, built upon that
Foundation.

And (to deal heartily) I could wish it were drawn into Custom, to do yet
no otherwise our selves: For, although i^ be true, there can no considerable
error be committed in the Degrees deficient, or the places of great
Conjunctions, and the like* yet as to the true Times of all or any of these,
the hazard is obvious, whilst depending upon Tables requiring Reduction, we
know not how happily we can perform it beforehand: So that erring in the
moment of Eclipses or other Configurations, we cannot but the like in the Times
their Effects begin, and continue. Howbeit, the Effects of the Eclipses this
year but a little concerning us, nor the Guerdon (otherwise) encouraging, it
shall suffice that we rest contented for the present, with what the Tables
afford us.

The Inhabitants of this Earthly Star shall twice, this year, be deprived of
a part of the Sun's Light, by the Moons Interposition. Once, the 27. of January
33. min. after High-Noone: but not to the Quantity of one Digit in any part of
England. To other Regions which incline more to the South-West [in France,
Italy, Spain, the Fortunate Island, etc.] it will appear much greater: and in
the South Latitude of 3. 23. viz. in the Countries that adjoyne upon the South
Coasts of Affrique, the Sun shall be almost totally darkened, in the 1^. 54. of
Aquary.

It threatens (Astrologically) Public Thefts; or what we (modestly) call
Plundering etc. Robberies, Rapes, Earthquakes' in the Countries naturally
subject thereunto) and Famine, with Monopolies, and other ungodly Devises of
pilling, and polling the Over-ridden People.

The second time, on the 23. of July, 24. past one in the Morning, but not
visible in any part of Great Britain, or Ireland, etc. because the Luminaries
are then both under the Earth, and the Latitude of the Moon Southern.

This happens in the 9. 27. of the Lion: which foreshewes the death of a famous
Prince, or (if not) his many Misfortunes: with great Scarcity of Corn and
Grain.

Andreas Argolus (a great Mathematician, and an eminent Astrologer) in his
Ephemeris for this year, gives us two mo^^ Eclipses of the Moon: viz. One the
8th. of July, the other the 7h. of August. But this Noble Author shrewdly
mistook in his Calculation: for there cannot be (this year) any other
Eclipse, either Lunar or Solar, then what I have here mentioned; as time will
manifest.

Thus far I have proceeded in the General Accidents incident to mankind,
etc. from the Comet, Eclipses, Revolution of the World, and other extraordinary
Signs and Causes formerly mentioned. Now, to know the particular persons
concerned therein, and on whom their* Effects shall fall, the Happiliest or
Heaviest, it were requisite that I first knew and perused their respective
Genitures; for, by that means I might discover abundantly, the Rise and Fall of
some who act their parts so eminently upon the Stage of this World; what men or
women shall have Fortune, or Misfortune, peace or discord, gain or less,
comfort or discomfort in their enterprises, and actions, health, or sickness in
their Bodies, and when: In a word, any thing that concerns humane affairs; (for
with those that he divine or supernatural, Astrologers meddle not.) But as I
trouble my self with few Nativities, nor (of those few) consider any, unless
of good and signal concernment, or such as I shall be peculiarly (and upon
good terms) enjoined to look into: so shall I forbear all further enquiries
this year; except after what my self or intimate friends may occasionally
thirst for private satisfaction in. And it is hoped by Me, that what I have here
written will not be found offensive to any body, but those Monopolizing
Stationers, whom nothing will satisfy but my ruin, which I hereby assure them
of, rather then the least parcel of my Propriety: and if yet my Ears must
needs be Horns, it is fit those Fellowe^ should wear them.

Confederates in Mischief quickly fall:
Their Ruine's sure; oft-times Reciprocal.

Deo proteCtorI natI^nIs oMnIs honor and gLorIa.
FINIS.
Books worth buying, as being Learned, Honest, or Useful.
EPhemeris Parliamentaria, or a Faithful Register of the transactions of those
eminent Parliaments in the beginning of K. Charles his reign, containing the
several Speeches, Cases, Arguments of Law, together with the great mysteries
of the Kingdom then in agitation between His Majesty and both Houses.

The Letters of that most excellent Orator Monsieur de Balzac, the 1. 2. 3.
and 4. parts, translated ou: of French into English by Sir Richard Baker, and
others, newly collected into one volume, with a methodicall Table of all the
Letters, both printed for John Williams, and Francis Eglesfield, to be sold at
the Crown and Marigold in S. Paul's Churchyard London.

Calam^s Mensurans: The Measuring Reed: Or, The Standard of Time. By John Swan,
an honest Divine, a learned Mathematician. To be sold by the same John
Williams, at the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard.

The Complete Ambassador, or two Treaties, of the intended Marriage of Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, comprised in Letters of Negotiation, of Sir
Francis Walsingham her Resident in France; together with the answers of the
Lord Burleigh, the Earl of Leicester, Sir Thomas Smith, and others; wherein as
in a clear mirror, may be seen the faces of the Courts of England and France,
as they then stood, with many remarkable passages of State, not at all
mentioned in any History; Faithfully collected by the truly Honorable, Sir
Dudley Diggs Knight, late Master of the Rolls: in folio.

As also, The Ladies Cabinet enlarged and opened, containing many rare secrets,
and rich Ornaments; under 3. heads, of Preserving, Conserving, etc. Physic and
Chirurgeri^; Cookery and Housewifery; with choice exttactions of Waters, Oils,
etc. collected, and practiced, by the late learned Chemist, the Lord Ruthuen,
with Tables to each part: The third Edition, with Additions; both these printed
for, and sold by G. Bedell and T. Collins, at their shop at Middle Temple Gate
in Fleetstreet.

VULGAR ARITHMETIC, (the most exquisite peace extant) made applicable to
Trade, by my Noble Friend, Noah Bridges Esquire; who teaches the Greek,
Latin, and French Tongues; also fair Writing, Arithmetic, Merchants
Accounts, Geometry, Trigonometrie, Algebra, etc. at Putney in the County of
Surrey. Sold by Andrew Crook in S. Paul's Churchyard, and Humphrey Tuckey, over
against ^. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street.

The Queens Closet opened: Incomparable Receipts of Physic, Preserving,
Candying, and Cookery, transcribed from Her Majesty's own Receipt-Book, by W.
M. one of her late Servants.

The Exact Surveyor of Land, showing how to plot all manner of Grounds, and to
prove the truth thereof: and to reduce Irish Land-measure into English, Useful
for all that either purchase or sell. By J. E.

Both to be sold by Nath. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill*


