Gesta Britannorum: OR, A Brief CHRONOLOGY OF THE Actions and Exploits,
Battails, Sieges, Conflicts, and other signal and remarkable Passages, which
have happened in these His Majesty's Dominions, From the Year of CHRIST, 1600.
until the present 1663. Being the Space of 62. complete Years.

Collected by GEO: WHARTON.

-- Alta sedent civilis vulnera dextrae.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for the Company of STATIONERS. 1663.

To the Friendly READERS.
Gentlemen,
HEre follows a Compendious Chronology for 62. Years last past: which (till
the beginning of our late Plus quam civilia Bella) I have faithfully extracted,
either from the private Adversaria of some very curious Observers, or the
public writings of others, exceedingly eminent for their performances. The
rest from the store of my own Collections; wherein yet I had either my own
Eyes, or the joint consent of all Parties, to warrant their Entry.

The Impulsive to which was no other, than have all provident Husbandmen, who
in planting such Trees and Fruits, as they cannot but know (by the slender
stock of their own Nature) they shall never live to taste of, do nevertheless
reckon it Guerdon sufficient, but to think that thereby it is possible, they may
gratify Posterity, and perhaps therefore have grafted on their Memories, the
venerable name of Good-Common-wealths men.

For, the very All I hereby intend, is only an infallible, an impartial
conveyance to Posterity of the following Transactions, in their due Series of
Time. By the Sanguine part whereof, I would not be thought Dolores renovare, to
set our wounds fresh a bleeding, but Triftium Breviarium dulce exhibere, to
present you with a sweet Summary of Britains bitter Calamities.

That there is a kind of voluptuousness in the rehearsal of past miseries, a
Pleasure even in misery it self, my own experience has taught me.

For, although (I know) it cannot but affect any truly honest man's heart, to
reflect on the exquisite Cruelties, unheard of Rapine and Bloodshed common to
us all of these macerated Nations, in so narrow a Period of years, yet
concerns it not a little to recollect, view, and review, as in a Mirror,
with what Providence those Judgments befell us, by what Instruments and
Artifice perpetrated, with what Plots and Impieties acted: how the troubled Sea
of our Misfortunes Ebbed and Flowed, with the various shapes of alternate
Successes: how Impetuous the Storm, how menacing, how dangerous the Waves: how
unequal the Temper of best composed Spirits: how inordinate the Pulse in
soundest Constitutions! Lastly; what, and how wonderful the Vicissitudes and
Changes thence emergent. And if so, then certainly from this bulk of Miseries,
may be sucked some Honey as well as Poison.

Besides, (if Chronology be the Eye of History) I doubt not, but that
hereafter, when by the Moss of Time, our Scarres are overgrown, this
despicable Brat may ( Digito monstrare) point at the Barbarous, bloody Hands,
as well as Envious Times, that gave them.

It Is true, a Micro-Chronicon has attended my Calendar several years together:
but the little room therein allotted, so confined me, that whenever any new
matter came to be added, more or less of the Old was still omitted, it could
not be otherwise: Insomuch that unless all my former Chronical-notes were ever
in readiness, you should one time or other be to seek, for what you desired
most to be informed in.

To prevent which, was the present Collection of all the most considerable of
them, into this one portable Volume: wherein you have also this advantage (for
I presume still it will Prodesse, as well as Delectare,) That whereas the Ae^a
of the most of my former Computations preceded not the unhappy commencement of
the Long Parliament; this agrees with the year 1600. soon after which the Two
Crowns, (of England and Scotland,) were united under the name of Great Britain,
the lamentable Scene in this Tragedy, as the late Murdered King Charles, of
Glorious Memory, the First that Enters.

To conclude, I declare it, that (as there are and ever will be Mistakes and
Defects in the best of Humane actions, especially in works of this Nature, so)
none shall more oblige me than such, who can and will freely by Material
Additions but assist me in the least; or give civil notice of any thing, that
either for want of better Intelligence, or through my own or the Printers
Inadvertency, has escaped Erroneous.

Tower of London, Aug. 11. 1662. GEORGE WHARTON.

Gesta Britannorum.
Anno 1600.
Charles I. (of glorious memory) born at Dunferml. in Scotl.

Essex beheaded.

Anno 1601.
MOnopolies restrained by the Queen.

Spaniards landed in Irel. but forced thence with loss.

Eliz. began.



Anno 1602.
Eliz. dyed, and James the 6. King of Scotl. Proclaimed King of Engl.

Land.

Anno 1603.
James began his journey out of Scotl.

Hinchinbrook nigh Huntington, where the Cambridge Doctors waited on His
Majesty.

London.

Anne, with Prince Henry, and the Lady Elizabeth, (her Son and Daughter) came
to York.

Easton in Northamptonshire.

Land.

Westminster.

Walter Rawleigh condemned.

Watson, Clerk, and Brook executed.

Hampton Court.

Millemanus Petition for Reformation presented to his Majesty.

Anno 1604.


Rippon Petitioned Qu. Anne for a College General to be established there.

She condescended to afford them Her Favor, and best furtherance ^herein.

His Majesty founded ^ Dean and Chapter of 7. Prebends, allowing them 247 l.
per an. out of His own Crown-Land, for their maintenance.



Charles the First, (now D. of A^bany) being newly recovered of a Fever) was
brought to Windsor.



York.

And this year King James enstyled K. of Great Britain.

Anno 1605.


Powder Treason discovered, and

Everard Digby, Robert Winter, John Grant, Thoma^ Bates, therefore executed, at
the Westend of S Paul's.

Thomas Winter, Ambrose Rookwood, Robert Keys, and Guy Faux; in the
Parliamentyard at Westminster.

Oath of Allegiance first devised and administered.

Anno 1606.
HEnry Garnet executed in S. Paul's Churchyard, for the Powder Treason.



Christianus King of Denmark, first arrived in Engl.

Departed thence:

Northumberland, and the Lords Mordant and Sturton censured in the Star Chamber.

Anno 1607.
AN Insurrection in Northamptonshire, Warwicksh. and Leicestershire about
Enclosures; whereof Captain Pouch was the Ring leader.

A great Inundation in Som^^setshire and Gloucestershire.

James made ^ree of the Cloathworkers.

Thomas Garnet (a Je^uit) executed at Tyburn.

Henry made free of the Merchant-Taylors.

The Bible began to be Translated into English, by command of K. James.

Anno 1608.
THomas E. of Dorset (L. Treasurer) dyed suddenly.

The New-Exchange built.

St. Edmunds Bury burnt.

Virginia planted.

Anno 1609.
James) Britains Burse.



The making of Alum first brought t^ perfection in England* by Sir John
Burchier.

Silk-wormes first brought into England

King James laid the first stone of Chelsey College.

A League with France.

Anno 1610.
Chelsey College, appointed by K. James.

Henry created Pr. of Wales.



Anno 1611.
Robert Carre created Viscount Rochester.

Gold enhansed.

The Lant-grave of Hesse visited the King.

James writ to the States against Con^^dus Vorstius.

Set forth a Declaration against him, commanded his Books to be publicly burnt
at St. Paul's Cross London, and in both the Universities.

Bartholemew Legate condemned for an Ar^ian Heretic by the Consistory, and
afterward (by a Significavit) delivered up to the secular power.

James gave order to the Broad Seal, to direct the Writ de Haeretico c^mburendo
to the Sheriffs of London for burning the aforesaid L^gat.



Richard Sutton, the Founder of the Charter House Hospital, dyed this year.

The New Translation of the Bible finished.

Anno 1612.
EDward Wightman (of Burton upon Trent) burnt at Litchfield for an Heretic.

Sanquer (a Scot) executed for contriving the murder of John Turner a master of
F^nce.

Frederick Prince Palate. of the Rhine arrived in Engl

Henry sickned.

James's Hor 7.30. P. M.



Elizabeth sister to Charles I. married to Frederick V. Pr. Elector Palatine at
Whitehall.

Plantation in Ireland by the Companies of London.

Anno 1613.


Dorchester consumed with fire.

Robert Carre created E. of Somerset.

The Lady Francis Howard divorced from the Earl of Essex, and afterward
married to the E. Somerset.

This year also was the Globe-play-house burnt.

The Artillery Company revived.

Wadh. College in Oxf. founded.

A Parliament suddenly called, soon dissolved.

Anno 1614.




S^ratford upon A^on consumed with f^^e.

The New River br^ught to London by Sir H. Middleton.

Moo^^fields fashioned unto W^^ks.

Ignoramus acted before the King at Cam^ridge.

Anno ^615.
Arab^lla died in the Tower

Sir Thomas Overbury poisoned; for which the E. of Somerset and his Lady were
condemned; Sir G^rva E^vis and diverse other suffered.

Anno 16^6.
Charles created Pr. of Wales, etc.

Marcus Antonius d Dominis, Archbishop of Spalato, came into England.

James began his progress into Scotland.

Anno 16^7
J^mes returned from Scotland.

William Butle^ (the great Physician o^ Camb^idge) dyed.

Anno 1618.


Walter Raleigh beheaded.

Dort.

Bainbridg presaging the death of Queen Anne.

Anno 1619.
Dort ended.

Anne dyed at Hampton Court.

Anno 1620.
BErna^d Calvert of Andover performed his journey from Southw to Call^ce and
back again in (this) one day.

Peace with France.

Anno 1621.
Fra. Bacon L. Chancellor was outed his Office, and committed to the Tower.

George Abbot Archbishop of Cant. casually killed the Lord Zouch's keeper in
Bramshill Park in Hantsh.

Anno 1622.
Protestants) was therefore commanded to depart the Kingdom within 20. days.

English Treated with the Spaniard touching the Restitution of the Palatinate.

Anno 1623.
Charles Imbarq'd for Spain.









James took up Arms for recovery o^ the Palatinate.

Anno 1624.


Count Mansfield (coming into England) suffered shipwreck.

Amboyna's bloody cruelty.

King James came last at Cambridg, where he lodged in Trinity Col.

Anno 1625.
James dyed at Theobalds, and (his Son) P. Charles Proclaimed K. by Sir Edward
Zouch then Knight Marshall.

A great Plague in Land.

James's Corpse removed to Denmark-house in Land:

Paris.



James Inhum'd at Westminster.

Montague was questioned.













Michaelmas Term translated to Reading in Berks, because of the sickness in
Land.

Gade's voyage.

Charles I. Crowned at Westminster.



E. Arundell committed to the Tower.

League with Denmark, Suevia and the States, against Spain.

York-house about Arminian Tenets.



Bishop of Lincoln lost his Keepers place.

Anno 1626.
Bristol.



Sir Dudly Diggs and Sir John Eliot committed to the Tower, but soon released.
E. Arundell discharged also.

Arundell confined to his house. E. Bristol committed to the Tower.



Tilly.



Bourdeaux.

Sir Fra. Bacon dyed:

Anno 1627.
The.

Manifesto.

The.

Martins Fort besieged.

Sir John Buroughs slain.

Martins Fort relieved by the Marshall of Schomberg.

Duke raised his siege, and was defeated by the French, many gallant Eng^ish
being slain, and most of the honor lost which we got at Ag^ncourt.



The Rochellers (besieged by the Duke of Guise) craved aid of the English.

Sir W^lliam Balfore (a Scot) and Da^bier (^ Dutchman) sent by the King into
the Netherlands, to buy and transport 1000. horse into Engl.



Comm^ssions for Loan and Excise Outlawed and cancelled.

Archbishop Abbo^ suspended from his Jurisdiction for casual Homicide.

October. 20. and afterwa^d by Proclamation, till Jan. 20. ^ollowing.

Anno 1628.
Denbigh set ^ail for Relief of Rochel.

Attempted it but in vain.



S^oad (an English Garrison) rendered to the Imperialist.

Lamb (so called by a Ch^rientismus) murdered in the streets by the Rabb^e.

Mai^waring ce^sured.

Lambs d^at^) 6000^.



M^inwaring sub^itted himself at bot^ ^h^ Bars in P^^l. upon which much of hi^
censure was ^emitted.

October. fol^owing.

Earl Marlborough removed from the place of Lord Treasurer, and Sir Richard
Weston preferred in his stead.

Sir Thomas Wentworth dignifyed with a Barony.

Another Fleet designed for Rochell, commanded by the Duke.

John Felton) at Portsmouth.

Portsmouth commanded by the E. Lindsey.



Rochells relief attempted but in vain, by reason of contrary winds.

Rochell surrendered to the French, and ordered to be called (from the Queen
mother) Borgo Maria.

Parliament adjourned till 20. Jan. following

John Felton executed at Tyburn, whence his body was transmitted to Portsmouth,
and there hung in chains.

A Proclamation against Richard Smith Bishop of Chalcedon, who thereupon fled
into France.

March 2.



Charles born, baptized, and dyed.

Ten of the members of the late Parliament committed.

Anno 1629.
Mar Huntly and others (proclaimed Rebels there) fled into England.





They refused appearance, and denied that Courts Jurisdiction over offenses
done in Parl.



Ashhurst, and Capt. Stamford (the D^servant and famous wrastler) were
afterward executed.

Bedford, Sommerset and Clare with others committed.

Anno 1630.
CHarles II born. Sir Robert Anstruther Ambassador into Germany.

Charles II. baptized.

Doctor Leighton (a Scot) censured in the Star Chamber for his seditious
pamphlet entitled, Sions Plea.



Essex married to Mrs. Pawlet.

Anno 1631.




Sir Gyles Allington censured.

Mary born.

Anno 1632.
SAint Paul's Church in London began to be repaired.

Buildings in Covent Garden begun by the E. Bedford.



Some Tumults in Ireland, but soon reduced.

Anno 1633.
CHarles I began his progress into Scotland.







Laud Translated from London to Canterbury.

James Duke of York born.







Anno 1634.
ATtorney General Noy projected the design of ship money.



A Parliament called in Irel.

The Scots began their plots against the King.

Anno 1635.




Elizabeth born.



The Illustrious Prince Rupert arrived at London.

Bishop of London made L. Treasurer.

Commotions began about Ceremonies of the Church.

Anno 1636.


Charles I. required the Judges opinions touching the legality of ship money,
whereupon no fewer then twelve gave their opinions for it.

Anne born.

Anno 1637.
Rupert Imbarqued for Holland.

Book of Liturgy sent into Scotl.













Scots entered into a Covenant.

Anno 1638.
MAr Hamilton sent to appease the tumults in Scotl.

Dalkeith as Commissioner.

Charles I. his Declaration (against Innovations in Religion) sent to Hamilton.





Charles I. his Declaration discharging the Service Book, etc.



Maria de medicis (Qu. mother of France) came into Engl.





Argyle declared for the Covenanters.

Hamilton returned into England.

Covenanters began to arm.

Solicited France for aid.

Anno 1639.
CHarles I. marched against the Scotch Covenanters.

Declared against their seditious actions.







Dissolved by His Majesty.

Charles I. encamped within two miles o^ Berwick, in view of the Scotch army.

Mar Hamil. at Forth with the English Fleet







Charles I. returned to Theobalds from His Northern Exped^tion.

Whitehall.

E. Traquare sent Commissioner into Scotl.

Scotland, which abolished Episcopacy, High Commission, Liturgy, and Book ^f
Canons.



L. Deputy of Ireland arrived in Engl.

Created E. of Strafford.









K. ordered their repair.

Their Reparation hindered by the Covenanters.

Charles I. declared his Resolution for a Parl* in case of the Scotch
Rebellion; moved for by E. Strafford, Archbishop Laud, and Hamilton.

Scotch Parliamen Prorogued till June 2. 1640.

Traquare returned into Engl.

Four Commissioners sent from the Scots to the King.

E. Strafford imbarqued for Irel. where he summoned a Parl.

Straf. returned into Engl.

Scotch Commissioners secured.

Anno 1640.


Finch.

E. Lowden accused for subscribing it.





A new Oath imposed upon them.



Edinburgh.

Hen. D. of Glocest. born.

Charles I. set forth toward the North.

Newborn Fight, and Newcastle deserted.



Durham the like.

Charles I. set up his standard at York.



Commissioners (consisting of 8. Earls and 8. Barons) appointed t^ Treat with
the like number of Scots, who met at Rippon.





cujus sceleris non ^nvenit aetas nomen.



Straf. impeached o^ Treason, and commit^ed to the Black rod.

100000l. voted for the Scots.

Lincoln enlarged, and two daye^ after sat in the House of Lords.



House of Lords denied the E. Strafford Bail and Counsel.

Strafford committed to the Tower.





Windebanck fled into France.



The Judges questioned.

Anne dyed at Richmond.





William Laud Archbishop of Cant. sequestered and committed to the Black Rod.

Wren accused of High Treason.

Finch made his defense, yet voted a Traitor.





Finch.

Strafford read in the House of Commons.





dear Brethren of Scotland.



Orange propounded.





Strafford made his defense before the Lords House, and remanded to the Tower.







Straf. Trial began

Anno 1641.


Straffords Trial ended. After which the Commons H^ debat^d the bill of
Attainde^ against him, and voted him Guilty of H. Treason, which was Lea^nedly
opposed by the Lord George D^gby (now Earl of Bristol) and others.

Orange cam^ to London.

Strafford vote^ the second time guilty of High Treason by the Commons.

Bill of attainder rea^ in the House of Lord where many opposed it.





Mary married to the Pr. of Orange, a^ Whitehall.





Strafford voted the second time Guilty of H. Treason by the H. of Lords.





Some of the Bishops advised him to pass the Bills.

The Earl himself desired him, to sign the Bill for his execution.



Strafford beheaded.



October. 20.















Land.



Winds.





































Anno 1642.
John Hotham denied the K. entrance into Hull, and was therefore proclaimed a
Traitor.



Ess^x voted General.



Ess^x divided his men into Regiments.

Necessitated to take up Arms.

















Aubigney interred at Oxford.

Ralph Hopton.

Gervas Holles. Saltash taken for the K.

Leeds stormed and taken by the Parliam.









Brook slain at Litchf.









Spencer, then Earl of Northampton, was unfortunately slain.





Anno 1643.
Hugh Cholmley declared for the King.

Scarbo^ough delivered by Brown Bushel.

Fairfax routed on Bramham moor.



Rupert entered Litchfield with his forces.

Essex sat down before Reading.

Litchfield Close surrendered to P. Rupert.





Essex.



M^ddl^^ncheny Town-field.

to the Parliament.

Monmouth the like.





Rob. Yeomans, and

Mr. Geo. Boucher murd. at Bristol.









Hampden received his mort. wound.

Newcastle.



Hampden dyed.









Tompkins and Mr. Challoner murd.



John Hotham and his Son brought prisoners to London.



Burl. house ta by the P.











Weymouth and Melcome submitted.







Newcastle.





Essex. Waller rout. at Winch.

Manchester.



Essex to Hungerford.





Essex to London.



Hartford installed Chancellor of Oxf.





Daniel Kniveton murd.



John Pym dyed.

Hopton.









Mar Hamilt. sent prisoner to Pendennis.

Will. Waller.





Thomas Byron dyed in Oxford.

Thomas Byron buried in Christ-Church











Anno 1644.


John Steward dyed at Abington.















Charles Blunt slain.



Essex's army passed Charwell.



Waller to pursue the King.

Gage.

Henrietta born at Exeter.

Waller defeated at Cropready Bridge.









Essex fled to Plym.



Colon^l G^g^.



Northh^mpton, and Sir H. Gage.





Charles to Oxford.

G^ge Knighted.

Kings army rendevouzed on Burlingt. green.







Basing siege raised.

Parabelii (or 3. Sun^) seen in London.



John Hotham sentenced to be beheaded.

Alex. Care^ beheaded.

Arthur Aston discharged from the Government of Oxf. and Col. Will Leg placed
in his stead.

John Banks dyed.

Tho. Fairfax voted General of the Parl. forces.

Hotham the Son Beh

Hotham the Fath Beh



H. Gage was slain.

Maurice for Worc.

Hor. 5.39. P. M.

Macquire (an Irish Baron) exec. at Tyburn.



Shrewsbury surprised by the Parl.

Rossit^r defeated near Melton-Mowbray.



Charles set forth from Oxf. toward the West

October. 10.

P. Charles came to Brist*

For preservati^n of His Majesty's Person, should be left out in Sir Tho.
Fairfax's Commission.

Anno 1645.


Massey defeated at Ledbury.

^o the Parl.

Windebank sentenced for delivering the same.



















Genesis Fairf^x raised hi^ siege there.

























Montross defeated the Scotch army in Kilsieth field, near Glasc. in Sco.

Fairfax sat down before Bristol.



Littleton died*

And the same evening the K. came to Oxford.





Gardner slain.



Montross defeated at Phillip-haugh in Scotl.

























Westchester the like.









Foy quitted by the K.

Ber. Steward interred in Christ-Church Oxon.

Hopton accepted of conditions for disbanding his army.

L. Astly defeated.

Anno 1646.




Corse castle taken by storm and stratagem.



Michaells mount yielded.

Ruperts Troops disbanded.

Dun^ter castle deliv.





Fair^.













Isis (at Oxf.) diverted and turned into the old Channel.

Carnarvon Town and Castle surrend.





Oxford.





Yorks servants discharged.





Henrietta conveyed from Oatlands.





Pendennis yielded.

Conway. tak. by storm.

Engl. broken and defaced.



Essex dyed.



Essex's Funeral.



Fairfax triumphantly to Land.





Charles a prisoner to Holmby.

Anno 1647.
Joyce, and carried to Childersley.















Thence to Stoke:













Burleigh executed at Winchest.

Jenkins brough^ to the Chancery Bar, where he denied the power of the Court.

Anno 1648.
James's.

Marmad. Langdale.

Philip Musgrave.

Nic: Kemish slain:



Tenby surrend.





Norwich at Bow and Stratf. with his forces



Fra. L. V^llars slain at Kingston.

H^milton defeated.



Sir Chapter Lucas shot t^ death

Sir Geo: Lysle shot t^ death



Rainsborough slain.















Pitcher murd. in S. Paul's Church^y^rd.







Vot. that Writs should no longer ^un in the Kings name.



Brown prisoner to Windsor Castle.

King brought from Windsor to S. James's.







Charles sentenced to death by Bradshaw, that ^old Traitor.

C^arls II (His ^ld^st Son, and the un^oubted Heir to these Dominions) b^gan
His reign over us, which God grant Long and Prosperous.

Capel escaped from the Tower: But



Hamilton, E. Norw. E. Holland, the L. Capel, and Sir J. Ow^n.

Charles II. proclaimed in Scotl.

and dangerous.

The Kingly Office unnecessary and burthen^





Charles I. inhum'd at Windsor.

Hamilton, etc.



Holland sent for.

Charles II. procl. in Irel



Warwick displaced



Hamilton, E. Norw. E. Holland, L. Capel, and Sir J. Owen sentenced.

Earl of Norwich, and Sir J. Owen reprieved.

Hamilton, E. Holland and L. Capel Murd*



Anno 1649.
DOrislaus slain in Holland.

Andrews proclaimed the Act for a^lolishing Kingly Government.



Anno 1650.
Montross defeated in Scotl.







Levens murdered.



Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, anno Libertatis Anglia restitutae primo, Anno
1648. Jan. 30.

His Statute at the West end of St. Paul's thrown down and defaced also.

Eusebius Andrews brought to his trial.



Andrews murd.



Elizabeth dyed at Carisbrook.



Benson murdered.

Orange dyed.

Orange delivered of a Son.

Charles II. Crowned at Shoon in Scotl.

Hen. Hyde murd.

Orange his Funeral.

Anno 1651.
BRown Bushel murd.



Worc. Love and Gibbon murdered on Tower Hill.







Darby murdered at Bolton.



Sir Tim. Fetherstonbaugh murdered at Chester.







Anno 1652.


Massey escaped from the Tower.





Blake worsted by the Dutch.



English Fleet (in the Levant Seas) worsted by the Dutch.

Anno 1653.


Van Trump was therein slain, and their Fleet worsted.

Anno 1654.


Anno 1655.
JAmes (the noble Duke of Lenox dyed.



Anno 1656.
Thomas ebbed and flowe^ twice in three hours.

Anno 1657.
Harvey dyed.





Anno 1658.
Hen. Slingsby, and Dr. Huet murdered on Tower Hill.

Cromwell dyed.

Richard Cromwell (his eldest Son) Proclaimed.





Anno 1659.










George Boothe, whos^ Forces surprised Ch^ster, Liverpole, Ch^^ Castle and some
other places.

Lambert advanced with Forces toward the North, for suppressing them.

Desborough toward the West.

Geo: Boothe Routed

Geo: Boo^he taken prisoner.



Mord^^^ (now L. Mordant) and others suspected to be engaged with Sir Geo:
Boothe.





Fleetwood nominated Commander in chief.

Monck signified (by Letters) his dislike thereof, and advanced with his Forces
into Engl*

Bradsham (that bloody Villain) dyed.

Lambert advanced with Forces toward him.

Hewson, Olivers cobling Lord.





James.

They pardoned Lambert and all others that should submit to them by the 9. of
Jan. upon which his Forces left him, and dispersed themselves, and he submitted
to the Rump.

Gen: Monck arrived at Newcastle, after which he was Petitioned by all the
Counties through which he marched, (if not all the Counties in Engl.) for a
Free Parliament.

Morley made Lieutenant of the Tower.

Geo. Boothe and his adherents ordered to be sold.

Genesis Monk at North ^llerto^





The Rump approved of his marching into Engl.

Thomas Scot and Luk Robinson ordered to go and meet Genesis Mon^ ^o congratulate
his successes.



The army quartered in the City.

Monk.

Monk at Nottingham.



Genesis Monk at Leicester, where the Rump two Comm^ssioners me^ him.

Monk at St. Albanes.









Wren enlarged

April, 1660.

Anno 1660.
LAmbert escaped out of the Tower.



Lambert p^oclaimed Traitor.

Ingoldsby.





Declaration, to both Houses, and to the L General Monck, presented by Sir
John Greenvill, after which there followed many wholesome Resolves in order to
His Majesty's sp^edy return to Hi^ people, who throughout the City and Suburbs
expressed their joy by Bonfires, Bells, and Ordnance, from the Tower.

Mordant and Sir John Greenvill.

Montague and the whole Fleet (upon Reading His Majesty's gracious Letter and
Declaration to them) unanimously submitted.

Quinque Pasch. being May 8.

Charles I. his Statue set up again in Guildhall-yard.

Justices and Sheriffs, etc. (in Office April 25 1660.) c^^tinued, and to
exerci^^ their Office in the Kings name.



His Majesty left Breda.

Hague.



Monck at Rochester

His Majesty with Hi^ two Brothers (the Dukes of York and Gloucester) imbarqued
for Engl.

Dover, and from thence went t^ Canterbury.

Rochester.

White Hall, and this evening crowned the Solemnity o^ the day with incredibl^
Demonstrations of jo^ for His Majesty's s^ miraculous Restaurati^u.

the House of Lords, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester took their places
there.



William O^ghtred.

York, before the 1. of May last past) Recalled.

John Robinson (that constant Royallist) made Lieutenant of the Tower.



Hen. Terne Commander of his Majesty's ship the Hamptshire, being assaulted by
six Spanish Men-of-warre, fought them nine hours, and (although desperately
wounded h^mself) brought off his Convoy. The first tha^ lost blood in His
Majesty's service after his happy Restoration.

John L. Culpeper, master of the Rolls, etc.

George Monck created ^y His Majesty D. of A^berm^rle, etc. in considerat^on of
those signal services performed by him in Restoring His Sacred Majesty, and
with him the three Kingdoms to that Tranquillity and Happiness they now enjoy.



Albans began his journey toward France.

Edward Montague (who commanded the Fleet at His Majest^es Restoration) being
for that and other Eminent services, created by His Majesty Earl of Sandwich,
etc. took his place also in the House o^ Peers.

Mar of Ormond the like, as E of Brecknock.

D^nmark.

Spain Proclaimed.

Nov. 6.

An Act for di^banding the army, etc.

Prince de Lig^e (Ambassador from Spain) came to Land.

Henry Duke of Gloucester (that unparalled Prince) departed this life.

York went to meet their Illustrious Sister, Mary Princess of Orange.

Land.





Tho Harrison (one of them) executed (according to law) at Charingcrosse.

John Carew (another) executed in the same place and manner.

John Cook and Hugh Peter's (that Bell-weather of Sedition) executed in the
same place and manner.

Tho. Scot, Gregory Clement, Ad^^^ Scroope, and John Jones, executed in the
same place and manner.

Dan. Axtell the like, at Tyburn. Francis Hacker hanged only at Tyburn also.



Henrietta (Her Daugher) and Pr. Edward, Brother to the Prince Elector Palatine.



Mary Pr. of Aurange dyed.

Mary Pr. of Aurange interred in Henry the sevenths Chapel.



Henrietta Maria, began their journey for France.

Venner and his Phanatick proselytes rebelled, but dispersed.

Arthur Haslerig dy^d in the Tower.

Venner their seditious Ring leader.

Venner and 19. more of them arr^igned.

Venner and Hodgkin hanged, and quartered in Coleman-street, Oxman and
Pritchard hanged at Wood-street end in Cheap side.





Qu. mother, and Her Highness the Pr. Henrietta Maria Imbarqued for France.

O. Cromwell, H. oIreton, and J. Bradsh^w drawn upon sledges to Tyburn, and
being pulled out of their Coffins, there hanged at the several Angles of that
Tripletree till Sun set Then taken down, beheaded, and their loathsome Truncks
thrown into a deep hole under the Gallows. Their heads were afterward set up
on Poles on the top of Westminster Hall.

Mazarin dyed.

Anno 1661.


Charles the Second Crowned at Westminster.



Parl. began in Irel.

Eliz. Q. of Bohemia arrived at Land.



Argyle received his sentence.

Edenb. for high Treason.

Chapter Lucas and Sir G^^ ^^sl^ (savagely m^rder'd in cold blood at Colchester,
August 28 ^648.) most honou^ably there Celebrated.

Richard Brown.

Mounson, Sir H. Mi'dmay, and Mr. Robert Wallop, brought ^o the Bar of the H.
and there sentenced to b^ drawn (like th^mselves) upon sledges, with ^opes
about their necks, from the Tower to Tyburn

Prin recanted his Sundry Reasons, etc. and the House remitted his offense.



Nov. ^0. following*









October. 10. following.

Swedish Ambass^dor landed at Tower wharf, where the French and Spanish
Ambassadors so hotly con^end^d for Precedence.

John Berw^k Doctor in Divinity, Elected Dean of St. Paul's

Paul's Churchyard, into Aldermanbury and Broad-street.

James D. of Ormond (that truly honorable and most constan^ly Loyal Personage)
made L. Lieutenant of Irel.

John James arraigned for sedition and Treason



l. Voted for ^upply of His Majesty's present occasions.



John Jam^s sentence^ to be drawn, hanged and quartered.

Henry Earl of St Albanes (L. Ambassador Extraordinary from Hi^ Majesty to the
Crow^ ^f France) came to Whi^ehall.

P^n^ington only by reason ^f h^s bodily infirmitie^ ^xcepted) were brough^ ^o
the bar of the House^ and Lam^ert, Vane, an^ the rest lately sent away ordered
to be sent so back to the Tower.

Praise-God B^r^bon^, and Sam. Moyer committed to the Tower for treasonable
designs and practices.

Wildman, Mr (sometimes Sir) James Harrington, Mr. (sometime Alderman) Ireton,
and Major Haynes committed also to the Tower for the like crimes.

Rob. Holmes committed to the Tower by order of the Council.

John James hanged, ^rawn, and quartered ^t Tyburn.

Charles Compton, departed this life.

Salmon committed to the Tower for treasonable designs and practices.

Brian L. Bishop of Chester.

Peterborough, took his leave at Wh^te-hall, to go for Tanger.

Tanger, Imbarqued at Dunkirk.

Jan. 7. next following.

Hen. Covent^y Esquire (Son to the late famous Tho L. Coventrey, L. Keeper of the
Great Seal of Engl.) sworn one of the Grooms of His M^jesties Bedchamber.

Frederick L. Cornwallis Treasurer of H^s Majesty's household departed this life.

Hen Vane and Mr. John Lambert ordered to be sent for back to the Tower of
Land. And

Marquess Durrazzo Ambassador extraordinary from the Commonwealth of Genoa
entered Land.



Munson, Sir Henry Mildmay and Mr. Robert ^allop, all drawn from ^he Tower of
Land. on sledges with Ropes about their necks to Tyburn, and (having there
threaded the Triple-Tree) back again in like manner to the Tower.

Pete^burgh took Possession of Tanger in Africa for His Majesty.

Genoa Ambassador took his leave of His Majesty.



Eliz. Queen of Bohemia departed this life.



Engl. Sir John Stawell.

Christopher L. Hatton (that most Pious and Faith^ul Counselor to His late
Majesty) sworn one of His Majesty's m^st honorable Privy Counsel, made
Governor of Guernsey durante vita: and the Reversion of that Government most
deservedly Conferred on his Son.

Miles Corbet, John Okey, and John Barkstead brought Prisoner to the Tower of
Land. having been taken at Delft not many days before by the care and
faithfulness of Sir Geo: Downing

Geo: Withers removed from Newgate to the Tower for his wonted Practice of
Seditious Libelling.

Anno 1662.
Will. Compton, Master General of His Majesty's ordnance, (Son to that
magnanimous Hero Spencer late E of Northampton, who so gallantly sacrifice^
his life in defense of His late Majesty at the ^attel on Hopton Heath Anno
1642.) sworn of H^s Majesty's most honorable Privy Council

Katherine Imba^qued for Engl. in the Royal Charles

Miles Co^b^t, John Ok^y and John Ba^kstead re^eived ^he sentence due to Rebels
and Traitors to their Sovereign Lord and King.



Algier by Sir John Lawson.

Ru^e^^ Geo: Duke of Buckingh. and John L. Midl^ton ^worn of His Maj^sties most
honorable Privy Council.

James's.

Katherine landed at Portsmouth.

Land. for Joy thereof.

Feb. 18. next following.

Portsmouth.

Charles the II. and Donna Catherina Infanta of Portugal publicly married by
Gilbert L. Bishop of Land. at Portsmouth.

Albans set sail for Calis, to wait upon the Queen Mother into Engl.



Land. with the chief Officers of the City came to Hampt: Court, and tend^ed
their Duty to the Queens Majesty.

Hen. Vane Indicted and found guilty of High Treason.

J. Lambert the like.

Lambert his execution Respited by Order from His Majesty, because of his
Prudent and Civil Demeanor at his Trial*

Hen. Vane beheaded on Tower Hill.

E. Peterburgh (being returned from Tanger) came to Hampton Court.

London and Westminster.

Lisbon.

Ormond L. Lieutenant of Ireland, began his journey toward that Kingdom.

Irel.

Queen Mother landed at Greenwich.

Katherine first to Whitehall with great Triumph.

Exit Jack-Presbyter. Nevertheless



Mr. William Lenthall dyed very penitently.

John Robinson Knight and Baronet, His Majesty's Lieutenant of the Tower
unanimously chosen Lord Mayor of London, for the following year.

Welfare fair London for this happy choice!
The Snake's untwisted at her thundering voice.
The Royal Tower and Town (both in such hands)
Despise all Factious and Fanatic Bands.
He dreads no Plots, nor dreameth of Surprise:
Naught startles him like Presbyterian Lies.
FINIS.

