A TREATISE OF THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY, WHEREIN ITS Rise and Progress Are
Historically Considered.

(...)

Epiphan. Haeres. XLIII. in init. LONDON: Printed by H. Clark, for James
Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

THE PREFACE.
AMong the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, there are such which
have neither any foundation nor show of Antiquity, but are the mere Inventions
of latter ignorant and barbarous Ages: Others, which obtained not indeed in the
Ancient Church, but arose from the degeneracy of some Belief, or Corruptiin of
some Practice received and used by the Ancient Christians. Of the first sort
are Transubstantiation, Half-Communion, Supremacy of the Pope, Worship of
Images, and the like groundless Opinions and Practices, which the Ancient
Church never thought of, much less admitted. Of the latter kind are Invocation
of Saints, which arose from an extraordinary Veneration paid to the Memory and
Relics of blessed Saints and Martyrs, degenerating in latter Ages into
downright Superstition and Impiety. Purgatory, advanced from a Belief generally
received in the Ancient Church, that the Souls of the departed are not admitted
to the beatisical Vision before the Day of Judgment, into a foolish Opinion of
a Fictitious Place of Torment, which might receive them in that interval of
time: And Infallibility of Councils, raised from an external Submission of
ancient Christians to their Decrees, into an Obligation of yielding an internal
Assent to their Definitions. The Beginnings and Rise of the Errors of the
sirst sort, are unknown and uncertain, as being founded in dark and ignorant
Ages; whose Actions are now no less obscure, than were then their Notions. But
the latter sort admit a more clear and more certain Knowledge: Their several
Steps, Progresses and Gradations, may without much difficulty be traced out,
and exposed to the view of all Mankind; as has been often done by the Divines
of the Reformed Churches.

But the most eminent Instance of the latter kind, is the Imposition of
Celibacy in the Church of Rome, which arose from an immoderate affection and
reverence of Virginity in the Ancient Universal Church, and Example of many
particular Churches. Upon which account, I may boldly affirm, that the
Imposition of Celibacy has greater advantages to recommend and justify it to
the World, than any other erroneous Practice or Opinion of the Church of Rome
whatsoever. Many others indeed proceeded from the Imitation and Advancement of
some Ancient Doctrine or Practice: But then that Practice degenerated into
Abuse, and that Doctrine was advanced into Error. Whereas the Imposition of
Celibacy can plead not only the Countenance and Resemblance of Ancient Times,
but produce the Examples and Authorities of Popes, Councils and Doctors, who
anciently imposed Celibacy upon the Clergy, and urged the Imposition of it with
no less fervor, than it is at this day continued in the Church of Rome.

However Celibacy be confirmed by these Great Authorities, and recommended by
this peculiar advantage of Undoubted Antiquity, few Divines of our Church have
handled this Controversy, or endeavored to show the inclusiveness of those
Authorities, and weakness of this Antiquity. Some few have produced Authorities
of the Ancient Writers in Favor of the contrary Practice; or in treating of
other Arguments have briefly touched of it; and all have passed it over in a
few Words, as a Matter of less Moment. At least none, that I know of, have
handled this Controversy in a particular Treatise; nor shown the Beginnings,
Occasions, Advances and Success of the Imposition of Celibacy, in the several
Ages of the Church. This Enquiry has been omitted, not because Truth is
wanting to our Side, or the whole Stream of Antiquity runs contrary to us: but
because this is one of the less Momentous Controversies; and our Clergy, whose
peculiar Glory it is to be less solicitous of their Interest even in things
lawful and indifferent, declined the Controversy; least in pleading for the
lawfulness of Marriage, and they should be thought by a Censorious World to
plead for their own Passions and Inclinations, and perhaps Practice too.

To supply this. Defect is the Design of this Treatise, to vindicate the
injured Cause of Marriage, and show that the Ancient Esteem of Celibacy was
neither Rational nor Universal, that both Ancient and Modern Imposition of it
is unlawful, and that the Ancient use of it, is no reasonable nor necessary
President of the Modern Practice of it, to show the Occasions of that Esteem
and Beginnings of this Imposition; and carry the History of the Celibacy, and
Marriage of the Clergy through the several Ages of the Church. This I have here
undertaken, and as I hope, in some measure performed; perhaps with so much the
better Success, because induced by no Prejudices, nor pleading for any peculiar
Interests. For the Reader may be assured, that the Author of this Treatise has
neither experienced the Pleasures of Marriage, nor has the Honor to be a
Priest of the Church of England.

It may not be amiss, because our Adversaries commonly object to us falsifying
of Citations, and borrowing them from one another; (a Crime which the Romish
Priests of England are truly guilty of, perhaps therein to be excused, because
the badness of their Cause requires the former, and their own Ignorance
necessitates the latter) (...) farther, to advertise the Reader, that of all
the Citations which he shall find in this Treatise, no one is taken up at the
second hand for the first 1300. years, and after that time no more than three
Writers cited upon the Faith of others, viz. Alvarus Pelagius, Panormitan, and
Polydor Virgil, whose Writings I had not then by me, nor had any opportunity to
consult.

A TREATISE OF THE CELIBACY OF THE CLERGY. WHEREIN Its Rise and Progress are
Historically Considered.
VIrginity is a thing so plausible, and if true so venerable; so countenanced
by Antiquity, and admired by the Unthinking Multitude; so highly subservient to
the Secular Interest, and outward Grandeur of the Clergy: That among all the
Artifices wherewith the Church of Rome upholds a sinking and decaying Cause, it
is no wonder, if She more especially make use of this. It might justly deserve
our reverence, and excite our Emulation, if her Clergy made good their glorious
Pretenses of Virginity by a real and unspotted Chastity: But since when we
departed from the Church of Rome, we resumed that ancient privilege of
Mankind, of believing our Senses; since Reason and Revelation assures us, that
so great a part of Mankind cannot, and Experience demonstrates that it does not
enjoy a Perfection so extraordinary; since an enforced Virtue, and servile
Piety, is neither acceptable to God, nor venerable to Men: We slight their
Virginity, because imposed; and do not believe it, because we do not see it.
The Plea indeed of Antiquity is not only specious, but in some measure true. In
the Ancient Church, they retained an infinite esteem and veneration for
Virginity: Many extolled it as the glory, and some made it even the business of
Christianity; it was an unusual abstinence from lawful and permitted Pleasures,
that procured them Admiration from the Heathen, and Honor from their
Fellow Christians. But then they really performed, what they generously
undertook: Their Celibacy was no less chaste than voluntary; their Piety was
fully adequate to their Zeal, and both perhaps in some things greater than
their Knowledge. Yet should we even do violence to our Reason, and force our
Nature to imitate the Examples, and receive the Doctrine of those great and
holy Persons, if either their Consent or their Practice had been universal. But
on the contrary, the Imposition of it has been condemned by the most Famous
Councils, and Greatest Writers, never used in the Eastern Church, not
introduced in the Western till almost two hundred years after Christ, enjoined
but in some few Provinces of that, and even in those not universally practiced;
and all this without doing injury to the sacred Bond of Marriage, and ever
leaving open a refuge for incontinent Persons. Not so the Church of Rome, which
not only advises, but imposes Celibacy; in many of the Clergy have dissolved
Marriage, in all descrieth it as Heresy, defines it to be worse than
Fornication, and to none allows a remedy for Incontinency. To demonstate the
Injustice of the Church of Rome herein, and her departure from the Doctrine and
Practice of the Ancient Church, shall be the Subject of this present Treatise.

It is no small presumption of Error, when the Defenders of any Opinion agree
not in the merits of the Cause they undertake. In the Church of Rome, there are
Four Opinions about the Celibacy of the Clergy: The first, that it is of Divine
Right, Instituted and Commanded by God. So In 4. Disp. 2^. Qu. 2.
Jo. Major, de contin. sacerd. c. 4.
Clichtovaeus, and de dogmatic. charact. l. 2.
Turrian teach, that God has forbidden Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons (whom we shall hereafter comprehend under the general Name of the
Clergy, unless when we manifestly distinguish them) to Marry, or use their
Wives already married. The second is that of Bellarmine, Valentia, Vasquez,
Becanus, Aquinas, and the far greater part of the Roman Divines, that it is not
properly of Divine, but of Apostolic Right, as being instituted by the
Apostles, and ever since constantly and invariably practiced by the Church;
that a Vow of Continence should be annexed to Holy Orders; and consequently,
that Marriage thereby becomes unlawful to the Clergy, without a Dispensation.
The third, without any respect to Divine or Apostolical Institution and
Practice of the Ancient Church, whether they be here had or not, thinks it
sufficient that the Church has Power to impose a Vow of Continence upon the
Clergy, and that such a Vow being once taken, all use of Marriage is become
unlawful, and subsequent Contracts invalid. This seems to be the Opinion of
many of the Canonists, and the Council of Sess. 24. Can. 9.
Trent; which ventured to define no more than this, that Clergymen or Regulars,
after a solemn profession of Continence, cannot Marry, or if they do, that
their Marriage is unlawful. Lastly, the more moderate Divines maintain, that it
is neither of Divine nor Apostolical Right, but deriveth all its Obligation
from Ecclesiastical Institution; which as well as the Vow annexed to it, will
cease to oblige, as soon as the Church shall please; although in the mean while
she has sufficient reason to continue her Institution. Against these Opinions,
I shall prove these Four Propositions. I. Celibacy of the Clergy was not
instituted either by Christ or his Apostles. II. It has nothing excellent in
it, and brings no real advantage to the Church or to the Christian Religion.
III. The Imposition of it upon any Order of Men, is unjust, and contrary to the
Law of God. IV. It was never universally imposed or practsed in the Ancient
Church.


I. First then, that Celibacy was not instituted either by Christ o^ his
Apostles. By Celibacy, we mean a perpetual abstinence from the use of the
Nuptial Bed in those already Married, and not Contracting of Marriage in single
Persons, after taking of Holy Orders, or making a Vow of Chastity. That such
Celibacy was not at all enjoined by Christ, nor by the Apostles, as of Divine
Right, is sufficiently proved from the dissent of our Adversaries herein. For
it is the received Opinion of the Church of Rome, that nothing can be a matter
of Faith, such as this would be, if it had been commanded by Christ; which is
doubted and disputed of among the Doctors of the Church. Now this is denied by
the Maintainers of the Second and Fourth Opinions: As for the Third, that
according to the usual artifice of the latter Popish Councils, is so obscurely
proposed, that it neither directly favors nor opposes it. Besides, neither
Scripture or Tradition can be offered for this claim of Divine Institution. The
former is not so much as pretended to, or if it be, we shall examine it
afterward: The latter cannot justly be, since none but an universal Tradition
of all past and present Ages is sufficient to convey down a matter of Faith;
whereas here the greatest part even of the present Church deny it. But I will
not insist upon disproving this, as well because it is disowned by the greatest
part of our Adversaries, as because all the Arguments to be produced against
the other Opinions, will with much more force be valid against this. I will
only observe, that if this Opinion be either false or uncertain, the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome is wholly overthrown; since many Popes and
Councils in the Eleventh Age, determined the Celibacy of the Clergy to be of
Divine Institution, and the lawfulness of their Marriage to be downright
Heresy.

Controv. Tmo. Il. l. 1. 18, 19.
Bellarmine therefore, and with him the more Learned of the Church of Rome,
decline this Plea, and assign to this Celibacy a bare Institution of the
Apostles, acting herein without any particular or express Commission from our
Lord, but by them prescribed and advised as meritorious itself, and convenient
to the Church; punctually herein followed and obeyed by the Church in all Ages.
Whether the Church, and more especially the Ancient, did conform its discipline
to this pretended Institution of the Apostles, we shall enquire hereafter; and
by proving that it did not, prove also that the Apostles made no such
Institution: Since the Primitive Church cannot be supposed to have immediately
degenerated from the Instructions and Admonitions of her Founders and great
Doctors. But to pass by that, I observe, that whether the Apostles instituted
Celibacy, and ordained a Vow of Continency to be annexed to Holy Orders, is a
Question of Fact, and consequently cannot be infallibly determined by the
Church; but must be by them clearly proved, either from express Texts of
Scripture, or an universal and invariable Tradition. That there is no such
Tradition, we shall show in some measure presently, and more largely hereafter.
For Scripture, we desire to know, where those plain Admonitions of Celibacy to
the Clergy are to be found. For we are in no ways obliged to prove the
Negative; Marriage being not forbidden to the Clergy by the Moral Law, and
therefore to be esteemed Lawful to them, till a manifest Prohibition shall be
produced. Bellarmine indeed urges that Precept of the Apostie, Tit. 1. 8. that
a Bishop be sober and temperate, (...). But, not to say that Bellarmine herein
forsakes his own Principle, and makes Ceiibacy to be of Divine Institution,
since St. Paul speaks this, 1 Cor. 7. 25.
not only as one that had obtained Mercy of the Lord to be Faithful, but also,
Tit. 1. 1.
as an Apostle of Jesus Christ: These words serve not the purpose, as designing
neither Continence nor Chastity, but Abstinence from Drunkenness and
Coveteousness, and are opposed the first to (...), and the second to (...) in
the former Verse. Or if we should with In Ioc.
St. Chrysostom interpret (...) in this place, of an universal Temperance, we
must remember, that such a Temperance is nothing else but a Moderation in the
use of all lawful Pleasures. (...), says Strom. l. 3.
Clemens Alex. (...). He is universally Temperate, not who abstaineth from all
things, but who moderately uses those things, which he judges lawful. Or
Lastly, if we should against all reason interpret (...) Chaste and Continent:
Yet the Fathers unanimously teach, that these Virtues are not incompatible with
the moderate use of Marriage, as we shall prove hereafter. In the mean while
let it be observed, that Act. 24. 25.
St. Paul reasoned before Faelix (...), of Righteousness and Temperance; and
yet cannot be supposed to have forbidden him the embraces of his Wife. As for
Bellarmine's other Text, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that warreth, entangleth himself
with the affairs of this life: It is sufficient these words are addressed not
only to Clergymen, but to all Christians. Whether a Married state does
necessarily entangle Persons in the Affairs of this Life, more then Celibacy,
shall be enquired hereafter.

We come now to that great Storehouse of the Assertors of Celibacy, the VII
Chap. of the 1 Epist. to the Corinthians: And here a few Observations might
have prevented many Mistakes; as first, That the Apostle was so far from
imposing Virginity upon any Order of Men, that he seems to have foreseen the
danger of such Mistakes, and therefore to have inserted these Cautions of them:
Ver. 6.
But I speak this by permission, and not of command. Ver. 23.
Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men. Ver. 35.
And this I speak for your own profit, not that I may cast a snare upon you.
Secondly, To those who are already Married, he advises not a total, but a
temporary Abstinence: Ver. 5.
Defraud not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that you may
give yourselves to fasting and prayer, and come together again, that Satan
tempt you not for your incontinency. Ver. 20.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. Ver. 27.
Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed. Thirdly, That of those who
are already Unmarried, he advises Virginity to them only who have the Gift of
Continence. Ver. 37.
Nevertheless he that stands steadfast in his own heart, having no necessity,
but has power over his own will, and has so decreed in his heart, that he
will keep his virgin, he does well. Ver. 8, 9.
I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them if they abide
even as I. But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to
marry than to burn. Fourthly, That this advice of Virginity was given not for
the attainment of any greater merit, but merely for reasons of Convenience, and
the urgent Necessities of those times. Ver. 26.
I suppose therefore that this is good for the present distress. Ver. 28, 29.
Such shall have trouble in the flesh, but I spare you. But this I say,
brethren, the time is short. Ver. 32.
But I would have you without carefulness. Fifthly, That this Advice was
directed not only to the Clergy, but to all Christians in general. The Apostle
no where restrains his discourse to the former, but all along addresseth
himself to the whole multitude of Believers. If any one of these Observations
be true, as they are all most certainly, then no advantage can be drawn out of
this Chapter for the cause of Celibacy, now in Controversy.

But our Adversaries are not only destitute of Reason and Revelation in favor
of this Opinion, but we have also many strong Arguments against it. For to pass
by the greatest of all, the Silence of Scripture, and the contrary Practice of
Antiquity; the first manifested already, the latter to be proved hereafter:
Many of the Greatest Divines of the Roman Church do expressly confess, that the
Celibacy of the Clergy is neither of Divine nor Apostolical Institution. This
all those Popes, Councils and Doctors, hereafter to be produced, who allow the
Marriage of Priests in the Greek Church to be lawful, must have held, unless
they be supposed to have betrayed the Doctrine and Tradition of the Church. All
those Divines likewise who have admitted or allowed a total abrogation of the
Laws of Celibacy, could not believe it to have a Divine or Apostolical
Original. However I shall produce some few, who expreslly denied it. As first,
the Canon Law, which may be looked upon as the sense of the whole Church of
Rome for some Ages. So then Gratian, Copula sacerdotalis nec legali, nec
e^angelica vel apostolica auihoritate prohibe^ur, ecclesiastica ^amen lege
peni^us interdicitur, Cause. 26. qu. 2. c. 1.
The Marriage of Priests is Forbidden neither by Legal, nor Evangelical, nor
Apostolical Authority; and yet is wholly Forbidden by the Ecclesiastical Law.
And, Ecclesia post apos^olica cons^ituta quaedam consilia perfectionis addidit,
utpote de continentia ministrorum, Cause. 35. qu. 1. in fin.
The Church, after the Apostolical Institutions, has added some counsels of
Perfection, as that of the Continence of Ministers. Constituo sacerdotum
caelibatum non esse juris divini, aut quoquam modo ab Apostolis pr^ceptum, sed
tantum cons^ltum. -- Si nulla lex, aut nulla essent vota monastica, liceret
sacerdotibus aut monachis nube^e, Council. Tom. XIV. p. 1551.
Joannes, a Ludegna, in a Speech made in the Council of Trent, and Printed
among the Acts of that Council, determines and largely proves, that the
Celibacy of the Clergy is neither of Divine Right, nor in any sense commanded
by the Apostles, but only advised by them: And that, if there was no Laws of
the Church, or Monastic Vows, Priests or Monks might lawfully Marry.

Besides, if the Opinion of those Divines be true, who maintain that Christ
superadded no Evangelical Counsels to the Moral Law; Celibacy can be neither of
Divine nor Apostolical Institution, unless we suppose that the Apostles
immediately adulterated that most pure and simple Religion, which they had
received from their Master. And indeed, this seems highly rational, most
consonant to the Honor of God, and adapted to the Nature of Man. That Religion
was most be^itting the Wisdom of the Deity to prescribe for the last and most
perfect Rule of Mankind, which was most pure and simple: And this seems to have
been the great End of Christ's coming into the World, to free us from the
bondage of the Ceremonial Law, and estate us in that perfect liberty, if not of
Will, yet at least as to the objects of Choice, in which we were at first
Created: whereas had he prescribed a perpetual Continence to all those who aim
an Perfection, as is pretended, without altering their Natures at the same
time, and by an extraordinary Miracle, enduing all, who desire it, with the
Gift of Continence: This alone would have debased the excellency of his
Religion; and have been an Imposition more grievous and burthensom, more
difficult and intolerable, than all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Mosaic
Law. And then in respect of us, it became the Wisdom and Goodness of our
Supreme Lawgiver, to give us a Religion, not as to Angels or Spiritual Beings,
but in a way most consentaneous to our Natures, and and agreeing to our
Imperfections. That can neither refine, nor perfect our Nature, which is
Preternatural; and if in this Mortal State, while enchained in a Body,
surrounded with frailties, and endued with passions, we affect the
impassibility of Angels, and the perfection of Spirits, we may be called
Ambitious, but I know not whether Pious.

But this is not all. The Apostle not only forbids not, but even expressly
permits Marriage to the Clergy. For laying down the necessary Qualification
of a Bishop, the highest and most perfect Degree of the Clergy, he proposes
this as as one, that 1 Timothy 3. 2, 4.
he be blameless, the husband of one wife. One that rules well his own house,
having his children in subjection, with all gravity. Of a Priest, that Tit. 1.
6.
he be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children. Of a
Deacon, that 1 Timothy 3. 12.
he be the husband of one wife, ruling his children, and his own house well:
And further, looks upon it as no small mark and testimony of the ability and
worthiness of the Candidates of any of these Sacred Offices, if they have ruled
their own Houses well, and by their precepts and examples taught their Wives
and Children the practices of all Virtues. And in another place, 1 Cor. 2. 2.
to avoid Fornication, allows to every Man his own Wife, makes no exceptions.
That is a lamentable refuge of some, who seek to elude the force of the former
places, by pretending that the Apostle means here by the word (...), he who
has been the Husband of one Wife, but is not now, being become a Widdower, or
at least unable for the exercises of the Bed. For besides that, the Tim. 3. 2.
Apostle gives Rules for the virtuous Carriage of Deacons Wives; besides that,
this Interpretation is uncertain, which is sufficient to our purpose, that it
is contrary to the sense of all Mankind, and the Vulgar acceptance of the word
Husband, that it seems repugnant to the following Precept, of ruling their
Houses well, and is certainly repugnant to the Explication of the Fathers: The
Practice of the Ancient Church do manifestly evince the falseness of it,
wherein it cannot be denied many Persons were admitted to Sacred Orders, who
had Wives then alive and dwelling with them. And in the Apostolical
Constitutions, the Apostles are introduced thus speaking, (...). lib. 6. cap.
17.
We have ordered, that a Bishop, Priest and Deacon, be the Husband of one Wife,
whether their Wives be alive, or whether they be dead.

To pass by therefore this unreasonable Interpretation, there are three other
Explications of this word (...), all of them backed with great Reasons and
Authorities. First, That the Apostle means no more thereby, than that the
Persons admitted into Holy Orders, should not have two wives at the same time.
Secondly, That he should not have successively two Wives, much less three or
four, one after the death of another. Thirdly, That he should not have two
Wives living at the same time, one Married after the Divorce of another. The
first Interpretation was generally followed by the Greek, the second by the
Latin Fathers; although Hom. X. in 1 Ep. ad Tim. and Hom. II. in Ep. ad Tit.
St. Chrysostom espouseth both, and Ep. 83. ad Oceanum, comm. in Ioc. l. 1.
adv. Jovin.
St. Hierom in so many several places admits all three. Which of them be the
truest, is of no great moment to the present business, since each of them
destroy the Opinion of our Adversaries, and leave to the Clergy a liberty of
Marriage. However, because the second Interpretation, if admitted, may in some
measure prejudice that Principle which we shall hereafter lay down, that all
cannot contain, and that God and Nature has provided no other remedy for
incontinent Persons, than Marriage, which consequently must be reiterated as
often as necessity shall require: I shall say somewhat to it, and oppose first,
the contrary Opinion of all the Greek Fathers. Secondly, the Authority of the
whole Catholic Church, who admitted Bigamist Bishops and Priests, or those who
had married one Wife after the death of another, and that in great numbers, as
we shall hereafter occasionally demonstrate; so that if the Apostle had
forbidden all such to be admitted into these Sacred Offices, the Universal
Church had erred in a matter of the greatest moment. Thirdly, the third
Interpretation seems far more consonant to Reason, the Analogy of the
Scripture, and the Circumstances of those Times. For that ought not to exclude
any Man from this Sacred Dignity, which is so far from being a Crime, that in
many cases it becomes Necessary; and if Marriage be allowed to all Men, to
avoid Fornication, if any Man's Wife dies, before either his years, or the
peculiar favor of God has reprieved him from the temptations of Incontinence;
that Man, although a Priest or Bishop, may, withouthe least injury to the
strictest Rules of Piety or Religion, contract a second Marriage. Bigamy in
him, as Comm. in 1 Ep. ad Tim. cap. 3.
Theodoret invincibly argues, will become involuntary, and conseqnently not
derogate from his character either of Priest or Christian. Besides, it was an
abuse very frequent in that Age, both among the Jews and Gentiles, to Divorce
their Wives upon the slightest occasions, or the least discontent; an abuse
which argued in all an inconstant and unjust, and in many a lustful Mind; and
therefore although committed before their Conversion, rendered such Persons
unworthy of this Sacred Character. This Interpretation therefore is embraced by
Theodoret, who, after he had affirmed the same Opinion to be maintained by many
Others, and asserted it by many Reasons, concludes thus, (...). Loc. c. 14.
They seem to me to be in the right, who hold, that the Apostle here teaches
him to be worthy of Episcopal Ordination, who lives chastely with one only
Wife. For he has not herein rejected second Marriages, which he has in many
cases even commanded to be contracted. Considering then these and such like
Arguments, I receive the Interpretation of these Writers. St. Chrysostom also
in Hom. 2. in Ep. ad Tit.
one place explains it the same way. And St. Hierom, when freed from the
passion of Disputing against Jovinian, inclined to the same Opinion. For
proposing Comm. in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1. Tom. IX p. 245
the Examples of two Bishops, whereof the one shall have lost his Wife in his
youth, and overcome by the necessity of the flesh shall marry another, bury her
after some time, and ever after contain; the other shall enjoy the company of
but one Wife, even till his death: He determines the former to be the better,
more chaste, and more continent. And in another place, Ep. 83. ad Oceanum. in
init.
resolving Oceanus his Question, Whether Carterius, a Spanish Bishop, who had
married one Wife before, and a second after Baptism, had not thereby violated
the Apostle's Injunction, of a Bishop's being the Husband of one Wife? He
pronounces, That he had not. Lastly, The contrary Opinion is built upon a
false Foundation. For, not to say that it was first set on foot by Tertullian,
after he was become a Montanist, and from him received by the Latin Fathers; it
relyeth wholly upon these Two false Suppositions. First, That according to any
other sense, the Precept of the Apostle would have been unnecessary, the Roman
Laws never allowing Polygamy. Secondly, That the Apostle makes use of the same
Phrase, when he commands 1 Timothy 5. 9.
a Widow to be chosen, the wife of one husband, (...), although no Laws or
civilized Nations ever permitted Women to have two Husbands at the same time.
But both these Reasons vanish, when opposed to our Third Interpretation. For
Divorce was permitted by the Roman as well as Jewish Laws, for many other
causes besides that of Adultery, which alone was allowed by Christ: So that
whosoever had put away his Wife for any other cause, and married another, might
truly be said to have two Wives: and any Woman, who had married again after
such an unlawful Divorce, had truly two Husbands.

Having thus refuted the pretense of Divine or Apostolical Institution, I
proceed to the Second Proposition, That the Celibacy of the Clergy has nothing
excellent in itself, and produces no real Advantage either to the Church or
the Christian Religion, beyond Marriage. And here I am not ignorant, what
Panegyricks and Encomiums of Virginity have been composed by many of the
Ancients, and almost all the Writers of the Barbarous Ages. This was a large
field for them, wherein to display their Rhetoric, a subject so specious in
itself, and glorious in its Title, that it is no wonder it has been the Theme
of so many luxuriant Wits; many of which have little less than Deify'd it, and
equaled its Merits to the collection of all other Christian Virtues. I shall
not here undertake, nor is it necessary to make an harangue upon the Praises of
Marriage, much less to depress the Excellencies of the Virgin state; it will
suffice to show the weakness and invalidity of the contrary Arguments, and
thereby reduce both Marriage and Virginity to that Equilibrium, wherein Nature
first placed them, and our Savior left them.

First then, I observe, That this extraordinary affection and reverence of
Virginity, was first started and introduced by a Heretic, Tertullian; who
deceived by the Enthusiasms of Montanus, endeavored to resine the Christian
Religion, and advance it into a System of Angelick Perfection. He led the way
to the Writers of the Latin Church; who receiving this prejudice from him,
propagated it in some measure among the Greeks, although it never was by them
embraced with that zeal, and pursued with that fervor, which always
accompanied it in the Western Church. Secondly, it may be observed, That this
extravagant veneration of Virginity prevailed proportionably to the decay of
Learning, and increase of Ignorance in all Ages. The Reputation of Celibacy was
ever then highest, when Knowledge was at its lowest ebb. Particularly in the
Tenth and Eleventh Ages, the most scandalous and barbarous periods of Time,
that ever the Church waded through; when Learning seemed banished out of the
whole World, then Celibacy triumphed every where, and was looked upon as the
Consummation of all Virtues; Marriage of the Clergy decried and abolished, and
more Monasteries founded, than in all the Ages either before or since. Thirdly,
This Opinion was first produced, and ever after advanced and maintained by a
gross Mistake; that there is somewhat of impurity or sinfulness in the use of
Marriage, and that Chastity cannot be retained in a Married state.

That the Admirers of Celibacy among the Ancients were guilty of this Mistake,
we shall have hereafter occasion to observe; and although the more Learned
Writers of the Church of Rome are ashamed of such a Proposition, yet do they
constantly fall back and recurr to it, when they assign the Reasons of imposing
Celibacy upon the Clergy. So Bellarmine, after he had before disowned it, when
his purpose requires it, doubts not to say, In actu vero conjugii negari non
potest, quin admixta sit quaedam impuritas and pollutio, non quae peccatum sit:
sed quae ex peccato tamen nata sit. Controv. Tom. II. lib. 1. cap. 19.
It cannot be denied, that some impurity and pollution intervenes in the act of
Marriage; not what is a sin, but what arises from sin. If by this Pollution
and Impurity, he means a Natural one, we grant it; but then that affects not
the Soul, nor depreciates the worth of Marriage: if a Moral one, that will
indeed be truly and properly a Sin; but this he dares not say. Besides, his
Distinction of a Sin, and a Consequence of a Sin, is wholly vain. For, if in
all Use of Marriage, the effect of a Sin interveneth, then cannot Marriage be
used without some precedent sin: A Proposition so false and erroneous, that the
Use of Marriage was intended for our first Parents in the state of Innocence,
and would have been practiced to this very day, had they never fallen. Nay
farther, whether fallen or not fallen, it was their Duty to make use of
Marriage for the Propagation of Mankind; and even for some Ages after the
Creation, it was so far from being meritorious, that it was Unlawful to
continue Virgins. But if by the antecedent sin, which produces this Pollution
in the Act of Marriage; Bellarmine means, only the Original depravity of our
Nature: if it be a Necessary effect of this depravity, then God cannot in
Justice, and will not in Mercy impute it to us; if it be not a Necessary effect
of it, then Marriage may be used without it, and his Proposition will fall to
the ground.

However, because this ever was, and is still the great Engine of the Patrons
of Virginity, wherewith they gained Applause in the World, and blinded the eyes
of unwary People, it will not be amiss to clear this matter a little further,
and demonstrate that a true and proper Chastity and Continence may be observed
in Marriage; which will also overthrow most of the Authorities produced out of
the Writings of the more moderate and disinteressed Fathers, as insinuating no
more than an Advice of Chastity in the Use of Marriage. If this Proposition
seems either harsh or like a Paradox, it is only because we are unacquainted
with it, and our judgment anticipated by false notions of Chastity, which
consists as well in a moderate and well regulated Use of Matrimonial Acts, as
in a total Abstinence from them; nay, the former will always be a Virtue, the
latter sometimes a Sin, (as in the Infancy of the Creation, and if one married
Person totally abstaineth without the consent of the other) and in most cases
but a thing indifferent, and then only a Virtue, when it administers occasion
and opportunity to a greater good, than is the Propagation of Mankind, and
virtuous Education of Children for the future Service of God. Such Cases did
often happen in the Beginning of Christianity, and the Times of Persecution;
but in the calm and flourishing estate of the Church, are more rarely to be
found. So that in all others, Chastity in the notion of a total Abstinence, is
a thing wholly indifferent, even although such Abstinence should be true and
perfect. But alas! the far greater part of Mankind are not capable of such an
Abstinence, which consists not only in the preserving the Body from actual
Pollution and unlawful Pleasures, for that may be a matter of Necessity as well
as Choice, and is common to thousands who shall never see the Glories of
Heaven; but also in refraining the Mind from the desires, and even the thoughts
of Uncleanness, and preventing the circles of an inward Fire. Such a Man may
truly be said to retain a pure and unspotted Virginity; but then I doubt, that
at the same time he will be the Phoenix of his Age. And then after all, if he
want either Abilities or a Will to employ himself in Virtue and the Service of
God, to greater advantage than he could have done in a Married state, his
Celibacy will be devoid of all merit, and become wholly indifferent.

On the other side, the conservation of a true Chastity, is both possible and
easy in Marriage; if it be not frequent, that arises from the corruption of
Mankind, not any desicience or imperfection of Marriage. Now that Chastity and
Continence may be here found and practiced, the Apostle assures us, when he
says, Heb. 13. 4.
(...), Marriage is honorable in all men, and the bed uudefiled, or
impolluted, directly contrary to Bellarmine's Proposition. The Apostle is
herein followed by almost all the Fathers. I shall producce some of them: and
first the Great Paphnutius, who when in the Council of Nice the Celibacy of the
Clergy was proposed, under the pretense of advancing Chastity, (...). Socrat.
l. 1. c. 11.
pronounced the embraces of a lawful Wife to be Chastity, and was therein
applauded by the whole Council. So Clemens Alex. (...). Strom. l. 3.
Just Men under the Old Law, begat Children, Marrying (or using Marriage)
incontinently. (...). Ibid.
What, may we not use Marriage continently? and not go about to dissolve that,
which God has joined. (...) Ibid.
He also who marries for the sake of Procreation of Children, ought to use
continence, so as not to lust even after his own Wife, whom he ought to love,
begetting Children with an honest and chaste will. Lactantius, Sed sicut
faeraina castitatis vinculis obligata est, ne aliud concupiscat, ita vir eadem
legetenetur, quo (quia) Deus and viro uxorem unius corporis compage solidavit.
Epitome, cap. 8.
As the Woman is bound by the Laws of Chastity, to lust after no other Object;
so is the Husband bound by the same Law; because God has joined the Husband to
his Wife, by the union of one Body. St. Ambrose, Sunt ergo virginitatis
praemia, sunt merita viduitatis, est etiam conjugali pudicitiae locus. Epist
82. ad Vercell.
Virginity has its rewards, Widdowhood its merits; there is also place for
conjugal Chastity. The Qui unius uxoris virum (...) esse, non quo exortem
excludat conjugii, nam hoc supra legem praecepti est: sed ut conjugali
castimonia servet ablutionis suae gratiam. Ibid. ante Med.
Apostle commands a Bishop to be the Husband of one Wife; not that he excludes
an unmarried Man, for that is not the sense of his Precept, but that by
conjugal Chastity he may preserve the grace given him in Baptism.

If then Chastity is common both to Marriage and Celibacy, the latter can have
no intrinsic Excellence beyond the former: Nor indeed do our more judicious
Adversaries pretend to that. Few are guilty of so foul an error, except some
zealous and unlearned Monks. The Excellence therefore of it is wholly
accidental, and consists only in affording greater advantages of Piety,
Knowledge, and Beneficence, than Marriage. This therefore is next to be
examined. Let us then consider any one as a Man, a Christian, and a Priest. If
in the first quality, as a Member and Citizen of Mankind, that estate will
deserve the pre-eminence, which is most communicative of good, and beneficial
to the whole Universe. The benefits of Celibacy are indirect, accidental, and
rare; those of Marriage, direct, natural, and frequent. If as a Christian, that
state will be most eligible, that more immediately procures the grace and
favor of God; this Celibacy directly affords to none; Marriage conferrs on
all, in the Opinion of the Church of Rome, who make it a Sacrament. If as a
Priest, that state is preferrable, which gives the greater and more diffusive
Example to the Laity. A Virtuous Celibacy will be indeed Exemplary to Virgin
Laics, the smallest and most inconsiderable part of the Church: But then a
prudent and religious conduct of Marriage will serve as a Rule for other
married Persons, the far greater part of the Laick Church.

Thus far the Merits of both are at least equal. If we recurr to the Authority
of Examples, we may begin at Paradise, and the first state of Mankind. Here we
sind a married Couple even in the state of Innocence, and the very first
Blessing given by God unto Mankind, to be this, Genesis 1. 28.
Be fruitful, and multiply. And as it can be no laudable. Ambition, to desire
to exceed the Piety and Innocence of Paradise, so neither can it be any great
Perfection, to defeat the first Blessing of the Creation. If we descend hence
until the Times of Moses, we shall find all the Patriarchs both before and
after the Flood, to have pleased. God, and served their Generations at the same
time. All this while Celibacy has no Example, nor any one President. If we
look into the Mosaic Law, Marriage was there expressly permitted, and
indirectly commanded to the Priest, since none but their own Posterity could be
admitted into that Order. I am not ignorant that the Patrons of Celibacy urge
mightily the Three days Abstinence Exodus* 19. 15.
from their Wives, imposed upon the People, in preparing themselves to receive
the Law of God in Mount Sinai. But this was enjoined not only to the Priests,
but to all the People; was a short and temporary, not a total and perpetual
Abstinence; served only to typifie that inseparable Purity of Mind and Body,
which was to flourish in the Church of Christ; and was a mere Rite and
Ceremony, unworthy of the dignity and simplicity of the Christian Religion.
Again, if we consider the Saints and Prophets of the Old Testament, (...). Mat.
Hom. 56. in fine.
St. Chrysostom will tell us, that all the Prophets had Wives and FaFamilies,
as Esaias, Ezekiel, and the Great Moses; and yet sufferd thereby no diminution
of their Virtue. Or if we take our measures from the venerable Examples of
Christ and his Apostles, we may learn both from their Doctrine and Practice,
that the Perfection of a Christian state consists not in an idle and
contemplative, but in an active and benefactive state. That most, if not all
the Apostles were Married, we shall prove hereafter; and if our Savior chose a
Single state, wherein to pass his life on Earth, Clemens Alex. shall answer for
us, Strom. l. 3. p. 446.
That He had his proper Spouse, the Church; that He was no ordinary Man, who
should either want an help, or be subject to the temptations of Incontinency;
that it was not necessary for him to continue his Species by Procreation, who
was himself God, blessed for evermore. And then if we cast our eyes upon the
Worship and Opinion of the Gentiles, we shall find Celibacy in no great esteem
among them, and Marriage not only allowed to their Priest, but even made
necessary to some of them; insomuch as the Pontifex Maximus among the Romans,
could continue no longer in his Office, than his Wife lived. Adv. Jovin. l. 1.
in sin.
St. Herom indeed, and after him all the Champions of Celibacy, allege the
Exmple of the Hierophantae of Athons. But had that good Father in the heat of
his Disputation, considered the Character of those Priests, he would not have
ventured to produce their Example. For if we may believe the Relations of
Lucian, and the more Ancient Christian Writers, those Hierophantae of Greece
practiced in their secret Rites and Mysteries, the most abominable Lusts and
Villainies of the Pagan Superftition. In speaking of this matter, I will further
observe, that there was but one great Order of Priests among the Heathens,
which professed Virginity, those of Cybele or Isis (for as for the Vestal
Virgins, they were permitted to marry, when their time of Service was expired,)
and but one Sect of Philosophers, that decried and contemned Marriage, the Vid.
Cl^m. Alex. Str^m. l. 2. p. 421.
Epicureans, and of these the first were the most Infamous and Incontinent of
all Priests, the latter the most Debauched and Voluptuous of all Philosophers.

Lastly, If we consult Reason (for Scripture we have before examieed, and
Tradition we shall hereafter,) neither will that declare in favor of Celibacy.
That will only teach us, that state is more Noble, which most advances the
Happiness of Life, and gives the greatest assistance to the Perfection of our
Nature. For neither Marriage nor Celibacy have of themselves any intrinsic
Merit, at least not Celibacy, as we before proved: Neither of them does
immediately and directly illuminate the Understanding, refine the Reason, or
purge the Will. Now the Happiness of Human Life, and the Perfection of Nature,
consists in the tranquillity and imperturbation of the Mind, whereby it is
sitted for the Contemplation of her Creator, and the Exercise of all more noble
and sublime Virtues. This Tranquillity, next to Habits of Vice in the Soul, is
chiefly interrupted by immoderate and ungoverned Passions in the Body, although
even those Habits were produced at first by the intemperance of these Passions.
The greatest and most vehement of our Passions, are those of Desire, and among
them the propensity to the continuation of our Species obtains thefirst place.
A a right Use of Marriage satisfies this propensity, allays its violence,
secureth the Mind from all tempests on that side. This Celibacy can do only in
those who have the Gift of Continence, who perhaps are not the thousandth part
of Mankind; if those be excepted, to whom not God or Virtue, but some defect of
Nature, has given a reprieve from this Passion. In the rest, Celibacy,
especially when enforced, will be only the occasion of perpetual, or at least
intermitting tempests, which instead of a sweet Serenity, will introduce into
the Mind a turbulent Commotion, dissorder all her Thoughts, and deprive her of
all Happiness: Or if we should grant, which is most false, that Celibacy well
governed, is in all able to give the Mind the same tranquillity, and secure her
from all perturbations arising from the passion of Desire; yet still the Merits
and Advantages of Marriage and Celibacy will be equal, even in this
Consideration.

There remains then only arguments of temporal convenience, and outward decorum
of the Church. And here though it might suffice to observe that arguments of
convenience are of no validity against a probability of unlawfulness, much less
against an express Divine Permission; yet shall I briefly examine the Reasons
of this kind produced by our Adversaries. They may be reduced to three Heads: A
greater immunity from secular cares and worldly business, and thereby a better
opporunity to attend the Service of God, and execute the Duties of their
Office: Secondly, A certain indecency in the use of Marriage, which renders it
incompatible or at least inconvenient, to the Sacerdotal Office: Thirdly, The
better administration of the goods and revenues of the Church. As for the First
that might indeed with some color have been pleaded in the infancy of the
Gospel, when many of the Clergy were designed as itinerant Preachers, for the
propagation of the Faith; although it was then so far from being necessary,
that many of the Apostles did in their travels lead about with them, if not
their wives, which is most probable, yet at least women. But now when the Faith
is planted, and the Clergy have particular limits assigned them wherein to
execute their Office; that reason cease. Another case may happen wherein this
argument may take place; in times of Persecution, when it is of great advantage
and interest to the Church, that her Clergy give examples of patience and
constancy to their flock, and is very probable that a man will embrace
Martyrdom with a greater resolution and unconcernedness when freed from the
solicitude of Wife and Children, whose consideration and perhaps importunities
might tempt him to Prevarication; but then Celibacy is here also so far from
being necessary, that it will augment the Merits and the Glory of Martyrdom to
break through those Obstacles, and slight those Considerations. However,
certain it is, that in the Peaceable and Flourishing Times of the Church: this
Reason is of no Validity. Hence appears, with how little Reason our
Adversaries urge that so much celebrated Text of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 32.
He that is Unmarried, cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he
may please the Lord. An admonition by the Apostle adapted to those times of
Persecution; as appears by the Preface of it: But I would have you (speaking to
all Christians) without Carefulness. For otherwise, Marriage does not
necessarily involve more Carefulness or Disquiet, than Celebacy. If a greater
Anxiety does ordinarily attend it, that proceeds not from the nature of
Marriage, but the abuse of Men. And therefore Clemen, Alex. (...). Strom. l. 3.
answers to the Ancient Heretics urging this very Text against Marriage: What
then? Cannot those who please their Wives in a lawful way, give thanks to God?
May not a Married Man, together with his Marriage, care for the things that
belong to the Lord? Further, these Texts do no more prove the Necessity or
Convenience of Priests Celibacy, than it does of all other Christians. Nor can
it be here pretended, that the Clergy are more peculiarly devoted to the
Service of God, and therefore more particularly obliged to this Duty. For,
first, That would suppose some Excellency in Celibacy, which we have proved
cannot be found; and then the Priests under the Old Law, were no less solemnly
Dedicated to God, who yet were not debarred Marriage. Besides, the Church of
Rome excludes not those from holy Orders, who have either Buried their Wives,
or vow a perpetual Abstinence from them, although they may have many Children
then alive: As if an equal Solicitude and (...). Clem. Alex. Stom. l. 3. in
init.
Anxiety were not required to provide for Children begotten before as after
Ordination. Not to say that the Ancient Heretics made use of the same Plea,
and shunned Marriage, to avoid the trouble of providing Necessaries for a
Family; and that the Apostle was not ignorant of this inconvenience, if it be
any, and yet thought it not sufficient to enjoin Celibacy to the Clergy. But in
truth it is a mere Chimaera, a Figment, and a vain Suspicion. For to use St.
Chrysostom's words (...), etc. Hom. XXI in Genes.
Marriage does not only not hinder the Practice of Divine Philosophy, if we
will be sober, but also administers to us great Assistance in it, by culming
the turbulencies of. Nature, and not permitting it to be tossed in tempests,
but preparing it a haven, wherein to ride securely. Wherefore God has herein
granted a Privilege to Mankind. Again, if a Priest or Bishop must therefore be
Unmarried, that he may decline the Cares and Troubles of the World; then
certainly with much more reason he ought not to intermeddle in Secular
Business, and the Government of whole Provinces. For who can imagine that the
government of a single Family involves more care and trouble, than the
administration of St. Peter's Patrimony? Lastly, I appeal to the Experience of
the whole World, Whether the Regulars of the Church of Rome, who to their Vow
of Continence have added another of Retirement from the World, do not busy
themselves in Secular Matters, exercise Merchandise, and heap up Riches, beyond
the Clergy of the Church of England?

The Second Reason alleged by our Adversaries, is a certain indecency and
impurity in the act of Marriage, which renders it unfitting for a Priest to
proceed from the late embraces of his wife to the administration of holy
things. So that because the Clergy of the Christian Church do either daily
administer the Sacraments, and offer up Scrifices of praise and thansgiving to
God, in the name of all the people; or at least ought to be always ready and
prepared to do it: They ought therefore perpetually to abstain from conjugal
Duties. This was ever the chief Argument and Foundation of Celibacy. Popes and
Councils in enjoining it to the Clergy, seldom make use of any other than this;
and all the enemies of Priests Marriage from the times of Origin to this day,
have certainly placed it in the front of their Arguments. Yet after all it is a
shameful and most foolish Sophism. For, if by this indecency and impurity in
the use of Marriage, they mean a moral one; that is absolutely false, and flat
Heresy: The very opinion of the Marcionites, Encratites, and other more absurd
Heretics. But if they mean only a natural impurity, that in no ways renders
any man less sit for the Service of God, nor ought to exclude him from the
administration of holy things, any more than the other more frequent
evacuations of Nature. So gross a conceit is unworthy the simplicity of the
Christian Religion, and makes it degenerate into the dregs of Judaism. Besides,
if we should suppose a natural impurity somewhat indecent in the Clergy (which
yet is foolish to imagine of a secret and hidden impurity, such as this is) yet
will it be infinitely outweighed by the inevitable danger of a moral tupitude
to which Priests are exposed by enforced Celibacy. Lastly, this Argument of the
daily celebration of Mass and consecrating of the Eucharist, affects not
Deacons nor Subdeacons; and is entirely overthrown by the practice of the
Church in the Apostolic and Primitive times; when all Baptized Christians
daily received the Eucharist, and yet cannot be suppo'sd either to have been
enjoined or have used perpetual abstinence from their wives.

The Third Reason is the better Economy of the goods and revenues of the
Church; which our Adversaries would not have expended upon wife and children,
but in public acts of charity. This might indeed with some pretense be urged,
if all the unmarried Clergy employed the superfluity of their Revenues upon
Piety and Charity, or none of the married Clergy did it, or if the well
ordering of Families and good Education and decent provision for children were
not of advantage to the Public. But these are equally false. And then in vain
are wives and children removed, when nephews and other relations can gain
access. The examples of the Court of Rome, especially for the last two hundred
years, demonstrates that Popes have employed themselves with greater zeal and
fervor to the aggrandizing of their Families, than ever the married Clergy of
the Reformed Churches did to the enriching of their Posterity.

Thus have we examined the pretended advantages of the Clergies Celibacy, and
found them to be null and vain. But suppose them valid, and really as great as
they are represented to us by our Adversaries. If after all it has in other
respects no less disadvantages, Celibacy will yet remain indifferent, both in
its nature and convenience. To pass by therefore the inconvenience of Celibacy
in general, as that it ordinarily produces Morosness, Pride and
Uncharitableness, to say nothing worse, when affected and chosen as a matter of
Merit, as (...). Strom. l. 3.
Clemens Alex. of old observed: I shall consider only the particular
inconveniences arising from the enforced Celibacy of the Clergy, and mention
but Two of them; but those so great and sensible, that each of them infinitely
outweigheth all the pretended advantages of it. The First is the inevitable and
most certain danger of open Incontinence in many of the Clergy, and thereby
introducing a horrible Scandal into the Church of Christ, which may alone more
effectually obstruct Piety and Virtue among the Laity, than the Preaching of
all together can promote it. For all ignorant Christians, which are the far
greater part of the Church, are led more by Examples than Reason, and assent to
the Christian Religion merely for the authority of their Pastors that Propose
it. So that the Scandal caused by the Lust of one Incontinent Priest, is more
dangerous to the Church, than the Celibacy of an hundred Chaste Priests can be
advantageous to it. Now that forced Celibacy betrays the Clergy to open
Incontinency, let St. Bernard speak. Toll de ecclesiae honorabile connubium
and torum immaculatum, nonne reples eam concubinariis, incestuosis,
seministuis, mollibus, masculorum conoubito^ ibus, and omni denique genere
immundorum? Sermon. 66. in Cantica post. init.
Take from the Church honorable Marriage, and the Bed undefiled; Do you not
fill it with Fornicators, incestuous Persons, Abusers of themselves, Sodomites,
and all kind of uncleanness? This Experience has also sadly demonstrated, as
we may hereafter show. The Second inconvenience of forced Celibacy, is that it
deprives the Church of the service of many Pious and Learned Men; who either
being already married, will not consent to separate themselves from there Wives;
or being yet single, will not receive Orders upon the terms of Celibacy, as
either finding that they have not the Gift of Continency, or doubting whether
they shall always have it. The lamentable Effects of this Truth in England and
Germany, in the Eleventh and Twelfth Ages, we shall afterward have occasion to
mention.

Lastly, Suppose that Celibacy had all the aforementioned Advantages, and none
of the Inconveniences; yet still if Marriage has peculiar advantages, which
Celibacy wants, both will remain indifferent, and neither to be preferred. That
Marriage has such, cannot be denied. For not to say, that Marriage, in the
Opinion of the Church of Rome, actually confers Grace, and was chosen by Christ
to be a Type of his Mystical Union with the Church; not to urge the precedent
Arguments, nor produce anew the Authority of St. Chysostom; not to say, that
the virtuous Marriage of a Priest may be highly exemplary to his People, since
the Effects of it are visible and manifest in the prudent Government of his
Family, and the pious (...). Clem. Alex. Snrom. l. 3.
Education of his Children; whereas Continence, which is the Perfection of
Celibacy, is a Virtue of the Soul, invisible, and hidden from the Eyes of Men,
and so cannot be properly Exemplary. To pass by all this, I will I will allege
only the Authority of Clemes Alex. in these words. (...), etc. Strom. l. 3.
Marriage, as well as Celibacy, has its peculiar offices and duties pleasing
to God, God, I mean the care of Children and Wife. Whence the Apostle
commands those to be chosen Bishops, who from the virtuous government of
their own Families, have learned to preside over the Church well. (...) etc.
Strom. l. 7.
And in truth, a Man approves not himself in choosing a single Life; but he
transcends the ordinary rank of Men, who uses Marriage, and the procreation of
Cildren, and the government of a Family, without immoderate affection or
anxiety; and notwithstanding the care of his House, is unalterable from the
love of God, and bravely resists all the temptations of Wife and Children,
Servants and Possessions.

Having thus proved that the Celibacy of the Clergy was neither instituted by
Christ nor his Apostles, and has no excellence in it self, or convenience to
the Church: I proceed to the Third Proposition, That the Imposition of it upon
any Order of men, is unjust and repugnant to the Law of God. And here because
the possibility of Continence in all will intervene as the main Question, I
will divide my Discourse, and prove,

I. That the Church has no Authority to Inhibit Marriage to the Clergy, even
supposing that all can contain. II. That all cannot contain, and consequently
that to impose Celibacy upon any Order of men, made up of all Ages,
Constitutions and Humors, is directly contrary to Reason, Justice, and the Law
of God.
I. First then, the Church has no Authority to forbid Marriage to the Clergy,
even supposing that all men may by due diligence obtain the gift of Continence.
This may be evidently deduced from what was last proved. For the Church cannot
challenge a greater Authority than the Apostles had. But their Authority, as we
are assured by 2 Cor. 10. 8.
St. Paul, was given them only for Edification and not for Destruction. Not
that the Imposition of Celibacy tends not to the edification of the Church, we
have already proved, that it naturally tends to the destruction of many members
of the Church is manifest. For in so numerous a Body as the Clergy is, it is
morally impossible that many of them should not neglect those means whereby the
gift of Continence may be acquired, and thereby falling into Inconinency lose
their own Souls, and by their Scandal and Example draw many into Perdition with
them: Whereas had Marriage been permitted them, both would in all probability
have been prevented. Indeed if the edification arising from the imposition or
prohibition of any thing indifferent be obvious and evident, and the
destruction either none, or dubious and uncertain; or even if the edification
be uncertain, so as there be not the least danger of destruction; or perhaps
even although both edification and destruction were equally dubious; the
decrees of the Church in all these cases ought to take place: For otherwise a
door would be left open for the obstinate contradiction of foolish and
unreasonable men. But in this case the edification produced by the Celibacy of
the Clergy is, as we have proved, none, or at least, infinitely dubious:
Whereas the danger of destruction, which may be caused by it, is most certain,
manifest, and apparent. Secondly, The Church cannot totally deprive any man of
the liberty of enjoying any lawful and natural pleasures; nor take from him any
of those comforts and benefits, which nature and the right of creation first
gave him and intended for him. She may restrain and limit the use of them as to
time and place, but can by no means totally abollish it. So the Church may
forbid flesh to be eaten, or Marriage to be contracted at some certain seasons
of the year; but as she cannot enjoin to any man a perpetual abstinence from
flesh; so neither can she totally forbid Marriage to any order of men. For this
is contrary to the very genius and constitution of the Christian Religion;
whose peculiar glory is the simplicity of it, and the entire conformity in all
the Agenda of it to the law of nature. Thirdly, Whatsoever may be pretended for
inhibiting Marriage to the unmarried Clergy, the Church most certainly cannot
dissolve the Marriage of those, who never made any vow of of continence, and
were lawfully married before the prohibition of the Church: Since our Savior
expressly says Mat. 19. 6.
What God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Yet the Church of Rome
did this in the Eleventh and Twelfth Ages, when many Popes and Councils
commanded the married Clergy to be separated from their wives upon pain of
Excommunication, not permitting them to retain their wives, by relinquishing
their Offices, and retiring into Lay Communion: Although the Clergy in their
Remonstrance offered to Nicolas II. protested that they had never made any vow
of Continence, and could not contain without the use of Marriage. I know it is
pretended, that the Clergy in receiving Orders, are supposed to have made a
Tacit and Interpretative Vow of Chastity. But the vanity of that pretense, I
shall manifest immediately. Other Reasons might be produced, but these are
sufficient.

II. All Men cannot contain, and therefore to impose Celibacy upon any Order of
Men is injust, and contrary to the Divine Law. For all Persons who cannot
contain, have a right to Marry by the Law of Nature, that they may not be
necessitated to Sin; and are commanded to Marry by the Law of God. Cor. 8. 9.
But if they cannot contain, let them Marry: For it is better to Marry, than to
Burn. In imposing Celibacy therefore upon the Clergy, the Church of Rome
forbids many to Marry, whom God commands to do it. Now that all Men cannot
contain, appears from this very place of the Apostle, which Insinuates that in
some Persons, there is no Medium between Marriage and Burning; but it is
evident beyond all contradiction from the Reason of this Permission of Marriage
assigned in the precedent Verse: Ver. 7.
For I would that all Men were even as myself: (that is, Continent.) But every
Man has his proper Gift of God; one after this manner, and another after that.
Our Savior expressly Teaches the same thing, when to the Apostles objecting;
That if the the Case were so, it is not good to Marry. He answered, Mat. 19.
11, 12.
All Men cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given. And, He
that is able to receive it, let him receive it. God has obliged himself indeed
by Promise, to Confer upon us all Graces necessary for the performance of our
Duty, and attainment of Salvation; but the gift of Continence is not of this
Nature, since God has provided Marriage for a remedy of Incontinency; which if
we will not make use of, the danger lies at our own Doors, God is no further
obliged. Indeed, if through any Accident, which disables either of the Married
Persons, Marriage fails to be a remedy of Incontinency, (which our Adversaries
frequently Object) God must be them supposed to have obliged himself to bestow
the gift of Continence when duly asked, because in that case he has provided
no other Remedy. So that the Argument of the Council of Trent, that, God will
not deny this Gift (c) Sess. 24. Can. 9.
to those that rightly ask it, as having promised, not to suffer us to be
tempted above what we are able; is wholly Impertinent. Since God thereby
obliged himself to no more than with the Temptation also to make a way to
escape, not that way which we best like, for that is not promised, and is
highly unreasonable, but which Himself pleases: And that he has abundantly
done, in Assigning the easy and natural way of Marriage. As for Bellarmine's
Argument, That whosoever desires the gift of Continence, thereby to form a
Habit of it, and that God will not be wanting to Crown our honest endeavors
with a perfect Possession of it: That is many ways false. For, first, A desire
of Continence rather supposes, that we yet want it. Then it is not an Honest
Endeavor to covet all kind of Divine Gifts, but only those which are
Necessary; as it would not be laudable now to desire the gift of Tongues,
merely for Ostentation. 1 Cor. 7. 17.
But as God has distributed to every Man, so let him Walk. Lastly, God Crowns
not all even Honest Desires with with a grant of them. For suppose any Man
should out of the abundance of his Charity desire the gift of Miracles, merely
to cure the Diseases, relieve the Necessities, and remove the Errors of
Mankind, without any admixture of Interest or Ambition therein; yet would it be
Irrational to expect the performance of it. As for that place (which is urged
by some) I would that all Men were even as myself. That no more proves the
possibility of Continence in all, than that other place: 1 Cor. 14. 5.
I would that ye all speak with Tongues; does, that all can obtain the gift of
Tongues.

The Ancients thought the same thing. So St. Ambrose, Virginitas in voto magis
est quam in magisterie. De Virginib. l. 1
Virginity is rather in our Wish, than in our Power. St. Hirome, even when
disputing for Celibacy, freqently grants that all cannot contain; more
especially in these words: Noli metuere ne omnes virgins siant: difficilis res
est Virginitas, and ideo quia rara, difficilis. Multi vocati, pauci electi,
Incipere plurimorum est, perseverare paucorum. Si omnes Virgins esse* possent,
nunquam and Dominus diceret. Qui potest capere, capiat; and Apostolus in
suadendo non trepidaret. De Virginibus autem praceptum Domini non habeo. Adv.
Jovin. l. 1. c. 21.
Fear not that all will become Virgins. Virginity is a difficult thing, and
therefore rare, because difficult. Many are called, but few chosen: Many begin,
but few can persevere. If all could be Virgins, our Lord would never have said,
He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. And the Apostle would not
have doubted in persuading it, nor said, Now concerning Virgins, I have no
Commandment from the Lord. St. Bernard, Utinam magis turrim inchoaturi fedentes
computarent, ne forte sumptus non habeant ad perficiendnm. Utinam qui concinere
non valent, perfectionem temerarie prositeri, aut coelibatui dare nomina
vererentur. Sumptuosa siquidem turris est, and verbum grande, quod non omnes
capere possunt. Esset autem sine dubio melius nubere quam uri. De Convers. ad
Cleric. cap. 29.
Would to God, they who begin this Tower would sit down, and better compute the
Costs, least perhaps they have not sufficient to finish it. Would those who
cannot contain, would dread rashly to profess Perfection, or undertake
Celibacy. For the Tower is Costly, and the Saying is great, which all cannot
receive. It were undoubtedly better for them to Marry, than to Burn. Upon this
account they thought Virginity not lawful to be commanded, and even in its
nature incapable of Imposition. So the Author of the Commentaries upon of St.
Paul's Epistles, extant among St. Ambrose's Works, whom all agree to have been
Hilary, Deacon of Rome, under Pope Liberius, delivers his Opinion. Ideo non
delet quis constringi, ne ab licito prohibitus, illicita admittat: Sed ipse
sibi eligat quid sequatur. Comm. in 1. Ep. ad Cor. cap. 7.
For that reason none ought to be obliged to Continence, least being restrained
from what is lawful, he commit things unlawful. But let him choose for himself,
what he will follow. St. Hierom, Neque tamen alicui necessitatem imponit aut
laqueum. -- Quia ultra homines est, and quodammodo impudentis erat adversum
naturam cogere, alioque modo dicere, Volo vos esse, quod angeli sunt. Adv.
Helvid. cap. 10.
The Apostle in persuading Virginity, lays not a necesity or a snare upon any.
For that is beyond the power of Men, and would be as it were impudence to
compel against nature, and say in other words; I would have you be, what Angels
are. Noli igitur admirari, si inter titillationem carnis, and incentiva
vitiorum, angelorum vitam non exigimur sed docemur. Adv. Jovin. l. 1.
Wonder not therefore, if amidst the proneness of the flesh, and incentives of
Vices, we are not Commanded but Taught the Life of Angels. St. Ambrose, Sola
est enim Virginitas, qu^ suaderi potest, imperari non potest, res magis voti
quam praecepti. Exhort. ad Virgins post init.
It Is Virginity alone which can be persuaded, cannot be commanded; a matter
rather of Wish than Precept. Clemens Alex. (...). Strom. l. 3.
Of necessity therefore Marriage must not be forbidden. Theodoret upon those
words, Tim. 4. 13.
In the latter days, some shall depart from the faith -- Forbidding to marry,
says. (...). Comm. in loc.
The Apostle blames not here Celibacy or Continence, but condemns those who
compel to use them. Pope Gregory I. Mihi durum atque incompetens videtur, ut
qui usum continentiae non invenit, neque castitatem ante promisit, compellatur
a sua uxore separari, atque per hoc, quod absit, in deterius cadat. l. 1. ep.
42.
It seems harsh and unfit to me, that he who has not obtained a habit of
Continence, or promised Chastity, should be compelled to separate from his
Wife, and thereby fall into worse crimes, which God forbid. The Second Council
of His autem quibus voluntas propria desiderium nubendi persuaserit, concessam
ab Apostolis licentiam auferre non possumus. Can. 2.
Toledo, Anno 531. declare, That they have no power to take away from those who
desire to marry, the permission granted by the Apostles. Lastly, Papa etiam cum
majore part concilii non poterit indicere continentiam certo generi personarum
post promotionem eis resistentibus and reluctantibus: quia co^tinentia est res,
quae potest persuaderi, imperari autem non. Cause. 32. qu. 1. cap. Integritas.
Panormitan determines, The Pope, even with the greater part of a Council,
cannot enjoin Continence to any Order of Persons after their promotion, if they
resist and refuse; because Continence is a thing which can be persuaded, but
cannot be commanded. Upon the same Principle, of the Impossibility of
Continence in many, proceeded most of those many Fathers, whom we shall
presently produce for the validity of Marriage Contracted after a Vow of
Continence. I deny not, that many of the Fathers believed it possible for all
to obtain the Gift of Continence; but that does not in the least prejudice my
Argument. For the Church cannot lawfully impose Celibacy upon any, unless it be
a point of Faith, that all can contain; which the Dissent of those Doctors I
have already produced, evidently manifest it is not.

If it be objected, that the acquisition of Continence is possible to all, by
the use of frequent Watchings, long Fasts, and other great austerities: I
answer, first, it may be perhaps justly questioned, whether it be lawful to
afflict the body with those austerities, which are in some Persons necessary to
the attainment of Chastity. For the Soul ought sweetly to guide and direct, not
tyrannize over the Body; which was given as a Companion, not a Slave to it.
Here, as in all other Actions, Reason ought to prescribe limits to the
government of the Soul. Now such a Mortification as is necessary to destroy
Lust in incontinent Persons, will at the same time destroy their Health, and
consequently more hinder the service of God, the practice of Virtue, the
exercise of Piety,, than a single Life can promote it, or Marriage would
obstruct it. Secondly, If it should be lawful for the Soul voluntarily to
exercise this Arbitrary Power upon the Body, yet most certainly it is unlawful
for the Church to impose any thing, which will induce a necessity of offering
violence to Nature, weakening the energy of the Soul, heaping diseases upon the
Body, and dissolving the harmony of Both. Thirdly, All are not able to undergo
these Austerities; and when undergon, they are not always sufficient to prevent
Incontinency. The frequent repetition of them, demonstrates this; which would
be useless and foolish, if the disease did not as often recurr. Not Watchings
or Fastings, not Whippings or even Emasculation itself, practiced of old by
Origin, and the Valesian Heretics, and in the last Age by Thuan. Hist. l. 99.
in sin.
Ambrosius Morales, can wholly eradicate in some this peccant humor. It must
needs have been a very violent passion, the indignation of which could extort
so severe a remedy; which when it was used, did effectually indeed preserve the
Body, but not in the least diminish the Lust of Mind. Animus est enim qui aut
S^nctificat aut pol^uit Corpus. Quid enim prodest Corpus mund^m habere, and
animam pollutam? Cum merito animae aut honoratur Corpus aut damnatur. Hilarious
Diac. Comm. in 1 Epist. ad Cor. c. 7.
Yet it is the Mind which either sanctifies or pollutes the Body. For what does
it profit to have the Body clean, and the Soul polluted, whenas the Body is
either saved or damned by the merits of the Soul. As for all other severities,
how ineffectual they are, in some Constitutions, Hist. Lausiac. c. 22.
Palladius relates a memorable Story of Moses, a most Famous Abbot in the
Deserts of Egypt, afterward made Bishop of the Arabians; whom Palladius calls,
the Blessed; Theodoret, Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 20.
the Divine Moses, who from his Youth perpetually vexed with temptations of
Incontinency, could not free himself from them by all the austerities which Wit
could invent, or Nature endure; and therefore all his life was forced to
abstain from receiving the Sacrament; till in his Old Age (...).
he was by an extraordinary Miracle delivered from them. Upon which Palladius
makes this Remark: For in truth Concupiscence is perfectly untameable.

But the great Plea of the Writers of the Church of Rome, remains behind, which
must be more largely discussed. They pretend that the Church imposes Celibacy,
or a Necessity of Continence, upon no Man: That she has annexed it indeed to
the four Superior Orders of the Clergy, but then forces none to enter into
those Orders: That the Unlawfulness of the Clergies Marriage, is not so much
founded in the Prohibition of the Church, or Incompatibility of Marriage with
Holy Orders, as in the Vow of Continence, which all either do make, or are
supposed to make, when they receive those Orders. To this I shall Oppose, and
in order Prove these Three Propositions.

I. This Plea cannot justly be used by the Church of Rome, nor will excuse her
Practice. II. A Vow of Continence obliges not in case of insuperable
Incontinence, and then may not only lawfully, but must necessarily be violated.
III. Whether lawfully or unlawfully, necessarily or unnecessarily violated, if
Marriage be Contracted after a Vow of Continence, it is firm and valid, and
cannot be rescinded.
I. For the First, That this Plea neither belongs to, nor avails the Church
of Rome, it appears many ways. As First, Although it should be granted the
Church of Rome directly imposes Celibacy upon none; yet it cannot be denied
that she forbids all who have once made a Vow of Continence, ever after to
violate it, although in case of Incontinence; when the impossibility of
observing it any longer without actual sin, maks the violation of it become
necessary and commanded by the Law of God. Secondly, She has actually and
often imposed Continence upon those who never vowed it; as when she first
enjoined Celibacy to the Clergy, and renewed that Injunction when become
obsolete. Nor can she at this day be excused from the same Imposition, since a
numerous society of Clergymen are necessary to the being and continuance of the
Church, and she has enjoined Celibacy to all who will be Members of this
Society; although it be uncertain, whether there be so many continent Persons
in the Church, as are necessarily required to execute the Ministry of it; much
more, whether among all continent Christians there be so many both worthy and
willing to receive Orders, as may serve the necessities of the Church. Thirdly,
Whether the Church commands any to make a Vow of Continence, or forbids them to
violate it when made? Both equally defeat all the great Advantages and glorious
Merits which are pretended to be in Celibacy. For nothing can be either
acceptable or meritorious, which is not purely voluntary, neither commanded nor
punished by any human Laws. Otherwise it can never appear, whether the Action
proceeds from the Dictates of the Will, or rather from the Awe of that Command,
and the Fear of that Punishment. And therefore St. Hierom introduces Christ
thus speaking, Mihi illi Eunuchi placent, quos castravit non necessitas sed
voluntas. l. 1. adv. Jovin.
Those Eunuchs please me, which Will, not Necessity, has emasculated. Whereas
in the Church of Rome, none can be admitted into the Four Great Orders, nor yet
in the Three Lesser Orders enjoy any Ecclesiastical Benifices or Privileges of
Clergymen, unless they Vow perpetual Continence. Nor is it permitted to the
former ever to violate their Vow, by Contracting of Marriage, although they
should resign their Preferments, and depart from the Execution of their Office.
Fourthly, which is chiefly to be respected, It can never appear that any Vow is
truly made by those who are ordained, if the Church commands all such to make
that Vow. For a Vow is the peculiar, voluntary, and free act of him that
Voweth, as being a Promise made to God, and consists in the internal Action
of the Soul, which necessarily supposes an Intention of Vowing. So that if any
Person pronouncing the Form of the Vow, should either not mind what he says,
or at the same time resolve the contrary of what he says; the first is guilty
of Negligence, the second of a Lie; but neither can truly be said to have
Vowed, and therefore if they afterward Marry, do violate no Vow. This Scotus,
Durandus, Dorbellus, Paludanus, and other Divines of the Church of Rome, do
expressly teach; and for this very reason maintain, that Marriage is unlawful to
the Clergy, not upon the account of any Vow annexed to their Orders, but merely
for the authority of the Church's Prohibition.

As for a tacit and interpretative Vow, which many recurr to, supposing a Vow
of Continence to be inseparably annexed to Orders; so that these cannot be
received but that at the same time a Vow must be supposed to have been made;
that is wholly vain. This refuge was invented as well to avoid the Reason last
mentioned, as to solve an Objection drawn from the Practice of the Church of
Rome, which even for the last Six Hundred years have not always required an
explicit Vow, nor does at this day, although many Popes have enjoined it to be
openly and expressly made; but their Decrees meeting with great Opposition, they
were forced to let them fall, and recurr to this Expedient of an Interpretative
Vow. This Vow must be annexed to Orders, either by Divine Right, or only by the
Command of the Church. If the former, that were indeed sufficient, but then it
is absolutely false, as we proved in the first Proposition; and Bellarmine
Decretam, quo votum annexum est ordinibus, non quidem proprie divinum est.
Controy. Tom II. l. c. 18.
expressly acknowledges; and may be further evinced by this Argument, that then
neither the Church nor the Pope could grant a Dispensation of Marriage to any
of the Clergy. If it be annexed only by Ecclesiastical Right or Command of the
Church, then our former Argument will return with more force. For he who in
receiving of Orders shall omit to make that tacit Vow, will not be guilty of so
much as a Lie or Dissimulation. He neglected indeed the command of the Church;
but a Vow he neither made, nor pretended to make. So that there remains only a
presumptive Vow; the truth of which resides in every man's breast and
conscience: So that none ought to be excluded from Marriage by a Vow, even
supposing it valid and inviolable, but those who shall confess they made it.
And therefore the Author of the Gloss Decret. Greg. l. 3. tit. 3. cap. Cum olim.
upon the Decretals of Gregory IX. professes that himself, and many other
Doctors with him, cannot imagine how the Clergy of the Western Church can be
said to be obliged by Vow to Continence. This were enough to silence the Plea
of a tacit Vow: yet I shall add somewhat more, as first, The II. Council of
Toledo Decrees that none be looked upon to have vowed (c) Cau. 1.
Continence, but those who being asked by the Bishop promise it, Coram tota
plebe, before the whole Congregation: And all Councils which command a Vow to
be taken by the Clergy at their Ordination, order it to be made openly in the
face of the whole Church.

Secondly, in the Primitive Church many were Ordained violently and against
their wills. So St. Augustine Multi u^ Episcopatum suscipiant, tenentur inviti,
perducuntur, includuntur, custodiuntur, patiuntur tanta quae nolunt, donec cis
adsit voluntas suscipiendi operi^ boni. Ep. 204. in init.
tells Donatus, That many were apprehended to be ordained Bishops, kept in bold
against their wills, dragged, shut up, and imprisoned, and suffer all this
unwillingly, till they be forced to receive Ordination. So was St. Augustine
himself Possid. inVit. Aug. ca. 4.
seized npon violently by the people of Hippo, dragged to their Bishop
Valerius, and ordained amidst abundance of tears. So Epiphanius ordained
Paulinianus Brother of St. Hierom, as himself confesleth. For seeing him
present at (a) Epist. ad Jo. Hier inter Hieronym Opp. Tom. II. P. 156.
Divine Service, without the least apprehension of any such violence intended
against him, he commanded the Deacons to apprehend him, and hold his mouth with
their hands, and in that posture ordained him Deacon; and immediately after he
had with many Entreaties persuaded him to do somewhat at the Altar belonging to
the Office of a Deacon, commanded him to be anew apprehended, and in the same
manner ordained him Priest. Now shall such Clergymen as these be thought to
have made a tacit Vow of Continence at their Ordinations, or must they forfeit
all right of marrying, or if already married, must their marriage be dissolved,
and against their will by the violence of others.

Thirdly, Almost all the Divines of the Church of Rome agree that Children are
capable of receiving Holy Orders. Many Examples of it have been seen in that
Church; and at this day Alvarez. Hist. AEthiop.
great numbers of Children are ordained Priests and Deacons in the Abyssine
Church.

Fourthly, Greg. Nyssen. in vita ejus P. 976.
Gregory Thaumaturgus was ordained Bishop of Neocaesarea by Phadimus of Amasea,
absent, and not so much as dreaming of it. Now shall either he or those
Children be presumed to have made a Vow of Continence at their Ordination, when
the first were not capable of making a Vow, the second did not know that he was
ordained?

Lastly, Supposing this Vow to have been openly and explicitly made, granting
it to have been intended, and none of all these many necessary Circumstances
wanting, yet will it not oblige, if it be not accepted by God. For that the Vow
is made to God, not to the Church, all agree; so that if it be not accepted by
God, it becomes only a simple Resolution of the Mind, which every man has a
right to change as he shall see good. Now we cannot be assured God accepts this
Vow, unless it be either for some excellency and holiness in Celebacy, or
because himself commanded it, both which we before disproved. Nay, rather
seeing it draws many into open Incontinency, and exposes all to the danger of
it, it is prejudicial to the honor of God, to imagine that he accepts, much
less delights in such Vows: At least there is no promise of acceptance, and
therefore the Obligation of these Vows will ever be uncertain.

I pass to the Second Proposition, that a Vow of Continence obliges not in
case of insuperable Incontinence. For no man can be obliged by Vow, or even the
greatest Authority upon Earth to commit a sin, which in this case will be
inevitable, unless the Vow be violated. And that cases of insuperable
Incontinence without the use of Marriage may and do often happen, I proved
before, when I demonstrated that all cannot contain. And certainly if in
temporal Affairs no Vow, Contract or Promise obliges in case of a natural
impossibility, much more will it not oblige in case of moral impossibility; by
how much the Virtues of the Soul are of more concern than the conveniences of
the Body. But I will not further enlarge upon this Argument, which is in it
self so evident; I choose rather to observe, that it is highly probable that
not only in case of impossibility, but even of great and apparent difficulty a
Vow of Continence cease to oblige. For first, all the Defenders of the Pope's
dispensing power proceed upon this foundation, that Circumstances may alter the
Obligation of a Vow; and that when a greater good is to be attained, it cease
to oblige. And indeed this is highly reasonable: For if circumstances can alter
the nature of Actions as to Vice and Virtue, which is on all hands granted,
then a Vow which in some circumstances may be laudable, or at least lawful, may
in others become unlawful, or at least not obligatory. Now in case of violent,
although perhaps not insuperable, temptations of Incontinence after a Vow of
Chastity, the circumstances of him that Vows are altered; and by violating the
Vow, a greater good may be attained, serenity of Mind, freedom from unruly
Passions, and an escape from the danger of Sin. Not in this only, but in many
other cases also, the diversity of circumstances may change the Obligation of a
Vow. Whence Aquinas determines, That Quia in his quae ad seipsum pertinent de
facili fallitur homo in judicanda, talia vota congruentius secundum arbitrium
superioris sunt vel servanda vel prae^ermittenda, ita tamen quod si ex
observatione tali^ voti magnum and manifestum gravamen sentiret, and non esset
facultas ad superiorem recurrendi, non deberet homo tale votum servare. Aquin.
2. 2. qu. 88. art. 2. in sin.
Because in matters belonging to himself, a Man is easily deceived in judging;
it is most fit such Vows should be either observed or omitted, according to the
pleasure of his Superior, yet so, that if any great or manifest inconvenience
should arise from the observation of such a Vow, and there were no opportunity
of recurring to the Superior, a Man ought not to keep such a Vow. Secondly, It
is acknowledged even in the Church of Rome, that a Vow of Continence made by
one married Person without the consent of the other, is null and void, and that
because of the danger of Incontinency, to which the other party is thereby
exposed. Wherefore Lib. 9. Ep. 44.
Gregry I. commanded the Husband of Agathosa, who had entered into a Monastery
without her consent, to be taken thence, although Professed, and be forced to
live with her. But if the danger of another's Damnation produced by a Vow of
Contitinence, can dissolve the Obligation of it, certainly much more will the
danger of any one's own Damnation produce the same effect. Thirdly, If it be
true what Lib. 2. Tract. 8. Disp. unica, sect. 5. numb. 51.
Salas the Jesuit teaches, That a Friar Professed of any approved Order, who
shall have a probability of Divine Revelation, that God dispenses with his Vow
to enable him to Marry, may Marry, and make use of this probable, though
doubtful Dispensation; certainly he who after Continency Vowed in the taking of
Orders, shall find himself assaulted with any grievous temptations of
Incontinence, may make use of the same remedy, having more than a probable,
even a plain and undoubted Revelation of the Lawfulness of it, in those words,
1 Cor. 7. 2, 9.
Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife; and it is
better to marry than to burn. So that in many cases it is Lawful, in some
Necessary, to break this Vow.

Thirdly, Whether Lawfully or Unlawfully, Necessarily or Unnecessarily
violated, if a Marriage be Contracted after a Vow of Continence, it is firm and
valid as any other, and cannot be rescinded. For Marriage is a thing of Natural
and Divine Right, whose continuance, when once Contracted, is commanded by the
Laws of God, and first Principles of Reason; whereas Vows of Continence are but
of human Instituion, as we have proved; or at the most, but of Evangelical
Counsel, as all our Adversaries confess; and therefore must in all cases give
place to a matter of Natural Right, and Divine Preeept. Apu^ Catholicos nunqu^m
dubium fuit, quin votum continentiae simpl^x sit impedimentum impediens
contrahendu^, non tamen dirimens contractum. De Matrim, cap. 21.
Bellarmine acknowledges this, and affirms it to be the constant Opinion of
all Catholics, that a simple Vow hinders the Contracting of Marriage, but
dissolveth it not when Contracted; although a solemn Vow he would persuade us
does. But since the difference between a Solemn and a Simple Vow, consists
merely in an External Act, in pronouncing outwardly with words, what the Mind
inwardly resolves. This distinction is wholly vain: For that External Act
adds nothing Essential to the Vow; and although a Solemn Vow only can subject
any Man to the Censures of the Church, and Punishment of the State, yet a
Simple Vow does equally oblige in Conscience; so that all the use that can be
made of such a distinction, is this, that such a Contract is not valid in the
present Canon or Civil-Law, although it be a true Marriage in the Eyes of God,
which is sufficient for our purpose, and will make the annulling of it to be
unlawful in the Sight of God, although lawful in Human Judicatures. However,
the contrary of this, was the only thing which the Council of Trent adventured
to define in the Cause of Celibacy, most unhappy in their Choice; for that in
all the dependent Questions of Vows, Marriage and Celibacy, there is none more
apparently false, nor any one opposed by so constant and uninterrupted a
Tradition from the Apostles Times to the Days of Hildebrand, when such
Marriages were first declared to be null and void, if we except two or three
obscure or inconsiderable Councils about the Year D. CCCC. All the Fathers
before that time, who treat of this Matter, not one excepted, allow their
validity; and even after that time, all the more Famous Divines and Canonists
till the Council of Trent. Some Provincial Councils indeed, after the Year D.
ordered those who had Contracted such Marriages, to be separated from each
other; but that was not for any invalidity, which they supposed to be in those
Marriages, but in way of Penance, to expiate the guilt of the Violation of
their Vows, and the Scandal given to the Church; as may appear from all those
Canons which Loc. cit.
Bellarmine alleges in Defense of the Decree of Trent. Sometimes also a
Separation of such Married Persons was commanded, or rather permitted, only
thereby to enable the Man to be readmitted into the Ministry. As for the
Council of Can. 16.
Chalcedon, commanding all who Contract Marriage after a Vow of Continence, to
be Excommunicated, produced by Bellarmine, who might have added many such like
Canons of other Councils. They rather prove the validity of these Marriages,
because contented to inflict the Punishment of Excommunication, they proceed
not to a Dissolution of them; especially since the Council of Chalcedon in the
close of that Canon, leaves to every Bishop a Power of Remitting even that
Punishment. But that Excommunication does not suppose the invalidity of these
Marriages, evidently appears from the Canons of all those many Councils (as
Aurelianense II. Can. 19. Arvernense Can. 6. Toletanum IV. Can. 63. Nicaenum
Can. Arab. 53. Arelatense I. Can. 11.) which Excommunicated those Christians
which Married Jews or Gentiles; although none will deny those Marriages to have
been perfectly valid, and further ordered the Married Persons to be separated;
which also proves, that a Sentence of Separation does not simply imply the
invalidity of any Marriage.

To manifest then the constant Tradition of the Church to have been contrary to
the Definition of the Council of Trent, I might produce a long Bead-roll of
Councils, Popes, and Emperors, who in the their Canons, Decrees, and Laws,
have inflicted upon the Clergy, who Married after a Vow of Continence, no other
punishment than that of Degradation, and some no more than an Incapacity of
rising to higher Dignities in the Church. All these by permitting the use of
such Marriages must necessarily be supposed to have owned the validity of them.
But because their Authority, however certain, yet is indirect; I will content
myself with those, who if not in terminis, yet at least directly, assert the
validity of these Marriages. I begin then with St. Paul, who gives these
Instructions to Timothy concerning the Deaconnesses of the Church: 1 Timothy 5. 9,
11, 12, 14.
Let not a widow be taken into the number under threescore years old. But the
younger widows refuse; for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ,
they will marry: Having damnation (in the Greek (...), which is too severely
translated) because they have cast off their first faith; I will therefore that
these marry. These Deaconnesses were Women, chosen out of the Widows, to
attend the Service of the Church; who, maintained with the Revenues of the
Church, were with some peculiar Ceremonies set apart, and as it were Ordained
to that Office; whom decency and the Custom of the Church permitted not to
Marry again, because thereby they must have quitted their Offices, and so
defeated the end of their solemn Dedication to the Church; or as the Apostle
terms, have cast off their first faith. In taking upon them therefore this
Office, they obliged themselves not to Marry again, and therefore as to a Vow
of Continence, were in the same condition with the Clergy of the Church of
Rome. Now at this time in the Church of Ephesus, some young Widows had
imprudently been chosen into the number of Deaconesses, who either not being
able or not willing to contain, had some of them Married, and others (as the
Apostle seems to imply) had given Scandal by their loose carriage. The Apostle
therefore ratifies the Marriages of those who were already Married, and gives
free leave to the rest to Marry. But for the future, commands that none be
admitted into that Order under Threescore years old, at which age there is no
danger of Incontinency. Now that the Apostle treats here of these
Deaconesses, or Widows who had promised to the Church to observe Continence,
appears as well from the Context, as from the common Interpretation of the
Fathers, many of whom De Monah. l. 2. c. 24.
Bellarmine reckons up, and embraces their Opinion.

After the Apostle, succeed the Fathers. St. Clemens Alex. the great Defender
of Marriage, and most Learned of all the Writers of the Three first Centuries:
(...). Strom. lib. 1.
Second Marriage, after a Promise of Continence, is unlawful, not in the
Contract, but in the breach of Promise. Si autem pers^verare nolunt, vel non
possunt, melius est nubi int, quam in ignem delictis suis cadant. Epist. 62. ad
Pomponium.
St. Cyprian, speaking of Virgins that had professed Chastity: But if they will
not or cannot persevere, it is better they should Marry, than fall into
Incontinency by their faults. Epiphanius, although otherwise a great Bigot of
Virginity, speaking of those who after a Solemn Vow of Continence, and
undertaking a Monastic Life, find themselves tempted with Lusts, gives them
this advice: (...). Haeres. 41. in fine.
It is better to commit one sin (by violating the Vow) than many (by indulging
a wandering Lust,) it is best for him who cannot perform his undertaking, openly
to Marry a Wife according to the Law. St. Basil, blaming some Virgins, who
after they had solemnly devoted themselves to God, and vowed perpetual
Chastity, behaved themselves unseemly, says, (...), etc. lib. de vera
Virginit. P. 728.
It were much better for them being married to a Husband, to receive from him
directions of life, and recompense the benefits of his government, by assisting
him in the care of the Family, and educating a succession of hopeful Children,
and so preserve her Chastity, although it were only to avoid the Jealousy of
her Husband. There is extant among St. Chrysostom's Works, two Eloquent and
Passionate Treatises, written by him whilst young, to his Friend Theodorus,
afterward the Great and Learned Bishop of Mopsuestia, who in his youth having
entered into a Monastic Life, had in the twentieth year of his age quitted it
for the love of Hermione, a fair Virgin, whom he resolved to Marry. Here
Chrysostom employeth all the strength of his Rhetoric to exaggerate the
heinousness of his Sin committed, in violating his Vow made to God; yet no
where adventures to declare, that his Marriage would be invalid; gives it the
name of Marriage, and not of Adultery; and although he equals the Sin of it to
that Crime, and by a Metaphor calls it Adultery; yet he plainly distinguishes
it from formal Adultery, more especially in these words; (...). Paraen. 2. ad
Theodor. laps. cap. 2.
Marriage you will say is lawful; so say I; Marriage is honorable, says the
Apostle, and the bed undefiled; but fortnicators and adulerers God will judge.
But it is not permitted to you to celebrate the Rites (or rather use the
lawfulness) of Marriage. For when one is joined to a heavenly Spouse, to part
with him for a Wife, and join himself to her, this is Adultery, although you
should ten thousand times call it Marriage; and by so much worse than Adultery,
by how much God is greater than Men. Wonder not if Marriage is condemned
equally with Adultery, when God is despised. Here the Crime indeed is
sufficiently aggravavated, but placed wholly, as may be observed, not in the
use of his intended Marriage, but in violating his first Faith pledged to
Christ in his Vow of Continence. Calls his intended Contract, Marriage; grants
that when Married, Hermione will be his Wife: And in the close of his Passage,
plainly distinguishes his Crime from Adultery. Wherefore the Latin
Translation in Fronto Ducaeus his Edition, renders it thus; Wonder not if such
a Marriage is compared to Adultery. The same Father in another place saying,
(...) adv. vitup. vit. Monast. l. 3. c. 13.
That some Monks in his time quitting their Profession, Contracted Marriage,
passes the same Censure on them; always proceeding upon this ground, That they
who make a Vow of Chastity, do thereby as it were join themselves in Marriage
to Christ, and therefore by a subsequent Marriage become as it were guilty of
Adultery. Upon which account also many other Fathers in their Rhetorical
Flights, give to these Marriages the Title of Adultery. But if we come to close
and strict Reasoning, De bono viduit. c. 10.
St. Augustine will tell us for them, That as this Marriage with Christ, is not
True, but only Spiritual; so neither is this Adultery True and Real, but only
Spiritual and Mystical. This Father professedly handles this Question, refutes
all the contrary Objections, and having said, that Damnantur tales, non quia
conjugalem fidem posterius inierunt, sed quia continentiae primam fidem irritam
fecerunt -- Fit autem per hanc minus inconsideratam opinionem, qua putant
lapsarum a sancto proposito faeminarum, si nupserint, non esse conjugia, non
parvum malum, ut a maritis separentur axores quasi adulterae sint, non uxores;
and cum volunt eas separatas reddere continentiae, faciunt maritos earum
adulteros veros, cum suis uxoribus vivis alteras duxerint. Ibid.
Such Persons are condemned, not because they afterward Contracted a Marriage,
but because they violated their former Promise of Chastity: Determines in these
words; No small an evil arises from this inconsiderate Opinion of the
invalidity of Marriage of holy Virgins which quit their Profession. For hereby
Wives are separated frrom their Husbands, as if they were Adulteresses, not
Wives; and they who would by separating of them, reduce them to Continence,
make their Husbands become true Adulterers, if while these are alive they marry
other Wives. Wherefore Gratian contracteth the sense of St. Augustine's
Argument, and truly represents it thus: Quidam nubentes post votum asserunt
adulteros esse. Ego autem dico, quod gravitur peccent, qui tales dividunt.
Did. 27. cap. 2.
Some affirm those who Marry after a Vow, to be Adulterers; but I say they
grievously sin, who Separate such Persons. I might produce many other places of
St. Augustine to the same purpose, especially where, sp^aking of Professed
Virgins, which although Incontinent, adventured not to Marry, partly for Shame,
and partly for fear of Punishment: He gives his Opinion thus; Hae igitur, quae
nubere volunt, and ideo non nubunt, quia impune non possunt, quae melius
nuberent quam urerentur, id est quam occulta flamma concupiscentiae
vastarentur, quas paenitet professionis, and piget confessionis. l. de sanct.
virginit. c. 24.
These who long to Marry, and yet do not Marry, because they cannot do it
unpunished; it is better they should Marry than Burn, that is, than be scorched
with the secret flames of Lust, who repent their Profession, and are grieved at
their Promise. St. Hierome, writing to a Consecrated Virgin, who leaving her
Mother, lived with an unmarried Clergyman, and was suspected to maintain an
unlawful familiarity with him, gives her this advice, either to return to her
Mother or Marry her Lover. Why are you afraid to return to her? Si virgo es,
quid times diligentem custodiam? Si corrupta, cur non palam nubis? Secunda
post, naufragium tabula est, quod male caeperis, saltem hoc remedio temperare.
Epist. 47. de vitando suspecto contubernio.
If you be still a Virgin, why need you fear a close Consinement? If Debauched,
why do you not publicly Marry? That will be the next refuge after Shipwreck,
to extenuate at least your Crime by this Remedy. A Passage so much the more
Memorable, because of this Couple, the one was a Clergyman, the other a Nun;
and yet St. Hirome not only allows, but advises their Marriage. The Council
of Ancyra, in the Year, 314. Decreed, that (...). Can. 19.
Those who having vowed Virginity, falsified their Promise, should be placed in
the rank of Bigamists. But none will say that Bigamy is unlawful, much less
that it is Adultery. I might mention many other Councils, which inflicted only
a Temporary Penance on those Marriages. Pope Leo I. Decreed, that a Unde qui
(ex Monachis) reli^ singularitatis professione, ad militiam, vel ad nuptias
devoluius est, public^ paenitentae satisfactione purgandus est; quia etsi
innocens militia, and (...) potest esse conjugium, electionem tamen m^liorum
deseruisse transgressio est. Epist. 92. a^ Rusticum Narbon. cap. 12.
Monk, who forsaking the profession of Continence, either became a Soldier, or
Married, should expiate his Fault by Public Penance; because although Warfare
may be Innocent, and Marriage honest, yet it is a Crime to forsake the better
Choice. Pelagius the Heretic, who in the matter of Vows and Marriage, was as
Orthodox as any, in his Epistle to Demetrias the Virgin, falsely ascribed both
to St. Hierome, and St. Augustine, says, Aut nubant si se non possunt
continere, aut con^ineant si nolunt nubere, inter Opp. Heronymi and Aug.
Let the Consecrated Virgins either Marry if they cannot contain, or contain,
if they will not Marry. Pope Gelasius, in the end of the Fifth Century,
defines thus: Si quae (viduae) propria voluntate professam castitatem mutabili
mente ^alcaverint, periculi earum intererit, quali Deum debeant satisfactione
placare. Sicut enim si se forsitan continere non poterant, nullatenus nubere
vetabantur, sic habita secum deliberatione promissam Deo pudiciti^ sidem
debuerunt custodire. Nos autem talibus nullum laqueum debemus injicere, sed
solum, etc. Epist. ad Lucania Episc. cap. 21.
If any Widows shall through Inconstancy, violate their profession of Chastity
willingly undertook; it concerns them to take care with what satisfaction they
may appease God. For as if they could not perhaps contain, they were not at all
forbidben to Marry; so when they have once deliberately promised Chastity to
God, they ought to have kept it, yet ought not we to lay a Snare (or impose a
Necessity) upon any such: But proposing to them the merits of Continence, and
danger of breaking of a Vow, leave the matter to their own Conscience. In the
Seventh Age, Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Penitential, which was
the Canon Law of the Church of England for some Ages, ordered, that Si vir
simplex votum virginitatis habens adjungitur uxori, non dimittat uxorem, sed
tribus annis p^niteat. apud Gratian. Did. 27. c. 3.
If any Man having a simple Vow of Virginity, married a Wife; he should not put
away his Wife, but only do Penance. In which words, lest Bellarmine's
distinction of a Simple and Solemn Vow should be thought to take place, it may
be observed, that Naldus, in his Annotations upon Gratian, confesses the word
Simplex is wanting in all the Manuscript Copies. In the end of the Eleventh
Age, even after the Decrees of Hildebrand were published, Epist. 218.
Ivo Bishop of Chartres, the greatest Canonist of his Age, relates how a Canon
of the Church of Paris Contracted Marriage; and maintains, that that Marriage
neither can, nor ought to be dissolved. In the next Age, Gratian the Compiler
of the Canon Law (consirmed by Eugenius III. and at this day in use in the
Church of Rome) is express for the validity of these Marriages. Si vero
Diaconus a ministerio cessare voluerit, contracto man imonio licite potest uti.
Nam etsi in ordinatione sua castitatis votum ob^ulerit; tamen tanta est vis in
Sacramento conjugii quod nec violatione voti potest dissolvi ipsum conjugium.
Did. 27. cap. 1.
If a Deacon (says he) will lay down his Office, he may lawfully use Marriage
when once Contracted. For although he made a Vow of Chastity at his Ordination,
yet so great is the force of the Sacrament of Marriage, that not even by the
violation of the Vow, can the Marriage be dissolved. In the Thirteenth Age,
Innocent III. and the whole Can. 14. Council. Tom. Xl. p. 168.
Lateran Conncil, acknowledged the Marriage of Priests, in some Western
Provinces, to be firm and valid, and the Use of it to be lawful. In the
Fifteenth Age, Epist. 307.
AEneas Sylvius, afterward Pope, by the Name of Pius II. and the most Learned
of all that have sat in St. Peter's Chair for these last Thousand years, being,
when Cardinal of Siena, desired by a Priest of his Acquaintance, who found he
could no longer contain, to obtain for him a Dispensation from the Pope to
Marry; returned him Answer, That the Pope refused it, and at the same aim gave
him this advice. Credimus te uti non insulso consilio, si quum nequeas
continere, conjugium quaeris, quamvis id prius cogitandum fuerat, antequam
initiareris sacris ordinibus. Sed non sumus dii omnes qui futura prospicere
voleamus. Quan^o huc ventum est, ut Iegi carnis resistere nequeas, melius est
nubere quam uri. Ibid.
I acknowledge you do not act imprudently, if when you cannot contain, you seek
to Marry; although that ought to have been considered, before you entered into
Holy Orders. But we are not all Gods, to soresee future Necessities. Seeing the
case is so, that you cannot any longer resist the law of the slesh, it is
better to Marry than to Burn. Thus we have proved, that the Doctrine of the
Invalidity of Marriages Contracted after a Vow of Continence, was unknown in
the first Ages of Christianity, opposed in the last, and not universally
received in the Church of Rome, until defined with an Anathema by the Council
of Trent; which thereby left the Controversy in a worse condition than they
found it.

Having thus dispatched the Controversial, I pass to the Historical part of my
Design; and therein will evince, that the Celibacy of the Clergy was looked
upon as a thing Indifferent in the Two first Centuries, Proposed in the Third,
Magnified in the Fourth, and in some Places Imposed in the Fifth, yet so, as
that even that Imposition did infinitely differ from the present Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of Rome; that however Commanded in some Provinces of
the West, it was no where universally Practiced; that in a few Ages this
Imposition became obsolete; this Yoke intolerable, and Marriage universally
prevailed, till condemned and forbidden by the Popes of the Eleventh Age; that
even their Decrees and Canons became ineffectual by an universal Opposition of
the whole Church; and the lawfulness of Marriage in the Clergy was aftewards
allowed and permitted by many Popes, and one General Council of the Roman
Church; that all this while Celibacy never was imposed or practifed in the
Eastern Church from the Apostles time; but the Imposition of it was rejected by
one, and condemned by another Council of the Universal Church; and obtained not
even in the West, till the Ambition and Usurpation of the Popes drawing to
themselves the Disposition of all greater Ecclesiastical Preferments, Poverty
became necessary to the Married Clergy; which caused Marriage to be wholly laid
aside by them about Two Hundred years before the Reformation. The Proof of
these things shall be the Subject of the remaining part of my Discourse. But
first I shall premise these few Considerations.

I. Although the Ancient Church should have imposed, or universally practiced
Celibacy, yet the Obligation of that Law, and Authority of that Example, would
be no reasonable, much less necessary Motive to the present Church to continue
the Imposition; since the Reasons which might have induced the Ancients to
enjoin or use it, are long since ceased. Those Reasons were to make the Clergy
more ready and willing to renounce the Pleasures of the World, and suffer
Martyrdom in Times of Persecution, and by their brave Example incite the Laity
to the same generous Constancy of Mind. In the flourishing and peaceable Times
of the Churches, there could be no other reason of enjoining it, than to
procure an extraordinary Veneration to the Clergy, by their Abstinence from
permitted Pleasures, and thereby facilitate and promote the common Edificacion
of the Church. As for the Reasons of some Admirers of Celibacy, who were led
aside with false Prejudices, and pre-conceived Errors; they vanish together
with the detection of their falsity, and do no longer oblige than those Errors
are maintained. But as for the other more solid Reasons, Providence has
annulled the first, by giving rest unto the Church; and an universal decay of
Piety, as well in Clergy as Laity, has defeated the second: Since what perhaps
was before Exemplary, is now become a Scandal to the whole Christian World.
This Cassander ingenuously confesses in these words; Nam causae ille, quibus
Majores ad constitutionem hanc faciendam inductos esse diximus, non solum hodie
cessarunt, sed etiam in contrarium sunt conversae. Nam primo videmus hoc
decreto usque adeo castitatem and continentiam in clero non consirmari, (...)
per illud ad omne libidinis and slagi^ii genus fenest^a aperta esse videatur:
item usque adeo non refraenatam in Clero avaritiam, ut etiam fraena magis (...)
esse videantur. Consult. Art. 23.
For those Reasons wherewith the Ancients were induced to make this
Constitution, are not only now ceased, but are even become opposite. For first,
we see that by this Decree Chastity and Continence is so far from being
promoted in the Clergy, that thereby a door is rather opened to all kind of
Lust and Villainy: and Coveteousness in the Clergy so far from being restrained
by it, that it seems hence to have received no small increase.

II. To Confute our Adversaries pretense of Antiquity, and establish my Design,
it is sufficient to produce the Authority of some Fathers, who thought the
Imposition of Celibacy unlawful or inconvenient to the Church; to allege the
Testimony of some Historians, assuring us that Marriage was in their Time used
indifferently by the Clergy; and propose the Examples of some Married Clergy:
Although some Fathers and Writers were of a contrary Opinion, or the greater
part of the Clergy perhaps practiced Celibacy. For this will undeniably prove,
that both Marriage and Celibacy were left indifferent to all; that neither was
a Point of Faith, an Institution of Christ or his Apostles. or a matter of
Universal Practice. Whereas our Adversaries pretending herein to an
uninterrupted Tradition, and constant Practice of the whole Church in all Ages,
must to that end produce a perfect consent of all Doctors, Historians and
Writers; and an universal Practice of all Times. If any one Writer occur, not
condemned; or any one Example not censured by the Church; the Plea of Tradition
must fall. Some indeed of the Roman Church, as Erasmus and Cassander, pretended
not to so Universal a Tradition and Practice; but then they were so far from
Defending the present Constitutions of the Church of Rome, by the Authority of
the Ancients, that they were open Enemies to the Imposinion of Celibacy.
However, the Dissent of ancient Doctors and Councils, and the diverse Practices
of private Clergymen, will manifestly demonstrate, that Celibacy was neither
universally imposed nor practiced in the Ancient Church, as it is at this day
in the Church of Rome; but that, as well as Marriage, left indifferent both to
Clergy and Laity, if not in some particular Provinces, yet at least in the
Universal Church.

III. The numbers of the Married Clergy in the Ancient Church, ought not to be
estimated only from the accounts of them which we find in Ecclesiastical
History of Monuments of Antiquity. For the Relation of Wives or Children, add
neither Ornament nor Use to History, nor have any part in it, unless upon
extraordinary occasions, which rarely happen. It concerns not Posterity to
know, whether Aristotle or Plato were Married; since neither Marriage nor
Celibacy will inhaunce their Virtue, or diminish their Worth. And if mention of
Wives be rarely found in Civil, much less will it in Ecclesiastical History.
For Women sometimes bear a share in Civil Matters; but in public Acts of
Religion, and Affairs of the Church, it is even unlawful for them to
intermeddle. So that if but a few Examples of Marriage in the Clergy of the
Ancient Church can be produced; we may thence reasonably conclude, that the
Married Clergy were then very numerous.

IV. The Reader may observe, that almost all those places, which we shall
produce out of the Ancient Doctors for the lawfulness of Marriage in the
Clergy, and against the Imposition of it, are taken either from their
dogmatical Treatises, which were written deliberately, and in a sedate temper
of Mind; or from their Harangues of Virginity, where the very force of Truth
extorted from them those Confessions. Whereas the Testimonies made use of by
our Adversaries, for the Necessity or Convenience of Celibacy in the Clergy,
are for the most part drawn either from these Encomiastick Discourses of
Virginity, where they employed all the force of their Eloquence to magnisie the
Merits of that State, and recommend it to the World; or from their Polemick
Writings against the Adversaries of Celibacy, wherein they were more intent to
Destroy Error, than Establish Truth. And no wonder, if in both these
Occasions, corrupted with Prejudice, or transported with Passion, they bent the
Bow to much, and receded from that Exactness of Truth, which is seated in the
middle way.

To these Observations, I may add the Confession of many Great Men in the
Church of Rome; who allow Celibacy, neither to have been imposed, nor
universally practiced in the Ancient Church. To pass by then Cassander,
Erasmus, and the more moderate Divines of that Church, I will produce only
Gratian and Mendosa; the last De consirm. Cont Illiber* l. 2. c. 66.
of which acknowledges that Marriage was always allowed to the Clergy, and
every where thought indifferent, till forbidden by the Council of Illiberis in
the Fourth Age: the first goes further in these words: Sive ergo Presbyter,
sive Diaconus, sive Subd. fuerit, Ex hac authoritate apparet, quod in praefatis
ordinibus constituti ^icite matrimonio uti possunt. -- Tempore Ancy^anae Synodi
nondum erat introducta continentia ministrorum altaris. Did. 28. cap. 13.
From this Authority (an Epistle of Pope Pelagius in the Sixth Age) it
appears, that the Clergy of the aforementioned Order, Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons, might then lawfully use Marriage. And in the time of the Council
of Ancyra (in the Fourth Age) the Continence of the Ministers of the Altar was
not yet introduced. Although perhaps by this last Passage only Deacons and
Subdeacons are understood. However, in another place he speaks more generally:
Cum ergo ex sacerdotibus nati in summos pontifices supra leguntur esse promoti;
non sunt intelligendi de fornicatione, sed ex legitimis conjugiis nati; quae
sacer dotibus ante prohibitionem ubique licita erant, and in Orientali Ecclesia
usque ^odie eis licere probatur. Did. 56. cap. 13.
When therefore we read that the Sons of the Clergy are promoted to be Popes or
Bishops; they are not to be thought to have been born of Fornication, but of
lawful Marriage, which was every where permitted to the Clergy before the
prohibition, and is to this day permitted to them in the Eastern Church.

Having premised these few preliminary Observations, I proceed to Matter of
Fact; and begin with the Apostles: than whom none better knew the intention of
their Master, or the convenience of the Church, and were the best Pattern of
the Clergy for all future Ages. St. Basil seems to have believed that all the
Apostles were married, where speaking of the excellency of of Marriage (...).
Sermon. de abdicat. rerum post init.
he brings in the Example of Peter and the rest of the Apostles. The
Interpolater of Ignatius his Epistles (who lived in the beginning of the Sixth
Age) in like manner produces the Examples of Peter, Paul, and (...). Epist. ad
Philadelph.
the other Apostles, or as the Latin Translator (antienter than Ado Viennensis,
who flourished in the year 875.) renders it, Reliqui Apostoli. Ibid.
the rest of the Apostles. The Author of the Commentary upon the Epistles of
St. Paul in St. Ambrose's Works (who was Hilary a Deacon of Rome) excepts Omnes
Apostoli, exceptis Joanne and Paulo, uxores habuerunt. Comm. in Epist. ad Cor.
cap. 11.
St. Paul and St. John, and affirms all the rest to have been married.

That St. Peter was married we are assured by the Authority of the Holy
Scripture: Matthew. 8. 14.
That he had a Daughter by her the ancient Book of his (...) or Travels,
Quamquam legatur in (...) and uxor ejus (Petri) and filia. apud Hieron. adv.
Jovin. lib. 1.
writ before the times of Origin, manifest; to whom the latter Legendary
Writers give the name of Petronilla. St. Peter is kniwn to have had a Wife; and
the begitting of Children hindered him not from obtaining precedence among the
Apostles, says the abovementioned S. Petrus uxorem habuisse cognoscitur, and
primatum ut acciperet in^er Apostolos, non ei obstitit gencratio filiorum,
inter August. Opp. Tom. IV. prope fin.
Hilary in his Questions upon both Testaments, falsely ascribed to St. Austin:
For that he was the Author of them is abundantly demonstrated by the learned
Garnerius, Appendix ad par. 1. Opp. Marii Merc. Dissert. 1. cap. 8.
That he led about his Wife with him in his Travels and Preaching. St. Paul
plainly intimates in these words: Cor. 9. 5.
Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, (...), as well as other
Apostles (or rather, as the rest of the Apostles, (...)) and as the brethren of
the Lord, and Cephas? Our Adversaries indeed pretend, that by (...) in this
place is to be understood not a Wife, but an assistant Woman, commonly of the
richer and more aged sort, carried about by the Apostles to minister to their
necessities, provide them maintenance, and serve them in the quality of
Deaconesses: And thus it must be acknowledged the greatest part of the Ancients
did interpret it. However, I will oppose to that Opinion some considerable, and
perhaps convictive Arguments. As first, the ordinary acception of the word
(...) both in the Septuagint and the New Testament, where the name Wife is
never designed by any other word. Secondly, this Interpretation was by the
Ancients received from Tertullian, who first proposed it in his Book of
Monogamy, which he writ after he was become a Montanist. Thirdly, the contrary
Opinion of all the Catholics in Tertullian's time, For in his Exhortations to
Chastity, writ likewise after his fall, decrying the excellency of Marriage, he
introduces the Catholics thus objecting to him, Licebat and Apestolis ^ubere,
and uxores ci^cumducere, cap. 8.
It was lawful even for the Apostles to marry, and to lead about their wives
with them. And indeed Clemens Alexandrinus, the most Learned and Orthodox of
all the Writers of the three sirst Centuries; expressly interprets Strom. l. 3.
this place of Wives; and further adds, That St. Peter had several Children by
his Wife. Not to mention Cardinal Humbert in latter Ages, who, Respons. ad
Nicet. Pectorat. apud Baron. Annal. Tom. XI. p. 720.
although a bitter Enemy of Priests Marriage, allows and follows this
Interpretation. That is more considerable, which Eusebius Lib. 3. c^p. 30.
relates from the same Clemens, that St. Peter saw his Wife suffer Martyrdom,
and standing by her exhorted her generously to undergo it; which alone might
demonstrate, that she accompanied him in all his Travels: Since, excepting St.
Stephen, and St. James the Great, none suffered Death for the Christian Faith,
till the latter end of Nero's Reign, when St. Peter was wholly employed in the
West.

The Marriage of St. Paul, however, commonly denied by the Ancients, and
universally by the Moderns, is attested by great Authorities. Clemens
Alexandrinus, the Disciple of Pantaenus, who (by the Testimony of Photius) Cod.
118.
had those for his Masters, who had seen and conversed with the Apostles, and
who himself writ within 125 years after the death of St. Paul, and had
traveled into Palaestine; expressly affirms Strom. l. 3.
it. From him Euse^ius Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 30.
receiving this Tradition, transcribeth and approves it. These two Authorities
are sufficient alone to create a probability. However, I will observe that many
still retained the same Opinion in the end of the Fourth Age. So St. Hierom
Epist. de custod. virgin. ad Eustoc^ium.
assures us some believed in his time. St. Chrysostom Hom. 13. in Philipp.
acknowledges the same thing, and adds that many in his time maintained, St.
Paul directed those words to his Wife ( Philipp. 4. 3.) I entreat thee also,
true yoke fellow, (...). For those words in the Attick dialect, the most
elegant of the Greek Tongue, may be translated, my faithful Wife. Nay, in the
Sixth Age the Interpolator of Ignatius's Epistles has these words: (...).
Epist. ad Philadelph.
In praising Virginity, I do not blame all other holy Men, because they used
Marriage. For I desire only to be thought worthy of God to be placed at their
feet in the kingdom of heaven; as of Abraham, Isaac; Jacob, Joseph, and the
other Prophets, as of Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles, who used
Marriage. This place the Ancient Latin Interpreter, who lived about the Eighth
Age, has retained and translated with advantage: It is a foolish, as well as
impudent Pretense, which the Writers of the Church of Rome allege to defeat
the Authority of this Testimony: They maintain that the name of St. Paul was
foisted in by the fraud of some latter Greeks, at least Reformed Printers: and
therefore the Index Expurgatorius commands his name to be wiped out of all
Editions, yet have they no other Foundation for this consident Calumny, than
the Authority of two Manuscript Copies, which they pretend to be very ancient,
the one of Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary; the other of Magdalen College
in Oxford, taken up upon the Credit of an Irish ^ugitive. Whereas the first was
never seen since the days of Ambrosius Camaldulensis, who lived 250, years
since; the other Bishop Usher Not. in ^gnat. Epist. cap. 17.
saw, and found to be no older than the year 1490. That the Reformed Printers
corrupted not this place, appears from all the Editions before the Reformation,
particularly those of Fabor Stapulensis Paris 1498. Strasbourg 1502. and Jod.
Clichtovaus Paris 1515. and many Editions set forth by Papists since the
Reformation; wherein the name of St. Paul is found. The Greeks are no less
cleared from all fraud herein by the consent of the Latin Copies, particularly
of one 800. years old in Baliol College in Oxford, mentioned by Dr. James,
Corrupt. of the Fathers, par. 2. p. 57.
wherein although some zealous Romanist had blotted out the name of St. Paul,
and the other Apostles, yet they had done it so slightly, that the words were
still easily legible.

Now whether St. Peter led about his Wife with him, or St. Paul was married, is
not of so great moment to our case, as is the Conclusion, which may be
evidently drawn from the belief, entertained by some of the Ancients, both of
the one and of the other. For even if we should grant their Opinion to have
been erroneous; yet it manifestly demonstrates, that in their time, the
Celibacy of the Clergy was neither believed to have been instituted by the
Apostles, nor universally practiced by the preceding Ages, nor the use of
Marriage inconvenient, much less incompatible to the Priesthood. Had any of
these Opinions been generally received in their time; it is impossible they
should have been so stupid, as to believe the Apostles had done a thing
contrary to their own Institution, or the laudable practice of succeeding Ages,
or the Dignity of their Office.

Of the other Apostles, St. Philip had Three Daughters, whom by the Testimony
of (...). Strom. l. 3.
Clemens Alex. he Married to so many Husbands. Of the Four Virgin Daughters of
Philip the Deacon, we read in the Act. 21. 9.
Acts of the Apostles. The Marriage of Nicholas the Deacon, is Famous in
Ecclesiastical History; which because the Mis-representation of it gave
occasion to many Errors, and the Imposers of Celibacy in the Eleventh Age,
constantly traduced the Marriage of Priests with the Title of Nicolaite,
Heresy, it will not be amiss here to rectify. Clemens Alex. the most Ancient
of all who mention it (for Lib. 1. cap. 27.
St. Irenaeus says only, That the Nicolaites came from Nicolas the Deacon)
relates it it thus: Strom. l. 3.
Nicolas having a very beautiful Wife, became unreasonably Jealous of her: for
which being rebuked by the Apostles, that he might purge himself of all
Suspicion of Jealousy, he brought his Wife into the midst of the Company, and
giving up his Right to her, gave free leave to any one to marry her; not that
he intended any such thing, but only to show by that Bravado, how far he was
from Jealousy. This indeed was a rash and imprudent Act, which gave neither
Example nor just Occasion to those execrable things which afterward the
Nicolaites practiced, and some credulous Persons believed to have been
committed by Nicolas; whom Loc. cit.
Clemens affirms to have been truly Chaste, and have used the company of none
but his own Wife; by whom he had one Son, and several Daughters, all Persons of
Exemplary Virtue and Modesty. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 29.
Eusebius, De Haeres. cap. 5.
St. Augustine, and Haeret. Fab. l. 3. c. 1.
Theodoret, relate the Story the same way. Only Haeres. 25. in init.
Epiphanius relates in a different manner; That Nicolas having vowed perpetual
Abstinence from his Wife, was allured by the Charms of her Beauty to return to
her Embraces, and violate his Vow; and afterward not only became unreasonably
Jealous, but fell into all kind of Uncleanness, and founded the Heresy of the
Nicolaites. This Relation Epiphanius seems to have received from the impure
Gnostics, with whom he conversed in his Youth; and as he was a Person
infinitely credulous, and of weak judgment, blindly to have followed it.
However, his Authority in a matter of this nature, is of no moment, when
opposed to Clemens and Eusebius, judicious and more ancient Writers.

From the Apostolic Times, I proceed to the Doctrine and Practice of
succeeding Ages, till the Council of Nice. Of the two first Ages, few Monuments
of the Church are now extant; and in them not the least foot-step of Celibacy
imposed or generally used by the Clergy, to be sound. Rather Clemens Alex.
assures us, that (...). Strom. l. 3. (...). Ibid. (...) (Apostolus) (...).
Ibid. (...) Ibid.
Every Christian in his time, might as himself pleased, either chose or omit
Marriage. That all, none excepted, had power to make use of that Marriage which
the Gospel permitted them, first Marriage; where he plainly speaks of the
Clergy: for second Marriage was never forbidden to the Laity. But the following
words are more remarkable: The Apostle very well approves the Husband of one
Wife, although he be a Priest, or a Deacon, or a Layman, if he uses his
Marriage unblameably: for he shall be saved by Procreation of Children. And
what will the Condemners of Marriage say to these Precepts, since the Apostle
commands him to preside over the Church in quality of Bishop, who governs
his own House well, and the Marriage of one Wife represents the Church of
Christ. Indeed, about the Year 170. Pinytus, Bishop of Gnossus, in Creete, had,
under pretense of a greater Perfection and Purity, endeavored to impose
Celibacy upon his Clergy: Which when Dionysius the Famous Bishop of Corinth
heard, he writ an Epistle to him, representing the injustice of his attempt,
and persuading him, (...). Eusebius Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 23.
not to impose so heavy a burden, as Necessity of Continence, upon the
Brethren; but to have regard to the infirmity of many. That by the Brethren in
this place, only the Clergy are meant, appears evidently from the Character
which Eusebius gives of Pinytus, That he was a Pious and Orthodox Person:
Whereas had he imposed Celibacy upon all the Faithful, he had been guilty of a
gross and most erroneous Heresy. To this I might add the Confession of the
most Learned De confirm. Council. Illib. l. 2. c. 66.
Mendoza, and many others, if so clear a Matter wanted any further
Illustration. That Pinytus yielded to the Admonition of Dionysius, and quitted
his attempt, we are assured by Rescribent, sententiam quidem consilii melioris,
amplectitur. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 23.
Russinus, who says, That Pinytus writing back to him, embraced the Opinion of
his better counsel. In the Third Age, Origin plainly insinuates, That First
Marriage was in his Time indifferently permitted to the Clergy; Sicut ab
Ecclesiasticis dignitatibus, non solum fornicatio, sed and nuptiae repelunt.
Nequeenim Episcepus, nec Presbiter, nec Diaconus, nec vidua possunt esse
Digami. Hom. 17. in Luc. prope sine.
Not only Fornication (says he) but also (Second) Marriage, excludes from
Ecclesiastical Dignities. For neither a Bishop, nor Priest, nor Deacon, nor
Deaconness, can be Digamists. Himself indeed was agreat Admirer of Celibacy;
but that we shall speak to hereafter.

Of the Practice of the Church in these Three first Ages, not a few Examples
may be produced. For, to pass by the Apostles and Deacons already mentioned,
Epist ad Philipp. prope sine.
St. Polycarp professes himself to be very sorry for Valens Presbyter, of
Philippi, and his Wife. That Tertullian Presbyter, of Carthage, was married,
all ackowledge; that he abstained from his Wife, after his entrance into Holy
Orders, is a mere Fiction of the Papists; which however contemned by some
Reformed Divines, may be refuted by Tertullian's own words. For in his Two
Books directed to her, to persuade her to continue a Widow after his death; or
if through the infirmity of the Flesh we cannot do that, yet at least to marry
none but a Christian, he has these words: Quare facultatem continentiae,
quantum p^ssumus, non deligamus? Qu^m primum obvenerit, imbibamus; ut quod in
matrimonio non valemus, in viduitate sectemur. Amplectenda occasio est quae,
ademit, quod necessit as imperabat. Ad Uxor. l. 1. prope sin. edit. Basil.
1528. per B. Rhenanum.
Why should we not love the Perfection of Continence, as much as we are able?
As soon as it offers itself, let us embrace it, that what we are not now able
to do whilst Married, we may perform in Widowhood. That occasion ought to be
laid hold of, which depriveth us of those Pleasures, that Necessity before
commanded. A little before Tertullian's time, Adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 9.
Irenaeus relates how Marcus the Haeresiarch being entertained by a Catholic
Deacon in Asia, who had a handsome Wife, debauched her both in Body and Mind,
and ran away with her. In the Decian Persecution, Chaeremon, Bishop of Nile, in
Egypt, fled into the Mountains of Arabia, ( a) together with the Companion of
his life, or as Valesius (...). Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 42.
truly translates it, Cum conj^ge fugiens.
With his Wife. Among the Articles of Misdemeanour, whereof Epist. 49. ad
Cornelium.
St. Cyprian accuses Novatus Presbyter, of Carthage, and Author of the
Novatian Schism in Africa, one is, that he kicked his Wife great with Child,
and caused her to Miscarry. That St. Cyprian himself was married, and lived
with his Wife after the the receiving of Holy Orders, we may learn from In vit.
Cypriani. post init.
Pontius his Deacon, who speaking of his eminent Virtues, and extraordinary
Piety, whilst yet Presbyter, says, That neither Want nor Sorrow could
discourage him; neither the Persuasions of his Wife, nor the Sufferings of his
own Body, could divert him from neglecting the care of his estate, to attend
the Exercises of his Religion. Caecilius, Presbyter of Carthage, who had
converted St. Cyprian to the Christian Faith, at his death, Id Ibid.
recommended his Wife and Children to his Care and Protection. Inter Cypriani
Epist. number. 18.
Caldonius, in an Epistle to St. Cyprian, reckons Faelix, a Presbyter, and
Victorin his Wife, among the Confessors of Africa. In the Dioclesian
Persecution, Phileas, the most Holy Bishop of Thmuis, in Egypt, and Philoromus,
being brought Eusebius. l. 8. c. 9.
before the Heathen Judge, to receive Sentence of Martyrdom, were desired by
him to take Pity, if not of themselves, yet at least of their Wives and
Children, and prevent the Ruin of their Families, by sacrisicing to Idols;
although those brave Martyrs slighted his Admonitions, and scorned such ignoble
Considerations.

However, Celibacy and the Merits of Virginity, began to be highly extolled,
and gained great Reputation in the Third Age. Many Causes concurred to advance
this Reputation, as the Convenience of the Church at that time, the Mistakes of
Catholic, and Artifices of Heretics, I shall begin with the last, and
observe, that in all the numerous train of Heresies, from the Apostles time to
the Council of Nice, scarce was there any one which did not condemn Marriage,
or at least decry the Dignity of it, and cry up Celibacy as the most Perfect
and most Virtuous state, and the nearest way to Heaven. Which alone is no small
Prejudice to the Doctrine and Practice of the present Church of Rome, that the
imaginary Excellencies of Celibacy were unknown to the World, till discovered
by the grossest and most foolish Heretics that ever infected the Christian
Church. I do not hereby accuse the Church of Rome of their Heresy, yet cannot
but take notice, that in urging Celibacy to her Clergy, she proceeds upon the
same Principles with them, a greater Perfection, and more refined Piety, an
unusal abstinence from all Pollutions of the Flesh, and Pleasures of the World:
That some of them enjoined not Celibacy to all their Followers, but only
persuaded it to those who aimed at Perfection; and that the Heresy of
Eustathius, condemned by the Council of Gangra, was in terminis revived by the
Popes and Councils of the Eleventh Age.

Saturnilus, Disciple of Menander, led the dance; (...). Theod. Haeret. Fab. l.
1. c. 3.
He first called Marriage the Doctrine of the Devil: and was herein followed by
an infinite rabble of Heretics, Nicolaites, Cerinthians, the Sects of Marcus,
Basildes, Carpocrates, Isidorus, Marcion, Cassian, Tatian, and many others, who
absolutely rejected Marriage, as unlawful and impure, and beneath the dignity
of a spiritual and more perfect Christian. To this end, they pretend no less
specious Reasons, than are at this day alleged by the Patrons of Celibacy, as,
Vid. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3. in init.
that being freed from the Cares of a Family, they might attend the better to
Acts of Devotion and Piety: That (...), i. e. (...). Id. Strom. l. 3.
it was a noble Attempt, and worthy the ambition of a Christian to surmount all
the inclinations of the Flesh, and by afflicting of it entirely subject it to
the Soul: not to yield to the unruly Passions of the Body, but rather by such a
Mortification increase the perfections of the Soul with Faith and Knowledge.
Nor were these their only Reasons: They also pretend to Tradition, and although
immediately after the Apostles deaths, entitled their horrid Doctrines to those
Sacred Names; and to confirm their Plea forged Gospels, Acts, and Histories
under the Apostles names, injurious to Marriage, and consonant to their own
Opinions. But so gross a Heresy, however, backed with great and specious
pretenses, survived not the middle of the Third Age. When that declined, other
more subtle and refined Heretics arose in their stead, who indirectly and
obliquely oppose Marriage, yet upon the same topic of greater Purity and
Perfection. Thus the Montanists condemned all second Marriages; and reviled the
Catholics, who defended them, with the opprobious Title of Pry^hici or Carnal
Men. Thus the Novatians revolted from the Church, and accused her of
licentionsness, because she admitted to Communion those Digamists, who after a
Divorce of one Wife, for whatsoever cause, even for that of Adultery, had
married another. Lastly, thus the Manichees, although enjoining Celibacy to
none, nor forbidding Marriage to any, through a mistaken Impurity in the use of
it, excluded all married Persons from the rank of their Elect, or more perfect
Christians, and permitted it only to their Hearers, or inferior order of their
Sect. And when all these Heresies were every where exploded by the Catholic
Church; the Reputation of Celibacy still found entertainment in the World, as
being more speciously and cunningly proposed, especially by the Eustathian
Heretics, who aflixed it only to the Clergy, and refused to communicate with
married Priests, imagining the Sacraments by them administered to be wholly
ineffectual.

Thus did the Celibacy of the Clergy gradually advance from a gross and foolish
Heresy to a regular and well formed error: And however, these ancient
Heretics committed the most abominable Villainies, and unnatural Lusts under
pretense of absolute Purity and Continence, so that what Pope Leo Conjugalem
copulam detestantur, quia non est illic libertus turpitudinis, ubi and pud^r
matrimonii servatur, and spes sobolis, Epist. 93. ad Turrib. cap. 7.
said of the Priscillianists, might justly be applied to them all: They
detested Marriage, because there is no liberty for uncleanness, where the
Chastity of the Nuptial Bed, and the hope of Posterity is preserved;
notwithstanding their promiscuous Fornications, and brutish Lusts, which gave
scandal to the very Heathens: The glorious pretense of Chastity and Perfection
gained infinite applause in the World, and drew multitudes of Sectators after
them. The very name of Encratites or continent Persons, common to all these
Heretics, commanded Veneration from (...) people; and all were apt to admire
an imaginary Perfection, which they found themselves so much wanted. It seems
ever to have been the unhappiness of Mankind to be deluded with excesses of
Virtue; although all such naturally degenerate into Vices, or at least into
things indifferent. Thus a rash and precipitate boldness is admired beyond a
moderate and wellgoverned valor; and Enthusiasm ever gains greater esteem than
a sober and rational Devotion. Thus among the Speculative Sects of Heathen
Philosophy Platonists, among the Moral Sects, Stoics and Cynicks, obtained the
greatest applause; merely because the first pretended to an extraordinary, and
perhaps, impossible abstraction of the Mind from corporeal and sensitive
Objects; and the latter boasted of a perfect Immunity from all Passions, and
the exercise of a tyrannical command over the Body: And both seemed to trample
under foot the considerations of Flesh and Blood, and surmount the ordinary
Capacity of Mankind. Such prejudices as these recommended Celiba^y to the
World, and advanced the pretentions of these ancient Heretics: Who although
they corrupted not the whole Church with the Poison of their Error, yet they
almost every where introduced false Notions of Marriage into the Minds of Men;
and although they could not cause it to be universally condemned, yet at least
procured it to be generally despised. And indeed never did any Heresy prevail
in the Church, which did not leave some tincture of it self, even in the Minds
of Catholics. Thus it may be observed, that there is not one Writer in the
Fifth Age, wherein some touch either of Pelagianism, or Predestinatism may not
be discovered. How far the Heresy of these Encratites prevailed, and secretly
corrupted the Judgment of Catholics, I shall next enquire.

First then, The Relics of the Eustathian Heresy so far prevailed among the
Catholics, that many of them believed it highly indecent for him to meddle
with the Administration of Sacred Things, who indulged himself the liberty of
Marriage, as if he had contracted some Impurity thereby, and made himself
unworthy of the holy Office: an Error common to all the Patrons of Celibacy,
which proceeded so far in the time of Gregory Nazianzen, that many would not
willingly receive Baptism, or the Eucharist from married Priests; but much
farther in the time of Hildebrand, and once again advanced into the formal
Heresy of the Eustathians. From the Montanists the Catholics received their
dislike of second Marriages, one of the most palpable Errors of Antiquity;
since what the Apostle expressly allows, and in some Cases advises, most of
the Ancients decry as scandalous and inconvenient, oft-times as a tolerable
Evil, and sometimes even as a grievous sin. Tertullian has written whole Books
against it. Athenagoras* (...), Legate, christ. prope fin.
calls it a decent Adultery. Origin Puto digamum, licet bonam habeat
conversationem, and caeteris virtutibus polleat, non esse tamen de Ecclesia.
Hom. 17. in Luc. in sin.
maintains that a Digamist, however otherwise a person of good conversation,
and adorned with all other Virtues not to belong to the Church. I might add
many other Fathers and Councils, who imposed a tedious Penance upon Digamists:
but the thing is sufficiently notorious. This prejudice against Digamy was
first taken up in the end of the Second Age. Before that time second Marriage
was thought indifferent, and wholly innocent. Hermes Et dixi, si vir vel mulier
alicujus decesserit, and nupserit aliquis eorum; nunquid peccat: Qui nubit, non
peccat, inquit. Pastor, lib. 2. Mandat. 4. Sect. 4.
in ^he First Age had determined the lawfulness of it; and Clemens Alexandrinus
Storm. lib. 3.
in the next pleads largely for it. From the Gnostics the Catholics received
an erroneous Opinion of some Impurity and Sinfulness, or at least Imperfection
in the use of Marriage. They scrupled not to use the Authority of Books forged
by those Heretics in prejudice of Marriage, such as the Gospel of the
Egyptians, the Acts of Paul and Tecla, and the like; and in some measure
adopted their Errors. Thus Origin, and one of the most early Favorers of
Celibacy, writes thus of Marriage, Ego autem licet non usquequaque pronunciem,
puto tamen quod sunt nonnulla etiam communium hominum gesta, quae quamvis
peccato careant, non tan^ digna videantur, quibus interesse putemus Spiritum
Sanctum ut verbi gratia dixerim, connubia legitima carent quidem peccato, nec
tamen tempore illo, quo conjugales actus geruntur, praesentia Spiritus Sancti
dabitur; etiamsi Propheta esse videatur, qui officio generationis obsequitur.
Hom. 6. in Number.
Although I will not positively pronounce, yet I suppose these are some
ordinary actions of Men, which however they be free from sin, are not worthy to
be honored with tbe presence of the Holy Gospel: for instance, lawful Marriage
is not indeed sinful; yet while conjugal Acts are performed, the Holy Ghost
will not be present; although he seems to be a Prophet, who performs them. St.
Hierom, the great Patron of Celibacy, in the next Age, goes farther, and
disputing against Jovinian, does in some places make Marriage not only sinful,
but even damnable. If it be good, says he, Si b^num est mulierem non tangere,
malum est ergo tangere; nihil enim bono contrarium est, nisi malum. Adv.
Jovian. l. 1. Quamdiu impleo mariti officium, non impleo Christiani. Jubet enim
Apostolus, ut semper oremus; si semper orandum est, nunquam ergo conjugio
serviendum: quoniam quotiescunque uxori debitum reddo orare possum. Ibid. Puto
quod and (...) sinis mors. Ibid. Nuptiae terras replent virgini^as Paradisum.
Ibid. Et sicut baben^ibus uxores tollit licentiam dimicendi eas, sic virginibus
nubendi amputat facultem. Ibid. Tolerabllius est uni homini prosti^tam esse
quam multis. Ibid.
for a Man not to touch a Woman, then it is evil to touch her: For nothing is
contrary to Good, but Evil. While I perform the Duty of a Husband, I do not the
Duty of a Christian. For the Apostle commands we should always pray. If so,
we must never serve the ends of Marriage. For as often as I do that, I cannot
pray. I suppose that the end of Marriage is eternal Death. The Earth indeed is
filled by Marriage, but Paradise by Virginity. And as the Apostle permits not
those who are already married to put away their Wives; so he forbideth Virgins
to marry. Marriage is permitted only as a remedy of Lust; it being more
tolerable to be prostituted to one man than many. Nor did this Error expire
with those Heresies, from whence they rose. About the year 600. when Augustine,
Archbishop of Canterbury, desired of Pope Gregory some Instructions for his new
Converts in England, and Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline, he gave him this
for one. Vir autem cum propria conjuge dormiens, nisi lotus aqua intrare
Ecclesiam non debet sed neque lotus statim intrare debet. apud Bedam. Hist.
Eccl. l. 1. c. 27.
A Man after he has laid with his own Wife, ought not to enter into the
Church, till he has washed himself with water, nor must then immediately
enter. Whereas Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. lib. 3.
praising the Simplicity of the Christian Religion, instanceth in this very
Ceremony; which although used of old by the Jews, he says was no where
practiced in his time by the Christians. Many other erroneons Opinions obtained
in the ancient Church, which proceeded from no other cause but this. I will
observe but one more: their Opinion of the lawfulness of Self-murder to prevent
the loss of Virginity, imagining somewhat of Sinfulness and Impurity was
inseparably annexed even to the natural act of Generation. So Eusebius Hist.
Eccl. l. 8. c. 44. and alibi.
bestows large Encomiums upon some Virgins and Matrons, who had laid violent
hands upon themselves to prevent the Lust of Heathens: And Aldhelmus Propria
manuperire non licet, absque eo ubi castitas periclitatur lib. de Virginit. in
Orthodoxogr, p. 1694.
cites a Sentence of some Father more ancient than himself: Self-murder is
unlawful, unless when Chastity is endangered: which he consirms, and
illustrates with many Reasons and Examples.

Such weaknesses of the Ancients had deserved indeed to be buried in Oblivion;
if they had not influenced their Practice, and laid the Foundations of an
Error, which continues even to this day, that Marriage is a state
Unbefitting, and Celibacy therefore Necessary to the Clergy: An Opinion first
taken up upon those Prejudices which we have just now mentioned, and maintained
upon the Authority of those who are led away with these Mistakes. So that to
take away the Plea of Antiquity from the Church of Rome, in the case of
Celibacy, it were sufficient to show, that the Ancients received and embraced
it merely for the sake of these Prejudices and Mistakes: Which we have already
done. For these were the great and only Arguments of Celibacy, for the first
Thousand years; while none were yet so foolish as to imagine it to be of Divine
or Apostolical Institution. The pre-conceived Opinions of the impurity of
Marriage in all, and great indecency of it in those who administered Holy
things, tended directly to introduce the Celibacy of the Clergy. For these
Reasons, Unde mihi videtur quod illius solius est sacrificium offerre
indesinens, qui indesinenti and perpetuae se devoverit castitiati. Hom. 28. in
Number.
Origin and Demonstr. Evang. l1. c. 9. in fine.
Eusebius, who were the only Orthodox Writers before the Council of Nice, who
openly prefer the Celibacy of the Clergy to their Marriage, desired it might be
introduced. For they rather faintly wished the thing, than dogmatically used
it; and by their Wishes manifest, that it was not yet introduced. As for their
unreasonable prejudice against Digamy, that contributed no less to the cause of
Celibacy, than the other Mistakes, For the unlawfulness of Digamy once
supposed, the force of the Apostles Precept of Marriage to all who could not
contain, became wholly enervate; since a Man is no less subject to Incontinence
after enjoyment of a Wife for some few years, perhaps days, than he was before
he ever married. Besides, all the Patrons of Celibacy failed not to make use of
this Argument: That if Second Marriage be unlawful or indecent to the Laity,
even First Marriage will be so to the Clergy; it being usual for them who
disallowed Second Marriage in all, to think First Marriage only a tolerable
evil, and permitted in some; as Divorce was formerly to the Jews. And then it
was a natural order of Superstition, first to forbid Second, and then all
Marriage to the Clergy. Therefore we may observe, that in the beginning of the
Third Age, Ad Uxorem. l. 1. c. 7.
Tertullian affirms Digamy to have been forbidden to the Clergy both by
Apostolical Tradition, and the Discipline of the Church, and to be generally
discussed by them in his time, as a scandalous Imperfection, if not a Crime.
But we no where find Marriage forbidden to the Clergy, till the time of the
Apostolic Canons, first published in the end of this, or beginning of the next
Age.

These Mistakes and Prejudices, and Reasons of Celibacy founded upon them, were
common to both Churches; but there was one Reason peculiar to the Western
Church, which however it may seem light, was of great efficacy: and that was
the unhappy Fall of Tertullian into Montanism. That Great and Learned Person,
naturally endowed with an ardent Genius, of a severe and inflexible temper of
Mind, infinitely zealous for all outward appearances of religious
Mortification, and after his Fall prompted with that Enthusiastic Spirit,
which was the peculiar Character of the Montanists, set himself to advance the
Opinion of his Sect with all imaginable vigor. The unlawfulness of Digamy, was
the chief Tenet of that Sect, and that founded upon an erroneous Supposition of
some Imperfection in the Use even of First Marriage. In maintaining and
recommending these Errors to the World, Tertullian employed all the force of
his Wit and Eloquence to debase the dignity of Marriage, and extol the merits
of a Single-life, whether Widowhood or Virginity. The extraordinary reverence
and esteem which his great Learning and apparent Zeal procured to him in
succeeding Ages, mightily propagated his Errors, and corrupted his Readers
with false Prejudices and Notions of Marriage and Virginity. For although it had
been reasonable and sufficient to say of him, what St. De Ter^ulliano nihil
aliud dico, quam Ecclesiae hominem non fuisse. Adv. Helvid.
Hierome once said, when pressed hard with his Authority, He was a Schismatic,
no Writer of the Church: Yet few considered that; the persuasive force of his
Eloquence was more sensible than the remembrance of his Schism; and then few
enquired which Books he writ before, and which after his Fall; or rather it was
a common Error, that he writ very few after, and almost all before his Fall.
Whereas in truth he writ before his Fall only the Three little Treatises of
Baptism, Repentance, and Prayer; not the Twentieth part of his Works now
extant. To this Reputation of Tertullian, and the ill Effects of it,
contributed not a little the infinite esteem and veneration which St. Cyprian
had for his Writings; while unwary Persons imagined, that the deference, which
that blessed Martyr paid to his Learning and Zeal, was an effect of the
soundness and orthodoxy of his Doctrine. However, certain it is, that the Fall
of Tertullian advanced and increased the former Prejudices; and this I take to
be the only reason, why Celibacy ever prevailed more in the Western than in the
Eastern Church.

All these Prejudices were in themselves unlawful. But there were other Reasons
of preferring Celibacy in the Ancient Church; which might have been allowed, if
not attended with such fatal Consequences. And first, many Catholics openly
espoused the cause of Celibacy, and others winked at their Policy, merely to
prevent the Delusion of more simple Catholics, by the no less glorious than
fraudulent Pretenses of the Encratites: Quia sciunt virginale vocabulum
gloriosum, sub ovium pellibus lupos tegunt. Christum mentitur Antichristus, and
turpitudinem vitae falso uominis honor convestiunt. Epist. ad Eustoch. de
custod. Virgin.
Who (to use St. Hierome's words) because they knew the name of Virginity was
venerable, covered the Wolves under Sheepscloathing. Antichrist pretended to
act the part of Christ, and veiled the uncleanness of their Lives, with the
false honor of that usurped Name. They esteemed it a laudable Policy to
prevent the Mischief, by proposing to the Practice of Men that very Perfection,
which the Heretics so much boasted of, and the Multitude were apt to admire,
as being always casier led with great Pretenses, than sober Truth. A not unlike
Policy with this, was afterward used by Socrat. l. 6. c. 8.
St. Chrysostom against the Arians; when fearing the People would be seduced
by their Enthusiastical singing of Hymns, he set up the same way of singing of
Hymns among the Catholics, and thereby prevented the design of the Arians; a
Stratagem, as the (...).
Historian observes, and may be applied to our case; which however specious,
was the Occasion of very ill Consequences.

While Celibacy thus gained ground by the Artisice of Heretics, and Connivance
of Catholics, few interposed themselves to undeceive Mankind, and stop the
torrent of these vulgar Prejudices; as well because the immoderate esteem of
Celibacy seemed a Matter of no great moment, while it was forcibly imposed upon
none, nor made necessary to any; as because the dis-favour and unjust
suspicions of the Multitude would probably have attended such an undertaking:
While unreasonable Men would have esteemed such a Person as a Libertine, an
Enemy of refined and more severe Religion, and thought him to have therein
pleaded only for his own Passions and Inclinations. And when Celibacy became
once universally esteemed, and great numbers of Laymen vowing Virginity,
voluntarily abstained from Marriage, who by their supposed Sanctity and
specious Abstinence, drew to themselves the eyes and admiration of all Men; the
Clergy also were necessitated to make some advances in the Use of Celibacy,
that they might not suffer loss of Reputation, and seem less Virtuous and
Spiritual than Laymen. Hence St. Hierome frequently urges the Celibacy of the
Clergy, by the Example of Lay-Virgins, affirming it to be highly indecent that
the Laity should exceed the Clergy even in voluntary Acts of Piety and
Mortification. This Reason afterward received great advantage from the
wonderful increase of Monkery, and Vows of Continence, in the Fourth and Fifth
Ages; insomuch that Ut pene jam major in Eccles^is omnibus virginum apud vos
quam mulierum numerositas habeatur. Apud Augustine. lib. 30.
Faustus the Manichee objected to St. Austin, that the immoderate Commendation
of Virginity had among the Catholics produced this Effect, that in all their
Churches there seemed to be a greater number of professed Virgins, than married
Women. No wonder then, if Reverence attending the unmarried, and Contempt the
married Clegry, Celibacy prevailed in the Church, and Marriage by being
dis-esteeemed became also dis-used; especially since Ambition contributed not a
little to it. For from the end of the Fourth Age, the Bishops and greater
Clergy were generally chosen out of the Monks, and thereby Celibacy became the
nearest way to Preferment.

But to return to the Third Age; the frequent Persecutions of that time, did
not a little advance the Cause of Celibacy; it being highly convenient to the
Church, that the Clergy should show an Example of Constancy and Resolution to
all other Christians, which it was believed they would more readily perform,
when freed from the encumbrances of a married state, and not withheld with
the temptations of Wife and Children. For the fury of the Heathen Persecutors
generally fell most heavy upon the Clergy, and sometimes was directed against
them only: So that to be promoted to any eminent Place in the Church, was to be
exposed to certain Martyrdom. For this reason, as Eusebius somewhere relates,
in the Choice of Bishops, single Persons were commonly preferred before married
Men, in Times of Persecution. And then Celibacy was no grievous and intolerable
burden, when attended with a continual Expectation of Death, and being hurried
away to Execution. To which may be added, that few were then received into the
Priesthood, but aged Men, who by a long course of Virtue, had given sufficient
proof of their Continence and unspotted Chastity. Whereas in the Church of
Rome, Boys were admitted to Profess or make a Vow of Continence at Fourteen,
Girls at Twelve years of age, till the Council of Trent, which reduced it to
Sixteen.

All these Reasons concurred in the First Ages, to increase the esteem of
Celibacy, and prejudice the Marriage of the Clergy. The way was opened, by
forbidding Second Marriage to the Clergy, and receiving none into Holy Orders,
who had married twice after Baptism. For if a Man married once before, and
again after Baptism, he was commonly reputed no Digamist. This Prejudice
against Second Marriage increased so far, that all were made incapable of Holy
Orders, who had married Widows; lest they should seem to countenance thereby
the supposed scandal of Digamy. I mean not hereby, that Second Marriage was
forbidden to the Clergy by any Council, or Orders denied to all Digamists, none
excepted; for neither the one nor the other of those Suppositions is true, but
only that it became the general and ordinary practice of the Church, not to
permit Second Marriage to those already ordained, nor Orders to those already
twice married. In the same manner a Custom was introduced, and by the end of
the Third Age established in the Church, that the Clergy might indeed freely
retain their Wives married before the reception of Orders, but not marry after
Orders once received. Not that this was yet forbidden by any Canon, nor
practiced without Exception, (for the contrary of that we shall immediately
demonstrate,) but only was the usual and more ordinary Discipline of the
Church: Whence both the Prohibition of Digamy, and Marriage after Orders to the
Clergy, were inserted among the Apostolical Canons, wherein that is the
Sixteenth, this the Twenty fifth (...).
Canon. These Apostolical Canons were not the Constitutions of any Council,
much less Precepts and Institutions of the Apostles, but only the Customs and
Usages of the Eastern Church, in the end of the Third and beginning of the
Fourth Age; which seem to have been collected about that time by some private
Hand, however then authorized by the Use, and afterward confirmed by the
Decree of the Church.

This Custom of the Ancient Church, however it may seem almost equivalent to an
Imposition of Celibacy, was yet far from it. For first it was not so strict and
universal, as to admit no Exception. Marriage was permitted to many, even after
the reception of Orders, as we shall show by and by from the Canon of Ancyra;
and allowed indifferently to all, if they receded from the Execution of their
Office, and returned to Lay-Communion in order to it; as we shall also
hereafter prove. Secondly, If any Person to be ordained were not yet married,
and did in the least suspect he should not be able afterward to contain
without Marriage; he was not only permitted, but even advised by the Church,
first to Marry, and then to receive Orders: So that they frequently married,
whilst Candidates of the Priesthood, and already designed to that Holy Office,
perhaps but some few days before their admittance into it. So the Sixth General
Council renewing this very Apostolic Canon, forbid any to marry after Orders
once received; and adds, (...) Can. 6.
But if any one who comes to be ordained, has a mind to join himself unto a
Wife with the bond of Marriage, let him do it before he be ordained Deacon, or
Subdeacon, or Priest, and then- receive Orders. Thirdly, By allowing to the
Clergy the free Use of Marriage contracted before their Ordination, they
acknowledged both the lawfulness and decency of their Marriage, whether
contracted before or after Ordination. For if there be any indecency in
Marriage, which makes it unbecoming the dignity and holiness of the Priesthood,
it must be in the Use of it, as all confess; and if so, the Use of Marriage,
contracted before as well as after Ordination, will become indecent. For the
Contract itself is a thing most honest and decorous, so far from carrying any
impurity and indecency along with it, that the Churh of Rome believes it to be
a Sacrament. What were the particular Reasons why the Ancient Church permitted
to the Clergy the Use of the one Marriage, and disallowed the other, may be
probably reduced from what we have already said. For those Men who were led
away by the Mistakes and Prejudices produced in the Church by the Heresy of
the Encratites, endeavored at least to introduce this Custom; when they
despaired of a total Abrogation of the Clergies Marriage, and perhaps thought
that intolerable in itself, or inconvenient to the Church. And then those who
otherwise clearly perceived the falsehood of these Prejudices, contented
themselves with silence, and connived at the Introduction of this Custom, as
well for fear of a Popular Odium and Dis-esteem, as because they were convinced
by the Reasons last mentioned, that such a Custom, if it proceeded no farther,
was little less than equivalent to a total Permission of Marriage. To which may
be added, that the Rites of Marriage being anciently, especially among the
Greeks, always celebrated with great Riot and Luxury, continued for many days
together; it was thought unbefitting the gravity of a Clergyman to be present
at, much more to be chief Actor in such licentious Solemnities. Upon which
account, the Councils of Can. 54.
Laodicea, and Can. 39.
Agatha, forbid the Clergy to be present at Nuptial Feasts; although the Can.
24.
Quinisext Council restrained that Prohibition only to the Iudicrous and more
trifling part of the Solemnity.

In some of the Clergy, these Prejudices of the Excellency of Celibacy, and the
Inconvenience of Marriage to the dignity of their Order, prevailed so far, that
upon pretense of Continence and greater Purity, they sequestered their Wifes,
although unwilling, from their bed, and sometimes from their society. The
superstitious and scandalous conduct of these Men was universally condemned and
censured by the Church: Whence among the Apostolic Canons, this is one; (...).
Can. 5
Let no Bishop, Priest or Deacon put away his Wife upon pretense of Religion.
If he does, let him be excomunicated; and if he continue obstinate, be
degraded. Our Adversaries indeed pretend, that this Canon was not opposed to a
denial of Nuptial Duties by the Clergy to their Wives, but to a denial of
Maintenance, and turning them out of doors to beg their Living. But the vanity
of this Plea is evident. For not to say that the constant acceptance of the
word (...) imports no more than a sequestration from the Bed, the Canon in the
sense of our Adversaries would be useless and trifling. For we do not find, nor
can imagine, that so great an abuse ever obtained in the Church, as that the
Clergy should eject their innocent Wives, and expose them to want and poverty.
Whereas that many removed them from their Bed, and believed their embraces
unlawful after Orders received, is already clearly proved, and on all sides
confessed. The Error of the Impurity of Marriage had so far obtained in the
Minds of many, that it was necessary for the Church to interpose her Judgment,
and vindicate the Cause of injured Marriage. For as Aristenus (...). Syntagm.
Alphabet. lit. (...). cap. 16.
truly paraphrases this Canon, A Clergyman by sequestring his Wife from his Bed
seem to accuse Marriage, as if he thought the lawful pleasures of it to be
impious. The same says Zonaras Comm. in Can.
upon this Canon. This was also the occasion of the like Precept in the
Apostolic Constitutions (a Work of the same Age and Authority with the Canons)
where the Apostles are introduced thus speaking: (...). lib. 4. c. 13.
He which makes a Vow of Virginity, (which we leave to every ones choice, only
advise that it be not done rashly and lightly) let him demonstrate his
profession to be sincere, and undertaken for a better opportunity of Piety, not
for dislike of Marriage. The same Precept may be found in the interpolated
Epistle of St. Ignatius to the Philadelphinas. But what clears the Matter
beyond all doubt, is, that when the Council of Nice rejected the motion of
those who proposed a total Celibacy of the Clergy, and upon the persuasions of
Paphnutius permitted to them the use of Wives married before Ordination, they
formed a Decree to that purpose in the very words of this Apostolic Canon
(...). Gelasius Cyzic. Hist. Council. Nicaen. l. 2. c. 32.
That the Clergy ought not every one to put away his Wife.

In the beginning of the Fourth Age, Celibacy received great Advances from the
increase of Errors and Prejudices taken up in the former Age, and the length
and a sharpness of the last Prosecution begun by Dioclesian, and continued by
Maximus and Licinius, which infused melancholy thoughts into all Christians,
and an unusual reverence for all shows of Austerity and Mortification. Then was
Marriage first forbidden to Priests and Bishops after Ordination by a judiciary
Act of the Church, but that formed in a Provincial and inconsiderable Council,
whose Canons were never taken notice of, or ratified by any subsequent
Councils, or even Popes, till the midst of the Ninth Age: I mean the Council of
Neocasarea, which in the year 314. made this Canon, (...). Can. 1.
If a Presbyter marry, let him be deposed from his Order; but if he commit
Fornication or Adultery, let him be cast out of the Church, and put to Penance.
Where it may be observed. 1. That this Canon forbids not the use of Wives
married before Ordination. 2. That it forbids not to Deacons and Subdeacons to
contract Marriage even after Ordination. 3. That it manifestly distinguishes
between Fornication and Marriage after Ordination. 4. That it does not command
a Separation from Wives so Married, but only a dimission of the holy Office.

However, the pretentions of Celibacy received no small check from the Council
of Ancyra, held the same year: A Council of far greater Esteem and Authority,
which was ratified and confirmed by many subsequent Councils and Popes,
particularly by Leo the First, Apud (...), Did. 20. cap. 1.
and whose Canons were received into the ancient Code of Canons in the
Primitive Church. The Fathers of this Council considering the inconveniences
of forced Celibacy and right, which all men have to Marriage, Decreed, (...),
etc. Can. 10.
That if Deacons yet unmarried protested of the time of their Ordination, their
intentions and necessity of Marrying, as not being able to continue Unmarried;
they might Marry after their Ordination, and continue in their Office. But if
they made no such Protestation of their Ordination, and afterward Married,
they should relinquish their Office. The pretentions of Baronius and Binius,
that in both Cases Deacons Marrying after their Ordination, were obliged to lay
down their Office, deserves not to be considered, since nothing could be
invented more directly contrary to the plain words of the Canon. It is more
considerable that Aristenus Comm. in Can. 6. Concili VI.
extends this Canon also to Presbyters, reading it (...), and affirms that by
virtue of it, both Presbyters and Deacons were always allowed Marriage in the
Greek Church after Ordination, if they had not neglected to make their
Ptotestation; till this Permission was repealed by the Quinisext Council in the
year 692. That this Canon took place in the Western Church appears not
particularly, except from the universal approbation of the Acts of this Ancyran
Council; although somewhat like it was enacted in the Eleventh Council of
Toledo Can. 1.
in the year 531. To which we may add what Sir H. Spelman relates in the
British Councils, Tom. 1. p. 43.
that Restitutus Bishop of London, returning from the Council of Arles, in the
year 314. brought with him into England the Canons of that Council, amongst
which one was this very Canon of the Council of Ancyra. Indeed, no such Canon
is now found in the Acts of the Council of Arles published by Sirmond: but then
we are to remember that these Acts are not entire, and perhaps not genuin.

The Decree of Ancyra was indeed favorable to the Marriage of the Clergy, but
the restless Importunities and scandalous Practices of the Sectatours of
Celibacy obliged the Church to proceed yet farther, and declare it self more
openly in favor of their Marriage. For Eustathius, Bishop of Sebastea in
Armenia, and first Founder of a Monastic Sozom. l. 3. c. 14. l. 4. c. 24.
Life in Armenia and Cappadocia, had formed a new, but then plausible Heresy,
that Holy Things, and the Sacraments of the Church, ought not to be Administered
by the married Clergy, and that the People ought not to communicate from their
hands. With this Doctrine he had drawn great numbers into Schism, and created
no small disturbance in the Church. Upon which account the Council of Gangra
met about the year 324. who condemning this Hercsie, and deposing the Author of
it, published this following Canon: (...). Can. 4.
If any one separates from a married Priest, as if it were unlawful to
communicate, when he officiates; let him be Anathema. A Canon the more
considerable for the Authority of the Council which made it. For this was ever
most reputed of all particular Councils in the ancient Church, confirmed by
many general Councils and Popes, and recieved into the ancient Code of Canons.

This was the Progress and Condition of Celibacy in the Eastern Church before
the Council of Nice. In the West, if we except perhaps that of Arles (for the
Roman Synods under Pope Sylvester are confessedly spurious) no Councils had
determined any thing in it, but that of Eliberis in the year 305. which
ordained Placuit in totum prohiberi Episcopis, Presbyteris, and Diaconibus, vel
omnibus, Clericis positis in ministerio, abstinere se a conjugibus suis and non
generate silios. Quicunque vero feceret, ab honor Clericatus exterminetur.
Can. 33.
that Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and all the Clergy placed in the Ministry
(or while they Minister) should abstain from their Wives, and not attend to
procreation. If any does, let him be deposed from the Order of the Clergy. Here
to pass by the Opinion of those mentioned by Albas Pinae^s, Not. in Can.
who expounded the words of this Canon in their Grammatical Sense, for the
Latin runs thus: We absolutely forbid the Clergy to abstain from their Wives;
in which case it will be coincident with the Fifth Apostolic Canon: our
Adversaries maintain that it is to be understood of a total abstinence of the
Clergy from their Wives. If we should grant this, it would not much prejudice
our Cause, since this was that foolish Council, which forbids Can. 34.
Candles to be lighted in Churchyards in the day time, least the Souls of the
dead Saints should be disquieted: a Council of so little Reputation, that it
never was confirmed by any Pope or Council to this day. But I doubt not to
evince, that this Canon is to be thus understood only of a temporary abstinence
of the Clergy, while they performed their Office in their turns. For the Clergy
had not then as now each one his Parish assigned him wherein to officiate; but
all of one City, at least in the lesser Cities, belonging to one Church,
supplied the necessities of the Church in Order, and relieved one the other by
turns. That this Canon is to be thus understood, appears. 1. From the plain
words of it, where Positis in ministerio must either signify this, or be
wholly impertinent; since all the Clergy, by the very nature of their Office,
are placed in the Ministry of the Church. 2. Otherwise total Abstinence will be
enjoined to Subdeacons, Readers, Exorcists and Acolythi, as well as to Bishops,
Priests and Deacons; and so Albaspinaeus Loc. cit. omnibus omnino Clericis.
explains the words in totum prohiberi, it is forbidden, says he, to all
Clergymen whatsoever. Whereas Subdeacons were never forbidden the use of
Marriage, till the middle of the Fifth Age; and the three inferior Orders are
not at this day forbidden it in the Church of Rome. 3. When a total Abstinence
of Bishops, Priests and Deacons was proposed in the Council of Nice, all the
Historians of that Council express it by saying, some endeavored to introduce
(...), a new and unheard of Law: and Paphnutius opposing it, pleaded that the
Church ought not to be burdened with new Impositions, but that the universal
Tradition and practice of it was to be preserved. Now if this total Abstinence
had twenty years before been imposed by the Council of Eliberis, all those
Historians had mistaken; and Hosius, Bishop of Corduba, who had been present in
the Council of Eliberis, and presided in that of Nice, would not have suffered
the Fathers to be led away with the false representations of Paphnutius.

Celibacy was not yet arrived at its Crisis, universally indeed applauded, but
no where imposed; yet had the unreasonable affection of it in many Clergymen,
and an immoderate Ambition of the honor of Virginity in many Lay Persons,
already introduced two of the most enormous Scandals, that ever the Church
labored under from the Apostles to this day, I mean Emasculation, and (...).
These (...) were unmarried Women, commonly those who had vowed perpetual
Virginity, taken into the house as Domestic Assistants by Clergymen, who had
either never married, or buried their Wives; or unmarried Men, commonly of the
Clergy taken into the House, in the same Quality, by Women or Virgins, who had
vowed Continence. We want a proper English word to express them, and therefore
must be content to call them Housekeepers: they were called by the Greeks,
(...) and (...), but most commonly (...), which name was first given Eusebius. l.
7. c. 30.
by the people of Antioch to the Housekeepers of Paulus Samosatenus, their
Bishop and his Clergy; by the Latins they were termed Subintroductae,
Adscititiae, Extraneae, Alienae, Dilectae, Sorores, Commanentes, and Focariae.
They were taken in by most under pretense of Piety to encourage and assist one
another by Spiritual Conference and Exhortations, but by all upon pretense of
Domestic Assistance, that the Men might defend the Women from all injuries, to
which otherwise that weak Sex is exposed; and the Women might provide
Necessaries for the Men, and take care of their Families. Some perhaps made
good their Pretenses by a sober and prudent Conversation: but the greatest part
indulged to themselves the most inward Familiarities of Man and Wife, and made
them even the Companions of their sleep, where they used all the Embraces,
Caresses, and Allurements of the Nuptial Bed, save only Carnal Knowledge. And
all this they openly maintained to be lawful; and thought it not injurious to
their Profession of Virginity, and the integrity of their Chastity. But some
proceeded farther, and by visible effects discovered the Approaches of a nearer
Familiarity, and more ^lose Embraces, to their own Shame, and the great Scandal
of the Church. Others finding or fearing, they should not be able to contain in
the midst of so great Temptations. ( For can a Man take Fire into his Bosom,
and not be burnt; Prove. 6. 27.
as the Fathers frequently applied to this Case) emasculated themselves, that
they might at least prevent all visible Scandal, when they could not extinguish
the Fire of their Minds. Thus did Socrat. l. 2. c. 26. A. tha^as. Ap^. de fuga.
Leontius the Arian, Bishop of Antioch, for the love of Eustolium his Paramour:
and that the abuse was frequent even among the Catholics, appears from all the
Writers of those times, especially, the Author of the Book, De singularitate
Clericorum, and St. Basil's Treatise of true Virginity, where he eloquently
describes and bewails the scandalous familiarity of these Eunuchs and
Housekeepers.

See two egregious Scandals, the immediate effects even of a voluntary Celibacy
in the ancient Church, greater than any which the Church now suffers in the
dregs of time. We needed not say any more of them; if the unreasonable wills of
our Adversaries did not necessitate us to clear the Matter a little farther.
They maintain that by these, (...) were meant also the Wives of the Clergy; a
pretense, which however shameless and foolish, was the main Engine of advancing
Celibacy in the latter Age; when the Authority of all those Councils, which had
forbidden Housekeepers to the Clergy was produced against their Marriage; and
the ignorance of those Ages had sitted them for a miserable Delusion by such
Impostures. To pass by then the Confession of some learned Writers of the
Church of Rome, and the constant practice of the Eastern Church, which always
forbids Housekeepers, but never Wives to the Clergy. I will only oppose a few
Passages of the Ancient Writers. St. Cyprian lamenting the folly of many
consecrated Virgins, who had entered into the Families, and even into the Beds
of unmarried Clergymen, says, Denique quam graves multorum ruinas hinc fieri
videmus, and per hujusmo. li illicitas and periculosas conjunctiones corrumpi
plurimas virgineis cum summo animi nostri dolor conpiscimus. Epist. 62. ad
Pomponium.
Lastly, how grievous falls of many do we see hereby produced; and with extreme
grief behold the corruption of many Virgins, by these unlawful and dangerous
familiarities. Wherefore, if they desire the reward of Virginity, let them be
Virgins in good earnest; but if they will not, or cannot contain, let them
Marry. The Author of the Book, De Singularitate Clericorum has these words: Ut
quid sibi adhibuit mulierem, qui ducere contemsit uxorem. -- Ita is qui
despexit vinculum nuptiarum, and ali^er vinculis faemineis obligatur; quamvi^,
etc. ante med.
Why has he taken a Housekeeper, who scorned to marry a Wife; So he who
despised the Bond of Marriage, and yet retains the familiarity of Women,
although he be not actually polluted, yet enjoy them by Imagination, Sight,
Conversation and Society. St. Gregory Nazianzen professes (...). Carm. de
Virginit.
he knows not whether to call them married or unmarried Persons; since in an
unmarried State they performed the Duties of Marriage. St. Chrysostom in like
manner says, They are neither Wives nor Concubines, but a middle kind unknown
to former Ages; and thus bespeaks them: (...), etc. Hom.* 1. contra (...).
If you desire to have Men dwell with you, you ought not to have chosen
Virginity, but to have married. For it had been much better so to have married,
than thus to profess Virginity. For such a marrige neither God condemns, nor
Man blames; for it is an honorable State, injurious to none, scandalous to
none. But this Virginity, performed in the company of Men, is accused by all
Men as worse than open Fornication, Lastly, thus St. Hierom describes them,
Pudet dicere, proh nefas! Triste, sed verum est. Unde in Ecclesiam Agapetarum
pestis introiit? unde sine nuptiis aliud nomen uxorem? immo unde novum
concubinarum genus. Plus inferam, unde meretrices univirae? Eadem domo, uno
cubiculo, saepe u^o tenentur and lectulo: and suspiciosos nos vocant, si
aliquid exis^imamus. Epist. ad Eustoch^de custod. Virgin.
I am ashamed to speak it; it is sad but true. Whence did this plague of
Housekeepers enter into the Church? Whence without Marriage another name for
Wives? yea, whence this new kind of Concubines? I will say more; whence these
Whores tied to the oompany of one Man? They lodge in the same House, in one
Chamber, and oft-times in one Bed, and yet they call us unreasonably
suspicious, if we think any thing amiss. Such then were these (...) first
introduced in the middle of the Third Age, and notwithstanding the frequent
Prohibitions of Councils, and Declimations of Fathers, continued in the Church,
but with greatest Scandal about the Year 400. till at last they degenerated
into open Concubines in the Church of Rome; in which state the Reformation
found them generally then thought Lawful, or at least a venial Sin; although
none since has dared to defend them. They were forbidden in the Ancient Church
by the Councils of Can. 27.
Eliberis, Can. 19.
Ancyra, Can. 3.
Nice, the Can. 3.
First, and Can. 17.
Third of Carthage, the Can. 5.
Third of Constantinople, the Can. 18.
Second of Nice, Can. 39.
Aquisgran, and many others; and by the Emperor Justinian in his Novel 123.
Novels. As for Emasculation, that was severely forbidden by the Apostolic
Can. 21.
Canons, and the Council of Can. 1.
Nice, and seems to have been dis-used before the Year 500.

Upon occasion of these (...), it will not be here inconvenient to speak
somewhat of the Book de Singularitate Clericorum, which we just now cited. This
Book, however in its Title it may seem to oppose the Marriage of the Clergy, is
one of the most pregnant Evidences of the Use of it in the Ancient Church, that
is now extant. It is by some ascribed to Origin, by others to St. Augustine, but
by most to St. Cyprian. However, all Learned Men now agree, that it belongs to
none of them. The late Learned Editors of St. Cyprian's Works, at Oxford,
conjecture it to have been written about the time of Bid. Rather it was most
certainly written before the middle of the Fifth Age, because the Author of it
makes use of the old Italick Version, which was in use in the Latin Church
before St. Hierom's Translation. Most probably therefore it was writ in the
Fourth Age. The scope of it is to decry and reform the abuse of Housekeepers,
which (as the Author says) Non durant sine faemi. nae sodalitate dormtre.
was then become so scandalous in the Church, that the unmarried Clergy could
not endure to sleep without the company of a Woman. If in the heat of
Disputation he lets fall any thing injurious to Marriage, it is such as
opposes no less the Marriage of the Laity than of the Clergy; and indeed the
former part of the Treatise is nothing else but a Satyr against Women. But the
design of the Author, and the lawfulness and use of the Clergies Marriage in
his time, may be evidently collected from many places. I will produce one or
two of them, premising this Observation, that the Author ranks those Women also
among the (...), who lived in the House with married Clergymen, if they had no
Relation of Kindred or Marriage to them: That the company of near Relations was
never denied to the Clergy, since proximity of Blood, and the dictates of
Nature, sufficiently secured their Honor; and that all other Women but
Relations and Wives are by this Author termed Alienae and Extraneae, Strange
Women. ^ui nunc pro dimittendis faeminis, alienis adhaerent; quid facerent, si
liberos and uxores projicere jubeantur? Aut quando valebunt pro Christo
renunciare cogna^is, qui mulierculas non suas praeponunt Christi preceptis?
Post Med.
If then (says he) the Clergy instead of putting away their Wives so fondly
adhere to Strange Women; What would they do, if they were commanded to put away
their Wives and Children? Or how will they be able to renounce their Kindred
for Christ, who prefer to the Commands of Christ, Women endeared to them by no
other Obligations? And in another place, Rogo vos, Clerici, quantum valeo, --
Si quis habet matrem, vel filiam, vel sororem, vel conjugem, vel cognatam; sic
^abeat, ut nulla ancilla intersit, neque alia ingrediatur extranca, etc. prope
fine.
I affectionately entreat you, O Clergymen, if any of you has a Mother, a
Daughter, a Sister, a Wife, or a Kinswoman living with you; ye so save her,
that no Waiting-maid live with them, nor any other Strange Woman have access;
lest you be suspected to retain your Relations with you for this only reason,
that ye may under that Pretense take Strange Women into your houses. If they
cannot want the service or assistance of Maids, or the company of Friends of
their own Sex; it is better that they should remove into another house, than
that ye should entertain Strange Women for their sakes: For as it would be
unfit that a Clergyman should deprive them of the necessary assistance of their
Sex; so it is indecent that they should injure his Reputation, by bringing
suspicious Women into his company. To which may be added the Testimony before
cited; wherein the Author upbraids to those Clergymen who could not live
without Housekeepers, the^ (...) to marry Wives.

We are now come to the great and Famous Council of Nice, wherein the Cause of
Celibacy was debated and decided. I will represent the whole matter, in the
words of Socrates the Historian; ( c) It seemed good to some Bishops to
introduce (n) (...), etc. Hi^. Eccl. l. 1. c. 11.
a new Law into the Church, That the Clergy, I mean Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, should not lay with their Wives, which they had married being yet
Laymen. And when the thing was proposed to he consulted of, Paphnutius
standing up in the midst of the Assembly of the Bishops, contended vehemently
that so heavy a Yoke ought not to be imposed upon the Clergy, saying, that even
Marriage was undefiled (or chaste) and the Use of it honorable; that they
should take heed of rather injuring the Church by this excess of Severity: For
that all could not contain, neither perhaps could the chastity of every one's
Wife be preserved, (or as Sozomen expresses it, For that it was a thing very
hard to be borne, and would perhaps be the cause of Incontinence both to
themselves and to their Wives.) But he asserted the company of a lawful Wife to
be Chastity; that it was sufficient that he who was first Ordained, should not
Marry after it, according to the Ancient Discipline of the Church; but that
none ought to be separated from that Wife which he had before married, while he
was yet a Layman. And this he said, being himself unmarried, and brought up
from his Youth in a Monastic and Ascetick Life. The whole Council yielded to
the Arguments of Paphnutius, and therefore ceased any farther Debate, leaving
it to the will of every one, whether they would abstain from the company of
their Wives or not. L. 1. c. 23.
Sozomen and L. 8. c. 19.
Nicephorus relate it almost in the same words, In voce (...).
Suidas in the very same, Hist. Tripart. l. 2. c. 14.
Cassidiorus in the like words; and so do Panorm. l. 3. c. 88.
Ivo Carnotensis, Did. 31. cap. 12.
Gratian, and Syntagm. Alphab. lit. g. cap. 2.
Blastares, and who is ancienter than them all, except the two first, Hist.
Con^. Nic. l. 2. c. 32.
Gelasius Cyzicenus, who transcribed the Acts of that Council out of a Copy
which had belonged to Dalmatius, Bishop of Cycicum, who was present in the
Ephesine Council, in the Year 431. So that they who doubt of the Truth of this
History, may with equal reason deny the Existence of the Nicene Council, since
both are attested with the same Authorities. Yet is this done by many Writers
of the Church of Rome, particularly Barronius, Bellarmine, and especially
Turrian, whose trifling Arguments the Learned De confirm. Council Illiber. l. 2.
c* 66.
M^ndosa relates and confutes.

More general and notorious has been the fraud of the Church of Rome, in
pretending that the Third Canon of this Council, made against the
Housekeepers, was directed against their Marriage. Of this Imposture, the
Popes and Councils of the Eleventh Age made great use, never failing to back
their Decrees with the Authority of the Council of Nice. The Canon is conceived
in these words: (...). Can. 3.
The Great Synod has wholly forbidden to all Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and
all the Clergy, to have a Housekeeper, unless she be a Mother, or a Sister, or
an Aunt, or those Persons only who are liable to no Suspicion. That wives are
not hereby forbidden to the Clergy, would be impertinent to demonstrate, if the
unreasonableness of our Adversaries did not require it. First then, The
Authority of all the Historians last mentioned, prove this. For if the Council
had by this Canon forbid Wives to the Clergy, the Advice of Paphnutius would
not have been followed, but rejected. Secondly, We before proved that (...)
were a sort of Women far different from Wives, who were never ranked in the
number of them. Thirdly, The constant Practice of the Greek Church demonstrates
it, which ever allowed to the Clergy the society of their Wives, from the
Council of Nice to this day. Fourthly, Otherwise Marriage would have been
forbidden to the Inferior Orders also, contrary to the Practice of the
Universal Church in all Ages. For the Canon after mention of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, subjoyns (...), a Prohibition to every one of the Clergy. Fifthly,
The Emperor Theodosius Junior, repeating and re-inforcing this very Canon,
after a Permission of the Cohabitation of Mothers, Sisters, or Aunts with the
Clergy, in the very words of the Canons, subjoyns; Illas etiam non relinqui
castitatis hortatur affectio, qu^ ante sacerdotium maritorum legitimum meruere
conjugium. Nec enim Clericis incompetentur adjunctae sunt, qu^ dignos
sacerdotio vi^os sui conversatione fecerunt. Cod. Theodos. l. 16. tit. 2. lez.
44.
Those also, chase love, requires not to be forsaken which were lawfully
married before the Ordination of their Husbands: For they are not unfittingly
joined to Clergymen, who by their discreet Conversation made their Husbands
worthy of the Priesthood. And (c) (...). Comm. in S. Basilii Epist. ad Gregor.
Balsamon thus Comments upon this Canon; ( d) Read the Canon of the Nicene
Synod, which forbid Housekeepers to be retained. By Housekeepers, the Canon,
which is the Third of that Synod, means Women taken into the houses of
unmarried Clergymen, and dwelling with them. Lastly, to omit the Confession of
other Learned Romanists, De consirm. Council. Illib. l. 2. c. 66.
Mendoza not only grants, but proves, that in this Canon, Housekeepers were
forbidden only to those Clergymen, who never had married Wives, or had lost
them by death.

The Determination of the Council of Nice settled the Matter, and put an end to
the Controversy about Celibacy in the Eastern Church. Thence forward is a
profound Silence in the Acts of the Eastern Synods, concerning the Marriage or
Celibacy of the Clergy, till the Quiniext Council in the Year 692. where
Bishops were forbidden the Use of Marriage, which till then was permitted to
them as well as to the inferior Clergy. Of that Council we shall speak more
largely hereafter. In the mean while, the general Custom which obtained in the
Eastern Church, of permitting to the Clergy the Use of Marriage contracted
before, but not after Ordination, received some little variation. Three several
ways, which deserve to be next observed. First then, A total abstinence of the
Clergy from Socrat. l. 5. c. 22
their Wives, was introduced into the Province of Thessaly by Heliodorus,
Bishop of Trica, under the Reign of Arcadius, in the end of the Fourth, or
beginning of the Fifth Age. So that the Clergy accompanying with their Wives
after Ordination, were deposed. The same Custom obtained in the Provinces of
Thessalonica, Achaia, and Macedonia, in the time of Socrates, in the middle of
the Fifth Age, but in no other Part of the Eastern Church, as he obesrveth. How
long this Custom continued in any of these Provinces, is uncertain. Secondly,
Toward the end of the Fourth Age, it became very usual for Bishops both in the
Eastern and Western Church, when they were assumed to that Dignity, publicly
to Vow perpetual Abstinence from their Wives. This they did voluntarily, not
necessitated to it by any Law, as (...). loc. cit.
Socrates observes; that they might raise to themselves the greater Reputation
of Holiness among the People, and equal the supposed Continence of unmarried
Bishops. In this case, it was not permitted to them to return to the embraces
of their Wives. If they did, the Fact was esteemed Scandalous, and sometimes
punished with the Censures of the Church. Thus among the Seven Heads of
Accusation, for which Antoninus, Bishop of Ephesus, was deposed by St.
Chrysostom in a Synod in the Year 400. one was, Quod cum Uxori propriae
abre^unciasset, rursus cum illa congressus est, filiosque suscepit. Pallad. in
vit. Chrysostom. c. 13. ex versione Ambrosii Camald.
That after he had vowed Abstinence from his Wife, he accompanied with her
again, and had Children by her. Thus Urbicus, Bishop of Clermont, in France,
about the same time, vowing Continence at his Consecration, and afterward
begetting a Daughter of his Wife, did Greg. Turon. Hist. Franc. l. 1. c. 44.
voluntary Penance for it. For this reason also Macliau, Bishop of Vannes, was
Excomunicated Id. l. 4. c. 4.
by the Bishops of Bretagne, for that having, when persecuted by his Brother
Chanao, Prince of Bretagne, fled to Vannes, and there disguising himself,
professed Chastity, and afterward made Bishop, he had upon the Death of his
Brother, resumed his Wife, together with the Principality. Thirdly, which is
most considerable, A Custom was afterward introduced in the Eastern Church,
whereby It was lawful (to use the words of (...). Syntagm. Alphab. lit. (...).
cap. 2.
Blastares) for Priests any time within Ten years, to be reckoned from their
Ordination, to marry lawful Wives. This Custom continued till the end of the
Ninth Age, when it was repealed by Novel 3.
Leo the Emperor, from whose Constitution it appears that this Custom was then
become Universal, although that instead of Ten years, reads Two years.

In the Western Church, the cause of Celibacy lay dormant till the end of the
Fifth Age, neither countenanced nor opposed by any public Constitutions of the
Church. However, in the mean while it gained infinite Veneration in the minds
of Men, and thereby made way for a public Imposition of it. This was attempted
by Pope Siricius, in the Year 385. a simple Pope, as Ep^st. 16.
St. Hierome, A Man of inconsiderate Zeal, as Vir parum considerati zeli. Vid
Paulini, par. 2. ad calcem Opp. Paul. Anverp. 1632 p. 680.
Sacchinus the Jesuit calls him. He in an Epistle to Himerius, Bishop of
Tarragon, in Spain, dated this Year, after a long Harrangue against the
Clergies Use of Marriage, drawn from the old Mistake of an unworthiness to
administer things contracted by the supposed impurity of Marriage, commands
Epist. 1. cap. 7.
Priests and Deacons thence forward to abstain from the company of their Wives,
upon pain of Deposition from their Offices. From the Preface of this
Constitution it appears, that the Use of Marriage was then indifferently used
by the Clergy, and defended as Lawful against the Oppugners of it. I understand
(says Plurimos enim sacerdotes Christi atque Levitas, post longa
consecrationis suae tempora, tam de conjugibus propriis, quam etiam de turpi
coitu ^obolem didicimus procreasse, and crimen s^um hac praescriptione
defendere, quia, etc. ibid.
Siricius) that many Priests and Deacons have a long time after their
Ordination, had Children, as well by their own Wives as by Fornication, and
defend this their Doing by Prescription, because in the Old Testament Marriage
was permitted to the Priests. It seems to have been by this time become a
general Custom in the particular Church of Rome, and all the greater Churches
of Italy, for Bishops, Priests and Deacons to abstain from the company of their
Wives. This they did voluntarily, there being yet no Ecclesiastical
Constitution to enforce it; and in that case removed their Wives out of their
Families, and lived separately from them. That this was voluntarily, is
manifest as well because no Command of any such Abstinence as yet made by the
Church can be produced, as from several Examples of the Italian Clergy of this
time, who enjoyed the company of their Wives after Ordination, as we shall
hereafter prove. That this Custom extended not into the remoter Provinces, is
manifest from the words of St. Ambrose, who writ about this time, and
persuading this total Abstinence to his Clergy of Milan, says, In pleri^que
abditioribus locis cum ministe^ium gererem, vel etiam sacerdotium ^ilios
susceperum, and id tanquam usu veteri desendunt. De Ossic. l. 2. c. 50.
In many remoter places, the Clergy beget Children in the time of their
Deaconship, or even Priesthood, and this they defend by Ancient Custom; where
the last words are very remarkable.

Siricius therefore seduced with the common Prejudices of that Age, and
imagining it to be no small Crime in the Clergy of Spain, not to canform to the
Customs of Rome, interposed his Authority, and commanded them to do that, which
he saw they would never perform of their own accord. The embracing of the
Vulgar Prejudices about Celibacy, are not the only argument of Siricius his
simplicity. This very Epistle carries other evident tokens of it along with
it. For to omit the many Superstitious Cautions about the Marriage of the
Inferior Clergy, he forbids Marriage to all Persons whatsoever, who had ever
done public Penance for Fornication. A Command which wholly evacuates the
Apostles Precept of Marriage, making Chap. 5.
Fornication an impediment of Marriage, which by the Apostle was assigned as a
remedy of it. The next year, Siricius writing to the Bishops of Africa,
pursues the same design; but here remembering that he acted out of his own
Patriarchate, he presumes not to command, but only advises Celibacy. Suademus
ut sacerdotes and levitae cum uxoribus suis non codant. hortor, moneo, rogo.
Epist. 4.
I persuade, advize, admonish, entreat, that Priests and Deacons would not
accompany with their Wives: And all upon the same topic of the Incongruity of
conjugal Embraces with the Priestly Office. Let us now see what effect this
Command of Siricius had in Spain, or his Admonition in Africa. In Spain, the
first Council of Toledo was held in the Year 400. which decreed, Can. 1.
That those Deacons who had not abstained from their Wives after Ordination,
should continue in their Office, but be made incapable of ever rising to the
Priesthood; and in like manner Priests who had not abstained, should be
incapable of the Episcopal Dignity; inflicting on them no further Punishment.
The same Command had it seems been sent by Siricius to the Bishops of Piemont,
who meeting in a Council at Turin. An. Dom. 397. made a Can. 6.
Canon of the same nature with that of Toledo, only debarring the Clergy, who
would not submit to a total Abstinence, from ascending to higher Dignities in
the Church. In Africa the Pope received a Repulse. The Eleventh Council of
Carthage was in the year 390. wherein a motion was made by Faustianus the Popes
Legate, that Bishops, Priests and Deacons should be enjoined Continentes esse in
omnibus, Can. 2.
to total Abstinence. The Synod would not yield to that, but only decreed, Ut
Episcopi, Presby. and Diac. vel qui Sacramenta contrectant, pudicitiae
custodes, etiam ab uxoribus se abstineant, ut in omnibus and ab omnibus
pudicitia custodiatur, qui altari deserviunt. Can. 2. ex edit. Holsten.
That Bishops, Priests and Deacons, or those, who administered the Sacraments,
should always preserve Chastity, and when they ministered at the Altar, even
abstain from their Wives. For that the Ancients believed Chastity not to be
inconsistent with the use of Marriage, we before proved. And this partial
Abstinence of the Clergy in the time of their waiting at the Altar, fully
satisfied Siricius his Argument, which proceeded upon the indecency of
performing the Duties of Marriage and the Administration of Holy Things, at the
same time. That this is the trne sense of the Canon, we shall demonstrate by
proving that the Canon, which we shall next relate, meant no more. For that
both are to be understood in the same sense, all agree. In the year therefore
398. was held the Fifth Council of Carthage, which made this following Canon
Placuit Episcopos Presb. and Diac. secundum propriastatuta etiam ab uxoribus
continere. Quod nisi fecerint, ab Ecclesiastico removerantur officio. Cateros
autem Clericos ad hoc non cogi, sed secundum unius cujusque Ecclesiae
consuetudinem observari debere. Can. 3.
Be it enacted, That Bishops, Priests and Deacons abstain even from their Wives
in their own courses. Which if they do not, let them be deposed. But that the
rest of the Clergy be not compelled to do this, but the customs of every
particular Church are to be observed. Bellarmin, Binius, and other Writers of
the Church of Rome maintain that a total Abstinence is here enjoined to the
Clergy, contrary to the plain sense of the Canon. For this they allege only
the Authority of St. Austin, De Adult. conjug. l. 2. c. 20.
and tht Decree of Gratian, which instead of Secundum propria statuta (wherein
the stress of the Canon lies) reads Secundnm priora Statuta, according to
former Constitutions. As for the Authority of Did. 32. cap. 13.
Gratian, that is of no Moment, when opposed to the constant Agreement of all
the Latin Copies of the Acts of this Council. Nor even can we be assured that
Gratian's Copy read it Secundum priora Statuta, since it is very usual with him
to represent the Ancient Monuments of the Church, not exactly in their own
Words, but accommodated to the Sentiments and Practice of his own time. As for
St. Austin, his Authority indeed would be sufficient; for he was present in the
Council: but he says nothing of it in the place alleged, only proposes to
the Laity, who hardly endured to be restrained to the Embraces of one Woman,
the Example of the Clergy, who practiced a total Astinence. For this infers no
more than that some or many of the Clergy did totally abstain; which none
denies, and we readily grant. The confutation of our Adversaries Reasons were
sufficient in this case. However, I will produce some further Reasons in
confirmation of that sense of the Canon, which we follow, and the words do
naturally import. First then, The Ancient Greek Code Can. 70.
of the Canons of the African Church compsosed before the time of the Sixth
Council, follows this sense, translating the Words into Question, by (...),
in their proper courses, or times of waiting. Secondly, the Fathers of the
Quinisext Council commanding Priests and Deacons wholly to contain (...). Can.
13.
in the time of the Administration of Holy Things, profess they herein follow
and ratify this Canon of the Council of Cartharge. And that they did not
mistake or misrepresent the sense of it, appears from the Subscriptions of
Peter, Patriarch of Alexandria, and his African Bishops, to the Acts of the
Quinisext Council; which they would never have done, had they been conscious,
that the Canons of their own Church were therein falsified and misrepresented.
Lastly, Balsamon Annot. in Can.
, Zonaras Annot. in Can.
, Aristenus Annot. in Can.
, and Blastares do thus unanimously explain it only of a partial Abstinence of
the Clergy from their Wives, when they celebrate the greatest Festivals and
Solemnities of the Church. I will produce only the words of Blastares (...),
etc. Syntagm. Alphab. lit. g. cap. 18.
. When the time calls them to the Administration of Holy Things, and
participation of the Sacraments; then ought they to abstain even from the
company of their own Wives, manifesting their continence by their Works. But
the fourth Canon of this Code (which is the second of the Eleventh Council of
Carthage beforementioned) and others like it being obscurely worded, and
Commanding the Clergy, administering Holy Things, to abstain from their Wives,
gave occasion to the Latins to require those, who are to be ordained, to put
away their Wives. Or if we should grant that this is the sense or these Canons;
themselves would be more worthy to be put out of the number of Sacred Canons,
than the Apostolic Canons of those of other Councils, which decreed the direct
contrary to them, if they be taken in the sense of the Latins.

In the end of this Age, Helvidius and Jovinian, in the beginning of the next
Vigilantius appeared in defense of Marriage, against the exorbitant pretention
of Celibacy. What their particular Opinions were, is not well known; nor may we
safely believe St. Hierom, their professed Adversary, in representing of them;
since all the World knows how much he has misrepresented Ruffinus. However,
certain it is all of them were guilty of some Errors. Hilvidius thought the V.
Mary to have had several Children by her Husband Joseph, after the Birth of
Jesus; Jovinian August. de Haeres cap. 82.
maintained the equality of all sins, and impeccability of regenerate persons.
Vigilantius believed it convenient for the present State of the Church, which
received great prejudice from the incontinence of the unmarried Clergy, that
none should be admitted into Orders which were not married; that so all danger
of future scandal might be prevented. All these we willingly grant to have been
Errors, but not Heresies. The first might be owing to a mistake of History,
the last of Policy; and the second indeed was notoriously false, but far from
the Contagion of Heresy. As for their common Opinion about Marriage, it seems
to have been no more than this, that the intrinsic merits of Marriage and
Celibacy were both equal; which however branded with the name of Heresy by St.
Hierom, is a most certain Truth. If they believed the accidental Merits of both
to be equal, which it can be never proved that they did; this indeed was a
mistake (for Persons, who have the gift of Continence, may do greater service
to God and the Church, in an unmarried, than in a married State) but a mistake
that neither injured Faith, nor was repugnant to Revelation. Indeed Jovinian
had a peculiar Error of a grosser nature, that the violation of a Vow of
Continence was a thing indifferent, even in those who could contain. For we
willingly allow, that when a Vow of Continence can without any great difficulty
or danger be preserved, it ought in no case to be violated. However, that any
of them were formal Heretics, can by no means be proved. Rather it is most
certain, that Vigilantius, not only drew several Hierom. adv. Vigil in init.
Catholic Bishops into the same Opinion with himself, who thereupon conferred
Orders to none but married Non ordinant Diaconos, nissi prius uxores duxerint
nulli caelibi credentes pudicitiam.
Men, but that he lived and died in the Communion of the Catholic Church. St.
Hierom indeed loadeth them all with the most opprobious names, and terms them
the worst of Heretics: but his Prejudice and Passion is too well known to be
herein trusted.

In opposition to these Men, St. Hierom writ several Tracts; which in truth are
so many Panegyricks of Celicy, and invectives against Marriage: Here he adopts
and reinforceth all the prejudices and mistakes of the former and present Age:
particularly so far urged the supposed Impurity of Marriage, that he asserts it
to be a Sin, and excludes married Persons from all hopes of Salvation; as we
before proved by producing several places, to which might be added many more.
This was an Error far greater than any of those which he opposed; and which,
if dogmatically proposed, and pertinaciously maintained, would be downright
Heresy. But we charitably suppose, those harsh expressions were rather the
effects of his Passion, than the products of his Judgment. And if he has
exceeded all bounds and limits of Reason in depressing Marriage, no less has
he in exalting Celibacy. This himself acknowledges, when upon a review of his
Book against Helvidius, he confesses Rhetoricati sumus, and in morem
declamatorum Paululum lusimus. Adv. Hilvid. in fine.
he played the Orator too much, and extended his Rhetoric beyond the bounds of
severe Truth. This his Errors about Marriage, and proceeding upon false
prejudices, may justly invalidate St. Hieroms Authority in the case of
Celibacy, which yet he no where says is necessary for the Clergy, but only
highly eonvenient and decorous to the dignity and holiness of their Order. It
may be some further Diminution to his Authority in this case, that all these
extravagant Encomiums of Virginity seem to have proceeded only from an
immoderate desire of repairing thereby his injured Reputation, and the honor
of his Name suffering under unjust suspicions of too great familiarity with the
Lady Paula; which had proceeded so far, and taken such deep root in the Minds
of the Romans, that he was forced to leave Rome in disgrace; when he was
designed by all men to succeed Damasus in the Popedom.

Upon Occasion of St. Hierom, I will here say somewhat of Epiphanius, who
alone, besides him, of all the Writers of this time, seems fond of the Celibacy
of the Clergy: Although he not only allows, but even advises Marriage to
them in case of insuperable Incontinence. His great Affection and Veneration of
St. Hierom made him ready to receive whatsoever was proposed by him: And then
his weak Judgment enabled him not to discover the Sophistry and Mistakes of his
Reasoning. Of the Imbecility of his Judgment Photius (...). Cod. 122.
long since observed, That in his great Work against Heresies, he had done
Injury to Truth, by a weak Defense of it.

In the beginning of the Fifth Age Pope Innocent I. renewed and confirmed the
Constitutions of his Predecessor Siricius, in Two Epistles, one Epist. 2. cap.
9.
to Victricius, Bishop of Roan, written in the Year 404. the other Epist. 3.
cap. 1.
to Exuperius, Bishop of Toulouse, in the Year following. In both he alleges
and enforces only the old Argument of the Impurity of Marriage, which made it
incompatible with the daily Administration of Holy Things performed by the
Clergy. He commands Priests and Deacons (for Subdeacons he mentions not) who
abstained not from their Wives in Obedience to the Constitution of Siricius, to
be deposed; except perhaps they had been ignorant of the Constitution. For in
that case he would only have them obliged to Continence for the future. That
these, and indeed all the first Twenty Six Epistles of this Pope are spurious,
many learned Men have endeavored to prove with many Arguments. But I will not
insist on that. It is not improbable that he made such a Decree. Celibacy was
then fitted to the Genius of the Age, and particularly of the Sea of Rome.
After Innocent, Pope Leo I. carried on the Design yet further, and in an
Epistle Epist. 84. cap. 4.
to Anastasius Bishop of Thessalonica, forbid the use of Marriage to Subdeacons
also, thereby perfecting the System of Celibacy at this Day used in the Church
of Rome. The same Constitution he reinforced in an Epistle Epist. 92. cap. 3.
Lex continentiae eadem est Ministris Altaris, quae Episcopis atque Presbyteris.
to Rusticus Bishop of Narbon, prescribing the same Law of Continence to the
Ministers of the Altar (viz. Deacons and Subdeacons) as to Bishops and Priests.

These were the Decrees of the Popes of R^me, which were o^t-times renewed, and
sometimes relaxed by the following Popes. As for the Western Councils of this,
and the following Ages, they were all Provincial, and pretended to no Authority
out of their own Provinces. The Council of Orange was the first, which ever
imposed total Abstinence upon the Clergy. It was a Convention of no more than
Seventeen Bishops, in the Year 441. who then made this Canon. Si quis post
acceptam benedictionem leviticam cum uxore sua incontinens invenitur, ab
officio abjiciatur, Can. 23.
If any one after he has received Deacons Orders, be found incontinent with
his Wife; Let him be deposed from his Office. Providing in the following Canon,
that this Punishment extend not to those, who had retained the use of their
Wives before this Canon was made. Whence it may be gathered, that total
Abstinence was not yet enjoined to the Clergy of the Gallican Church by any
Public Authority, and that the Decrees of Pope Innocent, directed to the
Bishops of Roan and Toulouse, as acting out of his own Patriarchat, had not
been received. The Second Council of Arles, in the Year 452. comes next, which
in the Second Canon forbids any married Man to be ordained Priest, who does not
vow Continence; in the Forty Third Canon extends the same to Deacons; in the
Forty Fourth Canon forbids to Deacons the use of Marriage in the Words of the
Council of Orange; in the Third Canon, forbids Bishops, Priests and Deacons to
keep their Wives with them in the same House, unless they also have vowed
Continence, upon pain of Excommunication. This Punishment was thought too
great, and was therefore moderated by the First Council of Tours, A. D. 461.
who enjoining Can. 1.
total Abstinence from their Wives to Priests and Deacons, enact Can. 2.
withal, That if any Priest or Deacon use the Company of his Wife, he be not
excommunicated, but only reduced to Lay-Communion. In the year 506. the Council
of Agatha received Can. 9.
and confirmed the Constitutions of Siricius and Innocent about the Continence
of Priests and Deacons; and further enjoin Can. 10. 16
that their Wives be not permitted to dwell with them, although they also
promise Continence. The like did the Council of Girona ordain in the year 517.
In the year 531. the Second Council of Toledo decreed Can. 1.
That those who from their Childhood were by their Parents dedicated to the
Holy Office, and were to that end brought up at the Charge of the Church,
should, when they came to the Age of Eighteen, be asked publicly by the Bishop
in the face of the Church, Whether they were willing to oblige themselves
never to marry. If they were, then they might be ordained Subdeacons, and
gradually arise to the higher Offices of the Church. If not, then they might
have leave to marry; and whenever both married Parties should promise
Continence, the Husband should be received into Orders. Here is the first
mention of a Vow of Continence exacted of those that were to be ordained, that
can be found in Ecclesiastical History. And here also it was first forbidden to
Subdeacons to marry Wives after their Ordination, (for this concerned not
those Subdeacons who married before Ordination) whereas in all the precedent
Councils it was left free to Subdeacons, as well as to the other inferior
Orders, to enjoy their Wives married either before or after their Ordination to
that Office. The Council of Clermont, Anno 535. complaining Can. 13.
that many Priests and Deacons, notwithstanding the Prohibition of the Church,
had used the Company of their Wives, and begotten Children of them, commands
all such to be degraded from their Office. The Fourth Council of Orleans, in
the year 541. ordered Can. 17.
That Priests and Deacons should not be permitted to dwell with their Wives,
upon pain of Deposition, thereby to take away ever all suspicion of forbidden
Commerce. The Third Council of Orleans had before, in the year 538. forbid Can.
2.
the use of Marriage not only to Priests and Deacons, but also to Subdeacons.
The Fifth Council of Orleans A. D. 549.
commands Can. 4. Cujuslibet loci vel ordinis.
all Clergymen, of whatsoever Dignity or Order, who return to the Embraces of
their Wives after Ordination, to be for ever degraded, and reduced to
Lay-Communion. The Council of Auxerre, in the year 578. enjoin Can. 20. 21
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, upon pain of Deprivation, not to accompany
with their Wives, calling that a carnal Sin. The First Council of Mascon, in
the year 581. repeat Can. 11.
and renew the Canon of the Council of Clermont. The Third Council of Lions, in
the year 583. forbids Can. 1.
the use of Marriage to Bishops, Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons, and the
cohabitation of their Wives, to the three first Orders. In a French Council,
about the year 620. all Marriage and cohabitation of Women was forbidden Can.
8. 12. Council. Tom. V. p. 1656.
to Priests and Deacons. In the Fourth Council of Toledo, Anno 633. it was
ordered Can. 27.
That Priests and Deacons should promise Continence before their Bishop, when
they were inducted into their Livings and Preferments. The Eighth Council of
Toledo, in the year 653. laments Can. 5, 6.
the Obstinacy of many Priests and Deacons, retaining their Wives, and even
marrying after Ordination, against the Canons of the Church; and severely
forbids it for the future. In the year 868. the Council of Worms commanded Can.
9.
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, to abstain from their Wives, upon
pain of Deprivation. Many other Councils between the year 600, and a 1000.
forbid the Cohabitation of all Women, and consequently also of Wives, to the
Clergy: And many others permit only Mothers, Sisters, and Aunts to dwell with
the Clergy, rejecting all other Women under the Name of Extraneae; wherein
they seem to have mistaken the meaning of the Third Canon of the Council of
Nice. Lastly, some Councils proceeded so far, as to inhibit to the Clergy the
Cohabitation of all Women whatsoever, even Mothers, Sisters, Aunts, and the
nearest Relations, permitted by the Council of Nice. Thus did the Council of
Mentz Can. 10.
in the year 888. observing that some Priests had committed Incest with their
own Sisters, (see the effects of enforced Celibacy:) And the Council of Metz,
Can. 5.
in the same year, upon the same Account. The next year Riculfus Bishop of
Soissons published his Constitutions, Council Tom. IX. p. 416.
wherein Cap. 14.
he not only renewed the Canon of these Two last Councils, but also forbid the
Clergy to talk with Women in private, or even speak to them without some
VVitness standing by.

These were the Progresses and Gradations of Celibacy in the VVestern Church
from the Council of Nice to the times of Hildebrand. Proposed it was by some
Doctors of great Authority, enforced by Popes, and enjoined by Councils; yet
could not all these Authorities effectually recommend to the Practice of the
Clergy a Doctrine so contrary to the first Notions of Reason, and common
Inclinations of Mankind. The frequent and continual Repetition and renewing of
Decrees and Canons to the establishment of it, argue the universal Opposition
which it met with in the World, every later Decree manifesting that the former
was unsuccessful. And indeed most of these Constitutions are ushered in with a
Preface of the Obstinacy of the Clergy in retaining their Wives, against the
express Prohibitions of the Church. All the aforementioned Councils were
Provincial; and Popes had not yet claimed the Government of the whole Church.
So that all these Decrees affected not the Eastern Church at all; nor those
Parts even of the VVestern Church, which were neither subject to the Roman
Patriarchat, nor the Jurisdiction of the particular Councils. And even in those
Churches which were then subject to either of them, the Laws of Celibacy were
never universally received and obeyed; and at last so far neglected and grown
obsolete, that in the beginning of the Eleventh Age, Marriage of the Clergy was
as freely used, and as generally practiced in most parts of the VVestern
Church, as it is at this day in the Reformed Churches. This I come next to
prove; where I might justly have omitted to speak of the Eastern Church, if our
Adversaries did not pretend an universal Practice of Celibacy in the Eastern as
well as Western Church, till the time of the Quinisext Council. The Refutation
of this Pretense will necessitate us to speak in general of the Practice and
Discipline of the ancient universal Church in the ^ase of Celibacy.

And first to take away all Prejudice, which may possess the Reader, that it is
impossible, at least improbable, that a Custom, persuaded by many Doctors,
commanded by Popes and Councils successively in several Ages, and which diverse
of the Fathers affirm to have been universally practiced in their time, should
never be generally used by the Clergy. I will produce an Example of a matter of
Discipline of far less moment, which was urged and enjoined with greater
Advantages and Authorities, and the universal Practice of it attested by more
VVriters; which yet after all never generally obtained in the Church, and was
indeed disused in all Ages. I mean the case of Bigamists, who by an early
custom of the Church, begun before the end of the Second Century, were excluded
from the Clergy. This Exclusion is commanded by the Apostolic Canons, Can. 16.
by the Apostolic Constitutions, l. 6. c. 17.
by St. Basil's Canonical Epistle Can. 12.
to Amphilochius, by the Councils of Valence, Can. 1.
Agatha, Can. 1.
Fourth of Arles, Can. 3.
Third of Constantinople, Can. 3.
of Rome Can. 2.
under Pope Hilarus, of Aquisgran, Can. 9.
and infinite others; by the Popes Siricius, Epist. 1.
Innocent, Ep. 2. c. 5.
Leo, Ep. 87. c. 1
Gelasius, Ep. 9. c. 22.
, and Gregory, l. 2. Ep. 25.
Tertullian, ad uxor. l. 1. c. 7.
says, The Ordination of Bigamists is forbidden by Apostolical Tradition, and
the Discipline of the Church. Origin Hom. 17. in Luc.
affirms, that in his time Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, could not be
Bigamists. St. Ambrose asserts Epist. 82. ad Vercell.
this Prohibition to have been confirmed by the Council of Nice. Pope Innocent
Ep. 4. c. 2.
says, No question ought to be made of it, it being manifestly of Divine
Institution. Pope Leo, Ep. 84. c. 4.
That this Precept was ever held sacred, and Ep. 87. c. 1.
that neither Law nor Gospel will permit such to be admitted into the Clergy.
Epiphanius, Haeres. 59. c. 4.
In truth, the holy Command of God, after the coming of Christ, receives not
into the Clergy those, who after the death of their first Wife, contract a
second Marriage. St. Hierom, Adv. Jovin. l. 1.
A Bigamist cannot be chosen into the Clergy, and Epist. ad Geront. de Monog.
A Layman is not chosen into the Clergy, if he be a Bigamist. St. Augustine, De
bono conjug. ca. 18.
It is not lawful to ordain any but the Husbands of one Wife. Hilary the
Deacon, Com. in 1 Timothy 3. 12.
No Bigamist is ordained. And by all the same Authorities, he who has kept a
Concubine, is made incapable of the Clergy.

After so many and so great Authorities, the common Tradition of both Churches,
Command of General Councils, and Belief of Divine Institution (all which
Advantages the Celibacy of the Clergy wanted) who can imagine any otherwise,
than that this point of Discipline was ^niversally received and practiced
without exception or limitation? yet nothing less. Textullian objects this to
the Catholics, as a main argument of his Separation and Departure to the
Montanists, that they admitted Bigamists even to the Episcopal Dignity. Among
you, says he, Quot enim and Bigami praesident apud vos? De Monog. ca. 12.
how many Bigamists preside? And when Theodoret ordained Count Irenaeus, a
Bigamist, then in Disfavour at Court, Bishop of Tire, and his Enemies, laid
hold of that pretense to accuse him of the Violation of the Canons; he defends
(...). Epist. 110. ad Domnum.
himself by the Authority of all the Bishops of Phoenicia, who gave their
Suffrage to the Ordination; by the Example and Tradition of his Predecessors;
by the Examples of Alexander Patriarch of Antioch, and Praylius of Jerusalem,
who had ordained Bishops; Diogenes and Domninus, both Digamists; that he
followed herein custom and famous Men, celebrated for their Knowledge and
Piety; and that Proclus, Patriarch of Constantinople, the Metropolitans of
Pontus, and all the Bishops of Palestine, had not only allowed, but also
commended this Ordination; and not the least doubt made of the lawfulness of
it. Lastly, St. Augustine was ordained Bishop of Hippo by the common Consent of
all the Bishops of Africa, who had far exceeded Confess. l. 6. c. 15.
the supposed Scandal of Digamy, by an open Cohabitation of two Concubines
successively. And, which deserved the first place, St. Hierom answering the
doubt of Oceanus, whether Carterius, a Digamist, were Canonically ordained
Bishop, says, Miror autem te unum protraxisse in medium cumom^is mundus his
ordinationibus plenus sit, non dico de Presbyteris, non de inferiori gradu. Ad
Episcopos venio, quos si sigillatim voluero nominare, tantus numerus
congregabitu^, ut Arimine^sis Synod^ multitudo superetur. Epist. ad Ocean.
I wonder you produced the example of no more than one, whenas the whole World
is full of these Ordinations. I speak not of Priests, nor of the inferior
Orders, I come to Bishops, whom, if I should name singly, so great a number
would arise, that the multitude of the Synod of Ariminum (the most numerous
Council which had been then held) would be exceeded.

That the Laws of Celibacy were no less disobeyed, and all the ancient
Testimonies of the universal Practice of it, are no less wide mistakes, I come
next to prove; and will begin with the Eastern Church. St. Athanasius, not long
after the Council of Nice, writing to Dracontius, a Holy Monk, rebukes him for
declining the Episcopal Office, and refutes the Reasons of his Refusal, the
chief of which was, That in the Episcopal Dignity he could not live so
retiredly, as he desired, but must be forced to lead a secular kind of Life. In
answer to this, Athanasius shows him, that as to that, nothing can be performed
in the one State, which may not in the other; and that when a Bishop, he may as
well use the retiredness of a Monk, as many Monks do the usual Freedom of a
Bishop; and produces this Instance, (...). Prope fin.
For many Bishops have not marri^d at all, and many Monks have been Fathers of
Children. As we have known Bishops Fathers of Children, and Monks having no
Posterity. For both are alike lawful to each Order, neither the one nor the
other is forbidden to them. A more express Passage than this cannot be
conceived, where he affirms many Bishops to have gotten Children after their
Consecration, and by the Instance insinuates, That this was very usual with the
Bishops of that time. That this Procreation of Children was performed by them
while Bishops, not before, is most evident; since otherwise the Instance of
Athanasius would have been highly impertinent. For Dracontius, in declining the
Episcopal Dignity, did not dread the Life of Bishops, before they were made
Bishops, that being the State wherein himself then was, and desired to
continue, but the supposed encumbrances of a Bishop's Life, after he was made
Bishop.

In the year 357. the Emperor Constantius made a Law, Omnibus Clericis
hujusmodi praerogativa succurrat, ut conjugia clericorum, ac liberi, etc. Cod.
Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 2. l. 14.
That all Clergymen should enjoy this Privilege, that their Wives and
Children, and Servants of both Sexes, and their Children also, (that is, the
whole Family of Clergymen) should be always exempt Tribute, and all public
Burdens. There are three or four other Laws in the Theodosian Code, made in
favor of the Wives and Children of the Clergy, which it is not here necessary
to repeat. About the year 375. some Superstitious Christians had conceived so
great a Veneration of Celibacy, that they despised the Married Clergy, and
would rather defer Baptism for many years together, than be baptized by Bishops
and Priests who abstained not from their Wives. These St. Gregory Nazianzen
sharply rebukes, Say not, says he, (...). Orat. XL. in Baptisma cap. 25.
a Bishop shall baptize me, or if a Presbyter, at least one of those who are
unmarried, and one of those that profess Continence, and thereby imitate the
Life of Angels. Hence it is manifest, that many Presbyters abstained not from
their Wives; for this was the occasion of those foolish Christians
Scrupilosity, supposing some impurity to be in the use of Marriage. Had the
married Priests renounced the company of their Wives, they had been no less
continent than the unmarried ones. And therefore it was not simply their
Marriage, but their use of it, which those Persons disliked.

About the same time Epiphanius writ his Panarium, wherein opposing the
Chastity and Continence of the Catholic Clergy to the Heretic, called
Apostolici, says, that Continence even from their own Wives was universally
observed by them; but then is forced to qualify his Boast with this Clause,
(...). Haeres. 59. cap. 4.
This is done chiefly where the Ecclesiastical Canons (or rather Customs, for
no such Canons were yet made) are accurate. But you will certainly say to me,
that in some places Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons do yet beget Children. This
is done not according to the Canon (or Rule of ut most Perfection) but by the
negligence of Men increasing with time, and by reason of the multitude of the
Clergy, there being not found a sufficient number of continent Persons. Here it
may be observed that this Custom of voluntary Continence was not introduced in
some places; that where it was introduced, it obtained not universally, which
may be gathered from the word chiefly; and lastly, that even there it was a
Novel Introduction. For speaking of those Clergy, who did not abstain, he
says, they yet beget Children: But after all, we are not to rely much upon his
Testimony even in a matter of Fact. The good Man, who was far from an accurate
Writer, seems to have taken his Measures wholly from his Native Country of
Palestine, wherein he was very much conversant, even after he was Bishop, which
Province was at that time ^illed with Monks and Monkish Clergy, who flocked
thither out of reverence to the Holy Places. The Author indeed of the Homilies
upon Job, amongst St. Chrysostom's Works, testifies Hom. 11. prope fin.
that in his time the use of Marriage was forbidden to Bishops; and therefore
Bellarmin fails not to make use of his Authority. But first this concerns not
the inferior Clergy, and then these Homilies belong not to St. Chrysostom in
the Judgment both of Fronto Ducaeus, and Sir H. Savil; but seem to have been
written after the Quinisext Council; when Continence was first imposed upon the
Bishops in the Greek Church.

In the middle of the Fifth Age, Socrates the Historian writ, who observes it
as a peculiar Custom of Thessalia, Macedonia, and Achaia, that the Clergy there
abstained from their Wives, therein dissenting from the Custom of the rest of
the Eastern Church, says indeed, that many abstained from the use of Marriage
in other parts of the East, but that (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 22.
All who did this, did it of their own accord, even Bishops doing it only
voluntarily, not necessitated to it by any Canon. For many of them in the time
of their Bishopric have begotten Children of their lawful Wives. So plain a
passage needs no Comment. In a few Ages this voluntary Abstinence of Bishops
became universal in most Provinces of the East: although the Bishops of Africa,
Libia, and some other places retained, as formerly, the use of Marriage.
Therefore in the end of the Seventh Age the Quinisext Council took advantage
from this voluntary Abstinence to impose a necessary Abstinence (c) Can. 12.
upon all Bishops; and obliged the Bishops of Africa herein to conform
themselves to the general Custom. They inflicted no Censure upon the African
Bishops for retaining the Company of their Wives, nor so much as blame them;
but rather term them (...).
most religious Bishops, and profess they impose Abstinence upon them only
(...).
for the better Edification of the People.

Till that Council the Bishops of the East freely enjoyed the use of Marriag.
This we have proved by the preceding Testimonies, and may be further evinced
by the Authority of Balsamon, the greatest Canonist of the Eastern Church,
whose words are these, (...). Comm. in Can. 5. Apost.
Before the Sixth Synod held in Trullo, it was lawful for Bishops to have
Wives, even after their Consecration, as well as Priests and Deacons, who are
ordained after Marriage. So that Eutychius, Annal. Alex. 1. 1.
Patriarch of Alexandria, is grossly mistaken, when he terminates the Marriage
of Bishops at the times of ^he Council of Nice, if he does not rather mean that
till then they all retained their Wives; but after that time they began a
voluntary Abstinence; which sense indeed his words do more naturally import. As
for the Marriage of the inferior Clergy, that was so commonly used at that
time in the Eastern Church, that in Armenia they had taken up a custom of
admitting none into the Clergy, but the Sons of the Clergy. This was indeed a
great Abuse, and worthy of redress; which was therefore abolished by the
Quinisext Council, Can. 33.
as coming too near to Jewish Superstition.

From general Testimonies I pass to particular Instances and Examples of the
Marriage of the Eastern Clergy after the Council of Nice. In that Council was
present Spyridon, Bishop of Trymithus in Cyprus, celebrated by all the Writers
of those times, for his Holiness, Miracles, and Gift of Prophecy. Of him
Sozomen says, (...). l. 1. c. 11.
He had Wife and Children, and yet was not thereby in the least hindered or
rendered less fit and successful in the Administration of holy things. This Note
plainly intimates, that he used the company of his Wife, while Bishop:
Otherwise the Observation would have been trifling, since a married Bishop not
using his Marriage, is in the same condition with an unmarried one. Presently
after the Council of Nice, Gregory was made Bishop of Nazianzum. He had married
a Wife a little before, by whose means he was converted to the Catholic Faith,
and who lived with him to an extreme old Age; for they were both present at the
Funeral of their Son Caesarius, when Gregory had been now Bishop Forty Years.
He had by her, after he was made Bishop, Two Sons, Gregory Nazianzen, and
Caesarius, and most probably one Daughter, for Nazianzen seems to have been
older than his Sister, but most certainly was many years older than his Brother
Caesarius; yet that himself was born after his Father was made Bishop, he
assures us in his Life, where he introduces his Father thus speaking to him,
(...). Carm. de Vit. sua post init.
You have not yet run through so many years of your Life, as I have years of my
Pastoral Charge. Baronius Annal. ad An. 371.
affirms this to have been spoken hyperbolically, that the use of Marriage was
then forbidden to Bishops by the Canons and Constitutions of the Universal
Church, and these Canons most religiously observed both in the East and West;
that it may be demonstrated from Arguments of Chronology, Nazianzen was born
before the Council of Nice, when his Father was not yet Baptized. The first
Argument is already confuted by the precedent Testimonies; the second arises
to no more than this, that Nazianzen was Thirty Years old when St. Basil parted
from Athens, that Basil studied at Athens with Julian, who by the Testimony of
Ammianus Marcellinus, Lib. 15.
was come thither in the year 354. and that consequently Nazianzen was born in
the year 324. the year before the Council of Nice.

This Chronology of Baronius, Jac. Capellus Annot. in 1 Timothy 3.
says he has refuted in his History of the Church. I have not that Book now
by me, and therefore not knowing whether he has made good his Promise, must
offer some considerations to the Reader in opposition to Baronius his Argument.
First then, uncertain Arguments of Chronology, formed at this distance of time,
ought not to invalidate the clear Testimony of Nazianzen, who best knew when
himself was born. Secondly Nazianzen says not he was thirty years old, when
Julian came to Athens, but when Basil parted thence. Now Basil not only might,
but most probably did stay several years at Athens, not only after the Arrival,
but even after the Departure of Julian: At least most certainly he departed not
before Julian, who left Athens in the end of the year 355. For St. Basil tells
Ad. Jul. Epist. 208.
Julian, that they had learned together at Athens, (...), Theology, and all the
better sorts of Literature, and thoroughly searched the Holy Scriptures. This
was a Labor of more than a few Months, and therefore Basil cannot be supposed
to have left Athens before Julian, who stayed there but little more than a
year. Thirdly, (...).
Nazianzen says not he was thirty years old, when Basil left Athens, but
almost thirty; and that in a Poetic Work, where being not able to express the
just time of his Age, he was forced to make use of a round number, which may
admit a Latitude of two or three years. And it is most certain that his Father
was made Bishop presently after the Council, as himself assures (...). Orat.
fun. in Patrem.
us. So that even Arguments of Chronology make it probable Nazianzen was born
after his Fathers Ordination; to which his own Testimony being added, make it
most certain. And then his Brother Caesarius was so much younger than himself,
that in his Funeral Oration upon him, he frequently calls him a young Man, and
often laments his untimely Death, although his Father had been then Bishop
above Forty Years.

In the year 362. Basilius, Presbyter of Ancyra, and Eupsychius of Caesaria in
Cappadocia, (...). Sozom. l. 5. c. 11.
Who had newly married a Wife, and was yet as it were a Bridegroom, suffered
Martyrdom. It appears not directly from the words of the Historian, whether the
later was of the Clergy: But the words of Athanasius will put it past all
doubt, who numbering Adv. Arian. Orat. 1. p. 121.
the Writers of this time which opposed Arianism, mentions Eupsychius Bishop of
Cappadocia, of which Caesaria was the Metropolis; if he means the same
Eupsychius, which is not improbable. However if this be uncertain, most certain
it is, that St. Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa, was married, and lived with his Wife
Theosebia till her Death. This Nicephorus (...). Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 19.
testifies, saying, that when he was Bishop, he retained the Society of his
Wife, and (whose Authority is far greater than Nicephorus's) Nyssen's intimate
Friend, Nazianzen, who writing to Nyssen a consolatory Letter Epist. 95. (...).
upon the Death of his Wife, says, She had always lived with him, and mutually
shared with him all the comforts of Life; and calls her truly holy, the worthy
Wife and Companion of a Bishop.

I will produce but one example more, but that so pregnant and express, that it
might alone teach us what was the Discipline of the Eastern Church in that Age.
About the year 410. Synesius was, for the repute of his great Learning, chosen
Bishop of Ptolemais in Egypt. He was then married, and had a Wife, whom he
professed to love passionately. It seems the voluntary Abstinence from the use
of Marriage, which some Bishops of the East had undergone, was become an
universal Custom among the Bishops of Egypt, so that the People expected that a
married Man promoted to the Episcopal Dignity, should renounce the Pleasures of
Marriage. And there was a particular Reason, why this Custom should generally
obtain in Egypt, rather than in any other Provinces of the East. Egypt was then
the great School and Nursery of Monastic Discipline, which had probably at
that time more Monks residing in it, than the whole World besides. The Bishops
of Egypt were almost all taken out of these Monks, and consequently so great a
Veneration for Celibacy possessed the Egyptians, that those few married Bishops
which were among them, could by no other means conserve the Reverence and
esteem, which was due to their Character, than by a voluntary renunciation of
their Marriage: Synesius therefore, that he might not deceive the expectation
of the People, and willing to decline the burden, professed* (...). Epist. 105.
ad Evopium fratrem.
openly, and declared to all, That he would neither totally separate himself
from the Company of his Wife, nor yet (separating himself only in appearance)
enjoy her Company by stealth, like an Adulterer. For this would be unlawful,
and that unjust. But that he both intended and desired to have many and handsome
Children. Notwithstanding this Profession, he was ordained by Theophilus,
Patriarch of Alexandria, than whom none better knew the Canons of the Church,
and who has left some learned Monuments of his Skill in that kind.

I proceed next to the Practice of the VVestern Church, where St. Hierom
writing against Jovinian, acknowledges that Celibacy was not then generally
entertained by the Clergy, many of whom retained the use of Marriage. If
Samuel, says he, Si Samuel nutritus in tabernaculo duxit uxorem quid hoc ad
prejudicium Virginitatis, quasi non hodie quoque plurimi Sacerdotes habeant
matrimonia? -- Eliguntur mariti in Sacerdotium, non nego, quia non sunt tanti
Virgins, quanti necessarii sunt Sacerdotes. Adv. Jovin. l. 1. c. 13.
(whose Example you object) being brought up in the Temple, married a Wife;
what does this prejudiceVirginity? As if at this day also many Priests used not
Marriage. And afterward, Married Men are chosen into the Priesthood, I do not
deny it: but then the reason is, because there are not so mayn Virgins (or
continent Persons) as are necessary to supply the Office of the Priesthood. For
all cannot contain. Where it is evident these married Priests renounced not the
enjoyment of their Marriage after Ordination. For then they must have been
supposed to be continent Persons. A little before his time, Hilary, Deacon of
Rome, writ his Questions upon both Testaments, wherein he has these words,
Hinc Apostolus eum, qui uxorem habeat, si in caeteris servet mandata,
Sacerdotem fieri posse ac debere ostendit. Inter Augustini Opp. prope fin.
Hence the Apostle shows, that a married man, if in all other things he keeps
the Commandments, both may and ought to be ordained Priest. This was written
few years before Siricius his Decree, and proves that the Imposition of
Celibacy was then so little thought of in the Church, that it was believed
unlawful, and repugnant to Apostolical Institution. That this Priest abstained
not after Ordination, is manifest: For then he would therein also have observed
the Commands, whether of God or of the Church. When St. Augustine writ against
Faustus the Manichee, in the beginning of the Fifth Age; no Imposition of
Celibacy was yet introduced, or so much as taken notice of in the Church of
Africa. For Faustus thus defends the Manichees immoderate Veneration of
Virginity, and dis-esteem of Marriage. Et tamen hoc nobis primo respondeatis
velim, utrum omnino Virgins facere Doctrina sit Daemoniorum, an solum
prohibitionem facere nubendi? Si per prohibitionem nihil ad no^. Nam and ipsi
tam stultum indicamus inhibere volentem, quam nefas est and impium nolentem
cogere. August. advers. Faust. lib. 30.
In the first place I would gladly be answered in this, whether in any case to
cause persons to continue Virgins, be the Doctrine of Devils, or only if it be
done by a prohibition of Marriage. If the later, it concern s us not. For we
also think it as foolish to forbid those who are willing, so unlawful and
impious to compel those who are unwilling: We persuade, but force none. Here
two things may be observed. First, that in the Controversy between the
Catholics and Manichees about Marriage, it was granted on both sides, that a
prohibition of Marriage to any Persons was unlawful, impious, and a Doctrine of
Devils: And then that no such Prohibition was in use among the Catholics,
which Faustus confesses, and pretends that his Party is no less innocent
from any such unlawful Imposition. Siricius, in imposing Celibacy upon the
Clergy, pleads neither any Divine Institution, nor precedent custom of the
Church; but only the indecency of Marriage in them. Rather Innocent renewing
the Imposition, confesses it was no part of Ecclesiastical Discipline before
Siricius his Decree. For commanding those who had disobeyed Siricius his
Constitution, to be deposed, he subjoins, Nam si ad aliquos forma illa
ecclesiasticae vitae quae ab Episcopo Siricio ad Provincias commeavit, non
probabitur pervenisse, his ignorationis venia permittetur, ita ut de caetero
penitus incipiant abstinere. Epist. 3. cap. 1.
But if it shall be proved that the form of Ecclesiastical Life, which the
Bishop Siricius sent into the Provinces, came not to the knowledge of any;
their Ignorance shall be pardoned, provided they abstain for the future. If
Celibacy had been now long since settled in the Church by Ecclesiastical Canons,
and become a matter of constant Discipline, none could have pleaded, none would
have deserved Pardon for their Ignorance. In Africa the repulse given to Pope
Siricius, and afterward the constancy of those Bishops in defending their
Liberty against the Usurpations of Innocent, had so far discouraged the Popes
of Rome, that despairing of being able to introduce Celibacy into that Church,
they thought it sufficient, if they could only hinder the Ordinations of
Bigamists, and those who had married Widows, which were frequent in Africa.
Therefore Leo, in his Epistle to the African Bishops, complaining of this
Abuse, says, The Apostolic Precept of the Monogamy of a Bishop was ever held
so sacred, Ut etiam de muliere Sacerdotis eligendi eadem intelligatu^ servanda
condi^io, ne forte illa, etc. Epist. 87. ca. 1.
that the same condition is to be observed concerning the Wife of a Bishop to
be chosen; lest she perhaps before she was married to him should have had a
former Husband. Of total Abstinence from their Wives he makes not the least
mention. And indeed all the Cautions and necessary qualifications, which the
ancient Church required to be found in the Wives of the Clergy, would have been
wholly unnecessary, if upon the Ordination of their Husbands they must
immediately have ceased to be Wives. But, which is further to be observed in
this Passage of Leo, the ancient Editions of his Decretal Epistles, and
particularly those in Crabbe's Collection of the Councils, Colon. 1538. and
1551. instead of eligendi read eligenda; and then the Sense will be, that the
same condition is to be observed in the choice of a Bishop's or Priest's Wife;
and consequently in the Church of Africa it was permitted, and by Leo thought
not unlawful for the Clergy to contract Marriage even after Ordination. That
they used Marriage after Ordination, we are assured by the Fathers of the
Quinisext Council (...). Can. 12.


And indeed the more sober and moderate Popes seem never to have intended their
Constitutions about Celibacy should be urged upon the Clergy out of the Roman
Patriarchat; nor did they calculate them for the universal Church. It was
Innocent alone, of all the ancient Popes, who equalled the Ambition of his
later Successors, and endeavored to make the Roman Patriarchat as extensive as
the Roman Empire. This Patriarchat tookin but a small part of the Western
Church, and even that was sometimes contracted into narrower Bounds by the
Invasions of the Barbarians, who by their Success of Arms alienating many
Provinces from the Government of the Roman Prefect, withdrew them at the same
time from the Jurisdiction of the Roman Patriarch. Hence it was that Sicily,
being in possession of the barbarous Nations, when P. Leo made his Decree about
the Celibacy of Subdeacons, the Clergy of Sicily thought not themselves obliged
by it, nor took any notice of it. At least it met with no Obedience in that
Church, till the Island was in the next Age recovered to the Roman Empire. And
then it obtained not in Virtue of Leo's Constitution, but because enforced by a
Decree of Pope Pelagius II. about the year 588. Till then the Subdeacons of
Sicily neither obeyed the Constitution, nor were obliged to do it, as Pope
Gregory confesses in his Repeal of Pelagius his Decree. Three years since,
says he, Ante triennium Subdiac^ni omnium ecclesiarum Siciliae prohibiti
fuerant, ut more Romanae e^cl. nullatenus suis uxoribus miscerentur. Quod mihi
durum atque incompetens videtur, ut qui usum ejusdem continentiae non invenit,
neque castitatem ante promisit, compellatur a sua uxore separari. Lib. 1.
Epist. 42.
the Subdeacons of all the Churches of Sicily were commanded to abstain from
their Wives in conformity to the custom of the Church of Rome. Which seems
hard and unmeet to me, that he, who is not used to such Continency, and never
before promised Chastity, should be compelled to be separated from his Wife. He
makes no mention of Leo's Decree, rather owns that Celibacy was not commanded
to the Subdeacons of Sicily before Pelagius his Constitution, but expressly
asserts that Celibacy was not before then used by them, and that then they
first began to abstain from their Wives. The Isle of Corsica was never subject
to the Roman Patriarchat, as appears from an ancient Notitia of the several
Patriarchats of the Church, published by the learned Dr. Beverege, Pandect.
Can. Tom. 2. in Not. p. 135.
and from Nilus Doxopatrius, Notit. Patr. inter Moynii Var. Sacra. p. 217.
and therefore neither received nor were obliged by either the Constitutions of
Popes about Celibacy, or the Canons of those Provincial Councils before
mentioned, wherein none of their Bishops were present. Upon this account Pope
Gregory I. expressly allows to the Clergy of Corsica the use of Marriage. We
will, Praeterea volumus, ut Sacerdotes, qui in Corsica commorantur, prohiberi
debeant, ne cum mulieribus conversentur, excepta duntaxat matre, sorore,
ve^uxore, quae cast regenda est. Lib. 1. Ep. 50.
says he, that the Priests, (Sacerdotes, by which word Bishops as well as
Presbyters are designed) which dwell in Corsica, be forbidden to converse with
Women, except only a Mother, Sister, or Wife, who ought to be chastely governed.
That the Church of Milan was not subject to the Roman Patriarchat is fully
proved by a Learned Divine Dr. Cave's Discourse of Ancient Church* Government,
cap. 5. 2.
of our Church. And this was the reason why, when once the voluntary Zeal of
Celibacy, which had possessed the Clergy of Milan in the time of St. Ambrose,
grew cold and expired, Marriage was publicly used by the Clerg^ of that Church
without any Interruption, till the times of Hildebrand; as we shall hereafter
occasionally show. The same was the Case of the Church of England, which owing
no Obedience to the ancient Papal Constitutions, and not intermedling in the
Councils, which decreed Celibacy, retained to her Clergy the free use of
Marriage, till by the Procurement and Artifices of Anselm, she forbid it in a
National Synod in the Twelfth Century; as we shall hereafter more largely prove.

This was the Case of Celibacy in those Provinces, which were not influenced by
the Authority of the Roman Patriarch, nor had obliged themselves by any
Synodical Act. Let us now view the State of those Provinces, which were the
Stage of those several Councils we before numbered, viz. Spain, France, and
Germany in the Ninth Age. That the so often repeated Canons of the Spanish
Councils were unsuccessful, appears from St. Isidore, Bishop of Sevil, about
the year 600. who in his Book of Ecclesiastical Offices, describing the several
Duties of the Clergy, says, Clerici castimoniam invi^lati corporis perpetuo
conservare studeant, aut certe unius matrimonii vinculo foederentur. Lib 2. c.
2.
Let Clergymen endeavor perpetually to preserve the Chastity of their Bodies
inviolable; or at least be joined with the Bond of one Marriage. And indeed how
hardly the inferior Clergy of Spain brooked the necessity of Celibacy imposed
on them by their Bishops in several Synods, is evident from the Policy of
Veitiza, King of Spain, in the year 702. who, conscious of his own Wickedness
and Tyranny, and fearing the Clergy, in revenge of it, might excite the
Populacy to Jo. Vasaus Chron. Hispan.
take up Arms and dethrone him, resolved to oblige the Clergy, and gain their
affections by some extraordinary Favor, which might be received by them with
universal Applause; and therefore by public Edict gave them Liberty to marry
Wives, or retain them already married.

In the Churches of France and Germany, Celibacy most certainly was not
universally practiced by the Clergy in the end of the Eighth Age, when Pope
Adrian offered to Charles the Great his Collection of Canons fitted for the
Government of the Churches in his Kingdoms. The Sixth Canon of that Collection
is taken out of the Apostolic Canons, and is conceived in these words,
Presbyter uxorem suam a guberna^ione sua non abjiciat, sed cast regat. Council.
Tom. 4. p. 1801.
Let not a Presbyter put his Wife out of his Eamily, but chastely govern her. As
for France, Boniface, Archbishop of Mentz, and Pope Zachary's Legate there, had
complained Modo autem maxima ex part per civitates (Galliae) Episcopales seeds
traditae sunt adul^eratis Clericis. Epist. ad Zachar. Pont Council. Tom. 6p.
149^.
not many years before, That the Episcopal Sees were for the most part bestowed
upon Adulterate Clergymen. For so he calls the married Clergy. The universal
freedom of Marriage, which the German Clergy pressed in the times of
Hildebrand, argue the Canons of the Council of Worms, Mentz, and Metz, in the
Ninth Age, to have been unsuccessful, and never fully received in that Church.
Nay, at the same time a Famous Bishop of Germany, who lived and died with the
reputation of a Saint, did strongly oppose all imposition of Celibacy. This was
Huldericus or Udalricus, Bishop of Augspurg, who in his Epistle to Pope
Nicholas I. demonstrates to him the Injustice of his Decree against the
Marriage of the Clergy, and persuades him to revoke it. No such Decree indeed
of Nicholas is now extant; however Gratian Did. 32. cap. 4.
cites a Decretal Epistle of his to Odo, Archbishop of Vien, wherein he
forbids Marriage to the Four Superior Orders of the Clergy. As for the Decree
against hearing the Masses of married Priests, which Gratian produces in the
next Chapter, that most certainly belongs to Nicholas II. although the last
Collectors of the Councils have ranked it among the Decrees of Nicholas I. Most
probably then Nicholas had directed into Germany a Decretal of the same nature
with that, to Odo, and solicited the reception of it by his Emissaries, whose
Diligence and Artifices at last gained the Point in the Council of Worms, the
year after Nicholas his Death. This Decree therefore Huldericus opposes in a
learned and passionate Epistle, Inter Orthodoxogr. Basil. 1569. p. 481.
wherein he represents to the Pope, that the Marriage of the Clergy is not only
lawful in it self, but ought necessarily to be permitted. For that all cannot
contain, and that none ought to be necessitated to Incontinence. That Marriage
of the Cle^gy was used in the Old Law, left indifferent by Christ, permitted by
the Apostles, countenanced by the ancient Canons of the Church, and continued
by the Council of Nice. That the Imposition of Celibacy had produced in the
Honestius esse pluribus occulte implicari, quam aperte in hominum vultu and
conscientja cum una ligari.
Clergy the most enormous sorts of Lusts, Incest, Sodomy, and the most
exeerable Villainies. That these Lusts were openly acted by those very Men, who
detested the chaste Marriage of the Clergy; who when they could not contain
themselves, imposed it violently upon their Fellow Servants, and were not
ashamed to maintain, that it is more honest to accompany with many Women in
private, than to be tied to one in the Face and View of Men. That nothing can
be more unjust, than when Christ says, He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it; to oppose, He that cannot receive it, let him be Anathema. That
this is the Heresy which the Apostle of old foretold would arise in the later
times, speaking Lies in Hypocrisy, and forbidding to marry. That the Chastity
which these Men so much pleaded for, might no less be obtained in a married,
than in a single State, and with less danger be preserved. Here we may observe
that the Champions of Celibacy in this Age had so far improved the ancient
Mistakes of the Impurity of Marriage, that they maintained the open use of it
to be a greater Sin than Fornication. And then Huldericus plainly intimates,
that Celibacy was never yet introduced into the Church of Germany. For he
allows that those, who have made a Vow of Continence, ought in no case to
violate it, but may be even forced to perform it, but pleads that the Clergy
had made no such Vow.

Bellarmine, to avoid the Authority of this Epistle, maintains DeCleric. l. 1.
c. 22.
it is spurious, and endeavors to confirm his pretense from Chronology, and to
prove there was no Huldericus Bishop of Augspurg contemporary with Pope
Nicholas. That there was but one of that Name Bishop of that See, who was
created Bishop in the year 924. or 903. and died in the Eighty Third year of
his Age, and Fiftieth of his Episcopacy; and that there were two Hulderici,
Bishops of Augspurg, is a mere Invention of the Magdeburg Centuriators. To this
may be answered, that Bellarmin does no less gratis deny, than the Centuriators
do affirm the existence of two Hulderici; and in that case the Authority of the
Manuscript Copies is sufficient to satisfy us. Besides, this is no obscure
Writing found out and obtruded on the World since the Reformation. It was
famous, and noted more than Six Hundred years since. For Bertoldus of
Constance, in his Continuation of Hermannus Contractus, relates, Ad. An. 1079.
p. 349. Edit. Francofurt. 1670.
That Gregory VII. in a Synod held at Rome, in the year 1079. condemned the
Epistle of St. Udalricus to Pope Nicholas about the Marriage of the Clergy. And
AEneas Sylvius Transivimus Augustam S. Udalricus huic praesedit, qui Papam
arguit de Concubiuis. Lib. de Morib. Ger^. p. 1053.
owns the truth of the whole matter, when relating his Journey through Germany,
We passed through Augspurg, says he; St. Udalricus was Bishop of this City,
who opposed the Pope in case of the Clergies Concubines. For so they called the
Wives of the Clergy after the days of Hildebrand. Lastly, that there was an
Huldericus, Bishop of Augspurg, contemporary to Pope Nicholas, may be proved
from the Authority of Jacobus de Voragine, who says, Legend. Aur. cap. 202.
Edit. Argentin. 1496.
St. Udalricus died after many Miracles in the year 900. the Eighty Third of
his Age, and Fiftieth of his Consecration, by which Computation Huldericus both
preceded and survived the Popedom of Nicholas.

Thus we have proved that the Laws of Celibacy were never universally received
in the ancient Western Church, in some Provinces even not imposed, and in none
practiced. The matter will be farther cleared by particular examples of married
Clergymen. The marriage of Restitutus, Bishop of London, in the beginning of
the Fourth Age, is attested by three accurate and learned VVriters of our
British Antiquities, Bale, De Script. Angl. Cent. 10. cap. 5.
Bishop Godwin, De Praesul. Ang. p. 227.
and Sir H. Spelman Council. Angl. Tom. 1. p. 43.
In the middle of that Age St. Hilary, Bishop of Poictiers, is known to have
been married. For to omit the Epistle to his Daughter Abra, which I deny not to
be spurious; this is evinced by the Authority of Venantius Fortunatus, his
Successor, who writ his Life, Apud Sur. Jan.. 13
and therein relates, that Hilary had a Wife and a Daughter living, when he was
promoted to the Episcopal Order, which both continued to cohabit with him. That
when he was banished by Constantius into Asia, he left his Daughter Abra,
together with her Mother, at Poictiers. That returning from Banishment, he
persuaded her to devote her self to God, and profess perpetual Virginity. Which
when the Mother saw, she never ceased to solicit her Husband, till he gave her
leave also to dedicate her self to God, and make a Vow of Continence. A Passage
which most evidently demonstrates, that she had hitherto enjoyed the Company of
her Husband, and all the Pleasures of a chaste Marriage, and had not vowed
Continence at his Assumption to the Episcopal Order.

S. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, comes next; whose Example is most remarkable, as
well because he was one of the sincerely pious men of all Antiquity, whom St.
Martin Sup. Sev^r. de vit. Martin. cap. 26.
was wont to propose as the Pattern of all Perfection; as because he was made
Bishop in the Roman Patriarchate, not long after the Promulgation of Siricius
his Constitution, and seems to have been persecuted by that Pope, merely for
retaining the company of his Wife, in opposition to his Decrees. He was
descended from the greatest Family of Rome, had born the Consulship, and was in
all respect the second Person of the Empire; when quitting all secular Honors
in the year 393. he was ordained Priest at Barcetona in Spain. His Wife
Therasia then lived with him, the inseparable Companion of all his Travels, and
his whole Life. Paulinus was then in the 40th year of his Age, and she somewhat
younger; yet did they continue to live together in the same House, and in the
same Cell, till separated by Death. After some stay there, Paulinus returned
with his Wife to Rome; where he was received with infinite Applause by the
Common People, but with great Rudeness by Pope Siricius, whose Pride and
Churlishness Paulinus Epist. 1. ad Sever. p. 10.
himself complains of. The occasion of this Deportment of Siricius, seems to
have been the prejudice which he feared his Constitution of the Continence of
Priests and Deacons might suffer from the cohabitation of Paulinus with his
Wife; the Example of a Person so illustrious, and so highly reputed for
Sanctity, being alone sufficient to restore Marriage to its due esteem.
Retiring thence to Nola in Campania, he was not long after made Bishop of that
place. That his Wife lived with him in the same little Cell, even after his
Consecration, Sacchinus Vit. Paulin. in init.
confesses: and indeed is most evident. St. Ambrose Virum sequitur and exiguo
illic conjugis contenta cespite solatus se religionis and charitatis divitiis.
Epist. 36. ad Sabin.
speaking of Paulinus's Retirement at Nola, says, His Wife accompanied him,
and contented there with the voluntary poverty of her Husband, comforted her
self with the riches of Piety and Charity. Many of his Epistles written from
Nola, are directed in both their names, having this Inscription, Vid Epist. 2*
26. 30. 31. 35. 41. 42. 44. 45. 46.
Paulinus and Therasia Peccatores: and almost all are dictated in the plural
number. St. Augustine and St. Hierom, in their Epistles to Paulinus (written
after his assumption to the Episcopal Office, for their acquaintance began
late) never fail to salute his Wife Therasia; and St. Augustine Epist. 34.
invited them both together into Africa. And Gregory Turonensis De glor.
Confess. cap. 107.
relates a memorable Passage of them, That when dwelling together in their
little Cottage at Nola, Therasia once hindering the prodigal Charity of her
Husband, by overmuch Frugality, diminished the Blessings of Heaven to them
both: That he made any Vow of Continence from his Wife at his Ordination, can
never be proved. Rather St. Hierom plainly intimates the contrary, that he
denied not himself the Pleasures of Marriage, at least was not reputed to do
it; when in his Epistle to him, he doubts whether, although equalling the
Perfections and Piety of a Monastic life, he may properly call him a Monk,
Quoniam sanctae sororis tuae ligatus and vinculo, and non penitus expedito
pergis gradu. Epist. 13. ad Paulinum.
because he was yoaked with the Bonds of Marriage, and thereby was hindered from
practicing the utmost Perfections of a Monastic Profession.

Among Paulinus his Epistles there are two Epist. 30. 31.
directed to Aper a Presbyter, and Amanda his Wife; who in the same manner
renouncing the Honors and Riches of the World, lived together in a common
Retirement, so far from forsaking the Duties of Marriage, that in that state
they gave Education to a numerous Offspring of Children. That Prosper,
commonly reputed Bishop of Rhegium, was married, is manifest from his Poem
dedicated to his Wife. Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Clermont, had married,
while a Layman, Papianilla Daughter of Avitus the Emperor: and that she lived
with him after his Ordination, appears from an Epistle Lib. 5. Ep. 16.
written to her, when absent, about the common affairs of their Family, under
the Reign of Nepos, who was made Emperor in the year 474. two years after
Sidonius his Consecration: and from the authority of Gregory Turonensis, Hist.
Franc. l. 2. c. 22.
who relates that Sidonius, when Bishop, used to take his Plate out of the
house by stealth and give it to the Poor, which his Wife was wont to redeem
with Money. His Predecessor in that See, Namatius, built Id. l. 2. c. 17.
the Cathedral Church of Clermont; and at the same time his Wife built the
Church of St. Stephen in the Suburbs. But a more eminent Example of the
Practice of the Gallican Church at that time, is the Election of Simplicius
Bishop of Bourges. The Bishops of the Province not agreeing in the choice of a
Bishop, committed the disposition of the whole matter to Sidonius, giving him a
power of Nomination. Sidonius then going to Bourges, nominated Simplicius a
married man, whom in a Speech he thus recommended to the People: Vxor illi de
Palladiorum stirpe descendit, qui aut literarum aut altarium Cathedras cum sui
ordinis laud tenu^vunt. Sane, etc. Oration post Epist. 9. lib. 7.
His Wife is descended from the Family of the Palladii, who have possessed the
Chairs either of Professors or Bishops, with great Commendation of their
Order. In truth, because the person of a Matron requires a modest and brief
mention, I dare constantly ^verr, that woman is not unworthy of her Relation to
the Clergy of both Families (he had before said, that Simplicius also descended
of the Race of Priests) either that wherein she was born and brought up, or
that whither she was removed by Marriage. They both educate their Children
prudently and virtuously. In the name therefore of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, Simplicius is he, whom I pronounce shall be your Bishop. To what purpose
was all this Commendation of Simplicius his Wife, or what did it concern the
People what manner of woman she was, if immediately upon his Ordination she
must have retired from his Family, and cease to be his Wife? And then, which is
most observable, Sidonius pronounced him Bishop, without giving him any
previous notice of it, when neither his nor his Wifes resolutions of a total
future abs^inence from the use of their Marriage, could be supposed to be
known, and therefore must be supposed not to have been required of them. As for
his willingness to accept the Bishopric, they enquired not after that; since
in that Age they thought it lawful to force men to take upon them the Pastoral
charge; but never thought it lawful to force them to put away their Wives, and
abjure the Duties of Marriage.

In the next Age Venantius Fortunatus mentions Carm. l. 1. c. 11.
the Posterity of Emelius Bishop of Bordeaux, and in one almost whole Book
Carm. l. 1.
celebrates the Praises of Leontius his Successor, and Placidina his Wife,
descended from Si^onius of Clermont, who adorned with Hangings the Churches
which her Husband built. Some few years before, Sidonius Apollinaris, Son of
the same Sidonius, had Greg. Tur. Hist. Franc. l. 3. c. 2.
obtained his Fathers Bishopric by the Intrigues of his Wife Placidina. In the
same Age, or toward the end of the former, Gerhardus or Genebaldus the first
Bishop of Laon, having at his Ordination separated himself from his Wife, the
Niece of St. Remigius, afterward changed Fascic. Temp. ad an. 494.
his Resolutions; and resuming her society, begat St. Latro of her, who
succeeded him in his Bishopric. Many other married Bishops of these and the
succeeding Ages might be reckoned, but these are sufficient to show, that
neither the Constitutions of Popes, nor Canons of Councils, ever gained
universal Reception in any part of the Western Church, the use of Marriage
being still retained by many Bishops, eminent both for Piety and Learning. So
true is it, what Polydore Virgil Aliis super aliis promulgatis legibus, non
ante Po^tificatum Gregorii VII. conjugium adimi occidentalibus Sacerdotibus
potuit. De invent. rer. l. 4. c. 4.
confesses, that notwithstanding the frequent repetition of the Law of
Celibacy, Marriage could never be wrested from the Western Clergy, before the
Popedom of Gregory VII.

Many other Arguments might be produced to demonstrate, that the use of
Marriage was retained by the Clergy of the ancient Church; which however they
be less direct than those already mentioned, yet are they no less conclusive.
Of this kind is the Practice of all those Heretics and Schismatics, who
departing from the Western Church before Celibacy was introduced, retained the
use of Marriage to their Clergy. It being the custom of all Heretics, whose
Errors were merely speculative, to preserve that Ecclesiastical Discipline,
which the Church then used when they departed from her, but not think
themselves obliged by any subsequent Decrees of it. Thus the Goths and Vandals
being infected with A^ianism, under the Reign of Valens, before any imposition
of Celibacy was attempted in the Church; and afterward seating themselves in
Spain, took no notice of the Decrees of the Catholic Councils against the
Marriage of the Clergy. Hence it was, that when toward the end of the sixth
Age they began to be converted apace to the Orthodox Faith, most of their
Clergy were found to be married; which forced the third Council of Toledo, in
the year 589. in a manner to dispense with them in this Canon, Compertum a S.
Concilio Episcopos, Presb. and Diac. venientes ex haeresi, carnali adhuc
desiderio ^xoribus copulari. Ne ergo de caetero fiat hic praecipitur, ut, etc.
Can. 5.
It is observed by the H. Synod, that the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
returning to the Church from Heresy, do yet retain the use of their Wives.
That it may not therefore be done for the future, it is ordered, that they be
separated from their Wives. But if any will not condescend to that, let him be
reduced to the Order of Readers (the fifth Order of the Clergy). As for those
who have all along been subject to the Canons of the Church, if any of them
accompany with their Wives, let them be more severely punished. Here the
Council teaches us, what was the general Practice of the Arian Clergy at that
time; and acknowledges, that they were not obliged by any precedent
Ecclesiastical Canons about Celibacy: whereas the Arians always confessed, they
were obliged by all Constitutions of the Catholic Church made before their
departure from it. The second Council of Caesarangusta or Caragosa, in the year
592. made a not-unlike Canon, Can. 1.
although somewhat more severe. For they commanded the converted Arian Clergy,
who would not part with their Wives, to be reduced to LayCommunion.

The Rules prescribed by many Councils to the Clergy, for the government of
their Wives, are a no less certain Argument of their cohabitation with them.
The Council of Eliberis, Can. 65.
Neocaesarea, Can. 8.
and some others, commands, that if any Clergy-mans Wife commits Adultery,
after (...).
the Ordination of her Husband, and he knows of it, he shall be bound to put
her away. But (...).
if he will continue to cohabit with her, he shall be incapable of executing
his Office, says the Canon of Ancyra; he shall Et scierit eam maritus su^s
maechari.
be excommunicated, says that of Eliberis. This Canon does not only prove,
beyond all contradiction, the cohabitation of the Clergy with their Wives after
Ordination, but also it is most manifest, that they abstain not from the
company of their Wives, by that proviso, if her Husband knows that she commit
Adultery, which otherwise would have been impertinent. For it cannot well be
imagined that the Adultery of any man's Wife, with whom he accompanies not
himself, should escape his knowledge. A Synod held in Ireland by St. Patrick,
in the year 450. or 456. decreed, Can. 6. Et uxor ejus si non vetato capite
ambulaverit. Spelman. Council. Anglic. Tom. 1. p. 52.
That if any Clergyman, from a Sexton to a Priest, should be seen without his
Coat, or if his Wife walked abroad without a Veil upon her head; they should be
both of them contemned by the Laity, and separated from the Church. Where it
would have been highly unjust to punish the Clergy for the light carriage of
their Wives, if at their Ordination they renounced the company of their Wives,
and thenceforth ceased to have any power over them. The first Council of
Toledo, in the year 400. ordered, Si quorumcunque Clericorum uxores
peccaverint. Can. 7.
That if the Wives of any Clergymen were scandalous in their carriage (or
rather were false to their Beds) their Husbands should have power to keep and
imprison them in their houses, and in^lict any arbitrary punishment upon them,
which extended not to death. But themselves should not so much as eat with
them, unless they first did penance. Whence it appears, that before the fault
committed, they might have eaten with their Wives, and even after the fault,
may again receive them to the usual familiarity of a Wife, if they will first
do penance; which was in conformity to the ancient Canons of the Church, which
enjoined, that if the Adultery of even any Lay-mans Wife was notorious; he
should either be bound to put her away, or if he will retain her, first to do
penance, lest he should otherwise seem to have consented to and connived at her
Adultery.

An evident Argument of the use of Marriage permitted to the Clergy, may be
also drawn from the violent and forcible Ordinations of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, which were frequent in the ancient Church. For many of these persons,
thus violently and against their wills ordained, were married, whose
resolutions to abstain from their Wives, could not then be known, and as all
acknowledge, could not be forced. Or if they should condescend to such a
renunciation of the pleasures of Marriage, yet was it uncertain, whether their
Wives would con^ent to it. Who if they should dissent, they ought not to be
defrauded of their Husbands Embraces, as all will grant: and therefore total
abstinence was not universally used by the Clergy, while such violent
Ordinations were in use. I will produce but two Examples of them. Paulinus, as
himself Epist. 6. ad Sever. p. 101.
relates, being present in the Church of Barcelona upon Christmas Day, was
suddenly laid hold on by the people, dragged to their Bishop Lampius, then
officiating at the Altar, and ordained by him: his Wife Therasia not knowing of
it till it was done. In Africa, about the same time, Pinianus an illustrious
Nobleman of Rome, but more famous for his Piety, going with his Wife Melania to
visit St. Augustine, August. Epist. 225.
was beset in the Church of Hippo by the people, and forced to divert their
present intentions, by promising them under Hand and Seal, before many
Witnesses, that if they would now dismiss him, he would in due time enter into
Priests Orders among them. This he did, his Wife Melania being not only
unwilling, but even weeping and protesting against it, as loath to descend from
the pomp of a Roman Lady, to the humility of a Priests Wife.

The Titles which were anciently bestowed upon the Vid. Can. 13. 19. Concilii
Turon. 2. anno 567.
Wives of the Clergy, are no mean Argument of their cohabitation and continued
use of Marriage. The Wives of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, are
frequently Can. 21. Concilii Antissiodorensis anno 578.
in the Councils called Bishopesses, Priestesses, Deaconesses, and
Subdeaconesses; Titles which argue they did not immediately cease to be Wives,
upon the Can. 1, and 2. Concilii Romani an. 721. can. 5. Concilii Romans an. 743.
promotion of their Husbands to those several Orders, nor lose all relation to
them. Rather the first of these Canons enjoin, That a Bishop having no
Bishopess (no Wife) shall not keep any number of women in his Family; which
plainly intimates, that he might admit women into his Family, if he had a Wife
to preside over them, and by her prudent government secure their sobriety.

Lastly, Children are the visible Effects of Marriage; and those many Sons of
the Clergy, which were eminent in the ancient Church, manifest there were many
more, who neither deserved nor obtained any place in History, and that the
Marriage of the Clergy was then both frequent and honorable. I will produce
the chief of them. In the First Age we have Petronilla, Daughter of St. Peter,
four Virgin-Prophetesses, Daughters of Philip the Evangelist, and three
Daughters of St. Philip the Apostle. In the Second Age Marcion the degenerate
Son of a Pious Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
and Orthodox Bishop. In the Third Age Domnus Son of Dometrianus, Bishop of
Antioch, was made Bishop of that See, upon the deprivation of Paulus
Samosatenus. In the Fourth Age Probus and Metrophanes were the Sons, and in
order Successors of Dometius Bishop of Bizantium. Eustathus Bishop of Sebastea
was Son of Eulalius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia. St. Gregory Nazianzen
Bishop of Constantinople, and Caesarius Count of the Empire and Questor of
Bithynia, both Sons of Gregory Bishop of Nazianzen. Sozomen L. 8. c. 6.
mentions a great Officer in the Court of Theodosius the Emperor, son of
Helladius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia. Flavius Dexter,
Praefectus-Praetorio of the East, was the son of Pacianus Bishop of Barcelona.
Abra, daughter of St. Hilary. Eulampia, daughter of Anicius, a Presbyter and
Mother of Philostorgius the Historian. Apollinaris, the learned Bishop of
Laodicia, son of the no less learned Apollinaris, Presbyter of Laodicia.
Evagrius Ponticus, Archdeacon of Constantinople, son of a Presbyter of Iberia.
Pope Anastatius, Son Liber Pontif.
of Maximus a Presbyter. In the Fifth Age there was Julianus Bishop of Ecla in
Campania, son of Memor Bishop of Capua, and his Wife Ia daughter of AEmilius
Bishop of Beneventum. St. Patrick, son of Calphurnius a Deacon. Leporius,
Presbyter of Marseilles, son of Sulpicius Severus Presbyter of France, (as some
think.) That Sulpicius was married, is evident from his Epistle to Bassula his
Motherin-law. Pope Boniface I. son Pallad. Hist. Lausiac. cap. 130.
of Secundus, Presbyter of Rome. Theodulus, son of St. Nilus, Presbyter of
Elusa. Auspiciola, daughter of Salvian, Presbyter of Marseilles. Photina, an
holy virgin daughter of Theoctistus, Presbyter of L^odicea. Salonius and
Verarius, sons of Eucherius, Archbishop of Lions, and both Bishops in their
Father's lifetime. Gelasius Cyzicenus, Archbishop of Caesarea in Palastine, son
of a Presbyter in Cyzicum. Alcimus Avitus, Archbishop of Vien, and Apollinaris,
Bishop of Valence, sons of Isicius, Archbishop of Vien. Superventor, a
Clergyman of France, son Council. tom. 3. p. 1492.
of Claudius, a Bishop. Pope Foelix III. son of Foelix, Presbyter of Rome, (so
the Liber Pontificalis) or of Valerius, a Bishop of Africa (so Gratian Did.
56. c. 2.
) Radulphus de Diceto, says Imag. Histor. ad Ann. 1161.
Pope Gelasius I. was son of Valerius, a Bishop. In the end of this Age,
Leontia, daughter Victor. Vit. de persecut. Vandal. lib 5.
of St. Germanus, a Bishop in Africa, suffered Martyrdom at Carthage. In the
Sixth Age Pope Silverius was son of Pope Hormisda. Pope Agapetus, son of
Gordianus, Presbyter of Rome. Epiphanius, Patriarch of Constantinople, praised
by Justinian Novell. 3. in fine.
the Emperor for his descent from a Priestly Family. Chronopius, Bishop of
Perigord, descended from Ordo Sacerdotum cui fluxit utroque parente. Venit ad
haeredem Pontificalis apex. Venant. Fort^n. in Epitaph. Chronopii carm. 1. 4.
Bishops both by Father and Mother's side. Nonnosus, the Historian, son of
Abraamius, a Presbyter. Sidonius Apollinaris, Bishop of Clermont, son of
Sidonius, Bishop of that place. Archadius, Senator of Clermont, son of
Sidonius, junior. Latro, Bishop of Laon, son of Ger^ardus, Bishop of the same
place. Syagrius, son of Desideratus, Bishop of Verdun. Pope Gregory I. great
Grandchild of Pope Foelix IV. In the Seventh Age we find Pope Deusdedit, son of
Stephen, Subdeacon of Rome. Pope Theodorus, son of Theodorus, suffragan Bishop
of Jerusalem. Samuel, the British Historian, son (...) apud Baleum. Cent. 1.
c. 77.
of Beulanus, Presbyter of Britain. In the Eighth Age we have Anchises, son of
Arnulphus, Bishop of Mets, Progenitor of the Caroline Family. St. Florebert,
son and successor of St. Hubert, Bishop of Liege. Gerbilo, son and successor
of Geroldus, Archbishop of Worms. In the Ninth Age, Pope Hadrian II. son of
Talarus, an Italian Bishop. Pope Marinus, son of Palumbus, a Presbyter. Pope
Stephen VI. son of John, Presbyter of Rome. In the Tenth Age, Pope John XIII.
son of John, an Italian Bishop. Pope John XV. son of Leo, Presbyter of Rome.
Joannes Cameniata, the Historian, son of a Presbyter of Thessalonica: As for
John XI. base fon of Sergius III. in this, and Hadrian IV. Bastard of Robert
Parson of Langley in Hartfordshire, in the Twelfth Age, they peculiarly belong
to the Church of Rome, to whose Celibacy they owed their being, and to whose
shame they possessed their Thrones.

In the end of the Seventh Age, that undisturbed freedom of Marriage, which the
Eastern Clergy had hitherto enjoyed, suffered some little diminution in the
Quinisext Council. This was a Council assembled at Constantinople, in the Year
692. to supply the defects of the Fifth and Sixth General Councils, of which
the last was held but eleven years before, and neither of them had made Canons
for the better government of the Church, being wholly taken up with the
determination of Matters of Faith. To remedy this defect the Quinisext Council
was called, which in truth was nothing else but a continuation of the Sixth
Council, almost the same Bishops being present in both; and therefore the
Canons of it are commonly cited under the name of the Sixth Council. A
voluntary abstinence from the use of Marriage, was now become common to all the
Bishops of the East; which is not at all to be wondered at, for that custom was
already taken up, which at this day continues in the Eastern Church, of
choosing the Bishops, not out of the Secular Clergy, but out of Monasteries.
This voluntary Abstinence therefore being now become universal, was in this
Council formed into a Law, upon occasion of the Bishops of Africa and Libya,
who still retained the use of Marriage. This the Council inhibited Can. 12.
to them and all other Bishops for the future, professing they did it not (...).
in derogation of the ancient Apostolical Discipline, but for the greater
edification of the Church: whereby they acknowledge, that the use of Marriage
was permitted even to Bishops by the Apostles, and that permission continued
down in the Church till their times.

As for the Marriage of Priests, and all the other inferior Clergy, the
Council only commanded an abstinence from the use of it in the time of the
celebration of the more sacred Mysteries of Religion, at which times it had
been forbidden also to Laymen by the Canons of many Councils. Thus only
renewing the Third Canon of the Fifth Council of Carthage, in all other things
they left to the Clergy the free use and enjoyment of their Marriage. And not
only so, but condemned also the practice of the Church of Rome in these words:
(...), etc. Can. 13.
Whereas in the Church of Rome, we understand it is prescribed in form of a
Canon, that those who are to be invested with the Order of Priest or Deacon,
should promise perpetual abstinence from their Wives: we following the ancient
Canon of Apostolical Truth and Discipline, enact, that the lawful cohabitation
of the Clergy with their Wives cease not to be accounted valid, not daring to
dissolve the union between them and their Wives, nor depriving either of the
convenient Society (or Embraces) of the other. Lest we should thereby be
unavoidably injurious to Marriage, which God ordained, and blessed with his own
presence; the Holy Gospel pronouncing this Sentence, What God has joined
together, let no man put asunder; and the Apostle teaching us, that Marriage is
honorable, and the bed undefiled; and again, Art thou bound unto a Wife? seek
not to be loosed. If any one therefore shall presume against the Apostolical
Canons, to deprive the Clergy of the lawful company of their Wives, let him be
deposed.

This Council was ever held sacred, and the Constitutions of it about the
Marriage of the Clergy continued down in the Greek Church without variation to
this very day. That it was an Ecumenical Council the Greeks always believed,
and the Latins have sometimes confessed. For the Church of Rome acknowledges
the Third Constantinopolitan Council to have been General, of which the
Quinisext was no more than an Appendix, and therefore always accounted part of
it. The interval of eleven years does no more prejudice the identity of the two
Councils, than almost twice that number of years between the first and last
Session of the Council of Trent can hinder them from being esteemed parts of
the same Council. Besides, the Church of Rome does at this day receive the
Definitions of the Second Council of Nice, and accounts it Ecumenical. But
this Council expressly confirmed the Sixth General Council, and therein also the
Quinisext Council. For that they accounted the latter to be a part of the
former, and consequently confirmed both together, is manifest; because citing
the Eighty second Canon of the Quinisext Council, they call it (...). Act. 4.
p. 234.
the definition of the Holy and Ecumenical Sixth Council. Or, lastly, If the
express approbation of a Pope be required to make a Council General, neither is
that here wanting. For Pope Hadrian I. in his Epistle to Tarasius, Patriarch of
Constantinople, citing the same Canon, calls it, In sextae Synodi divine and
legaliter praedicatis Canonibus.
one of the divine and lawfully enacted Canons of the Sixth Synod. The Greek
Translation is more express, which runs thus: (...). Council. Tom. VII. p. 122.
I receive all the Decrees of this holy Sixth Council, with all the
Constitutions and Canons divinely enacted by it. However, that the Church of
Rome has approved this very Custom of the Eastern Church, of permitting to the
Clergy the use of Marriage, appears from the Decretal of Pope Stephen, cited
by Gratian in these words: Aliter se Ori^ntalium habet traditio Ecclesiarum,
aliter hujus S. Romans ecclesiae nam, etc. Did. 31. c. 14.
The Tradition of the Eastern Churches is different from that of the holy
Church of Rome. For in them Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons are joined in
Marriage, (Matrimonio copulantur, i. e. enjoy the use of Marriage, as Mendoza
De confirm. Conc. Illib. l. 2. c. 66.
has learnedly proved the meaning of those words to be) But in this or the
Western Churches, none of the Clergy, from a Subdeacon to a Bishop, has
liberty to use Marriage. Here the Pope expressly confesses the use of Marriage
by the Clergy, to have been always the Tradition and Practice of the Eastern
Church. And if so, it must have been also sometimes of the Western. For being
never practiced in the East, it could not be of Apostolical institution; and
therefore must have been introduced in the West by some subsequent Decree of
the Church.

This was the state of Celibacy in the Christian Church for the first thousand
years. Nowhere imposed in the better and purer Ages of Christianity,
introduced into the Roman Patriarchate by a rash Pope, commanded by many
Provincial Councils of the West, but in no place universally observed; the
imposition of it always disused, and at last condemned in the Eastern Church;
and the practice of it in these latter Ages, become obsolete in the West. It
will not now be amiss to look back a little, and make some Observations upon
the Authors, and advance of Celibacy; whereby we may the better judge, how far
the Authority and Example of those times ought herein to influence and direct
the practice of the present Age.

First then, the Celibacy of the Clergy was hitherto esteemed by all, a matter
of mere Discipline, first introduced for reasons of Decency, Convenience, and
supposed Edification; which have not only long since ceased, but Celibacy is
now become a Snare to the Clergy, and a Scandal to the whole Church. So that
the obligation of the Laws of Celibacy, even in those particular Churches where
it was anciently introduced and commanded, have long since ceased. The pretense
of Divine or Apostolical Institution, was not heard of, till the days of
Hildebrand, and is but faintly maintained in these times. That the ancient
Imposers of Celibacy never thought of this pretense, is evident, because they
never made that plea. This we before observed, particularly of the Decrees of
Siricius and Innocent, and may be affirmed of all Popes and Councils, which
favored or commanded Celibacy in those times. Not to say that some Councils,
as the Quinisext II. of Toledo, and others, expressly acknowledge the permission
of Marriage to the Clergy to be of Apostolical Institution.

II. The Example of the ancient Church in this case, is not only not
conclusive, but even of no authority; it neither necessitates nor recommends
Celibacy to the present Church. For all the deference which we ow to the
Authority and Example of these times, proceeds from a probable supposition,
that the ancient Church had greater and better opportunities of knowing the
mind of Christ, the intentions of the Apostles, and the exigences of the
Church, than the present Age can pretend to, as being more removed from the
Fountains head, and animated with a less vigorous and impartial zeal for the
knowledge of Truth, and increase of Piety. But when this supposition becomes
not only improbable, but is evidently false; when we are assured the practice
of the ancient Church was occasioned and introduced by prejudices and mistakes,
false notions of Piety, and gross errors about the nature of things; imitation
would not only be not laudable, but even foolish, and perhaps unlawful; lest
the continuance of such a practice should uphold the errors which first
produced it. At least, when these mistakes are discovered, these prejudices
removed, the authority of this example will vanish with them. That this was the
case of Celibacy in the ancient Church, we have all along observed and proved;
and need not here repeat our Arguments.

III. If we should allow the usage of the ancient Church ^o be in all cases a
Rule and Pattern to the present Age, yet will Celibacy receive no advantage
from it. The Marriage of the Clergy may put in a larger and much better Plea of
antiquity, as being able to produce the practice of the Universal Church in the
four first Ages of Christianity, of the whole Eastern, and many parts of the
Western Church to this day, and allege the Suffrage of two General Councils,
the first and fourth, which confirmed and allowed it. Whereas the imposition of
Celibacy was unknown to the first and better Ages, not universally practiced in
the latter, rejected by one, and condemned by another General Council, and
never confirmed by other than Provincial Synods, whose Acts may be annulled;
and Decrees abolished by the single authority of any particular Church. And
certainly if, what most of our Adversaries pretend, the tradition and practice
of the present Universal Church be the only certain method of knowing the
Opinion and Doctrine of all precedent Ages, the lawfulness and convenience of
the Clergies Marriage must have been the belief of the ancient Church: since
all the Eastern Churches, the greatest part of the Universal Church, not to
speak of the Reformed Churches in the West, do at this day permit the use of
Marriage to the Clergy, and maintain the impositio^ of Celibacy to be unlawful.
Which also is no small prejudice to the cause of the Church of Rome, if there
be any truth or solidity in that grand Argument of our Adversaries, that in the
case of two dissenting Churches, when the one openly condemns the practice of
the other, and receives not the same severe Sentence from her Adversary, Truth
and Justice must necessarily ly on that side. For however the Greek Church has
always condemned, as impious and unjust, the imposition of Celibacy in the
Latin Church, the Latins never dared to return the same Sentence upon the
permission of Marriage to the Clergy in the Greek Church. Rather the practice
of the Eastern Church has been allowed and ratified by the public Authority
of the Church of Rome. For to omit the great Later an Council under Pope
Innocent the Third, wherein our Adversaries confess that permission of Marriage
was continued to the Greek Priests, thus Pope Nicolas the First answered to the
Inquiry of the Bulgarians: Consulendum decernitis, utrum Presbyterum habentem
uxorem debeatis sustentare, and honorare, an d vobis projicere: quo
respondemus, licet ipsi valde reprehensibiles sint. d^jicere ^um a vobis non
debetis. Cap. 70. Council. Tom. 8. p. 540.
You ask whether you ought to maintain and honor a Priest, having a Wife, or
to remove him from you. To which we answer, That although they be very
blameable, you ought not to cast them off. And Bellarmine De Cl^r. lib. 1. cap.
21.
acknowledges, that although the Roman Church approves not herein the practice
of the Greek Church, and judges it to be an abuse, yet she permits it to the
Greeks; so that if they had no other errors, a Peace might easily be accorded
between the two Churches.

IV. The practice of the ancient Church in the imposition of Celibacy, was
various and diverse; and consequently neither Celibacy it self can be of
Apostolical Institution, nor the ancient practice of it be a fixed Rule to
succeeding Ages. The great variation of the Canons of those several Councils,
which enjoined Celibacy, we before observed; and might add the alterations
introduced into the practice of the Greek Church by the Quinisext Council, and
Novels of Leo the Emperor. But I will here insist only upon the case of
Subdeacons, who in the present Church of Rome are no less forbidden the use of
Marriage, than the superior Clergy. Not to the ancient Church. Siricius and
Innocent left Marriage free to them. Pope Leo the First endeavored to impose
Celibacy upon them; but his Decree gained no acceptance. Many Councils after
that time, permitted Marriage to them. Palagius the Second forbid it to the
Subdeacons of Sicily: but his Successor Gregory repealed that prohibition.
That Continence was not yet commanded to Subdeacons, neither in Spain nor
Sicily, at the time of the third Council of Toledo, Anno 589. Baronius Annal.
ad an. 589.
and Binius Not. in Council.
affirm, may be evidently deduced from the fifth Canon of that Council. In
England, Augustine Archbishop of Canterbury had consulted Pope Gregory, whether
Clergymen not being able to contain, might marry; and whether when married,
they ought to resume a secular Life. Gregory returned answer, that Clerici
extra sacros ordines constituti. Respons ad Interrogat. 2. August. apud Bedam
Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 27.
Clergymen who were not in Holy Orders, if they could not contain, might
marry, and ought still to be maintained from the Revenues of the Church, and be
employed in sacred Functions. By Clergymen not in Holy Orders, an ancient
Saxon Homily produced by Mr. Whelock, Not. in B^d. in loc.
understands all besides Deacons, Priests, and Bishops. And even after the time
of Hildebrand, Pope Urban the Second, in the Council of Beneventum, prescribed
Continence to Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, but not to Subdeacons; to whom the
Fathers of the Council asfirm, Can. 1.
Celibacy was neither imposed by the Primitive Church, nor commanded by the
Apostles. Lastly, Gratian contends, Did. 28. ca^. 13.
that neither Deacons nor Subdeacons ought to be restrained from contracting
and using Marriage.

V. Whatsoever Popes and Councils in the ancient Church forbid Marriage to the
Clergy, did at the same time forbid to them the company of Concubines, with
much greater and severer penalties. Which does not only demonstrate, that they
believed not the use of Marriage by the Clergy, to be equal to the crime of
Fornication; but also takes away from the Church of Rome all just title to any
plea of antiquity in the imposition of Celibacy; since she has sometimes
openly permitted the use of Concubines to the Clergy, and always in these
latter Ages affixed greater punishments to the Marriage, than to the
Concubinacy of the Clergy. And therefore the Gloss upon the Canon Law Did. 34.
cap. 7.
observes, that Fornication is less disadvantageous to the Clergy, than
Marriage; because in many cases Marriage would exclude a man from Orders, or
deprive him when ordained; when a Fornicator might be admitted into and
continued in the sacred Office.

VI. The ancient Church, in imposing Celibacy upon the Clergy, ever left open a
Refuge for incontinent persons, and thereby prevented the danger of their
incontinence and scandal of the Church. And not only those who could no longer
contain, but even all who desired Marriage, were permitted to contract it, by
quitting the sacred Office, and retiring to Lay-Communion; maintained still by
the Revenues of the Church, and sometimes allowed to rank themselves among the
three inferior Orders. Thus the Councils of Orleans I. of Tours, and many
others in the Western Church. In the East, no other punishment than
deprivation, was ever inflicted upon the superior Clergy contracting Marriage.
So the Council of Neocaesarea, and the Novels Novel. 6. cap. 5.
of Justinian the Emperor. And even this punishment of total Deprivation, Leo
Novel. 79.
the Emperor thought too severe, and therefore moderated it, decreeing, That
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, contracting Marriage after Ordination, should
only be deposed from that degree wherein they were before their Marriage, and
be reduced to a lower Station among the Clergy, using in the mean while the
Habit of the Clergy, and attending to the administration of holy things,
although acting in a lower Sphere. And this Balsamon Comm. in Can. 5. Conc. 6.
proposes, as the constant practice of the Greek Church in his time. In the
West however, many Popes and Councils of the fifth, sixth, and seventh Ages,
commanded the Clergy contracting Marriage, to be excommunicated and separated
from their Wives: these furious Decrees vanished and grew obsolete in the next
Ages: and Deprivation was thought a sufficient punishment of Marriage, when
Isidore Mercator forged the Decretals about the beginning of the ninth Age; as
appears from a spurious Decree of Pope Lucius, cited by Gratian, Did. 81.
cap. 19.
and from the Canons of the Councils of Worms and Mentz, toward the end of
this Age. I may add, that no more than a temporary Deprivation seems then to
have been sometimes used. For the spurious Acts of the second Roman Council,
under Pope Silvester, forged by the same Mercator, decrees, Nemo Presbyter a
die suscepti Sacerdotii conjugium in^at: sin faciat, honor per decennium
privetur. Can. 19.
That no Presbyter shall contract Marriage from the day of his Ordination, if
he does, let him be deprived of his dignity for ten years. Thus did the ancient
Church allow a Remedy to the Incontinence of the unmarried Clergy; and perhaps
cannot properly be said to have forbidden Marriage to any, since none was by
her Constitutions rendered incapable of Marriage, nor totally debarred from it.
Not so the present Church of Rome, which maintains Marriage contracted after
Ordination, to be in it self unlawful, and no other than the sin of Fornication
and Adultery; nay, much worse than both, in the judgment of Cardinal Q^od
Sac^rdotes fiant mariti, multo esse gravius peccatum, quam fi plurimas domi
mer^trices alant. Sleidan. Com. lib. 4.
Campegius, who to the Ambassadors of Strasbourg complaining of the open
Concubinacy of their Clergy, and desiring Marriage might be permitted to them
as a Remedy of it, answered, That the Marriage of Priests was a much greater
sin, than if they kept many Concubines in their house. For that these were
persuaded they did well, but the others both knew and confessed their sin. And
lest we should imagine this to be only the product of a rash and precipitate
judgment, Costerus Enchrid. Controv. c. 19.
the Jesuit proposes and defends the same Proposition.

VII. The scandalous and bad effects, which too great an affectation, much more
the imposition of Celibacy, produced in the ancient Church, might justly deter
the present Age from imitating that Example, and thereby continuing and
augmenting the same scandals. The horrible and sad abuses of Eunuchs and
Housekeepers, we have before described; whose ill examples have done greater
injury, and given deeper wounds to the honor and reputation of the ancient
Church, than ever the affected or imposed Celibacy of the Clergy brought luster
or advantage to it. And if in those times when the first zeal of Christianity
was not yet expired, when Piety and Virtue were excited by Miracles, and
fomented by Persecutions; when a generous renunciation of the World, and
contempt of all Sublunary Pleasures, was the common practice, and seemed to be
the very genius of Christianity: if under all these advantages Celibacy could
not make good its glorious pretenses, nor promote that, for which it was at
first intended, true Virginity: if then the voluntary practice of it betrayed
the Church to open scandals and manifest inconveniences, in vain do we hope in
this degenerate state of Christianity, to attain a perfection which former and
latter Ages wanted, and introduce among the unmarried Clergy such an uniform
exemplariness of Continence and Chastity, as may promote among the Laity the
great ends of Holiness and Purity, and advance the true interests of the
Church. It may be a laudable ambition, to surpass the Virtue of former times;
but little less than madness, to attempt that which the Experience of so many
Ages has demonstrated to be impossible.

VIII. If it be imprudent to imitate a practice, from which naturally flows
so many Scandals and Abuses, no less unsafe is it to place this imitation upon
a matter, which seems to have been the great Stumbling block of Antiquity, and
chief Fountain of her grossest Errors. I mean Marriage, about which the many
false Opinions that obtained in the Church, evince that most Christians had
false notions of the nature and institution of it. And here, not to repeat what
I before observed of the generally-supposed impurity, and by some believed
sinfulness of Marriage; to omit the annulling and separation of Marriages
contracted betwixt Christians and Infidels, and the perpetual prohibition of
Marriage to those who had done penance for Fornication; to pass by the Decree
of Pope Gregory the First, of admitting no married man into the Church, after
he has accompanied with his Wife, till he has washed himself with water; and
the permission Apud Gra^. Cuus. 32. qu. 7. cap. 18.
given by Pope Gregory the Third, to all of marrying a second Wife, when the
first, although alive, is disabled by sickness, age, or any accident, from
performing the Duties of Marriage; and many other Decrees, Practices, and
Opinions of the ancient Church about Marriage, which all sober Casuists will
allow to be gross and pernicious Errors: I will mention only a few extravagant
Canons relating to the Marriage of the Clergy. The 17th Apostolic Canon, and
third of the Quinisext Council, command, that none be admitted into the Clergy,
or if admitted, that he be deposed, who has married two Wives after Baptism,
or one which has been a Widow, or a divorced woman, or a Whore, or a Servant,
or a Stage Player. The Council of Auxerre, in the year 578. forbid Can. 22.
the Widows of a Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon, to marry after the death of
their Husbands. The second Council of Mascon, in the year 585. extended Can. 16.
the same prohibition to the Widows of Exorcists and Acolythi. The Council of
Bourges, in the year 1031. decreed, Can. 8.
That the Sons of Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, born after their
Ordination, should by no means be admitted into the Clergy: Because Quia tales
and omnes alii qui de non legitimo conjugio sunt nati, semen maledictum in
divinis Scripturis appellantur.
such, and all others who are not born of lawful Marriage, are called a cursed
Seed in holy Scripture. The same Council farther commanded, Can. 19.
That none should give his Daughter in Marriage to a Priest, Deacon, or
Subdeacon, or to their Sons: and in the next Canon forbid all to marry the
Daughter of a Priest, Deacon or Subdeacon, or their Widows; because Quia
detestabile est.
that would be detestable. Here Celibacy or a perpetual abstinence is enjoined,
not only to the Clergy themselves, but also to their Wives, Sons, and
Daughters: as if either all these must be supposed to have the gift of
continence; or it concerned the interest of the Church, they should be
necessitated to a single life. Such unnecessary cautions about the Marriage of
the Clergy, and unlawful prohibition of it to their posterity, could be no
other than the effects of some gross mistakes or foolish superstition.

IX. It is no small prejudice to the cause of Celibacy, that all the great
Patrons and Defenders of it could not themselves preserve that Virginity, which
they either admired or imposed. They had not only suffered under, but even
yielded to, the temptations of Incontinence, and could never themselves obtain
that perfection, which they recommended to the practice of mankind. In these
men I will not say a satiety and glut of unlawful pleasures procured a contempt
of lawful enjoyments; but certainly an injudicious repentance and abhorrence of
the former was prejudicial to a right esteem of the latter. For when these
persons, many of whom afterward were eminent for holiness, reflected upon the
greatness of their crime, and their violation of the divine laws of chastity,
no wonder if in exaggerating the one, and seeking to compensate the other, they
misplaced the guilt of their crime, by removing it from the unlawful use of
those pleasures to the very nature of them; and then imagining no sacrifice too
great to appease the divine anger, endeavored to promote and preserve that
chastity in others, which they had prostituted themselves, and by restraining
many from lawful pleasures, expiate the guilt of their own unlawful enjoyments.
This is manifest from the example of all those, who were the main Authors of
urging and imposing Celibacy for the first 1100 years, I mean Tertullian,
Eustathius, Heliodorus, Epiphanius, St. Hierom, Dunstan, Hildebrand, Lanfranc,
and Anselm; to whom we may add the Founders of the four great Monastic Orders
in the Church of Rome. I begin with Tertullian, who acknowledges, De spectac.
c. 19. de Resurrect. c. 59.
that in his youth he had been guilty of all the debaucheries of the age, and
labored under a total corruption of manners. Eustathius was Sozom. l. 4. c. 24.
six times deposed by so many several Synods, for his scandalous and enormous
Vices. Heliodorus was Neceph. l. 12. c. 34.
deprived of his Bishopric by a Synod of Thessalia, for writing a lascivious
Romance. Epiphanius inveighled in his youth by the artifices and Iusts of the
Gnostick Women, as himself Haeres. 26. p. 99.
confesses. St. Hierom acknowledges he had lost his Virginity (although it
was for many ages celebrated by the Roman Church in her public Offices) For
thus he writes: Virginitatem in coelum fero, non quia habeam, sed quia magis
mirer, quod non habeo. Ingenua and verec^nda confessio est, quo ipse careas, id
in aliis praedicare. Apolog. ad Pammach. Ep. 50. in fine. Scitis lubricum
adolescentiae iter, in quo and ego lapsus sum. Ad Chromat. Epist. 43.
I extol Virginity to the skies, not because I possess it, but because I the
more admire that, which I want. It is an ingenuous and modest confession to
commend that in others, which your self want. And in another place, speaking of
the danger of Incontinence, to which youth is subject, You know, says he, the
slippery path of youth; in which I also fell. Dunstan was by many vehemently
suspected of Incontinency; and the Adulter^es of Hildebrand, with the Countess
Mathildis, are insinuated by the Historians of that time. Paul the 14th, Abbot
of St. Albans was Matthew. Paris, Hist. Abbat. Alban. p. 49.
generally supposed to be the base Son of Lanfran^. Anselm, however celebrated
by the Monkish Historians as an undoubted Virgin, himself confesses and
deplores the loss of his Virginity. For in an ancient Manuscript, in the King's
Library at St. James's, are extant Twenty three Prayers of Anselm: of which the
Twelfth (not to be found in the printed Collection of his Prayers among his
Works) is entitled, A Lamentation of the Loss of his Virginity. Therein at
large he bewails his fault, and confesses his crime, but more especially in
these words: O sornicatio sordidatrix (...) meae, perditrix anim^ meae, unde
mis^ro subrepfisti! -- Tu namque anima mea, perfida Deo, adultera Christi,
libenter de sublimitate virginitatis es demersa in barathrum sorni^ationis.
O fornication, the defiler of my mind, the destroyer of my soul, whence have
thou stol^ upon me, miserable man! For thou my soul, perfidious to God, and
adulteress against Christ, voluntarily falling down from the sublimity of
virginity, art plunged into the sink of fornication. Of the Founders of the
four great Orders, Francis, by the confession of Walsingha^, was in his youth
unchaste, and indulged to himself the most licentious pleasures; as did Ignatius
Loyola also by the acknowledgement of Ribadeneira In vitejus.
. As for Benedict and Dominick, if they escaped the unlawful embraces of Women,
yet could they not avoid the violent temptations and desires of them. For
remedy of which the first was forced frequently to roll his naked body upon
thorns, and the latter Theodoric. de Apold. in vit. ejus.
to whip himself thrice every night with an iron chain.

Thus have we brought down the History of ^elibacy to the times of Hildebrand,
or the middle of the Eleventh Age: when although the Marriage of the ^lergy was
once again become frequent, and connived at over all the West, yet the fatal
ignorance and stupidity of the precedent age had prepared the way to a renewed
imposition of Celibacy, by anticipating the judgments of men with false
prejudices and notions of the nature of Marriage and Celibacy. All the mistakes
of ancient times were then resumed and with advantage improved: and the
supposition of some hidden impurity in the use of Marriage, had so far
prevailed, that it gained belief and reception even among the married Clergy.
For this I take to have been the only reason of that abuse, frequent in the
Ninth Age, (which Elfric complains of in his Epistles to Wulfin and Wulfstan)
whereby the Priests administering the Eucharist, communicated not themselves.
Besides all these errors and mistakes, and the miserable ignorance and
barbarity of those times, which prepared the minds of men: there concurred
another great reason, which induced the Popes to impose Celibacy upon the
Clergy. The Popes of the Eleventh Age, especially Hildebrand, or Gregory the
Seventh, had formed a design of subjecting the whole Christian World to the
obedience of the Sea of Rome, as well in Temporals as in Spirituals. To this
end nothing could be more subservient than to withdraw the Clergy from the
Allegiance due to their Princes and Affection to their Countries, and tie them
up wholly to the interest of the Court of Rome. This could not be accomplished
while Marriage was permitted to the Clergy, since the consideration of Wives
and Children endeared their Country to them, and were so many Pledges of
Fidelity to their Natural Princes. This Obstacle therefore was to be removed,
and the Clergy to be invested with a perfect liberty of blindly pursuing the
dictates of the Sea of Rome. This observation may be hence confirmed, that the
same Hildebrand endeavored to subject Temporal Princes to the Papal power, and
to deprive the Clergy of the use of Marriage. For although some Popes of this Age
attempted the imposition of Celibacy before Hildebrand, yet was the whole
attempt designed and managed by him, who is known to have exercised an absolute
Tyranny in Rome more than twenty years before he was made Pope.

Pope Leo the Ninth led the way: who although he made no formal Decree, at
least not any now extent, against the Marriage of the Clergy in the West, sent
Legates to Constantinople, in the year 1054. Cardinal Humbert, who fiercely
contending there with the Greeks, both by Writings and Disputations, among
other heads of accusation, charged them with the Heresy of the Nicolaites, for
permitting Marriage to the Clergy, and pronounced an Anathama against them. How
foolish and false this accusation was, is evident from what we before said
touching the History of Nicolas the Deacon. The cause of the Greek Church was
defended by Nicetas Pectoratus, a Regular Priest, who, besides the common right
of mankind, the divine permission, and the necessity of it, alleges the
constant Practice and Tradition of the Greek Church in all precedent Ages in
favor of the Clergies Marriage. In the year 1056. the Council of Toulouse was
held by the command and by the Legates of Pope Victor the Second, which
commanded Can. 7.
Priests, Deacons, and all other Clergymen possessing Ecclesiastical Dignities,
to abstain from their Wives, upon pain of Deprivation and Excommunication. The
next year Pope Stephen the Ninth held Leo Ost^ens. Chron. Cas^. l. 2. c. 98.
several Synods at Rome against the Marriage of the Clergy; whose Acts are
lost. The Clergy generally despised these Censures and Canons, and retained
their Wives in opposition to them. This obliged the Popes to invent and make
use of new stratagems. None could be more effectual than to forbid the Laity to
hear Mass and receive the Sacraments from the hands of the married Clergy. This
was indeed the very formal Heresy of the Eustathians condemned of old by the
Council of Gangra; but the advantage which it might bring to the Sea of Rome,
did abundantly in their esteem compensate the danger and contagion of its
error. Pope Nicolas the Second, therefore in a Synod held at Rome, in the year
1059. decreed, Can. 3.
that none should hear the Mass of a Priest, whom he undoubtedly knew to have a
Concubine, (for such the imposers of Celebacy in this Age would have the Wives
of the Clergy to be esteemed) or a Housekeeper. And that whatsoever Priests,
Deacons or Subdeacons after the Constitution of Leo the Ninth, concerning the
chastity of the Clergy, had openly married a Concubine, or put her not away
when married, should be deposed from his Office and lose his Revenues. In this
Canon it may be observed, that a general and uninterrupted use of Marriage by
the Clergy is acknowledged to have obtained in the West immediately before the
Constitution of Leo the Ninth, and that the universal opposition of the Clergy
to the imposition of Celibacy had forced the imposers of it to mitigate the
Penalties of Marriage, and inflict only deprivation upon the married Clergy.
This Canon was renewed and confirmed by the Council of Tours Can. 6.
in the year 1060. by the Roman Synod Can. 3.
under Alexander the Second in the year 1063. and the latter part of it by the
Council Roan of Can. 15.
in the year 1072. But all these Decrees were only the rash efforts of a
furious zeal for Celibacy, and met with no success or obedience, till
reinforced by Hildibrand, now become Pope Gregory the Seventh, whose violent
genius left neither any force nor fraud unattempted to complete his designs. He
in a Synod held at Rome in the year 1074. commanded, Can. 3, 4. Lambert.
Schaf^ab. ad A^n. 1074.
that the Clergy should either put away their Wives, or be deposed: and that
none for the future should be ordained, who vowed not perpetual continence and
a single life. But when the Clergy chose rather to lie under the sentence of
Anathema (as Simeon Dunelmensis D^ gift* Reg. Angl.
and Hoveden A^nal. par. 1. p. 262.
relate) or (as Bromton C^ron* ad Ann. 1074.
has it) when they contemned his censures, he renewed the next year the
Decrees of his predecessors, that none should hear Mass from nor communicate
with a married Priest. These Constitutions he vigorously endeavored to put in
exec^tion by force of Arms, Threats, and Flattery, thundering out
Excommunications against those Bishops who blindly employed not their whole
power and interest to execute his commands. By these violent methods he
obtained the confirmation of his Decrees from the Council of Poictou Can. 9.
in the year 1078. of Islebonne Can. 3.
the same year of Quintilineburg Can. 3.
in the year 1085. and many other Provincial Councils. Most of the succeeding
Popes pursued the same Design, and many Councils seconded them in it, as that
of Melphi Can. 2.
in the year 1089. Clermont Can. 9.
1095. and others not worthy a particular relation.

The force and violence which these Popes and Bishops used to separate the
Clergy from their Wives, is known to all who have conversed in the Histories of
those times. But their frauds and impostures, gross ignorance and trifling
prejudices deserve a more particular consideration. The mistakes and errors of
precedent Ages, which they adopted and improved, need no repetition. I will
insist upon those only which were peculiar to this and the former Age. An
universal ignorance had fitted the minds of men to be abused and deceived; and
the Patrons of Celibacy failed not to make use of this advantage. They
pretended the Marriage of the Clergy to be in it self null and void; and
therefore in their Decrees and Canons gave to the Wives of the Clergy no other
name than that of Concubines; and ever termed their Marriage, Adultery,
Concubinacy, and Invtteratum morbum fornicationis Clericorum. Gregor. VII. l.
2. Epist. 30.
the inveterate Disease of Fornication of the Clergy. Many had before forbid
Marriage to the Clergy; but none had yet dared to call the use of it
Fornication, which Clemens Alex. (...). (...). l. ^.
affirms to be an opposition of the Law and Gospel, and no other than downright
Blasphemy. Then was the Third Canon of the Council of Nice alleged in against
the Marriage of the Clergy; and all the spurious Decretals of ancient Popes,
the late Forgeries of Isidore Mercator, produced in favor of the imposition of
Celibacy: which fraud is at this day continued by the Writers of the Church of
Rome, who are not ashamed to cite the Epistles of Pope Calixtus the First, the
Roman Council under Pope Silvester, the Acts of Paul and Tecla, the History of
Abdias, and many other spurious Writings, the product of latter Ages or foolish
Impostors. Another artifice was then set on foot, which nothing but the highest
impudence could devise or maintain, and that was to accuse the Greek Church of
imposing Marriage upon the Clergy, pretending the 13th Canon of Quinisext
Council had decreed none should be admitted into Priests Orders, who had not
first married a Wife. This calumny also is espoused by the present Writers of
the Church of Rome, and particularly Bellarmin De Cleric. l. 1. c. 19.
who could not but know the falseness of it, and that Marriage is no where made
necessary to the Clergy, but in the Church of Russia. The imputation of Heresy
to the defenders of the Clergies Marriage was started in this Age, and the
opprobrious titles of Nicolaites fastened on them. This new Heresy is thus
described by Petrus Damiani, the great Agent of the Popes in the cause of
Celibacy. Nicolaitae autem dicuntur Clerici, qui contra castitatis ecclesiast.
regulam faeminis admiscentur. Qui plane tunc fornicatores sunt, quum foedi
commercii copulas ineunt: tunc Nicolaitae jure vocantur, quum hanc letiferam
pestem velut ex authoritate defendunt. Epist. ad Hildebrand. and Joannem in
vita Opp. praefixa.
The Nicolaites are those Clergymen, who against the rule of ecclesiastical
chastity accompany with Women: who then truly become fornicators* when they
add Marriage to this unlawful Society; and are then deservedly called
Nicolaites, when they defend, as lawful, this mortal Heresy. Lastly, to crown
these Impostures, Miracles were forged, as the most proper artifice to impose
upon mankind in a superstitious Age, when that cause was triumphant, not which
was most rational, but whose followers could by a pretense of Miracles delude
the World with greater art and impudence. Hence the admired Fable of the 1100
Virgin Martyrs, the imposture Polydor. Virgil. Hist. Angl l. 6. in fin.
of the Crucifix in the Synod of Canterbury, openly giving its Vote for
Dunstan, against the married Clergy; and Capgrave.
the whole College of married Priests of Elingen turned into Eels, when by the
favor of the Emperor they retained their Wives against the threats and curses
of the Pope, with a thousand other ridiculous tales which might terrify the
married Clergy, amuse the credulous multitude, and advance the interest of the
greedy Monks; who then built their fortunes apace upon the ruins of the secular
Clergy. But to give an evident testimony of the Frauds and Impostures which
promoted Celibacy in this Age, I will instance in Council. Tom. X. p. 315.
an Anonymous Author of this time, whom the Collectors of the Councils thought
worthy to insert into their Edition; and who, if I be not mistaken, was the
first that ever dared affirm the Celibacy of the Clergy to be of Divine or
Apostolical Institution. This Writer in an Apology for the Decrees of
Hildebrand, published in the Roman Synod, Anno 1074. pleads the cause of the
Imposition of Celibacy. In his Plea he alleges the Third Canon of Nice, the
First of Neocaesarea, and the Decretals of Silvester. Whatsoever is said by St.
Hierom, or other ancient Fathers, against the Housekeepers, he applies to the
Wives of the Clergy. Affirms, Nicolas the Heresiarch to have been the first
Author and Introducer of the Clergies Marriage. Reckons Paulus Samosatenus
(condemned and deposed by the Synod of Antioch for his scandalous use of
Housekeepers) among the defenders of their Marriage. Urges all the spurious
Decretals of ancient Popes, Alexander the First, Clement, and others, and
doubts not to affirm from Clemens. Alex. that Nicolas the Deacon prostituted
his Wife to the lust of all persons; whenas that learned Father relates the
direct contrary, as we before showed.

No wonder then, if amidst so gross ignorance and shameless impostures, when
the interest of the Sea of Rome required, and the ambition of the whole
Monastic Order promoted it; when forged Decretals were received, and foolish
Miracles believed; when ancient Canons were securely falsified, and the
practice of other Churches misrepresented; when the Bishops and ruling part of
the Clergy were either taken out of Monasteries, or otherwise at the devotion
of the Court of Rome; Celibacy triumphed, and the Marriage of the Clergy was
decried and run down. The lamentable and scandalous effects of these
proceedings, are at large related by the Historians of those times; which I
will here only briefly touch. Matthew Paris Hist. Major ad an. 1074.
and Radulphus de Diceto Abbreviat. Chron. ad an. 1074.
having related Pope Gregory the Seventh's prohibition of Marriage to the
Clergy, use these words: Hence arose so great a scandal, that not even in the
time of any Heresy had the Church ever been divided with a more grievous
Schism; one Party contending for Justice, the other against it. Besides, few of
the Clergy preserving Continence, some dissembling their Lust either for Gain
or Vainglory; but many aggravating their Incontinence with Perjury and
continual Adultery: The Laity refused to receive the Sacraments from married
Priests, burnt the Tithes due to them, and oftentimes trod under foot the Body
of our Lord consecrated by them, and ofttimes voluntarily spilt the consecrated
Blood upon the ground. In Germany, as Nauclerus Chronograph. vol. 3. generat.
37.
relates, upon the prohibition of hearing the Masses of married Priests, the
Laity were forced to administer the Sacraments themselves, and baptize their
own Children. This scandal arose much higher in England, where when the same
prohibition was by the procurement of Anselm enacted in a National Synod, all
Divine Service was, for want of unmarried Priests, generally discontinued in
Parochial Churches, and the Church-doors overgrown with Thorns. As for the
scandalous incontinence and uncleanness of the Clergy, that is not much to be
admired, being the natural effect of imposed Celibacy. But it may be justly
wondered, that while the Pope engaged with so much violence against the Marriage
of the Clergy, they willingly overlooked and connived at their Fornications and
prodigious Impurities of Life. This Petrus Damiani Epist. ad Nicolaum II.
himself assures us, and affirms it to be the custom of the Church of Rome, in
his time, severely to exact other points of Ecclesiastical Discipline, but to
connive at and dispense with the Lust of the Clergy: which was then become so
brutal and notorious, that he writ a Book, entitled Gomorrhaeus, particularly
upon that subject. This alone might justify what we before observed, that the
Church of Rome imposed Celibacy upon the Clergy, not for increase of Piety, or
advancemen^ of Purity, but only for temporal ends, and secular advantages.

However, the Marriage of the Clergy wanted not Defende^s in this Age to
maintain its right against the calumnies and tyranny of its Adversaries. The
Decrees of the Popes were condemned by some Councils, universally opposed by
the Clergy of all Nations, and gained not success till a long and sharp
contention. In the year 1061. the Bishops of Lombardy, by the instigation of
Guibert Damian. de Legate. ad Henric.
Bishop of Parma, met in a Council at Basil, wherein they annulled the Decrees
of Pope Nicolas, and decre^d, That no Pope should be obeyed, who would not
(...) and yield to their Infirmities. About the same time the Clergy of Laon
being urged by Petrus Damiani Ad. Epist. ad Cunipertum.
to put away their Wives, produced in their defense a Decree of the Council of
Tribur, which permitted the use of Marriage to the Clergy. Several Councils
were he^l at T^ibur in this Age; of whose Acts we have little or no account
left, and therefore cannot (...) the time of this Council. The Synod of (...)
we shall mention afterward, when we come to the Affairs of England. In the
year 1080. Gregory the Seventh was condemned and deposed in the Council of
Brixia, as well for other crimes, as because h^ had ^ Divor^es between married
persons, (to use the words of the Historian Conradus Ursperg. Chron.
or had violently separated the married Clergy from their Wives. To these we
may add the Council of Beneventum, held eleven years after by Urban the Second,
which permitted Marriage to Subdeacons, as we before observed: and the great
Lateran Council under Inno^ent the Third, of which more hereafter.

If many Bishops disliked, annulled, and mi^igated the Papal Decrees of
Celibacy; with much more violence, although with less authority, did the
inferior Cle^gy oppose this unjust Imposition. Particularly (...) Hildebrand
published his Decrees, the Historian says, (...), bominem plane haer^ticum and
vesani dogmatis esse clamitantes, qui ob^itus (...) Chri^ti, etc. Lambertus
(...). ad (...) 1074.
The Cl^rgy were in a rage, crying out, the (...) was plainly a Heretic, and
maintainer of mad Opinions; who forgetting those words of Christ, All (...)
t^is, and ^e that cannot contain, let him marry, would by a violent exaction
compel men to live the life of Angels; and while he stopped the wonted course
of Nature, let loose the Reins to a promis^uous Lust. (...) the learned Monk of
Gemblac^, writ to Henry Archdeacon of Liege, a peculiar T^eatise or Apology
against those who s^andered or condemned the Masses of married Priests, (as
himself Catal. Script. Eccl. in fine.
tells us) which is now lost. The same Author in another place give^h Novo
exemplo and inconsiderato praej^dico contra SS. Patr^m sententiam. Chron. ad
an^ 1074.
this judgment of the Decree of Pope Gregory, That it was made by an unheard of
Example, and inconsiderate prejudice against the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers.
Matthew Paris Hist. ad^ an. 1074.
uses the same words. In Germany the Clergy opposed the Papal Decrees with
great courage and animosity, rejected the persuasion of their Bishops, wanted
little of tearing in pieces the Popes Legate who proposed to them the
imposition of Celibacy; and when at last by the violence of their Adversaries
forced to submit, chused rather to quit their Office than their Wives. In
France the Clergy of Laon rejected the Solicitations of Petru^ Damia^i. Of
England we shall speak more largely afterward. In Italy, Damia^us being sent
to Milan by Nicolas the Second, in the year 1059. to subject that See to the
Obedience of the Church of Rome, and the Clergy to the Yoke of Celibacy, could
effect neither, without great commotions. For as himself writ back to the Pope,
the people and Clergy contended with great heat, that the Ambrosian See owed no
Obedience to the Bishop of Rome, and that the Law of Celibacy was unjust and
intolerable.

Mr. Fox in his English Martyrology Tom. 2. p. 466.
has published two ancient Latin Apologies for the Marriage of the Clergy,
under the name of Volusianus Bishop of Carthage, both directed to Pope Nicolas.
The first, which is short, is nothing else but the Epistle of Huldericus,
before mentioned, which has been often published. The second, is far longer,
was never elsewhere published; and seems to have been the Remonstrance or
Apology of all the married Clergy of the Western Church, offered to Pope
Nicolas the Second, and the other Bishops of the Church, who endeavored to
impose Celibacy, presently after the Roman Synod, in the year 1059. which
forbid the Laity to hear Mass from the married Clergy. The Author of it writes
far more elegantly, and argues more strongly than Huldericus: and indeed,
abating some allegorical interpretations of Scripture, the peculiar Genius of
those Ages, it may be accounted a rational and exact Treatise. The sum of it is
this: That Continence is the peculiar Gift of God, not bestowed upon all; which
therefore cannot be commanded. That no Vow or Gift is grateful to God, but what
is voluntary, not compelled. That it savoured of Judaism, to impose such
burdens upon men under the Gospel. That the Governors of the Church were not
invested with an arbitrary power, nor could lay such grievous impositions on
the Clergy, against their will. That this Yoke was imposed for vain
ostentation, and worldly ends. That although many of the inferior Clergy were
awed by Force, Authority, Threats, or Anathema's, to submit to this Imposition,
yet they unwillingly underwent the burden of Celibacy, and hated the cross laid
upon them, because they bore it rather to their destruction than salvation.
That from the imposition of Celibacy, greater inconveniences arose; Sodomy,
Adultery, Fornication, Incest, and other horrid Lusts. That Marriage is the
only Remedy assigned by God to incontinent persons; which they who contemn and
affect a greater show of perfection, commonly fall into precipices. That the
Apostle commands, that to avoid Fornication, every man should have his own
Wife; and expressly teaches, all have not the Gift of Continence. That the
Apostles advice of Virginity, was temporary, himself professing that he cast no
snare upon us. That as for themselves, they professed they could not contain
without the use of Marriage, and therefore by the Precept of the Apostle had a
right to marry. That it was a vain and false pretense, that this Indulgence was
given by the Apostle only to the Laity, and not to the clergy. That the Yoke of
Celibacy was unlawful and intolerable, condemned of old by Dionysius
Corinthius, and Paphnutius. Lay not therefore, we beseech you, this heavy
burden upon us, which we are not able to bear; nor violate the Reverence due to
Holy Orders and the sacred Mysteries, for our sakes. Certainly, you render both
contemptible in the sight of men, whilst you forbid the Sacraments to be
received from our hands. A Prohibition directly contrary to the ancient Canons;
which define, that the Sacraments lose not their efficacy by the unworthiness
of him that administers them. By these Authorities and Reasons you ought to be
persuaded, and neither remove us from the sacred Office, nor deprive the Laity
of the benefit of the Sacraments. Concluding with a protestation, that they
could not contain without Marriage, nor obtain Continence any otherwise than by
the peculiar Gift of God.

Thus the married Clergy wanted neither learning nor courage to defend the
justice of their Cause, and however they were overborn by the violence of the
Court of Rome, and prevailing interest of the Monastic Order, yet many of them
retained their Wives for some Ages after the times of Hildebrand; although from
his Popedom the marriage of the Clergy gradually decreased, and at last was
born down by an universal Celibacy. For some time after that, the Priests of
Germany publicly cohabited with their Wives, says Aventinus, Annal. Boior^m
lib 5. p. 564. edit. Ingolstad. 1554.
as other Christians did, and begat Children; as appears from the Records of
Grants made by them to Churches, Priests, or Monks; wherein their Wives by name
subscribe as Witnesses together with their Husbands, and are called by the
honest name of Priestesses. Presbyt^rissae.
This constancy of the Clergy in retaining their Wives, was the only reason of
the frequent renovations of the Laws of Celibacy by the Popes and Councils of
the 12th and 13th Ages. These Laws seem not to have been introduced into
Dalmatia, till the year 1199. when a Council being held there by the Popes
Legates, this Canon Can. 2.
was made: Whereas the Priests of God ought to live continently, they are said
to hold both their Wives and Churches in the parts of Dalmatia and Dioclia.
Wherefore we enact, That Clergymen having Wives married before Ordination,
live with them and resign their Benefices; but that those who have Wives
married after Ordination, dismiss their Wives, and retain their Benefices. To
pass by other Councils, I will produce only the great Lateran Council under
Innocent the Third, in the year 1215. which not only allowed the Marriage of
the Clergy, when contracted, to be valid, but also permitted Marriage to the
Clergy of some Provinces, wherein the Laws of Celibacy had not yet been
received. The first appears from the 31 Canon, conceived in these words: To
abolish a great Corruption, which N^ Canonicorum filii, maxim spurti. Can. 31.
has been introduced in diverse Churches, we straightly forbid, that the Sons
of Prebendaries, especially their Bastard Sons, be made Prebendaries in the
secular Churches, wherein their Fathers were instituted. Where by excluding
especially the Bastard Sons of the Clergy, it is acknowledged that their
Children born in Marriage are not Bastards. The latter is no less evident from
the 14th Canon, which enjoining Continence to the Clergy, adds this Proviso:
But whereas Gravius puniantur, cum legitimo matrimonio uti possint. Can. 14.
many of the Clergy, according to the custom of their Countries, have not
renounced their Wives, if any of these commit Fornication or Adultery, let them
be more severely punished, because they can make use of lawful Marriage. The
latter Writers of the Church of Rome, to ^lude the Authority of a Council, so
much reverenced by them, declaring in favor of the Clergies Marriage, would
have this clause understood of the Greek Clergy; but produce not the least show
of Reason for their pretense. No mention is made of the Greek Clergy either
before or after: nor did the Fathers of the Council, in forming this Canon, any
more dream of them than of the Clergy of the Abyssine Church. Lastly, almost
the whole 17th Title of the first Book of Decretals of Gregory the Ninth, is
made up of Epistles written by Alexander the Second, to the Bishops of England,
about admitting or not admitting the Sons of Priests into the Benefices of
their Fathers, without any intermediate Successor. In these Epistles Bastardy
is nowhere objected to the Sons of the Clergy, but only the danger which may
accrue to the Church, if Ecclesiastical Benefices should descend like a Lay
Inheritance from Father to Son. And this danger the Pope sometimes dispensed
with. For it is manifest from the 9th Chapter, that he had given a Faculty to
the Archbishop of York, of inducting the Sons of the Clergy into the Benefices
of their Fathers, immediately after the death or cession of the latter. The
12th Chapter has these words: Clement III. An a potificibus generati valiant
ad sacros ordines promoveri -- Si ex legitimo matrimonio sunt procreati, licite
possunt.
to the Archbishop of Cassels. Whereas your Brotherhood inquired of us, the
Sons of Priests (or Bishops) may be promoted to Holy Orders, if they be adorned
with knowledge and sobriety; know that if they be born of lawful Marriage, and
there be no other Canonical Impediment, they may lawfully ascend to Holy
Orders. Where it is manifest, that the Sons of which Pope Clement speaks, were
born after the Ordination of their Fathers; for none was ever so mad as to
doubt whether the Sons of Clergymen born before their Ordination, were capable
of Holy Orders. But if any scruple remains, the 14th Chapter will remove it,
which is this: We understand that N. begotten in Priesthood, born In Sacerdotio
genitus, de uxore legitima natus and conceptus.
and conceived of a lawful Wife, desires to be admitted into Holy Orders.
Wherefore let it be done Thus did Popes, General Councils, and the practice of
the Church, after the times of Hildebrand, acknowledge the lawfulness of the
Clergies Marriage, and connive at it; till the Papal ambition drawing the
disposition of all Ecclesiastical Preferments to themselves, and allowing the
use of Concubines to the Clergy, Marriage was at last forced to yield to the
more advantageous and easy way of Fornication.

It remains that we speak somewhat more particularly of the state of Celibacy
in the Church of England, which more peculiarly concerns us, and probably the
last of all the Churches in the West, submitted to the imposition of it. The
Church of England being no part of the Roman Patriarchate, nor intervening by
her Bishops in those Western Councils which enjoined Celibacy, took no notice
of, nor gave any obedience to the Decrees of Popes, or Constitutions of
Councils in that matter; but allowed an uninterrupted freedom of Marriage to
the whole body of her Clergy, till the end of the tenth Age, and to the far
greater part of them till the beginning of the twelfth Age. Elfric Epist. ad
Wulfin. Episc. Council. Tom. 9. p. 1003.
indeed, a great Zealot of the Monastic Order, in which he was brought up,
disliked and opposed the Marriage of the Clergy, yet so that from his words it
is manifest the Marriage of the Clergy generally obtained in England, and
himself rather wished than hoped for an abolition of it. In opposing it he
joined the prejudices of Antiquity to the impostures of latter Ages. From hence
he received the poor pretense of the prohibition of Marriage to the Clergy by
the Council of Nice, in the third Canon: from thence his detestation of second
Marriages, against which he had conceived such unreasonable prejudice, that he
forbid Ibid. Can. 9.
Priests to be present at the solemnities of those Marriages, or even to bestow
a blessing on them. Nay, the Clergy of the Church of England enjoyed at that
time so great a liberty of Marriage, that even the Monks enjoyed the same
freedom: and, as the old Manuscript Chronicle of Winchester relates, Apud
Spelman. Council. Anglic. Tom. 1. p. 434.
all the Monasteries of England, except Glastenbary and Abendon, were nothing
else but Colleges of married Priests, till King Edgar drove them thence, and
planted Monks in them. This was done by King Edgar about the year 974 at the
instigation, and by the artifices of Dunstan, who held diverse Synods for that
purpose, and had sharp disputes with the married Clergy possessing the
Monasteries: where his frequent recurring to tricks and impostures, related by
the Monkish Historians under the name of Miracles, manifest that Reason and
Justice failed him, and that in both he was overpowered by the married Clergy.
But the favor of the Prince gave to Dunstan the advantage of obtaining his
design, who, as Malmsbury relates, De Gest. Pontif. Angl. l. 1.
when he gave the Clergy their choice, either to quit their Wives, or their
Monasteries, forsook their Places, and left them empty to the Monks. Alferus
indeed, Prince of Mercia, drove out the Monks again, and replaced the married
Clergy; but they soon lost their recovered possession with the fall of that
Prince. However, this Violence of Edgar and Constitutions of Dunstan touched
not the Secular Clergy, whether Parochial Priests, or Prebendaries of Cathedral
and Collegiate Churches. They yet enjoyed the use of Marriage with no less
perfect freedom than before. And therefore among King Edgar's Canons one is,
Can. 30. apud Lamb^rdum.
that if a Mass-Priest commits Fornication, or violate his Marriage, he fast 10
years, and always bewail his crime; if a Deacon, 7 years; if an inferior
Clergyman, 6 years; if a Layman, 5 years. Not only the Secular Clergy, but even
many Regulars, who lived separately out of Monasteries, enjoyed then the
benefit of Marriage; (as many Nuns do Alarviz.
at this day in the Abyssine Church) whence Sir Henry Spelman Council. A^glic.
Tom. I. p. 530.
observes, that their Wives are frequently called Monachae and Moniales, Nuns.

Afterward Pope Gregory the Seventh imposing Celibacy upon the whole Clergy,
and seconding his imposition with reiterat^d commands to all Bishops to execute
his Decrees, Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury endeavored to introduce
Celibacy into the Church of England. But perceiving the attempt to be
impossible, by reason of the constant and unanimous opposition of the Clergy,
he was contented in the Council of Winchester, in the year 1076. to make this
Decree only. Nullus Canonicus uxorem habeat. Sacerdotum vero in castellis vel
in vicis habitantium hab^ntes uxores non cogantur ut dimittant, non ^abentes
interdicantur ut habeant. Council. Tom. X. p. 351.
Let no Prebendary have a Wife. But of the Priests, who live in Towns and
Villages, those who have Wives shall not be compelled to put them away, those
who have not, shall be forbidden to marry any. Thus Lanfranc prepared the way
for the more resolute undertakings of his successor Anselm: who, not contented
with a partial Celibacy, attempted to debar the whole body of the Clergy from
the use of Marriage, which they had hitherto enjoyed.

So common and general was the Marriage of the Clergy in the Church of England
at that time, that Pope Paschal the Second, in an Epistle Quia in anglorumregno
tanta hujusmodi plenitudo est, ut major and melior Clericorum pars in hac
specie censeatur, apud Eadmer. Hist. Nov. l. 4. p. 91.
to Anselm, giving him a Dispensation to admit the Sons of the Clergy into Holy
Orders, assigns this reason of it; because there is so great a number of this
kind in the Kingdom of England, that they make up the greater and better part
of the Clergy. And indeed many great and illustrious Members of the Clergy, the
sons of Priests, who lived at this time in England, may be produced out of
History. Herebertus Losinga, Bishop of Norwich, was Malmsbur. de gest. Pontif.
Angl. l. 2.
the son of Robert Losinga a Clergyman, afterward Abbot of Winchester.
Rithmarch was Godvinus de Praesul. Angl. p. 605.
son and successor of Sulgheim, Bishop of St. David's. Thomas, Archbishop of
York, was Id. par. 2. p. 23.
the son of a Norman Priest, as also Id. par. 2. p. 23.
his brother, Samson, Bishop of Worcester, whose son, Thomas, succeeded Id.
par. 2. p. 23.
his Uncle in the Archbishopric of York. Henry, Archdeacon of Huntington, the
Historian, was the son of Nicolas, Priest of Lincoln, who for his great Piety
and Learning was called, Stella Cleri. Hen. Huntind. Hist. l. 7.
The Star of the Clergy. Richard, Archdeacon of Coventry, was the son and
successor of Robert, Bishop of Chester, (or of Coventry and Lichfield, which
See was then placed at Chester) upon which Radulphus de Diceto makes this
observation: Non igitur vel a sacris ordinibus, vel a parochialibus curis, vel
ab ^cclestis cathedralibus, vel etiam ab ipso papatu filii sacerdotum, si
probabilis vitae fuerint, sunt arcendi. Imag. Histor. ad Ann. 1161.
Not therefore either from Sacred Orders, or from Parochial Cures, or from
Bishoprics, or from the Popedom it self, are the Sons of the Clergy to be
debarred if they be of an honest life. It cannot be here imagined, that all
these persons were born before the ordination of their Fathers. For first
Clergymen were then ordained young; and then the contrary can be plainly
demonstrated of many of them. For Eadmerus Hist. Nov. l. 1. p. 7.
relates, that Lanfranc going to Rome in the year 1071. impleaded Thomas
Archbishop of York, and Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, before the Pope, that
neither of them were canonically promoted to their Bishoprics; because they
were the sons of Priests, and consequently made incapable of Holy Orders by the
Canons. Which incapacity was never extended to the sons of the Clergy, born
before their ordination. Besides the learned Seldom Spicileg. ad Eadmer. p. 195.
observes, there was no such express Canon then made, nor ever heard of, before
the Council of Clermont in the year 1095. and therefore the incapacity of the
sons of the Clergy to Holy Orders could arise only from their supposed
bastardy, being the fruits of the use of Marriage after ordination, which the
Hildebrandine Popes and Councils had defined to be fornication.

This was the state of the Clergies Marriage in the Church of England, till the
times of Anselm, who being educated in a Monastery, and a dependant of the
Court of Rome, endeavored to introduce the Papal Laws of Celibacy into
England. His attempts of this kind I will represent in the words of our
Historians. Henry de Knyghton Prius no^ prohibita^. De Ev^nt. Angl. l. 2. c. 8.
says, Anselm forbid Wives to the Clergy at Leicester in the year 1102. which
before were not forbidden to them. Simon Dunelmensis, Hist. ^e g^st. Reg. Angl.
ad Ann. 1102.
In the year 1102. Concubines (or Wives) were forbidden to Priests in the Synod
of London. Whence many of them shut up the doors of their Churches, omitting
all Divine Service. Henry Huntindon Histor. l. 7.
, In the year 1102. Anselm forbid Wives to the Priests. Which seemed most chaste
to some, to others dangerous, lest while they affected a purity beyond their
power, they should fall into horrible uncleanness, to the great scandal of the
Christian Religion. Matthe^ Paris Hist. ad Ann. 1102.
repeateth very near the same words. The same prohibition was Simeon, Dunelm.
ad Ann. 1108.
renewed by Anselm in a Synod in the year 1108. In the year 1125. John,
Cardinal of Crema, was sent into England by the Pope upon the same design, who,
holding a Synod at London, persuaded the Clergy, in a set speech, to dismiss
their Wives, and live continently; but he being caught Huntindon, l. 7.
Hov^den, Annal. par. 1. p. 274.
that very night in the act of fornication, was dismissed with shame. In the
year 1129. a great Council was held at London, (to use Matthew Paris, Hist. ad
Ann. 1129.
and Bromton's Chron. ad Ann. 1129.
words) wherein Concubines (or Wives) were forbidden to the Clergy, and the
exe^ution of the wh^le matter left to King Henry. Which thing ended afterward
with great disgrace. For the King took an infinite Sum of Money of the Priests,
to redeem their Wives. Then the Bishops repented of the power granted by them
to the King, when it was too late.

Thus the King, by selling Licenses to the married Clergy, defeated all the
Decrees of these Synods. The same had Henr. Knyghton, l. 2. c. 7.
William Rufus before done in respect of the married Prebenda^ies, after the
prohibition of Lanfranc. Which made the Author of the Saxon History of
Peterborough Apud Spelman. Council. Angl. Tom. II. p. 36.
say of these Councils of Anselm and others against the Marriage of the Clergy,
All these Councils availed nothing (...) the Clergy, by the favor of the King,
enjoy yet their Wives, as they did before. This may be further confirmed from
the frequent repetion of this prohition in subsequent Synods, which would have
been unne^essary, if the Decre^s of former Councils had been received and
observed. In the year 1138. the Decree of Pope Gregory was Ricard^s Hagustad.
de gest. Steph. Regis. Gervas. Tilber. Chron.
renewed in the Synod of London. In the year 1175. it was ^nacted Gerv^s.
Tilber. Chron. ad. Ann. 1175.
in the Council of Westminster, that whosoever in the degree of Subdeacon, and
upwards, contracted Marriage, should leave their Wives, although unwilling and
refusing. And indeed Anselm himself in an Epistle Lib. 3. Ep. 110.
to Ernulphus, complains, that notwithstanding his frequent proh^bitions the
King still suffered the Clergy to enjoy their Wives as freely as they did in
his Father and Lanfranc's times. The Clergy yet retained the use of Marriage
for some Ages in the Church of England, although not with so much freedom, nor
in so great number, as before the times of Anselm. In the Appendix Council. Tom.
X. p. 1633.
to the Third Council of Lateran, in the year 1179. may be found many Epistles
of Alexander the Third to the Bishops of England; from which it appears, that
an infinite number of the Clergy then in England had Wives, and even married
them after ordination. And the Pope himself does in some measure allow their
Marriage, by decreeing Can. 4.
, that if (...) contract Marriage, if they were before such persons, as it
might be feared, lest instead of one they should abuse many women, their
Marriage should be dissembled, and their Co^abitation with their Wives connived
at: because a less evil is to be tolerated, that a greater may be avoided.
Which reason will equally agree to all Orders of the Clergy. In the beginning
of the Thirteenth Age Innocent the Third writ (...). Greg. l. 3. tit. 3. cap. 5.
to the Bishop of Norwich, that he understood many Clegymen of his Diocese
contracted Marriage and retained their Benefices. The Synod of London, in the
year 1237. complains Can. 15.
that many Clergymen privately contracted Marriage, and retained their Wives.
Three years after the Synod of Worcester commands Ca^. 34.
the Archdeacons to inquire after married Priests. Toward the end of the Age,
John Peacham, Archbishop of Canterbury, published a Constitution Ly^vodi
Provinciale, lib. 1. fol. 23.
, that the sons of the Clergy should not succeed immediately to their Fathers
in their Benefices; which must be understood of the legi^imate sons of the
Clergy. For Bastards were ever forbidden to succeed either mediately or
immediately, and indeed to be received into Holy Orders. In a word, Mr. Fox
undeniably demonstrates (...). Angliae, Tom. II. p. 484.
from ancient Deeds, Evidences, and Records, wherein Estates are given, settled,
or int^iled upon Clergymen and their Wives, and Heirs lawfully begotten of
their Wives; or wherein they together with their Wives sell Estats ^ that the
use of Marriage was yet retained by the Clergy of England in the middle of the
14th Age.

We might perhaps carry yet much farther the continuance of the Marriage of the
Clergy in the Western Church, and that not only to the Reformation, but even to
this day. For many of the more sober Clergy of the Church of Rome finding they
could not cont^in without the use of Marriage, and the Church permitting to
them, or conniving at the use of Concubines, have, under color of keeping
Concubines, secretly married wives, and thereby both satisfied their own
consciences, and avoided the censures of the Church. Or if they either could
not or dared not ^se the Ceremonies of the Church in their contract of
Marriage; yet at least they obliged themselves and pledged their faith to their
Con^ubincs never to forsake them, and always to be true to their Bed, receiving
the same assurance from them. By this reciprocal Promise a true and perfect
Marriage is formed in the sight of God, although the public Ceremonies of the
Church do not intervene. So St. Augustine De bono conjug.
, Ifidote Apud Gratian. Did 34. c. 5.
and Gratian Did. 34. c. 5.
plainly determine: and therefore such Concubines are expressly allowed by the
first Council of Toledo Con. 17.
in the year 400. and Justinian Novell. 18.
, and were permitted to Christians, till forbidden by Eeo the Philosopher
Novell 89.
. Now that both these cases of Marriage were continued down in the Church of
Rome, we are assured by Alvarus Pelagius De Planct^ Eccl. l. 2. art. 53.
, who complained to Pope John XXII. that many Priests, and other persons in
holy Orders, especially in Spain, Asturia, Gallieia, and other places,
publicly, and sometimes by public Writing, promised and swore to Women,
chiefly those who were well descended, that they would never put them away; and
gave them Joynt^res of the Goods and Possessions of the Church; and sometimes
publicly married them, in presence of their Kindred and Friends, with a solemn
Banquet, as if they were their lawful Wives. About the year 1240. Otho, the
Pope's Legate, coming into England, published his Constitutions for the
Government of this Church. Among them one Constit. 5.
is particularly directed against the (...) Marriage of the Clergy. After the
Reformation Cassander Optimi quique ac religiofissimi sacerdotes, Consult. art.
23.
relates, that all the best and most religious Priests, perceiving their
infirmity, and ^etesting the fou^ess of Formeation, If they dare not publicly,
at least privately, enter into Marriage. Thus we find Marriage yet retained by
the better and more religious part of the Roman Clergy. But then what shall we
say of that Church, which so far allows Concubinacy, that, for the sake of
it, she connives at the violation of her so much admired Celibacy; and to whom
a cha^e Marriage of the Clergy can recommend it self under no other name, than
that of Fornication.

Thus have we brought down the History of the Imposition of Celibacy, to its
Final Period, I mean the Universal Reception of it in the Western Church,
toward the end of the Fourteenth Age: when the Marriage of the Clergy fell
from a general into a total disuse, and was thenceforth compelled to take
refuge in the name and disgrace of Fornication. What a deluge of Lusts and
Impurities overflowed the Christian World, when Celibacy became triumphant, and
Marriage was exploded, may easily be imagined. Such deplorable Scandals of the
Church I should willingly pass under silence and not provoke the anger of our
Adversaries, by the rehearsal of so sad a truth, if the nature of my design did
not require me to say somewhat of it, which yet I will propose with all modesty
and brevity. I will not here upbraid to our Adversaries the noted Tragedy of
Pope Gregory's Fishponds, although related by Haldericus Epist. ad Nicol. Pont.
more than 800 years since: nor the more famous story of Pope Joan, although
attested by more than twenty eight Historians Vid. Godvinum Catal. Cardinal.
Angl.
before the Reformation: I will not object to them the Incredible Bestialities
and Horrible Lusts of the Popes of the Tenth Age, nor insist upon the Infamous
Impurities of private Churchmen, I will produce only a few General Testimonies
of the Writers of latter times. Alvarus Pelagius, Bishop of Silva in Portugal,
in the beginning of the Fourteenth Age, wishes De Planctu Eccl. l. 2. art. 27.
, that the Glergy had never vowed Chastity, especially the Clergy of Spain,
wherein the Sons of the Laity were not much more numerous than the Sons of the
Clergy. About the same time Durandus, junior De modo celebr. Conc. Genesis par. 2.
rubr. 10.
Bishop of Mimatum in France, proposing means for the reformation of the
Church, advises, among other things, that it were ordered, that Public Stews
might not be kept near great Churches, nor in the Court of Rome next to the
Palace of the Pope, nor in other Places near the Houses of Bishops. In the next
Age Gerson De Vita spirit. anim^e. Lect. 4. Cor. 14. Prop. 3.
affirms, that either incontinent Priests must be tolerated, or none can be
had; and therefore that it were more convenient for the Church, that Concubines
should be publicly permitted to the Clergy, than that the L^ity should be
forbidden to hear the Masses of incontinent Priests. ( Glemangis De corrupt.
Ecll. statu. p. 15.. ^.
relates, that in many Diocesses, the Priests, giving a set and determinate
price to their Bishops, publicly and openly kept Concubines. This scandal of
selling Licenses of Concubinacy to the Clergy proceeded so far, that in Germany
the Bishops and their Officers not only granted those Licenses for a certain
sum of money, to all who asked them; but also forced those Clergymen to take
them, who neither desired no^ intended to make use of them. In Switzerland it
Sleidan. Comment. lib. 3.
was the custom in many Cantons in the times of Popery, that whenever they
received a new Pastor, they obliged him to take a Concubine, that he might not
attempt the chastity of Virgins and Matrons.

The same reason induced the Senate of Rome, when Pius V. intended to put down
the public Stews, to intercede Thuanus Hist. lib. 39.
and petition for the continuation of them, as well to gratify the Clergy who
incited them, as to prevent greater scandals; justly fearing the honor of
their Wives and Daughters, if the Lust of the unmarried Clergy were diverted
from the wonted channel. To say no more, the Adulteries, Fornications,
Sodomies, and Bestialities, discovered in our Monasteries at their dissolution,
are an evident demonstration of this sad truth. The Author of Onus Ecclesi^,
who was John Suffragan Bishop of Saltzburg, and writ just before the
Reformation, says, Cap. 21.
There were very few Gurates in Germany, who did not wallow in the filth of
Conoubinacy; and that Sunt proptala, ut ipsa loca Veheris. cap. 22.
The Nunneries in his time were as publicly prostituted as the common Stews.
And lest we should imagine the Romish Clergy to have observed a greater Purity
since the Reformation, than before, the Fornications and Incest of Paul III.
the So^omies of Julius III. and incestuous Commerce of Innocent X. with his
Brothers Wife Olimpia, are yet fresh in the memory of all men; of the latter of
which, Abbot Gualdi Life of Donna Olimpia.
confesfeth, that the Histories of former Ages cannot produce a scandal so
enormous, or an unlawful love so immoderate; which made him for her sake to
forfeit both the Reputation of his Person, and the Honor of the Church. I will
produce but one Example more, but that related by the Doctors of the Sorbon,
Moral Practice of the Jesuits.
and consequently undeniable to our Adversaries. In a Visitation made in the
year 1619. by the Bishop of Serzane, at the command of Pope Paul V. it was
found that among the Ecclesiastics of three large Provinces, Stiria,
Carinthia, and Carniola, (who had all been bred up under the severe Discipline
of the Jesuits) there were found only six Priests, who kept not Concubines. Nor
did the imposition of Celibacy infect only the Morals of the Roman Clergy, but
also corrupted their judgment; and by that means introduced far greater
scandals into the Church: when Concubinacy and other unnatural Lusts being
become universal, they employed their Wits to prevent their own shame, by
proving those Villainies not to be unlawful. For to pass by an Encomium or
Apology of Sodomy, published by John Casa Archbishop of Beneventum, and Legate
of the Pope; to omit the Complaint of Gualter Mapes, Hanc mulieribus proponit
maximam; Quod nulla salvabitur ad horam ultima^, C^lorum nec i^gredi poterit
januam, Ni de corpore d^t suo decimam. Apocalypsis Gollae Pontif.
That the Priests insinuated into silly women a fear of damnation, if they
denied their Embraces to them: it cannot be denied that many latter Casuists of
the Church of Rome have asserted, That Fornication committed only for the sake
of Health, or evacuation of an extimulant Humor, is not unlawful: and that
most of them teach, that simple Fornication is no deadly sin. I will allege
only one instance of these scandalous Maxims, but that proceeding from the Head
of the Romish Church, and related by Wesselus Apud Wolfium Lect. Memorab. Cent.
1^. p. 836. Fiat, ut petitur.
of Groningen a learned and pious Divine of that Church. Pope Sixtus IV. out of
the fullness of Apostolic power, gave a License to the whole Family of the
Cardinal of St. Lucia, to commit Sodomy in the three hotter months of the year,
with this clause: Let it be done, as it is desired.

The sense and scandal of so many Lusts, Impurities, and Bestialities, daily
committed by the unmarried Clergy, induced many great and learned men of the
Church of Rome, to advise the abrogation of the Laws of Celibacy, and
permission of Marriage to the Clergy. Panormitan Credo pr^ bono and falute
animarum quod esset hoc salubre statutum. In cap. cum olim de Cler. coning.
gives his opinion in these words: It is enquired whether the present Church
can enact, that a Clergyman may contract Marriage, as the Greeks do. I answer,
It may. And I do not only believe that the Church has a power of decreeing
this; but I also believe, that this would be a wholesome Constitution for the
good and salvation of Souls. Pope Pius II. confessed, Platina in Vita ejus.
That there were indeed former causes why Marriage should be taken from the
Clergy, but now much greater causes why it ought to be restored. Polydor Vergil
delivers his Judgment thus: Illud dix^rim tantum ab suisse, etc. -- proinde
forsitan tam e republica Christiana quam ex ordinis usu esset; ut tandem a
liquando jus publici Matrimonii Sacerdotibus restitueretur, etc. De Invent.
rer. lib. 5. cap 4.
This I will affirm, That this enforced Chastity is so far from surpassing
conjugal Chastity, that even the guilt of no crime ever brought greater
disgrace to the Holy Order, greater damage to Religion, or greater grief to all
good men, than the stain of the Clergies Lust. Wherefore it would perhaps be
the interest as well of Christianity as of the Holy Order, that at last the
Right of public Marriage were restored to the Clergy; which they might rather
chastely pursue without Infamy, than defile themselves by such brutal Lusts.
Erasmus has the like words: Si quis perpendat horum temporum statum, quotam
hominum portionem Monachorum greges occupent, etc. Annotat. in Ep. 1. ad Tim.
cap. 3.
If any consider the state of these times, how great a part of Mankind the
multitudes of Monks take up, how great a part the Colleges of Priests and
Clergymen; and then consider how few, out of so great a number, truly preserve
Chastity of Life, with how great scandal most of them are openly incestuous and
incontinent, into what kinds of Lusts innumerable of them degenerate: he will
perhaps conclude it to be more convenient, that those who do not contain, may
have the freedom of public Marriage, which they may purely and chastely,
without infamy, maintain, rather than that they should commit unhappy and
shameful Lusts. The World has now many unmarried men, but few chaste; although
neither is he chaste, who uses not the company of a woman, because it is
forbidden. But I very much fear, that the Revenues of the Church makes more
Clergymen at this day Eunuchs, than Piety does: while we are afraid lest our
Possessions should be intercepted by Wife and Children, or at least nothing
added to them by married Clergy. Cassander Quare si unquam tempus fuit antique
al^^uj^s consuetudinis immutandae; corte haec tempora hujus, quamvis prisci,
moris immutationem aliquam essiagitare videntur. Consult. art. 23.
says, That if ever there was a time to change any old Custom, certainly these
times seem to require some alteration of this, however ancient, Custom. Lastly,
all Princes and States before the Council of Trent, in their Petitions and
Remonstrances for Reformation of the Church, never omitted to require the
permission of Marriage to be restored to the Clergy. In the time of the
Council, and after the conclusion of it, Ferdiand II. and Maximilian II. the
Emperors, Sigismund Augustus King of Poland, Albertus Duke of Bavaria, and
other Princes, earnestly desired the same thing by their Ambassadors. But that
Council too well knew the interests of the Church of Rome, to grant a Petition
of that nature. Rather by defining that Marriage contracted after a Vow of
Continence, is neither lawful nor valid, they have perhaps put the case beyond
all remedy, and taken from the Church all possibility of ever restoring
Marriage to the Clergy. For if Marriage after a Vow be in it self unlawful, the
greatest Authority upon Earth cannot dispense with it, nor permit Marriage to
the Clergy, who have already vowed Continence.

If in the precedent Discourse I have said any thing injurious to the honor of
true Virginity, I here retract it, and profess that a great veneration is due
to that state of life, when a matter of choice, not of force, and that both in
the entrance into it, and continuance of it; when undertaken for the increase
of Piety, and advancement of divine Glory, not for any secular ends and
advantages; when taken up by those who have the Gift of Continence, not
affected by such as cannot contain. We believe there is somewhat in those words
of our Savior, He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. And with
Clemens Alexandrinus, (...). Strom. l. 3. in initio.
We reverence the happiness of the Gift of Continence in those to whom it is
bestowed by God; we admire Monogamy, and the decency of one Marriage: yet
assert, that we ought to indulge with, and bear the burdens of others, lest he
who thinks he stands firmly, should fall. We dislike not the Virginity of the
Romish Clergy, but slight the pretense, and condemn the imposition of it.
Experience demonstrates the one to be false, and Reason the other to be
unlawful. We affect not the name, but the purity of Virginity; and while we
impose Celibacy upon none, nor deny Marriage to any, we promote a voluntary
Continence in many, and secure a real Chastity in all, of the Clergy.

FINIS.

