THE English-Grammar: OR, The Institution of LETTERS, SYLLABLES, and WORDS in
the English-Tongue.

Containing all Rules and Directions necessary to be known for the judicious
Reading, Right-speaking, and Writing thereof.

Very useful for all, that desire to be expert in the foresaid properties.

More especially profitable for Scholars, immediately before their entrance
into the Rudiments of the Latine-tongue.

Likewise to strangers that desire to learn our Language, it will be the most
certain Guide, that ever yet was exstant.

Composed by Jer. Wharton, Mr of Arts.

SUETONIUS in libro de Illustribus Grammaticis. Cura artis Grammaticae ita
increvit, ut ne clarissimi quidem viri abstinuerunt, quo minus and ipsi aliquid
de ea scriberent.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard for the Author, Anno Dom. 1654.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND Truly-Noble-Gentleman, JOHN COULSON Esquire.
SIR!
AS your solid judgment in consultation, singular courtesy in conversation,
and other noble endowments, have made you deservedly honored, and beloved of
all that know you: so your particular bounty, favor and good will toward me,
has obliged me to you in very great thankfulness and respect; and having an
earnest desire, but no means otherwise to express my acknowledgment thereof, I
have presumed to present you with, this small Work; the rather for that I
judged, you had a twofold right to it above any other; for at the first
undertaking it was chiefly intended for the use and benefit of some of your
hopeful Offspring; and also whilst it was doing, I was most encouraged by your
constant and continued respect: if therefore upon trial it shall be found
beneficial to the Education of Youth, or otherwise (as I strongly hope it may),
Vouchsafe that it may live under the shelter of your favorable protection. But
however it be esteemed, let your deserved good name and honor still encreas
more and more; which is and shall be the constant Vote of, Sir,

Your humbly-devoted servant J. WHARTON.

TO THE Courteous READER.
IT is the judgment of many learned, that in the Education of Youth, it should
be the care of every Teacher, as well to accustom them to the exercise of good
English, as of good Latin. And not without great reason: for our mother tongue
is likely in the practice to be most useful, and is as capable of any
Scholar-like expressions, as any whatsoever. Besides the purity and Elegancie
of our own Language is to be esteemed a chief part of the honor of our Nation,
which we all ought to our utmost power, to advance. Lastly, because for one
that is trained up in the Grammar-Schools, to any perfection, fit for the
Universitie, or any learned Profession, a hundred are taken away before; of
whom the most, very shortly after, wholely in a manner, forget their Latin; so
that if they be not bettered in the knowledge of their Native Language, their
labor and cost is to little or no purpose. Upon this ground, and for these
reasons, I have composed this ensuing Treatise, entitled, The English Grammar:
By the use whereof, any one may be able 1. In the hardest English both to judge
of other's Reading, whether it be true or falls, and also to justify his own,
2. To do the same in Writing. 3. In any English Subject, to distinguish every
Part of Speech asunder; the knowledge whereof is of great use to young Scholars,
for the judicious Construing, Parsing, and making of Latin. 4. From any
Primitive or simple word to form all the Derivatives and Compounds that flow
from it; and likewise to reduce any Derivative word to his Primitive; which
property, as it will discover the elegancie of the English-tongue, together
with the proper sens and use of almost all pure English words, so will it be a
good model, so far as it extends, by which to learn any other exotic
language. 5. Upon the sight of any Englished-Latine-word, perteining to the
rules of Derivation set down herein, he shall be able presently to turn it
into Latin; though before he never saw or heard of it before. Which book
therefore will be very useful for all that desire to be expert in the
foresaid properties; more especially profitable for the youth of this Nation
immediately before their Entrance into the Rudiments of the Latin tongue:
because the knowledge of their mother tongue is most necessary, both for the
understanding of what they hear or read therein, as also the expressing of
their conceit, in what they understand: And it is as commendable to give a
warrantable rule or reason of their own, as of a foreign tongue. Besides they
will more easily comprehend the Rules and Terms of Art in that tongue, wherein
they have been accustomed from their infancy, then in the Latin, whereof they
are altogether ignorant. Lastly, it will be a notable Preparative to the
learning of the Latin, or any other Grammatized language; because the Rules in
this, for the most part may be applied unto that. Moreover by them also, that
are already entered into the Latine-tongue, it may profitably be learned upon
the By, without any hinderance to their other proceedings. Likewise to
strangers that desire to learn our language, it will be a special help; which
they shall find not to be barbarous, confused, and irregular, (as the common
saying is) but familiar, orderly and easy, equal to the Greek, and beyond the
Latin for Composition, yea happy above them both in this, not that it cannot
be reduced to any: but that indeed it needs little or no Grammar at all. For
whereas in the Latine-tongue there are threescore Variations of the
Terminations of Nouns, and six hundred of Verbs, and in the Greek that number
almost dubbled; in the English there is little or no variation at all; and
therefore needs not any Declensions of Nouns, any Conjugations of Verbs, any
Rules of Concord or Construction, wherein the difficulty of any language does
consist, and which in the Latin and Greek cost much labor and toil. Now if any
here object, What need a Grammar for that language which all speak of custom,
especially for ours which is so easy: To this I answer, Even the same that
made the noblest of the Romans, when their tongue was com to the highest pitch,
to write something of the Grammar thereof, that by Rules and Precepts it may be
made yet more elegant, certain and permanent. And for this cause Charles the
Great caused to be set forth a Grammar for the Teutonick tongue, from which
our English at first proceeded.

In like manner many worthy men of our own Nation have in their several ages
composed books of this nature, Mr Mulcaster. Mr Coot. Dr Gill. B. Johnson. Mr
Butler.
from all which I acknowledge, more or less, I have received light and
direction. What herein is performed more then formerly I leav to the judgment
of others: not doubting, but that upon further consideration and practice
therein, it may be reduced to a more perfect order then yet is don, which I
shall endeavor to effect at the next going over; and in the mean time commend
this, as it is, to thy courteous acceptance.

THere is another book ready to com forth, called, The Illuminator of the
English Tongue, which only waits to see what enterteinment this shall have.

The English Grammar consisting of Ten Chapters.
CHap. 1. Of Letters and their force. Chap. 2. Of syllables and how to divide
them. Chap. 3. Of e final and the uses thereof. Chap. 4. Of diverse other
letters not sounded. Chap. 5. Of words sounded otherwise then they are written.
Chap. 6. Of Rules for reading and writing some words. Chap. 7. Of the Parts of
Speech. Chap. 8. Of the Derivation of words. Chap. 9. Of the Composition of
words. Chap. 10. Of Points to be observed in reading and writing.
To which is annexed, A Collection of words Like and Unlike.

The labor of this Grammar is but small,
But the fruit great, which by it reap you shall.
THE English-Grammar.
Cap. 1. Of Letters.
GRAMMAR is the Art of Writing, and Speaking well.

This consists in the institution of Letters, Syllables, and Words.

There be twentie-four Letters, which are written either with small
characters; as, a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z; or with
great, thus; A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z, which are called
Capital letters.

These Capitals are used, 1. In the beginning of any matter. 2. After a Period,
or full point. 3. In the beginning of a verse. 4. In proper names of all sorts,
whether they happen in the beginning, middle, or end. 5. In names of Arts,
Offices or any other word of special note in a sentence, though it be not
proper, but common. 6. In the personal Pronoun I. In other cases the small
letters are to be used.

The letters are divided into Vowels and Consonants.

A Vowel is a letter which makes a full and perfect sound of it self.

Vowels.
There be five Vowels, a e i o u, besides the Greek Vowel y.

Of these coming together are made Diphthongs.

Diphth.
A Diphthong is one sound made of two vowels.

Diphthongs are either proper or improper.

Prop.
Proper, wherein both Vowels are fully sounded.

Of proper Diphthongs there be eight, namely, ai ei oi, au eu ou, ee oo.

Ay ey oy are Diphthongs, and have the same sound with ai ei oi, saving that
these are commonly used in the beginning and middle of a word; those in the
end, as in these examples, air, fair, either, heifer, oister, cloister; but
say, may, whey, prey, joy, annoy.

Aw ew ow are Diphthougs also, and have the same sound with au eu ou, saving
that ow is sounded slat and soft; ou sharp and shrill: and they are all used
indifferently in the beginning or middle of a word; but in the end aw ew ow
only; as, auger, awl, eunuch, ewer, out-gate, owner; so fraud, bawl, lewd,
jewel, cloud, knowledge; but law, saw, brew, chew, know, blow, etc. except thou,
you, adieu, and the words to be reformed, vid. Cap. 5.

Rule.
When any of these two Vowels com together in a word, they make a Diphthong, and
must be sounded together; as in faith, neither, join, aul, eunuch, trout,
seed, food.

Except. 1.
Except in these words, laity, Mosaick-work, deity, Atheist, Stoic, moitie,
doing, re-enter, reedifie, re-extend, re-inform, re-iterate, pre-eminence. Dier.


Exc. 2.
Except likewise, for the most part in proper names throughout the Bible; as, ai
in Laish, Jair, Ephraim, Sepharvaim. ei in Beth-birei, Ceilan, Edrei,
Hakkoreim. oi in Chamois, Lois, Toi, Zeboim. au in Arehelaus, Emmaus,
Nicholaus. eu in Alpheus, Bartimeus, Peulthai. ee in Azreel, Be^rsheba,
Bezaleel. oo in Booz, C^os, add Boots, etc.


Lim.
Yet in these proper names following, some of these two Vowels are sounded
together like Diphthongs; as in Cain, Cainan, Theudas, Reuben, Eustace,
Zaleuchus, Beelzebub.

Diphth. Imp.
Improper Diphthongs are such, wherein one of the Vowels is but little, or not
at all sounded: of which sort there be only three, ea oa ie.

Examples of the two first, are these; earth, wealth, boat, woad. In both which
Diphthongs a is not sounded; yet it serves to draw the syllable long, which
otherwise would be short, as in beast, best; bread, bred; goad, god; coast,
cost; goat, got.

And when either of these two Vowels com together in a word, they are not to
be parted, but sounded together.

Except in beatitude, creator, creation, real, theater.

Except likewise generally all proper names of men, women, cities and
countries; as, ea in Eleaza, Apamea, Cesarea, Gibeah; oa in Abinoam, Bagoas,
Boanerges, Gilboah.

Examples of the Diphthong (ie) are these, wield, shield, field, chief,
kerchief, brief, relief, grief, griev's, reliev's, cavalier, cashier,
enterfier, siege, liege, shriev, Lieutenant, siev, at chiev, priest, friend,
pierce, piece.

In which words (i) is not sounded, yet serves to draw the syllable long: and
this Diphthong (ie) is sounded like (ee) Diphthong as friend, like friend, and
grief, as greef.

These vowels (ie) meeting together in other words whether proper or common,
are usually parted as in Daniel. Ethiel, so in tied, espied, except they happen
in the end of a word as, merry, charity, for then they are sounded together.

Ae oe are Latin, but no English Diphthongs, and therefore the English for
them, do both write and sound the single e, as in equity, Caesar, Egypt,
female, Phoenix, tragedy; of aequitas, Caesar, Aegyptus, foemina, Phoenix,
tragoedia.

Note.
This was general: but now borrowed words of rare use, especially proper names,
begin to resume these Diphthongs, for marks of their original; as, Aeneas,
Aetna, Euboea, oeconomie.

The French have two Triphthongs eau and ieu, as in beau and lieu, but we make
them Diphthongs by changing u vowel into v consonant, either single or dubble,
as, Lieutenant, liew, beawtie.

Consonant.
A consonant is a letter which makes a sound by the help of a vowel.

All letters besides the vowels are called consonants, some whereof are termed
dubble, because they have the force of two consonants, as, z and x y z of d and
s: x of c and s.

To the consonants may be added j v and y when they are set before themselves
or other vowels in the same syllable; as, J in James, Jericho, Jimnah, Joseph,
Judas, V in Valentine, velome, viands, voluptuous, vulgar. Y in Yarmouth,
yearly, yoke.


Here note that j and v being consonants, have a different Character from the
vowels, which in writing is diligently to be observed, as in these Examples,
injoin, jointure, injunction, so valor, venom, vulgar.

Likewise j and y being consonants, differ in sound; as in jet, yet, jew, yew,
jeer, year.

Use of y Con. 1
Being vowels they have the same sound, and y being a Greek vowel, is rightly
used every where in words originally Greek, as Crystal, Polypus, Apocrypha,
Apocalypse. Use of y Con. 2
And common use has allowed it in the end of other English words, insomuch
that i and y are in that place used indifferently, as bounty or bounty.

Use of y Con. 3
Also when two ii com together y has commonly the place of the former, as
burying, saying, denying: and sometimes when e follows, as marryeth, denies.

Sometimes j does so com betwixt two vowels, that it may be taken indifferently
for a vowel or a consonant, as Benai-ah, or Bena-jah, Micaiah, or Micajah,
Jehoi-akim or Jeho-jakim, etc.

Note.
Here is to be noted that some consonants have not always the same sound as c
ch g p s t th. C strong
C before a o oo u is sounded strong like k, as in cat, coat, coot, cut.

C weak.
C before e i y and ee, is sounded weak like s, as in censer, cider, cypres,
exceed.

Chapter
Ch in all pure English words, has a peculiar sound differing from other
languages, both before the five vowels and after.

Before them as in chance, cheap, chine, choke. churl.

After them, as in ache, reach, rich, roch, such.

So the Latins sound Ch as in Charites, Chelys, Chiragra, Chorus, Chus, Chitus.
But generally in all words derived of the Hebrew or Greek, it has the sound of
k, in any part of the word.

Examples hereof in the first syllable before the five vowels. Character,
Chedorlaomer, Chios, Chorazin, Chushite


Examples hereof in the second syllable. Achan, Archelaus, Lachish, Achor,
Malchus.


Examples in the last syllable after the five vowels. Berodach, Melcbisedech,
(...) Antioch, Baruch.


And in all other such like names or words contained in the Bible or elsewhere:
except in these, Rachel, Cherubim, Tychicus, Archbishop, Archduke, Architect,
Arch-enemie, Arch-pirate.

G
G Sometimes has it is own proper sound, sometimes the sound of j consonant.

G hard.
Before a o oo and u it has its proper sound, which is hard, as in gad, god,
good, gug. And generally in English words before the other vowels e and i, as
in get, target, bragget, geld, anger, hanger, conger, linger, ringer, finger,
dagger, bragger, stagger, swagger, beggar, vinegar, hunger, cager, meager,
monger, anger, beggar, geer, gees.

So before i as in begin, biggin, giddie, gift, gig, giglet, gild, gimlet,
Ginnie-hen, gird, girdle, girl, girth, Girton, giv, Gibbon. And in the
Derivatives of both sorts; so in hangs, hanging, longs, longing, belongs,
belonging, stringeth, stringing, swingeth, swinging, of the Primitives ending
in g strong, viz. hang, long, belong, string, swing. Except in these few,
genet, gellie, gemow, gin, gibe gibbet. Except likewise in the deduced wotds of
Primitives ending in g weak, as in, ages of age stages of stage cages of cage
barges of barge arges of large charger of charge twinged of twinge fringed of
fringe verger of verge. forger of forge. urging of urge. purging of purge.
ranger of range. granges of grange. swinged of swinge. plunged of plunge, etc.


G soft.
But before e and i in words derived of the Latin, g is sounded soft like j
consonant, as in Agent, George, gentle, gentilitie, gem, gentile, generositie,
generation, gender, genealogy, genitor, Genesis, Geometry, gesture. So giant,
ginger, clergy, imagine, gypsy, etc. And in the Derivatives of all these.

Phe.
Ph is used only in words derived of the Greek or Hebrew, and has the sound
of F, as in Pharisee, Philosophy, physic, triumph, Pharez, Epitaph.

S
S has two characters, one long s, to be used in the beginning and middle of
words; another short s, which is commonly final, as in sisters, sessions. vid.
Chap. 6. Rule 9.

S between two vowels is always sounded as z, as in easy, bosom, etc. so in
as, was, is, his, phrase, glase, grase, and many more words: also in these
eight following, being Verbs s is sounded as z, viz. to abuse, excuse, use,
muse, refuse, present, leas, greas; but being Nouns, it is sounded weak
according to its property, as an abuse; etc.

Ti.
Ti, before a vowel sounds si, as in Egyptian, patience, nation, etc.

Exc. 1.
Except where it follows s or x, as in question, combustion, bestial, mixtion.

Exc. 2.
Or in the deduced, of words in ti, such as are, crafty, lofty, hearty, haughty,
naughty, mighty, weighty, dainty, scanty, pity, etc. as, craftier, loftier,
weightiest, pittieth, daintier, daintiest, etc.

Th.
Th, is commonly sounded with a brisk air like the Greek Theta, and sometime
with a more heavy and flat sound.

This sound was anciently written with the Aspirat letter d.
In these words following, it has a flat sound, that, the, them, then, thence,
their, there, these, this, thine, thou, though, thus, fatham, father, furthest,
thither, worthy, brothel, and generally in words of more then one syllable
ending in there, thed, theth, thest, thing.

In all other words, it has a brisk air like the sound of a Greek Theta, as in
thank, theft, third, thong, thumb.

CHAP. 2. Of Syllables and the Rules to divide them.
OF Vowels and Consonants are made Syllables.

A syllable is the comprehension of one consonant or more with a vowel,
pronounced with one breath, as, if, the, stif, black, French, Knights, strength.

Any of the five vowels make a perfect sound alone, and may be reckoned as a
syllable, as in a-bate, e-very, i-vie, o-pinion, u-surie.

So most of the Diphthongs as au-ger, Eu-stace, ow, ai-der, ei-ther, oi-ster,
ea-ten, oa-ten-meal.

Note.
This particle es in the end of a word, sometimes is swallowed up in the sound of
the precedent syllable: sometimes it make's a syllable of it self, and such
words so ending are commonly either Nouns of the plural Number, or Verbs of the
third person singular.

In these following es is swallowed up.

Nouns. Verbs. A hide hides he hide's himself. A drake drakes he bake's
bread. A bile biles he pile's up wood. A name names he name's me. A bone
bones he mone's and weeps. A rope ropes he cope's with. A wire wires he
tire's all men. A brute brutes he sute's well with it. A way ways he
staie's for me. An eye eyes he lie's in wait. A virtue virtues he argue's
well.

In these it makes a Syllable.

A grace graces he place's all things. A Church Churches he lurche's Conies.
A cage cages he wage's war. An hedge hedges he judge's none. A nose noses he
pose's scholars. A fish fishes he refreshe's himself. A witness witnesses he
oppresse's the poor. A box boxes he foxe's his guests. A size sizes he
freeze's for cold.

So also in all proper names as Maccha-bes, Phares, Mo-ses, etc. except James,
and in some common as aloes; Jubiles, Epitomes.

Rules 5.
There be five rules for the dividing or spelling of any word, whereof the
first is this:

Rule 1.
1. If two Vowels com together in a word, both fully sounded, and no Diphthong,
they must be divided; as in qui-et, mu-tu-al, tri-umph, coeternal, coequal.

Rule 2.
2. If the same Consonant be dubbled in the middle of a word, they must be
divided; as in Abba, accord, adder, affect, aggravate, etc.

Except such Consonants as are needlessly dubbled in words of the plural
number; as in crabbes, rods, cliffes, nagges, crummes, gunnes, croppes,
curres; for crabs, rods, cliffs, nags, crumbs, guns, crops, curs, cuts, and in
all such like words; which needless dubbling of the Consonant, either in the
plural or singular number, is in our writing altogether to be omitted: for it
is in vain to write a word with many letters, when it may be written with few.

Lim. 1.
But s is sometimes necessarily dubbled; namely, when the Vowel preceding fitteth
hard upon it; otherwise not; as in these examples does appear. Princes a
Princess Princesses Purchase an ass asses Purpose a cross crosses Needles
needless Brews Brewess fines fine-ness. leanes lean-ness. promise bliss. his
hiss. excuse discuss.

Lim. 2.
So l is commonly dubbled after a single Vowel in the end of a word, as in wall,
well, still, roll, full; but not after a Diphthong, as in mail, foil, etc.

Lim. 3.
Likewise I find in some very good Autors r doubled in the end of a word, where
the sound rests long upon it, as in abhor, deterr, averr.

Lim. 4.
Lastly the Consonant is dubbled in these words folllowing; Anne, a can, Inn,
add, pill'd, pinned, demurred, enterre, to make a difference from words of the
like sound; as, an, can in, ad, pil'd, pined, immured, enter. But in all other
words, a single Consonant is sufficient in the end.

Rule 3.
One Consonant between two Vowels, is joined to the later; as in a-vail,
ba-boun, a-ma-zed, animaie, de-li-ver.

Exc. 4.
There be four Exceptions from this rule.

1. Of certain words ending in es. 2. Of compounded words, 3. Of derivative
words. 4. Of words wherein x is contained.
Exc. 1.
There be certain words of the plural number ending in es, which termination is
swallowed up in the sound of the precedent syllable, as before was showed,
which follow not this rule; as, hides, drakes, biles, names, bones, ropes,
wires, brutes: so in all other Nouns and Verbs of like sort and ending.

Exc. 2.
A Compounded word is made of two simple words signifying something, wherein
every simple word must retein its own letters, and the consonant go with its
part; as, tradesman not tra-des-man. save-gard not sa-ve-gard. where-fore not
whe-re-fore. henceforth not henceforth.


an-other not a-no-ther. un-arm'd not u-narm'd. un-even not u-neven.
dis-appoint not di-sappoint.


Exc. 3.
A Derivative word is when the last part of a word is an addition only to the
Primitive, and signifie's nothing of it self, wherein the Primitive must be
sounded by it self, and the Addition by it self; as, hope-less, lame-ness,
friend-ly, entice-ment.

Other Derivatives, whose Addition begins with a Vowel, commonly follow the
general rule aforegoing, touching Primitives; And if the Primitive also end in
e, then e is syncopated; as in, en-ti-cing of en-tice. en-di-ting of en-dite.
re-pi-neth of re-pine. re-qui-reth of re-quire. en-qui-reth of en-quire.
a-ba-teth of a-bate.


Exc. 4.
X in any word must be joined to the Vowel going before it, contrary to the
general rule; as in Ox-en, ex-ercise: the reason is, because x has the sound of
two Consonants, c s, which cannot begin a syllable.

Rule 4.
Two Consonants, which may be joined in the beginning of a word, are not to be
separated in the middle; as, a-gree, be-stow, re-frain, re-store.

The two Consonants that may begin a word are thirty.

Bl as in blame Br as in bread Ch as in chaf Cl as in cloud Cr as in creep Dr
as in draw Dw as in dwell Fl as in flame Fr as in fret Gl as in glass Gn as in
gnat Gr as in grace Kn as in know Pl as in play Pr as in prais Sc as in scant
Sh as in shall Sk as in skin Sp as in speed St as in stand Sl as in stow Sm as
in smart Sn as in Snuf Sq as in squib Sw as in sway Th as in that Tr as in trap
Tw as in twain Wh as in when Wr as in wroth
Other Consonants are divided, as in god-ly, wis-dom, wil-der-ness.

Rule 5.
Three Consonants that may be joined in the beginning of a word, may not be
separated in the middle; as in con-strain, en-thral, destruction.

The three Consonants that may begin a word are nine.

Sch as in school Scr as in scraps Shr as in shrink Skr as in skrew Spl as in
split Spr as in spring Str as in stroke Thr as in thrall Thw as in thwart
Other Consonants are divided, as in im-ploy, king-dom.

Exc.
From these two last rules there is this Exception. In compounded words each
simple word must retein its own letters, as in these examples, mis-take not
mi-stake mis-like not mi-slike mis-lead not mi-slead dis-lodg not di-slodg
dis-close not di-sclose dis-miss not di-smiss


So trans-pose, not tra-nspose, nor tran-spose; cramp-ring, not cra-mpring, nor
cram-pring.

If these rules, for the dividing and spelling of words, seem too many, and too
intricate; take this one general rule in stead of them all.


Syllables are so to be divided in spelling, as they are in speaking: and so
consequently in writing at the line's end; as in all the forecited examples
may appear.

Cap. 3. Of e final, and the uses thereof.
Rule
E Single, in the end of a word, is never sounded.

Exc. 1.
Except, first in these Monosyllables, the me be he ye we.

Exc. 2.
Secondly in some outlandish word; as Fesse, Zanche, Conge, and the like.

Exc. 3.
Thirdly in words derived of the Hebrew and Greek, as Jesse, jubilee, Mamre,
Ninive, Abilene, Candace, Cloe, Daphne, Gethsemane, Penelope, Epitome, and all
words of the like sort, except Eusiace, Bernice.

In other words wherein e final is not sounded,E silent.
there be diverse reasons and uses thereof.

Use 1.
The first and chiefest is to draw the syllable long, which otherwise without
it, must be sounded short, as in these examples following may be seen.

To curs and ban, is children's bane. He lanced my bile with the point of his
bil. Good boy let me bite of thine apple one bit. At Spring, I Will bathe my self
in a bath. If I list I can break your pate with my cane. A scolding dame duck't
in a Mill- dam. Meat that is faught far is Ladies fare. A branch of fir good for
the fire. The Jailour will giv nothing but a cold give. To have one hop I am
out of hope. With apples this lad I Will presently lade. He says he will live
as long as he can see one alive. Some say a Cat liv's full out nine lives. Bad
usage has made many a man mad. Command your man to cut my horse mane. It Is full
two mile to the next mill. Of debt, I will quit, and discharge you quite. That
the way we may rid, apace let us ride. The poor will scrape up every scrap.
Some men will stare all night on a Star. I got a tun of wine for the tune of a
song. Oft-times one twin about the other does twine. A pint of good wine you
do not win. A scratch with a whin, will make a boy whine. To him I will write
about sending a writ.
As in the examples before, e after one consonant, draw's the syllable long: so
after two diverse consonants, it sometime effects the same, as in find, mind,
wind, rind, bind, waste, paste, taste, writhe, tithe, child; which
otherwise should be pronounced short.

But these words following have a privilege and custom to be pronounced long
without e in the end, as bold, cold, told, scold, bolt, colt, dolt, most,
ghost, both, Ruth: but it were better for learner and teacher, if e were
written after them.

Use 2.
The second use of e final not sounded, is to change the sound of these two
letters, e, g, First it softneth the sound of c, as in ace, place, lice, truce,
justice; whereas otherwise it sounds strong like k, as in ac-cept ac-count;
and not only alone, but joined with another consonant, as in chance, scarce,
etc.

Further, it softneth the sound of g, which otherwise would be strong, as ag,
age, stag, stage, cag, cage, hug, huge, etc. also in range, grange, strange,
twinge, swinge, fringe, plunge; whereas the like words without e, have a hard
sound, as rang, swang, twang, long, string, swing.

Note.
Note, that if g be hard with a long vowel, ue is added, as plague, rogue,
Prague, the Hague, catalogue, decalogue, prologue, epilogue, dialogue,
Synagogue, collogue, league, prorogue, tongue.

But if it be soft with a short vowel, it has d prefixed, as badg, ledg,
bridge, lodge, judge.

Use 3.
The third use of e final, is for beauty (as they say) rather then necessity
after i, o, and u; as in charity, mercy, virtue, argue, toe, foe, etc.

But here it alters not the sound at all, except that after i, it makes it
to sound more gently like the diphthong ee as charity, like charitee.

If e sinal be used in any word, without any of the foresaid reasons, it is
superfluous and might better be omitted.

CHAP. 4. Of diverse other Letters not sounded, and the reason thereof.
a
A is not sounded in Jaacob, Isaac, Caiaphas, Canaanite, Sabbath, Pharaob,
being originally Hebrew.

e
e, In George, deduced of Georgius.

i
i, In adieu, juice, pursuit, bruit, fruit, suit, bruis, being originally
French: yet in the five last it draw's the syllable long.

o
o, Is not sounded in people, Yeoman, jeopardie, Feoffee.

u
u, Is ever put after q, with another vowel, as in, quaf, queen, quick, quilt,
etc. which is here judged superfluous and fit to be omitted, for that q, has
the sound of cu.

u, Is also sometime added after g, with another vowel, yet never sounded, as in
guide, guest, guile, etc. to strengthen it that it may sound hard, so in
plague, etc. vid. page 18.

u, Is not sounded in buy, build, conduit, circuit.

b
b, In lamb, climb, kemb, comb, tomb, womb, thumb, debt, debtor, doubt,
bdellium; which is superfluous, except in the four last.

k
k, Is not sounded in back, deck, sick, rock, suck, etc. and the Latins make
the same sound with c alone, as lac, nec, dic, hoc, duc. And many of our best
Autors begin to write words deduced of the Latin, with c alone, as, public,
catholic, rhetoric..

g
g, Is not sounded in sign, resign, assign, design; reign, arraign, sovereign,
disdeign, phlegm.

h
h, In Christ, Christopher, Thomas, Crystal, Chrysostom, Chronicle,
Chronographie, chronology, ghost, John, scholar, authority, Rhene, Rhenish,
Rhetoric, schedule, schism.

n
n Is not pronounced in solemn, hymn, autumn, column, condemn, yet it shows
from whence they are deduced.

s
s is not sounded in Isle.

o
o is not sounded in righteous, glorious, frivolous, victorious, nor in any
English word of the like writing.

o
u likewise is not sounded in labor, favor, honor, nor in any words of the
like ending, being all derived of Latin words ending in or and now are so
written by the best Autors.


Two reasons there be (besides what was said before) of this writing some
letters not sounded.

Reas. 1.
One is to show the Idiom of our English tongue, as when we write virtuous and
pronounce virtuus.

Reas. 2.
Another is to show the derivation of a word, as b in debt, doubt, g in sign,
reign. s in Isle, p. in psalm; because they com of debitum, dubium, signum,
regnum, insula, psalmus; and where there is no reason for writing a letter not
sounded, it is superfluous and to be omitted.

Cap. 5. Of words sounded otherwise then they are written.
Sort. 1.
1. We write first, third, bird, dear, ear, hear, heard. Which vulgarly are
sounded furst, thurd, burd, deer, eer, here, hard. Here this sound must be
reformed, and made agreeable to the writing.

Sort. 2.
2. We write he, be, me, ye, we, even, evil, devil, with e single: but sound
them as written with ee Diphthong thus, he, be, me, ye, we, eeven, eevill,
deevil: so always in the prepositive particle be as in begin, behold, beseech,
it is written with e single, but sounded like ee Diphthong.

Sort. 3.
3. We write o single in these words following; but after the French manner
sound it as oo Diphthong or u, afford is pronounced afford monday is
pronounced moonday force is pronounced foerce wort is pronounced woort wort bie
is pronounced worthy mother is pronounced moother brother is pronounced
broother smother is pronounced smoother some is pronounced soom com is
pronounced coom dom is pronounced doom don is pronounced done do is pronounced
do do is pronounced dooest does is pronounced does womb is pronounced
woomb woman is pronounced wooman wonder is pronounced wonder wont is
pronounced wont son is pronounced soon month is pronounced moonth honey is
pronounced hoonie money is pronounced moonie moved is pronounced moved to is
pronounced too two is pronounced two word is pronounced word sword is
pronounced sword hord is pronounced hoord worm is pronounced woorm form is
pronounced foorm work is pronounced woork love is pronounced loove glove is
pronounced gloove move is pronounced moove wors is pronounced woors


Sort 4.
4. We write ou diphthong in these words following, but after the French manner
sound it as oo diphthong, or u; as for flood, courage, flourish, would, could,
should, we pronounce, blood, flood, coorage, floorish, woold, coold, shoold.
So scourge, nourish, young, youth, double, trouble, we pronounce, scurge,
nurrish, yung, yuth, dubble, trubble.

In all which, whether our Writing should be reformed, and made agreeable to
the sound, I leav to the judgment of the Learned.

Sort 5.
5 We write a single before l, but pronounce it as au diphthong in all these
words following; as, all we pronounce aul ball we pronounce baul call we
pronounce caul fall we pronounce faul gall we pronounce gaul hall we
pronounce haul stall we pronounce staul tall we pronounce taul wall we
pronounce waul shall we pronounce shaul admiral we pronounce admiraul several
we pronounce severaul also we pronounce aulso palsy we pronounce paulsie
falls we pronounce fauls altar we pronounce altar alter we pronounce altar
halter we pronounce haulter salt we pronounce sault malt we pronounce malt
bald we pronounce bauld scald we pronounce scauld
calf we pronounce cauf half we pronounce hauf stalk we pronounce stauk salv
we pronounce sauv calvs we pronounce cauvs halvs we pronounce hauvs walk we
pronounce waulk talk we pronounce tauk balk we pronounce bauk chalk we
pronounce chauk calkin we pronounce caukin falcon we pronounce faucon falchon
we pronounce fauchon folk we pronounce fouk alms we pronounce aums almond
we pronounce aumond balm we pronounce baum calm we pronounce caum palm we
pronounce paum psalm we pronounce psaum shalm we pronounce shaum malmsey we
pronounce maumsey qualm we pronounce quaum


Note.
In the two last columns of which words, l is swallowed up.

And this sound remains in the Compounds and derivatives of these words; as
in Almighty, recall, downfall, almsdeeds, walking, talking, calmest,
palmestrie, talness, falls, etc.

Here our Writing need not be altered, because a before l being generally so
sounded, it may pass for an Idiom of the English-tongue.

Exc.
Except that in these few words following it has a single sound; as in Ale,
gale, gallant, scale, scaled, shale, wale, wallet, mallet, fallow, hallow.

Sort 6.
gh is written in many words, but little sounded; in these following it is
sounded like f; and the diphthong in them loses one of the vowels: as for
laugh, cough, tough, enough, we commonly say, laf, cof, tuf, enuf: but in
these, howsoever they be pronounced, yet the writing is true, and to be
continued.

Sort 7.
We write these words following with ow, but sound them sharp, as ou in thou;
namely, mow, now, cow, sow, how, bow, vowel, flower, power, fowl, crown: again,
on the other side we write some with ou, and sound them flat; as ow in know;
viz. four, soul, ought, drought, trough, etc. But for writing ou and ow this is
the rule, if reason may take place of corrupt custom.

Whenever the sound is soft and flat, in the beginning, middle, or end of a
word, ow is to be used: but where it is sharp and shrill, ou; as, My father's
bow I want strength to bou. The mowers will mow to fill the great mou. Some peace
I Will sow to sat the sou. Hou can I pare the ground without a how.


Here by this means the words are distinguished, which before, under one and
the same manner of writing, had a dubble sound.

Chap. 6. Of certain Rules for the better reading and writing of some words.
Rules for Reading.
Rule 1.
THese Dissyllables following, being both Nouns and Verbs, are written after the
same manner, and distinguished in sound by the Accent only: the Verbs having
it in the last, the Nouns in the fore-last syllable; as, If there be no
accent, how shall he accent. If my master be absent, my self I Will absent.
I Will offer abuse, if me you abuse. If he will follow my advice, my brother I Will
advise. To Newcastle with a Convoy, the Captain did us convoy, or convey. Of
simples is made a compound, by him, that can compound. Hence every good collect
I will quickly collect. This make's a good Convert from naught to convert. To
make up our consort, we want a consort. He should live in a desert if he had
his desert. Without a contract, two cannot contract. Some witty devise, I Am
about to devise. Much harm does envy, therefore do not envy. With some pretty
excuse, my self I Will excuse. The wicked man's incens, the Lord does incens.
Against such an object, I have nothing to object. The premiss, or premises,
forget not to premise. With some rich present, my Lord I Will present. Your gift
is refuse, therefore it I Will refuse. He is a rebel, against his Lord to rebel.
Take heed of a relaps, it is dangerous to relaps.


With very great torment, they did him torment So these two Trissyllables.

With a very great overthrow, his enemies he did overthrow. With some small
recompens, I will him recompens.
Rule 2.
These Monosyllables following, being both Nouns and Verbs, are written after
the same manner, and distinguished in sound by the Accent only, the Nouns with
a Grave, the Verbs with an Acute Accent, as, The great town- close, on every
side close. Or givs.
The Jailor naught gives, but cold iron gives. I Will consult with my muse, and no
longer muse. Believ me in sooth, I love not to sooth. Get quickly out of house,
and the cattle house. If he take any use, his money I Will not use. Or livs.
A Cat lives nine lives, but a woman nine times nine.


Rule 3.
These words following, being marked with the note of Apostrophus, are
pronounced long, as, Advised, fined, immured, tuned, scaled, admired, fired,
occupi'd, tired, undermined, chased, hired, pined, Tam's, bored, lined,
perjured, throughpac'd, cased, mir'd, reposed, tried, espied, manured, stored,
sowed, etc.


These three, pinned, pill'd, demurred, are written with a dubble consonant,
and sound short, to make a difference from pined, pil'd, immured, which are
long.

Rules for true Writing.
Rule 1.
A Short syllable in the middle, dubbleth the consonant, as in Abbot, accord,
adder,chaffinch, follow, etc.

Exc. 1.
But k is dubbled by c, being a letter of the same force, as packet, not pakket.

Exc. 2
G soft and ch are never dubbled, but to shorten the syllable. d before g, and
t before ch serves in stead of a dubble consonant, as, bodger, patcheth.

Rule 2.
K as well in force as in form, is like the Greek Kappa, which has one and the
same sound before all the Vowels. But because c has the force of k before a,
o, oo, and ou, and before l and r; therefore the use of k is only before the
other Vowels, and before n, as in key, keep, kill, knit, knight. Wherefore we
should write, (...).
Calendar, Catherine, Catholic; not Calendar, Katherine, Katbolick, though the
two last of these com of Greek words written with Kappa.

Rule 3.
Sce sci, ce ci, se si, are of like sound, and therefore in writing, are often
mistaken the one for the other; for preventing whereof in the beginning of a
word, Note, that very few words begin with sce sci, as these only, Scepter,
science, sciatica; to which may be added, schedule, schism, of the like sound.

And because most of the other words of this sound are begun with s, I will here
set down all those that begin with c, as, Ceas, celebrate, celeritie,
celestial, cell, cellar, cement, censer, censour, censure, center, centurion,
ceremony, certain, certify ceruse, cess, cestern, cich, cider, cinque,
cinnamon, cipher, circle, circuit, citron, cite, city, cittern, civet, civil,
circumstance, cymbal, cypers, cypress, and in all the Derivatives and Compounds
of these. The rest of this sound begin with s, as sea, senate, sick, sigh; etc.

Rule 4.
These syllables si, ti, before on, in the end of a word, are of like sound,
which kind of words are all originally Latin Verbals, derived of the Supine;
which if it end in tum we write tion; if in sum, sion, as in these examples.

Ambition of Ambitum Apparition of Apparitum Attention of Attentum Benediction
of Benedictum Declamation of Declamatum
Allusion of Allusum Apprehension of Apprehensum Aversion of Aversum Confession
of Confessum Effusion of Effusum
Rule 5.
Words ending in ance, ence, ince, once, unce, ancie, encie, are usually written
with c, not s, as in Countenance, prudence, quince, sconce, continency; not
countenans, prudens, quins, scons, ouns, vigilansie, c^ntinensie.

Exc. 1.
Except in the Compounds with the Preposition trans, as translate, translate,
etc.

Except likewise one Verbal in ens, as sens.

Rule 6.
Words ending in the sound ace, are for the most part written with c not s, as
in face, grace, ace, mace, pace, space, Eustace; except in case, base, chase,
or when s is sounded like z, as in amase or amaze.

Rule 7.
Some few English words are derived of Latin ending in licus or liquus: those
are written with lick, these with lique, as public of publicus, catholic of
catholicus, etc. But oblique of obliquus, relic of reliquus, antique of
antiquus: And fabrique, traffic of the French.

Rule 8.
These words following are commonly spoken shorter, then originally they are
written; as, Aumner for Almoner Vittels for Victuals Surgeon for Surgeon
Potecarie for Apothecarie Ill for Evil.


Spittle for Hospital. Medcine for Medicine. Purtenances for Appurtenances.
Sumner for Summoner. Venturer for Adventurer.


So, escape for escape special for especial spy for epsy squire for esquire
stablish for establish State for estate.


to espouse Verbs. to estrange spouse Nouns. strange

sample for example. scuse for excuse.


Whereas page 8 it was taught, that the long s is to be used in the beginning
and middle of a word, and the short s in the end; Rule 9.
Note here, that the long s is to be used even in the end of those words, that
are any ways alterable; viz. Nouns singular into plural, or Verbs into another
person, as verse verses, cause causes: so, disburs disbursest, disburseth, etc.

Rule 10.
When you are to write any long hard word, mark how many sounds or syllables it
has, as if you were to write disdainfulness or universalitie or the like,
before you write it, say thus to your self, dis-dain-ful-ness,
u-ni-ver-sa-li-tie, and you shall hardly miss in writing thereof.

Rule 11.
Lastly, whereas there be many words, wherein the best Dictionaries and Autors
differ more or less in writing of them; it were much to be wished, that they
were all reduced to an uniformitie, which in the learned languages (as a
special grace and ornament) is precisely observed: for so certain is the
Orthographie of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, that all nations (though never
so far distant in place and different in speech) do write them alike. Whereas
many words in our language are written diversely, even at home, whereof these
following be some.

Aier air, airi eri, awl aul, alley allie, bauble babble, licorish licourise,
battle battle, conie cunnie, burrow beri, bottle bottel, sepulker sepulcher,
accessarie accessorie, frumentie, furmentie, corpse cors, key kay, cess sess,
cellar sellar, col-wort cole-wort, bittor bittern, acorn akorn, devil divil,
jail gaol, jerk yerk, dearling darling, bankerout bankerupt, etc.
Cap. 7. Hitherto of Letters, Syllables, and Words, as touching their Sound,
and manner of Writing; now I shall speak of Words as they are parts of the
English Speech.
IN the English tongue (like as in the Latin) there be eight parts: Noun,
Pronoun, Verb, Participle; Adverb, Conjunction, Preposition, Interjection.

Of a Noun.
A Noun is a word that signifie's a person or thing, as an author, a book,
learned, gilded.

It is either a Substantive, or an Adjective.

A Substantive is a word that stands by it self in signification, and
signifie's the person, or thing it self, as an Author, a Book.

An Adjective is a word that signifi's a quality belonging to some Substantive,
as learned, gilded.

A Substantive commonly has the Article a or the before it, as a book, the
book.

n needs not where h is sounded, as a horse, a hideous beast.
But if it begin with a Vowel, or h, a takes n to it; as an Author, an honor.

Also a agrees only to the singular, the to both numbers, the man, the men.

An Adjective cannot have a or the before him without a Substantive, as, A good
man, the wise man, the godly, the wicked; understand men.

A Substantive is either Proper or Common.

A Substantive Proper, is a name proper to the person or thing that it
betokens, as Henry, England, Gabriel.

A Substantive Common, is a name common to all things of the same kind, as a
man, a land, an angel.

Numbers.
NUmbers be two, the Singular and the Plural.

The Singular Number speaks but of one, as an author, a book.

The Plural Number speaks of more then one, as Autors, books.

Rule.
The Plural Number is made of the Singular generally, by adding to it s, as web
webs, robe robes, rod rods, hide hides, tree trees, key keys, fly flies, toe
toes, virtue virtues, book books, buck bucks, bell bells, ram rams, game games,
bone bones, bar bars, seal seals, care cares, siev sievs, dove doves, law laws,
ew ews, bow bows, bough boughs, lath laths, moth moths, mill mills, mile miles,
tun tuns, tune tunes, cur curs, cure cures, gag gags, gage gages, ache aches,
place places, close closes, whereof the four last encreas a syllable.

Except. 1.
But if the singular number end in ch, tch, dg, s, sh, ss, or x, the plural is
made by adding es, which increases a syllable, as Church churches, match
matches, hedge hedges, horse horses, fish fishes, cross crosses, witness
witnesses, box boxes.

Except. 2.
These singulars following being plurals, change f into v, as beef beevs, calf
calvs, knife knives, life lives, wife wives, loaf loavs, leaf leaves, sheaf
sheavs, shelf shelvs, Sherif Sherives, staf staves, thief thieves, turf turvs,
wolf wolvs.

Exc. 3.
These singulars are made plurals, by adding en; as, ox oxen, chick chicken,
brother brethren contracted into brethren, child, r put between, children, man
mannen contracted into men, house housen, hose hosen; to which may be added
mous mice, lous lice, die dice, or sou cou.
sow swine, cow kine, penny pence, goos gees, tooth teeth, foot feet. These
two sheep and mile are both singular and plural; as, one sheep, ten sheep; one
mile, twenty mile or miles.

Cases.
There be six cases in either number in the Latin tongue: The Nominative, the
Genitive, the Dative, the Accusative, the Vocative, and the Ablative.

Note.
But in the English Tongue there is no variation of Nouns by Cases, but only by
Number as above, and signs of the cases as follows: Singularly, Plurally, N.
a book, books, G. of a book, of books, D. to a book, to books, A. the book, the
books, V. o book, o books, Ab. in a book. in books.

Singularly, Plurally, N. an author, autors, G. of an author, of autors, D. to an
author, to autors, A. the author, the autors, V. o author, o autors, Ab. in an
author. in autors.

An Example of a Substantive and Adjective. Singularly, Plurally, N. a learned
author, learned autors, G. of a learned author, of learned autors* D. to a
learned author, to learned autors, A. the learned author, the learned autors, V.
o learned author, o learned autors, Ab. in a learned author. in learned autors.

Note 1.
Note that a is not always a sign of the Nominative case, or the of the
Accusative, but that usually it is so, and there is no better way to
distinguish them in declining.

Note 2.
Note also, that it is an Idiom of the English tongue to set the Genitive case
before the Substantive that governs it; as, My father's house. i. the house of
my father. My Master's son. i. The son of my Master. And it is the same in both
Numbers with the Nominative plural: except the Nominative plural end in n: for
then the Genitive plural is made by adding s to n; as, Children's bread i. the
bread of children: except also, when the plural has changed some letter of the
singular; as, a knif's edg, knive's edges.

Note 3.
Note lastly, that an Adjective is not varied at all, either in number or case.

Genders.
GEnders of Nouns in Latin be seven; but the consideration of them in English
is useless; but only to observe, that some words do signify Males; some females;
and some neither; and that of the first we must say he; of the second she; of
the third it: as,

Esau could not obtain his father's blessing: though he sought it with tears.

Jezabel was a wicked woman; for she slew the Lords Prophets.

An Idol is no God; for it is made with hands.

In the plural number they serves for all genders; as, They, that is, Esau,
Jezabel, and the Idol were all naught.

Comparison of Adjectives.
COmparison belongs to Adjectives, whose signification may be increased or
decreased.

There be three degrees of comparison, the Positive, the Comparative, and the
Superlative.

The Positive sets down the quality absolutely; as, hard.

The Comparative raises the signification of the Positive in comparison of some
other; as, harder.

The Superlative exceeds his Positive in the highest degree; as, hardest, or,
most hard.

The Comparative is formed of the Positive, by putting to er, and explained by
more.

The Superlative by putting to est, and explained by most; as, hard, harder or
more hard, hardest or most hard. soft, softer or more soft, softest or most
soft. high, higher, highest. low, lower, lowest.


Irregular comparison.
From these general rules are excepted these that follow. good, better, best.
ill, bad, naught wors worst. many, more or more, most. little, less, least.
nigh, nigher, nighest or next. near, nearer, nearest. far, farther or farther,
fardest or farthest. So fur, further or further, furdest or furthest. inner,
innermost and inmost. outer, outermost and outmost. utter, uttermost and
utmost. upper, uppermost, and upmost. under, undermost. nether, nethermost.
former, foremost and first. hinder, hindermost and hindmost.
Where those that end in er are positives (not comparatives derived of Adverbs
in, out, up, under, beneath, behind: except former which is comparative, whose
positive fore of before is found only in composition as the foreman, a
forehors, the forehead, but commonly pronounced short forman, etc.

Besides this way of increasing the signification of the Positive by the
Comparative and Superlative degrees; there is another way of decreasing it by
the Diminutive and Privative degrees.

The Diminutive decreaseth the signification of his Positive in part, in part
reteining it.

The Privative decreaseth it altogether.

Diminutive.
The Diminutive is formed of his Positive by putting to ish, and explained by
somewhat or a little; as of, white whitish, that is somewhat white, or a little
white: so of black blackish, sweet sweetish, sour sowrish, etc.

Privative.
The Privative is formed of his Positive by putting to un, and explained by not
or no whit; as of godly, is formed ungodly, that is not godly, or no whit
godly: so wise unwise, thriftie unthriftie, happy unhappie, etc. Likewise in
compounded with Adjectives derived of the Latin has the same sens with un; as
of temperate intemperate; that is, not temperate, or no whit temperate: so
impenitent, inexcusable, immortal, etc.

Note.
Note here, that many Positives have neither of these decreasing degrees formed
of them, by the particles ish or un: as glad, bold, nimble, etc. and sew do
usually admit both, as pale palish, but not unpale: bitter bitterish, but not
unbitter: so true untrue, but not truish: just unjust, but not justish.

Of a Pronoun.
A Pronoun is a part of Speech much like to a Noun, and always spoken of a Noun.

A Pronoun is of three sorts,
1 Personal, 2 Demonstrative, 3 Relative.
Personals are three; I, Thou, He, which are varied with number and case, as
follows, Singularly, Plurally, N. I. We. G. of me. of us. D. to me. to us.
A. toward me. toward us. V. is wanting. is wanting. A. from me. from us.
Singularly, Plurally, N. Thou. Ye. G. of thee. of you. D. to thee. to you. A.
toward thee. toward you. V. o thou. o ye. A. from thee. from you. N. G. D.
A. Ab. Sing. He. of him. to him. by him. with him. She. her. her. her. her.
It. it. it. it. it. Plur. they of them to them by them with them.

Note.
The Genitive case of the possessor is supplied by the Possessive; as, for the
life of thee, thy life, so my house, his land.

Possessives.
Of these three Personals are derived Possessives, which (like other Adjectives)
have no variation either in number or case.

Sing. 1 my Plur. our Sing. 2 thy Plur. your. Sing 3. his Plur their. her its.

For my and thy are used mine and thine; and to those that end in r is added s,
when they are put without Substantives; as, whose horse is this? it is mine, not
thine: it is hers or ours, not yours nor theirs.

Also mine and thine may be used before a Vowel, as my or mine arm, thy or
thine arrow.

Compounds.
These Personals and Possessives are sometime compounded with self.

1 Sing. my self Plur. our selves. I my self we our selves. my own self. our own
selves. 2 Sing. thy self Plur. your selves. thou thy self you your selves. thine
own self. your own selves. 3 Sing. him self Plur. themselves. her self it self
he himself Plur. they themselves. she herself his own self Plur. their own
selves. her own self its own self

2 Demonstratives.
Pronouns Demonstratives are three.

Sing. this Plur. these that those the same. the same.

The last may be compounded with self, as the self same. the other two with
same or self-same. as this same, this self same, that same, that self same
thing; these same, these self same, those same, those self same things.

Note.
When this and that are referred to two preceding Substantives: this is referred
to the last and nearest, that to the first and furthest off; as, Drunk'ness and
Love are like: for both do blind, The eyes of the body that, this of the
mind.

3. Relatives.
Relatives are likewise three, who, which, and that.

Who, is referred only to Persons (men and spirits.) which, and that,
indifferently to any thing: as, the man, which spoke to me; the man, that
spoke to me: the horse, which I saw; the horse, that I saw.

Who, is varied thus, Who, of whom, to whom, toward whom, from whom: hence
also the Possessive whose; as, Whose book is this?

Which and that are not varied: And these all are used in both numbers.

That sometime imports as much as that which; as, I gave you, that you ask;
for I gave you, that which you ask. And so is what used; as, I gave you, what
you ask: hear, what I say.

Where, with certain Prepositions following it; as, (about, at, by, in, of,
unto, with.) is put for which, with the same going before it; as, wherein for
in which: And so may here and there be used for this and that; as, herewith,
therewith, for with this, with that.

Interog.
Who, which, and what are also Interrogatives; as, Who comes? which is the
way? what do you say?

Of a Verb.
A Verb betokens the doing, suffering, or being of a thing with difference
of time.

There be three kinds of Verbs, Active, Passive, and Neuter.

A Verb Active betokens doing; as, I love.

A Verb Passive betokens suffering; as, I am loved.

A Verb Neuter betokens Being; as, I am.

Moods.
Moods 4.
There are four Moods, or Manner of signifyings in Verbs.

The Indicative, the Imperative, the Potential, and the Insinitive.

The Indicative declares; as, Thou love: or else demands, or doubts; as,
Do thou love?

The Imperative commands, entreats, exhorts, or permits; as, Love
thou, or let him love.

The Potential mood signifies a power, duty, or desire, and has one of these
signs, may, can, might, would, should; as, I may love.

The Infinitive mood follows another Verb, or an Adjective, and commonly has
this sign to; as, I desire to learn. Worthy to be praised.

Tenses.
Tenses.
There are five Tenses, or distinctions of time; the Present tens, the
Preter-imperfect tens, the Preterperfect tens, the preterpluperfect tens, and
the Future tens.

The Present tens speaks of the time that now is; as, I love or do love.

The Preterimperfect tens speaks of the time not perfectly past; as, I loved,
or did love.

The Preterperfect tens speaks of the time more then perfectly past; as, I
had loved.

The Future tens speaks of the time to com with these signs shall or will;
as, I shall or will love.

Signs of these five tenses in the Active voice be, Do, did, have, had, shall
or will.

Signs of the Passive voice be, Am, was, have been, had been, shall or will
be.


Note.
These signs of the five tenses in both voices, as likewise the signs of the
Potential mood, when they are alone, be perfect verbs themselve; as are in
Latin, ago, habeo, volo, debeo, sum, possum.

Persons.
Persons.
In Verbs there are three persons singular, and three persons plural, answering
to the persons of the Pronouns, I, thou, he, Sing. we, ye, they, Plur.

Active.
A Verb Active with his Moods, Tenses, Persons.

Indicative mood.
Tens Present. I love or do love, plur. we love or do love. Thou love or
do love, ye love or do love. He loves or does love, they love or do
love. Imperf. I loved or did love, plur we loved or did love. Thou lovedst or
did love, ye loved or did love. He loved or did love, they loved or did
love. Perfect. I have loved, plur. we have loved. Thou have loved, ye have
loved. He has loved, they have loved. Pluperf. I had loved, plur. we had
loved. Thou had loved, ye had loved. He had loved, they had loved. Future.
I shall or will, plur. we shall or will love. Thou shall or wilt, ye shall or
will love. He shall or will, they shall or will love.

Imperative mood.
1. Let me love, plural, 1. Love we or let us love, 2. Love thou or do thou
love, 2. Love ye or do ye love, 3. Love he or let him love, 3. Love they or
let them love.

Potential mood.
Tens Pres. I may or can love, plur. we may or can love. Thou may or can
love, ye may or can love. He may or can love, they may or can love. Imperf. I
might love, etc. I could love, I would love, I should love, Perfect. I might
have loved, etc. I could have loved, I would have loved, I should have loved,
Future I may or can love hereafter, etc.

The Preterpluperfect tens is wanting in this mood.

Present, to love. Perfect, to have loved. Future, to love hereafter.
There are besides belonging to the Infinitive mood three Gerunds; as, 1. Of
loving. 2. In loving. 3. To love.


A Verb Neuter with his Moods, Tenses, and Persons.

Indicative mood.
Present Note that after the Conjunctions if, though, although, unless: and
words of wishing, as I pray God, God grant. for am, art, is, are used be,
be, be.
I am plur. we are or be. Thou art ye are or be. He is they are or be.
Imperf. And after the same Conjunctions, or like Adverbs of wishing; as, I
would, I wish, would to God, I had leifer. For was, wast, was, are used were,
were, were: As, if you be wise, I pray God you be good. I had leifer, you
were honest, than rich.
I was, plur. we were. Thou wast, ye were. He was. they were. Perfect. I
have been. plur. we have been. Thou have been. ye have been. He bath been.
they have been. Pluperf. I had been. plur. we had been. Thou had been. ye
had been. He had been. they had been. Future. I shall or will plur. we shall
or will be. Thou shall or wilt ye shall or will be. He shall or will they
shall or will be.

Imperative.
Let me be, plur. Let us be or be we, Be thou, Be ye, Let him be. Let
them be or be they.

Potential.
Present, I may or can be, etc. Imperfect. I might could would should be,
etc. Perfect. I might could would should have been, etc. Future. I may or can
be hereafter. etc.
Infinitive.
Present, to be. Perfect, to have been. Future, to be hereafter.
Passive.
A Verb Passive.

A Verb Passive is the same throughout all Moods and Tenses with a Verb Neuter,
with the Imperfect or perfect tens of the Active voice added thereunto; as,

Indicative.
Present. I am loved. plur. We are loved, etc. Thou art loved. Ye are loved,
etc. He is loved. They are loved, etc.

Note.
Note, that in Verbs Active and Passive, there is generally but one variation of
all the tenses from the Present; as of love, loved; and of these two, are made
all the rest of the tenses, both Active and Passive, with addition of the signs
of the tenses. Neither is there any variation of the Persons; but in the
present tens singular; as, love, love, loves. And in the preterimperfect
tens singular; as, I loved, thou lovedst. But if the signs be added to the
Verbs, there is no change at all; as, I do love, thou do love, he does love,
so I did love, thou did love.

Rule.
The Imperfect tens, (whereof is made most of the tenses in the Active, and all
of the Passive) is generally formed of the Present tens by adding thereto ed,
and some en; as, love loved, confess confessed, fall fallen: But sometime e is
syncopated; as, loved, fallen, and then d after the single s is turned into t;
as, confes't, bles't, dres't, oppres't; for confessed, blessed, dressed,
oppressed.

From this general rule many Verbs are excepted, for of make is formed made
lead is formed led read is formed red spread is formed spread mete is formed met
sweat is formed swet leav is formed left bereav is formed bereaved 3
bereft bleed is formed bled breed is formed bred feed is formed fed speed is
formed sped flee is formed fled meet is formed met feel is formed felt spil is
formed spilt smell is formed smelled 2.
smelt keep is formed kept creep is formed crept weep is formed wept sleep is
formed slept sweep is formed swept bend is formed bent lend is formed lent rend
is formed rent send is formed sent shend is formed shent spend is formed spent
wend is formed went lean is formed lent mean is formed meant sell is formed sold
tell is formed told slide is formed slid stride is formed strid pitch is formed
pitched 3
pitht catch is formed caught teach is formed taught fetch is formed faught
seek is formed sought beseech is formed besought bring is formed brought think
is formed thought work is formed wrought buy is formed bought gird is formed
girded 3.
girt mis is formed mist kis is formed kissed 3.
kissed wis is formed wist bind is formed bound find is formed found grind is
formed ground wind is formed wound stand is formed stood sit is formed sat
hang is formed hung sting is formed stung string is formed strung wring is
formed wrung lose is formed lost.
leese loos is formed loosed shoo is formed shod shoot is formed shot.


Except. 2.
Some Verbs have two or more Variations: one used only in the Imperfect; as I
took, thou tookest, he took, and noted with 1. Another of the perfect tens, as
he has taken, he is taken and noted with 2. and some are used both ways,
which are here therefore noted with 3. as in example.

Expergesacio.
wake or waken. 1 wak't or awoke. 2 wakened Expergiscor
wake or awake 1 awaked or awoke. 2 awaked. take 1 took 2 taken shake 1 shook 2
shaken fall 1 fell 2 fallen slay 1 slew 2 slain dare 1 durst 2 dared beat 1
beat 2 beaten eat 1 ate 2 eaten help 3 helped or helped 2 helped tread 3 trod 2
trodden sees 3 sod 2 sodden shed 3 shod 2 shodden break 1 brake 2 broken 3
broke speak 1 spoke 2 spoken 3 spoke steal 1 stale 2 stolen 3 stole heav 3 hove
2 hoven 3 heaved weav 3 wove 2 woven 3 weaved wear 1 wore 2 worn shear 1 shore
2 shorn swear 1 swear 2 sworn 3 swore bear 1 bare 2 born 3 bore tear 1 tare 2
torn 3 tore cleav 1 clave 2 cloven 3 cleft get 1 gat 2 gotten 3 got beget 1
begat 2 begotten 3 begot forget 1 forgot 2 forgotten 3 forgot see 1 saw 2 seen
Jaceo.
ly 1 lay 2 layn Mentior.
But lie lied is regular fly 1 flew 2 flown bid 1 bad 2 bidden 3 bid bide or
abide 1 abode 2 bidden 3 bid chide 1 chod 2 chidden 3 chid hide 3 hid 2 hidden
bite 3 bit 2 bitten smite 1 smote 2 smiten 3 smit write 1 wrote 2 written 3 writ
ride 1 rode 2 ridden 3 rid rise 1 rose 2 risen shine 1 shone 3 shined strike 1
struck 3 stricken 3 struck spet or spit 1 spat 2 spit or spitten giv 1 gave 2
given or given drive 1 drove 2 driven 3 drove strive 1 strove 2 striven 3
strived thrive 1 throve 2 thriven 3 thrived drink 1 drank 3 drunk stink 1 stank
3 stunk win 1 wan 3 wun spin 1 span 3 spun swim 1 swam 3 swun ring 1 rang 3
rung sing 1 sang 3 sung fling 1 flang 3 flung sling 1 slang 3 slung spring 1
sprang 3 sprung swing 1 swang 3 swung draw 1 drew 2 drawn blow 1 blew 2 blown
crow 1 crew 2 crown grow 1 grew 2 grown know 1 knew 2 known throw 1 threw 2
thrown snow 1 snew 2 snown 3 snowed Sero 2.
sow 1 sew 2 sown 3 sowed Suo 2.
sow sowed or sew sewed. mow 3 mowed 2 mown do 1 did 2 done com 1 came 2 com
of Wend.
go 1 went 2 gone run 1 ran 3 run choos 1 chose 2 chosen

In these Irregular Verbs, which have two or more Variations; the Tenses of the
Passive voice are formed of the Preter; not the imperfect tens, with the Verb
Neuter premised.

Except. 3.
Some also there are, which have no variation at all: but the present tens
serves for all, as cast, hurt, rid, fet, for fetch, let, set, hit, knit, slit,
cut, put, shut.

Of Defectives.
Defectives
Unto these Irregular Verbs, you may add certain Defectives failing in Moods,
and Tenses; as wis and wot, trow, quoth, must, hight, hail, which are thus
formed, Wis and wot.
Present I wis or wot thou wotest he wot. we wot. ye wot. they wot.
Imperfect I wist. thou wist. he wist. we wist. ye wist. they wist.
Infinitive to wit.



Trow.
I trow plur. we trow trow'st thou trow ye he trow's they trow.

Quoth.
Present. Quoth I plur. quoth we. he they.

Must.
Present. I, thou, he, we, ye, they. Must.

Hight.
Present. I hight plur. we hight. thou hightest ye hight. he hight they
hight.

Hail.
Sing. and plur. hail i. e. salve salvete, health or hail be unto you. all
hail

Though hail be also an Adjective; as, a hail (that is, an healthful) body.

Impersonals.
Of Impersonals.
The third person singular of certain Verbs, with the Nominative it set before
it, is used Impersonally: as, It rain's, it snow's, it lighten's, it thunder's;
it chances, it becomes, it delights, it is said, it is certain, it is meet,
etc. The which is formed in all Moods and Tenses; as, it did rain, it has
rained, it had rained, it will rain, let it rain, it may rain: It does become,
it did become, etc.

Participle
Of a Participle.
A Participle is a word derived of a Verb, from which it has signification of
time present, past, or to com.

There be four kinds of Participles.

1 A Participle of the Present tens. 2 A Participle of the Preter tens. 3 A
Participle of the First Future tens. 4 A Participle of the Second Future tens.
A Participle of the Present tens signifies the time present, and ends in
ing; as, loving, teaching, reading, hearing.

A Participle of the Preter tens signifie's the time past, and always end's in
d, t, or n; as, loved, taught, slain.

A Participle of the First Future tens signi^^^'s the time to com, like the
Infinitive Mood (...) as, about or ready to love.

A Participle of the second Future tens signifie's the time to com, like the
Infinitive Mood Passive; as, to be loved, to be taught.

Adverb.
Of an Adverb.
AN Adverb is joined to a Verb, or a Noun, to express some circumstance or
quality.

There be many kinds of Adverbs according to their several significations.

Some be of Time; as, Then, when, now, never, ever, always, to day, to morrow,
yesterday, the other day, betimes, late, newly, lately, long-ago, out of hand,
by and by, anon.

Some be of Place; as, Here, there, where, hither, thither, whither, some where,
no where, elsewhere, hence, thence, upwards, downwards, this way, that way.

Some be of Number; as, Once, twice, thrice, four times, forty times, an
hundred times, a thousand times.

Some be of Order; as, Afterward, furthermore, first of all, last of all, at
length, secondly, thirdly.

Some be of Asking; as, When, where, whence, why, wherefore, whether.

Some be of Denying; as, No, not, not at all, in no wise, by no means.

Some be of Affirming; as, Yes, yea, surely, truly, verity, in good sooth, in
faith, in good truth.

Some be of Exhorting; as, Well, go to.

Some be of Wishing; as, Would to God, God grant, I pray God, O that, O if.

Some be of Gathering together; as, Together, altogether, jointly, universally.

Some be of Parting asunder; as, Asunder, severally, particularly, door by door.

Some be of Diversity; as, Else, otherwise.

Some be of Choosing; as, Rather, nay rather, yea rather.

Some be of a thing not Finished; as, Wellnigh, almost, scarcely, hardly.

Some be of Showing; as, Lo, see, behold, thus.

Some be of Doubting; as, Happily, peradventure, perhaps.

Some be of Chance; as, By chance, as it fell out, as it chanced.

Some be of Likeness; as, So, even as, like as.

Some be of Comparison: as, As well as, so, as, more, less, especially.

Some be of Quantity; as, Much, little, most of all, least of all, very much,
very little.

Some be of Quality; as, Well, ill. And those that are made of Adjectives by
adding ly; as, learnedly, valiantly, happily, etc.

Many Adverbs increasing the signification of their Positive are compared by
Signs, or Termination. By Termination; as, Well, better, best. Ill badly, wors,
worst. Little, less, least.

By Termination, and Sign also; as Often, often, or more often, oftest; and often,
oftener, or more often, oftenest or most often. Seldom, seldomer or more
seldom, seldomest or most seldom. Soon, sooner, or more soon, soonest. But the
multitude of Adverbs in ly are compared altogether by the Signs; as, Wisely,
more wisely, most wisely. Learnedly, more learnedly, most learnedly. etc.

Conjunct.
Of a Conjunction.
A Conjunction is a part of speech joining words, and sentences together.

Conjunctions are either single or dubble.

Of single Conjunctions there be many kinds.

Some be Copulatives; as, And, also, neither, both.

Some be Disjunctives; as, Or, either.

Some be Discretives; as, But.

Some be Causals; as, For, because, since that, since that, seeing that,
forasmuch as, inasmuch as, being that.

Some be Conditionals; as, If, if that, so that, if so be that.

Some be Interrogatives; as, Whether, whether or no.

Some be Illatives; as, Wherefore, therefore.

Some be Adversatives; as, Though, although, albeit.

Some be Redditives; as, Notwithstanding, yet, nevertheless, for all that.

Some be Electives; as, How, as, then.

Some be Diminutives; as, At least.

Dubble Conjunctions are, as follow, Both, and. Not only, but also. As well,
as. Either, or. Neither, nor. Although, yet. Because, therefore. By how much the
more, By so much the more. The more, the less. Where, there. When, then. If,
than. More, rather. Sooner, than.


Or any other Comparative.

Preposit.
Of a Preposition.
A Preposition is a part of speech set before other parts; either in
Apposition, or Composition.

Prepositions in Apposition are these: Above About After Against Amid or Amidst
Among or Amongst Anent At Before behind beside or besides behether beyond
between or betwixt beneath by concerning for from far-from in into mauger nigh
or nigh to of on or upon on-this-side on-that-side to or unto touching toward
or toward through through thorowout under until with within without


Prepositions in Composition are, A, as in apart. ad, as in ad-journ. above,
as in above-board. after, as in afternoon. be, as in be-ly. de, as in de-fame.
beyond, as in beyond sea. dis, as in dis-grace. en, as in en-close. in, as in
in-cline. enter, as in enter-line. inter, as in inter-pose. for, as in
for-swear. fore, as in foretell. from, as in from-above. fro, as in fro-ward.
mis, as in misfortune out, as in outlaw. over, as in overthrow per, as in
per-use. re, as in re-turn. through, as in thorow-fare un, as in un-don. under,
as in under-prop. up, as in up-lands. with, as in with-stand.


Interject.
Of An Interjection.
AN Interjection is a part of Speech expressing some sudden passion of the mind.

There be several sorts of Interjections, according to the soveral passions of
the mind.

Of Mirth; as, Heyda, o brave. Sorrow; as, Ab, alas. Crying out; as, Oh.
Marvelling; as, O strange! o wonderful! Dread; as, Hah, out alas. Praising; as,
Well-don. Shunning; as, Hence, bee-gon. Calling; as, Ho, hark, sir. Mocking;
as, Hoe. Laughing; as, Ha-ha-he. Scorning; as, Fob. Threatening; as, Woe.
Commanding silence; as, Is It, or whist.
Here should follow the Rules of Concord, and Construction: but because there is
little, or no variation in the parts of the English tongue: they are altogether
needless. Next therefore shall follow the Rules of Derivation, and Composition.

Derivat.
Chap. 8. Of Derivation.
IN respect of Derivation a word is said to be Primitive, or Derivative.

A Primitive word is that, which flows from no other; as, man.

A Derivative is that, which flows from its Primitive; as, manly.

Subst. of Subst.
Of Primitive Substantives are formed other Substantives three manner of ways.

Of certain Substantives signifying the matter, by adding one of these
particles er, yer, or ster, are formed other Substantives, denoting the Agent
employed about that matter; as, of Hat Hatter, Glove Glover, Garden Gardener,
Gun Gunner, Forest Forrester, Law Lawyer, Bow Bowyer, Game Gamester, Tap
Tapster, Seam Seamster, etc.


Rule 2.
Of certain Substantives signifying the person, by adding this particle ship are
formed other Substantives, which has the force of dignity, or state, set
before the Primitive; as, Apostle, Apostleship. i. the dignity of an Apostle;
Apprentice, Apprenticeship, i. the state of an Apprentice: So Admiral, Captain,
Lieutenant, Baylie, Steward, Chancellor, Proctor, Doctor, Master, Fellow,
Scholar, Tutor, Lord, Knight, Burgess, Elector, Constable, Friend, Surety etc.

So this particle hood being added to some Substantives has like
signification; as, of Father Fatherhood, i. the dignity of a Father. Child
Childhood, i. the state of a Child. So brotherhood, falsehood, manhood,
womanwood etc.

Rule 3.
Of certain Substantives are formed Diminutives by adding one of these particles
et, rel, lock, ling, kin, which have the force of little or petty set before
the Primitive; as, of cushen, cushenet, i. a little cushen. cabin, cabinet, i.
a petty cabin.
So cask casket, capon caponet, lanner lanneret, eagle eaglet, mall mallet,
crown crownet, trump trumpet, pistol pistolet, oak oket, pack packet, poke
poket, ham hamlet, boul bullet.

Of h^g, pike, cock, soar; hogrel, pikerel, cockrel, soarel.

Of hill bull: hillock bullock.

Of duck, goos, cat, pork, shield, stare: du^kling, gosling, kitling, porkling,
shilling, siarling: Although commonly ling being compounded with a word
importing some Adjunct signifies the Subject thereof: as, dearling, wearling,
fondling, hireling, shaveling, stripling, worldling, changling, suckling,
titling, knotling, yearling, youngling, grotling, shorling, fatling, starvling,
underling, sapling etc. like as let joined to a word importing a Subject,
signifies an Adjunct thereof: as, co^slet, chaplet, frontlet, bracelet,
partlet, for attire or furniture of the body; of the head, the forehead, the
arm, the neck (which is the parting of the head and body:) though sometime for
better sounds sake l be omitted; as, gorget not gorgelet.

Of lam, dwarf, in French a tabletloth.
nappe: are formed lamkin, dwarfkin, napkin.

Adject. of Subst.
Substantives are ten ways made Adjectives according to the rules following.

Rule 1.
These Substantives following are made Adjectives by adding this particle full,
which imports plenty of that which the Substantive does signisie; as,
beauty beautiful, that is, full of beauty; so Bane, Behoof, Bounty, Deceit,
Delight, Disdain, Distrust, Duty, Dole, Dread, Health, Man, Mind, Mistrust,
Pain, Plenty, Power, Shame, Skill, Sloth, Sorrow, Spite, Sport, Success, Watch,
Will.

Rule 2.
These are made Adjectives by adding less, which imports want of what the
Substantive does signify; as of Beard, beardless, that is, without a beard; so
Blame, blood, boot, bottom, bound, brain, breath, cause, end, danger, father,
fault, friend, God, ground, guilt, Heart, head, hap, match, money, name,
number, penny, Peer, prais, question, remedy, rest, Sens, shape, speech,
spot, tooth, troth, weapon, wit.

Rule 3.
These are made Adjectives both ways, by adding full and less, as of bliss,
blissful, blissless: so Care, cheer, faith, doubt, fear, fruit, grace, harm,
heed, help, hope, hurt, joy, law, list, mercy, need, pity, ruth, shame, use.
So of comfort, we say comfortless; but not comfortful, rather comfortable.

Rule 4.
These are made Adjectives by adding ous, eous or ious, which addition may be
explained by full; as of courage, courageous, that is, full of courage; so
Adventure, clamor, cautel, court, danger, dolor, envy, fame, gorge, grace,
grief, harmony, humor, lecher, malice, marvel, mischief, monster, ^utrage,
plenty, poison, raven, right, rigor, riot, scandal, valor, venture, venom,
virtue, vice, wonder, zeal: but adulterous of adultery, also heinous, hideous
of Substantives unknown, or unused in the English tongue.

Rule 5.
These are made Adjectives by adding ly, which addition may be explained by
like; as of beast beastly; that is, like a beast: so of body, brother, cost,
coward, day, earth, flesh, friend, spirit
gast, God, heaven, home, king, life, love, niggard, order, Prince, priest,
sloven, state, summer, time, traitor, year.

Rule 6.
These are made Adjectives by adding y or i with e silent, which addition may
be explained by having; as of blood bloody or bloody, that is, having blood;
so clay, cloud, craft, crag, dirt, eas, filth, grass, greas, guilt, hair, band,
hap, haste, head, heart, hunger, ice, loft, lous, luck, lust, mange, might,
moss, mould, mud, naught, need, pith, purs, sand, sap, sauce, savor, slime,
slipper, sore, stead, stone, storm, sweat, thrift, trust, weight, wind, wit,
worth, leaf, fire, baud. But merry of mirth.

Rule 7.
These are made Adjectives by adding ish, which may be explained by like as, of
ague aguish, that is, like an ague. So Ape, Block, book, boy, brute, child,
chuil, cloun, colt, devil, doult, diegs, fool, heathen, hog, knave, licoris,
lump, ram, salt, sot, water, where, woman. But this particle ish, being added
to Adjectives, diminishes their signification; as before was taught in the
comparison of Adjectives.

Rule 8.
These are made Adjectives by adding some; as of burden burdensome; that is,
having a burden: so cumber, game, hand, light, tooth, trouble, quarrel.

So buxom, fulsom, holesom, lonesom, lothsom, noisome, wearisom, of Substantives
unused; but ransom a Subst. of it self.

Rule 9.
These are made Adjectives by adding able, which may be explained by fit for or
worthy of, as of season seasonable, that is, fit for the season. blame
blameable, that is, worthy of blame. So Answer, approach, change, cure, favor,
marriage, match, measure, medicine, memory, merchant, note, pardon, peace,
profit, proportion, question, reason, sale, sail, search, service, suit, tune.

These are made Adjectives by adding to them all, call, or icall, which
addition is explained by, belonging to; as, of Rhetoric rhetorical, that is,
belonging to Rhetoric; so, of Accident, allegory, angel, arithmetic, canon,
geometry, history, logic, method, music, nature, person, prejudice, rustic,
satyr, scismatic, venerie. But Grammar and Tyrant, form grammatical,
tyrannical.

Subst. of Adject.
Thus are Adjectives derived of Substantives: Now I shall show how Adjectives
are again made Substantives two ways.

Rule 1.
Most of the Derivative Adjectives aforementioned ending in full, less, ous, ly,
y, or je, ish, and some, are again made Substantives by adding to them ness: In
full; as of beautiful, beautifulness, etc. In less; as of retchless,
retchlessness, etc. In ous; as of righteous, righteousness, etc. In lie; as of
friendly, friendliness, etc. In y or ie; as of crafty, craftiness, etc. In
ish; as of childish, childishness, etc. In some; as of lightsom, lightsomness,
etc.


In like manner all other Primitive Adjectives are made Substantives by adding
to them ness; as of apt aptness, dull dullness, happy happiness, wretched
wretchedness, etc.

Rule 2.
These Adjectives following, being derived to us from the Latin by the French,
are made Substantives by adding to them tie or itie after the French manner; as
of casual casualtie, certain certainty, chaste chastity, cruel cruelty,
scarce scarcity.

All the Adjectives aforementioned, whether Primitive or Derivative, except
some few, are made Adverbs, by adding this particle ly, as, careful carefully,
careless carelessly, glorious gloriously, childish childishly, accidental
accidentally, wretched wretchedly, cruel cruelly, etc.

Except those Adjectives that end in ly, for they without any alteration will
serve for Adverbs, as friendly.

Here follow certain Examples of all the Derivations together: Duty dutiful
dutifulness dutifully. Heart heartless heartlessly. Care careful carefullness
carefully. Care careless carelessness carelessly. Right righteous righteousness
righteously. Love lovelie loveliness lovely. Thrift thrifty thriftiness
thriftily. Fool foolish foolishness foolishly. Hand handsome handsonmess
handsomely. Peace peaceable peaceably. Rhetoric rhetorical rhetorically. Apt
aptness aptly. Dull dullness dully. Casual casualty casually.


Subst. of Verbs.
From most Verbs there are two Substantives ordinarily derived one of the Agent
or dooer: another of the Action or doing besides the two
participle-adjectives: as, of To Love, a lover, a loving, loving, loved. Teach,
a teacher, a teaching, teaching, taught. Read, a reader, a reading, reading,
read. Hear, a hearer, a hearing, hearing, heard.


Except. 1.
Yet some Substantives of the Agent so derived end in or not er; as of To Abet,
an abetttor, an abetting. Confess, a confessor, a confessing. Survey, a
surveyor, a surveying. Govern, a governor, a governing. etc.


Except. 2.
Again some Substantives of the Action or doing so derived in stead of ing, add
meant, or ance after the French manner; as of To Amend, an amender, an
amendment. Nourish, a nourisher, a nourishment. Allow, allower, an allowance
Accept, an accepter, an acceptance.


English Subst. of Lat.
Of Latin Substantives are many English Substantives derived several ways.

1. English Substantives ending in ion are made of Latin ending in io; as,
opinion, religion, question, solution; of opinio, religio, quaestio, solutio,
etc.

2. English Substantives ending in our are made of Latin in or; as, labor,
honor, favor, coadjutour; of labor, honor, favor, coadjutor, etc. But now the
best Autors write this kind of words without u.

3. English Substantives in tie or ty, are made of Latin in tas; as, Charity,
liberality, nobility, purity; of charitas, liberalitas, nobilitas, purlias,
etc.

4. English Substantives in ance are made of Latin ending in antia; as,
abundance, ignorance, temperance, observance; of abundantia, ignorantia,
temperantia, observantia, etc.

Yet some of this ending derived of Verbs in ance, after the French manner, as
before was declared, are not answered in Latin by antia, as acceptance, etc.

5. English Substantives in ence, are made of Latin in entia; as, Absence,
patience, benevolence, confidence; of absentia, patientia, benevolentia,
confidentia, etc.

6. English Substantives in ancie, are made of Latin in antia; as, Constancy,
infancy, arrogancy; of constantia, infantia, arrogantia, etc.

7. English Substantives in encie, are made of Latin in entia; as,
incontinencie, indifferency, indigencie; of incontinentia, indifferentia,
indigentia, etc.

8. English Substantives in tude are made of Latin in tudo; as, Multitude,
gratitude, fortitude; of multitudo, gratitudo, fortitudo, etc.

9. English Substantives in ture are made of Latin in tura; as, Stature,
conjecture, fraciure; of statura, conjectura, fractura, etc.

10. English Substantives in cian are made of Latin in cus; as, Musician,
Logician, Arithmetician; of Musicus, Logicus, Arithmeticus, etc.

11. English Substantives in is it are made of Latin in ista; as, Alchymist,
Evangelist, Baptist; of Alchymista, Evangelista, Baptista, etc.

12. English Substantives in meant, are made of Latin by Elision of um; as,
argument, instrument, monument; of argumentum, instrumentum, monumentum, etc.

Yet some in meant derived of Verbs after the French manner, as before was
declared, do not follow this Rule, as nourishment, etc.

13. Many other English Substantives, which have no general termination are
made of Latin by Elision. 1. of a, as planet, music, schism, history; of
planeta, musica, schisma, historia. 2. of um, as abstract, Presbytery; of
abstractum, Presbyterium. 3. of us; as, angel, orphan; of angelus, orphanus,
etc.

In like manner of Latin Adjectives are many English Adjectives derived
several ways.

1. English Adjectives ending in ant or ent are made of Latin in ans or ens;
as, Constant, fragrant; of constant, fragrans: so absent, eloquent; of absens,
eloquens.

2. English Adjectives in ous are made of Latin in us or osus; as, prosperous,
pious; of prosperus, pius: So curious, generous; of curiosus, generosus, etc.
except some few of this ending, derived of English Substantives, as before page
63. Rule 4.

3. English Adjectives in able or ible are made of Latin in abilis or ibilis:
as, culpable, durable; of culpabilis, durabilis: so contemptible, docible; of
contemptibilis, docibilis, etc.

4. English Adjectives in call are made of Latin in cus; as, comical, typical,
canonical; of comicus, typicus, canonicus, etc.

5. English Adjectives in all are made of Latin by Elision of is final; as,
general, special, artificial; of generalis, specialis, artificialis, etc.

6. English Particip. Adjectives in ed are made of Latin in us; as, accepted,
addicted, abused, annexed; of acceptus, addictus, abusus, annexus: some few in
shed of Verbs in ish, turn shed into us; as, admonished of admonish, etc.

7. English Adjectives in ive are made of Latin ending in ivus; as, attentive,
active; of attentivus, activus. etc.

8. Many other English Adjectives which have no general ending are made of
Latin by Elision of us; as, just, honest, apt; of justus, honestus, aptus. etc.

All these Adjectives derived of the Latin are made Adverbs by adding this
particle ly; as Constant, constantly etc. except those that end in able and
ible, for they only change e silent into y; as, honorable, honorably;
contemptible contemptibly.

Moreover of Latin Verbs are many English Verbs derived.

1. English Verbs ending in ate are all made of Latin in o as, recreate,
abrogate, accommodate; of recreo, abrogo, accommodo, etc.

2. Many other English Verbs which have no general termination are made of
Latin by Elision of o; as, affirm, adopt, acquire, adore, of affirmo, adopto,
acquiro, adoro, etc.

These few rules of Derivation (from which there are not many words excepted)
will prompt to a Learner some thousands of Latin words upon the first sight of
their English, though before he never saw or heard of them in Latin.

Chap. 9. Composition of words.
IN respect of Composition, a word is said to be simple or compounded.

A Simple word is that, which is not compounded; as, grace.

A Compound word is that which is made of two simples; as, disgrace.

In Composition, our English tongue is above all other, very hardy, and
happy, joining together after a most cloquent manner sundry words of every
kind of Speech; as, Comp. 1.
Two Substantives are compounded together; as, rain-how, ey-sore, hand-kerchief.
Comp. 2.
Sometime three Substantives; as, a tenis-court-keeper, a foot-ball-player, a
clove-gilli-flower. Comp. 3.
Sometime a Substantive and an Adjective; as, prais-worthy, blameworthy. Comp. 4.
Sometime two Substantives with an Adjective in the middle; as,
rose-finger'd-morn, heart-eating-grief, ey-pleasing-flower,
taste-pleasing-fruit. Comp. 5.
Sometime an Adjective and Substantive; as, New-ton, handi-craft, twilight.
Comp. 6.
Sometime two Adjectives only; as, Nonesuch. Comp. 7.
Sometime a Pronoun, and a Substantive; as, self-love. Comp. 8.
Sometime a Pronoun and a verb; as, self-do, self-have. Comp. 9.
Sometime a Substantive and a Verb; as, wood-binde, back-bite. Comp. 10.
Sometime a Verb and a Substantive; as, breakfast, draw-bridg, cut-purs. Comp.
11.
Sometime an Adverb, and a Substantive; as, downfall, up-rising, down-lying.


Besides all these ways, Prepositions are ordinarily compounded with Nouns and
Verbs, as before was in part declared in a Preposition.

But these Compositions following with con, counter, dis, en, enter, fore,
over, pre, re, and sur, are most general and most remarkable.

Con compounded with these words following signifying an acting of two or more
persons, or things together; as,

Conclude to shut up diverse matters together. Concord the ageeement of two or
mo together. Concours a running together. Concur to run together. Condole to
griev together with others. Confection a mingling together of diverse things.
Confederate to join together by oath or promise. Cofederate one so joined.
Conser to talk together. Conference a parley together. Confluence a flowing
together of waters into one place. Confound to mix together. Conglutinate to
glue together. Congratulate to rejoice together with another for some good hap.
Congregation a flocking together of people. Congress a joining together as of
two armies. Conjoind joind together. Connection a knitting together. Conspire
to breath as it were into one action. Contract to draw together. Contraction a
shrinking together. Contribute to give together with others. Co^venticle a
little meeting together; used in the worst part. Cenvers to live together.
Convocation a calling together. Convulsion a drawing together of the sinews,
as in the cramp. Cooperate to work together.
Counter.
Words compounded with counter (if they be Nouns) signify something against
the Names of the simple Word: (if they be Verbs to do something against the
sens of the simple Verb.

1 Of Nouns.
Counterhand one band against another. Counterchange a cross-exchange.
Counterfeit a picture made by a sample, pattern or mould laid against it.
Counterpane of a deed, in a pair of Indentures, one is the Counterpane to the
other; and is produced against the other as occasion may be. Counterpoint is
the back stitch or quilting stitch, where one point is opposite to another.
Counterround when one round goes one way, and another another way.
Counterscarf a mount or bank cast up against the city wall for more safeguard.
Countermure one wall built against another.
2 So in Verbs.
Counterbalance to weigh one thing against another. Countercheck to give one
check for another. Counterfeit to frame or mould one's self in any thing like
another though indeed he be not such. Countermine to make one Mine against
another. Counterpois to weigh one thing against another. Countervail to be of
equal valne against another thing.
Dis.
Dis in words compounded with it for the most part implie's either a Privation
or Negation of the thing signified thereby; sometime a Separation of it.

1 Privation.
Disable to take away ability. Disanull to make nothing Disappoint to deceiv
one of his expectation. Disarm to take away arms. Disarray to put out of array.
Disburden to take of a burden. Disburs to be out of purs. Dischamp to remove
the camp. Discharge to free from a charge. Discomfort to take away comfort.
Discover a secret. Discredit to take away credit. Diseas to take away eas.
Disfavor to take away favor. Disfigure to take away the good shape or fi gure.
Disfranchize to take away freedom. Disgorge to rid the stomach. Disgrace to
take away grace. Disguis to alter the shape. Dishearten to take away the heart.
Disinherit to take away an inheritance. Dishonor to deprive of honor. Dislodg
to put out of lodging. Dismayed deprived of courage and spirit. Dismantle a
foretress by pulling down the wall etc. Dismember to deprive of some member.
Dismount to unhors. Disorder to put out of order. Disparage to disgrace any
way. Dispark to break down the enclosure. Displace to put out of place.
Dispossess to take away possession. Disprais to take away prais. Disprofit to
take away profit. Disprove to take away proof. Dispute Disrank to put out of
rank. Disquiet to take away quiet. Disunite to break union.
2 Negation.
Disaccustom not to accustom. Disadvantage no advantage, hindrance. Disagree
not to agree. Disallow not to allow. Disappear not to appear. Disclame to deny
one's right to a thing. Discomfort no comfort. Disconsolate not comfortable.
sad. Discontent no content. Disco^tinuance lack of use Discord no agreement.
Diseas no eas. Dishonest not honest. Dishonestie no honesty. Dishonor no
honor. Dishonorable not honorable. Disobey not to obey. Disobedience no
obedience. Displeas not to pleas. Disproportion no proportion. Dissension no
concord, Dissuade to persuade from. Distaste no taste. Distempered not
tempered. Distrust not to trust. Disuse not to use.
Separation.
Discard, to deal away the cards. Disjoin, to separate. Dislocate, to unplace.
Dispers, to scatter abroad. Dissolv, to melt or pull asunder. Dismiss, to send
away.
En and Enter.
Are French particles, answering the Latin in and inter, and are used in words
borrowed of the French.

En in composition with Verbs implies an action don in a place, as,

Enclose, to close in. Encourage, to courage in. Endure, to dure-in. Entrench,
to trench-in. Emprison, to prison in, etc.
Enter in composition implies some thing don or put betwixt two other things;
as,

Enterline to write a line betwixt two other. Enterlace to put a lace between.
Enterprise to take between the hands, or undertake. Enterfier to smite between
the heels. etc.
But words immediately derived to us from the Latin keep in and inter; as,

Include to shut in. Increas to grow in. Imply to bring in. Import the same.
Interpose to put between. Intercede to go between two persons. An intercessor
or mediator betwixt two, etc.
Fore.
Fore in composition signifies the same with before, or beforehand; as,

Forearm, to arm before. Forecast, to cast before hand. Fore-door, a door
before the house. Fore-tokens, tokens before, etc.
Mis.
Mis in Composition is interpreted by ill, as

Misapplie, to apply ill. Misadventure ill adventure. Mis-becometh it ill
becomes. Misfortune ill fortune. etc.
Over.
Over in Composition for the most part implie's an excess, and may be
interpreted by too much; as,

Over-aw, to aw too much. Over-bold too bold. Overcharge to charge too much.
Over-hastie too hasty. Over-burden to burden too much. Overheat to heat too
much. Overlong too long. Overmuch too much. Over-seeth to sees too much.
Overplus more then enough. Overvalue to value too much. Over-ween to ween too
much.
Over in these three is interpreted by beyond; as,

Over-live, to live beyond. Overreach, to reach beyond, or cozen. Over-weigh,
to weigh beyond.
In other words it has its proper signification; as,

Overflow, to flow over.
But Over-see is taken two ways.

1. To see or take care over any person or thing, 2. To over-slip or omit any
matter.
Out.
Out in Composition with these words is interpreted by beyond; as,

Out-bid, to bid beyond. Out-go, to go beyond. Out-learn, to learn beyond.
Outlive, to live beyond. Out-ragious, ragious beyond.
In other words it has its own proper signification; as in

Outcast, the casting out or refuse of a thing. Out-crie, or a crying out etc.
Pre.
Pre in composition is usually interpreted by fore, or before; as,

Preamble, a flourish, profer, or voluntary played before the song begin.
Precaution, a caveat before hand. Precede, to go before. Precedencie, place
before another. Precedent, a pattern or example going before. Precogitate, to
forethink. Precontract, a former bargain. Predecessors, men that have gone
before in place or office. Predestinate, to foreappoint. Predestination,
fore-appointment. Prediction, a foretelling. Predivine, to guess beforehand.
Predominant, bearing sway before others. Preeminence, excellency, above or
before others. Preface, a short speech before any matter. Prefer, to put one
before another. Preferment. Prefigure, to represent before. Prefix, to appoint
a time before. Prejudicate, to judge a cause before it be heard. Prejudice, a
judging beforehand: otherwise to harm; and so prejudicial, harmful. A Prelate,
a Clergie-man in dignity above others. Premeditate, to think of a thing
beforehand. Premeditation, a musing before. Premise, to send before.
Premlsses, matters mentioned before. Premonish, to warn beforehand.
Praemonition, a forewarning. Premunition, a forearming. Preoccupate, to seiz
before. Preoccupation, a taking before. Preordain, to order beforehand.
Prepare, to make ready beforehand. Preparatorie, serving to prepare.
Preparation a making ready before hand. Proposterous out of order, implying
that to be last, which should be before. Prepositive set before. Prerogative
a privilege before others, Presage to foretell. Presaging a foretelling.
President a governor, who sits above or before others. Presume to take a
thing for given and granted before it be so. Presumption Boldness. Presuppose
to suppose before hand. Pretend, to hold before one, or make a show. Prevent,
to be beforehand.
Re.
Re in composition is interpreted by back, or again.

Reassume, to take again. Rebaptize, to baptize again. Rebel, to war again.
Rebound, to bound back. Rebuild, to build again. Recall, to call back. Recant,
to call back a saying. Recapitulate, to rehears again. Recharge, to charge
again. Recite, to say again. Reclaim, to call back. Recoil, to go back.
Recommence, to commence again. Recompense, to make amends again. Reconcile, to
make friends again. Recover, to get goods again. Recollect, to gather again.
Recours, a place to run back to. Redeem, to buy again. Redound, to return back
Redubble, to dubble again. Redress, to help again. Reduce, to bring back.
Reduction, a bringing back. Re-edifie, to build again Re-entrie, an entry
again. Re-extend, to extend again. Refection, a meal to refresh the spirit
again. Refer, to carry back. Reference, a carrying back of one matter to
another. Refiner, a finer again. Reflect, to bend back. Reform, to fashion
again. Refrain, to hold back. Refresh, to renew again. Refrigerate, to cool
again. Refuge, a place to flee back to for safety. Regard. Regenerate, to beget
again. Regrater, one that buy's and sell's again in the same market. Regress, a
going back. Reject, to cast back. Rejection, a casting back. Reinform, to
inform again. Rejoin, to join again. Reiterate, to iterate again. Relaps, a
falling back in sickness. Relation, a telling again of any matter. Releas, to
loos again. Remonstrance, a reason showed back again. Remedy, a means against
a diseas. Remove, to set back. Remunerate, to requite again. Remout, to mount
again Reparation, a making new again. Repay, to pay again. Repeal, to call back
a Law. Repeat, to say again. Repel, to put back. Repercussion, or beating
back. Replenish, to fill again. Reply, to answer again. Repriev, to take back
again. Repuls, a driving back, or a denial of a request. Resign, to yield up
again. Resound, to sound again. Restie, drawing back. Restitution, a restoring
back. Restore, to give back again. Restriction, a holding back. Result, to leap
back. Resume, to take again. Resurrection, a rising again. Retaliate, to return
like again. Retein, to hold back. Retire, to go back. Retort, to wrest back.
Retract, to draw back. Retreat, a going back. Retribute, to give again.
Retribution, a giving again. Retrive, to find again. Retrogade, going back.
Return, to turn back Reverberate, to beat back again. Revert, to turn again.
Revest, to apparel again. Review, to look over again. Revise, the same.
Revisit, to go to see again. Revive, to give life again. Revocation, a calling
back. Revolt, to turn back from a side. Reunite, to unite again. Revolv, to
turn often over again and again in the mind. Revolution, a turning back.
Sur.
Sur in Composition may for the most part be interpreted by Over or Upon; as,

Surbating, an overheating. Surceas, to give over athing. Surcharge, to
overcharge. Surcingle, a girdle over Surface, an upper part of any thing, as of
a Table. A Surfeit, an over-eating or drinking. Surmise, to think upon a thing.
Surmount, to excel over another. Surname, a name added over and above to the
name of our parents and family for some memorable Act or otherwise. Supass to
overpass or excel. Surplice an holy garment to be worn over other garments.
Surplus surplussage or overplus. Surprise to com upon a place or person on a
sudden. Surrender to give up or over a right in land. Surround to overflow.
Survey to oversee. A Surveyor. Survive to overlive. Surviver one that
overliveth.
Chap. 10. Of Points to be observed in reading and writing.
POints serving for the better distinguishing of Words are either Primarie, or
Secundarie.

Primarie Points which show the rising or falling, the straining or slacking
and pauses of the voice are fix.

1 A Comma noted thus, 2 A Colon: 3 A Period. 4 An Erotesis thus? 5 An
Ecphonesis! 6 A Parenthesis ()

A Comma is a note of imperfect sens, where the voice must be stayed: but the
tenor of it still kept up.

A Colon is a note of perfect sens: but not of perfect sencence, where the
voice must be staid some what longer, and the tenor of it let fall a little.

Some hereunto add a Semi-colon, which differs very little from a Colon; noted
thus[;]

A Period is a note of perfect sense and perfect sentence, where the voice must
be staid longest, and the tenor of it at the last word fall low.

An Example of these points as, 4. Phil. v. 8. Finally, brethren, whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report: If there be any virtue, and if there be any prais, think: on
these things.

Another example out of the 1 Cor. 13. v. 1.2.3.

Though I speak with the tongues of men and of Angels, and have not charity: I
am become as sounding brasi, or a tinkling cymball.

And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all
knowledge: and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains; and
have no charity, I am nothing.

And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor; and though I give my body
to be burned: and have no charity; it profits me nothing.

Erotests is a note 1. of Asking: as, Mat. 18.21. How often shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times?

2. Of Urging or instance in reprehension; as, Mark. 9.19. O faithless
generation! how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you?

3. Of earnest avouching the contrary; whether the Interrogation be
affirmative or negative; as, Luke 6.39. Can the blind lead the blind? shall
they not both fall into the ditch? that is they cannot, they shall.

Erotesis if it be pure raises the common Tone or tenor of the voice in the
last word.

But if it begin with a word Interrogative; as, who, what, how, where, when,
why, etc, it falls as a period, and raises the tone of the voice in the
Interrogative; as, Luke 17.17. Were there not ten cleansed? But where are the
nine.

This point in the two last uses thereof, straineth the sound of the voice
throw-out the whole Interrogation.

Ecphonesis is a note of exclamation; when some great passion of the mind is
pathetically uttered, whether it be in Admiration, Lamentation, Commiseration;
or the like.

Ecphonesis falls as a period, and raises the tone in the particle of
Exclamation [o, oh, ah, alas,] or for want of such, in some Emphatical word; and
always requires a louder sound; and when it makes perfect sens, pauseth as a
period; as, Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unserchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out!

So Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death.

And Numbers 24.23. Alas! who shall live when God does this!

Parenthesis is two semicircles enclosing one or more words of perfect sens, in
a sentence, for perfecting thereof: without which yet, the sens is perfect; as,
Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right: Honor
thy father, and thy mother: (which is the first commandment with promiss) that
it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the earth.

Parenthesis is wholly sounded with a lower voice, and always ends as a Comma:
unless the part precedent of the sentence be noted with some other simple
point: for then it ends according to that point.

Of Secundary points.
Secundary points are four.

Apostrophus thus ['] Dieresis thus [..] Eclipsis thus [ -- ] Hyphen thus [-]
Apostrophus signifies the Elision of a Letter in any part of a word, whereby
two syllables are contracted into one. Sometime of a Vowel, as The Almighty,
learned, is it, it is. Sometime of a Consonant, as in the for in the. Sometime of
a Consonant and Vowel together, as never for never, over for over, I Will for I
will.

Eclipsis signifies the Elision of words in the beginning or ending of a Verse
or Sentence, cited in our writing; as, Chaucer.
-- There Chaunticleer the fair
Was wont, and eke his wife to repair.
Gower.
My brother has us sold
To them of Rome. --


Dieresis is a note of parting two Vowels, which otherwise might seem to make a
Diphthong, as Lais, Gilead, Timotheus, Bagoas, Capernaum.

Hyphen is a note of joining two syllables in one word, which other wise might
seem to be parted: namely, when the first is the sast of the former line; and
the other is the first of the line following; as in example, -- teaching.

But if the word be compounded, whose parts may seem several words; then is
hyphen always to be set between them; as a seaman, fish-monger, cart-load,
freeman.

An End.
A COLLECTION OF Certain words Like in Sound, but Unlike in Signification and
manner of writing; which being brought together into one short Sentence, the
difference betwixt them is more easily and certainly discerned, and
consequently their true manner of Writing.
ADAM'S sin did both abash, and abase him in the sight of GOD. Abel was not
able to resist the violence of his brother Cain. Ai me, i.e. woe is me, might
Cain then say, I am undon for ay, that is, for ever. Though you advise me to
repent, I have not grace to follow your advice. A whole aker of ground this
year, will not afford one acorn. My kinsman or allie, uses to allay his wine
with sugar, when he is in the bowling- alley. Every faithful Christian must
alter and change his revengeful mind, and be in charity with his brother,
before he may com to the Altar of the LORD. He that has a loud voice must
not be allowed to speak aloud in the School. I will not assent or agree, that
any of my Scholars shall clime the ascent or rising of that hill. My son
assaie's or trie's to read over Mountain's exercises or essaies. Some ill
husbands of the Gentle-craft spent all in good ale, which they get with their
awl. I would give an angel for an angle to angle in this angle or corner of the
river. In March Aries the celestial sign uses to arise. My aunt to day was
stung with an ant. The Acts and Monuments of the Church, written by Mr Fox,
were cut in pieces with an Ax.
B
This fool does babble of his babble, like to the builders of the Tower of
Babble. I brought a Barberrie-tree, out of the land of Barbary, for my sister
Barbara. My son has caught five fishes called Barbels, but my cattle have got
a diseas called, the Barbles. At Christmas I had rather have my clothes well
lined with Baiz, or fine freez, then my windows with Bays or Laurel. Where any
great battle is fought, there the ground a long time after becomes fruitful or
battle. John Ball was hit on the ball of the eye with a Tennis- ball, which
made him to bawl and cry like one of the Priests of Baal. Poor folks live
barely, feeding oft-times on barley-bread. A Barrester or Counselor at Law,
did plead against a notorious Barrettor, as a Bar- troubler. A bearn or child
is sometimes found left in a barn. Been or bees often have been kept all Winter in
a hutch or bin. To sill his belly his father he will belie. A Bear once drunk
beer out of my bare hand. It is uncertain whether Venerable Bede in his prayers
ever used a bead. I have received a billet, scrole or little bill for the
quartering of three soldiers; but have not one billot or shive of wood to make
them a fire. A Bittor or Bittern is a fowl whose flesh is bitter, which fixing
his beak in the marish ground utrereth the sound of a Bull. Whilst two maids
the one black, the other bleak, did bleach or whiten their linen; the wind
blew away both their blue Wast-coats. The blind can never blend or mingle
things rightly. A Collier and a Fuller cannot dwell together, for the one does
blache, or make black, the other does bleach or whiten. He is ready to breath
out his last breath. A Brewer brew's good beer, a Cook make's good brewis, a
Surgeon heal's a bruis well. I had rather study my book then hunt a Buck.
Cattle do sometimes brows on shrubs growing upon the brows of hills. There is a
bruit or fame that Brute from Troy first in habited this Island, before whose
time there was in it nothing but brute beasts. I eat good straw- berries at St
Edmund's- bury. A wise child will buy nothing but by his father's appointment.
With an awl you may bore the Boar through the snout. Boys I charge you let no
hole be bored through this board. Maid bolt the door, and then boult the meal.
This youth is of a good breed, and well bred; though he eats little bread. I
will go to the bourn, or spring of water to drink, because I burn with heat.
C
Callis a city of France; Cales of Spain. I can drink sack out of a cane as
well as beer out of a cann. When cannons are roaring, canons or rules bear no
sway. The letter- carrier, put his horse on a round pace or career. A wrangling
caviller is not worthy to speak to a noble Cavalier. The censor or reformer of
manners, gave censure or judgment upon one for letting fall the censer, wherein
incens was burned. Sitting in a chair he eats good cheer. When glasses you
carry you had need be charie. I will play with you at chess for a Cheshire
chees. In winter a child may soon be chilled. I have often seen cypres; but
seldom a cypress-tree. A cluster of grapes is more acceptable then a clyster or
washing purgation. Some that pretend to be preachers, are more fit to be sent
to a sheep- cote in a frize- coat, then to quote Scripture. I had rather hear
the claus of a sentence then feel the claws of a Lion. When I had got the
Collier by the collar, I soon assuaged his choler. I will choos this sheep that
now chew't her cud. I could not quite vanquish him, but I cooled his courage.
It is a common thing for friends to commune or talk together. The cock crew
when the crew of soldiers entered. These wicked crues have not left us a cruse
to drink in. A carol is a Christmas song, but coral is a green shrub under
water in the Sea which being taken out hardneth and becomes red. Some had
rather lie on a couch then ride in a coach. He that needs counsel or advice,
let him repair to the council house. Some cosen and beguile their neighbors under
the show of a cousin. Currants or small raisons are very dear and cannot be
bought without current money. I had rather have a crick in my neck, then be in
a creek or gulf of the Sea.
D
A fat Deer is a deer present, fit only for a dear friend. A demure shamefast
man may sometime demurr or paus in seemly purpose. Thanks is due to God for
every sweet morning dew: but because they quickly bid the ground adieu. Without
some rain all the dews at last will not be worth a dewce. The champion went
away as much discomforted as discomfited. There has been much dissension about
Christ's descension into hell. This diseas I fear will disseis or throw my soul
out of its tabernacle. Your cake will be dough or dow, if you do not set a
swifter greyhound to run after the Do. The Surgeon will take away the dolor or
pain of the wound for a dollar. The dor or drone-bee sits at the door but is
no doer or gatherer of honey. My Dragoons all fought like dragons. Apollo pul's
the busbandman by the ear and advises him not to ear his ground every year.
Now the wind is East I have good store of yeast. He is a gentleman both
elegant and fine in apparel and eloquent in speech. Eminent men of great note
are now a days most subject to imminent dangers. I had rather have a wife
endued with virtue wanting a portion, than one endowed with a portion wanting
virtue. If the priest will enterr the corpse, I will enter the Church. The
Parliament sent an errand or message to the Judges or Justices errant or
itenerant, which rid the circuit concerning the trial of an arrant knave. The
executioner or hangman for the most part is the prisoner's executor. Poor
people earn their bread hardly with spinning of yarn.
F
Subtle men feign good will and give good words, which make fools glad or fain.
I saw a falconer with a falcon on his fist, and a falchon, or short sword by
his side. Those that are well fee'd, or take good fees may feed high. He that
let us a fiest at a feast deserves to be buffeted with the fist, and sent away
in a foist or pinnace. Men flee; but birds fly. When it begineth first to
freez, then presently I clothe my self in frize. Fiend and friend are alike in
sound: but contrary in sens: for fiend in the ancient Saxontongue signifie's an
enemy, and the Devil is called the fiend of hell, that is, the enemy of
hell. That wheele-wright is a bungler which cannot make the felloes of a wheel
fellows. My brother Philip gave me a fillip on the nose. If the Jailor find
not the lost prisoner, he will be deeply fined. Fine flower is not fit to ly
on a barn- floor. Lets pay the waterman his full fare, fraught, hire, because
he has carried us to a fair, where we had very good fare. In winter I would
have my gown well lined with furs, and my heas well stored with furz.
G
The Arborist was vexed at the gall, because his chiefest tree received a gaul
or chafing by a sudden gale or blast of wind. If a Jew had been gentle he
would not have called every man beside his own nation a Gentile. But a gentil
is a maggot. I guess I shall have a guest to night. I will not presumptuously
draw upon me the guilt of one sin for the gaining of ten gilt cups.
Rhetoricians by proverbs and similitudes give a fine gloss to a speech: but
cheaters gloss and flatter. As the stars in the firmament glister: so
Kings-courts with rich hanging of Tapestrie do glitter. In Greece upon a stair
or grees I once found a pot of greas. The fox running over the green was caught
in a grin. Cooks use to gild march-pane and other things against the Guild.
H
Seamen, when they are arrived safe in the haven, think themselves as it were
in heaven. Hale this fellow out of the hall, and thrust him out of doors,
though it hail. A haggard or untamed hawk is usually very untoward, and awk.
Happily hereafter in Ireland, a man may live happily. We caught a dozen of
conies in a hey-net coming to feed on the hay-stack. My son and heir, as I
hear, walking forth to take the aier, by chance caught a hare with a gin of
hair. My father heard me read two hard chapters, whilst I kept the herd: and
here (if you pleas) you may again hear me. I will hire a horse, that shall be
higher than yours. For one to hiss at his friend is uncivil. One host is not
able to entertein a whole host or Army of soldiers. He is grown hoars since
he rode forth on his horse. Ho boy! you take no hoa, or care, hou I shall get a
how to pare the ground. Hoar is not more pernicious to corn, then a whore to a
man. We must pray that we may have a holy mind in a whole body, that so we
may be wholly happy. Idle boys, when they should hallow the Lord's day, whoop
and hollow in a holly-tree. Hugh was of a pale hew, when the hue and Cry
overtook him.
I
Some hold that it is cheaper lying in an Inn, then in a Gentleman's house. It is
an idle thing to regard any Idol. It is a pastime to hear witty jests, but it
is more solid content to read of the gests and noble acts of Princes. A joice
is a slight square piece, joined to the Summer, but juice is the sap of any
thing. A jointer or long plane, which streighteth bords edges to make a close
joint, differs from a jointure, i.e. lands made over or joined to a woman in
marriage, during her life.
L
I would give all my latten-mettal, so that I could speak pure Latin. A
soldier cut the cable with his lance, that he might presently lanch into the
deep. It is reported of Aristaxenes Cyreneus that he watered his lettice or
lettuce with Mede, to make them bigger and sweeter; and then lest they should
be stolen, watched them through a lattise. He is a licorish follow; for he
loves licoris. The Leper being cured, for joy became a leaper. I have let a
leas of my pastures or leaz for ten pounds and a leash of hounds yearly. Of
evils choos the least, lest afterward you repent it. If you loos or unty your
purs you will soon lose your money.
M
Few men are able, in any good manner, to manure half the land belonging to
their manor. Many of the meiny, or multitude. It is meet a Lord Marshal should
be a martial man. One of a manual occupation, found my little book or manuel.
The Majer of a Regiment has more command then the Mayor of a Town. A wet
mantle will be soon dry, if it be hanged on the mantel of the chimney. My
sister Marie is very merry, for she is like to marry, as thinking that
Marriage is a merriage. In this pleasant meddow or mead, let us drink off our
sweet mede. It is very meet that a glutton's meat should be mete out to him. I
have received a message from my Landlord about a mesuage or Tenement in our
town. The widdow's mite or two cast into the treasury, might happily be better
accepted of, than all the great gifts of rich men; because they gave but of
their superfluity, but she cast in all her substance. My man Maurice is a
fine dancer of the morris. By the end of March the soldiers may well march
over the marsh. A medlar is a pleasing kind of fruit; but a medler or a
busie-bodie is to be avoided. Here lie's More, and no more but he, More and
no more, how can that be. In the moor there is not one moar to be found more.
Most of the days of this week have been moist. In Northfolk the mother call's
her young daughter modder. A moth that eats garments is small: a mote in the
sun smaller: yet either can fly over the moat. A mustar is of soldiers:
mustard is a sauce. Some are fitter to be mustard-makers, then muster-masters.
In two great mows or mou's I found not one mous.
N
The nave is the middle of the cart-wheel, as the navel is in the middle of the
belly. None of the scholars were present at noon. Nay it is my horf that does
ney. Every one that is wise will be willing to go on in learning the Grammar
of his own mothertongue. Oh! it is my grief that I ow any thing to any man but
love. My husbandman has laid the ordure or dung in very good order. Every hour
is to be well spent, because our life is short. Let each man take an oar and
fetch over the silver- ore. An Ordinance of Parliament is as Prevalent in time
of peace, as the great Ordnance in time of War. I took an ounce of syrup of
Violets at once.
P
Maids are seldom pale which use the milk- pail. I was in pain to see the pane
of glass broken with a brass- pan. A Peer of the realm gave me a pair of
gloves, to pare him one pear. Since I took this boie's part, he is very witty
and pert. Meat parboiled, i. e. a little boiled, is hard of digestion: but
perboiled, i.e. thoroughly boiled, it is easy even to the sick. An il-favored
person is not fit to be a Parson: nor to have a Parsonage, except he have a
personage answerable. A perch-fish is seldom taken with a perch. A patent for
Tobacco is not worth a paten or wooden-shoo. I will rather paus here a while,
then fall into the Lion's paws. I will give a bushel of peace, and a piece of
cloth, to make my peace. I thrust up the palate of his mouth, as he lay upon a
pallet. The Apostle Paul scarce ever wore a Bishop's pall. I can buy ten pens
for two pence. Some that pretend to be pillars of the Commonwealth, are indeed
cater- pillars thereof. I can easily pearce or bore through your book; but I
cannot pars or examine it. Mr Pierce will pearce his rundle of sack for the
Nobles or Peers. Petty things for the most part are pretty. We shall never
catch any plais in this place. He that shows little pity to a man, has less
piety toward God. Scholars hold it a good plea for play, if it be fair. I
will try my title if you pleas in the Court of Common- Pleas. Men of power and
authority should pour in their alms into the laps of the poor. A thief has
more mind to his prey then to pray. A covetous man prey's more upon the poor
then he pray's unto God. There is a preas or throng of people every day at the
Printer's press. Pride when it is pried into will soon have a fall. In running
of a race he wan a prize of very great price. A true Prophet to his Country
brings much profit. Some great Ladies wear garments enirched of purl and
pearl.
Q
I shall never be quiet in mind until you quite and clean discharge or quit
me of the debt. There was a quarrel about a quarrel of glass.
R
Let us run a raze for a race of Ginger. The enemy will take and raze the
city if we do not speedily raise the siege; for he is of a cruel race, stock,
or lineage. That raddish is best, which is reddish. Rey or Darnel is best picked
out of Rye in a ray of the Sun. In the late King's reign there fell such a
rain, that I was not able to rein my horse. A glutton will ravin like a raven.
In the realm of England a ream of paper contains twenty quires. A reason may
be given why a raisin is better then a curran or current. If you can read this
chapter well, I will give you my red cane or reed. As I went to Rome, lying in
a damp room, a reum fell into my eyes. The rhyme, or frozen mist was so great,
that the Poetaster had no mind to rhyme. The price of Rice will rise. The rine
wherein the brain lies, differs from the rind or bark of a tree, and from
the river Rhine. The rood of land lying next the rode or station for ships, I
measured with a perch or rod. I saw a Roe running upon a rough way, by a row
of trees.
S
Merchants sometimes have wares that are saleable, when the seas are not
sailable, But they use to slight slighty wares, that are not wrought with
slight and cunning. This scion or graff came from Sion-hous. As soon as the
storm upon the seas shall ceas, I will seiz upon the ship for the fine, that
the State shall sess or cess. Great store of sedg is carried to the siege of
Newcastle. The scars of my wounds are scarce seen. Scoul and frown upon your
son, and he will run to school. Scholars willingly sever themselves from
masters that are severe. A Cellar is very convenient for a seller of wine: not
so a solar. We sear or cauterize flesh with a searing-yron. We cere the joints
of woods with a cering-candle. It is not lawful to carry any sheep beyond Sea
in a ship. I will shear all my sheep in Warwick- shire, whereof I hope to make
for my own share an 100 l. in sheer gold. At the last Sise or assise I won a
pair of shoos of a large size, with throwing a sice. The heron being sore
distressed by the goshawk did soar aloft. The site or placing of the house is
pleasing to the sight Sparowgrass is sodden on a sudden. A Soldier sometimes
for want of lead make's bullets of Solder or sodder. It is a sign he is
guilty of sin, that is often seen in bad company. I Will sow some oats to fat the
sou: for the sou's ears will make good souce. There is no statute against
making a statue of any stature. There is the sole of the foot, the shoo- sole
and the sole-fish, which three have some resemblance one of another: but the
soul of man is invisible. It Is too late in the spring, for birds to set a
spring. To see a stear climb up a staircase, would make one stare. There is
no succor to be hoped for, from such a blood- sucker. I won a new suit of
apparel at one shoot, whereat the people gave a great shout. Some gamesters play
for a great sum of money. At the sound of a Canon many women are ready to swoon
or swound. My Son rises soon after the sunrising. Bread gotten by sweat is
very sweet. I new sol'd my boots, and then sold them. This gelding shall serve
in stead of a great horse or steed. A ship sometime may sink in one of the
cinque ports.
T
I bought a teal without a tail for a tale of a tall woman. There is no tax or
excise laid upon hooks and tacks. Tide and time is ti'd to no man. There was
one of their acquaintance. There is many a tare in my wheat, which make's me
tear my hair, and shed many a teer. They smote thee upon thy thigh. This tow is
too tough to bind to your toe. The herb time is precious to bees, time more
precious to men. The Sheriffs office in Corporations is committed to two men. A
King sometime is thrown out of his throne. He gave a jewel called a Turkois for
two turkies. There is lately com forth a treatise concerning certain treaties
of peace.
V
It is vain to let blood in a wrong vein. It is no disparagement to a maid in a
veil to carry a joint of veal. The vate was so large, that it reached the
vault or arched roof. I will give a vial of rose water to hear one lesson on
the viol. A vallie is of greater value then the hills about it. The visage of
the vizzard was disguised with a visard: But a viser is the sight of an helmet.
W
Mr Walter Devereux went by water. Waits in a city are better then falls
weights in a shop. The wain or wagon came by in the wane of the moon. I will
weigh my gold by the way. If you were careful, you would not so fast wear out
your clothes. To day the Mayer will wait upon the bakers touching their weight
of bread. These watch-candles have so small a wick, that they will last, while
you be weak, though it be a whole week. With turning of the wheel I have a
blister or wheal. The ferret brought the rabbit whole out of the hole. Whom
will you have to go home with you. I know not whose hose this is. He can
brandish or wield a sword: though he be wild. When men woo they are sometimes
full of woe. Where wreak or revenge takes place all things go to wreck or
ruin. A wurt in my garden and wort in my tub is better then a wart on my hand.
The Surgeon did wrest my wrist, since which time I had no rest. Mr Cart- wright
will write to me concerning this rite or ceremony, whether it be right. All
our bread is vinnowed, therefore I must have some more corn winnowed. You can
now hardly get a bow made of yew, but easily an ew sheep. In your
communication, ye must only use yea and nay. Sir when you have brought your
Scholar in ure to use this book, I will give you a Basin and Ewer.
An End.

