Mr. WHALLIES The Famous Irish ASTROLOGER, HIS Wonderful Prophesies, and
general Observations upon the Year 1699.
BUT to the Matter in hand. The last quarter, or the beginning of this will
contribute Justly to a general peace between the Christians and the Turks, and
Friendship betweem several Nations, for carrying on some great ends, which I
incline to Conjecture to show themselves before the Summer Quarter be justly
expired, whatever they may be, they will be attended with blows and bloody
Noses before their effects are over. I expect that either this quarter or the
beginning of the next, will give an insight unto some of these Predictions in
my last years Almanac. And among the rest, I cannot but persuade my self, That
there will be about that time something more than ordinary to do in France or
Spain, but chiefly the former. And I verily believe, Notwithstanding of the
long Expectations had of his death, that the King of the Latter lives to see it.

The Spring and Summer in general, will supply us with vanity of odd News, and
much of it surprising too. And among the rest, strange debates about persons,
and things relating to Laws, Religion and Settlement, which for a time will
unsettle things of the Nature, and beget uneasy disputes betwixt some Prince
and his Clergy. HOWEVER HIS MAJESTY OF GREAT BRlTTAlN is Highly Courted, and
Honorably Addressed both at home, and from some of the most roping Neighboring
States: Yet I wish this Summer do not produce some Roguery, even in the City of
London: At least I doubt they will give uneasiness in their most National
Counsels, if not worse trouble in Flanders. And I think the Empire or Emperor
of Germany will not be altogether free from some under hand dealings or
Villainies, nor the Duke of Bavaria form some disturbance, either in Health Mind
or Body, or altogether.

May. The Configurations of the last Months Latter end, and beginning of this
threatens Disorders, Mischiefs and Villainies of several kinds, and such too as
will prove of no small Consequences, to more places and People than one in
Europe, and in particular, I doubt will more then a little concern even the
City of London. Its twenty to one, but we shall about this time be made Sensible
of some Popish or Jacobite Roguery, which for some Months past have been
carried on in the dark, to undermine the Foundation of the present Government.
This I believe will produce uneasiness, Disturbance, Troubles, and Removals of
several kinds, but in a more eminent manner in some of the Superior Station, if
not Raptures also in the general Affairs of the World

June


