A DISCOURSE OF HUSBANDRY USED IN BRABANT AND FLANDERS; SHOWING The wonderful
improvement of Land there; and serving as a pattern for our practice in this
COMMONWEALTH.

seal

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, Anno Dom. 1650.

To The Right Honorable THE COUNCIL OF STATE.
ALthough it is a duty incumbent to all Men, as Men; and to all Professors, as
Christians, to love Mankind, as Christ loved us; and to imitate the God of the
spirits of all flesh, who causes his Sun to shine upon the good and the bad;
and although there is a special delight, to do that which is good and
commendable, only for the love of Goodness it self, and the commendableness of
Virtue; Yet, when we meet with special and powerful encouragements to set us
on, and provocations to draw forth our affections to laudable endeavors, we
must needs add some more effectual zeal to the performance of these duties. For
mine own part I may say it without vanity, that the first of these motives,
the delight to do good, in love to the Public, has supported me hitherto,
notwithstanding manifold destructions in the way wherein I have walked. And as
it has been one of my Aims, to have the honor (if possibly I could attain unto
it) of serving the Public. gratis, and at mine own cost, in the best things:
So I have made it a part of my Agencie, to provoke others to do the like, by
offering unto every one, the things which might be most advantageous unto
themselves, by doing service unto others. And how far my affections have carried
me beyond my abilities in this course, I need not to mention: this has only
been my comfort, that having served my Generation generously and freely, I
never had cause to repent of what I had don, whether it were resented by others,
or not. But now of late, seeing it has pleased God, not only by the
settlement of this State in the way of a Commonwealth, to give to all men a
more open door then ever heretofore, to enter upon a concurrence to serve the
Public, that thereby they might both preserv and encreas their own welfare;
but that I have found unexspectedly from your Honors some peculiar expression of
favor toward my self, upon the account of my publick-heartedness; I must
confess, that I am thereby not so much refreshed by reason of that which
befalls to my self, as delighted in the hopeful apprehension of that which
befalls to the Public, whiles in this particular I am able to perceiv, that
the good hand of God has put the management of his Cause and Work in the hands
of Men, whom he has endued with a public spirit, which is a clear testimony
to me, that he will build thereon a superstructure, which by his grace upon
your ways will redound to his glory and evince unto the world, that it is not
any private Interest, but his Glory and the Public Happiness, which has
acted and does act, both the Parliament and your selves in all your
undertakings. And verily the consideration of this very thing, that God has
set in public places Men that mind the Public for it self, and seek out
those that are so-inclined, although they make no special application unto them
(which hitherto I have not don) is more worth to me then the private
advantage, which your Honors favor can bring unto me. For although the
straits, wherewith the times, and my own forwardness to serve others have cast
me, might induce me to rejoice at the fruit of your Honors bounty toward my
self; Yet that is no ways comparable to the sens of joie, which I have at the
clear Character, which this has given me of the spirit by which you are led;
for herein I perceiv that henceforth the labors of impartial love toward the
Public, are not like to be in vain, as for the most part they have been
heretofore, and that there will be some real encouragement for the making of
rational overtures, tending to resolv that grand question, which is proposed by
the Psalmist in the name of all men, who, with one and the same accent, say;
Psalm. 4.6. Who will show us any good? Therefore since the Wisdom of the
Parliament has enacted a way to answer the Quere, as to the Trade of this
Nation (which is a manifest demonstration of their eminent care for the
Public) it has raised with joie both mine own, and the thoughts of some others
to a forwardness of contributing, that which might be subservient and useful
to that design; that as Bees belonging to t'e same hive, we should bring our
honey together, to be preserved and increased in one stock for the good of
all. In order to this resolution, and as a testimony of gratitude, I thought
it might be seasonable to off^r to your Honors, and under your name to the
Public, this following Epistolarie Discourse, which relate's unto the
advancement of Agriculture, being one of the Noblest and most necessary parts
of Industry belonging to a Commonwealth, the first ground of mutual trading
amongst men, and the wellspring of wealth in all well ordered Societies. And
if concerning this subject (as being a main Interest of State) some course in
due time were thought upon to set forward the Judicial, and regulate the
Practical way of Husbandry, such overtures could be made in that kind, as
would sensibly (even to the meanest capacity) demonstrate a very Cornu-Copia
and fullness to be atteined of the choicest temporal blessings to supply all
men's wants. And although I cannot say much of mine own experience in this
matter, yet Providence having directed me by the improvement of several
relations unto the Experiences and Observations of others, I find my self
obliged to become a conduit-pipe thereof toward the Public, chiefly now, where
there is so favorable an aspect of Patronage from those that are in eminent
places toward those that mind public advantages. Prove. 11.25. It is said in
the Proverbs, that he who does withhold Corn the people shall curs him; but a
blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. If not to impart the
means of livelihood to those that stand in* need thereof, when it is in our
power to supply them therewith, be to withhold the same; and this deserves a
curs: then no man can blame me for the largeness of this communication, from
which all that shall reap any benefit, are thereby to be indebted unto your
Public affections, and bless them as the cause, whose influence has given it
this production; for it is included only as a pledge of further endevors in
the same and other kinds, for which the State in due time will be beholden to
your care and vigilance, when the tenders thereof shall find that acceptance,
and the furtherance thereof, that encouragement which your wisdom and love to
the Public shall find expedient to bestow thereon. May the God of all grace
and goodness so bless your Consultations for the good of this State, that they
may end in the settlement of a firm and lasting Peace, where not only outward
Plenty and Prosperity, but the treasures of a better life in the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, may be enjoied to the prais of God the Father. These are, and
shall be the daily prai^rs of

Your Honor's truly faithful and most humble servant SAMUEL HARTLIB.

A Discourse of Husbandry used in Brabant and Flanders; Showing the wonderful
improvement of Land there; and serving as a pattern for our practice in this
Commonwealth.
IT is a certain thing, that the chiefest and fundamentallest point in
Husbandry, is, to understand the nature and condition of the Lands that one
would Till; and to Sow it with such Seeds, as it will produce either Naturally,
or by Art, that which may turn to a man's greatest profit and advantage. I did
think I had understood that point (when I went out of England) after thirty
years experience in Husbandry, and having improved my Land, as much as any
man in this Kingdom has don both by Water and Fire. But, after I had been a
while in Brabant and Flanders, I found I was to learn a new Lesson, in point of
Husbandry; for that the barrennest, Heathie and Sandy Lands in those
Countries did produce richer Commodities, by an ordinary way of Husbandry
there in practice, then the strongest and richest grounds that were in both
those Countries. When I first arrived at Dunkirk, and went to Bridges, (which
was near forty miles) I saw as rich a Country as ever my Eyes beheld, stockt
with goodly Wheat and Barlie, and excellent Meadows and Pastures. The soil
began to alter into wors, midwaie between Bridges and Gaunt, which were twenty
four English miles asunder; and so soon as I was past Gaunt, in my journie
toward Antwerp, I did see such Land, for about twenty miles together, that I
cannot compare any ground more like, then the Land by Sandy Chapel, three
miles distance from Kingston upon Thames. A great part of the Highwaies, out of
the Road and Track of Horses and Carts, did bear Heath; and such Enclosures, on
the inside of the Ways, which were not kept in Tillage, did either produce
Heath or Broom of their own natures. The soil did not much amend until I came
within two miles of Antwerpe, which was thirty English miles from Gaunt. There
I saw a goodly Marsh or feeding ground for Cattle, which was kept with a
strong Banck for being overflowed by the River of Sceld, under which
notwithstanding there lay Sluices to let in the Water when they pleased, and
Ditches were made in the Marsh to convey it back into the River at low Tides
when they thought fit. On the other side of Antwerp was Contribution-land lying
in Brabant, which naturally was as barren and apt to Heath as any land betwixt
that City, and Gaunt. I stayed not long at Antwerp before I returned to Gaunt,
and diligently reviewing the Country as I went back, I could find no other
Corn to grow there, then Rye, Oats, and French Wheat; which seemed a sufficient
Testimony to me of the barrenness of the soil, which would neither bear
Wheat, Barlie, or Peace; and for that the former Grains did usually grow in
England upon the edg of Forests and Heathie grounds. A few days after my
return, I fell into discourse with a Dutch Merchant, then living at Gaunt, but
had lived some years in England, and told him that I did not think that all
Flanders had yielded so much barren ground as I had seen between Gaunt and
Antwerp. He answered me that that Land was the richest part of all Flanders.
I smiled to hear him say so, thinking at first he had jested, and I replied,
that I believed, that one Acre of Land between Bridges and Dunkirk, was worth
ten Acres of any Land I saw there between Gaunt and Antwerp (excepting the
Marsh-land and some little straps of Meadow by the River side): for one did bear
goodly Wheat, Barlie, and Peace, and was in many places naturally excellent
Meadow and Pasture; and the other would carry no other Corn, but Rye, French
Wheat, and Oats, and would never bear any considerable grass, but turned
presently after it was laid down, to Heath or Broom. The Merchant told me
again, that their best Commodities were pulled and cut before I went that way;
but he would prove that the Land did yield more profit yearly then the best
Land in Flanders, and that the Bores (for so they term their Farmers) were
richer then in any part of the Country. I must confess at first I thought his
discourse to be some kind of Riddle, but seeing him earnest in affirming that,
which seemed strange to me; I desired him to explain himself, how it was
possible, that, that Land should yield more profit then the other. I will tell
you (said he) the reason, why it yeildeth more profit, is, because that Land is
natural to bear Flax, which is called the Wealth of Flanders; and one Acre of
good Flax is worth four or five Acres of the best Corn, which grows between
Dunkirk and Bridges; and after the Flax is pulled, it will bear a Crop of
Turnips; which may be better worth, Acre for Acre, then the best Corn in the
Country. After that Crop is off, about April following you may sow the same
Land with Oats; and upon them Clover-grass seed only harrowing it with
bushes, which will com up after the Oats are mowed, and that year yield you a
very great Pasture till Christmas; and the next year following you may cut
that grass three times, and it will every time bear such a burden, and so good
to feed all sorts of Cattle, as the best Meadows in the Country do not yield
the like; and will continue good four or five years together without sowing it.
After this we parted. At first I wondered much at his discourse; but much more
at the ignorance and sloathfulness of our Country which being near to
Flanders, and many Merchants and Gentlemen traveling thither daily, none
should understand, or at least put in practice these Husbandries, there being
so much Barren and Heathie Land in England of very little value, which might
by following their Example in these Husbandries be made more profitable, then
the best Land in this Kingdom. I after pondered what the Merchant said all that
day and the next, and then began to imagine with my self, what an huge
Improvement I might make of my own Estate, if these things were true which he
had told me; and if God Almighty pleased to permit me quietly to enjoie it.
And to be further satisfied, I sent another Dutchman in the Town that had been
in England, with whom I was grown acquainted, and desired him to inform himself
from some of the Bores in the Country, whether those things the Merchant had
affirmed to me were true. He returned me an Answer from three or four, whom
he said he knew to be honest men and understanding those Husbandries, that a
Gammet of Flax, (which was their Acre, but somewhat more in quantity then ours)
might well produce forty or fifty pounds worth of Flax, if the Land were
well dung'd and Husbanded, and sowed with good East-Countrie seed, and that it
pleased God to send convenient rain after it was sowed, and a seasonable time
till Harvest. These were no other conditions, then I conceived all other seeds
and grain to be subject to, either to prove good or bad. And for the other
questions wherein I desired to be satisfied, concerning the Turnips and
Clover-grass, he told me they did concur in all with the Merchant, without
any other condition or limitation. The Winter after I did examine diverse
persons upon the like questions, who I thought did understand that business,
and found very little difference in their relations. And in April following,
which was the chiefest time for sowing of Flax and Clover-grass, I did often
walk into the Fields a mile or more out of the Town, and expostulated the
business with the Bores, when they were sowing of Flax and Clover-grass-seed,
and afterward observed that these things did prosper very well, on such
ground as I conceived to be extreme barren of its own Nature.

But further to inform my self more fully what an Acre of Flax might be worth,
I bought an English rod of Flax, when it was grown up, neither the best nor
worst, and caused it to be pulled, watered, and dressed by it self; then
valued it as Flax was sold the week following in the market at Gaunt, and the
seed likewise afterward. I cast up what eighty rod, which was an Acre, would
rise unto, according to that valuation; and I found that it came to thirty six
pound, fourteen shillings, six pence, and though by that rate an Acre did not
com to forty pound, yet it made me believ, that an Acre of good Flax might
be worth forty pound and more; for that which I tried was but indifferent
Flax.

I went presently afterward to Antwerp, and saw almost every third or fourth
field by the highwaie side for twenty five miles together, stocked with
goodly Flax, far beyond that which I bought to make my Trial off; Whereof some
was pulled, and the rest was ready to pull. The similitude of a great quantity
of Land I had in England unto theirs in Flanders and Brabant, which I saw did
bear their richest Commodities: and my Loss in England both of personal and
real Estate, made me enquire after all Husbandries of those Countries, of such
as I conceived could any way instruct me, that I might learn something, or
other, whereby to repair my fortunes, if hereafter it pleased Almighty God to
give me leav to enjoie my own Estate in Peace again. And being one day in
company of some Merchants, It happened that discourse fell out about Improvement
of their barren ground. I said that I had a great quantity of Barren and
Heathie Land in England, that I thought might be easily brought to bear Flax,
Turnips, and Clover-grass as well as their barren Lands did in Flanders and
Brabant. To which a Merchant answered, that he would carry me to a man
within three miles of Antwerp, who had taken a Farm upon Improvement, which was
just such Heathie Land as I described mine to be. For he was about five years
since to have bought it, and when he saw it all Heath, he would not meddle
with it; but the Farmer had so improved it already, that he had now growing
upon it, a Nurserie of twelv Acres of all sorts of Trees, as Pear Trees,
Apple Trees, Cherrie-Trees, Chestnut and Walnut-Trees, Oaks, Ashes, Elms, and
the like; he had there also growing, both Flax, Turnips, Clover-grass, Roman
Beans and most sorts of Corn, and he had planted a Hop-ground and an Orchard;
he said he would tell me what Husbandry he used to make such a strange
Conversion, and that I could not pleas him better then to com to see it: and
he did assure me, that it was worth my Journie to be informed from him: for
never a man in that Country could better instruct me, then he; and I will
(said he) go thither with you, when you pleas. I thanked him very kindly for
his offer, and told him I would wait upon him thither to morrow morning. It was
agreed between us both to see this wonder. But I asked him before we parted,
what that taking of a Farm upon Improvement was, which he before did speak of.
He answered, that when another had bought the Land, this man offered more Rent
then he could make of it at that time, to have a Leas for one and twenty
years, upon condition, that whatsoever four indifferent persons (whereof two to
be chosen by the one, and two by the other) should judge the Farm to be
improved above the Rent at the end of his Leas, the Owner was to pay so much in
value to the Tenant for his improving it. I told him it was a way of letting
land I never knew of before: He answered it was an ordinary way with them of
letting such barren Land, as men could not tell how to manage themselves.

The next day, we went thither, and the first thing we saw was his Nurserie
of trees, which did grow and prosper very well, and he made account they
would yield him ten thousand pounds before his Leas was exspired and as I
remember he valued them one with another but at two shillings a tree. Then I
saw a little Close of flax, which I esteemed to be about three english acres:
of which flax he told me, the Merchant that brought me thither before I came
from Antwerp, that he had made a hundred and fifty pounds, which was by
computation fifty pounds an Acre. I also saw growing there very good Turnips,
and excellent Clover-grass, which he valued to be then worth twelv pound an
acre. I after saw it cutting the first day of June 1644, being then two foot
long, and very thick, and went thither again the nine and twentieth day of the
same month, and saw the same grass grown up, and then cutting again, being
twenty Inches long, I saw it cutting again in August following, being then
eighteen inches long. I viewed the grounds round about, and found the skirts of
the Closes left unploughed to be heath: and both he and the Merchant
affirmed, all the rest, where his flax and Clover-grass grew, was heath but
three years before. I was very inquisitive of him to know what husbandry he
used to the land, for to convert it from heath to bear such rich Commodities.
He told me, first he broke it up with a strong Team of horses, then ploughed
it cross, afterward tore off the heath with a great harrow, then gathered it
up and burnt it, and laid about twenty loads of dung upon an acre, and spread
it upon the Land; then ploughed it again, and sowed the first crop with Rye,
the next with Oats; and when he had harrowed his oats, he sowed Clovergrass
seed upon them, which he harrowed with a bundle of bushes under his harrow,
and that came, after the Oats was off, to be of a very good pasture before
Michaelmas; and this third year he had mowed the Clover-grass thrice, as I had
seen, and it would com to a very good pasture quickly, to feed till Christmas;
and the same he thought he should do for three years more; but afterward the
ground would turn to an ordinary grass. He said, he used his ground where
his flax grew, as his other; but first again, about half the quantity of dung
he did at first; and then sowed it with flax, and upon the flax
Clovergrass-seed, as he had don before upon the Oats. his Roman-beans, his
Hops, and Orchard thrived very well, and all with the same quantity of dung,
proportionably used; for there they know no other Manure. I asked him how he
could make 12 l an acre of this Clover-grass: he said, either die feeding
Cattle, or keeping Kine, or laying it for seed after the first cut. For an
Acre of it being made part into haie, and the rest fed green, would keep four
Kine, winter and summer; and an Acre laid for seed might carrrie five bushels,
which valued at 6 d. a pound, come's to 8 l. Sterling; besides the first and
second cuts of grass and hay, and the after-pasture. He said the best time for
sowing flax and Clovergrass-seeds was about the beginning of April, presently
after a shour of rain. Some continue sowing of flax until the end of May, and
some sow after; though I know no cause to commend their slowness, in sowing of it
so late. I was not very inquisitive after his other Commodities. I saw by his
Turnips which he had sowed upon his heathie land, at his first breaking up,
that he differed in that point from all other husbandmen in those Countries,
who sowed them immediately after Rye or flax; but those things are left to
every ones experience to proceed therein as he think's best, according to his
own Observation. Now what I had observed here, and between Gaunt and Antwerp,
my Reason told me, grounded upon some former experience, that there was no land
that naturally bore heath, being either of a sandy, or loamie mould, but
might by devonshiring first (which I prefer before their Husbandry in
Flanders, whereunto adding some Dung, or Lime, or Marle, in fit proportion as
shall be hereafter expressed) may be made better then the best land, that
Flanders or England does afford. For no man with reason can deny, but that
Land is best, which will bring forth such Commodities as will yield most money
to make one wealthy and rich; for though wealth and Riches may consist either
in Cattle, Corn, housholdstuff, Plate, Jewels; yet, when those things are
valued, we commonly say, they are worth so much money. So Regina Pecunia,
Money is the Queen that commands all. Now if the same quantity of Acres of
poor heathie Land, by producing Flax, Turnips, and Clovergrass, will yield more
money then the rich Land, which bears wheat, barlie, meadow, and good
pasture: then by consequence it follows, that the poor Land is better then
the Rich. And I suppose that they find by experience in Flanders that their
rich land will naturally bear those Commodities; otherwise they could not be
ignorant that they do so far exceed their best Corn and Meadows in matter of
profit, which appears clearly by their own valuations: for they value an Acre
of flax may be worth forty or fifty pound. An Acre of Turnips worth eight
pound, or ten pound; an Acre of Clovergrass worth ten or twelv pound, whereas
they value their best barlie may be worth ten or twelv pound, their best wheat
may be worth five or six pound an Acre, and their best meadow worth four or
five pound an Acre: Now if ye compare the value of these Commodities together,
supposing the rich Land will not bear the other, which are the richer
Commodities, so well as the poor; you must needs conclude the poorer Land to
be the better. And it is a strong Argument to me, that their rich land will
not bear those rich Commodities so naturally as the heathie and sandy Land
does; for though I went often between Bridges and Dunkirk, which is thirty
nine miles, being the richest Land in Flanders, and where there is goodly
wheat, barlie, and meadows, as ever my eyes beheld; yet I never saw in all that
ground, to my remembrance, one Acre of Flax, or Clover-grass: whereas, on the
contrary, between Gaunt and Antwerp, (which is thirty miles, and the poorest
Land in all the Country, much like Sandie-Chappel in Surreie, or some part of
the Heathie Land in Windsor Forest) I have seen many hundreds of Acres of
goodly Flax, Turnips, and Clover-grass, close by the Highwaie side, and their
Corn there not any thing but Rye, French Wheat, and Oats.

It is not only dung, which causes the fertility in those Barren, Heathie,
and sandy Lands for to bring forth those rich Commodities; but partly the
nature of those seeds, which do delight to grow rather in a light and gentle
Land, then in one too stiff and heavy. Though it is true, that dung is of that
virtue, that it heat's, fatten's, sweeten's, and reclaim's all Barren grounds:
and unslakt Lime and Marl are of as great an Efficacy, being proportionably
tempered with Earth and Ashes, and of longer continuance to enrich Land, as I
will show hereafter. But because some will say, that the burning of the Turff
(which we call Devonshiring) will make the ground the wors after three years,
I do most confidently affirm, upon my own experience, that, with the addition
of Dung, or Lime, or Marl, in fit proportions, there is no such Husbandry in
the World, perfectly to prepare any Heathie Land and make it nourish, receiv
and ripen seeds. For the Earth is, as it were, renewed by the Fire, having no
other Roots in the entrails of it, produces nothing for many years but what
one sow's upon it; and shall remain vigorous enough to serve as long as one of
knowledge and understanding will desire it. And therefore I shall advize you to
prefer this Husbandry upon your Heathie Land before any other.

Though they have no other manure to mend their Land, but Dung in the Barren
and Heathie Land in Flanders and Brabant: yet they have a very fine way in
Brabant to raise a great quantity of Dung; the practice whereof may much
advance the Improvement of St Leonard's Forest. They that keep sheep there,
upon the Heaths, house them every night, and in the Summer, at noon, first
having laid three or four Inches of Sand at the bottom of the Floor, wherein
they lodge their sheep for a night or two, which tread their Dung and Piss into
the Sand, and so they daily use more Sand to be used in the same manner, until
the quantity be grown so great, that the sheep cannot conveniently go in or
out. Then they cast that out of the House, and put in more Sand, and so proceed
throughout the year, and by that means three or four hundred sheep will raise
one thousand Loads of Dung in a year: and eight hundred sheep two thousand
Loads, which, allowing twenty Loads to an Acre, will Dung an hundred Acres
yearly: and this Dung by experience does mightily improve such Heathie Land as
St Leonard's is. Besides there is Marl in most part of the Forests. I account
any mine that is free from stones, and lies so thick, as it is worth the
digging, and near and convenient to carry to your Land, and of clammie
substance, when it is wet, though it seem only Clay or Loam, yet to be Marl,
and very good Manure for Sandy and Heathie Land, be it of what Color it
will; as either Graie, Yellow, or Blue; and forty Loads of it laid upon an
Acre in Summer, and presently spread, and so let lie all Winter to incorporate
with the earth, then Devonshired the next March, and spread upon the Land and
Sowed, will mightily improve it. I did use six Acres thus, that was nothing but
Heath, and had two Crops of Corn from it; and the third year it came of it self
to be as good Grass, as ever I saw grow in any Meadow in England. I saw
another great Improvement in Clement Stoke's Farm adjoining to the Forest; he
had Land, that he let out, two years together, for twelv pence an Acre: at
last he Devonshired it, and caused his hills, before they were burnt, to be
set a just rod square one from another; and when they were burnt, he put a
peck of unslackt Lime, which was forty Bushels, this Lime being slackt in the
hills, with the first Rain was mingled together with the Ashes, and then spread
upon the Land, and after Sowed with Wheat; and brought as good as any was in
the Country: brought next year a very good Crop of Oats, and the year
following com to as good Grass as any he had to his Farm. This I hold to be
the cheapest Husbandry: because four or five Load of Fern, of which there is
store in the Forest, being cut from the beginning of July to the middle of
August will burn off twelv Loads of Chalk Lime; and though your Chalk cost dear
the bringing thither; yet the Lime will not stand you in twelv shillings a
Load, and by this way you save much carriage, and so by consequence may
compass to manure yearly much more Land. As for Example, you carry but one
Load of Lime to your Land, whereas by the other ways you must carry twenty
Loads of Dung; and forty Loads of Marl. So as by the Lime, if that will do as
well, you may Lime twenty Acres as soon as you can Dung one Acre, and forty
Acres for one with Marl; But I advize you to make Trial your selv's of all
these several Husbandries, and then to follow that which you find cheapest and
best.

I have set down at large, how I came first to know the Husbandries, and how I
was satisfied in the particulars. I have also set down three several ways to
improve your Land; now I will lay down the charge in severaltie; then cast up
the profit from one Acre to five and twenty Acres; then to fifty, and so to
an hundred Acres; by which it shall appear, that by an ordinary way of
Husbandry, according to the value, which they make of like Commodities in
Flanders, how that by improving a hundred Acres of Heathie Land every year, as
namely of St Leonard's Forest, and Sowing the Seeds of Flax, Turnips, and
Clover-grass, you may in five years improve five hundred Acres to be worth
abov seven thousand pounds a year. The particular charge of an Acre of Flax is
as follows.

First, the devonshiring of an Acre 01 00 00 A load of Lime to put into the
Hills 00 12 00 The ploughing and harrowing of an Acre 00 06 00 The bushel of
flax-seed at thirteen shillings four pence the bushel. 02 00 00 The weeding of
an Acre 00 10 00 Pulling and binding an Acre 00 10 00 Graffing the seed from
the flax 00 06 00 Watering, drying, swinging and beating the flax of nine
hundred weight upon an Acre. 04 10 00
This is the uttermost charge that I could learn: so the whole comes to L S D
09 5 00 Nine hundred pound weight of Flax, upon an Acre at eight Stivers the
pound, which was an ordinary price in Gaunt, when I was there, together with
the Seed, valued to be worth 40 00 00 Now if you deduct fifteen shillings, an
Acre, more, toward Charges or Losses, the Account being already ten pound an
Acre, short of the value of their best Flax, yet remain's abov all Charges
clear for an Acre 750 00 00 By the same Account you will be at five hundred
pound charge for fifty Acres and then receiv at forty pound an Acre, two
thousand pound; but clear abov all Charges but 1500 l. The like Account of a
thousand pound charge for an hundred Acres; you receiv upon the Account of
forty pound an Acre four thousand pound; but clear abov all Charges 3000 l.
This thousand pound Charge for an hundred Acres is only supposed, in case you
lay out all the Charge before you receiv any Money for part of your Flax; but
before you are out seven hundred pound, some Money will com in for Flax
continually, so as indeed you shall not go out abov seven hundred pound at all
in stock, and after the first years profit is com in, you cannot Account that
you are out any thing from your purs, because you have your full stock again,
and three thousand pound more.

But this is not all the profit you are to exspect from your hundred Acres the
first year; for after the Flax is pulled, which will be either in Julie or
August, the same Land may be sowed with Turnips, and, prove according to the
Flanders Account, worth eight pound an Acre, over and abov all charges: so
twenty five Acres comes to two hundred pound; fifty Acres to four hundred
pound, and an hundred Acres to eight hundred pound. They sow in Flanders but
two Bushels and a half of Turnep seed upon an Acre, which was worth, when I was
there, but twelv pound, and plough it once after the Flax is pulled, they
harrow it, and weed it, if there be cause, and that is all their charge
concerning that business.

Both these Crops are sowed, ripe and ready to be pulled within eight
months; that is, between the beginning of April and the end of November: so
the profit of an hundred Acres, the first year, comes to, besides all charges
on this Account, unto three thousand eight hundred pound. And the hundred pound
allowed for charges, may very well com into your purs again within the other
four Months.

When the Turnips are pulled, I would have the same hundred Acres made ready
again to be sowed with Clover-grass seed alone, about the beginning of April
then next following, therein altering the custom of Brabant and Flanders, which
is to sow it immediately either with or after the Corn. For I found by
Experience in Herefordshire, that it will thrive much better the first year,
and turn to more profit alone, then a Crop of Oats and it sowed together will
do.

The charges of an Acre is first ploughing and harrowing about 00 05 00 Ten
pound of seed as it cost me at Antwerp 1645 at sixpence a pound 00 05 00
Cutting the Grass, twice making the Haie, and threshing out the seed. 01 10 00
So the whole charge is 02 00 00
The second years profit.
Which being deducted there remain's clear for one Acre, according to the
Brabant and Flanders Account. 10 l. Which for twenty five Acres comes to two
hundred and fifty pound, for fifty Acres, to five hundred pound, and for an
hundred Acres to 1000 l. Then an hundred Acres must be Devonshired and sowed
with Flax and Turnips, as is before expressed, which, with Gods blessing, may
yield the like profit of three thousand eight hundred pound, when to the
thousand pound above mentioned for Clover-grass, being added the whole profit
of the second year from two hundred Acres, amounts to four thousand eight
hundred pound. 4800 l.
The third years profit.
Then the last hundred Acres, sowed with flax and Turnips, must be sowed as
before, with Clover-grass seed, which, according to the former account coming
to one thousand pound, and a hundred. Acres more devonshired, as formerly, and
sowed with flax and Turnips, yielding the like profit of three thousand eight
hundred pound, as is before specified, adding thereunto the two hundred Acres
of Clovergrass, the whole profit of the third year is 5800 l.
The fourth years profit.
Then the hundred Acres sowed before with flax, and Turnips, must be sowed as
formerly with Clover-grass seeds, which yielding a thousand pound, according to
to the former Accounts, and another hundred Acres devonshired as formerly, and
sowed with flax and Turnips, and yielding like profit of three thousand eight
hundred pound, and adding thereunto the three hundred Acres formerly sowed with
Clover-grass seed, mak's the whole profit of the fourth year 6800 l.
The fifth years profit.
Then the last hundred Acres sowed with flax and Turnips, must be sowed as
before with Clover-grass-seed, which yielding like profit of a thousand pound,
and another hundred Acres devonshired as formerly, and sowed with flax and
Turnips, yielding the like profit of three thousand eight hundred pounds,
thereto adding the four hundred Acres formerly sowed with Clovergrass seed,
make's the whole profit of the fifth year 7800 l.
Thus have I plainly showed what I promised in my Preface, that was, how an
industrious man in Brabant and Flanders would convert five hundred Acres of
barren and heathie Land from little value in five years to be worth above
seven thousand pounds a year.

You see, you have better means to mend your Land then they have; your Land
lies in a manner under the same Climate; for Chichester and Mecklin are in one
degree; the Soil is much alike, as I have showed, you may have as good a vent
for your Commodities, as they have for theirs, if you pleas; and therefore I do
not know what Reason can hinder you from putting those things into practice.

You may continue this yearlie profit of seven thousand eight hundred a year
upon this five hundred Acres. If you will by Liming, dunging, or marling, and
devonshiring again the first hundred Acres, laid down with Clover-grass, and
sowing it with flax, and Turnips as before, and so go round with every hundred
acres, as formerly in its course; but having great store of barren and heathie
ground, you were better improve that, and let the Clover-grass continue as long
as it will. And if after five years continuance it turns to a mingled Grass;
yet that will be as good as most Meadows and Pastures, that I know in England;
for it turn's commonly from a red honey suckle to a white, which we repute the
sweetest Grass, although it does not carry the greatest burden. And I am
persuaded it will continue longer if it be kept for Seed and cut but twice,
whereas they commonly cut it thrice a year in Flanders always in the Sap,
which will kill Fern.

Now I will show you how they vent these Commodities, that you may learn the
better, how to vent yours. First, they make great store of Linen themselves,
and send it most for London, what they make not in Cloth; they have a Market
every Thursdaie at a place called St Nicolas, almost midwaie between Antwerp
and Gaunt, whither Merchants com on purpose to buy it, and send it into
Holland, and there sell it at dear rates. I met with a Linen Draper of London,
when I was at Gaunt, and questioning him what vent there was for Flax at
London: he told me that before these troublesome times, if I had had a very
great quantity, he could have helped me to Chapmen to have bought it off at
dearer rates at London, then usually they sold it at in Flanders; for he said
he did believ there was not less then a hundred thousand pounds worth of Flax
brought yearly into England from foreign parts; a great part whereof to his
knowledge was sent from London into Lancashier; there made into Cloth, and
afterward brought back in Cloth, and sold in London; and if times grew
peaceable again in England, he told me I need not doubt the venting of more
Flax at London, then ever I would have to sell; and two honest English
Merchants of my Acquaintance did assure me, that if I could not sell my Flax
at London to my content, they would transport it for me into Holland, where I
might fell it dearer, then they sold their Flax in Flanders: for Merchants
usually sent for Flax out of Flanders and sold it again in Holland, at dearer
rates then they paid for it there.

But if you find that these Commodities thrive with you, and you grow rich by
them; I would advise you to send for some workmen out of Flanders, that
understand the Manufacture of Linen Cloth, and make your Flax into Linen
Cloth, you cannot choos but gain by it exceedingly, when you are aforehand
with the World, if they live by it who fetch it first from London into
Lancashire by Land; being made in Cloth, recarrie it up; and besides you shall
do a charitable deed by bringing in that Manufacture into the Kingdom. For it
keep's a very great number of poor Women and Children at Work in Flanders and
Holland, that otherwise would not have means to live. So by this way you
should be sure to vent your Flax, and withal procure a public benefit to the
Kingdom.

The Husbandry of Turnips is as Common between Gaunt and Antwerp, as that of
Flax; for, as there is more Flax sowed there, then of any other Grain or Corn;
so Commonly, after the Flax is pulled, immediately they sow Turnips, and
presently after their Rye; what they do not eat themselves they give unto their
Cattle; they will feed Oxen and Kine as fat, as Hay or Oats; the Roots being
clean Washed, and then Roots and Leaves being put into a Trough* and there
stamped together with a Spitter, and after boiled in Water and given to Kine
will make them abound in Milk, yet grow so fat withal, that you would wonder
at it. The only difficulty is to make you Cattle eat them at first; but breed
them up by hand, as they do there. Others do the same already* in many parts
of England, they will take Turnips and eat, or any other thing you will give
them.

To encourage you the more to sow Turnips, I will demonstrate unto you what an
Acre of them transplanted may be worth by Calculation as they are sold in
London. They commonly there sell four or five Turnips in a bunch for a penny.
A rod square being sixteen foot and a half may bear a thousand eight hundred
and nine Turnips, being set at half a foot distance the one from the other.
Now suppose that a thousand comes to good, and five sold for a penny, then a
Rod of them amount's to sixteen shillings eight pence, and an Acre of them
being eightscore Rod by the same Account, com's to abov thirty pound, and
therefore certainly an hundred Acres sowed, may be very well valued at eight
pound an Acre one with another, when you have brought your Cattle to eat them
as theirs do.

I told you before how in Brabant and Flanders they made twelv pound an Acre of
their Clover-grass, either by feeding Cattle, keeping Kine, or by the seed;
which, commonly increasing to five Bushels upon an Acre, was worth eight pound
when it was sold, but at sixpence a pound; but being sold for two shillings a
pound (which price I my self now paid for it) the value of the Seed quadruple's
from eight pound to thirty two pound an Acre; and the man that sold me seed
this year for two shillings a pound, desir's all that I can spare, the next
year at the same price, if you get but into the best kind of those they use in
Flanders. For when your Neighbors see your Labors thrive and prosper so far as
to convert your Land which bore nothing but Heath, for many Ages, First into
excellent Flax, then into such delicate Turnips, as they never saw before or
tasted, and to end with such Clover-grass, as they will admire, when they once
see your Crops, and somewhat understand, that you do reap some benefit by them,
they will com to you as to an Oracle to ask your Counsel, and be instructed
and desire it from you as a favor, at first to buy your Seed at any reasonable
price.

But if you find that you have more Seed of Flax and Turnips (if you will let
them grow to Seed) then you can vent, you must then set up either a Water-Mill,
or Windmill, as they do in Flanders, and make them into Oil; both which Seeds
mak's good Oil, which you may be sure to sell in London at good Rates.

And for your Clover-grass-seed, if you find you cannot sell it to your
content, you may choos whether you will let it grow to Seed or not; and if you
do not let it grow to Seed, you may cut it once more in a year, then otherwise
you could do.

You must change your Flax Seed, though never so good at first after four
years, the other Seeds do not so much require it.

I doubt not but these things will seem as strange to you at first, as they did
to me; and therefore I desire you but to try what I propose, upon such
profitable Terms, as no man, that is well in his wits, but will venture at
them, being laid down so plainly to you, as a child may understand them.

You may observe, that Flax, Turnips and Clover-grass, already grow in England;
but there is as much difference between what grows there, and here, as is
between the same thing, which grows in a Garden, and that which grows wild
in the Fields.

To prevent what may be strange or troublesome to you at First for want of
knowledge, I would advise you to send to Tom or Robin to Gaunt, where by means
of some of their old Acquaintance there, they may provide you a servant, who
understand's these several Husbandries as well as any of ours do the
Husbandry in getting Corn; and by observing of his practice, you your selv's,
or whom you will appoint may be sufficiently instructed in a year or two so
far, as to Command such things to be don by others as are not fit and
necessary to be don by your selv's.

Besides the excessive profit you will reap by Sowing these Commodities,
imagine what a pleasure it will be to your Eyes and Sent, to see the Russet
Heath turned into greenest Grass; which does produce most sweet and pleasing
Honie-Suckles; and what Prais and Reputation you will gain by your Examples,
first introducing that into your Country, which being followed by others,
must need's redound to the general benefit of the whole Commonwealth. I do by
my Will Command you for to execute no more, then what I would my self to morrow
put in practice, if I had Liberty: you should learn these things I have set
down by Examples, which I am enforced to leav you as a Father's Precepts, and
with a Father's blessing to you all, desiring God Almighty to guide you and
direct you in all your Actions, I will leav you to his divine protection and
providence.

FINIS.

