THE Civil Rights, and Conveniences OF EPISCOPACY: WITH THE Inconvenience OF
PRESBYTERY ASSERTED; As it was delivered in a charge to the Grand Jury, at the
General Quarter Sessions, held at Nottingham, Apr. 22. 1661.

By Pen. Whalley Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said
County.

LONDON, Printed for Philemon Stephens the Younger, at the Kings Arms over
against Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street, 1661.

The civil Rights and Convenience of EPISCOPACIE, With the inconvenience of
PRESBYTERY Asserted.
GENTLEMEN,
HAd it not been that all the several Sects of this Nation, who not long since
breathed nothing but fire and destruction against each other, have of late been
like Herod and Pilate made friends all in one day; I should not have detained
you with any Discourse at this time by way of Preamble; but that considered,
with the extravagancie of some Expressions which fell of late from some persons
(whose Education, in common reason might have entitled them to more wit)
against the Discipline of the Church of England; I am invited nay compelled, as
a Son of the Church, to say some thing in vindication of that which they
commonly call the unnecessarie superfluity, but others the (...) or Decorum of
the Clergy: wherein I shall prove the Rights that they have to those Eminent
places of Honor, which they now enjoy, or may pretend to, as sitting in the
House of Lords, etc. with the Conveniencie and profit which may accrue to us
Commoners by their having so: I am induced the rather to it, because the time
is now at hand, when every man possibly may hope to get a toleration, or
connivence for his own humor, or fancy, which very many now a days mistake
for Conscience in the exercise of Religion* and the way for it being thought
feasible by that old one of petitioning the Parliament, as it may be by some
conceived. Now to the end, that you, like your Predecessors, should not be
gulled in Petitioning for you know not what; I will by Gods help lay down the
Legalitie and Conveniene of Episcopacie with the contraries of Presbytery,
(for they are now like to be the only Rivals) and then if you have a mind to
Petition, you may know what to Petition for. The Rights then which the Bishops
have both to their Lands and Honors are twofold, by Custom or common Law, and
by Statute Law.

The Custom under which they claim, is of great Antiquity, for it bears date
almost with Christianity it self; In Ethelberts time, the first Christian King
of the Saxons, you shall find a Convention at Canterbury consisting of Bishops
and Lords, to settle the Affairs of Church and State, and that is above a
thousand years ago, and look what Privilege they enjoyed under him, they had
under the respective Saxon. Kings of the Heptrarchie, as soon as converted to
the Christian Faith, amongst whom they had the precedencie of the other Lords;
for the writ of Summons ran, Ad Episcopos, Principes, Proceres, and optimates
Regni; For the Bishops, Princes, Peers, and other good men of the Realm. And
afterward, when the Arms of the West Saxon Kings had so prevailed, as happily
to reduce England to a Monarchy, The Acts of that Parliament held at
Kingsbury, pro negotiis Regni, were confirmed by the Bishops, Abbots, and other
great men of the Nation; and this happened, Regnante Aethelwolpho filio Egberti
the first Monarch of England, who afterward. Anno Dom. 845. called a
Parliament or Convention of Estates at Winchester, and decreed Cum consilio
Episcoporum and principum suorum, by the advice of his Bishops and Princes unto
the Clergy, with several Temporalities and the Tyths of all men's estates, and
those free ad omnibus secularibus servitiis, nec non regalibus tributis
majoribus, and minoribus sive taxationibus; from all secular Impositions, and
the Kings Taxes both great and small; I chose to instance in this, because you
may see the right that the Church has to Tithes; and how it was the intention
of the first Doners, to free her from all Imposition and Taxes whatsoever,
which though the Clergy do not now pretend to, yet more moderation may be used
for the future in assessing them then formerly; And this privilege of sitting
amonst the Lords, they enjoyed without alteration till the Conquest, during
which time they held their Lands pura and perpetua Eleemosyna, by Franck
Allmoigne as the men of the Law term it; But when the Norman came, though under
him they still enjoyed their Lands, yet their Tenure was altered from Franck
Almoigne, to be held sub militatari servitute, (as Matt. Paris has it) by
Knights service or Baronage, by which they were compellable to furnish the King
toward his Wars, equally with Lay Subjects of the same tenure; which though at
first it looked like an encroching upon their Privileges, proved an advantage
unto them; for whereas before they sat amongst the Lords only Virtute Officii
as Bishops, now they had place En respectede lour possessione l'Autient
Baronies annexes a lour dignity, Stamf. ple. V. 3. C. 1.
as Barons, and so they owned themselves at the Parliament held at Northampton
in Henry the Seconds time, when they said, non sedemus bic Episcopi nos;
Barons, vos Barons, omnes pares hic sumus; We do not sit here as Bishops, we
are Barons, you are the rest of the Clergy were held, and that justly too, the
first Estate of the Realm, and so they continued till Henry the Thirds time, in
whose Reign Magna Charta was confirmed, which is the first of that we call
Statute Law, under which we claim much of that which we pertend a property in;
and there you shall find those great Privileges of the Church, amply and fully
confirmed; for it runs thus. First we have for us and our Heirs confirmed for
ever, That the Church of England shall be free, and enjoy all her Rights and
Liberties inviolable; and it follows likewise, All Acts made against this by
any succeeding Parliament in time to come shall be void to all intents and
purposes: and this was confirmed by a solemn curse denounced on all the
infringers, by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, the prime Peer of the Land.
And truly it would not be amiss, if all the Opposers of the reflourishing of
Episcopacie and others would consider, whether or no, those occurrences which
have happened amongst us since that great violation of Magna Charta, the
disfranchisement of the Clergy, have not rather resembled a Curse, then a
Blessing.

But to return again to the matter in hand; if Magna Charta be, as most of us
are apt to incline to believe, it is, like the Laws of the Medes and Persians
unalterable, as to the main, it is so in every part; for the Rule must hold,
Quicquid incorruptibile est in toto, incorruptibile est in singulis partibus;
what is incorruptible in the whole, is likewise in every part: But possibly a
man may receive the same answer in this particular, as the King of Persia did
in another case, who falling into an incestuous love, demanded of his Counsel,
Whether there was not a Law, that the Kings of Persia might marry their own
Sisters? They after some advice return this Answer, That they could not find a
Law tolerating such marriages, yet there was another which permitted the Kings
of Persia to do what they thought fit: And so, though there be no Law that
Magna Charta should be infringed in the least particle, yet there is a Law or
Custom, for Parliaments to do what they will; And by a Parliament was Magna
Charta, as far as concerns the Church, violated; and therefore good and
binding: It Is true, the Royal assent was as a man may say extorted to that
Bill, whose condescending to that and some other things about that time, to
prevent as he hoped (that which it caused) a War, together with his signing
those Sacrilegious destructive, and self tottering Propositions at the Isle of
Wight, made him appear to be a man, and in those things subject to infirmities.
But however this is well enough answered out of Bodinus, that great Statesman
of France, Nihil a duobus ordinibus potest decerni, quo uni ex tribus
incommodum inferatur; Nothing can be Decreed by two Estates, to incommode the
third; and that the Lords Spiritual are an Estate, I hope will not be denied;
when my Lord Cook, that Oracle of the Law affirms it, who in his Chapter of
P.F, 1. says, The three Estates of the Realm, are the Lords Spiritual, the
Lords Temporal, and the Commons; and his I think is a sufficient Authority to
confute that Frivolous but King-lessning Tenent, which holds his Majesty to be
one of the three Estates.

The next thing to be inquired after, is the advantage that does, or may accrue
to us Commoners by these Privileges of the Church; and they are either in
general, or particular.

The first is very Evident; for if at any time the Lords should attempt to
encroach (a thing which possibly they may hereafter incline unto to be quit
with us) upon the rights of the Commons, the Bishops are as so many Advocates
to plead our Cause in the upper House, to which their own interest must enforce
them; for as they are generally the sons of Commoners, and so taken from
amongst us; so to us they must return in their issues; and therefore, look
whatsoever they assent unto, which entrenches upon our liberties, is
prejudicial to themselves in their Posterities and Relations.

The next to be treated of, is, that which will be sure to get acceptance,
every man's particular advantage, and that worldly too, by the reflourishing of
the Church; and this is as apparent as the former: For all that Grandeur and
splendor, those eminent places of Honor and Profit in the Church, are but as
so many Crowns and Prizes held forth to the encouragement of us, and our
Children in the progress of Virtue, according to that of Claudian, Egregios
invitant praemia mores.

And the rather to incite us, the meanest person in the Nation is in himself or
posterity capable of the highest Church preferment, if parts and industry be
not wanting; so that now we may say to our Children as soon as they are fit to
go from us.

Disce bonas arts, sanctam cole Relligionem;
Sic tibi cum magno surget honor decus.
Pursue good Arts, embrace Religion true,
So Honors great to thee shall soon accrue.
For now Heavens be praised, the Church has got such a nursing Father, as she
wants no preferment wherewith to encourage her deserving and obedient sons. And
though all men cannot arrive at the highest pitch of Honor; yet, where there is
merit, there will never be wanting a sufficient compensation. Better too is it
for the body of a Nation, when virtue is encouraged by rewards, then when Vice
is only disgraced by penalties. For Noble and generous Spirits, are sooner
drawn to the ways of Virtue by Honorable Requitals, then deterred from those
of Vice by ignominious punishments; And therefore praiseworthy is that
Inscription upon the Town Hall of Zant, a City in an Island of the same name;

Hic locus odit, amat, pumit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jara, probos.
Here are rewards for Virtue, as well as punishments for Vice: Neither is it a
new thing for learned Men, to be preferred before others that are superior in
Birth and Estate, if inferior in that qualification; for which Sigismund the
Emperor gave this Reason; Who upon a time being asked by some of his
heavie-headed attendants, Why he valued Scholars above themselves, who were far
their superiors both in Honor and riches? returned this Answer: Se jure illos
colere, qui vobis donis tam divinis antecederent; That he did them nothing but
right, because they out went them in gifts so Divine: For (says he) Wisdom
and Learning are only the gifts of God, whereas he himself could confer honor
and riches upon any body; and of this mind was Antisthenes the Philosopher when
he cursed that City, where (...), good and bad, fools and wise men, had equal
honor.

As now I have spoke something of the Rights and Conveniencie of Episcopacy, so
it remains that I should say likewise something of the no right and
inconveniency of By Presbytery must be meant the Scotch, to set up which, the
Nation, when they were set a madding, Covananted.
Presbytery: But the former it is needless to insist on, because having proved
the Rights of the one, the illegalitie of the other is of natural consequence;
therefore the chief bent of my Discourse shall be to treat of the
inconveniencie that Presbytery brings along with it to all sorts and orders of
men; and first I Will begin with the King. From him (though a Sacred Person) it
ravishes the chiefest Jewel of the Crown; the dernier resort, or last appeal of
the Subject. For, whereas by the Laws of England; If any man find himself
aggrieved at any consistorial proceedings of any Bishop, there lies an Appeal
to the King in Chancery, who of course in those cases, commissionates certain
Delegates, under the Great Seal, who are to inquire, and take Cognizance of the
matter depending, and accordingly to relieve the Plaintiff if they see
occasion for it. With the Presbytery it i^ other ways; for they say, in the
book of Discipline, From the Kirk is no appellation; and as this is very
prejudicial to the Authority of Princes, so is there another passage in that
book as prejudicial to their persons; For, to Discipline (say they) must all
Estates, 2. Book of Discip. c. 18.
and Persons, as well they that Govern, as they that are governed, be subject.
If now the King cannot escape Scot-free, the Subject must not expect to be free
from their insolence. For they say, That for an uncomly gesture, a vain word,
suspicion of covetousness, 1 Book of Disc. 7. head.
Sabbath-breaking, keeping a table above a man's rank, and the like; (and of all
this their Reverendships must be the sole Judges) Church censures ought to be
inflicted; and though it be granted, they begin first with Admonition, yet if
there be not a present Conformity to what those supercilious Gentlemen will
please to impose, they proceed presently to excommunication. And as they are
oppressive in those things that possibly may be no faults, so are they worse in
those that are: For whereas our Law says, Nemo debet bis puniri pro eodem
delicto, No man ought to be punish twice for one offense; They say, Nothing
forbids the same fault to be punished, Syn. Theor. 63.
one way by the Politic power, another by the Ecclesiastical; by one under
the formality of a Crime, by corporal or pecuniary punishment, by the other
under the formality of a scandal, with Spiritual Censures: And though some may
think this harsh, yet are they wors when they say, 1 Book of Discip. 9. head.
Parents shall loose the disposal of their Children in marriage if the Child
desire a Husband or Wise, and the Parent gainsay it upon the common ground
only, of want of guds, or disparitie, of Birth, then upon the Child's desire the
Minister is to travel with the Parent, and afterward at his discretion admit
them to marriage; (for the work of the Lord (as they say) ought not to be
hindered by the corrupt affections of men: Though this be very high, yet is
their practice much higher; for the Presbytery does ordinarily compel the
injured Parent to give the disobedient Child an equal portion with the rest of
his Children.

Thus they encourage and countenance Disobedience and Rebellion, which the
Scripture compares to the sin of Witchcraft; and no marvel then if they, who
are so great Patrons of Disobedience toward natural Parents, should be such
stout, assertors of Rebellion against Politic. And now I Will tell you what this
Excommunication is, to which every man is liable for slighting his Minister,
though he be never so raw a novice; After the Sentence is pronounced, no Person
(Wife and Family excepted) may converse, eat, drink, buy or sell with him,
without License; 1 Book of Discip. 7. head.
Nay the Children that are born afterward, are not to be admitted to Baptism,
till they be of years to demand it, and then presently of course, Letters of
Horning goes out, which is an outlawing by the sound of a Horn, and putting out
of the Laws protection, 54. Artic. 1.599.
so as any body may kill the Excommunicate person that will be at the trouble
of it.

But all these, some may say, are but contingent inconveniences, and may be
(by a wise man) prevented; But now I will speak of some other of their brave
Tenets, and they are such are very enchroaching upon the properties of all,
though never so wise; All Tithes (say they) Oblations, 2 Book Disc. ca^ ^
Temporalities, of Bishops, Deans, Sub-Deans, and all Lands belonging to
Cathedral Kirkes, was the Patrimony of the Kirk, and ought to be disposed of
by the Kirkes appointment: Then as preventing an Objection, that the present
Possessours had Leases from the former Proprietours, they go on and say, The
Leasers were thieves and murderers, and ought not to alienate the common guds
of the Kirk. Thus you see what property any man is like to have in his Estate,
that they are pleased to call thieves or murderers; and this is that they would
be at in England, had they but power according to their will.

The commodiousness of one, and the incommodiousness of the other, in short
then lies thus; In Episcopacy you have a public Revenue set forth for the
support and encouragement of Learning and Virtue; In Presbytery you have all
Learning discouraged, because none are capable of preferment, but such who out
of the predominancy of Ignorance and folly with submit to those hotheaded, and
for the most part illeterrate Gentlemen. And therefore, as no Commoner can be
against the former, but such as maligns the contingent advantage of his
Posterity, and other Relations, so none can be for the latter, but such who
have a mind to deliver themselves and posterity up to an insupportable slavery.

Now seeing that Presbytery and Episcopacy can by no means agree, as being of
such different Principles; It will not be amiss therefore, to try how near we
can bring the Presbyterian and Jesuit together. Father Mariana, in his book De
Rege and Regit Institutione, says, That Princes which be excommunicated by the
Pope, may lawfully be killed by their Subjects; Mr. Kant the Scotch Presbyter,
in his book De Excommunicato trucidando, delivers for Orthodox, That all
persons who will not take the Covenant (the King not excepted) ought to be
excommunicated, and all persons so excommunicated, ought to he killed. Thus far
they go along pretty well; Father Escobar a late Casuist in that society,
lays down for a rule, Goods gotten by dishonorable ways as Treason, Murder,
Sacrilege, an unjust Sentence, Mist. of Iesuitism. Let 8. p. 112.
are lawfully possessed by him, who has so gotten them; and he is not at all
obliged to make restitution: This you will say, is damnable doctrine, and very
scandalous to civil as well as Christian society, yet as bad as it is, it is
certainly the Opinion of our jolly Casuists of the Discipline; otherwise they
(at least the pretenders of Theology amongst them) would not now rejoice in
the wages of Iniquity, in what they got by plundering and Killing their
Fellow Subjects for doing their duties. They would make restitution of what
they have received by Sequestring of honest men's Livings: They would tender
satisfaction for the injuries they have done by exposing the Wife and Children
of the Loyal Clergy to a necessary poverty: And that faculty of plundering
of Livings was so Epidemical amongst them, that a man may without breach of
Charity, say, They would all have been guilty of it, had they but had
opportunity.

The Jesuits, Mist. of Jesuit.
who are generally observed to be very strict Observers of Discipline,
especially in that part which concerns their habit, Mist. of Jesuit. let. 6. p.
70
say, No man ought upon pain of Excommunication to lay aside his habit, except
it be, Furandi vel Scortandi gratia, to whore or to thieve: So our Gentlemen,
those great Judaizers of the Sabbath, in which they differ from all the
Churches of Christ in the world, certainly hold that the Sabbath is not to be
broke, except it be to plunder or kill; else they would never have made an
onset upon the Kings Army at Edgehill on a Sunday. Mist. of Jesuit. Let. 5.
And as the Jesuit Doctrine of Probability is justly counted the Viper and
bane of Morality; so the Disciplinarian Doctrine of Predestination, reduced
into practice it of as ill if not worser consequence. But perhaps some may say,
that all this might have been spared, considering how instrumental of late the
Presbyterians have been in restoring of us to our Peace: Its granted that many
of those who formerly were of that judgment, have of late been very signally
eminent for Loyalty, which is a convincing Argument of their repentance: For
men possibly may repent of Presbytery, but Presbyters never yet repented of
any thing.

Now for satisfaction howere of those who as Presbyterians did Contribute to
His Majefties Return, I shall insert a Story out of the Chronicles of
Scotland, Spotswood his history of Scot.
which will be pertinent enough to the purpose; During the Eighteen years
Imprisonment of James the First, here in England; The government of that
Kingdom fell to Murdake Earl of Fife, by whose means it was not improbable,
the King was so long detained.

This Earl of Fife had in that while two sons that grew up to be so boisterous
and wicked, as neither the Father nor any body else could rule them; who
thereupon told them, that since they would not be directed and governed by him,
he would send for one who should rule both him and them; And immediately sends
away for the King, who upon his return summons a Parliament, in which Murdake
and his two sons were condemned for Treason, and accordingly executed.

The Application is very obvious, Independencie and Anabaptisme, the two
ungracious sons of Presbytery, in the Kings absence, occasioned by Presbytery,
grew to such an height of Stubbornness and Rebellion, as instead of being
ruled, they often attempted to murder and destroy their common Parents, who
induced by the certainty of being ruined by them, sent for the King to come
home, and rule them all; whose mercy is such, as that he will not apply as to
persons, yet such is his Wisdom, that he will, if he Consult (which I am sure
he does) his own Safety, and our Peace, make a home Application as to things.
But now lest my Discourse should be too prolixe, a thing to be avoided in
Sermons themselves, I shall direct you, (Gentlemen) in discharge of the Duty
as to the business in hand, and that shall be only in putting you in mind of
your Oath, part of which is to enquire and present what is given in charge; You
are to enquire after all Treasons, Petti-Treafon, etc. It Is High Treason to
compass or imagine the death of the King, the Queen his Wife, or of their
eldest Son and Heir.

And though the Nation be not yet so happy as they will be when his Majesty
rejoices in those endearing Relations; yet by this you may see, that this
Statute was made chiefly to preserve the Person of the King; for it is the
Personal, not the Politic Capacity that never dies, if a King can be said
to have either Wife or Children.

Its High Treason likewise, if Master Saint John the late Kings Solicitour be
to be believed, in his Argument at Law (against the Earl of Strafford) for to
alter the Religion Established; and this the Covenanters were sworn to, when
they Covenanted against the Hierarchy, and Discipline of our Church; For
believe it, Discipline and Ceremonies are as necessary for the preserving of
Religion in its Primitive Purity, as the skin or rind of an Apple, (which of
it self is insipid, and of little worth) it is to preserve the Fruit from
putrefaction.

To impose Oaths likewise, or persuade Forraigners to level War within this
Kingdom, according to Master Saint John, and Master Pym, is High Treason; and
their Authothoritie may be sufficient, as Argumentum ad Homines; I insist the
rather, because the Covenanters may see how far they are from being Obliged
by the Covenant, (the imposing of which, being High Treason by, then,
Presbyterian Authorities) that they are Obliged by the Laws both of God and
Man to the quite contrary, according to the Rule, In malis promissis rescinde
fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum. You are to present all Ministers, as well
Beneficed as others, that do not constantly upon every Sunday, or other
Opportunity of Religious Worship, read the Liturgy of the Church established
by Law, commonly called The Common Prayer. In Vindication of which, If I say
something more then properly belongs to this place, The Orthodox Divine, (and
for the other I care not) I hope will grant an Indulgence.

The main Objection then against Bishops, is against our Liturgy in general,
Viz. That it is a Form; and (as the Information from Scotland says) It is not
lawful for a man to tie himself up, or be tied up by others to a perscript
Form, either in Prayer or Exhortation; To which may be thus Answered; When
people meet together to worship God in public, it is not to be expected that
all should pray at once according to their particular Fancy, (which as it
cannot please him who is styled the God of Order, so indeed is no where
practiced) but that the Minister in behalf of himself, and the people, should
put up his requests to Heaven. Well then; That Prayer, in speaking of which,
the Minister is not tied up to a perscript Form, does not cease though from
being a Form to the Congregation; For every man who joins with the Minister,
(or if he do not, what does he there?) is as much tied up from dilating
himself by occasional Meditations, as if all had been read out of a Book; and
yet one of these is acceptable, the other as the abominations of the Heathen is
accounted. The Case then is just thus: One of yon purchases a piece of Land of
his Neighbor, and in Order to the making good of his Title gets the advice of
the most judicious and ablest Lawyers of the Land, in drawing the Conveyance;
which done, he thinks himself in a pretty safe Condition as to that: At last
meets with a bad fellow, One that uses to make motions in any Court that will
hear him, for ten groates, or a dinner, who tells him he has taken a great
deal of pains to no purpose; for he can make a better Conveyance Extempore. If
now the Purchaser should in this Case be ore-ruled by that small man of the
Law, you would think as I suppose, he deserved to be begged for a Fool; and yet
the Case is directly the same: For that Form establislit by Law, approved by
all the best Reformed Churches abroad, Compiled by the advice of all the pious,
sober and Learned men of that Age, Sealed with the Blood of so many Reverend
Prelates, and by all agreed on to be that acceptablest way of Worshipping, God,
must now be rejected for the Extempore Form of every saucy idle-headed Jack in
a Pulpit.

You are likewise to enquire of all persons that have wittingly heard, or been
present at any other Form of Common Prayer, Administration of Sacraments,
making of Ministers, or other Rites then what are expressed in the said Book,
or which are contrary to the Statute of 2. and 3. E. 6.1. And truly, if you
would but do your duty in this particular the penalty is so great, that the
Auditors of Unlicent Lecturers would not be so numerous as formerly, neither
would the unconforming Preachers, [These Disturbers of the Peace] have any
encouragement any longer to oppose for they would soon be weary of Preaching to
stone walls; To which improbabilitie, they must be necessitated, if this
Statute was put in due Execution. You are likewise to inquire, etc.

FINIS.

