Wise Nature humane Judgments to direct
Placed the Index of our Minds in the aspect
As here appears; For this Physiognomie
Speaks Valor, Wit, and perfect Gallantrie
Learning and love of Arts; So who this Look
Contemplates well, will Read and like the Book.


Select and choice POEMS Collected out of the LABORS OF CAPTAIN George Wharton.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Blaiklock, at the sign of the Turks Head in
Ivy-Lane. 1661.

The continued Loyalty of (that eminent Sufferer for the Good Old Cause of his
Majesty) Captain GEORGE WHARTON.
FRom the year 1642, until the surrender of Oxford, this Loyal-minded Person
was actually in the Service of his late Royal Majesty of glorious Memory: being
sometimes Comptroller of his Majesty's Train of Artillery, and Captain of a
Troop of Horse, which he raised at his own costs and charges. And then, there
being nothing more to be done (the unhappy Wars now brought to a period) he
came to London upon the benefit of the Oxford-Articles; where long he had not
been, but he was necessitated to drink deep of the Cup of sorrow, providence
had provided for the Royal Party; being (as himself in Hemer. 1651. says)
constantly at the pleasure of the then power, subject to be turned out of Town,
to graze upon the Common, clap't up in Prisons to study the generation of Nits
and Lice; or necessitated to such a Hellish kind of living, as nothing but Bats
and Owls and Cavaliers could possibly endure. And he (as having more enemies,
and those more mischievons then many other Persons of that Party) was more
narrowly searched after; and at the last, viz. in 1648. (by ill fortune)
discovered; and when once in hold, the famous Jayls of Newgate, the Gatehouse,
and Windsour-Castle, began to be as commonly known to him, as if a Prison had
been all the Portion he (in this world) could probably expect. However, once it
was his good hap to escape; and being at liberty, he writ his Bellum
Hibernicale, Merlini Anglici Errata, etc. wherein he roundly and fearlesly
corrected the errors of some that were the Parliaments hirelings to abuse the
King and his Party, under pretense of Astrology: But Liberty being a thing too
precious for him long to enjoy, in those cloudy and Tyrannical times, he was at
length retaken: and for ten or twelve years together, was seldom half a year
from being under restraint, until this time of the happy Restoration of his
glorious Majesty King CHARLES the Second, unto his three Kingdoms of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

But notwithstanding his constant sufferings, and their frequent imprisoning of
his body, his more noble part was always free: and, as he had opportunity, he
did signify to the world his Loyal affections to His Sacred Majesty and his
Cause, in several Books of his, which (that the world may see, there have been
some men like sturdy Oaks, that could never be shaken or bribed to perjury) I
shall (with other curious pieces of his wit) present unto the Reader. That the
lively Copy of a truly Loyal subject may not be buried in Oblivion, but be
brought to light afresh, for the encouragement of others to persevere according
to Allegiance, in Loyalty, Duty and Obedience.

IN his Loyal Almanac for 1650. being the next opportunity of the Press he
had, after the Bloody Murder of His sacred Majesty of blessed memory, Charles
the First; he has these several signal sparks of Loyalty following.
1. He begins -- with -- Liber Lectori.
Touch me not, Traitor! For I have a Sting
For all, but such as love and serve the King.
I am no Temporist: Nor can I brook
The Pocket of a Bradshaw Bradshaw the bold Villain that sentenced His late
sacred Majesty to Death Steel, one appointed to draw up the Charge against him,
but by reason of sickness was absent. Cook, the Villain that solicited the
whole Villainy, and pray^d the pretended Court to murder his Sovereign.
, Steel, or Cook;
Or any Regicide that lives: I
Disdain all Harbors of Disloyalty.
URANIA is Divine! and (to be clear)
I serve no Mortal, but the CAVALIER.
If then thou be'st not one, pray let me lie,
Until thou can affect, as well as buy.
2. Under the Table of Kings, etc. having placed therein K. Charles the Second,
he writes --
Let such as Booker cringe unto a State,
And leave a Blank where I have ranked a King:
It Is far below my Quill to calculate
The spurious birth of that prodigious thing.
For maugre all its Acts, and damned Art,
Still Charles the Second's Monarch of my Heart.
3. Under the Table of Terms, etc.
Thus should the Terms begin and end, if we
Were not controlled by Traitors Tyranny:
But since they may adjourn, or vote them down,
My Rule's not certain, whilst they rule the Town.
4. In January (having put the Decollation of His Royal Majesty, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury: in Red Letters, that the Cruelty of those Actions
might more eminently appear) he writes --
Behold those Crimson Veins! England, lament!
Nay, curse the Authors of thy Dismal Fate:
But dote no longer on a Parliament,
Nor be ambitious to be hight a State:
Since in this Month those Tyrants hewed down,
In Laud, the Mitre; in blessed Charles, the Crown.
5. In February.
Lo here again two Martyrs on a tree
[Burleigh and Those two worthy persons were murdered in the month February,
though in different years, viz. 1. 1647. the 2. 1648.
Beaumont] basely put to death;
That, for attemping's Sovereign to free:
This, that he would not (Saintlike) break his faith:
Look to it Wild, and Lambert! there is a season
Heaven will revenge this blood, reward your treason.
6. In March.
Yet, yet, the thirsty Saints howl out for blood;
Brave Those 3 worthies were for their Loyalty murdered, March 9. 1648.
Capel! Cambridge, Holland, all must die;
The first, 'cause he for's King and Country stood;
They, 'cause they would, and yet would not comply.
--! They found thy mercy and fair-quarter
Flat cruelty -- But Capel is the Martyr.
7. In April.
The lofty Saints, their prowess now to show,
And make their fame float with the spreading main;
Vouchsafe this month, to let great London know,
They durst encounter boys as well as men.
For lyon-like April 9. 1648. there were several Apprentices, etc. killed in
the streets.
th'apprentices they slay,
But what cannot resist, is Asses prey.
8. In May.
Now wise and noble The E. of Strafford was beheaded, May 12. 1641.
Strafford, Mr. Yeomans and Mr. Bowcher put to death May 30. at Bristol 1643.
Yeomans, Bowcher,
And Sir Nich. Kemish put to death at Chepstow, May 25. 1648.
Kemish (in cold blood) resign to fate:
The Surrey suppliants too, they basely Butcher,
As trivial objects of their rage and hate.
Their blood cries still aloud: may it do so,
Till Hea'vn avenge it on his barbarous fo.
9. In June.
The Loyal June 3. 1648. The Kentishmen murdered for presuming so much as to
petition for a KING.
Kentishmen are Murdered next,
They would petition for, and have a KING:
What disobedient things were they, that vexed,
And so distu^b'd the States new-modelling?
Petitioning's the birthright of the Saints;
They must be heard, but will hear no complaints.
10. In July.
So Tompkins, Mr. Tompkins and Mr. Challoner put to death at London, July 4.
1643.
Challoner, and that brave soul!
[Francis Lord Francis Lord Villiers slain at Kingston, July the 7. 1648.
Villiers] in this month expired.
The cause the Kings: A crime most deadly foul,
Against those pure creatures, which the Crown aspired;
Nor do those Saints distinguish cruelty:
It Is Justice (right or wrong) how ever we die.
11. In August.
Who loves true worth, and grutcheth it to pay,
A tear for valiant Lucas, and stout Lisle?
Or why behooves it not, that -- pray
Their blood may not submerge this sinful Isle?
His Mercy's murder; honor, breach of trust:
Good God reward him as he is base, thou Just! 16^8. August. 8. Sir Charles
Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot to death at Colchester, after quarter given.

12. In September.
The last of Treaties in this month begun,
And promised fair, until the men of War,
Dreading a peace, surpised our Rising-Sun,
And dragged him to th'illegal newfound Bar
Of bondage. The next treaty they shall see
Will be through halters at the Gallow-tree. August 18. 1648. The treaty in the
Isle of Wight began.

13. In October.
What blood was shed at Basing, after they
Had spent their sury, with their poisonous breath:
And wanted strength unto their wills to slay,
But promised quarter! let the harmless earth
It fell on, witness! may it never forsake
That tincture, until Heaven enquiry make. Basing house taken by storm, and
after quarter was promised many were murdered, October. 14 1645.

14. In November.
Next, Kniveton's life their rage must satisfy,
For mere obedience to his Sovereigns will:
Who sent him messenger; yet like a Spy,
They take, adjudge him, and his blood they spill.
Did ever Turks, or Pagans violate
The Law of Nations, like this lawless State? Mr. Dan. Kniveton put to death
for his loyalty, on Nov. 27. 1643. at London.

15. In December.
Stout Major Pitcher shot to death in St. Paul's Churchyard for being loyal,
December. 29. 1648. Sir Alex. Carew beheaded December. 23. 1644. for the same crime.
Pitcher's murdered. Carew, who did praise
A servants treachery unto his King:
Lo! for reward his servant him betrays
Unto the block, a bloody-offering.
What grief it was, that when he did return,
It could not be, but by a shameful urne!
And for a Conclusion to this Heroic Piece of Loyalty, he writ the following
Epistle by way of Postscript.

To the High and Mighty, the Tyrants Triumphant at Westminster. Gentlemen
I Cannot call you, since you drenched your Hands in His Blood, who was the
Fountain of all our earthly Honor, and Happiness, the Life and Light of the
Land. ( Hoc scelus Abyssus, and ex Abyssu natum.) Nor Country men, who have (so
Nero-like) inhumanely ripp'd up the Bowels of your Natural Mother, and exposed
her Nakedness to the view of the pitiless-world. ( Si hi Sancti, qui Scythae?
Si hi Christiani, qui Cannibales?) For certainly none of you are of the right
English race, in that all of you degenerate so far from the true English Nature.

Facta haec Anglia olim, nec Sancta, nec Ethnica novit.
Or if you be; the most prodigious Monsters that ever the Earth groaned under:
in whose proditorious breasts, the Spirits of all expired Traitors, by a kind
of Pythagorical Transmigration, are enclosed. -- Let after-ages impose a name
suitable to your merits, for surely this cannot. In the interim, it shall
suffice me: you know whom I speak to; and that I speak what I know.

From year to year I have forewarned you of judgments threatened and
impending, for your horrible impieties. And though I had been silent, yet
methinks the general fate of all Rebellions (especially such as this is) that
sums up all Items, in this Total [The Barbarous Murder of Gods Anointed!] had
been enough to inform what you might trust to; but that it is too apparent we
are wheeled about to those times, wherein Sacrilege is counted Reformation;
Rebellion, Devotion; Murder, Justice: and Traitors consecrated Saints and
Martyrs.

-- Vis proditoria nomine vocatur Novo,
Angligina Virtus.
I have cordially wished, and seriously begged, you would have returned to your
pristine Obedience: as the surest step, to make your selves, your children, and
all of us happy. But I found your consciences were seared, your souls
flattered with ambitions dreams; and charms of heightened pride had mounted you,
Icarus-like, too near the Sun: which ever goes before destruction.

And indeed, you have not bin more Turk-like tempted with success in your
Actions (from which you still concluded, though very weakly, that GOD owned
your Cause) then Heaven has been merciful (I may say) in tempting you with so
large a time of Repentance. But sithence you have despised the Mercy, and
neglected the Opportunity; it is to be feared, the Mercy, and time of the
Mercy, are both forfeited.

For, I will not search into the secret Will of God: so far as it is manifested
either in his Word, or Works, shall satisfy me: and by their Rules (if I
understand either) your Commonwealth, together with your selves, are (even now)
falling to nothing. This I write in Charity to you, to the end, that (although
you have no hopes to escape a Temporal, yet) your endeavors may be to avoid
the Eternal punishment due to your wickedness: And that is as much as can be
desired, or prayed for, by,

SIRS, The Admirer of your Treason and Tyranny, George Wharton.


For the writing of this Almanac he suffered exceedingly; and was, by
imprisonment, made incapable of every thing that might probably assist him
through his earthly Pilgrimage: and was now so closely looked after, that he
durst not write again; neither could he be permitted that Liberty, until it
pleased God to put it into the minds of his Adversaries, to release him upon
promise to live quietly. And then in his Almanac 1651. for his Peaceable
living, he most ingenuously Apologizeth thus:

To you sour Critics, that Bystanders are,
Viewing the Gamesters, (playing foul or fair)
And by the strokes of you defining Will,
Save whom you fancy; those you do not, kill:
To you, grave Chair-men (whose attentive ear
Hears all you can, believes all true you hear,
And think the Roy'llists cannot real be,
Until a Rope conclude their Destiny)
Send I these Lines: To let you understand,
I live as well b' Example, as Command:
And that, whatever you judge herein amiss,
Conformable to your own Practice is.
The Prelates quit their Sleeves of Lawn, and all
The Hierarchy their Coats Canonical,
And live disguised, as if they were none such,
That ever laid claim to Tithes, or Christian-Church.
Why may not I as well disguised be,
As they, or rather their Divinity?
The highborn House of Lords Some Lords, after their House was voted useless,
very contentedly turn Commoners.
themselves, submit
Their Persons, Honors, Magazines of Wit:
Sure I (who am but dust and ashes) then,
May do as much as those Almighty-Men.
The new-conforming Garter-Knight, that erst
Hung's Watchet Ribbon over his amorous breast,
Thinks it far better (now the King is dead)
To lay't aside, then lay aside his head.
Why may not I some crimson Lines leave out,
To save my ankles from the Prison-gout?
The subtle Lawyer holds it not amiss
He paraphrase on Ambiguities;
And (though he scarce the Latin understand)
To write CUSTODES in a texted-hand.
Why might not I (though not for dirty gain)
Write as he writes? Will such Ink ever stain?
--, when he found the Presbyters decay,
Straight leaves his scribling-humour, to obey.
What if from scribbling (too) I deign to cease?
Do I ought more then all that live in Peace?
Nay, Lilburn (that prodigious Combatant)
Held it not safe perpetually to rant:
For he (once quitted from the dreadful Rope)
Waves Magna Charta, falls a boiling soap.
I Have escaped the Halter twice, as well as he:
What if I now resolve to live as free?
Compounders (some) not only Pay, but Swear;
Might I not Promise that I would forbear?
The brave secluded Member, that needs must
Revile the Army, doom the State to dust,
Observe him but, (now he is all to bits)
How penitent, how patiently he sits!
The parboyl'd-Citizen, who never would do
Scarce what an Ord'nance did enjoin him to;
See how obsequiously he trots about,
To find both Old and New-Malignants out!
The Wary-High-Shooe, who so idolized
The Covenant, that equally be prized
It with his Bible; Lo, but how he bows
Before the Engagement, to secure his Cows!
Now ( Zoilus) tell me, whether it is more fit
I sacrifice my folly, or submit?
These times afford few Martyrs, and those few
Scant would be Martyrs, if they could eschew.
The Clergy heretofore ate all the Cake,
They still usurped the glory of the Stake;
And should (methinks) if all be true they say,
Lead us as well to suffer, as to pray.
But now (alas!) their Zeal's congealed to Ice,
Obedience they prefer to Sacrifice;
And want not Scripture-texts more then enough,
Which warrant them to thrash as well as plough,
Had FOX but writ his Volumes in this Age,
His Book of Martyrs had not filled a Page:
England (I fear) would scarce have spared him one
Old Latimer, to make a Martyr on.
Indeed they tell's what New Jerusalem's,
And how it is paved with Pearls, and precious Gems;
Blaming us much, we freely leave not this
Course Clay, for a Celestial Paradise.
Yet when a doughty Priests unhallowed Gums
Sustain one rotten Tooths-ach, how he fumes
And froths! and if a Fever do but strike him,
What Peasant powts, and pants, or pineth like him!
O for a Doctor then! Bridle the Horse,
And haste the Clerk away -- He Is worse and worse!
Alas! the Doctor comes not! O, quoth he,
Would God restore me but, then he should see --
But what? Be sure no mind he has to Death,
The Parson's heart's fast chained to the Earth:
He blesses Heaven for's last nights Requiem,
But has no thoughts of New Jerusalem.
Mistake me not: For I include not here,
The Reverend Doctors of the Holy-Chair;
Nor yet the meanest of that Sacred-Quire,
Whose Service at the Altar is entire:
To them I bow, and willingly make their's,
The tyche (at least) of all my daily Prayers.
No, I intend the threadbare Motley-Coat,
Which makes the Pulpit, but a Juglers-throat,
And can from thence (t'enfatuate Mankind)
Disgorge both fire and water at a wind;
Yet (were it to preserve the World) not dye
Ought but his Stockings, prate he never so high.
I say, it is him I mean; for he I look
Will be the loose-Surveyor of my Book.
"Deal gently (good Sir- John) and do not quack,
"Live else the Subject of mine Almanac.
In Hemerose. 1652. this Learned and Loyal Person wrote these several witty
Verses following.
1. Under the Table of Kings.
When Romes perverse and giddy Multitude
Dissolved (in Tarquin) their Great Monarchy;
To doom the Act UNNATURAL and RUDE,
('It Is said) A Serpent Barked: But when We
Dissolved Ours, (so were they overcome
With Pannique fear!) both Men and Beasts were dumb.
2. Under his Moveable-Feasts.
Those Feasts were once held sacred amongst Men:
Old Folks may live to see them so again.
3. Under the Table of Terms.
The Law is good, and needs no Reformation;
It takes no Bribes, nor sleeps a long Vacation:
Delays no Suits, disdains not to embrace
A John-an-Oaks, or John-a-Styles his Case:
Yet, since the Pilots's dead Meaning King CHARLES THE First, our late Dread
Sovereign.
, and storms do threat,
(Rocks being near) the Wreck must needs be great.
4. In February.
Mars throws his Knapsack by, and stoutly draws
His trusty Bilbo, to prescribe us Laws.
Jove, claims his Privilege; and Mars, his Power:
Both wrangle Mars this Month, being in Aries, cast a Quartile to Jupiter in
Capricorn.
hard, and each on other lowre.
At length Jove yields, and Mars assumes the Chair,
Votes his own Person Noble; Doings, Fair.
5. In May.
A Zealous Month (or so it does appear)
Composed all of love, and Bottle-beer:
But whilst the Meaning our now Gracious and Dread Sovereign Lord, King Charles
the Second.
Shepherd's absent, or asleep,
The ravenous Wolves devour the silly sheep:
London! beware of Fire, and Beasts of prey,
And something else; But what, I will not say.
6. In October.
Swords now grow dull, and Heads are gravely tossed,
To balance what is gained with what is lost:
To find out how and where the danger lies,
To estimate old stores, with new supplies:
We Are now at leisure to attend the knocks
Of Sir John Levite, in his Jugling-Box.
7. In November.
What loud Dissention's this we softly hear
And dread, 'twixt Saturn and his Councellor?
Who Is that gives back? What Jovial Fools are they
Must needs command, before they can obey?
"Divide and rule, is Machiavils: Take heed!
"For though he died long since, here is yet his seed. This month there was a
Trine of the Planets Saturn and Mercury, from Cancer and Scorpio.

8. In December.
The first Eclipse Meaning the Eclipse of the Moon, that happened in Libra on
March the fifteenth day, this year.
, next month does take effect,
And Jove Jove and Mars this month were in Quartile Aspect.
and Mars move now in dire Aspect:
Whence the malicious Changling-Brotherhood
Of sniveling Mock-Priests, that cried out for Blood,
Shall surely feel (though yet they will not see)
The full-grown-fruits of their Apostasy.
In Hemerosc. 1653. this worthy Artist wrote these several Verses following.
1. Of the Vulgar Accounts, Notes and Festivals. The Christians of the East and
Greek Church, do number
From the Creation unto this present year 7161 Years. The Jews, Hebrews, and
latter Rabbines. 5413 Years. Ergo, they differ in their Computation 1748 Years.

Heavens direct us! what a Difference here is,
[Full seventeen hundred forty twice four years:]
Whose Reckoning shall we trust? or shall we wait,
Till some New-Prophet rise, and calculate
The year? [That year which Saints in Heaven not scan,
Yet needs must be confined by prying-Man!]
But if nor Jews, nor Christians can it find,
If Plato saw not, surely they are blind.
The Christian Abyssines and Egyptians, from the Dioclesian Era, 1369
or that of Martyrs,
Thus rots that Tyrant: And may all the same,
Who act like Cruelty, yet hate the Name.
The Saracens and Turks from Hegira, or the flight of their Prophet Mahomet.
1063

The Turks are very holy in their way;
They preach, give Alms, and most devoutly pray;
And live in hope: Our Zelots do no more,
Unless to over-do, and never give over.
Had we been born in Turkey, we should set
As great a rate on Rascal Mahomet,
As Turks themselves: If they in England, then
We had been all alike [Good Christian-Men.]
"'It Is Birth and Education, which does make
"Religion: that which seals it, is, the stake.
The Astronomers from Nabonassarus (of Egyptian years, 2401.
consisting each of 365 days)
They (of all others) can account the best,
Yet are accounted of, but like the rest:
The snarling Priest (who Numbers never knew,
More then to tithe his Pigs, or whence they grew;
But like the Alewife, chalks behind the door,
And sets even Christ and Moses on the score)
Gains more belief in striving how to bribe
Our Reason, then do all that learned Tribe.
But know (fond Men) the Bible was not writ
For you to draw Chronologies from it:
To prop up faction, warrant Breach of Laws,
Absolve from Oaths, and chain us to your Cause;
To teach Men Trades, or Sciences, or Arts:
'Twas made to rectify and steer our Hearts.
"Wretched those souls, who thus (by you) are fed
"With Tares and Husks, instead of heavenly Bread.
From the Death of Alexander the Great, 1976

He who conquered all the spacious earth,
Was conquered himself for want of breath:
He that (whilst living) could endure no bound,
Rests now contented with six foot of ground.
"His Birth, his Valor, his Exploits and Glory,
"All tumbled in a heap of Doubtful Story.
Even so at length (Great This was purely Prophetical, and is now most happily
verified.
Conqu'rours) shall you be
O'er-come, confined, as close, as low as he.
Ten thousand Armies strength will not defend:
Your Conquests, and your selves must have An End,
Nor can they yield you comfort when you die,
Being nothing but a splendid Robbery.
Since the Julian Institution, School

Since the Gregorian Emendation, 71

Our State have been reforming twelve long years,
The Church, Court, Country, City, (Hair and Ears:)
Should they the English Calendar omit,
'Twill be forgot when they begun to sit:
Ages to come, who thirst to celebrate
Their famous Deeds, shall find them without date;
And know no more when CHARLES or Strafford died,
Then some, When Christ was born, or crucified.
Perhaps mistake the Persons with the Times,
Finding so like, their Sufferings, and their Crimes.
2. Under the Feasts and Fasts.
What Changlings were the Presbyterian-Crew,
Who pulled old Crosses down, to set up new!
And burnt Christ's Picture, whilst they did embrace
Those Antique Draughts of Calamy and Case:
That durst adventure on such dangerous shelves,
As to un-Saint th'Evangelists themselves:
And leave us not a Festival, beside
What they so called, and had sanctified.
But Heaven is just: For, lo! they are forced to bow;
The Synod's down, and stinking-Elders too:
"Only they bark at Moonshine, now and then,
"To witness they are Dogs more like, then Men.
3. Under the Kings, etc.
I Have said y' are Gods: Who dare you Tyrants call,
Since (Good or Bad) y' are his Vicegerents all?
But you shall die like Men: This, I allow;
For Men must die: so did our Savior too.
"When once the Rulers, Priests, and People cry,
"Away with him, Pilate must crucify.
4. Under the Table of Terms.
Lawyers prefer the sharpest Laws, as best
To keep a Commonwealth in Peace and Rest:
If so, why should those Gown-men Frown and Puff,
To see the Courts of Justice lined with Buff?
"No Plea ere moved as a Sword can do;
"For that o'er-ruleth Judge and Jury too.
5. In January.
VVelcome, ye pregnant times! whilst you shall be
As cross to some, as they were cursed to me:
VVelcome, prodigious Births! wherein appear
No fewer Monsters, then are days in the year:
Thrice welcome are ye! For y' are none of mine:
A Poets issue, is, A Princely Line.
6. In February.
Disturbed Heavens produce disturbed Pates;
Confused Councils, more confused States.
A Quarter-witted Clergy half undone,
Their Grand Impostures, clear, as is the Sun:
Whence Giddy We have had Preachers of all sorts and sizes in this age of
Liberty and Licentiousness.
Zealots take the Craft in hand,
And breath a holy-madness through the Land.
7. In the month May.
VVhither an Army now? Well! I could say
Who it is will get, or who shall loose the day:
Thrasillus-like inform you, who shall prove
Victorious in's Ambition, who in's Love:
But I am silent; Nay, I must be dumb;
It Is TREASON now to pray, Thy Kingdom come.
8. In November.
The Nation mourns because of monstrous Oaths:
Her scarlet sins, cause want of Bread and Clothes:
Diseases rage, and strongly multiply;
Our New-Republick's sick, and like to die.
London bewailes, beshrews her lewd pretense,
Of begging for a Posture of Defense.
9. Where speaking of the Mutations of Empires, Kingdoms and Commonwealths, he
pithily concludes. --
Thus Changes come, thus Changes will ensue,
(Till these corrupted bodies change for new,
And put on incorruption) Men and Things,
Whole Countries, Cities, Beggars, Princes, Kings:
He who but lately wore a Crown of Gold,
Crowned now with thorns, exiled, or basely sold:
He clad in rags, and fed with scraps before;
Now, throned in's stead, and surfeiting with store:
A glorious Church and Kingdom, but to day;
To morrow, both the Wolf and Foxes Prey.
The Learned Lawyer, Orthodox Divine,
Once high esteemed, now ranked with filthy swine:
The Hospitable Lord erst fed the Poor,
And clothed the naked, naked turned out of door:
His sorrowing Wife, and helpless Children gone
To try their Friends, perhaps be frowned on;
And he in's hoary-age Petition, bare,
Those that his Grooms (at best) but lately were:
The Fool in's Coat, the VVise-man in his Chair.
The Indulgent Father, and the Hopeful Heir:
The griping Landlord, and the greedy Clown,
The glittering Tissue, and the gray-friz'd Cown;
The Rosy-Cheeke, and the unfurrowed Brow,
The Freckled VVainscot-Face, that milks the Cow;
The Flowery Bride (girt with chaste thoughts about)
Will all once changed be; their Lamps must out:
Nay, Heaven it self grows old, and will away:
It had a Birth, and shall a dying day.
All, all to change and dissolution tend;
Poor Almanacks, even they, must have an end.
In Hemeros. 1654. this ingenious Person wrote these following Heroic Verses.
1. Of the Feasts, etc.
Go ring the Bells, let Priests and People pray;
I know no Treason in a Holy Day.
2. Over the Table of Kings, etc.
Here stands the Regal Table, till it be
Convict and Banished for Malignancy.
Under the Kings.
Call me no more Malignant, since the Term
Has Hydra's Head; I Hercules his Arm:
And (though no God, nor worshipped at Tire)
Remember yet great Jupiter's my Sire.
Let States and Kingdoms whirle; mine shall not fall,
Except (when time is done) this Globe and all.
So Wolf and Lamb salute! the first for blood,
The second to be offered for our good.
3. Over the Terms.
Thus may the Terms begin, thus may they end:
As yet we know not what we do intend.
Under the Terms.
Friends! send your Sons no more to the Inns of Court,
But breed them Soldiers, Men of loud Report:
So need they fear no rude Return of words
Or Writs, nor yet Exception against their Swords:
So shall their Terms be never out of Date,
Nor liable to change, but with the State:
So may they choose the trade most profit brings,
Set up or Lawyers, Priests, or Petit Kings.
4. In January.
Now CHARLES is dead, the Senate in a ditty,
Sung in Wild Airs about the holy City;
The ill-got Lords made worse then Indian slaves,
And Priests (like Churches) hovering over their Graves.
Whose turn is next? speak you as may be free!
I dare not meddle with SUPREMACY.
5. In February.
Fetch Me a Ladder and a Broom, that I
May sweep the Cobwebbs from the azur'd sky;
Dispatch the fumes that cloud the subtle Air,
And make the Heavens look Maiden-smooth and fair:
Else is that Roof too mean for those that vie
With Gods themselves for Crowns and Majesty.
6. In March.
Justice now flows, and Righteousness does stream
Throughout the streets; the Conduits run with Cream.
Our Virgins Lamps be full of holy Oil,
Themselves o'er-charg'd and ready to recoil:
Old men dream dreams, and young men visions see:
Their cloven tongues are tip't with Prophecy.
7. In April.
Well fare Gay knacks, and men to change inclined;
They raise the dust, and cloud the work designed:
In gilded Roofs, who doubts of deceit?
In troubled waters, who can see the Bait?
He that would closely bring great things about,
Must mud, as well as fish the Rabble-rout.
8. In June.
We Are all reformed, and free as we were born,
Almost as naked too, much more forlorn:
The times are tyrannous, not men, for they
Have brought to pass, what men b'asham'd to say.
But (if one truth may slip my harmless Pen)
Times would be better, had we better men.
9. In July.
Sweet are the Sippets of a Diadem!
Shall Foraigners invade us, or we them?
Victors but once grown bouzy with success,
Dream of naught else, but Gold and Gloriousness:
But we are lowly minded, and despise
All earthly substance, being heavenly-wise.
10. In September.
What fine new-nothing's this, that I espy,
A Sect, a Schism, or a Heresy?
Or shall I Nick-nam't a Religion? Say!
No,'t relishes the sober water-way:
Yet wants no fire to make the spirit beat,
Nor bucksome creatures to allay the heat.
11. In October.
Must Treasurers account? it is fit they do:
(They shall in time make satisfaction too)
But those (and other pious cheats we have)
Can quote us Scripture why they play the knave:
Religion is a cloak for all deceit,
And shrowds designs that be of greatest weight.
12. In November.
Ho Presbyterians! Prick up your Ears,
Advance your Troops of jealousies and fears:
Summon your Elders in their several Classes,
The Covenanters, Directory-Asses:
And tell me (now, your blood and breath's nigh spent)
Where Is one dares Fight for King and Parliament?
13. In December.
A blessing on the Commonwealth Affairs:
(May that green Lady never know gray Hairs)
Let Us on with courage, and resolve to do
Whatever necessity compels us to.
So long as God's with us, what need we fear
Whose turn it is to reign another year?
In his Ephemeris 1655. I find these several excellent Poems following.
1. Over the Feasts.
Lo, here the sacred (Saint-offending) days,
Religion's outward worth and splendent rays:
Old truth's strong evidence, motives to zeal,
Rich badges of a Christian Commonweal:
Fair Hieroglyphics of what we profess,
'Live shadows of eternal happiness;
Lasting Records on earth, wherein even they
That w'ont be drawn to hearken what we say,
May by observing, only, what we do,
Read our Belief; and reading, do so too!
2. Over the Table of Kings.
Here Is yet the Regal Table; who can tell
But 't may (by thus long prostitution) swell?
Under the Table of Kings.
How! Tyrants all? what glory is 't to be
Accounted Gods, if Gods of Tyranny?
It Is strange your conquests were not claim enough,
Yet ours (of one another) Gospel-proof:
Either your Titles to the Crown were good,
Or ours (so mystical) not understood.
3. Over the Table of Terms.
Away to Westminster, and do not fear:
We will indulge ye yet another year.
Under the Table of Terms.
Go to, brave Hero's! and Abridge the Law,
[Teach (in Epitome) to Hang and Draw:]
Make Magna Charta speak us Lilburn-free,
That Treason which is writ without a T.
Correct old Littleton, and Print him New.
The Sword's one tenure, more, he never knew.
4. In January.
Rythm you whose measures charm you better luck;
I must be mute; my Muse is Planet-struck;
Her fancie's fettered, and her Ink is froze;
Complaint is made, her Pen's too broad at Nose:
I Will to the VVoods, and find some Satyr out;
There Is now no fellow to the Cloven-foot.
5. In May.
The Pole's perplexed, and the German dreads,
The horned Moon should pierce the Eagle's heads:
Goths, Huns, and Vandals once had greatest power;
The Tartars and the Turks have now much more.
If then success be it which best depaints
A glorious Cause, Turks are the only Saints.
6. In September.
From the honor of our ill-begotten Peers,
From the sour batch of jealousies and fears,
From floods of Orphans and poor Widows tears,
From twice-six other over-redious O. Cromwell the pretended Protector, and his
pretended Parliament, had agreed together for Triennial Parliaments.
years,
Good Lord deliver us. The Number Three
Has always in it some high mystery.
7. In December.
Now Falcifer, Gradivus does There was then an opposition of Saturn and Mars,
from Virgo, and Pisces.
oppose,
Then through the Virgin (Hobling backward) goes:
Hence the waters are corrupted, Fishes die,
The earth is barren; a mortality
Afflicts the Land; Mars The pretended Protectors Tyranny began now to be most
notorious.
rages up and down,
Not quiet with, nor yet without a Crown.
In Hemerose. 1656. are to be read these incomparable Pieces of Learning and
Ingenuity.
1. I shall present you with his Chronology, it being the last in Verse, and
the most complete of all his others.
SInce all things were of God created good
Since Noah ascended th'Ark to avoid the flood
Since God the Promise made to Abraham
Since the Israelites from Egypts bondage came
Since Solomon the Temple finished
Since King Zedekias a Captive led
Since JESUS of the blessed Virgin born
Since for Man's sins he suffered death and scorn
Since Caesar's force the Britains overthrew
Since hence the Ravenous Roman Eagle flew
Since first the Saxons stepped on English ground
Since here the Danes the like advantage found
Since Norman William Britain over-powr'd
Since Maud the English-Saxon Blood restored
Since second Henry Ireland first assayl'd
Since our first Edward hence the Jews expelled
Since Tyler's Highness would the Throne ascended
Since he his life (with his Rebellion) ended
Since Guns (those mortal engines) first were found
Since Printing made the world with books abound
Since Protestants (by Luther) first so named
Since Loiola the Jesuits Order framed
Since Ket and's followers seduced the Nation
Since hanged (upon the Tree of Reformation)
Since Kentish Wiat rose against Queen Mary
Since with Spain's Philip she did intermarry
Since London streets by Coaches first molested
Since Scotland with Geneva-trash infested
Since lightning last consumed Paul's high spire
Since all the Heavens appeared on a fire
Since Piercy and great Nevil's Insurrection
Since Gresham College, and The Exchange erection
Since Drake surrounded this our Globe of strife
Since pious Gresham did exchange this life
Since Saint Domingo ransacked was by Drake
Since then the Spaniards did (not fight, but) quake
Since Zutphen-siege our famous Sydney slew
Since Scotch Queen Mary bid the world adieu
Since boasting Spain's Armado overthrown
Since th'Indian Weed was first in England known
Since daring Drake and noble Hawkins di'd
Since Cheapside-Cross most richly beautified
Since Cales was from the Spaniards stoutly torn
Since CHARLES the first, to grief and sorrow born
Since Learned JAMES the English Crown possessed
Since he the Allegiance Oath upon us pressed
Since Fate revealed the Puny Powder Plot
Since first rejoiced for (now regarded not)
Since Fred'rick Count arrived on English earth
Since we bewailed Heroic HENRY's death
Since here (last) Christianus (Denmarks King)
Since Middleton's River brought from Amwel-spring
Since we Bermudas first inhabited
Since Learned Rawleigh's noble Blood was shed
Since last a Comet in the Scorpion seen
Since that brought death to Ann (our James's Queen)
Since Charles with cares as well as gold was crowned
Since his fair Queen first trod on English ground
Since Londons last great Plague from Heaven sent
Since then at Oxford sat the Parliament
Since Buckinghams great Duke so basely slain
Since England did conclude a Peace with Spain
Since living Charles first breathed this loathsome air
Since Reverend LAVD began St. Paul's repair
Since the Late King advanced against the SCOT
Since Peace concluded (but intended not)
Since Wolves and Foxes first were idolized
Since Learned Straffords Blood was sacrificed
Since Sects and Tumults set the Land on fire
Since the dead King was forced to retire
Since Hotham shut Hull-gates against the King
Since ruined for thoughts to let him in
Since we with Essex vowed to live and die
Since we cashiered him (of his Excellency)
Since Charles his Royal Standard streaming stood
Since Keinton-field deep died with English blood
Since Cheapside-Cross (for Conscience sake) did fall
Since Moses Tables forced to give the wall
Since the Scotch Army marched to our aid
Since they returned from Hereford, well paid
Since Vxbridge Overture's initiation
Since Love belcht firebrands that consumed the nation
Since first we felt the virtue of a Tax
Since glorious Laud triumphed over the Ax
Since Common Prayers ceased (abjured rather)
Since the wise Synod voted God the Father
Since Naseby-field first owned that fatal blow
Since even poor women felt the overthrow
Since pensive Charles left Oxford (in disguise)
Since he to treacherous Scots became a prize
Since Henderson received his Mortal Wounds
Since Scotch-men sold their Prince for English pounds
Since Holmby-house restrained his further flight
Since Joyce surpised him in the dead of night
Since he had terms proposed, and promised right
Since fairly juggl'd into the Isle of Wight
Since there the sinful Treaty did commence
Since (broken off) he forthwith hurried thence
Since the old Commons took a purging dose
Since CHARLES made truly great and glorious
Since they the House of Lords did useless doom
Since Kingship dangerous and burdensome
Since the Supremacy was Eastward bound
Since our Allegiance buried under ground
Since CHARLES's Crown exposed to a rate
Since England hight the Title of Free State
Since Scotland tasted of Heavens ireful Cup
Since English Hogs ate our dear Brethren up
Since Mars unroosted those had twelve years ruled
Since Madmen on their Ruins 'gan to build
Since that illiterate Conclave's Dissolution
Since this (blessed) Governments first Institution
This is added out of his Ephemer. 1655.
Since Time was pregnant of a Lord Protector
Since she brought forth a (more then Trojan) Hector
Since London feasted him at Grocers Hall
Since Viner the first Knight (amongst us all)
Since peace concluded with the Highborn Dutch
Since the shrill Trumpet noised it to be such
Since Knights and Burgesses their free Election
Since winnowed, and made of one complexion
Since they convened and sat (with blessed intent)
Since they presumed to tune the Instrument
Since found flat-guilty of that High-Ambition
Since taught the meaning of a Recognition
Since some (like Rats) forsook the falling House
Since others (big with Mountains) dropped a Mouse
Since the Protector set their sins before them
Since he dissolved (never to restore) them
Since Noble James (the Duke of Lenox) died
Since perjured Falc'ner wisely stepped aside
Since Wiltshire's Insurrection broached new fears
Since the grand seizure of the Cavaliers
For the continuing this Ingenuous Chronology to any time, you need but add
the elapsed years between your proposed year, and the year 1656. and it is done.
Examples are needless.

2. Over the Festivals.
Why rail we not at superstitious days,
Pull Crosses down, and burn the harmless Bays?
Why do we not inhibit Common-Pray'rs,
And threaten Bridewel to the Cockpit Players?
How can our tender Consciences digest
Organs and Altars, (stand they East or West?)
Plum-broth and Pies (made of Malignant-Paste)
Which erst the Godly would not dare to taste?
And plead Allegiance, now that Fatal Stroke
Has cut the Chain, and cleft in two the Yoke?
The change is great, and may be well defended:
But it is enough to say, The work is ended.
2. Over the Table of Kings.
Yet, yet the Regal Table courts the Nation:
Kings are not out of date, though out of fashion.
3. Under the Table of Kings.
Two Williams, twice four Henry's, Stephens but one;
Three Richards, twice three Edwards, and a John:
One Mary, one Elizabeth, a James,
And Charles, [five times five Sovereigns, with ten names]
Who numbers more, transgresses (out of Reason:)
God save my Cow! and that (I hope)'s no Treason.
4. Over the Table of Terms.
The Chancery's reformed, and so are we:
All things enjoy their pristine Purity.
Under the Table of Terms.
Lawyers ('it is true) like new-set Milstones grind
Their Rough-shod-Clients: yet are they the wind
That drive the sails. Who Is most blameworthy then,
The G^inding Lawyers, or Litigious Men?
Sat I as Judge, the Lawyers should go free,
Such Clowns on Calthrops, till they could agree.
5. In January.
Where our third Edward (that Puissant King!)
Was born to conquer France, I rudely sing:
Where The Author was Prisoner in Windsor-Castle, when he wrote his this years
Ephemeris.
Kings have Captives been; that stately wall
Confines my Muse: (for sin Original.)
Help you that can, or have my verse excused;
That Shepherd poorly Pipes, whose Reed is bruised.
6. In March.
Chronus Saturn and Mars this month were in Trine Aspect, from Virgo and
Taurus.
, the Virgin; Mars, the Bull ascends;
And (by their Trine) assure us they are friends.
When boisterous Knaves meet and salute each other,
Their common phrase is, How Devil do thou Brother?
The Graver sort abhor that hellish note;
Yet (in the fear of God) they will cut your throat.
7. In July.
It Is false to say Dog Days (but now) begin,
Since thrice five years have naught but Dog Days bin:
Or that in England Sirius is the great Dog Star which in July toward the
latter and thereof, arises cosmically with the Sun, inflaming the air; whence
(from that time, toward the end of August, are termed) Dog Days.
Sirius biteth not,
Whilst we have such deep wounds, and days so hot:
But Sirius quickly sets (elsewhere to burn)
Then shall our Dog Days into HALCYON turn.
8. In September.
Two haughty Rebels, (yet of heavenly race)
Invade the Virgins Confines: face to face
Dispute their Title there; but finding none,
(As trespassers) they hasten to be gone:
Concluding Hermes for the only man
That Is Heir at Law. But get it how he can. These Lines deserve a Comment.

9. In December.
Thus Windsor's my Parnassus, and the Jayl-
Supporting-Cole-hole, (crammed with Mills's Ale)
My Well of Helicon. How should my Quill
Want quickening, or my Muse inspired-skill?
Thanks, honest Luke: May all thy Ale and Beer
Turn Nectar; run untilted all the year! Luke Mills was the Tapster in
Windsor-Castle, at what time our Author was Prisoner there.

10. His Conclusion.
The time's at hand, Titan's indulged by Jove,
Crowned with Honors, dressed in Robes of Love:
Away, ye Miscreant Subjects of Despair,
That dream on Fogs, and think 'twill never be fair!
Shake off your pensive Mantles, wash down sorrow;
Phoebus appears, and bids the world Good Morrow!
The Clouds do scattter, and anon you will see
(What shall I say?) An ENGLISH JUBILEE!
In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1657. we shall find these several curious Pieces
of Wit and Loyalty.
1. Under his moveable Feasts.
These are the Festivals, which every year
Change their position in the Calendar:
The rest are fixed, till the higher Powers
Vouchsafe to unfix, and vote them out adoors:
But that is to do: let us therefore yet obey
Our holy Mother, and keep Holy Day.
2. Under the Table of Kings.
So have I seen amongst the Celestial train
Bright stars arise, and quickly set again:
Other (whose Circles greater Arches trace)
Though short in luster, run a longer race:
Some wondrous swift, some slower then the rest;
Yet (one and all) still tending to the West.
Impartial Death does no compassion take;
Cedars and Shrubs promiscuous Ashes make.
3. Under the Table of Terms.
The Terms commence, conclude; and yet the strife
Ends not: Contention has a tedious life:
And (which is worse) whoere the Conquest get,
Gains but a lump of drowzie after-wit.
But O revenge! (he will that, although he begs)
It Is sweeter far, then Muscadine and Eggs.
4. In January.
Bi-fronted Janus (the old Italian King)
Beholds the year transact, and entering:
Wisdom and Prov'dence, are firm props of State;
They support Princes, and make Nations great:
Their suffrages shall now restrain my Pen,
And make me one of the prudential men.
5. In February.
Now did the ancient Romans sacrifice
To Pluto, and the infernal Deities
For their dead Fathers souls: Furies were then
The direful Objects of Idol'trous Men:
And it is a weakness yet (in every head)
To cringe to and indulge the thing we dread.
6. In March.
Rome-building Romulus, gave this the name,
In honor of God Mars, from whom he came
By Ilia, thus to perpetuate
The Martial Prowess of the Roman-State:
This vanity (if so I may it call)
Those Heroes had; and so indeed have all.
7. In April.
April's so called, 'cause the Terrestrial Pores
Are opened now to drink the pleasant showers:
Fruits, Herbs and Plants, sprout forth their fragrant Buds,
And cloth all green, the Fertile Fields and Woods.
Flora presents variety of Graces,
Makes Ladies hide (for shame) their painted Faces.
8. In May.
May, a Majoribus: and what were they?
Great Jove was one, who else I cannot say:
The Pleiades and Hyades arise,
And drench the earth with chaste Humidities:
May, then a Madeo; (it sounds well)
So Friday-street, from buttered Mackerel.
8. In June.
June a Junioribus, (if so you will have it)
That is to say, Chuck-farthing and his Mate:
Or a unone, ('save us all!) for she
Was wife to Jove, and just so let it be.
Some Etymon, are like the Knight, or worse;
Who draws his honor from his Fathers purse.
9. In July.
But, Julius a Julio Caesare,
Romes Proto-Monarch, Pompey's enemy:
The ungrateful Senate robbed him not of all,
His name survives their cruelty, his fall.
Pharsalia's fresh in mind, whilst Caesar here
Triumphs thus, not once, but every year.
10. In August.
This Month Augustus Caesar did begin
His Consulship, and thrice triumphed therein:
Marc-Antony, by force of Arms subdued,
Brought Egypt to the Roman servitude.
Therefore the Senate thought it was but just
TO exchange Sextilis Mensis for August.
11. In December.
The Moon's obscured four parts (of twelve) and more,
And seen (if the air be clear) all England over:
But Cynthia's Labor is, with little pain;
Her throws are easy; she is soon light again.
Were men-eclipsed but restored thus,
We'd trouble no Jayls, nor should Jayls trouble us.
12. A Conclusion of this years Book.
But hold! the Press has overtook my Pen,
The Term's at hand, and I shall wander then:
My Steed is ready [the grave Pedlars Back,]
My Harbinger [his Dog,] my Inn [the Pack:]
Old Erra Pater (that hoof-beaten Jew)
The Shepherds Calendar, (with all the Crew
Of merry Rascals) my Companions are:
They deign to style me Fellow-Traveller.
Then Fairs and Markets I must duly keep,
And (on the stall) make up the dirty heap
Of Penny Ware: where the disdainful eye
Pores on me two long hours, before he buy:
Whilst Nobler Judgments purchase at first sight,
And swear (implicitly) I Am thorough Right.
Yet some (although they on me seem to dote)
Will not vouchsafe me every year a Coat;
Whose duller Brats I wish no less forlorn
And naked, twelve months after they are born.
Another, his Mundungus (with me) lights,
All, save three Pages, where he wisely writes
When Is Mare took Horse; his Cows the impatient Bull;
Or, when himself, some foul lascivious Trull.
Yet this, forbids no entries; only I
Would not be Pander to such Drudgery.
Nor do I grudge the hungry flames a whit;
For, they consume not, they refine my Wit.
Others behind them (in Fools Ordure) throw
My injured Leaves: they will serve the Bible so.
But O The Exchange! there, I endure the Rack,
Such Din is made, with Wharton's Almanac!
I cannot but Blush for shame, when I do meet
My Name (like Small-Coal) cried in every Street.
Howbe't, I thereon set the bolder face,
Because, like Fortune have, even Acts of Grace.
And yet, some trifling shops provoke me most:
For, here and there, they nail me to a Post:
O cruel hands! but that my patience bears,
It well presaging what attends their Ears.
Thus pleased, or displeased, I appear,
Servant or Slave, t'all interests, once a year.
So let me pass: and when this Journey's over,
I Will try if better luck I can discover.
In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1658. We find these learned and weighty Verses
following.
1. Under the Table of Kings.
Here, and not here, implies a Contradiction,
Reality (you will say) opposed to Fiction.
I grant it so: and he that asks me, Why?
Must know, I cannot skill of things too nigh.
He a large Picture, that will judge aright,
Sets it not near him, but aloof his sight. Here O. Cromwels Usurpation and
Tyranny, together with his praying Pretenses to Justice and Honesty, are
Curiously, though Anigmatically taxed. He would be a King in Re, but not in
Nomine.

2. Under the Table of Terms.
Peace makes a pleasant sound, well understood;
But Discord better, whilst the Peace not good:
I am not of his Humor, did prefer
The Vnjustest Peace, before the Justest War.
Admit one rifled, robbed of all relief:
Must he needs patch a Peace up with the Thief?
3. In January.
If, wanting wings, one may ascend the Skies,
And Phoebus view, without an Eagles eyes,
Then rouse up (Muse) from thy Lethargique strains,
And (having first invoked the God of Brains)
Let the Grand subject of thy Measures be,
No soul to England like a Monarchia, a Monos Archon, the Rule of one Prince.
Monarchy.
4. In February.
It is the Image of that Domination,
By which Jehovah rules the whole Creation:
Angels nor Saints, do in his Kingdom share;
God is sole Monarch; they but subjects are.
Whose Laws are such, as when they did rebel,
Sequestered not, but sent 'em straight to hell.
5. In March.
As Old as that Paternal Sovereignty,
God placed in Adam, ruled his people by;
Disowned of none, but them whose minds aspire,
And envy One should have what all desire:
For be it a few or many we live under,
Such shall repine, still, whilst not of the number.
6. In April.
The Ancients did a Monarchy prefer,
Made all their Gods submit to Jupiter:
And (when Affairs and Nations first began)
Princes Decrees were the only Laws of Man:
Experience will avow it, where there is any,
One honest man is sooner found then many.
7. In May.
The rational soul performs a Princes part,
She Rules the body by Monarchick Art:
Poor Cranes and silly Bees (with shivering wings)
Observe their Leaders, and obey their Kings.
Nature her self disdains a crowded Throne;
The Body's monstrous, has more Heads then one.
8. In June.
A Monarchy's that Politic simple State,
Consists in unity (inseparate,
Pure and entire;) A Government that stands
When others fall, touched but with Levelling hands:
So natural, and with such skill endu'd,
It makes one body of a multitude.
9. In July.
In order (wherein latter things depend
On former, that is most perfect does attend
On unity: but this can never be
The Pop'lar State) nor Aristocracy:
For, where or all or many bear the sway,
Such order to confusion leads the way.
10. In August.
A Monarchy more quickly does attain
The End proposed: for, it is the single Brain
That ripens Counsel, and concealeth best
Princely Designs, till Deeds proclaim 'em blessed.
Whilst numerous Heads are rarely of one Mind;
Slow in their Motion; louder then the Wind.
11. In September.
Treason, nor Force, so suddenly divides
The United strength that in a Crown resides:
Sedition prospers not; it seldom here
Results an Object of the Prince's fear.
Than when an Empire, Rome was never more strong,
Nor triumphed under other Rule so long.
12. In October.
A Monarchy abates those fev'rish fits
Of Emulation, a Free State begets:
A Prince cannot his Reins so quickly slack,
Or throw his Burden on another's Back.
But where so many Rulers have command,
The work's transferred, and tossed from hand to hand.
13. In November.
The People or the Nobles, to debate
The deep Concernments of a troubled-State,
Set times and places have assigned them: they
First meet, and then adjourn from day to day.
Whereas a Monarch, who by Nature's One,
Deliberates always, never's off his Throne.
14. In December.
But hold! Methinks I see the three Estates
Convened, thrown open prison-doors and grates,
Extinct our paltry Jealousies and Fears,
Grace offered to all but Cavaliers
And Papists: yet with patience they abound,
In hope for better, now, the wheel goes round.
15. The Conclusion.
Thus trace we Time, and (in our several Spheres)
Slightly pass over ne'er-returning years:
Thus States and Kingdoms to a Period draw;
Their Politics must yield to Natures Law.
Thus Kings and Beggars are Companions made,
Shake hands, and knock the Scepter against the Spade:
Thus Courts and Cottages become one Roof,
And Carts and Chariots meet without reproof:
Thus all the Greatness Mortals do contend
And Damn their Souls for, slideth to An End.
In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum, 1659. these following Pithy and Prophetique
Verses are to be found.
1. On the Moons Eclipse in April.
Now have amongst ye, you that stand
On slippery ground, or build on sand.
Seditious Spirits play their pranks,
Inundations break the Banks:
Rumors of Wars about us fly,
(Thrice happy Man, dares bravely die)
Intestine Tumults, taken Towns,
Besieged Cities, Princes frowns
Astonish Us. But I Will to plough,
And never mind what Madmen do.
Mavors and Hermes bear the sway:
May He, deserves it, have the day. In the Month April 1659. the Rump appear,
and put a Period to the Reign of Richard Cromwell, and indeed extirpate that
Family, whose Honor was only built upon a sandy Foundation.

2. On the Moons Eclipse in October.
Quick work and crafty! (He that sways
In this Defect, brooks no Delays:)
Beware of Pirates, Highway Thieves,
Dull Heresies, and Hanging-Sleeves:
Of scarcity and dearth of Grain,
With uncouth Griefs amongst Cattle reign:
Tempestuous Winds, Quotidian Fevers,
Ptisicks, and Priests that cock their Bevers:
Debates, that into question call
The Peoples Laws; even God's and all.
For Stilbon, only, has command,
And him alone I understand. On October 6. Parliament, Council of State, and
Officers of the Army, were feasted at Grocers-hall by the City. The 12 the
Parliament vote Lambert and other Officers Commissions from them. 13. They turn
the Parliament out of doors for it. 26. The (pretended) Committee of Safety
erected. Quere, Was not this quick work and crafty? etc.

3. On the Suns Eclipse in November.
What noise is this? methinks I hear
Some dread Hero, drawing near.
A busy Clergy belching fire;
Some Prince deposed, and in the mire.
I see (by the light of one fair Star)
Whole Nations going out to war:
Risings, Arraignments, sudden death
And Ruin, rushing on the earth:
The Rivers lessened, Fountains dry;
Waters corrupt, good Subjects die:
For Mars is rampant; and what hand
Can turn the Edge of Burlybrand? Lord General Monck, beholding the Confusions
of England, marches hither to put a stop to them. The King of Sweden shortly
after died; which this Learned Artist must needs mean, by this Eclipse of the
Sun.

4. Under the Regal Table.
Sacred's the name of King, and full of splendor,
Famous the Title of the Faiths Defender:
Yet (when on such the Rabble fixed their spleen)
Who had regard to Faith, to King or Queen?
But now, (such Comments on the Text they make)
All Mortals must submit for Conscience sake.
5. Under the Table of Terms.
Thanks, busie-Term-time! thou bring'st work to do
For Judge, for Council, and Attorney too:
But should thou end, and never more Commence,
Lawyers would lose their most voluptuous sense:
The knotty Laws (which now so dear we buy)
Be rated like Bishops Divinity.
6. Under the Tide-Table.
The Sea has fits, much like this giddy age;
Sometimes she pines, anon, she swells with rage,
And makes a rupture, where she overflows
The Fertile Banks, yet never further goes
(Without a Miracle) then Natures bounds:
Or if we think she do, it is where some Towns
Encroach upon her interest: For, she
Is full as constant, far more just then we.
7. In January.
All hail (my Masters!) I must now implore
Your Ticket, for a twelve months recreation:
I know no Plot The Author was suspected privy to, and guilty of, the Plot, in
which the Reverend Dr. Hewyt, etc. miscarried.
, (save that, which keeps us poor)
And this of mine, to gain your approbation.
All my designs lurk in these Rural strains;
My Guts conspire, indeed, but not my Brains.
8. In February.
I honor all that have a Sovereign Power,
Extol their Prowess (be it more or less)
Admire them growing in a golden shower;
Observe (but point not at) their vain excess.
The Suns defects seen in a line direct,
Hurt the eyes, not when in water they reflect.
9. In March.
I pray for Kings, and think it a pious Deed:
Good Princes very well deserve our prayers:
But thereof bad ones stand the most in need;
For such (be sure!) do stand on slippery stairs,
And (like to Iron) generate the rust,
From their own substance, turns 'em into dust.
10. In April.
I Am hugely taken with the Golden Train,
(Those lofty stars which glide along this Sphere!)
Yet Greatness, without Goodness, I disdain;
A spungie head full ill becomes a Peer:
Persons of honor should have Princely parts,
No empty Cock-lofts, or deceitful hearts. When the Florida Ambassador was in
London, Col. Pride being once at dinner with him, instead of propounding a
Question like a Statist, asked him, Whether there were not good vent for Beer
and Ale in Florida? whence our Author says, A Spungie head, etc.

11. In May.
I reverence Justice (on the meanest seat)
She was a virtue once, though now a wonder:
I like sweet words (intended not to cheat)
And works of Mercy, not too far asunder:
But cruelty! how that would make me swagger,
Were it not common, both to Sword and Dagger.
12. In June.
I love the Ministry, all but the name,
(That Motly and promiscuous Appellation:)
Which mingleth Dunghill Dirt, with Austin's Fame,
(With holy Writ, pretended Revelation)
Give me the Priest disdains to tell a Lie;
That Priest, who date for his Religion die.
13. In July.
I like the Comm'nalty (that Sovereign Power)
Whilst not to Faction, or Revenge disposed:
But Commons over-stinted, or too sour,
Are best improved, when they are enclosed.
Who gives a Giddy-Multitude the Reins,
O'erwhelms the State, betrays his want of Brains.
14. In August.
I own the Camp, where Gallantry commands,
Where Arts and Arms, advance their awful Grests;
But wish the Cramp befall such Victors hands,
As cannot conquer their ambitious Breasts.
Success enlarges Men's desires; nay, more,
It breeds some thoughts, they dreamed not on* before.
15. In September.
I hug the Soldier, dreads no violent end,
(For stoutest men, such fortune often have:)
It is the cause, (not mode) of death, shall send
Us glorious, or inglorious, to the Grave.
He who 'll avoid a shameful death, must run
The danger of a brave one; and it is done.
16. In October.
I fancy well, our great Metropolis,
She harbors store of Men and store of Riches:
There is no sounding of that vast Abyss;
What wonder then, if London wear the Breeches?
Yet must this Darling, now and then, untruss;
Correction keeps her most Obsequious.
17. In November.
But O the Country, free from jarring-strife,
(Where Plants and Flowers abound with Eloquence;
Where every Hedge and Tree does breathe new Life,
Where prattling Birds, do captivate my sense:)
There I (sequestered from the world) abide,
And (if needs must) there I Will be crucified.
18. In December.
Thus (in an humor purely innocent)
I add one year more, to a careful Age:
No more of this, till freed from my Restraint:
I cannot chant (like Birds) within a Cage.
Yet know! I have (although my aim's not high)
Seleucus-like, an Anchor on my thigh.
19. His Conclusion.
Thus have our melting eyes, England beheld
With smooth-faced Peace, and wanton Plenty swell'd]
Into a Monster; so unweildly grown,
Her own vast weight, depressed her Princely Crown:
A brutish War tore Church and State asunder,
Fooled us with fears, filled all the world with wonder.
The fairest Stars, losing their sacred light,
And cheerful day turned into drowzie night:
The Antipodes (true Mirror of the Cause!)
Reacted through three Nations, with applause:
But EXIT OLIVER, whilst yet we lend
Our Patience, till the PLAY It was the saddest and most dismal Tragedy that
ever was acted in England.
be at an end.
Lastly, In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1660. We meet with these several
excellent and true Verses: And although they be fresh in each Man's Memory, the
Year being but newly begun; yet, they being the works of the same Author, I
adjudge it convenient to insert them here, they being not most unworthy the
company of the rest.
1. Under the Regal Table.
Where Is now the Sultan? What remorsless Star
Removed that famous Idol, Oliver?
Unwelcome Death. But what flint-hearted Fate,
That Mushrom-Prince, his Son? Our glorious State.
Thus then we see what luck Protectors have;
A restless Life, or ignominious Grave.
2. Under the Table of Terms.
Lo! here is a Trade surpasses all the rest,
No change annoys the Lawyers interest:
His Tongue buys Lands, builds Houses without toil;
The Pen's his Plough, the Parchment is his Soil:
Him, storms disturb not, nor Militia-Bands;
The Tree roots best, that in the weather stands.
3. In January.
And is He Oliver Cromwell.
gone indeed? then farewell He;
Farewell to all our New Nobility:
Goodnight Illustriousness: adieu old Joan;
The Kitchen better fits you, then a throne:
Lay 'side your Purple, and your Robes off cast:
Play'rs are but Princes, while the Play The Play that prevented Englands
happiness, is now most happily ended.
does last.
4. In February.
About, my Muse, and try if thou can find
What powerful Charm, raised that prodigious At the death of Oliver Cromwell,
there was a most prodigious Wind; the like has seldom been known in England.
wind:
Some disaffected Conjurer (I trow)
Did long to hear what News there was below:
But others think, the Devil was matched so,
His breath grew short, and so was forced to blow.
5. In March.
But where be those fine Juglers, did Address
Such sugared Phrase, such smooth Obsequiousness:
That vowed to live and die, with Richard, yet
Never blemished, when they saw his glory set?
Such Hypocrites, run with the stream of things,
And will keep Time, whatever Dance begins. Most Countries in England sent up
Addresses to Richard Cromwell; with as much zeal, as if he had been the most
lawful and undoubted Heir to the Government of England.

6. In April.
O for a Besom now, to sweep the House,
And rid the Palace, both of Fox and Goose!
Some choice Perfumes withal, would be designed,
(Ill Spirits ever leave ill sents behind)
And when it is cleansed, and things sweeter grown,
Great Berecynthia's Sons, go claim your own. It is observable, that the
Parliament this month give order to warn all Lodgers out of Whirehal, that it
might be prepared the better for his Royal Majesty's use.

7. In May.
What Is to be done, now, all are grown so wise,
And our Forefathers wisdom, counted Lies?
Were all the many Ages, that are past,
Mistaken, until this un-erring Last?
Good God! how sped they? shall none saved be,
But Schismatics? Then what becomes of me?
8. In June.
But it is the mode: Come, come, let us all comply;
There Is no firm footing on integrity:
For, having said, and done all what we can,
The Pliant Willow, is the precious Man:
Whose Oaths, of one day, (though of fair pretext)
Vail to an inspiration, of the next.
9. In July.
Down then with Tithes, they are a burden great,
For which the Parson never soundly sweat:
Yet let us remember (maugre all new light)
He that detains them, robs God of his right.
And though to him the tenth we should not pay,
The Publicans will sweep it all away.
10. In August.
Let Us say the Clergy by: what need we Priests
Or Ministers? w' are all Evangelists:
The Bible's English, (thank the Bishops for it:)
The Spirit's in us, why not we exhort?
Yet let us beware, before we farther boast,
And think who 'twas received the Holy Ghost.
11. In September.
Let Us sell the Church and Colledge-Lands: Away
With humane Learning; (that is but for a day:)
Down with the Steeple Houses, melt the Bells,
And own no Metal, but what is in our selves.
But stay, first let us learned Spelman read,
And then (perhaps) we may abhor the deed.
12. In October.
Let Us tear our Ribbons, burn our Richer Laces,
VVear Russet, and contrive bewitched faces:
With Thee and Thou, let us go quack a while,
And cheat the world, in Quakers garb and style.
But do not trust'em, more then well befits;
The are Presbyterians run besides their wits.
13. In November.
Or were they not, yet fool not over-fast;
For this Religion too shall flag at last:
Naylor himself will never for it burn,
Nor let us use't but for our present turn.
On such sad Mummers, grace will not be had,
Much longer, then the multitude are mad.
14. In December.
But now the Apostates are restored their wits,
And Plots and Plotters crumbled all to bits;
A blessed Reformation will (I hope)
At last succeed, in spite of Turk and Pope:
Till when, and always, let us observe the Laws,
And truly celebrate, The Good Old Cause.
Which Good Old Cause, England is now again (by Gods especial Providence)
blessed with; to the great satisfaction and rejoicing of the inhabitants
thereof; who, by reason of their sufferings in our late twenty years Confusion,
cannot but give their joy the greater Latitude, at this so happy, and (by many,
almost) unexpected Revolution of Government; viz. of turning from Anarchy, to
the most natural of all other Governments, MONARCHY.

There are diverse other curious Fancies of this learned Author; but they being
more Astrological then any that are here mentioned, and not very easily
understood without a large Comment, (except by persons skilled in that Science)
is the grand reason why the Collector has omitted their Publication.

Multa renascentur, que jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor, vocabula, si volet usus;
Quem pones arbitrium est, and vis, and norma loquendi.
Horat. de Art. Poet. FINIS.
A POETICAL ESSAY.

As an ARRHA OF A Larger Harvest.

By G. S.

-- Ridentem dicere verum
Quis vetat? --
LONDON: Printed for Daniel White, at the Seven Stars in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

A Poetical Essay. Liber Loquitur.
TRistia principio, post haec celebrare triumphos
Meus est; nox olim sic fuit atra prior,
Post tenebrasque dies: regimur non impare fato,
Gaudia succedunt, sed praeit ante dolor.
Englished thus.

First doleful Ditties, Triumphs then to sing,
Is mine intent: thus Day the rere does bring,
Night leads the van: and such is humane fate;
Sadness our Joys oft-times does antedate.
Upon His MAJESTY, CHARLES the First, Being pretendedly judged and condemned
by his Subjects.
NOr want his sufferings their President;
His Blessed Pattern in the same path went,
Trod the same steps, won the same glorious Crown:
Like villainy both to the grave brought down.
Blessed Disciple of a Master blessed!
Both for their people suffered, both to rest
Past through a Sea of troubles, shed their blood;
Christ for his Scholar, he for such who stood
In bold defiance of his godlike love:
Christ he was born, Charles made by him a Dove.
Both like to harmless Lambs did suffer death:
Two Kings, like these, never drew vital breath.
Whose parity of passion plainly shows
That Christ and Charles were both true Kings of Jews.
Upon Kindle-Coale the Dry-vine, who Kindled a fire of intestine War in this
Kingdom, which flamed out for nigh twenty years, till it had almost (with our
selves) consumed some, and sorely scorched others of our Neighboring Nations.
STrange monstrous whirlwind! is it a Juglers mist?
Or do I see the fiery Alchymist
Here acted? is my fight beguiled? or how
See I so many shapes? Legion I trow
Is not broke loose again, and from among
The Tombs now come Churches to haunt, whose throng
Of people seem possessed with spirits strange.
The fire's fallen, although tongues do not change.
Had cloven tongues been with the fire joined,
(The fire we saw, we heard and felt the wind)
I should have thought the Comforter once more
Had visibly descended as before.
But sure that blessed Spirit never did teach
Such Doctrines which these pulpit-thumpers preach.
Or is it the wind and fiery Chariot,
That Rapt Elijah? was that fire so hot?
That wind so great? Oh no: this surely then
Is that Rock-rending whirlwind, raised by men,
Or rather fiends Incarnate; this the fire
Wherein God was not, but chose to inspire
Eliah in a soft and silent voice,
Such (had we heard) had made this Land rejoice:
But we in stead of this, had sons of thunder,
Whose fiery flashes made beholders wonder:
Such gusts and storms did from the pulpit blow,
As made the floods their banks to overflow*
Headstrong Rebellion down Religion's tide
Swam with such force, that nothing could abide,
But all was hurryed with the furious stream:
Even Majesty it self, that master-beam
Was overwhelmed, conscience wreckt, and lost,
Loyalty split on Rocks, allegiance tossed
So long upon the waves of the swelling flood,
Until it sunk, and buried lay in the mud.
Oaths, vows, and sacred Ties, now bind no more
Then strawes; all dashed are against the rocky shore.
Whence comes this madness? how were you misled,
Once famous Englishmen, while to your head
You faithful were, and due obedience gave
To your Liege Lord and King? what made you rave,
To such a height of fury, to forget
Gods Deputy on Earth, by Him there set?
Who could acquit you from those sacred ties
By which you were engaged? how dust you rise
In arms against him unto whom you swore
Allegiance? was it not that same God, before
Whose presence you made Vows of Loyalty,
Whom you conceive now pleased with Perjury?
Poor people! you were gulled with Pulpit-charms;
'Twas Curse ye Meroz made ye rise in Arms:
With juggling Peter's, who had learned the Art,
To play the Preachers and the Gypsies part.
By spiritual canting, he knew how to call
Your plate (with holy craft) to Goldsmiths-Hall:
Your Spoons and Tankards (from your Cupboards) he
On public Faith, procures a loan to be.
The work was great, and lest this should not do,
The Wenches Rings, Thimbles, and Bodkins too,
Another Sermon cleanly swept away,
To help on Gods Cause, as the knave did say.
Old Woolaston, (that trusty Saint) took care
Of this free-Offering, and carved out a snare
First to himself, next to his Brethren: all
To taste the bounty of the Saints have call;
The rest he ( Aaron-like) in mould does east,
Hoping to frame a Calfe: but what with have,
What with deceit (wherewith such Saints are stored)
Our comes a Bull, the Public Faith, which gored.
Alas poor Public Faith! and is it dead?
May the Bulls Horns grow on the Givers Head.
But since the work is done, methinks I spy
A monstrous change in the Presbytery.
Stout Boanerges now begins to whine;
The Enthusiast o'ertops the Book-Divine;
The Souldier-rampant in his Pulpit gets,
And while he preaches, the poor Parson frets.
Good Sir, lay by your anger; did not you,
By Metamorphosis, turn Captain too?
Swagger with sword by side? and in your zeal
Lead forth your Converts, Zions wounds to heal?
If Priests turn warlike Leaders, may not these
Turn Priests? it is only cake given to your cheese.
But here is the plague, men now so wise are grown,
They know enough, and will no Teachers own:
And since that all can preach, none now would pay
The Parson, but his Tithes would take away.
Does this displease you? strange! was it not the case
Of Bishops, Deans, and Chapters? you said Grace
Before that meal, which on their Lands was made;
Methinks you justly in your Coin are paid.
If they were Relics of the Whore, no doubt
But yours are of the same kind: if the rout
Raised by your selves, at last upon you fell,
For shame complain not; you are rewarded well.
It Is fit those Pulpits should contemned be,
Which first defiance bid to Majesty:
It Is fit such Presbyters their Tithes should want,
Which labored King and Bishops to supplant.
No Bishops, nor no Tithes, by humane Right;
And Jus Divinum is exploded quite.
O times! when Hobnails justle out a Crown;
And Surplice white, is changed to crimson Gown;
When to rebel, is judged a Saint-like thing;
Who hate conformity, dare kill their King.
But, God be praised, now New lights are found
To be Fools Fires, in a moorish ground.
King-killing now let us damn to lowest Hell;
Let not the Class against the Mitre swell.
Leave crimson Tenets to the crimson Whore;
Let Us all at last repent, and SMEC no more.
Upon the Death of DENNIS BOND, who died on that stormy Day, the same Week the
PROTECTOR died, who lived four Days after him.
A Zealot for the Cause, lived always graced,
To right and left, to front and rear he faced;
And as times changed, he turned still: thus his stake
He saved, and did of Honor still partake.
To the Kings Murder ( post) consent he gave;
And then admired proud Hops and Grains (that Slave!)
Owned him a Saint, saw much of God in's face,
Only his Copper-Nose did much disgrace
The Divine Image: yet there is reason why
Dennis with Oliver should thus comply.
Both Saints alike, and Rebels, the one in grain,
Most stained with blood, but Traitors both remain.
Nol's Actor, Dennis stands Abettor by;
Their Sovereigns Life, the Touchstone both to try.
He owns the Murder, the other cries Amen;
It is a Query which was worst: for when
He pawned his soul, this laid his Bond at stake,
A praise-deserving Action this to make
Clear as the Sun, and do appoint their day,
Ten years (bating few months) this game to play.
Thus Noll went foremost, nor did Bond disclaim
The Fact, but gives it a religious name:
And firmly is resolved to justify
That Law and Court which judged King Charles to die.
Pluto takes up the wager, and makes show
Of paints and varnishes both old and new,
To give a gloss to villainy, but asks
(In case that neither should perform their tasks)
Noll's foul, and will have Dennis in the Bond,
The time prefixed not to slip beyond;
But on the forfeit, seizure should be given.
This notwithstanding, both make sure of Heaven.
The time's elapsed, the wager lost: what now?
Both would forget their Lay, but 'twill not do:
For Pluto boldly comes, and makes demand,
The affrighted Gamesters both amazed stand.
Fain would they find Evasions; but he brings
Clear Evidence against Murder black of Kings:
For proof, he calls the best and worst of men;
First, Saints in Bliss; damned Powder-Traytors then:
The former, doom this Fact to lowest Hell;
The latter (now in woe) judge they did well;
If you compare these new Saints bloody Fact,
Which they before the Sun did boldly act,
With their bare plotted Treason, nipt in the bud,
While these all over are dipped in sacred Blood.
Shall our Intentions reap untimely death?
(By shame more bitter made) and these draw breath
Till Fate surprise them with a silent stroke?
Shall we (poor wretches) be with sulfurous smoke
Tormented ever? and shall these find bliss?
Shall horrid Facts meet Joys, which Plots did miss?
It Is strange, if true; Heavens Justice it forbids.
Thus spoke these damned Souls, when strait amids
Fear and Despair, proud Noll 'gins gasp for breath,
To yield his loathed soul to a cursed death.
In blustering storms the hellish Fiend attends,
While he in prayer some few minutes spends.
Pardon he begs not, lying in despair;
Some respite to obtain, is all his care.
Nor having hope in God, to Pluto he
Does thus Address himself: Oh pity me!
Great Lord of the infernal Commonwealth,
Or else I am undone, who in my health
Took care for nothing, but my Sons to fix
In The seat of Sovereignty (Oh cursed tricks!
By which I did this project bring about
Thus far) my stinking snuff if you put out,
Before I can accomplish this intent,
Loss must to you redound: for I have sent
(I boldly can affirm) more to your Court,
Then twenty lawful Kings: you know my sport:
Great Lucifer! in blood was my delight,
Unbowel'd carcasses much pleased my sight;
Whose Bodies escaped me, I destroyed their Souls,
So much as in me lay: the Muster-Rolls
Of my Trepanners, Spies and Instruments!
This Art insnares my Foes, my fall prevents.
What did I say? Prevents? Oh no, I lie;
I am beyond help fallen, if now I die.
Have pity (gentle Pluto) I you pray;
Release I beg not, only longer day:
And it is but four days respite which I crave,
Mean while, my Bond most willingly you have:
Take him, and use him, as my self you would use;
And four days hence, to come I Will not refuse.
Satan proves good to's servant, and accepts
This at the present, nor himself expects
Until the day prefixed. Now all his care
Is, to seat Richard in his vacant Chair.
But had you seen how Dennis lay amazed,
And on him Pluto how he staring gazed;
With pity it had made you laugh, to see
A strong-confiding Saint thus cozened be.
With strecht-out arms aloft he strives to go,
But Pluto soon another way does show:
This is our present path; fear not, it is broad,
Noll's Privy Council all may ride this road
Abrest, with all the Judges of the King,
And the whole train which they with them shall bring:
No fear of crowding; therefore courage, man;
You Will have a jolly Crew, and now and than
Some of your fellow-Rebells you will see
Come dropping in, till none remaining be.
Discoursing thus, they did approach that Lake,
At sight whereof, Dennis began to quake;
Yet did so strong of Modern Saintship smell,
That he was taken for a Saint in Hell.
In cloistered Cells he hears some roar and swear,
And zealously entreats them to forbear.
One hearing him reprove with such a grace,
Cries, Cursed Caytiff! well I know thy face,
Who stand'st condemned there for Perjury,
Schism, Sedition, and base Treachery.
Thou, who a Rebel labourd'st to advance
Unto his Sovereign's Seat, how comes this chance,
That thou (Arch-Traytor!) dare for Oaths (here sworn)
Reprove? anon thou'st curse, thou wretch forlorn!
Beelzebub hears this chat, and in he comes;
Enquires his guest, and shows him choice of rooms.
It Is plaguey hot (quoth Bond) Oh hold! I die!
Fear not (says Beelzebub) you will only fry:
This room's for Saint-like Rebels, chiefly those,
When Kings are murdered, who their Crowns dispose.
Come, stir the fire (some idle fiend) he cries.
I Have too much heat already, Bond replies.
The flame increasing, Dennis cursed and swore,
Who (Saint-like) could not brook an Oath before.
He yell'd, and shrieked, and vowed, in bitter pain,
To come in Bond for never a Rogue again.
SIMEON and LEVI'S Bond of Fraternity: OR, AN ESSAY Upon The Scotch COVENANT.
PRodigious noise! far more prodigious sight!
Bless me! what is the matter? this would fright
A Champion himself; a man would swear
That Hell were now broke loose, and coming here.
Fetch me some holy water; in a Ring
Encircle me about; a Crosier bring.
What horrid thunder claps I hear! Sure Jove,
Armed therewith, is coming from above.
The show, more ghastly, seems to represent
Lucifer with his Train; a ulph'rous sent
Attends them: Thunder makes their way I trow;
B'elzebub now makes holy day: this show
So strange, so frightful, that the like before
I never saw, and hope shall never more.
But hold, the wonder's over: now I see
The ground of this uncouth Solemnity.
And is it possible? this does amaze
My trembling heart, that this should be the cause
Of such infernal Triumph; Heaven defend
England and Englishmen! thrice cursed Fiend!
Who did invent this execrable snare,
Good men for to entrap; while wretches dare
Take it ( Sans scruple) and with no less ease
Break it, and dally with it as they please.
This day the Solemn League first saw the light,
That Caledonian Imp: Lucifer bright,
Incubus-like, the Scottish Kirk bestrid,
So got this Brat; which carefully he did
Afterward nourish, till it lusty grew;
And of it then he did make public show.
Beelzebub he played the Man-midwife's part,
And said the groaning Kirk with muckle art,
That, though this Brat abortive proved, and came
Before full time, yet lived, and had the name
Of the most Solemn League and Covenant.
Now nothing else but Godfathers they want;
England and Ireland persuaded were
T'accept this honor; but it cost them dear.
In the remembrance of whose birth, each year
This solemn show is celebrated here:
Pluto this day observes a Festival,
His Courtiers revel, others great and small,
Throughout his Kingdom, yearly thus do rant
Upon the birthday of the Covenant.
O Solemn League! whose Sire's so great a King!
If all the infernal Rabble Io sing,
In celebration of thy famous birth,
That their loud shouts do thus resound on earth;
Let no man marvel, if I take some pain,
A little knowledge thereof to obtain.
I viewed it carefully as it did pass;
I saw its shape, though knew not what it was.
But now, on second thoughts, I shall pourtray
This famous Bugbear, so far as I may.
It Is like the dreadful Polyphemus Den,
That fearful one-ey'd Monster, who on Men
Gorgeth himself; his Guests who does devour,
Not sparing any that is within his power;
And it is the mildest fate which does befall
His friends, he them devours last of all.
This is the [tertium quid] which reconciles
Prodigious differing Sects; though each reviles
And hates the other; herein all agree;
The Solemn League brings them to Unity.
The true Distinction is the Covenant,
Betwixt the Sectary and Protestant.
This is the Shibboleth to know them; one
Makes conscience of an Oath, the other none:
One having sworn, religiously stands ti'd;
The other twenty Oaths can take beside;
Allegiance and Supremacy can swear,
Yet take the Covenant without any fear.
This Dance was led by the Presbytery,
And closely followed by the Sectary.
The Solemn League seems like that brand of fire
Betwixt two Foxes tayls, who can conspire
In mischief, though their heads look several ways:
Thus Sects unite, when each the Devil plays.
Herod and Pilate quickly were made Friends,
While Christ with scorn one to the other sends.
It does resemble theevish Cacus Cave,
To which he drew his Oxen; or the grave
Of snakie-headed Typhon, whose last breath
Fired the Mountain Aetna at his death:
It Is like the Lions all-devouring Den,
To which all footsteps led; but back again
None could be found returning. But pronounce
The Covenant, it is not the Libyan Ounce,
Nor the Arabian Panther's half so fierce;
This through the Body to the Soul can pierce;
And like the inchaunted Bulls, which none can tame,
Does at its nostrils break forth smoke and flame.
The Trojan Horse, enclosing armed Men;
Or roaring Lion new roused from his Den,
Could not the object prove of so great fear:
Better to meet the fiercest Northern Bear
Robbed of her VVhelps, then in the claws to fall
Of The Solemn League, which far surpasses all.
This is the Babel of the Sectaries,
Which they intend shall overtop the Skies:
But as the number, so their Sects increase,
Until Confusion cause that work to cease:
Turn the Sectarians over, and you will find
Scarce any four, concurring in one mind;
This does resemble that Gygantick War,
VVag'd against Heaven, when men raged so far,
The Gods themselves most proudly to defy,
Pelion on Ossa heap't, to approach the Sky.
Till Typhon burnt with lightning from above,
And struck with Thunder from Vindictive Jove,
To wash his wounds, unto the River went,
Which such infected sulphrous odor sent,
Into the water, with his dropping blood,
As poisoned all the streams of the cristal flood.
Nor Aetna, nor Vesuvius throw out
More coals, vomit more flames, nor round about
Disgorge more ashes, cinders, burning stones,
Then does the Solemn League: who takes it once,
Take him and wash him at the head of Them
Or Isis, and so far as Thames its name*
Descends, he will rebellious poison send
From beyond Oxford, down below Gravesend.
Name but the Covenant, and you have spoke
Thunder and Lightnings, Earthquakes, Flames and Smoke,
Rebellion, Schism, Murder in that League
Lie couched, as does a Chicken in an Egg;
Which being hatched under a Sectary,
Out comes a Hydra straight of Villainy.
Had I the Covenant here, scarce durst I read
Two lines, nor further on my life proceed,
Unless I were within a Circle hemmed.
'Twere a fit Neck-verse for a Thief condemned;
The bare pronouncing it, such Fiends would call,
As would spectators fright, hangman and all.
It Is Gorgons Visage, and Medusa's Head:
The sight of it 's enough to strike one dead.
All the beholders breasts it turns to stone:
Another Circe, whose infernal tone,
By haggish Spells, men can transmute to beasts:
A fierce Hyaena, which loves humane Feasts.
The Egyptian Crocodile, to this compared,
Is like a harmless Lizard: to has ensnared,
Killed and devoured, ruined and destroyed
More then that poisonous Dragon which annoyed
The Babylonish Confines, and did wast
The Country, by that Venom which he cast;
Whole Towns and Villages his poisonous breath
Consumed; nor proved less fatal after death.
(So great a stench his rotting carcass made,
Which by no Antidote could be allayed.)
Thus from the expiring Covenant did spring
That cursed Engagement which renounced our King.
It Is a mysterious hidden villainy,
Treason in ambush, Pimp to Perjury:
Gods Name abused, the Devil to conjure:
Hypocrisy, which can the Rack endure,
Without discovery: it is the Nut of Vice
In Virtues Shell: Satan in Paradise.
It is a ravening Wolf in sheep-skin clad:
A Necromantick Charm, of Scripture made:
Borgia's Precepts of true Piety;
And tenderhearted Tereus Leiturgy:
Machiavil's grounds played in Division:
The secret Character of Babylon.
It Is her mysterious Name spel'd out at length:
It Is Death's (like Sampson's) secret lock of strength*
The Devil wrought, by curious Chemistry,
To an Elixir, to make thousands by.
The many-headed Antichristian-Beast,
With names of Blasphemy upon his breast:
Judas hayl Master, with his loving Kiss:
The brazen Bull of cruel Phalaris.
(All guests to fit) Procustes Iron bed,
By stretching joints, or chopping off the head.
Whatever I have said, describes it not;
But like as Hell is fancied fiery hot,
The Eternal Mansions of damned Sprites,
As we pourtray, by that which us affrights;
Just so the Covenant do I express,
By likening it to the pit bottomless;
Or to the Locusts which thence did arise
With dreadful Strings: Or to the fatal eyes
Of that Serpentine Monster, which can slay
Only by sight: yet still, whatever I say,
Ten thousand times comes short of that degree
Of hellish Venom and Malignitie
Which in the Solemn League by proof is found,
That Scotch-born Pest, nourished in English ground;
Which has devoured alike both beasts and men,
Lands, Houses, Churches, Castles: surely when
Grisly Abaddon with Destruction met,
That Sire and Damme this Goblin did beget:
Which to the life to express, does pass my Skill,
Puzzles my Fancy, and out-dares my Quill:
For beyond all that I can think or say,
It is Great Beezebub's ET CAETERA.
UPON The Detestable LIFE, And Accursed DEATH OF OLIVER, Lord PRO-TRAYTOR OF
England, Scotland and Ireland, with the Dominions thereto appertaining.
HOw many wonders center here in one!
Well may we call him Wonder's Legion.
He Is Prodigies in gross, a wholesale Pack
Of strange Portents: Amazements Almanac.
To think what first he was, to what he grew,
Would startle Faith, and nonplus Reason too.
No doubt but future Ages will suspect
His Story; yea, had we not seen the effect,
No Rhetoric could win us to believe:
Nay we might doubt our eyes did us deceive,
But that we also felt, as well as saw
The weighty load of his imperious Law.
God bless me! when I look on him, I fear,
As if some dreadful Comet did appear.
More frightful never was that blazing Star,
Whose flaming Tail struck terror near and far:
Nor could a flying Dragon scare me more;
Nor Thunderclaps which over head do roar;
Nor yet that rending Thunderbolt, which falls
Mingled with blasting Lightenings Fireballs
Such trembling horror and amazement bring,
As that Vile Monster, who destroyed his King.
What, is he dead? No, no; it cannot be:
Can Lucifer taste of Mortality?
Rather the time expired he here should dwell,
And hence he went to play his pranks in hell.
Who can imagine him of mortal breed?
Hell's Offspring only durst act such a Deed.
His Nose betrayed his Lin'age, and did show
His Pedigree: the infernal fire below,
(As in a Landscape) there was set to view,
Whose frequent Pimples seemed a Damned Crew.
Thus Hell was represented in his face,
Himself the Devil acted with such grace,
Who saw him, took the Actor for the same;
Thus he and Satan differed but in name.
Some think an Incubus his Mother pressed,
And while she bred him, say she was possessed:
Nor is it improbable: for that old Hagge
Proved afterward his Oracle, would brag
Much of her cunning, and (some say) would tell
Of secret whispers in a private Cell:
No sooner was a Health drunk to his Nose,
But she as quickly could and did disclose:
Yet let his Sire be what he will, we know,
That Lucifer he oft-times did outdo.
Some call him Jeroboam, and pourtray.
Him and a ghastly Goblin, both one way
Turning blind Fortune's Wheel, to get a Crown,
Though Oliver put Jeroboam down.
He was to him a Saint; two Calves of Gold,
Although he made, his Crown thereby to hold;
Yet openly rebelled, seemed what he was:
But Cromwell, in the dark, unseen did pass
Step after step, with gilded Perjury,
And with the most refined Hypocrisy.
All Jeroboam's sins he did commit,
And far out-strip'd him: he a Kingdom split,
Rent it in twain, but not to pieces broke;
Forsook his King, but not with fatal stroke;
Murdered him at his door, nor was engaged,
To Rehoboam; rather was enraged
Against him, for his fathers sake, who sought
His life, but he by flight his safety wrought.
This villain, to the death his King pursued,
More fierce, then fiercest Tiger; he inbru'd
His hands in Sacred blood, which to defend,
Often he had sworn: did the whole Kingdom rend
From his Successor. Jeroboam left
Two Tribes to David's Son: Cromwell bereft
His Sov'rains heir, not only of his Crown,
But all his friends most proudly trampled down.
Robbed him of all the comforts of his life,
And drew against him his blood-thirsty knife.
Instead of Golden Calves to be adored,
This daring English rebel well was stored
With monstrous heresies, which vented were
Without coutrol: all found protection here;
Old darkness was esteemed both light, and new,
Religions all were free, except the true.
Oh! what a Zealous Sycophantick gang,
Hosanna sung? what new Sects daily sprang?
The vilest Jeroboam chose for Priests,
Cromwell at this was expert, and suppressed
All that were ablest: who durst not comply
With his designs, were with contempt cast by
Thus sects with us, like the Egyptian swarms,
With humming music dance to Cromwels charms.
So that if now I should his name devise,
He should be Beelzebub, the Lord of flies.
Old Holofernes one was pleased to call
This rebel, but beneath the mark did fall;
And yet did very well, he level shot,
Aimed at the white, although he hit it not.
For that great Captain at his Kings command
Led forth an host, fell by a woman's hand:
This monster rose in arms against his King,
And slighting vows, to public death did bring:
Nor would when summoned, unto death submit,
But sturdily strove to abate its writ;
Till Lucifer in blustering storms did come
To ravish him perforce unto his doom.
Then did he yell, and howl, blaspheme and, rave,
And four days respite humbly begged to have:
Then! then! this wretch unto his place did go,
There to eternity to suffer woe.
Old Holofernes, his Kings foes subdued;
To such who did submit, he mercy showed:
Cromwell both King, and all his friends brought under;
His native Country he did rod and, plunder.
Jerusalem by force one did assault
( Vaux-like) the other in a secret vault,
By secret practices knew to delude,
And brought his Masters into servitude.
Better his own vile name then other may
His more accursed qualities pourtray.
Henceforth let it serve for a Magic spell,
A spirit raised, back to remand to hell.
And as a Bugbear froward children stills,
The trembling Scots his name with horror fills.
Dunbar, and Worster, fatal Proofs they found
How well the Covenant, thrived in English ground,
Our Covenanters learned to slay their King,
And on her knees their Kirk old Nol did bring.
He, to their grief, taught them, and made them feel
Their League was to be purged away with steel.
Now fie upon him, Loon! the Kirk did cry,
The League was good; he took it wickedly:
To rise in Arms our Covenant allows,
To root out Prelacy; nor do our vows
Forbid to sell our King; this does agree
Both with our League, and Presbytery;
The Egyptian Cavaleers while we kept under,
This was but Christian like! 'twas godly plunder,
But Simeon and Levi to fall out,
Brethren each other to assault and rout,
Oh! this is wicked, this goes very nigh,
And argues little Christianity.
Peace, Brethren, peace, quoth Cromwell, you have got
The day of treacherous Iscariot.
His thirty pieces, he brought back, had you,
By such an action shown repentance true,
I had forborne, who now come for that end,
To fetch that back, which you are loath to send.
O Son of Lucifer! how did thou rise
From Dunghill to the Throne? who did devise
Those villainies which thou did execute?
How of a Saint gott'st thou the first repute?
Did thy religion? every man does know,
Long thou had none, nor ever but a show*
To quaff a Can, boldly to court a Lass,
This, this, was thy Religion, till alas!
Thy credit lost, and all thy money spent,
There was no other way, but to repent;
And by Repentance, as the Proverb goes,
From an old Devil, a young Saint arose:
For his Profession served but as a Cloak;
His Zeal no fire had, but only smoke.
The Scriptures, like Decoyes, he did abuse,
To cover foul Designs with Saint-like shows:
Could preach and pray, had learned to use the Tone
Of snuffling Gospellers, who can bemoan
Themselves to God, with necks drawn quite awry,
Eyes turned up, hands lifted to the Sky,
Making most tedious hems and hums, when they
In Zealous Nonsense have quite lost their way.
A Text of holy Writ, he by his Art,
Could quite knock out of joint, and say by heart,
Many affected Phrases; he could run
Canting Division, and preach down the Sun;
But still his Uses he did most apply
To beat down Antichristian Prelacie.
This Doctrine pleased; thus by degrees he came,
His King with Pulpit-scandals to defame;
Taxt first his Council, and then rose in Arms;
Deludes the Soldiery with preaching Charms:
And thus, by show of Godliness, he crept
Unseen, into the Throne until he stepped.
By hidden motions, Fox-like, he did clime;
Ruled like a savage Wolf, until the time
Of our Deliverance from his Tyranny
Was come, when God did hear poor England's Cry.
Removed this Monster, whose far unlike Son
Lost like a Fool, what the old Knave had won.
O that the Devil had let loose his Soul,
(At least a few days) on his bare Parol,
To Have seen these Changes! there is no doubt but he
Would rather choose in hottest flames to be,
Then this heart-rending-sight to endure: there lie,
Thou SON OF PRIDE! and never dying, die!
There of thy Treasons, reap the due Reward,
No torment Hell affords, let now be spared.
For ever gnash, those Vipers teeth, and let
Hell (like that burning Furnace) once be heat
Sev'n times beyond its wont, to entertain
Thee (matchless Rebel) and whilst thou in pain
Do roar, For joy of thy thrice happy death,
We with loud Shouts will rend the very Earth.
FINIS.

