OTIA SACRA


Deus nobis hoec Otia fecit. Virg:

London Printed by Richard Cotes. 1648.

Columna Fidei.
OUR Senses are bewitched, and seem to grow
So to the Creature, and on things below,
That all our busied Fancy can devise,
Serves more to sink them, than to make them rise:
For out of sight and mind, at once agree
To blindfold Nature from Eternity;
And leave her grovelling, for to groap her way
Here in This Transitory bed of Clay,
Till Faith steps in; and in the stead of wings,
Unto Belief, a lofty Pillar brings,
Whereby we should be raised up; And thus
Ascend to Him, descended once for Us.
KAPDIAGNOSTS. On the Title Page.
THere is a Foul wont hide its head,
To Pass so undiscovered:
Judging it self exempt from eyes
Of others, whilst it none descryes.
Not much unlike are such to these,
Who commit Closet-trespasses
And Chamber-dalliance; and then
Go for unseen, 'cause so of Men.
If They my Pillars top attein,
They Will find an eye tryes heart and rein:
But Natures Pur-blinde sight short is;
Nor can she rise alone to this,
Till Grace assist, which will such virtue yield,
As both t'ascend the Pillar, gain this Shield.
OTIA SACRA.
Ad Libellum suum.
GO without Dedication, for that might
Imply I sought to Shelter what I write
Under some Patronage: I can afford
None Sharers in this Offering with my Lord:
His are both Line and Leisure, which misspent,
The fault lies on the unhappy Instrument
That should improve both better: But it is done,
And Thy fate is decreed, why woof is spun;
Censure must pass: Yet Blush not since thy Strings
Are only consonant with holy things.
Ad Viatorem.
NUmina, non Nummos, Me dum cernis Meditantem,
Et Me-ditantem creed (Viator) habes.
EST
In Vnitate Trinitas.
THat Number 'bove the rest,
For ever Blessed,
Which God Himself does daign
To Branch into, yet Re-unites again,
For as His Prescience could tell
When Angels fell
That Man would follow, and there should be On
Sent for to make Redemption:
So from our Misery did He Infer
The necessity of a Comforter.
This does inspire, That did Create,
The second did Regenerate:
Thus though Distinct, They are
Yet singular,
And One wise-ever Power it is does Tie
This Triple Knot into a Unity.

Mundi
Ex Maxima Part nondum Vocati. Participes Verbi es Sacramentorum qui fuere
vocati sed nondu^ electi. Ad
Sanctificationem. Qui propter externam vocationem Domini per Verbum, interne
and effectualiter vocantur per Spiritum Sanctum. Justicationem. Grex parvulus
Christi, Luke 12. 32. Glorificationem. Tertia pars Domini, Zachar. 13. 9.
Electi, ideoque vocati.

Let me not tread the Broad highway to Sin,
But being Elect declare my Call therein.
Seminantur
a Deo Inter Homines a Diabolo Veritas Inter Homines Mendacium Pax Inter
Homines Discordia Amicitia Inter Homines Inimicitia Ut Alterutri prodessemus Ut
Alterutrum devoremus.

A Morning Thought.
Sithence it is given Psalm. 104.73.

To Man, to fallows Labor till the Even,
And when that Star does close
Up Day, then to seek quiet and repose,
Let Us what is of our Own
Learn to make known,
To be
But so much Cash of purchased Misery;
All else Confess
(Of Love and Providence) true happiness.
For as our Souls had been
A Combating all Day with Flesh and Sin,
And then for Captives led
In Slumbers Fetters; Imprisoned in a Bed.
So by the Nights Exchange again to Day
They may
(Set free) take up their Arms,
And having overcome those Charms,
Boldly Conclude the Victory to keep
When as they War for Him kept them asleep.
No other Ransom Need
To Speed
This Liberty; but once awake,
Into our thoughts to take,
What such Confinement might
Administer of Danger in One night,
And how th'all-wakefull eye
Provided had for our Delivery;
Which on the wings of Contemplation raised
Again, we are Mounted, whilst His name is praised.
Psalm 19.
Coeli enarrant Gloriam Dei.
ARe we asleep? or do we see
No more than did blind The Son of Blindness in the Syriac.
Bartime?
Or are our Senses Charmed to lie
Benumbed into some Lethargy,
Whilst Sin makes of's a Conquest? Rise
Flesh-buryed Soul, and from the Skies
Let thy winged thoughts to thee relate
Who 'twas those structures did Create,
Where in Thy Hemisphere at large is penned,
More wonder then frail Clay can comprehend.
Whether a Sun, a Moon, a Star,
A Comet or a Meteor,
A Various Bow, true sign of Peace,
Swollen Clouds, which cause on earth increase
When breaking they Distill; the Glum
And horrid beat of Thunders Drum
We hear or see: Why are these sent?
But t'shew He is Omnipotent,
Who thus in Characters does write, whereby
We have a Lecture in Divinity.
For as those great and lesser Lights
Distinguish Time by Days and Nights;
So was it Day with us untell
Our Disobedient Parents fell.
Yet as the Tincell'd Night gives way
At th'opening of the true Golden Day;
So did the powers of Darkness fly,
The Sun of Righteousness being by:
And when we Comet-struck, int' Sin had run,
The Father did redeem us by the Son.
When th'Undertaker first did dain
For to restore His world again,
He used no other lock or sluice
In The Clouds, but sent a Bow of truce.
What did His Mercy less, when we
Who are the Worlds Epitome,
Deluged in Sin, lay Breathless, Drowned,
Until Our Saviors Precious Wound
Opened a Drayn, wherewith he laid us dry,
From wickedness into fertility?
The Air imprisoned, fain would try
The virtue of more Liberty:
Yet meeting with a tougher Cloud
Is forced to quarrel, and speak loud.
So if we seek our freedom here,
We must no Cloud of Fortune fear:
But like Bonargeses, proclaim
What we profess, then be the same.
For whilst the Face looks one way, and the Mind
Another, it is like Rain brought against the Wind.
There shall no Thunder-crack, nor dash of wet,
Prodigious Comet, in us fear beget;
But the Suns Purple, and the Silver wings
The Moon puts on, bespeaks us Saints and Kings,
Whilst Iris Endless Peace, the numerous Lights
Adorn the Night, discypher all delights:
Which for to seek to compass and obtain,
He that quits life and all here, makes great Gain.
My Country Audit.
Blessed Privacie, Happy Retreat, wherein
I may cast up my Reck'nings, Audit Sin,
Count o'r my Debts, and how Arrears increase
In Natures book, toward the God of Peace:
What through perverseness has been waved, or don
To My first Covenants contradiction:
How many promised Resolutions broke
Of keeping touch (almost as soon as spoke.)
Thus like that Tenant who behind-hand cast,
Entreats so often forbearance, till at last
The sum surmounts his hopes, and then no more
Expects, but Mercy to strike off the score.
So here, methinks, I see the Landlords Grace
Full of Compassion to my drooping Case,
Bidding me be of comfort, and not grieved,
My Rent his Son should pay if I believed.
Cui in calamitatibus soli sit fidendum.
WHen first the Towering Hills, the loftier Pine,
Exchanged to ride upon the swelling brine
Neptune prepared, and with more Active skill
Grew sometimes in the Vale, sometimes on the Hill:
Whilst Floating in a complete tackle dressed,
Iuv. Sat. 10.
She Is taught to Sail from Cadis to the East
Where Ganges runs, and from those coasts being come,
To steer a course back to Illyrium:
Then was that coward Fear banished the Mind
And Heart of Man, ambitious still to find
More worlds and works of wonder, wherein He
Might trace the Greatness of the Deity.
Then as if fortified with steel and brass, Hor. Od. 3.

Ventured his Bottom on this field of glass,
So brickle and unconstant, as contrives
A nearness unto Death, yet with reprives.
A small Gale over-fils the sayls, a leak
Is sprung, in shorter time than I can speak.
Then being o'r-set above, o'r-charg'd beneath,
What can expected be but present Death?
Unless we seek to Him, at whose command
Becalmed into Obedience, Tempests stand,
Rising when He so pleases, and are gone
When He Planes o'r their rugged Motion:
Whose Power at life's expressed, when weight ascends,
And almost to the Crystal Sky extends: Psalm 107.

And then again, when Nature on it does enter,
It is permitted for to wash the Center.
Then are such troubled as on it do ride,
Rolling and Tottering from side to side,
Being drunk through fear and sorrow; nor can tell
How many Sands shall knowl their Passing Bell.
Thus in a Trance dismayed, and quite bereft
Of sense, save of a little spark that is left
To kindle hopes, They to their Maker Cry,
Who straight releases them from Misery,
Sending a Calm; whereat the Liquid plain
Becomes to them a Looking-glass again:
So They in mind restored, have quick access
Unto the Haven of their Happiness.
My Carroll.
ARise, arise
Dull Fancy from the bed of Earth,
And that low strain
Besots thy vain;
That so thou may devise
Some Record of that famous Birth,
Which about This time, as our Date will have,
One Son for All the rest the Father gave.
Leave to the Be
To set a Valuation
On this, or that
Fair Garden-plat,
There to Browse some Flower or Tree:
And to some Foreign Nation,
To crown their Annals with the Pelican,
Or far-fetcht Cordial, Mirabolan.
Here Is Comfort more;
A gift that is far beyond all worth,
The Curious mind
Could ever find
In what a Plant ever bore,
Or Barren wilderness brought forth:
Sweetness excels the Bee's Bagg, and such Good
As proved our Strong Restorative by's Blood.
To overcome by Contraries.
IN humane things it is held a Maxim wife,
To seek to Overcome by Contraries:
And in Diviner, if we will express
Obedience of God, it holds no less;
For t'conquer Pride whereby we fell, no Art
Is comparable to a Contrite-Heart.
To Improve Afflictions.
IF David found it good He Would been in Trouble,
What would it teach Me am a sinful Bubble;
But that the Afflictions we meet with here,
Are sent to Steer Us to our God more near?
Who thus improves his thoughts on things go cross,
Without a Riddle, makes Great gains of Loss.
They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy.
AS in the Countrey-Parable it is found,
God's meant by Husbandman, and Man by ground,
His Word the precious Seed, that does excel
All other grain; Our hearts the Arable:
So would't inform We should our soil prepare,
To recompense so Great a Seedsmans care;
And neither pricked with Pride, stupid like Stones,
Laid Common to all wicked Motions:
Be unprovided t'save, much less t'afford
Increase against the Harvest of the Lord:
Wherefore as Earth 'thout Culture sithence man's fall
Is of fruits barren, Thiftles Prodigal:
So do the dispositions and desires
Nature brings forth, abound with Thorns and Briers;
Which to correct, the Masters strict Command
Is to break up again the Fallow-land:
And by Contritions Coulter and Plough-shares
To dress our Minds, furrow our Cheeks with tears
Of true Repentance. And those thus destroy
The Weeds of Sin, shall surely reap in Joy.
Ascensus Gratiarum, Descensus Gratiarum.
IF there be any Virtue left that can
Pull Blessings down, it is Gratitude in Man;
And to be humbly thankful, that alone
Makes Him true subject for Compassion.
All Other Graces as Assistants sit
Upon the Wool-sacks for to farther it;
In representing how the Law concludes
On Gods Rich Bounties, Our ingratitudes:
So thereupon Impeachment's drawn to show
Delinquencies, and what He gives, we ow.
First then unless dejected Care possess
The Heart and Soul for bypast wickedness,
And stir up Resolution to become
Henceforth more righteous, even to Martyrdom:
In vain it is to hope, or yet surmize
The acceptance of such Sacrifize
From Him, whose all-discerning eye does pierce
The very Center of the Universe,
And knows before we think: Let our thoughts fly
To overtake His Providentiall eye;
Then we shall straight be conquered, and confess
His Bounties, but our own Unworthiness.
And like the Eagle, first such flight begin
From the low contemptible Vale of sin,
Until Confession and Amendment raise
Our stretched our Pinions to the clouds in praise.
And then when all is done that we are able,
Still we must know, we are but Unprofitable.
Contemplatio Diurna.
WHen we behold the Morning Dew
Dissolve in the rising Sun: What would it show?
But that a Sun to us did rise,
Our Fathers hoary sin to Atomise.
And when the Flowers displayed appear,
To entertain the mounting Charettier:
What would they speak in that fair dress?
But Man's redemption out of wrethchedness.
For the shade-shortning Noon can tell
The Proud, and such as with Ambition swell;
That whilst upon Opinions wing
They seek to sore, they work their lessening.
And the Prognostic Western set,
May Our Conditions rightly counterfeit;
For if we rise, shine, and set Clear,
The Day Star from on high's our Comforter:
If Sin beclowd us as we fall,
Our next days rise will prove our Funeral:
Et quid lachrymabilius?
Vbi desinit Medicus, incipit Theologus.
Pharmaca aegrotantibus Optima.
COrpore si tu agrotas,
AEsculapius vocetur:
Anima sin sit, devotas
Preces quisque Meditetur.
Convictus facilis and maxim Nutriens.
Nec quid comesurus cures,
Paucis nam Natura gaudet:
Verbum Dei si procures,
Dapes (quis quis velit) laudet.
Aer Optimus and ad Veram Valetudinem propius conducens.
Era dum Malignum quaeris
Sis morbosus; nec sit mirum:
Sancto sodale si frueris,
Te que efficiet talem virum.
Exercitium veram sanitatem comparans optime.
EXercearis licet tota
Nocte Dieque Fata vocent:
Sed si Deo facta, Vota
Sint sincera, Haec non nocent:
Ad sanitatem potius veram
Et aeternam, Viam docent.
Where the Physicians skill can do no more,
Divinity must best of health restore.
Annus annulus, etc. Diminutione largimur.
AS the Year, Serpent-like does cast its Skin,
And's stripped of the Old, when as the New comes in;
What would 'tinform, but that anew w'invest
Our selves in Christ, Old Adam's Rags detest?
And if a Ianus Bifronted does stand,
Looking at once to this and the other hand,
What would He teach our Consciences, save this,
To see at one View whence Salvation is,
And whence our woe came; that for this we may
Our Tribute Tears, for that all-praises pay?
Now when the Season blossoms in its Spring,
And time puts on a party-colored wing;
Why should not our Souls, which before did lie
Defiled through th'smutch of Sin, receive a dye
(Whereat the Rose may blush) from that same flood
(All Streams surpasses) of our Saviors Blood?
For if that Leprosy we fain would heal,
This is our Jordan, stained with Cutchinneal.
If from our first Sire we received a wound,
This is that Spikenard that can make us sound.
And as the approaching Sun comes daily on
For to supplant the Winters Garrison:
So should our frozen hearts be thawed, and Melt
When we to Mind call what our Jesus felt,
And we deserved; His Zodiac should bring
Us to the Tropic of our Summering
In those warm thoughts, till ripe in faith and hope,
Love like a Vale, cover Our Horiscope:
For what can we return for His, who rent
The Temples to free us from Punishment?
O let the Lustful Clusters we behold
Betasseling Autumn, and those Ears of gold-
Resembling Corn, say to us, if we thirst
Or hunger: He who is both Last and First,
Did tread the Wine press for us, and fulfill
What was to us due for our Parents ill;
That so we might be numbered amongst those guest
The Lamb invited to his Mariage-Feast.
And though we once fell by what one Tree bore,
God by Another fruit did us restore.
Then whilst the Sharp'd-breath'd Winter seems to lay
Stripes on the bearing earth, and Blasts th'array
She late was decked in; Spitting on her face
Its Feather'd-rain, (all embling the disgrace
For Us He felt, who would have known no shame,
Had we been Innocent and without Blame)
Doth't not discypher how a Lilly pure
Sprung up 'midst Thorns, Scourgings to endure:
And how They Spat upon a Face that Shined,
Which proved our Eye Salve, who before were blind?
My Observation at Sea.
THough every thing we see or hear may raise
The Makers Praise;
For without Lightning or Thunder,
His Works are all of wonder;
Yet amongst Those there is none
Like to the Oceon.
Where (not a Catalogue to keep
Of several Shapes inhabiting the Deep)
Let but our Thoughts confer
With what once Gravel'd the Philosopher:
And we must straight confess
Amazement more, but apprehension less.
The Fire for heat and light
Most exquisit:
And the All-tempering Air
Beyond Compare.
Earths Composition and Solidity,
Bountiful Mixed with Humidity.
But here for Profit and Content,
Each must give place to the Liquid Element:
Whose Admirable Course, that Steers
Within Twelve Hours Mariners,
Outward and Homewards bound:
May be Sufficient Ground
To raise Conclusion from thence
At once, of Mighty Power and Providence.
For as the Cynthian Queen
Her bounty less or more vouchsafes be seen:
So by her wain She brings
The Tides to Neaps, and by her Full to Springs:
Yet not but as He pleas
Who set Her there, chief Governess of Seas:
Which understood
Truly by such would seek for Traffic good,
They must their Anchors weigh
Out of the Oozie dirt and Clay
Earths Contemplations yield,
And hoysing Sails, They Will straightway have them filled
With a fresh-Mackerell Gale, whose blast
May Port them in true happiness at Last.
There th'in a Bay of Bliss,
Where a Sweet Calm our welcome is:
Let us at length the Cables Veere
Fore and abaff, that may our Moorage clear
From warp or winding, so ride, fixed upon
Our Hopes Sheat-Anchor of Salvation.
Upon Moses put young to Sea, or hid in an Ark of Bulrushes:
Exodus 2. 2, 3.
THis son of Amram, soon as born did find
Pharaoh a Tyrant, but the Midwives kind:
So being from that bloody Doom set free,
Becomes His Mothers Care and Huswifrie;
Who to His safety, that She might confer
More hopes, She makes him first a Mariner:
A good presage; whereby it was implide,
His People He through the Red Sea should guide.
In Mosen adhuc Infantem Amni commissum.
Exodus 2. 3. 14.
Cur latitans Iuncis Moses fit Nauticus Infans?
Ut ducat Populum per Vada Rubra suum.
Docem Praecepta. Acrost. Konist.
1 I n AEgypte cum fuisses,
respexit (Solus) ut Exisses.
2 E rrantes in Eremo plectit paucos,
posteros ut reddat Cautos.
3 H abeas Nomen non in Vano
ore, sed in Cord Sano.
4 O pere, nec sordeat Dies,
in qua jussa Sancta quies.
5 V erus Amor Paternalis
docent in Parents qualis.
6 A rdens Cura ignoscendi,
tollat Rabiem Plectendi.
7 D oceat Casta Vitae normam
qui and Vitam dat and formam.
8 E ripiendi queis fruentur
alii, nec sit Men's libenter.
9 V era Testimonia Testes
reddant laetos, falsa Moestos.
10 S is Contentus tua sort;
Nec Iunctam cupias Portam Porta:
Capias Vitam tunc pro Morte.
The Contempt of this World, raises the Others Esteem.
WHen all the Virtue we can here put on,
Is but refined Imperfection,
Corruption Calein'd: A Mineral vain,
Where Clay (to be more prized) some Ore does gain:
Why should we not employ the best of Care,
To learn wherein Truest Contentments are,
And how attained? The Jewellers command
Over Art, is how to Foil the Diamond
As may add Luster to it: So, who tries
Less to Esteem of This worlds Flatteries,
Sets higher Value on the Other, where
Perfection proves the Eternal Jeweller.
In Diem Natalem.
NE moriatur Homo, Sanctus de Virgin pura,
Mirificxsque hodie nascitur Ille Puer.
Ne Peregrinetur Factus Peregrinus and Idem est,
In Cunis Stabulum Glorificatque suis.
Ne pro Delictis Proavi plectatur, amara
Pocula fert, alio non patienda Modo.
Exul ut e Coelis Migrans terraque Marique
Iactatus, tenebras Mortis, and Ima petit,
Nos ut surgamus Sancti, quoque Luce fruamur
AEterna, Astriferas incolit Ille Domus.
In Eandem.
Christus Vita Venit: Christus Veritas Venit: Christus Via Venit: Venit Mors
Discedunt Venit Mendacium Discedunt Venit Error Discedunt

Laeta Dies Cunctis, Mors qua calcanda recessit,
Nascitur in Domibu^ dummodo Vita suis:
Plena Dies Lucis Verum qua clarius exstat,
Et Falsi Fuscum tollitur Omne Genus:
Fansta Dies in qua Via stornitur Omnipotentis,
Error and aufertun, Clara, Beata Dies.
To Kiss Gods Rod; occasioned upon a Child's Sickness.
WHat ever Gods Divine
Decree
Awardeth unto Mine
Or Me,
Though It may seem ill,
With patience
I am resolved to undergo,
Nor to His purpose once say no,
But Moderate both Mind and Will:
And Conquering the Rebellions of Sense,
Place all content in true Obedience.
Thus I create it good
When His
Correction's understood,
Which is,
Not to destroy,
But to reclaim,
And t'cause me turn a new-leaf ore,
Count all an Error-writ before,
So find the sting of Flattering Joy:
Making the scope of all My future aim,
To Reverence and Glorify His Name,
Thus when our God will frown, if we weigh it
In Judgments Scales, we mak't a Benefit.
My Penthouse against the Storm of Grief, occasioned upon the Death of a dear
Friend.
O How the Blasts
Temptation Casts
Against my Naked Ston,
Threaten Subversion;
Sithence the Decree of late was Thine
To take away My Sheltring Vine!
Well, let them blow,
Break clouds and rain,
Their Gusts and Showers in vain;
For Confident I am,
My Gracious God upholds the Frame,
Whilst I the Olive Sprouts see grow.
Thus to my Heart
I may impart
The assurance of a Peace,
Wherein such Trials cease
If Patience-born; that Fear is good
When it withstands ill, not of ill withstood.
Man Levens the Batch.
GOD makes all things for good; it is Man
Sowers and worsts Creation:
Who Leven'd by his Father, thence
Becomes all Disobedience;
No thought, no word, no action He
Contrives, can own Integrity
To Him that made Him, for by Deeds
As Words and Heart, his growth's in weeds,
Which whilst neglected do express
Gods Grace, but Man's unfruitfulness:
Now if again man would bear Corn,
He must himself a Weeder turn.
The Attributes of true Love.
WE call that Patience, when provoked we can
Deferr revenge, but it is true love in Man:
And when with open hand we would express
Our Bounties Tribute, some style't Lavishness:
But They mistake, as far as those despise
All steps whereby an Other Man does rise;
Yet think they have Love too; and boast no less
Than that She is their constant Patroness:
If Her Decrees be not to seek her own
Praise, (as not seemly) whither are such blown,
As thus would tempt Her anger, when it is taught
She is not to be moved to an ill thought,
But's ever pleased, and does rejoice to see
Truth sit in Triumph over Iniquity:
As She sustains, and is contented still
With what wind blows, so do her hopes sails fill,
When from the windows of Belief does breath
A steady Gale, to advance her course beneath:
Till by the Saints transplanted, and above,
She Is Moored within that Port, and called True Love.
Contraria juxta se posita Gal. 5. 19. to 23.
C-upio Formans A-dmiror Creaturam R-eminiscor Injurice O-btempero Vosunteti

S-anctitate^ Curo V-irtuti Seruio T-rucsentia^ Sperno I-ncontinentia^ Noso
R-apacitate^ fugio I-rasei nequeo P-atientia Vineo S-asutem Spero

Like Night to Day, or foyles that Raise
The Luster of the Diamonds praise:
Such, and no other Virtue Lies
Hind in the approach of Contraries.
Love begets Fear.
'TWas of Thy Goodness (Lord) at first I had
Knowledge of what was Good, and what was bad:
Yet through the Ill of Nature become blind,
I followed Sin, and left thy Fear behind:
By which I forfeited a Blessing, till
Thou of thy Mercy, free and Gracious will
Sign'st me a Pardon in that style, Repent,
That so I might avoid all Punishment.
Thus then roused up and wak'ned, I began
Thy Judgments, Blessings, Love, and Fear to skan:
And in a Scoale when I them all had waigh'd,
Methought I loved Thee still, still was afraid.
My Invocation.
GReat, and Good God, of Justice, Love;
As That to Fear, so grant This move
My Trembling Heart, till It retain
Some Sparks of heat and life again;
Sithence My Creation-Fuell's don
Lighten again the Turf by thine own Son.
Small hopes of This, unless I may
In awe to That, find a decay
Of such Lewd Thoughts, Words, Acts, did bring
My whole Man to a wintering
In Lust, and Sin, and growth of Grace,
T'assure a fruitful Springtide in the place.
How Is that attained? By heat, not cold,
It Is that the Bounteous Marygold
Displayes its Treasure; and kind Showers
(Not Frosts) befriend both fruit and Flowers:
Thaw then my Breast till't open Zeal,
And let my Eyes those sighs reveal
In rain, that my Affections may subdue,
So from my Old Congealed Clot raise thoughts new.
Misericordia Dei Splendidissima.
GODS Mercy shines 'bove all His works, as far
As does the Cyprian-Queen out-light a Starr.
To Man. Epig.
HArd-Hearted Man! what can thou say,
That Thou thy self have turned to Brick thy Clay:
But that Thy Hopes are built upon
His Promise once sent Fountains out of Ston:
Wherefore to Sacrifice to Gods desire,
Psalm 51. 17
Man's Heart must be the Altar, Sighs the fire.
My Pool of Bethesda, or the Effusion of Christ's Merits to heal our Miseries.
WHen Children would go, or Cripples stand,
Crutches and Stools are framed for Arm and Hand
To rest upon, lest such attempting shall
Without like Props occasion them to fall.
What are the Sons of Adam? if we try,
Condemned to Lamenesse and to Infancy
Through Sin, and so disabled to Pace
The Paths of Virtue, tread the Steps of Grace;
Till God of's Mercy pleased to Confer
A standing stool, as if from the Carpenter,
Though He himself was Artist, and did frame
This Remedy for Those were Weak and Lame:
So that without a farther Inquisition,
We All were, and are such, Christ's the Physician.
The Five Porches to Bethesda.
MAn is Bethesda, and's five Senses be
Porches unto that Great Intermery,
Where Diverse Cures are sought for; yet not one
Attained but through an Angels Motion,
Grace powered on the Heart; which who so can
Improve, becomes straight a perfect Man:
But Those who Opportunity neglect,
Must not an other Saving help expect.
For as the Cripple Thirty eight years lay,
And had done more, had not Christ come in the way:
So whilst these powered out waters we would try,
Others step in, Profane their Sanctity.
Lusts both our Ears, and Eyes, and Palates charm:
Through Nostrils and by Fingers we do harm;
And' cause all over Leprous and defiled,
We'd fain be cleans'd, to health be reconciled,
Yet cannot get so soon into this Tide,
Afford us of that Jordan from Thy side.
Soliloquium.
ANima, quid tam tristaris?
Ocule, quid Lachrymaris?
Cur in Pectore singultus?
Cur Moerore madet vultus?
Qui fit, gemitu plangescis
Cor, ut si integram non esses?
Cum, quo hic fruamur toto
Nostro non in Dei voto.
Ejus est suffragii, sortem
Dare, Vitam dare and Mortem.
Mortis certitudo, brevem
Vitae Curam reddit levem:
Et post Mortem, sit levamen
Quod Vivetur semper tamen:
Nec mensura quavis, horae
Vespertinae, vel Aurorae
Metitur: aeterna Luce
Sed (haec dicta Dies) duce:
In qua, cum gandeat omnis Sanctus,
Luctus sistat, sileat planctus:
Poenam (hic) qua laboramus
Somno Mortis nam mutamus:
Et quid mali hora dedit,
Gaudio Sempiterno cedit.
Qui sic mutant, invidendos
Sentio solos: non deflendos.
e contra Pectora Peccatis data,
Cor corruptum, Ora lata,
Animam infectam Malis,
Nox dum sequitur fatalis,
Lugeat, doleat Omnis Tales.
A Carroll.
(IF nothing else) may not this season move,
Or Time become true Chronicle of love?
And so allay the Fury, stint the Rage
Or madness does predominize this age?
When for to Ransom Man, whose least Offense
Was charactered in Disobedience,
He who knew no Sin came, that, to fulfill
The Mercy Statute of His Fathers will:
Thus He forgave, and gave, to let us know
What to our Very Enemies we ow,
By His Example; and decrees this fate
To the Posterity unfortunate
Of too-beleeving Adam, That They must
Give themselves over to no other Trust
Than what His Word assures, nor to make less
That first of Sins, Create them numberless,
In Envy, Malice, and Ambition,
But join to Charity Contrition
For bypast faults, and resolutions raise
To spend the future in our Makers praise:
Obey Him first, then Those His Glorious Powers
Shall substitute for our Superiors:
And with our own Condition whatsome're
Content, enjoy a full Harmonious Sphere;
Leaving no Orb for Discords fond increase,
Sithence He that is born for us was Prince of Peace.
A Quid Retribuam.
POor sin-bound-naked-creature Man, never knows
What to return for that His God bestows;
But as Prosperities increase, goes less
In The retribution of Thankfulness:
His eyes not open but with Clay made dim,
Renders that Miracle, not wrought on Him,
Remains so stupid, but where Faith's declined
Int' unbeleef, such are for ever blind:
Now that I may like Judgment still prevent,
By entertaining True-Souls-Nutriment,
Not Poison: let Example spurr me on
To take the Cup filled with Salvation;
And t'praise his holy Name that did prepare
Such Cates for those heavy and Laden are,
Sins Dromidaries swift by Nature led
To run to Evil, here unburthened
By One who bore both Cross and shame, to free
The Pliant branch of Eves posterity:
(So have I tender Saplings seen unbroak,
When Tempests have o'r-turn'd the sturdier Oak:)
And if in Sacrifice we'd pass degrees,
The best for acceptation's from the knees,
Outward and inwardly expressed; whereby
To notify unfeigned Humility;
For such deny to show repentance thus,
Surely forget Christ came from Heaven to us:
And those of that short memory may know
Their Portion's here; They shall not to Him go,
Who Is Riches, Raiment, Food, and all Relief
To them Condemn this World, make Him their Chief.
E- dat V- itam C- aelestem H- omo A- nimi R- ecti I- ejunent S- imulantes T-
alibus I- nest A- morities

Though All must truly say, They Have done amiss,
Yet there Goes more than Ordinary to This:
For He that would not make the banquet sower,
Must form His Relish to his SAVIOR.
A Pelican feeding her young with blood out of her own Breast, a type of our
Savior.
P-orrigit E-ximtos L-atus I-ndulgetque C-ruores A-leseant N-ati V-ulneribusque
S-uis.

Behold Here from the PELICANS Breast sprung
A stream of precious blood to feed her young.
In Sanctam Coenam Domini, Epig.
WAsh and be clean; Eat, Drink this, and 't will save:
So easy is the suit our Lord does crave:
Yet with the healed Creeple, back He Will call thee,
And bid Thee, Sin no more, lest worse befall thee.
A Dedication of my first Son.
IS it not fit the Mould and Frame
Of Man, should dedicate the same
To God, who first Created it: and t'give
To Him the first fruit of that Span we live?
In the worlds Infancy could Hannah tell,
She ought to Offer her son Samuel
To Him that made him, and refine
That Sacrifice with Flower and Wine?
Was Abrams long expected seed
From Sarah's womb condemned to bleed?
And shall the times now they grow Old, conclude
In faithlesness, and in ingratitude?
Let shame awake us, and where blessings fall,
Let every one become a Prodigal
In paying vows of thanks, and bring
The best, and best for Offering.
Where am I then; whom God has deigned to bless
With hopes of a succeeding happiness
Unto My house? Why is it I stand
At the Altar with an Empty hand?
Have I no Herds, no Flocks, no Oil,
No Incense-bearing- Shebah-soyl?
Is not My Grainary stored with Flower that is fine?
Are not my Strutted Vessels full of Wine?
What Temporal Blessing's wanting to suffice
And furnish out a lively Sacrifice,
Save only this, to make a Free-Will-offering
of an Infancy?
Which if I should not do, that pil'd-Up
wood, whereon lay Sarah's child;
The Temple would accuse me, where the son
Of Elk'na first had Dedication.
Wherefore accept, I pray thee, this
Thou'st given, and my first Son is:
Let him be Thine, and from his Cradleling,
Begin his services first reckoning.
Grant, with his Days, thy Grace increase, and fill
His Heart, nor leave there room to harbor ill:
That in the Progress of His years
He may express whose badg He wears.
In Quadragesimam.
WHen all the Days we have borrowed are misspent,
Had we not need to beg more time were Lent;
And not to suffer This too, to be gone,
Because abused through superstition?
A knife to cut with his good, but if to kill
It be abused, why then we deem it ill.
All things are made for use; Abuses came
But as Usurpers to deprave the same:
And in some kind or other all we do,
Speak, think, or have, those have their morals too.
Our Pampred Bodies often such thoughts put on,
That they become like to proud Iessuron:
And when our minds from full Cups are expressed,
They Are like to Baltashazzer's at His Feast:
Our Actions too, laden with Temporal good,
Cannot permit t'aspire at Spiritual food;
But over-fed, we surfeit, and become
Like to the Beast in all things, save being dumb:
Tongue-tide we are not, when we would express
Our Enmity, from th'root of Bitterness:
Nor yet uncharitable, unless in this,
To judge that those who hunger do amiss,
And such as thirst too, whilst our Cups run over,
And Bellies are made Magazines of store.
It should be otherwise, if we would shun
The heavy doom of sad Temptation;
And as the Meat and Drink of Faith, prepare
A Holy-Fasting-sanctifying Prayer,
Cooked from our Cornered hearts, and not the streets,
A Sacrifice Incens't with Love for sweets.
And thus performing what is Lent aright,
We Will fear no Schismatic, nor Anchorite.
A Hymm occasioned upon going to receive the blessed Sacrament when it was a
snow.
INvited now to Sup with Thee my Lord,
All that I am is at a Period
How to be fitly dressed,
And so t'become a worthy Guest;
For it is prepared alone
For such as have the Wedding garment on,
Which through, Guilt I want,
And all my Substance t'buy one is too scant.
Make Me a Purse then, from His Sacred Score,
Whose institution 'twas, and will do more
For Those believe His name,
That to redeem us Sinners came
Into the World, and shed
His precious blood, which might stand all in stead;
By a quick Faith apply
The Sovereign Balsome of His Agony.
For like the Man met Thieves, we all were left
Naked and Wounded, Spectacles of Theft
And Rapine too, wherein
We weltring lay, a prey to Sin;
Till the true Samaritan
Passing this way, Redemption began,
Not sparing Wine, nor Oil
Out of His Hands, and Feet, and Side the while.
Thus now upon Recovery again,
Bound up in His Grave-cloaths, brought to our Inn,
And Earnest left, to prove
His high Compassion and Love:
What care should be t'express
In all our future Actions thankfulness?
Which no way's better spent
Than in partaking right this Sacrament:
Which, without Cleansed hearts, and minds that Can
Turn a new leaf with the Centurian,
More of a Christian show,
Made white as is this day with Snow;
And like the Prophets suit
Purged with Hysope from what does pollute,
We cannot hope to do;
Nor that, 'less prompted by thy Grace thereto.
Whereto (I pray Thee) so much mercy add,
That I may have some Balm from Gilead
To heal my Leprous Sore,
Whilst humbled for my Sins before,
My future days may be
The Inventory of more Piety;
My forehead bear thy stamp
Rev. 7. 3. Mat. 25.4.
As servant, having Oil still in my Lamp.
A Reveille Mattin, or Good morrow to a friend.
AS the Black Curtain of the Night
Is open drawn
By the Gray-fingred Dawn,
To let out light,
And bid good Morrow to the Teeming Day:
So let all Darkened thoughts Through Sin,
Call in
Their Powers, that led them in a blindfold way:
And Roused up from security,
Bring better fruits unto Maturity.
For now the Fragrant East
The Spicery of the World,
Has hurled
A rosy Tincture o'r the Phoenix nest;
And from the last Days Urn
An Other springs,
And brings
With it a Charettier too in its turn:
So then by this new fire
Be Goodness Hatched, all wickedness expire.
Then as This Prince of Heat does rise,
In Power, and in Might seem stronger,
Proclaiming that it is Night no longer;
By vanquishing the Witchcrafts of the Skies,
The Spelly-vaprous Mists:
So let the enlightened Soul
Control
Our Actions, that no farther they persist
To follow sense, whereby t'invite
Ruin, the sauce to unruly Appetite.
Thus now it is clear,
Out of all Question,
The world's unmasked, and all of Vailing gone.
Phoebus Triumphant o'r our Hemisphere:
Let us not therefore in disguise
Seek, or Bravado,
To shadow as if under Maskerado
So many faults and Villainies,
Knowing that He who made the Light,
Cannot Himself be destitute of sight.
But though His Providence
Did this beget,
That Suns that rise should set,
And in appearance vanish hence:
Yet does He claim for the interest
Of Day-lights bliss,
We slumber not amiss;
When as our Light is borrowed by the West:
But the Choice Cabbinet of mind adorn
With Contemplations may befit next Morn.
Trium Gratiarum maxima Charitas.
WHen all Perfections prove
But like some sound
Of Brass,
Wherein no certain Note is found,
Without Harmonious Love;
What do we see then more, than through a Glass?
We may with Eloquence
Beguild our Speech,
And then
Offer at more than we can reach,
And bring an Influence
Of Works to raise us: yet are we but Men.
For if provoked we be,
We'll not forgive;
And so
Forget the wrong we did receive,
Though it be Love's decree;
Until we can work our revenge in woe.
The Churl, whose sparing skill
Denies to feed
The Poor,
And such as stand in greatest need;
Yet thinks he does no ill,
Whilst He walks double on his Ivory floor.
An Other, Envie-swoln,
When once 'twas heard
By chance,
That such a one was new preferred,
Cries, What are honors stolen!
Yet by the same tract strives Himself to advance.
This Mushrum may appear,
When first the Sun
Does rise;
But when His Hemisphere is run,
And that the Even draws near,
It shuts up all its treasure, and so dies.
Unless revived again
BY Loves sweet Charm,
O'r which
No Night or Vapor can do harm;
For neither Pride, Wir, Gain,
Can make us truly Live, or truly Rich.
But if Affection
To Truth prevail,
And say,
No Suffering shall turn the Scale,
Nor yet promotion:
This Night will turn into eternal Day.
Matthew. 13.
El Sembrador, or, the Sower.
ALL are Solicitous, who grounds possess,
To know
Both when and how to sow,
That promise may to them the Most increase.
And by the several Seasons, Change, or Wain,
Full, or
Increase, to stir them for
What might be properest of every grain.
Nor do they search so deep as for a Mine
Of Gold;
Yet what is the fittest mold
For every seed, can readily define.
And does not great neglect and sloth appear
In these,
Whom Barley, Wheat, Rye, Pease,
Affect alone in being cheap or dear:
Whilst that the Fallows of their hearts, untilled,
No more
Can promise than before,
To be with Cockle-thoughts and Darnell filled.
For when the Bells do seem all In to Chime,
They Will say
This is some Holyday;
So never frame a work unto the time.
All that they pray, or hear, or read, or do,
Shall be
Choked with the Brierie
Cares of this world, which they are Slaves unto.
Before the Reverend Preacher can divide
His Text,
Some one soon tels't the next,
Yet's robbed of it; For 't falls by the highways side.
An Other gets a Point by the end, and may
Go on
Till Persecution
Declare him Niobe: then he must stay.
As when a Soil's prepared with art and Care,
The Hind
Such Crops does always find,
As to's endeavors answerable are.
So let our Hearts be thoroughly wed of Sin,
And then
They Will prove good ground again,
And bring us more than thousand profits in.
Necesse, est Vt
Temporum Vitia Careant Deiamicitia
Absque vera tristitia.
Terminus
a quo Romans 13. 13.
Gula Scortum Ebrietas
per quem Joel 2. 12.
Iejunium Luctus Maestitia
ad quem Luke 1.53.
Abundantia Gaudium Laetitia.


Opera
Tenebrarum -- Fugienda Poenitentiae -- Amplectenda Misericordiae --
Acquirenda.

Sic fiet; Ut
Dentium Mundities.
Candor cedat Copiae and ubertati Armorum Clangor cedat Paci and tranquillitati
Pestilentae ardor cedat Sanitati and temperiei.

Quod fac sit Dominus huic Mundi angulo Anglise.
AMEN.
A Caroll.
WHat though it be Cold, and Freese,
Let no good Christian leese
So much of heat and Zeal,
As not for to Remember
That blessed day of December:
And what to Shepherds Angels did reveal,
Which does of right Claim lay
To All that ever Man can write or say.
A Savior's born for Us,
What News more precious?
Were but some Neighbors Son,
The Bells would straightwayes ring --
In Cakes for Gossipping;
So soon the Tidings o'r the Town would run,
And many a light brain tossed
Amongst the Goodwives, where to place their Cost.
And shall my frozen heart
Not thaw, and bear its part
In Jollitie for this:
Whereby not I alone,
But each believing one
May promise to Himself eternal bliss?
For such can never be Cold,
Who have this Birthday in their hearts enrol'd.
But may be said to burn,
Till sone thanks they return,
Which though far short they reach,
The comfort is most sure,
'T has healing wings to Cure
Not for reward, but to make up the breach,
Which so repaired 't is we
Must make it good against Satan's Battery:
Whereto belongs this Care
In Chief and Singular,
That stricter guards we keep,
Because both night and day
The Artillery does play,
Nor does our Adversary ever sleep:
Then we shall show hereby
Christ's Favor has not slipped our memory.
Upon the birth of a Child.
WHen I (O Lord) Thy Mercies scan,
Stooping unto the Publican,
Who stood afar off, and did daign
To give, that He might ask again:
(For not the Outward-beaten-brest,
Nor down-cast-look could make Him blessed;
But 'twas thine own Power did control
His former Vice, stamp New His soul.)
Methinks I am so far set free
From all Sins bonds and Tyranny,
As that raised up in hopes; no More
I need Zacheus Sycamore:
But (though a Dwarf in Grace) conclude
I see Christ 'bove the Multitude
Calling me down; as if to say,
He meant to be my Guest to day;
And (though a Sinner) crown My wish,
Bringing an Olive Branch for's Dish.
This is a true saying, That Christ came, etc. Tim. 1. 1, 15.

BE a thing true or false, our Nature lies
Always so prone to Novelties,
That we are caught: and what is done or said,
Tickle, till we have uttered;
Yet are a sleep whilst this True saying's come,
(Or else with Zachary struck dumb Luke 1. 20

Through incredulity) although 't express
In it the height of our unworthiness:
And this the Scope, That He was 'nointed King
Although he governed every thing,
Contented was of's footstool to make a throne
Where He might work Salvation,
And so is a true Jesus; nor does thus Mat. 9.13.

Become unto the Righteous, Mark 2.17.

But to Those likewise who through sins decree
Condemned were to Misery,
Amongst whom the Apostle, whilst he'averrs
Himself as chief, so little errs:
What should we Judge our selves to be, whose all
Of Life is but Apocryphal,
Less than the least of Mercies: yet again
When in our ills we not remain,
Goodness shall cause that Scepter to distill
All saving Grace into the will;
So that repaired by this, forgiven by that,
We may thus far be Consolat,
That Princely Clemency, and wonted love,
May both the Crime and guilt remove:
Then though the chiefest of the Chief we be,
If we repent, this Verse may set us free.
My Looking-Glass.
FOe to Ill-faces for thy truth, be free
And Shadow back my Souls Deformity,
Thou Wilt please me better far, than that which can
Return a Raven White, or black a Swan:
For if thou should like to thy self, rubbed ore,
Give All for Moteless that comes Thee before,
I might suspect, (that justly) whilst you are set
To me 'n Diameter for Counterfeit,
So horrid black my Conscience does present
My Guilt-complexions Night Firmament,
Not Tincel'd with one Star of Grace, or Spark
Of Goodness, but Sin-clouded o'r and Dark.
How shall I then presume to Claim a right
In any Dawn of Mercy and of light?
Unless My Faith give credit for the Loan;
And so Gods Son lend from the Reflection
Of His Bright Merits, so much power to say,
My Pardon's sealed, and Night is turned to Day:
And then, and not before, I may seem dressed,
When His Great Favor, my Great Sin's confessed.
Shamed by the Creature.
THe Thankful Soil Manured and Winter Dressed,
Returns the Hind an Autumn interest
For all His care and Labor: nor denies
To be unclothed, to deck his Grainaries:
So does the Youthful Vine those Prunings own,
When as her Blossoms are to Clusters grown;
Nor (to show thanks) does spare her blood to spill,
That so the Planters Vessels She may fill.
This Vegetable Lecture may indeed
Cast a Blush o'r me, whose return for seed
So far falls short, as not for every one
To bring an Ear; but for a whole Season none,
No not that Corn again was left in trust,
And Harrowed up under My barren Dust:
But pregrant Nature does so rule and reign,
That with wild Oats She Choaks the better Grain;
And where My Grateful Heart should dye my Press,
It Is all Besmeared with unthankfulness.
Nor can a Thought, a Word, or Act proceed
Out of My Clay, that turns not straight to Weed:
And for My Fruits, ere Ripeness is begun,
Abortive-like, They wither in the Sun
Of Self-Conceit: Lord prune once more this Vine,
And Plow this Ground, left the Figtree's doom be Mine. Luke 13.7.

To Man, on his frail Condition.
WHat permanence to Earth or Clay is due,
Fond Man consider, for that Emblems you:
This Day brings humane flesh under Death's yoke, Hodie vidi, herividi, etc.

And yesterday I saw a Pitcher broke.
Our Forms are different, Substances the same:
The subtle Artist does both Vessels frame
For Honor and the Contrary; and thus
Our great Creator moulds and fashions us.
If we would then our Makers praise set forth,
We should take Care to become Those of worth.
The Fallacy of the outward Man.
ARe we awake, or do our Eyes
Only with the Gloworm sympathise,
To light the Pismire to his bed,
When it through toil and labor's wearied?
Does not the Bank of Moss appear
Crispt up in Moonshine far more clear;
When Argus-ey'd with many a Mite,
It waits upon the Goddess of the Night?
Have not the wanton Fairie-Elves
Their Torch-bearers, Light as themselves,
That with our Fancies sport and play,
Until they lead us quite out of the way?
Cannot a Spangle, Pin, or Bead,
By Candlelight, int' Error lead;
And representing Treasure, claim
A stooping to the Mat or Board for the same?
It Is from no other, but from hence
That whilst alone with the outward sense
We do behold, and not with the Mind,
We are asleep, or we are blind.
Awake and See: Let Sin no more
Lock up the Window and the Door
To thy fair apprehension (Soul,)
But let its own allurements give Control.
Let this false treasure, vapor, spark
Of candid dew, shine in the Dark,
And the Bejewel'd worm Eschew
The morn, left that her Diamonds prove untrue.
But Let Thy Luster Foyl-less be,
And so present the Day to thee:
Let Sparks of Grace, and Truths light steer
Thee to Contemplate Thy Lord Treasurer.
Who not on Bords or Mats did lie,
But did Install Humility:
Whilst in the Chambers of the Inn
One spies a Bead, an Other sees a Pinn.
He is that Light which does convay
All wise men to the eternal Day,
Whilst Fools by false Illusions fire,
As in the Dark slip into Dirt and Mire.
'Twas He alone; whose wounded side
And Hands and Feet are glorifide,
Whilst Potentates with Jewels hung,
But Barren Moss-banks are, and filthy dung.
No sweat, no Travail, grief nor Pain,
Did His Love Shun, to win again
Thee that were Lost: His Mercies Shon
Far above th'Glance of Truest Diamon'.
Wherefore if Thou make use of this
Worms Love to Raise thy thoughts to His;
If with Industrious Care Thou bring
Home to thy self His suffering;
If by reflection thou return,
Sighings unfeigned, for sighs, and burn
In Zeal: no Falsifi'd delight
Can ever deprive thee of thy sight.
But with the eye of Faith thou May behold
A Crown Immortal prized 'bove purest Gold.
Upon the Times.
A Wake thou best of sense,
Intelligence,
And let no Fancy-vapour steer
Thy Contemplation to think that peace is near,
Whilst war in words we do bemone,
There Is nothing less left in Intention.
England that was, not Is,
Unless in Metamorphosis,
Changed from the Bower of bliss and rest,
To become now Bellonaes Interest,
In danger of a Funeral Pile,
Unless some happy Swift means reconcile.
Which how to bring to pass,
Beyond Man's hopes, alas,
Therefore be pleased (Thou) who did make
Atonement for His sake,
To silence this unnatural spell,
As Thou did once the Delphian Oracle.
My Reformation.
If all the Span
Of Days
Lent here to Man
To Pilgrim in,
And in Times Calendar enrol'd,
God should but Skan,
What might He find for weight and Measure,
But Pounds and Pecks of this and to other evil;
No one marked to His Praise,
But spent or sold
For Profit, or in Pleasure:
By wholesale
Unto Sin;
And by Retaile
Unto the Flesh, the World, the Devil.
If the Immense
Goodness
Did not dispense
Its power upon
Our frailties, that like Clay or Glass
Makes no defense
Against Potters, or the Glasiers skill:
What could we promise to withstand such loss,
Our Miseries redress,
Unless (alas!)
His Son He let them kill:
So Himself to pay
That by One,
Which on all lay;
And t'expiate, through grief and cross.
Here am I lost,
So small,
Yet so much cost,
Wherein the debt
Would wel-nigh drive into despair,
Had not the Most
Of me been dross, and so unfit
To take the stamp of any Grace or Good;
Until he that made all,
Did to repair
My Cracked estate, and knit
By His pain;
Wherein met
To set again
That Breach for Balm, His precious Blood.
Captives ye know
Are led
Into much woe
And Sufferance,
Until by Ransom they get free
Again; and so
No more are bound, but to those ways:
Where lies my bond and Obligation then?
To Sin was Cancelled,
But still with Thee
My Savior, whose Bays
O'r Death's sting,
Hell, and Chance,
A Conquest bring
To set me at full Liberty again.
Not what I will
To speak,
Or do My fill,
As Appetite,
Not Reasons Fescue shall direct;
But with that Skill,
Thy Gracious Mercies shall infuse
To make me truly sensible of those;
Whilst I the Fetters break,
And so detect
That which did me abuse,
My Young years,
Which were light,
Too void of fears,
That so I might the rest for Thee compose.
My Close-Committee.
HOw busied's Man
To seek and find
An Accusation
Against all those
He deems his Bodies good, or Goods oppose!
And winks at such as Hazard Soul and Mind.
Nothing of late
Is done or spoke,
But either King or State
Concerned are;
The while Each against his Neighbor wages War,
So 're all the bonds of love and friendship broke.
And how Comes this,
But that we do
Or utter what is amiss
In every thing;
Making Each Fancy Lord, each Will a King,
And all that Checks not Reason, Treason too?
Were It not more wise,
To lay about
Which way for to surprise
That Traitrous band
Of Sins, that in our Bosoms bear command;
And entertaining Grace, to cause those March out?
Our Lust, our Pride,
Ambition,
Or whatsome'r beside,
Seems to give way
To that unjust Militia and Array,
Bring we to our Close-committees inquisition:
Thus when our hearts these for Malignants brand,
Commit them not, but banish them Thy Land.
Humiliation without Reformation, a foundation without a Building; Reformation
without Humiliation, a Building without a foundation.
BEst Architects whether in Brick or Ston,
Cast first to lay a sure Foundation,
Then raise the Fabric; Confident hereby
TO assign 't a term of perpetuity:
While Lesser Artists failing of that Care
And skill, erect them Castles in the Air,
An Element unconstant, which betrays
To Ruin whatsoever there those raise.
Such, and no Other are They, so profess
To add by Reformation, happiness;
Yet want the Basis for to build upon
To make it last, Humiliation;
When others seemingly cast on the flore,
Yet are reformed no better than before:
So here Foundation without Building is,
And there a Building on a Precipice.
Wherefore let me be humbled first, and then
Reform so, as never to sin again:
Blending these two together, with intent
To Build an Everlasting Monument.
A Carroll.
A Wake dull Soul, Luke 2.
and from thy fold of Clay
Receive the blessed Tidings of the Day: 8. 10.

Not of a Foxes Cubb, 13.
whose guile might be
A promise of successive Tyranny. 32.

Nor of the Victorious Eagles farr-spread wing, 2. 1.

The chiefest of the Worlds parts covering: John 1. 20.

But of a Lamb that is yean'd, a Child that is born,
No Spectacle of Glory, but of Scorn; Luke 2.

For in the house of bread, This Bread of life, 17.

For us, is come to Joseph and his wife: 11.

And though the City David's were, 7.
therein
His Son no Throne Possesses, but an Inn. 4. 5.

There thou may find him, at whose mean, low birth,
The mightiest Potentates of all the Earth,
Nay Oracles, are silenced and gone,
Nor longer serve the Devils delusion.
The Delphian Fiend confesses, He Is o'rcome.
And by an Hebrew-born-Childe stricken dumb.
Dion, Suidas, Nicepho.
The Letters of The Old Law effaced are,
Down falls the Statue of great Jupiter,
With the Twins, and their nursing Beast: which shour
Of Prodigies, rouse up the Emperor,
Who thus far in the dark could see, to erect
In honor of the Almighty Architect,
An Altar in the Capitol to's Son
Firstborn, with the sole dedication.
If Light thus through darkness shone, why is it,
That thou who have the Gospels beams, the mist
Of errors can not dissipate, but still
Becom'st Idolater in doing ill?
How does thy Pride and Envy hatch deceit,
And fond Ambition raise thee in conceit
Psalm 44. 20.
Of thine own worth, when all such honors can
But dress thee up more stately Beast, no Man?
The Serpents brood like Twins do always Pare,
Which by Thy beastly humors fostered are:
Thy tongue no more thy hearts cross-row does spell,
Than if thou were it an Other Oracle:
Be silent then, nor longer more profane
1 Cor. 6. 19.
That Holy Temple, for which thou art taken;
But let the Lambs blood wash away the stains
And Characters were written in thy veins
By thy first Parents, and which sithence thou have
By thy Endeavors into Volumes cast,
Throw down thy self for Him who meekly came
Into the world for thee, a Child, a Lamb,
Born to be Slain for thee, yet slain before,
To make the Victory and Conquest more.
Humility's a Child; a Giant, Pride;
Goliath from the hand of David did:
So though like Foes, thy ill Affections grow
Unto immensity, a Powerful throw,
Out of the Sling of Faith, of Hope, and Love,
May all that Monstrous-uncouth-brood remove.
Then may thou reign without suspicion, free
As Pharaoh did, till this Nativitie:
Then shall Thy Conscience Oraclise thy Fate,
Than was Augustuses more Fortunate;
Nor in the Capitol, but in thy Heart
Erect an Altar to Him, let each Part
Express thou art awake, and seeing can tell,
That now Salvation's come to Israel. Psalm 14. 11.

In Pueros Bethlehemiticos quos Herodes morte Christi causa multavit. Mat. 2.
16.

INnocuis nocuit, Iusto dum Injusta minatur,
Infanda Infantum Laurea Poena dabat.
My Handkerchief to dry my eyes after the loss of a most dear Friend.
LOrd, sithence the best
Of Thine,
Their Portions have
Of Sorrow, Sickness, and the Grave:
Why should the worst repine,
Though Thou lock'st up their chiefest joys in rest?
Joys, here but Lent,
And so
That we can say,
W' enjoy them for a day,
It Is of mere Mercy, when for all we owe,
The Landlord must distrain to have his rent.
This the unthrifty course we take,
Begets,
Whilst Pity moved, he tells
Us, He Will repair our tottering Cells,
And quite strike off our former debts,
If with Contentment, thankfulness partake.
These against sadness are
An Antidote,
Preventing its Cold Poison, and
A heat-allaying-Julep, where Thy hand
Does Thy displeasure in a Fever note:
They style the Grave, whether 'tbe near or far,
T'be but a Bed; wherein when all must sleep,
Let them rest envied, for our Sins we'll weep.
On the Proto-Martyrs Death.
THey w'r of Deucalions race, could be of no other,
Who stoned St. Stephen, Pyrrha was their Mother.
In Epiphaniam, sive manifestationem. Psalm. 148.3.

DUm manifesta Novo Christi quae Gentibus Astro
Lux hodierna refert, Astra loquantur Ave.
A Morning Fancy upon recovery from sickness, and the birth of a Son at the
same time.
MArk but the Sluggards shame, the Change
Where Pismires numerously do range;
And you will conclude, no sight so quick to try
Distinction in Those Creatures industry.
See but a shower of Motes that seem to beat
Some busy Traffic in a Sunbeams heat:
Then tell me what eye's so distinctiall,
As for to single One out of them all.
This, and much Less is Man, whose numerous fry
Fills the world to preserve posterity:
And yet there was an Eye both frowned and smiled;
A Sickness here, but there a Lovely Child.
Singling out One, to show at once the room,
Where Is Mercy do His Judgments overcom:
And when the Fatherly Chastisement's don,
Crowns him the joyful Father of a Son.
What can be here returned? the full expense
Of a whole Summers toil and providence,
Or such a pack of lighter Merchandise,
As in the Sun delight to exercise?
These, and no better are what we can raise,
To show our thanks, saving a heart of praise,
Which God Himself must give; and then it is no more,
Than t'borrow of one, to pay the same a score.
Yet Lord, here be my Creditor, and lend
A Soul, that may so much to Thanks pretend:
That whilst it seeks thine own but to restore,
Thou by acceptance may create it more.
Psalm 82. 6, 7.
From God to all Princes for moderation in taxing their Subjects.
THough styled Gods, yet must ye die like men,
Says God the Lord: Hear what he speaks again,
Whose Children if you would all accounted be,
(O Isreal's Princes) leave off cruelty:
Ezekiel. 45.9.
And let your judgments, Justice so put on,
That there be no room for Oppression:
Neither exact from those who call you Lord,
More than your needs require, their powers afford.
1 Cor. 1.31.
Verbum Dei manet in aeternum.
Psalm 105. 119.
LAEtari in Domino juvet; and cum Lubrica turbent,
Psalm. 8. 6.
Solamen Verbum Nocte dieque suum.
Vt sit and Cogitationibus, Verbisque, Factisque propitius Omnipotens.
GReat God in whom all Justice raigns
And Truth,
Let not the reins of youth,
So slacken in me still,
T'enthrall and Captivate my thoughts to Ill,
Much less my Deeds: but as thy Son
Begun
Where Solomon
Laid Ston:
So make thy house my heart,
And scourge out of it each Mechanic part.
Neither let words that die when spoke,
Provoke
My Soul to think,
They Will sink
Into Oblivion,
As soon as They are uttered and gone.
Place a Sentinel before
My door,
That by my Tongue
be song
No Anthem but Thy Praise,
Nor let it ever send forth other Lays.
Thus may my thoughts and words, which usher on
My Deeds to Action,
By Thy Divine Power purged from the dross of Sin,
Pave me a Golden Tract to Progress in:
Which if thou crown with Grace too, let appeer
Dormant, yet watchful, ceasing never here.
Non est bonum Iudere cum sanctis.
OMnis Caro moritur,
Mal. 4. 2.
Et Sol Iustitiae Oritur,
Luke 1. 78.
Proferens Sanitatem,
Isa. 60.1, 2.
Si volumus,
In Alis;
Qua curet Vanitatem,
Quam Colimus
In malis.
Ideo Qui timet Omen Inferni,
Metuat Nomen AEterni;
Et absit pravaricari,
Si velis Sanari.
Ad Angliam in quinti Novembris Feriam Annoalem.
FEstum quid proferas Insula? quid Diem
Commemoratione dignam existimes
Si Hanc praetereas? in qua Mirabilis
Acta est benignitas Liberationis,
Qualem qui comparet Antiquis seculis,
Parem inveniat nusquam in Atavis,
Gigantum licet repetat Fabulam,
Qua Coelum ipsum stultitia petitur;
Mons super Montem palam ostenditur,
Ast hic ad Centrum usque and Infernas
Terrarum nigras itur Cavernas:
Monet operta front malities,
Sed caeca jugulat, neque a pendente
Malo, quam a periculo latente
Tam dirum Nefas; munit Conditio
In qua praevalida stet admonit io.
Serpens Innocuus dummodo tuendus,
Quoniam Reptilis facile fugiendus
Herbarum sub umbra conditus metuendus.
Cui nec dissimiles Dolos fuisse
Hos subterraneos, Quos latuisse
Usque ad Vigiliam Diei festi,
Memineris in qua Manifesti
Amoris Divini patuere Radii.
O! si mihi faveat Arcadiae
Terra, vel Nemus, ut inveniam in Illis
Quibuscum notare Diem: Lapillis,
Uti mos Ve terum, nec mihi Rubro
Tinctus sit Calamus atramento,
Cum Luceat Dies and a sanguine Liberata:
Nigroque carbone notata
Nusquam Conveniat; nam licet Atra
Machinatio Ista and Tartarea
Frustavit Hanc Dominus, and Tenebrarum
Orcum fugavit Lumine Gratiarum.
Tutior Anglia ut in posterum sies
Cordibus Gratis notetur Dies.
Quid maxim semper in votis habeat.
VOtis si faveant Numina fervali,
Peccatis Placeant parcere; quantulum
Parcae Temporis and cedere posteris
Vitae Limitibus velint
Texetur Melioribus
Telis in addent.
Contemptu in habeat Splendida Seculo in
Hoc Nugalia: nam in Vespere Condita est
Aurorae facies, nec rugit amplius,
Cum Nox adfuerit Dies
Lethi, sic Thalumis modo
Dormiet Omnis.
Dum mane est fugiat Machina Tartari,
Nec in Meridiem Serdida contrahat,
Vespertinaque tunc Tempora conspicit
Laetus, Iudicium cupit,
Sperat Coelicu, at I^^probus
Altera suadet.
Times Mintage.
OF all the scattered Brood,
Or Brotherhood,
Drawn from Creations line,
To Blazon Providence divine;
The Worm, the Snail,
The Ant, the Fly,
Best make discovery
What Adam did entail
On His posterity.
To dwell with Dust and Clay,
Which Symptom may
Man's Low condition,
That without intermission
Heaps up with care
What here is got,
And Ignorant knows not,
These Transitory are,
Nor shall endure, but rot.
What was Domitians game,
Or the Sluggards shame,
The Bloodless creeping beast
Carries his house wherein to rest,
Or Legless one,
But Emblemer
Of frailty, would infer
Danger to be trod upon
By every Passenger.
And do we break our ease,
To follow these?
Fly at preferments pitch;
And adding to our heaps grow rich
In Muck and Slime?
When it is our Soul
Immortal should control,
And so Calcine our time
From all such dross to Gould.
Which by afflictions tried,
And worldly crosses purified,
Our Great Redeemer will apply
His stamp to give it currency.
Parab.
In Divitem and Lazarum.
Luke 16. 19.
DIves Quidam Ingens, sed nondum Nomine Dignus,
Purpureo Decoratus erat; Victuque Superbo
Gaudet and Assiduis Dapibus; nec sumptibus ullis
Parcitur, Ingluviem Queis possit pascere Foedam,
Sed Mare Consulitur Totum, and longinqua Potestas
Terrarum excutitur: nec non Iunonia Regna
Addunt Ingenuis cumulatim proemia Mensis:
Nec deerat, nisi Flammiferens Ignisque futurus.
Mortuuus Iste tamen, Somno Lethale sepultus
Dicitur -- nil aliud --
Pauper and Alter erat, gracilis Quem buccea reddit
Spectandum Charitate Magis, nudisque lacertis,
Frigidus ante fores procumbens Divitis, Omne
Solatium a Canibus Lambentibus esse fatetur:
(Non etenim blando hoc captanda est gloria seclo)
Mortuus est etiam: Sed Queis discrimine vitae
Dissimilis Fortuna fuit, His Mortis and idem:
Nempe; Quod in fragilis gaudetur tempore mundi
Vertitur in Lachrymas; Durissima quaeque fuere
Illius Arbitria, accipiunt pro munere Pectus.
Upon the Rich Glutton, and Poor Beggar. Parable.

THere was a Certain Mighty Rich man, had
No other name (in Scripture) although clad
In Purple: who delitiously did fare
Daily, for which there neither Cost nor Care
Was spared, to feed his Gluttony with store,
Of what the Seas could yield when Galed ore;
And whatsome'r both Earth and Air afford,
Seemed Heaped Tributes to his quainter board:
So that no Element to his desire
Was Niggard, save what was reserved, the Fire.
Yet this man Died, and on that sleepy score
Was Buried -- and no more --
There was an Other, whom spare Diet made
More spectacle for Charity, being laid
Naked and Cold before the Rich man's gate;
Who full of sores, and all Disconsolare,
Saving from what the licking Dogs apply,
Concludes all this worlds pomp but slattery:
Then He Dies too. But as in life these were
Nothing akin, so in Diameter
Death Their Condition states, for now't appears,
What here was sown in Joy, there is reapt in tears;
And He who by hard Fate was here oppressed,
In Abrams Bosom finds an Interest.
A Reveille Mattin to my best Friend.
LOrd, when the Casements of Mine eyes,
To welcome in
The Morn, first opened are;
Grant that my Heart may early sacrifice
To Expiate for Sin,
Prepare:
And mustring up Thy Favors and Its Crimes,
Cashiere the One, let the other stand enrold
To evidence at full that Time of Times
Wherein Thou Ransom'dst me, who once was sold.
Let all the Drowsy Vapors pressed
My Fancy down,
Dispell and give it way
To rise betimes, and to be better dressed;
So Dignifie and Crown
The Day
With Anthems may set forth that Glorious flame
Thy love burst out in, when my fault was so,
I Would line for ever benighted in the same,
Had Thou not vanquished and o'rcome my fo.
Cause (I beseech thee) that moist dew
That falls upon
My waking Temples tress
By every yawn, Thy goodness taught to show,
An Exhalation
Express,
Obeying no heat save what did proceed
From that most Righteous Sun, whose beams alone
Were of full Power to refine the deed
Our Parents Dross'd by their Corruption.
And as My Arms unfolded stand,
To fathom out
The Latitude, as't were,
'Twixt the Beds either side Meridian:
Let my Thoughts sore about
That Sphere,
Unparalleld for Grace: and stretch to be
Embracers of those Mercies did extend
Beyond all sounding Plummet or degree,
And thither all my Kids and Fatlings send.
Thus taken by the hand by His whose felt
What mine deserved,
I Am up; and straight perceive
The Mornings Birth Bedewed with his whose smelt
All of Perfumes, and served
TO conceive
Such Raptures in Me, that no part nor sense
Could be at quiet, till it rose to make
This Offering, and from a full influence,
Inspired of Love, Dull Thanklesness t'forsake.
Now if my Eyes, my Heart, my Head, my Arms,
Embrace, Contemplate, feeling, seeing Charms,
Where can this Exorcism trulier stay,
Than on that Star which changed our Night to day?
Quid Amabilius.
IF I must needs Discover
I am in Love: be Christ again my Lover,
And let His Passion bring
My Actions to their touch and censuring:
Who in this world was born,
Lived in it, and was put to death with scorn,
That I to Sin might die
Being born again, so live eternally:
Thus I Will no longer make
Addresses to my Glass for this Curles sake,
Or that quaint garb, whereby
I may enchanted be with flattery:
Nor on Luxurious vow,
Becircling Rose-buds seek to Gird my brow;
But with a melting thought
Bring home that Ransom whereat I was bought,
In Contemplation
Of that same Platted Crown He once had on.
And when my Glove or Shoo
Want Ribbond, Call for the Nails that pierced Him too:
Else farther to be dressed,
Borrow the Tincture of His naked breast:
Nor wash, but in Soul Pride,
Then use no other basin than His Side:
So, up and ready, think
How He, for Me, low in the grave did sink,
That I again might rise
With Him, who was both Priest and Sacrifice,
To make atonement in
The Difference 'twixt his Fathers wrath, Man's fin;
Whereto it must remain,
That I through Faith requite this love again.
Luke 24. 5, 6.
Quare Viventem quaritis? Non Hic est. Quare inter quaritis? enim est. Quare
Mortuos quaritis? surrectus est.
Dumin
Luxuria and Libidine, Et in omnium denique malorum consuetudine conquiescamus,
Arrogantiae and Avaritia, Et in omnium denique malorum consuetudine
conquiescamus, Tranquillitate and Tyrannide Et in omnium denique malorum
consuetudine conquiescamus,

Et tamen
Salvatorem and Salvationem, Denique quicquid bonoium ex omni munificentia and
singulari providentia largiri dignetur Omnipotens, petere conemur; quid aliud
ni^ viventem inter Moriuos quarimus? Veritatem and Vitam, Denique quicquid
bonoium ex omni munificentia and singulari providentia largiri dignetur
Omnipotens, petere conemur; quid aliud ni^ viventem inter Moriuos quarimus?
Immunitatem and Immortalitatem, Denique quicquid bonoium ex omni munificentia
and singulari providentia largiri dignetur Omnipotens, petere conemur; quid
aliud ni^ viventem inter Moriuos quarimus?

Ut itaque
Mortis amaritudine relicta Vita foelicitatis fruamur aeterna

Vitia vitemusutpote ad mortem aeternam ducentia, and Amphoram amplectemur
aquae Caelestis.

Nequitiam in nobismetipsis necemus, Ut beneficia Resurrecti acquiramus.
Descendamus per poenitentiam pro peccato in nostrorum ipsorum Contemptum, Ut
Ascendamus per benevolentiam humilitatis ipsius in Gloriam. Sic responsum
habeamus, Quando sponsum videamus,

Vt deposito Terrestri simus induti cum caelesti.

Et sepositis in sepulchro Carnalibus, Non illic speretur frui spiritualibus.
Sed verius de talibus dici potest hic non enim surrecti sunt and eu^ illis
Animae nostrae. Foelices ter and amplius, Qui Peccato ita Mortui fuerint Vt
simul cum Christo quam certissime resurrexerint.

The necessity and grounds of Faith.
MAN in the state of Innocence, knew Genesis 1. 26.

Nothing to fear (whom all things were set under)
But was Created by perfections pattern, Genesis 1. 28.

And so above all hopes: till he whose Pride Luke 10.18.

Sent him like Lightning from the place of Bliss,
To become Prince of Darkness, (which alone 2 Pet. 2. 4.

Proves Nurse to Envy and Maliciousness:) Jude 6.

Drowned in his hopeless Fortunes, seeks all means Rev. 20.10.

To make fond Man partaker of his woe.
By Deprivation, not of Paradise Genesis 3. 24.

Alone, but of the glorious Makers presence; Genesis 4.16.

And of those Visions Beatificall, Ezekiel. 1.5, 15

The Banishment from which, is Held to be
The Chief of Torments threatened for degree:
So 'twas decreed, to sharpen Satan's Crime,
Sweeten Gods Mercy: to cause his Comforts less,
Gods glory to appear by much the more;
And therefore mark how 't falls out; Man's alone,
So God provides him for Companion Genesis 2. 20.

Part of himself, a help, but such, whose skill Genesis 2.23, 10

Fit to receive the subtle Serpents guile, Genesis 3. 1.

And help to cheat too, when the subject's, Pride,
Ambition, or the like, what ere's forbidden;
As straight betrays him to the greatest offense
He could have fallen in, Disobedience. 5,

Now whilst he seeks to know, he is Ignorant, 6,

Yet knows more than he should, That he was naked, 7,

And so provides him Leaves to Cover that
Which without Leave he thus was stripped into,
Nor rests he there secure; it seems the guilt
Of what he had done, presented as a glass
His Souls deformity through Nakedness,
10,
In not believing God, (whose Voice but heard)
8,
They Boldly enter Thickets, though afraid:
Hence may that Passion count its age, and then,
What antidote prescribable, save hope,
That still Looks forward, 'less in Promises
Which calls the thoughts back, to see what shall come:
And this must work by Faith, and Faith recall
15,
The first Seducers Doom, (to be o'rcome
Heb. 11. 2.
By the same sexes Issue, was o'rcome first,
Which is the substance of our wished Desires,
Romans 8.24,
And Evidence of what each soul admires,
Job. 1.16.
Yet sees not, though thereby Salvation's wrought,
2 Cor. 1.20.
And Grace to win it; Absence prompts the mind
Job. 3. 15, 16.
To Incredulity; till faithfulness,
Luke 23. 2,
Grounded upon those Promises never fail)
24,
Assures it self of Pardon and forgiveness,
46.
Through him that was accused, condemned and died,
Yet Lives to try, and Judge hereafter all.
Romans 8.34.
By whose alone sufficiency of Merits,
1 Timothy 2.5.
And intercession as our Mediator,
There is found ground and Ankerage for Hope
Ephesians. 2.9.
To Stretch the Justifying Cable on;
When all that ever from our selves proceeds,
Avails us nothing, but to increase misdeeds:
Yet as a Body without motion,
Iam. 2.26.
Or spirits quickening, so Faith alone,
Without some operative concurrences
Is Dead, not Lively, but a Dream or Shadow,
Chimera, or such like, wherein we seem
To have some fancy-glimmerings of the truth,
Yet not believe it, not so much awake
As t'apprehend Christ and his benefits:
So suit our works according to his will,
Whose will it was to suffer that which we
Deserved had: and t'undergo the wrath 1 These. 1.10.

We justly had pulled down upon our selves.
The outward sense prevails much with our nature, Ephesians. 2.3.

And every one is apt to apprehend
Some wonders thence: from Lightning, Thunder, Hail,
The stormy winds and Tempests (without doubt,
Gods warning-peece) laden with Natures Cartridge,
Whereat the very Heathen feat and tremble, Nero, etc.

And the Mere worldling is convinced thereby
To think there is a God, whilst all the fruits
And benefits the earth repays him with
For all his sweat and labor, be ascribes
Solely to the Seasons temperature and bounty,
Not thinking in whose Fist the deeps and hills are; Psalm. 95.4.

And Both (for Nature couples them) impute
What ever good successes they obtain,
Or health, strength, wealth enjoy, to Casualty,
Chance, or Good Fortune, (as they call it) born
To tread a few steps here, and then return
They know not whither, they believe still well:
So how they should believe well, scorn to Learn;
When on the contrary, that Soul subdues Luke 1.46.

The motions of the sensual appetite, 49,

Which causes surfeit upon outward means, 50,

And fixes all Imagination, 51,

Up to the Throne from whence all blessings rain, 52, 53.

And Chastisements but drop, (yet so, as when
They mollify, not with their often fall,
They surely do confound and break withal,
Is in pursuance of the Makers praise,
Luke 23. 47.
And contemplation of that work of Wonders,
Mar. 15.39.
Made the Centurion first think of God:
It does believe the Sampler, and endeavor
To work it stitch by stitch, whereof such Love
John. 15.13.
Was never shown before, begins the Thread,
Ephesians. 5. 2.
Humility and Meekness seconds it;
Phil. 2. 8.
Charity, Patience, and Long-sufferance
Mat. 11.29.
Wind up the Bottom: for these well Cast over,
Job. 10. 11.
Will perfect Faith, so that it need no more,
Romans 2. 4.
To Rise to him, that did descend for Us,
And bring his Mercies down to take that rise by,
Mal. 4. 2.
Craving his Healing Wings to Impe our Feathers,
That so we flagg not through Lasiness
Toward what good is, nor yet make a plain-
Discovery that our quarry still is earth,
But like the true-bred Chicken of the Eagle,
With raised up Beak behold the glorious Sun,
Ibid.
That Sun of Righteousness, till all the Dark
And misty Vapors that our sins had raised
Dispell and vanish at his Merits Rays.
Ier. 8. 22.
No Balm from Gilead may refresh and heal
The festered sores of our Corruptions,
But such as that Samaritan applies:
For as our Leprousie through sin was grown
To a more cankered Infection
2 King. 5.15,
Then Naman, the Assyrian's, and Gahezies:
27.
There must another Jordan be found out
Zach. 13.1.
To work the cure; a Purple stream of blood
Flowing out of a precious saving Side,
To wash our Souls white, when applied by Faith;
Not only Seven times, but all that Time
Alots us here to breath in: That Disease 2 King. 5.27,

Compared to snow, being cured, resumes the flesh 14.

Of a young Infant: Here an Infants flesh Luke 2. 21.

And blood not spared, procures so bright a tincture,
As that no snow can parallel for whiteness,
The Lambs blood-washed Robes, wherein the Saints Job. 1.29.

Are clad here, first by Christian faith and Grace, Rev. 19.8.

And therein dressed, hereafter enter glory;
So thenceforth shall we promise happiness
Unto our selves in each condition;
When our Assurance, for foundation,
Has the tried Cornerstone, and all the fabric Isa. 28.16.

Is pedestall'd upon those precious piles Luke 23. 26.

He bore, and bore him, bidding us bear after. Phil. 2. 8.

And by which plenall satisfaction, Mat. 10.38.

The Vials of his Fathers wrath were stopped. Rev. 16.1.

God by reproof sends Sluggards to the Ant, Prove. 6.6

Proud Courtlings to the Riches of the fields: Matthew. 6.28.

And why should we not think that we are taught
By Love, to love again? were our hearts iron, Magnes Amoris Amor.

A Loadstone might attract them, and (such Love is)
Do the mild Turtles so engage themselves
By natures mandate, That the loss of one,
Denies the other benefit of Like?
And shall we not resent that benefit
Our Savior purchased for us, quitting Life,
To make ours sure for ever? Or, how is it
We can survive, not droop and pine away,
For our offense (which was the cause) we ought, 2 Cor. 5. 15.

1 Cor. 15. 21.
And the Dominion that sin has o'r us,
Else it is an other lesson Grace instructs,
Luke 24. 26.
And that is to entertain his Sufferings
1 Pet. 2.24.
As our enlargement, his Stripes, for our healings;
Embracing all those Bounties with such Souls,
May ready be to melt and to dissolve
2 Cor. 6.4.
In tears contritionall for their Corruptions;
5,
Yet raised with Comfort of such Mercies, Riches,
6,
Be fruitful in the works of Piety
10.
Henceforth, and praises of his holy Name
Ephesians. 1.23.
Who is the Fountain, and must give the same,
John 4. 14.
Unless with Bartimeus we were blind,
Genesis 2.7.
How do we not perceive the Clay we tread on,
To be the substance whereof we were made:
And by the Sun that Attom'd into Dust,
Tells us but what we must dissolve into:
Or like the Shadow represents us, see
We not what it is, and what we all shall be?
That in observance of our bubble Thoughts,
We still aspire, and make our Fancies dance
Within the Imaginary pool of Pride,
Or sea of Self-conceit; This not of Eyes,
But dimness of the Mind is too too bad,
Wherewith bemisted in our apprehensions,
We dream we fathom all perfections,
And yet but grope after the least of truths,
It may be in the twilight of our reason,
We offer at obedience to instruction,
And seek to be informed: If what we hear
John 3. 1,
Fly not beyond our pitch, (a great Professor,
4.
Master of Israel, once was gravelled
Upon that Shelf) and 'twas through lack of Faith;
Had he but had so much, as to have compared
With that least Grain of all, Mat. 17.20.
no Mountain could
Have bragged of firmness against his moving power.
But to show truly what esteem we ought
To set upon our selves, it is here set down,
When the prophetic Prince, and Prince of Prophets, Psalm 22.6.

Compares his Royalties but to a Worm;
And by the best Authority can vouch, Math. 18.3.

An innocent, and little harmless Child
Is placed for us to imitate: And those
Who would aspire great blessings of salvation, Mat. 20. 16.

For to be Last is First, and First but Last, Mark 9. 35.

Least greatest, greatest Least: Luke 9. 48.
Epitomize
Our selves, and we become voluminous
In Graces Library: when if we swell
With pride of our own Worth, the smallest vent
Un-winds that blather, blasting our intent: Luke 18. 11.

And that we may once more Example scan, 12,

Consider the Pharisee and Publican. 3.

But if all these not serve to break our ston
And iron hearts; Zach. 9. 9.
mark what he Rode upon
Into the City, who Salvation brings, Psalm 18.10.

And when he lists rides on the Winds swift wings.
Does the least cross or rubb we meet withal,
Set our whole little world afire, and raise
Tempestuous motions to disturb the rest
And quiet of our Souls: Psalm 44.11.
Prompting revenge?
And yet behold, Job 31.20.
our Food and Raiments friend
Led to the slaughter, Dumb, Isa. 53.7.
and to the Shearers
Without an angry Bleat to show distaste!
Are we so frozen-handed, that we fear
To open any help to those that need,
Upon this scruple, lest thereby we seem
To break the Ice for Merit to start out at,
So seek to share with him in whom all Lies,
Gal. 5. 6.
As if we knew not that our Faith were lame,
1 Cor. 13. 1.
Without this Grace for to support the same;
And that if in his Name who fed the hungry,
Cured the diseased, healed both Lame and Blind,
Administering (whilst here he was amongst us)
Luke 19. 9.
All comforts, for our imitation
And pattern to walk by) we do refresh
Deuteronomy. 15. 7.
Any the sons of Abraham with water,
Mat. 23.40.
A Mite or Ragg may help necessity,
Luke 16. 9.
He will accept it, as to him 'twere given,
And the reward or recompense is Heaven.
Call we to Mind when moved to any wrath,
How many ways we daily do transgress
Our gracious Gods decrees, who as the sarcell
Or master Feather of his Mercies wings,
To raise them above all his other Works,
Abounds in Patience, and delays due Judgment,
To favor our Repentance with more time,
Mat. 26. 67.
Never forgetting, how He bore the Taunt
Mark 14.65.
That whited Wall cast on him, nor the Buffet,
Luke 22. 63,
Scourging, or Spittings on, all that disgrace,
64.
Envy, and Malice could contrive for us
Mar. 15. 17,
Who had deserved no less; and then perchance
18.
Such Lessons may procure our temperance.
To suffer is a double kind of phrase,
For so he did that died for us, yet still
It Is through his sufferance that we are alive,
And suffered to enjoy one benefit;
Whilst by our Evil ways, what in us lies
We crucify the Lord of Life each hour:
As when our thoughts forge mischief on our beds, Psalm. 36.4.

Are not his temples Crowned anew with thorns?
Our hands that should be open to Relieve,
If that they graspe more than our own, so thieve
Or work oppression: and our feet are swift
In shedding Blood too: how do such again
Nail his unto the Cross? our tongues are tipped
With poisoned Envies and Maliciousness,
False lying, slanders, all that is impious,
Tuning our Lips to Blasphemy, and loose
Unsavory talk. John 19. 34.
Do they not seem to spit
On him afresh? tearing that window open
With our spear-pointed Discord, that let in
The Gall-less Dove brought the true branch of Peace
And Reconcilement, whilst from thence did flow
A Crimson shower of pure Compassion,
And satisfying Mercy in the height,
His Side (I mean) that like Noes Ark had been
Our safeties from the Deluge wrought by him,
And now Remains our pledge, that those that fly
Unto that Sanctuary never Die.
We through our Natures weakness, not of power
To give the Least of Sufferings resistance,
Although we promise fair, as Peter did,
May here be taught to trust so far to Faith,
Not that proceeds from vain security, Luke 22. 33.

Lest then the Crowing-Cock give us the lie; 34.

But such whereby we are Regenerate, Romans 3. 28.

And Justified, more than bare Law could promise,
As to o'rcome the great'st temptation,
And judge the Beffetings of Satan Blessings; Matthew. 4. 1.

The World, the wilderness, 8, 5.
and Every high
Conceit of our own worths we are tickled with,
To be the Mount: Superlative designs,
As when we pry too far into Gods Ark,
And sift those Mysteries, 'neath the Cherubs wings,
We seem upon the Temples Pinnacles.
Thus travailing like Pilgrims here a while,
Nothing but dangers and vexations,
Allurements through enticing change, betrays
Us to the snares of His precipit ways,
Whose Art destructive by enchantments power,
Seeks to encompass us within that circle
He fell himself into through presumption:
Which to eschew, whilst Gods long-suffering, patience,
And charity shown to his handy work:
His meek Humility, and chief of graces,
Favors us with forbearance; Let Us come home
Psalm. 95. 8. Heri vidi Fragile Frangi, Sen. trag.
Hodie vidi Mortalem mori. Sen. trag.
Quim Dies vidis veniens Superbum,
Hunc Dies videt rediens Iacentem, Ibid.

Whilst it is to Day, (for who can tell to whom
The morrow shall belong?) and in that way,
Tract by the Prodigal in the Parable,
Luke 15. 13,
Seek out our Fathers face with love and meekness,
18,
And we are sure of his embracing Arms.
19,
For though through Natures subtilty we have been,
20.
As 'twere, hid deep within the caves of Earth,
Buried in Worldly cogitations;
Romans 5. 6, 8.
The Merchant of our Souls did spare no pains
Nor cost in myning through the earths dark vains
To purchase us, so brings again to light.
Yet as pure Gold requires the Finers art,
And Diamonds polishing, and to be cut:
So here He past the Furnace, and became
Chief Jeweller, for 'twas the Blood o'th Lamb, Heb. 10.4.

Not of he-Goats could serve; and if we grind Heb. 9. 12.

Our selves for Sin to powder, The sacrifices of the Old, but shadows of the
New.
we are Refined
So as at first we were, unmanned by her
Should be our help; A Diamond dissolvable by Goats blood, and to be cut with
the help of its own powder:
that still she might so prove
God brings't about, no other Vessel serves
To entertain a ghest of so great price,
As that must Ransom all the world besides,
But of that Sex; Luke 1. 28.
and though the news at first
Struck terror and amazement, 29.
afterward
It was sole Remedy against fear: for as
The name of Caesar to the Seaman once, Quid Times? Caesarem and Fortunam suam
vehis, Luca.

Proved of security, sufficient
To make him put to Sea: So here the Virgin
Assured that 'twas Emmanuel she carried, Matthew. 1.23, 24.

Gave Joseph courage not t'abandon Her;
But casting Anchor on those promises,
To become full of Faith, and by what ere
The Lord suggested In that Course to steer. Genesis 12. 3.

Thus was time brought abed of what its young
And tender Infancy had only shown
By Revelation to the Patriarchs, Isa. 7. 14.

Prophets, and men of God; and which now past, John 3. 15.

Upon these latter Times by Faith is cast: Gal. 4.4,5.

So he that was before all time begun, 1 Timothy 2.5.

Came in the fullness, 1 Samuel 17. 26,36.
and remains a Son
To mediate with the Father, that our fears
Cancelled by Faith, we might become Coheirs. Psalm. 3. 6.

Bona
Regni Terreni Potestas quibus opponuntur Infirmitas Horor quibus opponuntur
Ignominia Divitiae quibus opponuntur Paupertas Deliciae quibus opponuntur
Luctus.
Regni Coelestis Haec
Temporaria sine Illis. Sempiterna. Illis.


Joys Flitting Pleasures, Transitory Lie,
Accompanied with much Infirmity
Below here: whilst without the allay of woe,
Heaven for eternity does those bestow.
The Brazen Serpent.
THe world's a Wilderness, and Man therein
Exposed to the bite and sting of Sin,
Whose wages, Death, from that same curse began,
Ushering in need of a Physician:
Then did the Great Creator of Mankind
(And all things else) a ready Balsame find
To cure those wounds, corrupted Nature so
Contracted had for its own overthrow:
Whose Mercy by a Type, at first invites
Unto belief the stiff-neck'd Israelites,
Brings Moses into credit as they pass,
By setting up a Serpent made of Brass,
To foil Sin at's own weapon, and to bring
The future hopes of our recovering
By Him alone who lifted on the Tree,
A cursed Death endured to set us free;
His goared Head, Pierced Side, and Hands and Feet,
With Crown of Thorns, and Spears, and Nails did meet,
That we might tread on Carpets, and become
Coheirs with Him in truest Elysium:
That bitter Cup he did vouchsafe to pledge,
For us whose teeth by sower grapes set on edg,
Were almost helpless; must incite us on,
To seek the liquor of salvation.
Taste Vinegar and Gall here first, and be
Greatly Ambitious of humility;
Cast down our selves for him was raised for us,
If we desire to rise Glorious.
Bear Cross, be robbed and hurt, shame undergo,
Pass from Jerusalem to Jericho,
There meet with thieves, no healing hopes we can
Expect, but from This true Samaritan.
Good Fridays Reveille, or on the Passion. Salutis Cataplasmus.
MAy we call this Days task to mind,
And prove we to each other still unkind?
Does Passion bear o'r Reason sway,
Making us quite neglect this Passion day?
Why are we suffered so to err,
As not t'remember our Great Sufferer
In Praises due? who whilst he dies,
Shows what He Would have us do for Enemies,
Forgive them first; for thus He sues
Unto His Father for the cursed Jews:
Next, whatsoever Crosses come,
To be like Sheep before the Shearers, dumb;
Or Lambs unto the Slaughter led
In Meekness, not with fury hurryed:
Then through that Conflict he endured,
If humbly we believe we shall be cured;
For it falls short in other art,
To frame a remedy for such a smart,
As from the sting of doing amiss,
In following Sin to death here heaped up is;
And to apply this Plaster, lay it on,
There needs no Others hand, save Faith's alone.
On Easter Day. 1648. Death, where is thy sting?
Grave, where is thy victory?

EAch thing below here has its day,
As in the Proverb's said;
And so it comes to pass that they
Conquer are Conquered.
For He who for man's fault assigned
Death, and 2 Graves reward,
Was pleased those bands for to unbind,
And so himself not spared,
But issuing forth his heavenly throne,
Vouchsafes the Earth to bless,
And became here a little One
To make our Crimes go less:
Not that our disobedience can
In weight or measure shrink;
But that this Great Physician
Before us takes the drink,
That bitter Potion we had
Deserved to quaff, and thus
He weeps Himself, and becomes sad
To purchase Joy for us.
And more than so: for every one
Will for his friend lay down
Some spark of love: but he alone
His Enemies to crown
Refused not Death; so deep from high
His Mercies did extend;
And if you ask the reason why,
'Twas mere for Mercies end.
Yet that grim Death and moldy Grave
No longer be His Prison,
Than He himself alone would have,
He 'bides not there, but's risen.
And if we would as Conquerors rise
With him who vanquished those,
We must not fear where danger lies,
For Him all to expose:
But though the Grave do open stand,
And persecutions reign,
At Hels desire and Deaths command,
Look on our Sovereign,
His Banner does present the Cross
He bore, and bare Him too
For us; and we must count it loss
To fail what he did do.
Thus Sin and Hell, the Grave and Death
Must quit the field and fly,
Whilst in contempt of borrowed breath,
We'd live Eternally.
Thrice happy day whereon the Sun
Of Righteousness did rise,
And such a glorious Conquest won,
By being our Sacrifice:
And as unhappy He, that shall
Not find the white and best
Of Stones to mark the same withal,
And priz't above the rest.
To Prince CHARLES, in April, 1648. Upon the hopes of his Return.
SEems not the Sun more Glorious in his ray,
When as the Cloud that shadowed's blown away?
Is not each beam He darts then truly said,
Of triple heat after being sequestered?
The Crimson streaks belace the Damaskt West,
Calcined by night, rise pure Gold from the East,
And cast so fair a Dapple o'r the Skies,
That all the Air's perfumed with Spiceries:
And shall we think when Jealousy and fear
Are out of Breath, the Day of hope's not near?
Does it not bloom already, and untie
That stubborn knot of Incredulity?
When blossoms fall, we say our Trees are set,
But so, as may a womb of fruit beget.
Thus when the clumsie Winter does incline
His candid Icicles, for to resign
To Flora's beauty, and the Spring drives on,
T'oretake Maturity's perfection,
The Cold so tyrannised had o'r blood,
Is thaugh'd, and each enjoyes new livelihood:
The Mariner meeting a stress of weather,
That with his Shrowds and Tackle shakes together
His apprehensive thoughts, till they are spent,
And naught but Death and danger represent:
With what a full Sea of content does he
Making a Coast embrace security?
These, and much more, Illustrious Sir, become
The Issues of your little Martyrdom,
With whom all good and Loyal hearts did bring
Ambitious heat to join in suffering;
For Seas prove calm when as the storm is ore,
And after Cold, warmth is of Comfort more.
Best Diamonds may have foyles; mistakes have gone
To blemish; yet raised disposition
More splendid in esteem; no more to say,
You are the April to our future May.
To Easter Day.
WElcome Blessed Day, where on
The Sun
(Not of the Spheres alone)
Did rise,
But that of Righteousness, who shon
Our True-Light, was our Sacrifice.
For 'thad been night
With us,
Dark, Everlasting, Dismal, Vaporous,
Entailed from our first Parents Appetite:
Till by the Power and Might
Of this Light of the world, our Shades took flight.
Death, Hell, the Grave
That ever Crave
And never satisfied appear,
No longer their Dominions have,
Sithence vanquished by this Conqueror,
Who does enlighten every faithful Sphere.
Now that each Orb consenting prove
The while,
And trulier might feel those comforts move
From so Great Light, such precious love
We must reflect, and back recoil,
To see what either has in's Lamp of Oil.
For without Doubt
Their share is Darkness, let their lights go out:
And where again
Ones light does shine through virtues before Men,
It Is True Divinity,
Our Heavenly Father's Glorified thereby.
Soliloquium ad Salvatorem.
QUid in Me conspicuum
Nisi Vitium?
Peccans ab Originale,
Non vult adhuc nisi Male.
Vile Lutum,
Fit Pollutum.
Quaenam est conceptio Mentis? vana,
Seu Prophana:
Verba sed (Heu) nostra ventis
Parent; non rationi Mentis:
Facere nec quidquam lubet
De Illo, quod Ipse jubet.
QUid in Tua facie
Nisi Gratia?
Sed qui Tempus antecedit
In Tempore Seipsum dedit;
Sanguine lavare,
Emundare.
Ast, quod caro factum fuit
Verbum, instruit:
Dum quod scriptum est loquutus
Qui and vinctus, and solutus:
Qui pro Illis quos creavit,
Nulla pati denegavit.
Verba Facta
Cor Correcta
Fac sint,
Qui pro summa Laud,
Vacuus est ab omni fraud.
AMEN.
The true Bread of Life. John 6. 48.
BRead is the staff of life, Lev. 26.26
and life's the scope
Of every man's desire, aim, and hope;
Yet He who was the spoil of Death (for so
The Syriack renders him) yielded thereto. Genesis 5. 25.

And after more than any else e're saw
Of Years and Days, did at the last withdraw,
To show the frail condition here beneath
Of those who in their Nostrills bear their breath:
So that compared unto Eternal bliss,
A Shadow, Bubble, Span, all Emblem This.
Why then should Thoughts be tossed to Court such Clay,
But that Our natures mandate we Obey?
And may do so, whilst appetite puts on
No other garb 'save Moderation:
The bounty Ceres from her Golden Ear
Scatters to bless the painful Labourer,
Comes from above too, yet when ground and bread,
It Is but our Tabernacle's nourished,
And that but for a while; the Soul must be
Beholding to an Other Grainarie;
Not that which Moses Prayer caused to fall
To satiate the Israelites withal;
2 Kings 4.
Nor of such Barley-loaves grew once on earth,
42, 43.
Wherewith Elisha fed some in a Dearth:
These might have hunger after; but Those blessed
With the True batch of Life may ever rest
So satisfied, as with the height of store,
For such shall, never need to hunger more,
But an Eternal life enjoy, wherein
No dearth or famine is, save that of Sin:
Plenty and Joys for evermore dispose
Themselves to be the Comforters of those.
And whilst our Faith makes that a life indeed,
The other seems to trust a broken reed.
Afflictions sour that Temporal bread with Leaven,
Which this is freed of, for it comes from Heaven.
A Carroll.
WHen we a Gemm or Precious stone have lost,
Is not the fabric or the frame
Of Fancy busied, and each thing tossed
And turned within the room?
Till we the same
Can find again, Is It not a Martyrdom?
Does Vanity affect us so: yet are
We slumber-charm'd, nor can employ
A thought that backward might reduce, so far,
Lively to represent
Our Misery,
Who fell, and thus incurred a Banishment?
Shall we leave any corner Reason lends
To give sense light, unsought, untried?
To find how far our Liberty extends,
And how refound we were
Re-edify'd
By th'Shepherd, and by th'Son of the Carpenter?
May not this skill and love in him, require
The white and better stone to Mark,
And t'raise this time above all others higher,
Wherein He came (though Light)
Into the Dark,
For to restore unto Mankind its sight?
Most sure it will: and where neglect denies
To be observant of this Day,
It proves not only forfeiture of eyes,
But all parts seem asleep
Or gone astray:
So's the house again unbuilt, and lost the sheep.
Tragicomoedia vitae Humanae.
ORimur and Morimur,
Mors and Nativitas simul introcunt:
Quid ergo Gloria Mundi Istius?
Verum Theatrica ingredi Scilicet,
Egredique semper, Mos fuit vetus,
Est etiam hodie, eritque, donec
Postrema scena peragenda est, in qua
Simul Omnes iterum parts ut agant prodierint:
Laevaque acies multis Miseriis
Finem impone^t, suae Tragoediae;
Dextrum Cornu dum in Choreis
Sponsi resone^t Epithalamium:
Ambo Epilogum Tragicomoediae
Narrent, dum manet Ambos Conclusio.
In Horologium.
MEntitur celeri facilis rota tempora cursu,
Et properans Tardam praeterit Illa Diem:
Sic Horam Alatam superet modo Plumbea virtus,
Cum juvet in stimulos pondere pressa suos.
Faltere quam facile est dum non sentitur, amisso
Pondere tarda rota est, tempora sed fugiunt.
O! mihi sic Liceat prudenti Cord fugaces
Annumerare Dies, ut mihi Pondus erit.
Sic possem subito vitam disponere seclo,
Ut renovet Claram Candida sera Diem.
The Tragicomedie of Man's life.
HEre One is born, and there an Other dies,
Nativity and Obsequies
Enter at once; What then is all
This worlds Pomp, but Theatricall?
For to come out, and to go in
Has evermore the Custom been,
And will be till the latter scene
Summons us all at once again.
Then shall the Left Hand file in Misery,
Shut up the story of their Tragedy:
Whilst with a Chorus the Right wing
The Bridegrooms Epithalamie does sing,
Both giving a Catastrophe
Unto this Tragicomedie.
Upon a Clock.
THe swifter lying Wheel o'r-runs the Day,
Would make it seem as guilty of Delay;
And the winged hour out-stretch as conquered
In swiftness, by the Plummets weight of lead:
The fallacy is easy, for admit
That weight were off, then time would out-fly it.
O let my flitting days so numbered be
By a wise heart, they prove of weight to me:
So may I life dispose, that in the end
By setting bright, it may a clear Day send.
Quid Vita Vera, Quaenam Mors certissima.
Soli vivunt -- QUi in Christo vivunt.
Soli Mortui -- Qui in Peccato remanent.
Seducit in Tentationem Vivificat per sui Ipsius oblatione.
V^pote Conditionis nostrae V^pote Mileriae nostrae and Misericordie
AEmulus Satanas Patris quam Memor Christus.
Veram igitur ut Vitam habeamus,
A Peccato dehinc abstineamus.
Moriamur itaque -- Non in sed a Peccato;
Ut Fruamur Vitae -- Quae sit and in and a Domino.
Upon a very wet S. Stephens day.
GOd would his Saints should be bemoaned,
So the day weeps for Stephen stoned.
In Diem Circumcisionis ad Adamum sive totam humani Generis stirpem.
Luke 2.21.
CIrcumcisus erat, Legi sic paruit Olim,
Ut parat invitis Pilea certa suis:
Gal. 2.4, 5.
Et Novus in vetulo dignatur Parvulus Orb
Vivere, Nos animis Vestiat Ille novis.
Tempora sic fugiant, Magna est Mutatio secli,
Non Mutare, suas mutet Adamus Opes.
Upon Easter day.
SIn buried Soul awake and rise,
Let not the Conquered More
O'r thy Affections Tyrannize:
All that This world affords for Ore
But Drossie is, nor the least Mite
Of happiness in Fleshly Appetite.
The Devil from the first was styled
A Liar, and has still
Improved His malice, so beguiled
Us as our Parents to his will;
Each Word we utter, Thought conceive,
Or Act, all serves but t'help him to deceive.
No marvail then if Thou were bound,
When 'twas a Threefold Cord,
A Trident mischief that does wound,
Requires a Treble Patience to afford
Relief: with which we here were sped,
When th'Womans Seed did break the Serpents head.
First 'twas One God in three Compact,
Vouchsafed to work this Cure,
Though It seemed the Sons alone, this Act,
Both Father and Spirit were there most sure:
For it is without Contention,
All Three in One worked Man's Redemption.
They were three Wisemen from the East
Conducted by a Starr,
Refused no Travail for this Guest,
But came with Presents from afarr,
To Court Heavens Munificence
With Gold, with Myrrh, and Frankincense.
Those three indeed bewitch our sense,
And what could Men bring rather?
Faith was in Infancy, and thence
It chose to suit the Gift, I gather,
As whereby t'shew what Dawning it is
That Entertains the Blossoms of our Bliss.
The Fruit comes after: and that was,
When He who knew no sin,
Condemned, yet contented as
A malefactor Great had bin,
Not only Born, but born to bear
Our Crimes, became for men a Sufferer.
Suffer He did, and was interred,
And shall fond man refuse
To Die for Him; or be afeard
To bear, nay, t'see his cross, and choose
Rather to pass a moments pleasure
Here, than partake of such a lasting Treasure?
Shame Rouse us, and as He did sleep
Three Days within the Grave:
So let our Sins be buried deep,
That They no more Dominion have;
Nor hang like Plummets on our thighs,
When with our Blessed Savior we should rise.
Who for our sakes this Conquest won
O'r Hell, the Grave, and Death,
Three that sought Man's Confusion;
Till Man-with-God-unite, beneath,
So far prevailed, as first to Die,
Then Rose again to Crown the Victory.
Christ alone the Author and finisher of our Faith.
WHilst we believe (no more) we but resemble
The Devils, for Those do so too, and tremble.
He who for Man's redemption was sent,
Will be of true Faith the accomplishment,
As well as framer; and assurance gives,
Though yet unseen, of Large Prerogatives,
As to become Coheirs in that estate
Which He did purchase for th'regenerate:
No Others to be quoted are, but all
Authors besides This One, Apocryphal:
He opens to's the door to true Belief,
Who seeks t'come in another way's a Thief.
Upon a Thanksgiving day for a Victory.
TRue Victory, on Fames wings taught
To fly aloft,
So covers all the Plash
Or Stream wherein her falser tidings wash,
That none of them more rise,
Upon our Faiths to Tyrannise,
But put to plunge what shift to try,
Shunning the Hawks pounce, meet the Pole, so die.
Now as In Aqueducts, the source
Must guide the Course,
And to the same degree,
Heighthen the reach of its humiditie;
So it is but just and even,
That Benisons sent down from heaven,
Should thither rise again in praise,
And fill each Calendar with Holidayes.
Not such as wont make red-Ink dear,
Charging the year
In memory, t'express
This or that Man's a Saint, could go no less.
But by duties t'show
Our Thanfulness, and what we owe;
As from that Place alone we can
Conclude our spring of Blessings first began.
Thus whilst for praise we set apart
Both Day and heart,
And sweetly do embrace
Gods mercies meeting in his holy place;
'Thout question He Will go on
To perfect the Conclusion,
And crown the Conquest farther, so
That that never more be our friend, He deems foe.

Gloria Pyramidum sifeat Memphiticaesensus
Pyramide ad Dominum qua libet me potest
Lucis Amplectenda, scilicet Joel 2.12.
Poenitentiae Iejunium Fletus Planctus
Tenebrarum Fugienda, scilicet Romans 13.13.
Nocturna Securitatis, Comessatio and Ebrietas, Scurrilitas and Luxus, Lis and
Invidia.


Quorum Proemia sic diverse;
His Ex Misericordia, Copia, Hilaritas, Gandium, Conferuntur.
Illis Ex Iustitia, Penuria, Anxietas, Moestitia, Conferuntur.

This difference in works is known,
The first is Gods, to others our Own.
My Embassy. Aliter cum Domino and cum Principibus Mundi istius negotiandum.
Votum Deo si mandatur,
tOr gemitibus rumpatur,
siT ocellis fons, in ore
ferUens precis, cum amore
eleeMosynentur Manus,
Nec Legatus rediet vanus.
Forma Cordis, sed infecti
jUvet, os pictura recti,
neC blandities parectur,
donUm dum prameditetur,
Sub alternum Regem satis,
Flectent Ista Quem nil gratis.
Catena Causarum ad Salutem pertinentium

Man's Hart's so sinkt to Sin wedded to Vice
It needs a Chain to bring it unto Christ.
The Seed of the Woman breaks the Serpents head.
Pegasus.
ALipes Astra petens (sic Fabula) gramina rumpit,
In Fontes Montis Helicon.
Culmina versa stuunt:
Siccantes Horat. Ovid. Ar.
Vatum satiantur Hippocren.
Nectare venae,
Ne careant animis Obid animas quasi habere dicuntur utpote and immortalia
quodammodo videntur, and Immortales etiam creasse: nam, Dignum Laud virum Musa
vera^ mori.
Carmina digna suis.
Nec careant dum Luke 1. 31.
vera subit victoria, frangit
Serpentem Genesis 3. 15.
soboles gui Mulieris erat:
Vnde fit ut cunctis virtutum Flumina manant,
Luke 1. 70. 1 Pet. 1. 10.
Vatidicis Matthew. 10.41. and 5.12.
Cunctos praemia dumque manent,
1 Cor. 6.11.
Diluit and Genus ab humo huminum, and ade^ in Peccatis volumini ut omni
Gratiarum succo pro^sus vacuum videatur.
siccos, sic Pulvere Genesis 3. 19.
spargit amorem,
Luke 22.44. John 19.34.
Purpureum: 2 Pet. 1. 3.
fidas and 1 Pet. 3.4. Christi Passio induit Fidele and Purpura: Resurrectio
vero and ascensio Coronam addunt Victoriae, ut ita Secum Reges etiam simus
participesque Patri, Gloriae.
Diadema capis.
A Carroll.
Luke 2.
WAs all the world by Caesar taxed to know,
What wealth each Country, City, house could show?
Did that Decree extend but just so far
As where Cyrenius was Governor?
Yes sure, where ever the Roman power bore sway,
None could decline the Doom of Syria.
So cam't to pass, that He of David's stem,
Hast'ned from Nazareth to Bethlehem
With his espoused Mary, and got there
Of what is before time, Time's th'accomplisher:
Nor would the Darkness of those Days confess
A currency unto such Preciousness;
But house and City, Country, all three seem
To cast upon those Guests the Low'st esteem;
And so the other Strangers well may be,
Shuffle these Friends into the Ostierie.
What do we less, whilst Emperour-like each one
Bears over his lesser world Dominion,
And freedom has to tax each Sense, to bring
Its best of treasure to this Offering:
Yet as asleep, or blind with Natures light,
We learn to court all Objects save the right:
And whilst those houses should been tricked ore
For Him alone, they would let in Sin before:
The Cities of our hearts possessed with vice,
Will not change garrison at any price;
So what the Region of our Souls can grant,
Is, t'appear rich in ill, all good to want:
Yet though this Province, Fort, and Sconces all
Taken, betrayed, and under Satan's thrall;
It Is not presumed, but that by Faith being led,
All these may easily be recovered,
Nay, all are won already to that breast,
Prepared is to welcome this new guest.
In Sanctum Stephanum Protomartyrem patientem and duritiem Corduum Judaeorum
Lapidantium.
MArtyrii dum prima Petris sua Laurea vincit,
Saxea Saxosi Corda Manusque gerunt.
To New Years Day.
IF Eagles shifting but their Bills, have made
Their youth return, so years seem retrograde;
And if it be true, that every change of Skin
To th'creeping brood, does a new age begin:
Or whilst th'eleven Months like food appeer
To satiate the hungry Ianivere.
Why should not man this Riddle too unfold,
And be renewed by putting off the Old?
Armamenta ad oppugnandos Hoftes, Carnem scilicet, Mundum and Satanam, Maxim
necessaria.
VErus Christianus sit,
Ephesians. 6. 11. etc.
Veritate Cinctus
Iustitia armatus,
Pacis Calceamento vinctus,
Salvatione Galeatus,
Super Omne, Fidei scutum
Cum Spiritus Ense reddent tutum,
Nec deesse potest Ei,
Heb. 6. 19.
Unquam Anchora Firma spei.

In stead of Jacobs Ladder here is one
To teach thee how to go to heaven upon,
His in a Dream did Angels represent
Passing both from and to the Firmament
But this applide unto thy Heart will guide
Thee broad awake, to thy Redeemers side
Amasse Licuit, Quem peccasse poenituit.
VT in initio Annorum
Inscii,
In Hamum
Satanae,
Et Improvidi
Incidimus:
Ita Malorum Nostrorum
Conscii,
Zach. 3. 8.
Ramum
Esaias 11. 1.
Salvationis
Fide
Capiamus:
Tune -- Spes Libertatis erit -- si non amplius nimis -- Cura Peculi.
Quid proficiet homini fi totum Mundum lucretur, and perdat Animam suam?
QUae sibi lucrae facit Fragilem Qui comparat Orbem
Totum, Animam cumque Hic perdat and Ipse suam?
Nulla salus Terris, Brevis and mundana voluptas,
Coelicolis nulla est turbida perpetuo,
Preferat immeritis Haec splendida Lubrica Nugis,
Terrestris superum nulla valoris erint.
Ad quendam tam Potentia quam Intelligentia and Doctrina, Divitiis aeque ac
Nobilitate and honoribus praeditum.
INgeniosus Homo es, nec quisque Potentior Orb
Ditior and nullus, Nobiliarve fuit:
Partibus eximiis juncta est Vigilantia fortis,
Nec decrat titulis Copia magna tuis.
Hoc tantum si scire placet (me judice) restat,
Ut reddas Domino qua tibi Cuncta dabat.
Englished:
Thou art a witty man, nor's every one
In The world for Power thy Companion;
In Birth and Riches all thou do outfly,
And exc'lent Parts backed with Authority.
On Thy arrears this only now may fall,
Thou spend these to His praise who gave them all.
Temporibus hisce Maxim discendum.
FAcile credimus quod volumus:
Velimus igitur Bonae,
Et statim credemus
Non omni Mendacio,
Sed Potius Verbo
Veritatis Ipsi.
Omnis Anima Potestatibus subserviat superioribus. Romans 13.

Such as stand upon false Bottoms in saving their SOULS.
The Ignorant.
INscius innumeros Domini meditatur Amores,
Et salvum nihilo se putat esse suo:
The Presumptuous.
Alter at indubi as Veniarum concipit Arts,
Ut sibi, dum Cunctis Victima Christus erat.
The worldly Wise.
Mundanis nimium sapit Alter amoribus, atque Hic
Sola Deo profert Munera ut accipiat:
The morally Civil.
Hic quoque civilis fruitur jam tempore vitae,
Nec dubitat Coelis quin fruiturus item:
The Hypocrite.
Sanctior oppositis sibi dum blanditur Inanis
Fictilis, and Meritis se valuisse suis,
Rumpitur, and nullam capit Ille vel Iste salutem,
Durabit Christo quae stabilita Fides.
In Epiphaniam sive manifestationem Domini.
John 1. 5.
Nonne putes Merito Caecos Qui Luce serena
Numb. 24. 17. Luke 1 78.
Nil cernunt, ad quos Phosphorus Ipse venit,
John 3. 19.
Nec tamen Evigilant? Densa Caligine Gentes
Luke 1. 79. Ephesians. 5. 8.
Umbrantur Miseri, (vespera tota Dies)
Matthew. 2. 1.
Sed tamen inveniunt stellam, sic noctis Imago
2 Thessalonians. 5. 5.
Versa est e tenebris qua duce clara Micat;
Matthew. 2. 1. 1 John 3. 5.
Et Magus in magno meditatur Lumine Divum,
Isa. 10. 3.
Sponte Novum Astrologos Astrum agitatque viros.
John 1. 16. Luke 2. 6.
Sin quorsum hoc rogites? ut sit Manifestus ad Omnes,
Gal 4.4.
Omni Qui in pleno tempore natus erat.
Natus, Damnatus, Necatus, Glorificatus.
Descendere descendit e Coelis ut (pravitate qua depressi simus Carnali
relicta.) ascendamus in Coelos: Pati dignatus in Mundo pro immundis, Vt
possideant Lucem, Qui meruissent Crucem. Morte mulctari se praebuit, Vt Vitam
capiat, qui Mori debuit. Agnus in Montem passus, pastus and in Montem agnus.
Pastor succumbit Oneri Legis, ut languori succurrat parvuli gregis. Ne desit
Fons, adest Mons: ad depremendam sitem, (Hanc) cape, Veram Vitem: Qui multo cum
cruore Mori vellet; ut humanos ab humanis erroribus avellat. Anguis ut a
praecipitio redimatur Ingratus; sanguis Pretiostssimi effunditur, and confossum
Latus: Tumuli limitibus se Captivum tradidit, Vt a Satanae Militibus nos
Liberos redderet. Sepulchro obdormivisse Lapideo videtur, ut duritiei Cordis
humani oblivisceretur. Morti pro triduo Temporis paret, Mori ut peccatis
quotidie nos praeparet; and ne quid in Redemptione sit amissum; horrendum
Barathri petit Abyssum. Sed Qui Lux vera est, and ab aeterno, non manet
tenebris nec in Inferno; Ast Palmam feriens verae victoriae, Coronam Fidelibus
texnit Gloriae. Et ne sit Fidei Thomae defectio, Octavo iterum die est
^a^efacta resurrectio. Postquam ab eis per quadraginta Dies notus fuit and
conspectus, Nubem induit and susceptus: a Monte qui Oliveti vocatur sursum
receptus est Pacificator, Cujus readventus est futurus, ita cum Iudicaturus.
Mente Me Deus sic donet Spirituali, Vt non sim iterum Reus hujus Mali.

A Threefold Cord is not easily broken.
MEek, Lowly, Humble, was that threefold Cord,
Our Lord,
To pull us up to Heaven did afford.
He bore the Cross first for us, and became
Esaias.
A Lamb;
Washed His Disciples feet, to teach the same.
But who takes out this lesson? is not Pride
Our Guide.
Envy, Oppression, Malice too beside?
To cross what is good, bleat after Natures call,
T'enthrall
Others; set traps t'ensnare their feet withal.
We can the best of care and thought unbinde,
To find
What may enrich the Body, not the mind.
So still be cumbered about serving much,
And grutch
That Others have not equal share in such.
When if our Savior we believe alone,
But one
Luke 10.42.
Thing needful was, and that was Mary's own.
That better permanent part, grant that I
May try,
To compass through unfeigned humility.
Regula nullo modo Spernenda.
Ut sit
Deo Gloria Uni very solo etsi Triplici Trinuno unanimiter non secundum hominis
fictum, sed sui ipsius id est veritatis verbum Totus inservire, quoniam Non
vult participem cultus Jesus.

Principi Honor Debitam obedientiam utpote gubernandi causa in nos, ab Ipso
Domino in omne scilicet quod Mandata non exuperet Licitae Praeposito, reddere,
quoniam Oppugnat Dominum spernere Regem.

Reipublicae salus Tantam tribuere Legum institutionibus et constitutionibus
reverentiam, ut in omni action unam vel alteram instar metae appetitui
praefigere, quoniam ut salus Populi suprema lex, sic sine Legibus nulla salus
Populo.



Sic
Veram Devotionem in Deum verum, verbo dum sacro Fides adhibeatur sancta
compares. Agnitionem and remunerandi observantiam quam humilem, Grato, Pio, and
Patientiae summae Fatrono-Principi. Pacem sic Tranquillam and ab omnibus [bonis
scilicet] maxim optatam Patriae.

Quibuscum Armatus Deterreant. Nec Papalis haeresis
Nec Fatalis Hypocrisis
Nec effrenata Anarchia
Confusionis Anomalia
Nec Galeata Dementia
Ex Plebeia Insolentia
Quin Homo Probus sis Tam uno quam Ambobus.

Triplex hominum Conditio.
Creatio prima, Genesis 1. 26. In Innocentia Creatus, Ephesians. 4.24. Depravatio
secu^da, Genesis 3. 6. In Disobedientia dislocatus, Genesis 3. 23, 24. Restauratio
tertia, Genesis 3. 15. In Summa clementia redintegratus, Romans 8. 32. Indutut
spiritu divino, 1 Cor. 15.45. Captus Dolo serpentino, Genesis 3. 4. Florens sole
matutino, Luke 1. 78.

Ab origin quam puro sine labe vel peccato, Postea in statu no^ securo, utpote
hortideprivato, Donce in Christo redempturo tunc credendo sublevato. Haec cum
Fide percepisses, Etsi Miserrimus fuisses, Causum Spei invenisses.

In Passionem and Resurrectionem Domini.
QUimodo tantorum Tumulorum vincula solvit,
Carceribus Tumuli traditur Ille novi:
Sic Placuit, maculaque animae purgentur ab omni,
Sanguine jam proprio diluit Ille suo.
Humanum inveniens aperit humus illico venaes,
Sarcophagus Dominum sed retinere nequit.
Quid seeds in Tumulum somnose Miles apertum?
Quem vigiles vigilant Mortis and arma rapit.
Cum sociis stupefacta videt Maria Sepulchrum,
In queis latitia and Mista pavore fuit.
Inveniant Dominum veniunt ut Marmore clausum,
Mane situs Dominus, nec manet usque diem:
Visurae gaudent Christum, metuuntque remoto
Saxo, dum visus Angelus est Domini.
Crux Vera
Non in Ligno, Sed in Signo,
Ducis Victoria, Crucis Gloria,

Privatio Vitae Donatio.
All other CROSSES may disquiet rest,
But this was that by which Mankind is blessed.
C-R-V-C-J-F-I-G-I-T-V-R.
-urrit ad Exitium Genitrix, repetitque Reatum
Filiolus: Poenas Hic dabit, I^^a suas.
-uminat ut Miseros Rex Inclytus, Alta relinquens
Ima petitque, subit Nubila lucis Opus.
-nicus a sceptris humiles facit Ille recessus
Sponte, suam tribuit Qui quoque vita fuit:
-um brevis e teneri concretaque pulvere forma
Quam vitiosa regunt, Ambitiosa velit.
-uncta Viro Consors, qua cum de sort perenni
Consulit, and Culpa haec (Morte) perennis erat:
-actus homo Dominus moritur, sed Morte subacta
Commutat fortem, and vita Perennis erit.
-rritat Superos Gens improba, sed super omne
Grata est, quae a scisso Pectore fusa fluit.
-ratia pro ingratis datur integra, Iustus Iniquis,
Pro Peccatore haec Pectora laesa mancnt.
-nduit and nostras humana faece volutaes
Naturas, nobis Coelica tecta facit.
-ransfixusque fuit, quo transeat omnis alumnus,
Et videat passum pacificumque virum.
-ictus Amore hominum vinctus, Captivus and Idem,
Ut Libertatis spes modo certa siet:
-espice sic Miserum, Miseros qui e gurgite Mortis
Eripuit, rapiant Viscera nostra, sua.
Spectaculum ver^e Humilitatis.
C -- um. H -- u^c. R -- espici^s I- S T -- ibi V -- ita S -- alur.

S -- uccumbit I -- nnocens M -- ibi O -- nus N -- atum

If in a glass one would descry
Perfect and true Humility;
Then go no farther, but observe
He bore the Cross which we deserve.
Pilat's Inscription. Joh. 19. 19

I -- ustus N -- ascens R -- edimit I -- njustos. 1 Pet. 3. 18


What PILATE wrote, He wrote, and did refuse
To alter for the High Priest of the Jews:
This Just man's birth with Prophecy suits well,
Who came to save the lost of Israel. Mat. 9. 13.

P -- ater I -- gnosce I -- nsciis R -- emitte E -- rrantibus G -- ravissimo I
-- udicio S -- ubditis C -- ondones O -- bsecro M -- iseris P -- eccantibus A
-- missoque S -- aluti S -- uccurres I -- n O -- blatione.

Of All the Virtues happiness Create,
None out-shines this, To be Compassionate:
Mercy the God of Glory does prefer,
Although All Is other works are singular.
This Kingly Pattern here before us set,
Should teach us to forgive, and to forget.
La Citta Improvida.
J -- aceo E -- versa R -- uinis U -- tpote S -- anctum A -- ngularem L --
apidem E -- misi M -- eum.

A Building that is Tight and free from weather,
Has all its parts well Cymented together;
For where such Unity In it self's away,
That structure falls under some quick decay.
This City bore name of Peace alone,
Whose Builders did refuse their Corner stone.
Il vero monte Testaccio.
G -- erit O -- ssa L -- ucet G -- loria O -- mnibus T -- remor H -- umilis A
-- lius

Memento mori, or a Deaths-head worn
Upon a finger, often becomes a scorn;
For what through use familiar is grown,
Nature counts less by apprehension.
Yet be advised, this Mount of dead men's skuls,
A greater dread and terror on thee pulls,
Who durst by Sins, and loose desires below,
Make him again pay that which thou did ow.
Easter days Resurrexit.
SEt the Cliff higher
Now,
And raise
Each hearts key,
To present a Vow
In praise
Of him who lately was our buyer,
And of this Day
Which He makes clearer far then Other days.
For look we back, and there
We may with ease
See what we were,
Transformed beyond
All works, did please
The Maker
So
That whilst He did commend
What He had done, Man wrought his endless woe;
Nor of those praises longer was partaker.
Before when known
To be,
By Innocencies Liverie,
The fairest likeness of Creation;
All other Things
Were but to Man as Offerings,
Whereby
He might maintain
The Title of the worlds true Sovereign.
Justice and Mercy both,
The King of Heaven
Delights to show;
And in his hands the Skoals does hold so even,
That whilst enforced to punish, yet he is loath
To overthrow;
And so a way prescribes, wherein
Man may revenged be of sin.
To this effect,
When He saw time,
His Son was sent,
That all disgraces of the Crime
On Him being spent,
No Contumely or neglect
Might lie behind,
To sink into Despair a troubled mind.
So suffered He
To set
Man
Free
Again,
Whose debt
Required no less
To recompense
The Guiltiness
Of so great Disobedience.
Which bond discharged,
All are enlarged,
Who can through Faith arise
With Him who Clarifies
Beyond our apprehension,
The Splendour this Days Skies
Put on,
To Emblem His Bright Resurrection.
In Diem Natalem etiam and Jejunalem quoniam Mercurialem Mensis ultimam.
Quondam Festa Dies, nunc Iejunantibus apta es,
Ut Queis non prosunt Gaudia Maesta juvent.
Englished:
A Holiday thou wast, and art so still;
For Holy Fasting saves, when Riots kill.
In novi Anni Diem Primam Dialogismus.
DUm novus Annus init, an nos nova Pectora flectent,
Cum Vetulo Vetulas vin periere vices?
Quid potius? nam qui memorare novissima certet,
Immemor errati gaudeat esse sui.
Ineffabilis Amor atque Admirabilis Christi.

Vt manus In Crucem. alat^.
extensas pandit Iudais.
Crudelibus, Ipsos
Gensila^.
Nos velut amplexu comparat Ille suo:
Ovid. Met.
Pythonem innumeris adimens Hydramve Vam laborum Herculis.
sagittis^
Serpentum The old Serpent, the Devil.
Proavum, S^mon virgins.
haec ^a sagitta neca^.
Nullus Apollonia salvios fiat art Neporum,
Nec quisquam Alcidis ^obore major erit:
Hic tamen haec magni Christ's conquest over death.
repetit victoria mundi,
Ferendo serit.
Es superat poenas Ille ferendo suis.
Pauperis est numerare Pecus, duodecimus olim
Herculeanus erat Huic Labor innumerus
Man had so offended God, that nothing but God and Man could make atonement.
Nempe quod in nostris ranta est numeratio Culpis,
Vt nisi qui posset singula nulla juves.
All power was given him of the Father, who voluntarily undertook the work of
our redemption.
Posse and velle suum est, sic nos redempsit iniquos,
Et firma in st tuat Anchora He becoming the truest Anchor of our hopes, we
cannot vere out the Cable of faith upon better security against all
shipwracking.
vera Fidem.
To my Gracious God.
Retired into a Calm of Leisure, Led
By Providence thus: grant me busied
Here after for My King and Countries good,
The Church and State where I took Livelihood:
That in my Calling I may never falter,
But hew wood and draw water for thine Altar.
The Object of Love and Power.
J -- nspic^ps E -- mentem S -- acrificantem V -- ictorem S -- acrificium.

Lost Man, when to be saved cannot devise
To expiate His guilt by Sacrifice;
Till Priest and Prophet, King, and all agree
In One, to offer and winn Victory;
This for what is past; the other act of power
He gained for us, who is our Savior.
Use and Memory Parents to VVisdome.
Use out of Date, and to Remember
Our Saviors Birth, wont bless December,
Cried down: What may we judge by these?
But this, That Wisdome's in decrease,
And certainly must Folly own,
When other Parents are not known.
The End of the First Part.
-- Tutus in Umbra Silvestram tenui Musam meditatus avena. Virg: W.M. sculpsit


To my Book, upon the second Part, and the Title Page. Famulentur Prioribus.
THy first Part bears a stamp Divine,
And so may pass for current Coin;
Though Momus Cark, and Zoilus bark,
Thou art preserved as in an Ark:
For what one does by Faith apply,
No flood of Envy can destroy.
Yet how to help thee at a lift,
That must be now my Second drift:
For seeing thou will not alone
Come forth, but be attended on,
It Is fit thy servant still should be,
Adorned with modest Loyalty;
Such as the Hills, and Groves, and Brooks
Afford the Fancy, 'stead of Books;
And help Contentedness to wade,
Though not to swim under a shade
Of such Security may give
Against heat and cold Prerogative
Defense: where no times rays or Thunder
Shall blast or scorch those so lie under.
But who themselves in Peace can thus read ore,
Need but be thankful, and never wish for more.
The Second Part.

Humane Science Handmaid to Divine. Famulentur Prioribus.
ALl were not Cedars that grew on
The Top of Towering Lebanon,
But here and there some less Plant set
To give attendance on the great:
So have I seen a grove of Pine
Becircled with Eglantine;
A Towle of Oaks that seemed the higher,
For over-looking of the Brier;
The Beech, Ash, Elm, take it not in scorn
From the low Shrub and prickly Thorn
That underneath their shades they dwell,
And guard their roots as Sentinel:
Medows, and Fields, and Gardens all
Produce both simples, Med'cinall,
And herbs of less esteem; yet these
May some one sense or other please.
Fountains with Crystal may compare,
As they run out are known to share
With this and that Land-water, til
They color change, yet Rivers fill.
And if I would my Fancy rear,
To lineat a day most clear;
It should be such a one, wherein
Some wooll-pack Clouds in corner's been.
Thus the wise God of Nature chose
And things in order to dispose:
And Humane Raptures only does command
As servants to Divine, to wait at hand.
Occasioned by seeing a Walk of Bay-trees.
NO Thunder blasts Jove's Plant, nor can
Misfortune warp an honest Man;
Shaken He may be, by some one
Or other Gust, Unleav'd by none:
Though tribulation's sharp and keen,
His Resolutions keep Green;
And whilst Integrity's his wall,
His Year's all Spring, and has no Fall.
Inter Acus and Aculeos pugna.
MAn like a little world, opens a pack
Of Government, to all such Climes as lack;
Wherein those humors that disturb the health,
For Power, do represent a Commonwealth;
And Nature (uncontrowlably) would try,
To subject all under her Monarchy;
But in that Conflict finds no small disease,
Whilst all restrained Authorities displease.
Here may we see as from a Chaos spun,
Discord, at push of pike; and Factions t'run
A tilt: so break int' shivers and destroy
The strict command of eithers sovereignty.
Yet neither Title need we fear to leese,
Sithence there is both King and Commonwealth amongst Bees.
Sort tua sis Contentus.
DUm fremit immodic is rapiturque voragine ventis,
Et vetat irato Gurgite Navis iter,
Littoribus Placidum Pelagus, non Indica reddens
Munera, sed Concha dat propiore dapes.
Elige quod mavis est, Tumidos insistere Fluctus
An Portum, Exitium quarere, sive bonum:
Tentet Avarus Opes, and Amara pericula Ponti,
Tuta cupit modicis rebus inesse Fides:
Quamvis Castrae petas, Fora vel Togatus Amasses,
Invenias Laqueis haec comitata suis:
Sola manet requies Animo Quem jurgia nulla,
Nulla vaporiferaeque Ambitionis habent.
Sed satur, in proprio formentur pectore pacis
Semina, quae fugiant Militiam atque Forum:
Gaudeat umbriferis Sylvis pro Class, Loquaces
Lympharumque Choros Curia nec sileat.
Namque Avibus junctis repetitur murmr cantus,
Et saltabundum ceruat ubique Pecus:
Gramineis locuples jactet jam terra tapetis,
Et violae soboles sub sepe coepta ferunt.
Pisciculis avidis Esca est inimica voracem
Dum Condens hamum, sic cupidos capiens.
Nec minus Agricolae dum tendit retia Turdus
Praeda fit, aut Visco fallitur Ipse suo:
Si sequeris Leporem, pedibus petit Ille salutem,
Currenti stimulos addit and Ipse metus.
Sin Rubis evigiles iremulas multo cane Damas,
Ostendunt nemori non adhibenda Fides.
Sis ubicunque velis, facias modo quid libet, Omne
Te Cruciat, Menti ni sit amica quies.
Insula Britannica ad seipsam.
QUid moror in terras? Pinus descendit in undas,
Et tondet Vitreas Classica sylvacomas.
Gallia, quid profers? quid Tu Teutonica tentas?
Hesperiesque tuis quidve Carina Malis.
Number dabitis Legem Oceano Mihi Iura negantem,
Littora Cui, Liquidus paret and Oceanus.
Conficiam eximias Aurato tegmine Puppes,
Signentur Rubra candida vela cruce.
Ne caream verbis ubi Rectum quaerere Ius est,
Pulmones strenuos, AErea Lingua vomet.
Moenia si quisquam violenti fulmine tundet,
Lignea forte putet, Igneaque inveniet.
Chloris Complaint.
Do not the Planets (howsoere
They wander) still retain a proper sphere?
And seasons serve the year to bless,
Although the Storms and Tempests are no less?
Seem not becalmed Seas more fair,
Than if they had never been irregular?
And shall fond Man alone be said,
To be of all things else unpacifi'd?
Lions to Lions kind, and Bears
Friendly to such; so Wolves partake of the fears
With their pursued kin; The fell
Est Tiger can with her associate dwell:
And yet (as if unhuman'd) we
By no means with each other can agree;
So that (we may degenerate
From Natures mandate) all our Passion's hate,
And where a Mishcief may befall,
All Disposition's turned to Prodigal,
Nor is there for Compassion
Left any room (now t's out of fashion,)
Befriend me wind, I Will try the wave,
Though some there be must sink, yet some 'tmay save,
My Calendar yet marks out spring,
Dis-gust may shake, not blast the Blossoming.
And therefore as I roav'd astray,
It Is reconciling Truth points now the way,
In which I would be thought as far
From variation, as the fixedst Starr;
But with a constant shining thence,
Serve King and Country by my Influence.
My New yeare-gift to the Times.
NOvum aperiens Ianitor nunc Annum,
Iani Bifrontis Quis Nothus Caesarum,
Restet ab victam long Britanniam,
Templa clausurus iterum Britannicis?
Barbariem nunquam, (vel raro saltem)
Tam feram memini Legisse seclis
Vt jam ostenditur,
Fratres in Fratres;
Filiae Filiique,
Obedientia omni,
Tanquam protinus soluti,
In matres etiam and in Patres,
Vim ferunt rapide,
Parents mutuo
Natos natasque maximo
Habent Odio,
Sexus, AEtates licet numeras,
Dissensionum undique querulas;
Rixasque intelligis and Invidiae
Arts ministratur assidue;
Majorem sub Leonino
Temperiem invenias Axe, vel Canino,
Tam fervida
Torquet Alterutrinque Ira,
Adeoque torret Discordiarum Flamma,
Vt destruit and consumit Omnia:
Friget in hoc aestu tamen,
Charitatis solamen,
Et quicquid saevitiae
Produxit unquam Scythiae:
Glacialis Sphaera,
Hujus inimicitiae
Fiat Imago vera.
Bellica fuimus
Praeda Romany,
Nec non Saxonibus,
Quondamque Danis,
Vicinis etiam victima Normannis.
Ast in Postremo
Hoc (absente Populo)
Qui nos confundat Seculo,
Ipsosmet petimus
Et pro Purpureo victore,
Quisque nunc tingitur Fratris Cruore.
The Fifth of November, being in Kent a stony Country.
AM I in Kent? and can I be no more
Befriended than to want a Stone to score
That escape from Danger; which had it o'r-come,
Might have both Conquered Kent and Christendom.
Dye-mans although not rare now, Rubies are
Through our Dissentions made peculiar
Blaz'ners of Virtues Heraldry: nor can
The Tincture serve of the Cornelian;
The Topaz, Sapphire, and the Emrald may
On fingers worn, proclaim it Holiday:
But I must find a whiter, though it came
Not far, but whence fair Albion took its name,
The Cliffs of Dover, on whose Candid Breast
I shall presume to share an interest
On this Occasion, that no Rubricks spell
May henceforth in some Bookers Chronicle
Eclipse my glory, or exempt my praise,
By ranking me amongst the Workedayes.
Surely the Dye that black design put on,
Would crave the best of all, and whitest Ston
To mark that Providence, which did prevent
The mischief of that vap'ring Element:
Which Hatched below, should our Conceptions rouse,
(In that before it grew pernicious,
The Shell was cracked; and so that enterprise
Was vanquished, with th'abortive Cockatrice)
First to the great Deliverer, and then
A freedom of acknowledgment amongst men,
That all of them may (as their fortunes are)
Spend something on a solemnizing care.
And as the Powder should have been our chance,
Now let 'texpress loud our deliverance.
Anglia Hortus.
THe Garden of the world, wherein the Rose
In chief Commanded, did this doubt propose
To be resolved in; Whether sense to prise
For umpire to Create it Paradise:
One led by th'Ear of Philomel tells tales,
And straightway cals't the land of Nightingales;
An Other sharper sighted, ravished, cries,
O that I could be turned now all to eyes!
A Third received such raptures from the taste
Of various dainty fruits, that it surpast;
A Fourth was caught (not with perfume) commends
The Indian Clime, but what here Nature lends;
Last, if you would Sattins or Velvets touch,
For soft and smooth, Leaves can afford you such.
And thus disposed, whilst every Sense admires,
It Is senseless t'plant amongst Roses, Thistles, Briars.
Naumachia. In Pugnam Navalem inter Hispanos and Batavos, die Octobris, Anno
1639. Commissam in freto vulgo Le manche; ubi victoria His, tulna quam
foelicissime Illis accidit.
Castiliana suos ardentes linquere Portus
Iusta est Neptuno and frigidiore frui:
Occurrit Liquidis Teutonica classis ab Oris,
Vt Ligno huic Ignes supped'tare queat.
Sole exusta suo solvit de littore Puppis,
Frangitur and Tepidis Artibus inter aquas.
Bella gerunt Homines, nec non Elementa vicissim,
Contendunt vires notificare suas.
Ignea sublimes vis occupat, Altera mergit
Tumosa AErios Ambitionis habet:
Sola manet nostras Terrestria tuta salutes
Conditio: maneat sic stabilita Diu. Ab Aqua and Igne liberavit nos Domus.

Ad Amicum super quatuor Anni Tempora and quatuor AEtates hominum Comparative.
BRumalis secli inconstantia,
Te reddat Moestum ab Infantia,
Ver praebeat Flores vanitatis
Ideo juventutis, satis
Viribus Virilis aetas,
In AEstate cum nil metas
AEstuet vano: dum senescis
Para fructum, adest messis.
AEstivum, Hyemale, vernum,
Ceres ducunt in aeternum.
My happy Life, to a Friend.
Dearest in Friendship, if you will know
Where I my self, and how bestow,
Especially when as I range,
Guided by Nature, to love change:
Believe, it is not to advance
Or add to my inheritance;
Seeking t'engross by Power (amiss)
What any other Man calls his:
But full contented with my own,
I let all other things alone;
Which better to enjoy 'thout strife,
I settle to a Country life;
And in a sweet retirement there,
Cherish all Hopes, but banish fear,
Offending none; so for defense
Armed Capapee with Innocence;
I do dispose of my time thus,
To make it more propitious.
First, my God served; I do commend
The rest to some choice Book or Friend,
Wherein I may such Treasure find
T'inrich my nobler part, the Mind.
And that my Body Health comprise,
Use too some moderate Exercise;
Whether invited to the field,
To see what Pastime that can yield,
With horse, or hound, or hawk, or to be
More taken with a well-grown Tree;
Under whose Shades I may rehearse
The holy Lays of Sacred Verse;
Whilst in the Branches pearched higher,
The winged Crew sit as in a quier:
This seems to me a better noise
Than Organs, or the dear-bought voice
From Pleaders breath in Court and Hall
At any time is stockt withal:
For here one may (if marking well)
Observe the Plaintive Philomel
Bemoan her sorrows; and the Thrush
Plead safety through Defendant Bush:
The Popingay in various die
Performs the Sergeant; and the Pie
Chatters, as if she would revive
The Old Levite prerogative,
And bring new Rotchets in again;
Till Crows and Jackdaws in disdain
Of her Pide-feathers, chase her thence,
To yield to their pre-eminence:
For you must know it observed of late,
That Reformation in the State,
Begets no less by imitation,
Amidst this chirping feathered Nation;
Cuckoes Ingrate, and Woodcocks some
Here are, which cause they't seasons come,
May be compared to such as stand
At Terms, and their returns command;
And lest Authority take cold,
Here Is th'Ivyes guest of wonder, the Owl,
Rufft like a Judge, and with a Beak,
As it would give the charge and speak:
Then it is the Goose and Buzzards art
Alone, t'perform the Clients part;
For neither Dove nor Pigeon shall,
Whilst they are both exempt from gall.
The Augur, Hern, and soaring Kite,
Calendar weather in their flight;
As do the Cleanlier Ducks, when they
Dive voluntary, wash, prune, play;
With the fair Cygnet, whose delight
Is to outvie the snow in white.
And therefore always seeks to hide
Her feet, lest they allay her pride.
The Moor-hen, Dobchick, Water rail,
With little Washdish or Wagtail;
The Finch, the Sparrow, Jenny Wren,
With Robin that is so kind to men;
The Whitetail, and Tom Tit obey
Their seasons, bill and tread, then lay;
The Lyrick Lark does early rise,
And mounting, pays her sacrifice;
Whilst from some hedge, or close of furrs,
The Partridge calls its Mate, and churrs;
And that the Country seem more pleasant,
Each heath has Powt, and wood yields Phesant;
Iunoes delight with Cock and Hens
Turkies, are my Domestic friends:
Nor do I bird of Prey inlist,
But what I carry on my Fist:
Now not to want a Court, a King-
Fisher is here with Purple wing,
Who brings me to the springhead, where
Crystal is Lymbeckt all the year,
And every Drop distills, implies
An Ocean of Felicities;
Whilst calculating, it spins on,
And turns the Pebles one by one,
Administering to eye and ear
New Stars, and music like the Sphere;
When every Purle Calcined does run,
And represent such from the Sun:
Devouring Pike here has no place,
Nor is it stored with Roach or Dace;
The Chub or Cheven not appear,
Nor Millers Thumbs, nor Gudgeons here,
But nobler Trowts, beset with stones
Of Rubie and of Diamonds,
Bear greatest sway; yet some entrench,
As sharp-finn'd Perch, and healing Tench;
The stream's too pure for Carp to lie,
Subject to perspicuitie,
For it must here be understood,
There are no beds of sand and Mud,
But such a Gravel as might pose
The best of Scholars to disclose,
And books and learning all confute,
Being clad in water Tissue suit.
These cool delights helped with the air
Fanned from the Branches of the fair
Old Beech or Oak, enchantments tie
To every senses faculty;
And master all those powers should give
The will any prerogative:
Yet when the scorching Noon-dayes heat,
Incommodates the Lowing Neat,
Or Bleating flock, hither each one
Hasts to be my Companion.
And when the Western Sky with red-
Roses bestrews the Day-stars bed:
The wholesome Maid comes out to Milk
In russet-coats, but skin like silk;
Which though the Sun and Air dies brown,
Will yield to none of all the Town
For softness, and her breaths sweet smell,
Does all the new-milcht Kie excel;
She knows no rotten teeth, nor hair
Bought, or Complexion t'make her fair;
But is her own fair wind and dress,
Not envying Cities happiness:
Yet as she would extend some pity
To the drained Neat she frames a ditty,
Which does inchant the beast, until
It patiently lets her Paile fill;
This does the babbling Echo catch,
And so at length to me't does reach:
Straight roused up, I verdict pass,
Concluding from this bonny Lass,
And the Birds strains, it is hard to say
Which taught Notes first, or she, or they:
Thus ravished, as the night draws on
Its sable Curtain, in I Am gone
To my poor Cell; which 'cause it is mine,
I judge it does all else outshine,
Hung with content and weather-proof,
Though neither Pavement nor roof
Borrow from Marble-quarr below,
Or from those Hills where Cedars grow.
There I embrace and kiss my Spouse,
Who like the Vesta to the house,
A Sullibub prepares to show
By care and love what I must owe.
Then calling in the Spawn and fry,
Who whilst they live never let us die;
But every face is hers or mine,
Though minted yet in lesser Coin,
She takes an Apple, I a Plumbe,
Encouragements for all and some:
Till in return they crown the herth
With innocent and harmless merth,
Which sends us Joyful to our rest,
More than a thousand others blessed.
De Imperatorum Julianorum lineae ultimo Et Sulpitii sive Electorum primo.
VT Cadat infoelix nec sicca morte Tyrannus,
Vindictam Patriae Vindicis Arma dabant:
Nempe Neronis erat Fatum dum terruit urbem,
Tandem terrifico succubuisse Iugo.
Sic Calvum Galbam appellant, sceptroque recepto,
Temnunt Calvitiem Plebs opinata suam.
Quid tu Caesareo gauderes nomine Sergi?
Cum non Caesaries ulla relicta tibi.
Imperium si forte velit supplere relictum,
Debuit and Capiti Comperiisse Comas.
Englished thus:
That the unhappy Nero might be said
To fall most like a Tyrant, not in bed.
Vindex in France raised Arms, and sought thereby
To vindicate the wrongs of Italy:
The Fates were just to Him, so frighted Rome,
Making at last fear Master of his doom:
So Bald-pate Galba to the Throne did rise,
Whom straight the Common People 'gan despise,
Crying, Why should thou Caesar's name put on,
When all the hair grew on thy head was gone?
If He the Empires Barque anew would rigg,
He should have brought with him a Periwigg.
In quendam Fictilem infirmi Corporis.
INfirmum and fragile est Corpus tibi (Fictile) verum
Men's tua sub curvo corpore recta latet.
Placet in Vulnus, Maxima cervix.
FLagranti stomacho Turdus vorat undigue Zuras,
Dum ferit art gelu frigidiore Diem:
Sic modo Pinguescens capitur, citiusque paratis,
Aucipis ingeniis praeda petenda jacet.
Saepius hoc discat Ditescens atque Gulosus,
Sic moderare dapes ut sibi lucra fiant.
Prospera nam subito mutentur tempora lapsu,
Et latet in pulchro gramine Mortis acus.
Upon a Journey of His Majesty's into Scotland, and His safe Return.
THe Planets whilst they move in several Spheres,
Cut out our time in weeks, in months, in years;
In Night and Day; whose revolutions bring
The day, night, week, month, year into a Ring.
What do our Princes less, when they go forth
A Progress West or East, or South or North?
Is not the first step that they forward set,
The Suns, when He his Golden locks does wet
In Thetis lap, to all that stay behind?
Is not the world Eclipsed to them, and blind?
Do not all Minutes stretch, and seem to grow
Each to an hour, to such as think them so?
Do not our crossed, yet longing hopes, present
Each hour a month or year in banishment?
They do: and 'twas not long since we were they
Who stood as Exiled from our Star of Day;
Whilst visiting Those parts whence He did rise,
He cast a General splendour o'r those Skies,
Leaving us only Cynthia and her Train,
To gives us hopes He would return again:
And so he does enrich again our Sky,
Bringing those hopes unto maturity,
Our Clime with Tropick's changed, and the same
Season of day, now lengh of night does claim:
Those only who by Elevation
Before enjoyed a lucid Horizon,
Once yearly now with more perfection shine
A whole month, Phoebus, suffering no decline:
Did I but called a month? They deemed it less,
If they could apprehend their happiness;
And we I Am sure had reason t'think it more,
Than many Ages counted ore and ore.
For as the Suns withdrawing leaves one world,
Into a Winters Tyranny t'be hurld,
Whilst it does bless an Other; so 'twas thus
In Scotland, June; but February with us
Till his return; which changed the Season quite,
Then ours with Corn, with Snow their hills were white;
The night that was resignes, and day's begun
With us already by our Gracious Sun.
Let Them pass Envie-free who boast them may
In the possession of this Month or Day;
For time wrapped up in swiftness does appear
When past, as if an Age were but a year;
A year a month, a month a week, and That
An hour or minute, whilst we consolate
Our selves may in this bliss; that future time
Seems always slower-winged in its Clime:
Their Jubilee was short and quickly gone,
Ours under CHARLES is a Perpetual one.
In quendam nomine Stone-house.
SAxea Pulchra Domus frons est sed nulla fidenda,
Nam si Ipsam introeas, invenies vacuam.
To N. B. an Angler.
THou that do cast into the Silver brook
Thy worm-fed Hook,
The greedier Fishes so to cheat
Seeking for meat,
Remember that Times wheel will bring
Thy deeds to censuring;
And then as thou through wile
Those Creatures did beguile,
So caught thou wilt be for thy deceit,
And made the food for thine own bait.
Let this suffice to cause thee t'steer aright,
Both day and night;
That skilfully avoiding this,
That Shelf thou miss;
For it is not all for to repent
Thy youthful Days misspent,
But care must now be had,
The future be not bad.
And as thine Audit waxes near,
So Thy accounts make perfecter.
In Quendam Glareosam.
QUisquis Te docuit Praeceptor, fecit and Idem
Littora Qui and sterilem bobus aravit Humum.
Amoris Sigillum.

C-orpore Cor latitans nondum est manifest notatum,
O-re, neque ingenio semper inesse queat:
N-empe quod eximium est pretioque notabile cernunt,
D-ifficiles aditus Cordit and alter opus.
I-nnocuos quae corda viros, facianeve Fideles,
A-ssimilent animis Pectus and Ora suis.
Englished:
Man's heart Locked up within his secret breast,
Cannot by tongue or Gesture be expressed;
For what is of so great worth, we must suppose,
It is a work of power to disclose:
Such hearts as make Men faithful and upright,
Are those at once both Looks and Minds unite.
Genii Hujus Laris and Penatum salutatio; Ad Rivulum Stanliacum nuper in
stagnum hoc Mervordianum Ductum.
O Dulce Flumen Vitreum,
Fundens Crystallum Liquidum
In Mare Hoc Domesticum,
In verum Nectar Piscium:
Mulces and Allicis dum curris
Somnos, Musicis susurris:
Nec evigilat Cadentis
Aqua vestra ut Torrentis.
Liceat Rhodano Loquaci
Strepitus, quoniam fugaci:
Domum Hanc Circundatam,
Munis and veddis Insulam;
Sicut Orbem dat Rotundum
Thetis, Tu cingis hunc Mundum.
Afferat Hortorum Decus
Priapus, Pan donet Pecus:
Tu silvane mittas flores,
Cypria Hic conflet Amores,
Dearum seu Deorum Chorus,
Totus fiat Munificus,
Ut pro splendore laud Digno
Undecimo addaris signo:
Tunc Omni Numine propitio,
Frui detur sacrificio.
Virtus vera Nobilitas.
WHat does He get who ere prefers
The Scutchions of His Ancesters?
This Chimney-peice of Gold or Brass,
That Coat of Arms Blazoned in glass;
When those with time and age have end,
Thy Prowess must thy self commend.
The smooty shadows of some one
Or Others Trophies carved in stone,
Defaced, are things to whet, not try
Thine own Heroicism by.
For cast how much thy Merits score
Falls short of those went thee before;
By so much art thou in arrear,
And stain'st Gentility I fear.
True Nobleness does those alone engage,
Who can add Virtues to their Parentage.
Upon a Roe.
TRamite nil metuat recto Qui incedere vellet
Capreolus, casus devia Rupis habent.
Upon a Cock.
IAm mea Nocturnos Pellat vigilantia somnos,
Nuntius Aurorae dummodo Gallus adest.
Upon King CHARLES return out of Scotland in November, 1641.
Does CHARLES return to make our Climate shine,
And shall not every Spring run Claret Wine?
Is not the Calendar reverst, and where
Decembers dirt, and th'Frost of Ianivere,
Threatened a winter, now those sheets display
Themselves ore fruitful June, or teeming May:
For thus as 'thin the Tropicks may we boast,
That two fair Seasons have twice blessed our Coast
Ere one whole year ran round: The time He went
Seeming the Springs forerunner, or our Lent;
For so He was but borrowed, and we rest
Pleased with his return alone, who is interest
Sufficient of Himself, in which bank lies
The Treasure of His subjects hearts and eyes:
See how they Flock else, and with tumbling have
Are less content because so soon He past.
Be satisfied, ye have your Prince again,
Fro'th' North, and CHARLES triumphant, not in Wain.
In quendam nomine Squier, haud Generosum.
ARmiger es neque Arma geris, non Martis at Artis,
Indutus Galea es Ingenioque vales.
Upon the King and Queens meeting after long absence.
THe welcome showers of Aprils morning dew
Distilled upon the Bosom of the Earth
Beget a May; whose Liverie anew
Clothes Fields and Woods, and there creates such mirth
Amidst the winged Quier; that Echo tells
It ore again from Natures Minstrells.
The Spicie Gumms that so perfume the East,
To bid the Sun good morrow; are not more
Esteemed for that, than is the golden West,
But that of Treasures Both have hidden store,
Is manifest: no perils can deter
The forward hopes of the Adventurer.
No world, no season, spring, summer, nor fall
In Fruits, in Flowers, Treasures could e're present
Such sweet and wealthy Joys Harmoniall
From Country, or from Element:
As when our Gracious King and his bright Queen,
Did after Twelve months parted interveen.
In Sim. and Lev. Pot. and Top.
NAtura His par est, Vitio nam non caret Alter,
Et virtute Carens Alter, uterque Opibus.
Cordium Concordia vera.

It is not meant, that three in one should be,
But in each heart triple Capacity,
Wherewith to serve ones God, ones King, ones Friend,
To which assigned, and for no other end;
In Flaming Zeal upwards to mount again,
In Loyalty to own a Sovereign,
In mutual Love society t'maintain.
To N. B. for his Company.
FRiend, Can I be at home, and you the same,
Yet neither meet?
The Courteous Flame the Flame,
And Streams each other greet,
Although it seem from either Pole they came,
Or farthest stretched
Meridian fetched.
Surely it is but some malignant Starr
That would debarr
This influence, for fear
We should more bright appear:
Souls in Conjunction frame the perfect'st Sphere,
So I to you must move, or you move here.
Ad Amicum, de Vita Beata.
ME qualem capiat Iudice Formulam,
Vita Commodius Tempora solvere:
Nec tantum tenui pareat Ilici,
Quem frangant Aquilones, neque vertici
Pinus stelliferae fidat ut arduo:
Imis non Careant Coelica Culmina,
Dormitque Occiduis Lucifer Alpibus.
Non est ut nihilo Laudeve Parvulo
Speret maxima; nam semper honoribus
Tantis praefigitur Lubrica Scalula; quae
Ergo, nec cupiat Ditior ut siet
Ponti Teutonici Littore: Fertileque
Agro vivere Fagis celeberrimo
Nondum nunc Placeat: Vinea Ripula
Secretis liceat sit nota passubus
Mentem nec laceret, Pondera talibus
Incumbunt Gravia: est Montis Acutuli
Ditantem-Locum ut in subsidium petat.
Alis Si-Lineis pervolet aequora
Quisquam, Naufragium vix fuget ultimum:
Et si in Remiget Omnibus Amnibus.
Portus non Aditum hic invenit Ullibi;
Nam Quot in Tonitru Hesperies Vomit,
Dotes provideant Indica viscera;
Dum Marsupia fert Alter Apostolus
Simonis Filio nec fit Iniquior:
Captis vae nisi sit cautus Agellulus,
Cum Parvo sonitu subrepit Inscia
Frigilla, and Nemorum jurgia suscitet,
Subrisum moveat Pullus Hirundinis,
Necnon and Monachi cui Domus arbore.
Exit ter nobilis cedere Conjugis,
Voto qui voluit sit licet improbum,
In Vanumque habeat quidquid and impedit,
Mentem quin sibi jam comparet integram
Vivat nam facili, cumque parabili
Re; nec Carleolis invidet Artibus.
Sed Coco vacuus praeparet Allia,
Gustum sic patina in contrahat optimum:
Nec desint Oleo Crurula Pulluli,
Reprensa ex Pridianoque superstite,
Adsit Bos Aridus, Lingulaque Hinnuli
Suis Buccina, Ientacula optime
Condit Rancida tunc Artocrea addita
Baccae Cervisia est in pretio, afferat
Promus Poculaque Alcimedontica:
Sectari Leporem Climate Limpido,
Dum suadet Catulis hora sagacibus,
Cedant Temporibus dumque Caniculis
Brumae sydera jam quaeritet anxie:
Damorum Domus, in Queis tremebundula
Terret Hospites and Silva Populeis.
Si quando libeat Limine proprio
Versari Officiis, non Saliaribus
Iactet Foemineis; Sed ut Equestribus
Se exornet studiis, Ferra Ferocibus
Dans Pullis; Sonipes Lorea despuat:
Nunc volvens pedibus queis viduaverat
Vulturnus Nemora, and nunc Folia, abditis
In Musaeolis and vertere Dactylo,
Sic fitque ut valido Corpore gaudeat
Solutus Medico Hic, atque Animo simul.
In praise of Fidelia.
GEt thee a Ship well rigged and tight,
With Ordnance store, and Manned for fight,
Snug in Her Timbers Mould for th'Seas,
Yet large in Hold for Merchandies;
Spread forth her Cloth, and Anchors weigh,
And let Her on the Curld-waves play,
Till Fortune-tow'd, she chance to meet
Th'Hesperian home-bound Western Fleet;
Then let Her board-um, and for Price
Take Gold-ore, Sugarcanes, and Spice.
Yet when all these Sh'hath brought a shore,
In my Fidelia I Will find more.
Two Turtles billing, and death with his Sith over them, ready to make
separation; To whom this Divide and Impera.
NAture has ore Affection so much won,
To knit a knot never to be undon
Whilst life remains; but Death to show his power
Cuts and Divides, so becomes Emperor:
Yet the Relict for to prevent Fates charms,
Does voluntary fleck into Deaths arms.
To Sir John Wentworth, upon his Curiosities and Courteous entertainment at
Summerly in LOVINGLAND.
WHen thou the choice of Natures wealth have skan'd,
And brought it to compare with Lovingland;
Know, that thou may as well make wonder less,
By fancying of two Timbering Phoenixes
At the same time: and dream two Suns to rise
At once, to cast fire 'midst those Spiceris:
(Pregnant She is) yet that must not deny
The purest Gold to come from Barbary,
Diamonds and Pearl from the Indies, to confer
On every Clime some thing peculier,
(For so She has:) And like a sum to all
That Curious is, seems here most liberal,
Affording in Epitome at least,
What ere the world can boast of, or call best.
Now as contracted virtue does excel
In power and force, This seems a Miracle;
Wherein all Travailers may truly say,
They never saw so much in little way:
And thence conclude their folly, that did steer
To seek for that abroad, at home was near
In more perfection: Would thou Phoebe meet,
Apollo, or the Muses? not in Creet
And Greece, but Here, at Summerly, those are
Removed to dwell, under a Patrons care,
Who can as much Civility express,
As Candie lies, or Grecia Barbarousness:
Would thou be sheltred under Daphnes groves,
Or choose to live in Tempe, or make loves
To any place where Shepherds 'wont to lie
Upon the Hills, Piping security
Unto their flocks? here the sweet Park contains
More eevenness than the Arcadian Plains:
Nor yet enchanted by those shadowed rings,
Some say the Fairies print with Revellings,
But's all in one dye clad, and does appear
Like the Springs Favorite throughout the year.
The useful Ash, and sturdy Oak are set
At distance, and obey; the Brambles met
Embracing twine int' Arbours, to conceal
And harbor such as stock this Commonweal;
Until their Master please they should delight
His, or his Friends desire and appetite:
All tales of Satyrs banished are from hence,
And fabled Goblins that delude the sense;
It Is real Venison and abroad, in paste
Alike may satisfy both eye and taste.
The Nobler Plants, as Fur Deal, and the Pine
Weeping out Rozen, bleeding Turpentine;
Like the Lifeguard, upon the Hall attend
At nearer distance; where the Gods descend
To keep their Courts, and either Globe's devised,
To grasp the Elements Epitomis'd.
The Sunbeams steady Fire, with the Air
Of the inconstant winds Indiall'd are:
So whilst the one, the Hour does infer,
The Other Points a rule for th'Mariner:
Earth here is Embroydered into Walks, some strait,
Others like Serpents are, or worms to bait
Occasions hook till every humor come,
And feed here fat as in Elysium.
Nor is there water wanting in this wood,
Clear as if running, Calm as if it stood,
And so contrived by Natures helper Art,
There Is no appearance from the whole or part,
That any sullen Sluice to malice bent
Can open, to impair that Element;
Nor yet The Ambition of a Springs ore-flow,
Cause it t'exceed, or Limits overthrow.
Thus like a gold Chain linked, or Bracelet strung,
From Carkanet Pleasures on Pleasures hung,
And such delightful objects did descry
Pursuing of each other, that the ey
Astonished at such wonder, did crave rest,
For fear of Forfeiting its interest
In so great bliss, for over-dazled t'grew,
And dim of sight made by each object new.
So there is a parley granted, and some space
To gather strength 'twix This and the other place,
But very short, not half a Mile at most,
We landed were again, and made a Coast;
Where if all ancient Poets were to write,
They Would need no other fountain to indite
Story of all kinds with, but dip their pen,
Then swear the Muses more then nine, were ten;
For here dwelt one whose Magic could infuse
A fluency beyond all other Muse,
And Court the Soil, with so much Art applide,
That all the world seems Barbarous beside.
Here Fish and Fowl inhabit with such state,
As Lords and Ladies wont when served in Plate,
Rich Arras, or the like, Bill, Breed, and swim
In all delightful solace to the brim.
Decoyed by so much rapture, on we pass
Unto a Castle that enchanted was
By th'magick spell of Music; till there set
We found a Cod like to Euterpe's net,
To catch all Passengers, the Lesbian Lute,
O'rcome in harmony became there mute:
Whilst as for Table to the Song-books served
The Crystal fountain: so have I observed,
When walking near a stream, the heavens to be
Beneath my feet, to ease Astronomy:
There tell the Gammuth of the Stars, and crack
Of all their motions even with Tychobrack.
The Fablers of old, I guess, might find
Some Objects t'help invention, but the mind
Was sure Prophetic, for what ever is
Described for rare by them, 'twas meant by this.
And yet this falls short too, when He to whom
The Cost and Care Owes tribute, 's there to sum
Up All, with such humanity, and press
Of crowded Favors, and heaped Courtesies,
As Friendship were a Jeweller the while,
His welcome seemed the Diamond, Those the foil.
Ad Amicum aegrotantem.
OMnes Te invisum veniunt AEgrote valebaes,
Nec fuerat Comitis spes tibi, solus eraes:
Haud te etenim invideo, tanti nam non valet hospes,
Quem mihi det morbus, sed been Solus ero.
Upon King CHARLES's meeting with the Dukes of YORK and GUOCESTER, and the Lady
ELIZABETH, his three children at Maidenhead, the 15 of July, 1647.
AFter a drowth, like welcome rain,
To Bless the Grass and Flowers again,
Lick up those dusty heats destroy
Their Brisker hude, Virginity:
No less of Comfort and of sweets
Proves it now Charles his Children meets;
When an intestine Warlike force,
Had caused so many years divorce.
He prays for them; their tender eyes
Returned Him duty sacrifice:
Until each others breast appears
Affection all dissolved to Tears,
Which to the High-mark-point flown on,
Stand ready brim'd for passion.
But here all Humors that annoy
Are banished, and give place to Joy;
Yet such as does prevail often times,
To make a tear no mark of Crimes.
All streams come from, and return to the Sea.
QUaeris aquas sitiens? nescis quod Flumina Cuncta
In Mare se rapiunt, nec satur? ah sitias.
Nox Diem sequitur, and Post Tenebras Lux.
NOn sine nocte Dies, Tenebrae nec luce carentes,
Sed Comitem sequitur Alteruterque suam.
To Prince CHARLES.
SO does the early Plumb, the Pear, the Cherry
Commit a Rape, and make nice Females merry,
When longing-ripe; as Your return will bless
The British Islands with new cheerfulness:
Be pleased no longer therefore, SIR, to tarry,
Lest a whole Gleek of Kingdoms should miscarry;
But You that are the Blossom of all hope,
Dispell the Mists from off this Horiscope;
And in the stead of Jelousie and fears,
Let there be harmony throughout Your Spheres.
There needs no other Midwifery to these,
(As wished for truth, and now desired peace)
But Your fair Hand to bring the same to pass,
And place Your Royal Father where he was.
This be Your Noble issue, whilst all those
Abortive prove, that so seemed to oppose;
And while they would bring to birth, and yet want strength,
Teach them to know themselves and You at length.
In readventum meum ad Antiquos Lares.
TEmpora sic renovant verno sub sidere Terras,
Sylva and frondiferis sic reparata Comis,
Post tenebras sic grata Dies: sic Fluminis unda
Gaudens Oceanum reperiisse suum:
Ut Meus Antiquos iterum spectare Penates,
Exultans Animus quod liquisse suos.
Englished:
The Spring thus does the Earth repair,
The Wood thus puts on Leavie hair
Of more acceptance, so's a Spark
Of Light after it had been dark:
The Rivers thus express desire,
Hastening to find their proper Sire;
As all this My return implies
To My Old Household Deities.
Navis in Tempestate.
FOrtuna and ventis agitur Loca certa tenere,
Nescia fit Dominis paret ut Illa suis.
The Fallacy of hopes or wishes.
ALl present good goes less: by Hopes we deem
Things Great; as Lights far distant greater seem.
My Farewell to the Court.
Go (fond Deluder of our senses) find
Some other Objects Henceforth, to make blind
With that thy glittering folly; for no more
I will be dazzled with thy falser Ore:
Nor shall thy Syren-songs enchant, to taste
Or smell, or touch those Sorceries thou have:
But I will strive first in my self to be
So much mine own, as not to flatter thee;
And then my Countries, for whose welfare still
My native thoughts prompt to impress my will,
And that draws Action forth, whereby to show
To whom, and what, and when, and where I owe:
Not as this nod, or beck, or wink, or glance
Would dictate and imply, to follow chance,
Fortune, or Favors ever-turning wheel;
But to be firm and Constant, backed with steel
And resolution for to give the True
God what is his, and Caesar Tribute due,
And that in season too for time and place,
As the one requires, and the other affords grace:
Not such as only from vain Titles springs,
And turns to bubble, to court Prince or Kings
With feigned applauses of whatever they speak
Or do, be it never so frothy, fond, or weak;
But what is clad in truth, and dares not lie,
Though all the world should turn its Enemy,
Brand it for want of breeding, and conclude
Because it not dissembles, therefore t's rude.
Those dancing days are done, nor longer suit
My disposition to the Harp or Lute,
Horn-pipe, or other Instruments have been
The Commonwealths disease, ore-swoln its spleen.
Iockie and Iinnie footing may appear
Most trim at the next Wake in Darby-shire;
Gotyer sail from the Clouds to catch our ears,
And represent the harmony of the Spheres;
Will. Lause excel the dying swan: Lancer
Nick it with Ravishments from touch of Lyre,
Yet uncontrolled by These, I safely may
Survive; sithence not stung by the Tarantula,
(That tickling beast, Ambition, that makes sport
In our hot Climate, called the verge of Court)
And so resolve, dressing my minds content,
Henceforward to be calm, and represent
Nothing but what my Birth and Calling draw
My life out for, my God, my King, my Law.
And when for these my wearied breath is spent,
Let with my last bloods drop one sigh be sent.
How to ride out a Storm.
HE only happy is, and wise,
Can Cun his Barque when Tempests rise,
Know how to lay the Helm and steer,
Lie on a Tack Port and Laveer,
Sometimes to weather, then to Lee,
As waves give way, and winds agree;
Nor Boom at all in such a stress,
But by degrees Loom Les and Les;
Ride out a Storm with no more loss
Than the endurance of a Toss:
For though he cannot well bear sail
In such a fresh and powerful Gale,
Yet when there is no other shift,
Thinks't not amiss to ride a drift;
To shut down Ports, and Tyers to Hale in,
To Seal the hatch up with Tarpalin;
To Ply the Pump, and no means slack,
May clear Her Bilge, and keep from wrack;
To take in Cloth, and in a word,
Unlade, and cut the Mast by board:
So Spoon before the Wind and Seas,
Where though she will Roll, she will go at ease;
And not so strained, as if laid under
The wave that Threatens sudden founder;
And whilst the fury and the rage,
Leaves little hopes for Anchorage;
Yet if She can but make a Coast
In any time, She Will not be lost,
But in affections Bay will find
A Harbor suited to her mind:
Where Casting out at first the Kedg,
Which gives Her ground, and privilege
Of stop, she secondly lets fall
That Anchor from the Stream men call;
The Others all a Cock-bell set,
One after other down are let
Into the Sea; till at the last
She Is come to Moorage, and there fast,
In hopes to be new Shethd 's inclined
To lie aside until Carin'd;
That when She shall be paid again,
So Engraved, She may endure the Main.
Thus when his Vessel has out-gon
This and that rugged motion,
His Pole-starr's fixed, and guides him there
Where CHARLES is not in wain but sphere;
Then He Will another Voyage try,
Laden with Faith and Loyalty,
Which He no sooner parts with, than
Dry-ground becomes an Ocean.
In Incursionem Gustavicam, vel introitum in Germaniam.
QVem Bohemiae rex seu Palatinus.
Domus Austriaca ab Patriis secluserat Oris,
Hunc Rex suetiae.
Gustave suum adjam remeare facis:
Nempe Palatinum Coelesti numine tutum
Fecit, and est Populi Dux Deus Ipse sui:
Vidit, and attonitas aperit Franconia Pro omni in Palatinatus Civitate.
portas,
Be Opnam.
Hispanos refugos, Wirtsburg.
Caesareosque ferunt.
Magdeburg.
Dura per immites salierunt moenia flammas,
Saevitiam pingens Militis Gods acre praelium Lipsie
Arva jacet.
The Blve flum German.
Albis clara suis lymphis mutata, color
Et quasi Rubescens sanguinolenta fluit.
Vnde fit? aut quorsum mutatio tanta? requiris
Palatioum in Prague.
Cur fugis a Portis Walstane dire tuis?
Quae Imperator in fug^m paratus ut fama.
fugiendi animum Fernande occasio reddit,
Quis Tibl dat vulnus? quis metus oratenet?
Tillius in Monasterium subreptus ut lama sed mendax.
Quid latitas Claustris tanta foeliciter annis
Castra regens? vivens cur Monumenta petis?
Vltor adest Dominus, Gentem victamque reponit
Victricem; Populum restituitque suum,
Saxoniae duae qui se neutralem huc usque reservasset.
Saxioniasque vires tandem laxavit in usum,
Et Suecus Hoc ita dictum a multiendine militum.
lango Hoc vero a puritate causea ad-suscipiendum hoc Bellam maxim movantis,
(...) ut Aquilae juen a Principibus Populoque Germanico tollatur and ut eis
pristi^ae restaurentur Libertates: Almania quasi Tora de quae Hyoci^a sylva
cincta Sibi subdie^.
flumine cuncta tulit.
Roses and Lys unys.
QUid Ganymedaeas formas canis and Irvis Ignes,
Reddit enim Caecos Ipse Cupido Deos:
Quidve Helenam numeras? nempe est perfectio Formae
Unica, cum fuerint Lilia nupta Rosis.
Mart. l. 7. Ep. 38.
Upon Celius.
WHilst Celius can no longer hear
The Newes-transporting BabbIer;
Nor yet endure a Morning spent
In entertaining Complement
From This or That Great person: He
Feigneth a Gouty Infirmity;
And better falsehood to difguise,
His founder feet with swathes he ties,
And seems to go in pain as far,
As art can prove a Crippeler:
Till She to Nature turns at last,
And so in earnest Celius's fast.
Mart. l. 10. Ep. 47.
A happy Life.
THat which Creates a happy life,
Is substance left, not gained by strife,
A fertile and a Thankful mold,
A Chimney always free from Cold;
Never to be the Client, nor
But seldom times the Counselor.
A Mind content with what is fit,
Whose strength does most consist in Wit;
A Body nothing prone to be.
Sick, a Prudent Simplicity,
Such Friends as of ones own rank are;
Homely fare, not sought from far;
The table without Arts help spread;
A night in Wine not buried,
Yet drowning Cares; a Bed that is blessed
With true Joy, Chastity, and rest;
Such short sweet Slumber as may give
Less time to die in it, more to live:
Thine own Estate whatever commend,
And wish not for, nor fear thine end.
In Magis. Vilet.
ANni Haec prima Dies Veris sic prima videtur,
Qua simul and Violam vidimus and Glaciem;
To Quintianus. Mart. l. 5. Ep. 18.

THat in December when gifts fly
From this to that Friend mutually,
I naught but Books send, thou wilt Judge thus,
Perhaps I Am Avaricious;
No, know I hate those fond deceits,
And Crafts in gifts are like to baits
On hooks, whereon a Fly does cheat
The greedier Fish when it would eat.
And whilst a Poor man sends not at all
Unto's rich friends, He seems more Liberal.
In quendam Militem panem in dorsum portantem.
VEntrem ut Hic oneret, non tergam oneraere recusat,
Ventrem Onerat tergam quae exonerare suam.
Ad Scoto-Britannum cui Carolus noster se subtraxit.
QUod fugit ad Scotos Rex, quid mirabile Scotus,
Mutuo nempe Anglis dum datur ille suis
Redditus est igitur: sic cum modo debita solvant
Cuncti iterum, Regem fac revenire Tuum.
Englished:
What wonder is it, the King to the Scots is fled,
When by the English He was Borrowed,
So now is restored: that all their debts pay thus,
I Would wish our Brethren send Him back to us.
Naturae defectus.
SI Peccare grave est placidum simul, integra non est
Natura, Pastor Fido.
exitium quae cupit Ipsa suum:
Lex vel dura nimis, qua cum ^atara videtur
Offensa, and Vinctis se opposuisse suis.
In Mortem sui Thesei, J. D. sororem ducturi, Anno 1623.
NOmine si hoc unquam mors (Invidiosa) meretur,
Tempora sint Lachrymis digna vel ulla meis,
Ecce adsunt: Hymen ipse Tedas cum ascendere inssit.
Accenditque suam Mors gemibunda facem.
Inque Elegos vertit Nuptialia Carmina, risus
In Gemitus; vestes nunc Color unus habet:
Amaracique fugat flores invisa Cupressus;
Atque suis Ramis Tempora Cincta tenet.
Dumque Mea jam partens animae rapit, altera resto
Mancus, and ingrata est quae mihi vita manet.
In Obitum Nobilissimi Principis Mauritii Hassiae, Landgravii, Anno 1633.
GUstavum doleant Alii, doleant vesecessi^^
Heu Frederice tuum; nec Careant Lachrymis,
Fontibus ex bi^is gemini maenare dolores,
Nam duplex Cordi Causae gementis erat:
Nunc ni Triformi huic maneat pars altena telis,
Impercussa suis Mors inopina redit
Tertius and Princeps semper deflendus ab omni,
Part perit Patriae Lausque decusque suae:
Virtutes Alii quibus est facundia narrent,
Suppressa Haec tanto pondere Musa filet.
An Epitaph on E. W.
NAture lent time, so He grew old
And prodigal at once in this,
Setting it all at stake against gold,
Whereof He made his greatest bliss:
But when She saw He took of All
Men interest, yet paid Her none,
She Calls for in the Principal,
And lays it up under this Stone,
Defessus est ambolando.
On a Player.
THou that so often in jest was wont to die,
Art now taken at thy word, and here do lie:
Thine Acts had many Scenes, Death's had but one,
His Entry was thine Exit, bad be gone;
Thou act'st a King no more, no that is laid by,
Nor any's Parasite in flattery;
Thou have put off the Clowns slops now, nor art.
Wrapped with the fury of a Lovers part;
But suit'st thy self in one, wherein all must
Thy fellow-Actors be, to sleep in Dust.
In Obitum Ben. John's. Poetae eximii.
HE who began from Brick and Lime
The Muses Hill to climb;
And whilom busied in laying Ston,
Thirsted to drink of Helicon;
Changing His Trowell for a Pen,
Wrote straight the Temper not of Dirt but Men,
Now sithence that He is turned to Clay, and gone,
Let Those remain of the occupation
He honored once, square Him a Tomb may say
His Craft exceeded far a Dawbers way.
Then write upon it, He could no longer tarry,
But was returned again unto the Quarry.
Of an Old Man.
HAppy is He who on his own fields stage,
And no where else, has acted ore his Age;
He, whom his own house, (had it eyes and tongue)
Might say it fees Him old, and saw him young,
Now trusting to a staff, he treads those sands
He formerly had crept on with his hands:
So reckons up the long descent and (dotage
Through decays) of that his homely Cottage,
He never was drawn with fortunes Train to haste,
Nor did He flatter Forain springs with taste;
He was no Merchant-man might fear the Straits,
Nor Soldier fancying Military baits,
He never Pleaded, neither strife nor force,
Of brabling Lawsuits ever made him hoarse:
But (as incapable of business) free,
Cannot resolve what the next town should be,
Yet does enjoy a prospect (may control
All others) of the free Air, and Pole.
Nor casts He up the year by Consuls now,
But as the Fruit Trees to their seasons bow;
By Apples Autumn, Spring by Flowers befalls him,
One field hides Phoebus-face, the same recalls him:
And thus This Countrey-swains observing way
Measures within his Ozh at the Course of Day.
He did remember yongre at Oat, when 't stood
But for a sapling, so's grown old with his wood:
And judging that same I Will (with less wits blessed.
More Barbarism) to be the Indies East:
He does conclude the Red Sea to be near,
Beholding Stanground, Farcet, and the Mere:
And yet through strength unconquered he may gather
Comfort, the third Age sees him Grandfather.
Let others wander to the farth'st of Spain,
The way is only Theirs, but life His gain.
De Tristibus. To a Cat bore me company in Confinement.
ASsociate to my Tears, whose nature tried
Makes thee a fit Companion for my side,
Who Captive sit under Confinements wing
For Being too active to act suffering,
So become Passive too: Scratch but thine ear,
Then boldly tell what weather's drawing near.
For I Will conclude, no storm of Fortune can
Prevail ore Caesar's barque, an honest Man.
Sola Bella clie piace.
It Is but a folly to be nice,
Since liking sets on Beauty price,
And what we do affect alone,
Becomes to Each His Paragon:
All Color, Shape, or Form, we know
Improve to best to those think so;
For where Esteem its Anchor wets,
There grows true Pearl, no Counterfets:
Were She as Crooked as a Pin,
And yet could Love, it were no sin
To love again; for Writers tell, Magnes amoris amor.

That love has in it the Loadstons spell:
Were She proportioned like the Sphere,
No Limb or Joint Irregular;
Yet to my fancy if she Jarr,
I shall not sail by such a Starr:
Did She outvie the newborn Day,
Or th'richest Treasuries of May,
So that what Skies or Flowers put on,
Give place to her Complexion,
I Will sooner deem a black Wench white,
That's suiting to my Appetite
Well, in conclusion, has She Fair,
Or Brown, or Black, or Golden hair
Where one is Cupid struck, Venus is there.
To Retiredness.
NExt unto GOD, to whom I owe
What e're I here enjoy below,
I must indebted stand to Thee,
Great Patron of my Liberty;
For in the Cluster of affairs,
Whence there are dealing several shares:
As in a Trick Thou have conveyed
Into my hand what can be said;
Whilst He who does himself possess,
Makes all things pass him seem far less.
Riches and Honors that appear
Rewards to the Adventurer,
On Either tide of Court or Seas,
Are not attained nor held with ease;
But as unconstancy bears sway,
Quickly will fleet and Ebb away:
And often when Fortune those Confers,
She gives them but for Torturers:
When with a Mind Ambition-free,
These, and much more come home to Me.
Here I can sit, and sitting under
Some portions of His works of wonder,
Whose all are such, observe by reason,
Why every Plant obeys its season,
How the Sap rises, and the Fall,
Wherein They shake off Leafs and all;
Then how again They bud and spring,
Are laden for an Offering:
Which whilst my Contemplation sees,
I am taught Thankfulness from trees.
Then turning over Natures leaf,
I mark the Glory of the Sheaf,
For every Field's a several page,
Disciphering the Golden Age:
So that without a Miners pains,
Or Indie's reach, here plenty raigns;
Which watered from above, implies,
That our acknowledgments should rise
To Him, that thus creates a birth
Of Mercies for us out of Earth:
Here, is no other Case in Law,
But what the Sunburned Hat of Straw,
With crooked Sickle reaps and binds-
Up into Sheaves to help the hindes;
Whose arguing alon's in this,
Which Cop lies well, and which amiss,
How the Hock-Cart with all its gear
Should be tricked up, and what good cheer,
Bacon with Cook's reports express,
And how to make the Tenth go less.
There, are no other Wars, or Strife's --
Encouragers, shrill Trumpets, Fyfes,
Or horrid Drumms; but what Excels
All Music, Nature's Minstrels
Piping and Chirping, as they sit:
Embowr'd in branches, dance to it:
And if at all Those do contest,
It is in this, but, which sings best:
And when they have contended long,
I [though unseen] must judge the Song.
Thus out of fears, or noise of War,
Crowds, and the clamourings at Bar;
The Merchant's dread, th'unconstant tides,
With all Vexation besides;
I hugg my Quiet, and alone
Take thee for my Companion,
And deem in doing so, I Have all
I can True Conversation call:
For so my Thoughts by this retreat
Grow stronger, like contracted heat.
Whether on Natures Book I muse,
Or else some other writes on it, use
To spend the time in, every line,
Is not excentrick but Divine:
And though all others downward tend,
These look to heaven, and ascend
From whence they came; where pointed hie,
They ravish into Mystery,
Nunquam minus sulus.
To see the footsteps here are trod
Of mercy by a Gracious God.
To my Book.
Go, and my Blessing with Thee; then remain
Secure, with such as kindly entertain:
If sent to any Others, tell them this,
The Author so takes but his Mark amiss:
Who Is fearless of reproach from Critics skill,
Seeing, t'look a given horse in the mouth sounds ill:
And what alone to Friends he would impart,
Has not at all to do with Fair or Mart.
Wherefore whoever shall peruse these Rimes,
Must know, they were beguilers of spare times.
TELOS
(...)
IS there a Child born? what great worder's that?
When it is natures property to Generat;
But here is a Son too given, which implies
All that can be ascribed to Mysteries;
For He Is a Father, Brother, Kinsman, Friend,
Both Sacrifice and Priest to recommend
That offering up: Samaritan past by
Himself, to Act the height of Charity
On us lay stripped wounded; A Physician
Cures the disease of our indisposition
To ought that good is; Shepherd to redress,
And bring us back out of the wilderness;
Where we had gone astray into his fould,
A Merchant that Redeems us who were sold
To sin and bondage; and to make all good,
Contented was to spare his precious blood
So was a Lamb before the Shearers led,
To be disroab'd, despised, and slaughtered,
That we might Live in credit, and put on
The whiter Robe of his Salvation:
This Atlas-like the Government does bear
Upon His shoulder, and if Counselor
We would esteem Him, we should be content
To make his mercies our encouragement:
For mighty faults deserve a mighty rod,
But He an Everlasting mighty God,
The Prince of Peace, full of Compassions store,
Holds out the Golden scepter evermore,
And that this Birth and Gift to us be known,
He pleads himself Our cause at's Fathers Throne.
Christus. Totus, Solus, Omnibus.
NE tibi defictas fac sie tibi Totus Jesus
Nec metuas, Christus sat tibi solus, erit
Omnibus and capreus rebus gaudere secundis
Conferat in Dominum singuta facta suum.
That to your self you be not wanting, make
Jesus all yours, and Christ alone your stake;
For who desires enjoyment of good things
Must place upon his Lord what e're he brings.
Tantillus Homo, and Tantus Peccator
HOw small a thing is Man, and yet Immence,
In acting over Disobedience;
From the first sparing time He did begin
To hatch Rebellion, and to foster sin:
Dispute His Makers mandate, and make choice
To yield unto the Subtle Serpents voice:
Thus then betrayed, ere since he does prefer
Custom to be New natures Usherer;
And so prescribes, Thinking he does no worse
Then his Fore-father who entailed, the curse,
A new Belief of credit would put on,
That God would sign a new Redemption:
As if his Son into the world did dain,
Once for to come, should come for him again;
And so He will; yet not by Ransom led,
To purchase that again man forfeited.
By second Error, but as Judge to try
(Whilst Conscience verdicts) each enormity:
And as man's misdemeanors They express,
Though Great in Guilt, in Goodness He Will go less.
Ad Amicum.
PRandia parva juvant, Parvis, lectusque domusa;
Nec magnus Puer est, nec focus illetuus
Parvis magna solet virtus gandere micatque
Oppositis positum grandius ingenium.
Before a Sacrament.
IS there a Feast to day? must I make one
At so great Celebration?
And am I yet to seek how to be dressed
As to become a worthy Guest?
If to some other Table bid I were
My Tailor, and my Shoemaker,
Sempster, and Barber, all might mustred be
To add to my Formality.
But this more real than all else, implies
A Banquet fill 'd with mysteries:
God's manifested in the Flesh, Tim. 3. 16.
and thus
The height of mercy shown to us:
And if the Rule of charity begins
At home, let us call to mind our sins,
Befreind our selves so far as to Confess,
How much He did, and we do less,
Be joyful for so Great a Saviors Power,
Yet in Contrition m^st a shower,
To think how often whilst lewd affections guide
We make our Lord New crucificte,
Then if we would no more of horror dread,
We may approach and take this bread
And wine, the Comfort and the staff, whereby
Not Life but Life's Eternity
Secured is, and then with Grace possessed
Show that we have an interest
In his high merits which alone Comprise
Job. 2.14.
Power to quell our Enemies.
And though our former Actions turned to weed,
Let Us now bring Faith though but a Mustard seen
So may we all remove that high appears
In our Conceits, into a sea of Tears;
For it is His Blood no other Jordan can
Cuer the Leperous Assyrian
1 Cor. 1.30.
Qui factus fuit nobis a Deo

Prove. 9. 10.
Sapientia; Vt Timeamus utpote Initium.
Cor.1.29.
Justitia; Vt nostra nihili pendamus quoniam carnalis.
Sanctificatio (...)
Redemptio, (...).
Non Recussantes, Cruci^ viz. Afflictionibus and Tribulationibus pro Illo
suecumber, Que^ astius Gravitatem and Anxietatem pro abbis sustentaverut.

