THE HONESTY AND TRUE ZEAL OF THE Kings Witnesses Justified and Vindicated
against those Unchristian-like Equivocal Protestations of Dr. Oliver Plunkett,

Asserting in his last Speech his own innocence; being as great Damnation to
his Soul, as any of his former Traiterous and Hellish Practices against his
King and Country, as breathing them upon the point of Death, without any time
of repenting the Enormity of them with true Contrition.

By FLORENCE WEYER, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for T. Baldwin, 1681.

THough never condemned by any Judge in this transitory world, yet no man can
limit himself his sojourning here, from the searcher of all hearts and the
Judge of Eternal Glory; but must stand as vigilant and awful not to offend his
Creator and Redeemer, as if he were to pass into another World in the twinkling
of an Eye. Wherefore I hope that all true hearts will consider how I hope for
Salvation as well as a dying man: So that I expect upon the Faith of a
Christian, they will give credit unto the true conviction of the subsequent
Assertions of Dr. Plunkett.

1. That the Witnesses were only designed for his Life. To that I answer, That
the Witnesses were not designed for his life, nor covetous of his blood, well
knowing that blood must be required for blood, if unjustly taken; but were only
zealous to discharge themselves of their bounden duty to their Dread Sovereign,
his Sacred Majesty. 2. That he was accused in Ireland of Treason and
Praemunire. Which in my judgment he should have styled High Treason, and that
the grandest of any yet imaginable. 3. That there he was Arraigned and brought
to his Trial. A very fine hysteron proteron, but if once quitted never
arraigned for the self and the same fact. 4. That the Prosecutors, men of
flagitious and infamous lives (as he pleased to term them) voluntarily absented
themselves. Wherein the Witnesses (though not flagitious, such of them as I
know) are much to be commended; for having first stated the case with the
Judges, what danger it was (lest the King should get the slip) to have the
Traitor tried there, where inevitably he must needs be tried by his own
Confederates for the most part, who would sooner hang the Judges than him;
thousands both of Clergy and Laymen having flocked thither and thereabouts,
expecting the event; the Judges were exceeding well pleased to pass the Trial
till further course were taken. Further pretending, That then at the Assizes of
Dundalke he had Records and Witnesses who would evidently convince the Kings
Witnesses, clearly show his innocence, and their wickedness. The nature of
those Records he speaks of I do not understand; Witnesses I know he had too
many, whose interest it was as much to defend him as to ransom their own lives
at the highest rate imaginable. What benefit he could reap by those Records I
cannot conceive, unless they could make out his being before then tried for the
said several actions of High Treason laid to his charge, which was impossible
for the said Records to do. Further complaining, That the Jury here did not
know him, nor the quality of the Accusers. The first fell out well for him, but
the latter ill for his Accusers: for, were the Jury and all other well-wishers
of his Majesty, but acquainted with the real sincerity of the chiefest of those
Witnesses, their present and future danger would be taken into better care, and
their necessary want would be better supplied; but had they known Plunkett,
they would side with him as the Jury in Ireland; but would have ordered (if
possible) his never dying and endless tortures, to be so preserved as an
example to all ambitious Usurpers, and base-born aspirers. Further complaining,
That by reason of the uncertainty of the Seas, and the difficulty of getting
Copies of Records, his Witnesses could not attain to him in time.

I pray, good Souls, observe the prevarication of that Speech, in one place
affirming, He had the said Records in Dundalke aforesaid, about a twelvemonth
ago. In another place saying, He had them still to get. I assure you, if there
were any such useful Records as he pretended, he wanted not friends enough to
take them out all this while: As for his Witnesses who may be justly called the
flagitious and infamous rather than the Kings Witnesses; a parcel of them being
most Notorious and Traiterous Rebels, were gathered together to Dublin, where
not getting the Kings safe conduct, as they were promised by Plunkett's
Solicitors, they all dispersed to their several refuges, excepting a matter of
four of them that came to this City; who, had they but arrived in season, their
only evidence would have cast him. As for his Transmarine Transactions, and his
writing of Letters to Foreign Princes for sending of forces to invade Ireland,
I can say nothing to them but by hearsay, therefore will leave them to be
treated of by them who know best; only this I will infer, that in Court, which
is a thing apparently known to the whole assembly, he did not much deny his
Letter to that effect produced by Mr. Moyre, though in his said Speech he
stands on strong negatives. His Domestic actions and contrivances I can
relate, whereof I will give some short account in their places. Further vowing
in his said Speech, That he never sent Agent or Agents to Rome about any Civil
or Temporal affairs. Having confessed before the face of the Court that every
Kingdom, State, and other Promontories of the Roman Catholic Religion, are
straightly bound to keep an Agent there continually. And did only deny, That the
said Agents yearly means did not exceed 50 l. which was contrary to the
Statutes produced by Mr. Moyer, under Plunkett's own hand, and confessed by him
to be his own handwriting, wherein was enacted, That the said Agent be
supported in Rome by the yearly maintenance of 500 l. Sterling: Grant it were
50 l. judge if 50 l. would maintain yearly such a Solicitor. Which swerving
from his confession in Court, are strong arguments to animadvert his said whole
Speech to be most false and untrue, for qui Delinquit in uno, Delinquit in
toto. But here Plunkett's Evasion is to be noted, protesting, That he did not
send an Agent about any Civil or Temporal affairs. Meaning the affairs not to
be Civil, as relating to Military, because intended for Rebellion and Massacre;
nor to be Temporal, being intended for Spiritual matters, as ad propagandam
fidem, etc.

So that Mr. Moyer has not swore false, as Plunkett says, but most true.
Further asserting, That he did not write to Cardinal Bullion, or any of the
French Kings Ministers, neither did any were in that Court ever write to him
directly or indirectly of any Plot or Conspiracy. Meaning that it was neither
Plot nor Conspiracy to reduce that Kingdom under their prerogative, as of
ancient right belonging to them, which is an indisputable opinion of the major
part of that Land. That he never employed Captain Con-O-Neill to the French
King or any of his Ministers, that he never wrote to him, nor ever received
Letters from him, and that he never saw him but once, and spoke not ten words
to him. In this I pray let self-reason convince the stupid: Suppose that
Captain Con-O-Neill, the son of General Owen-O-Neill, being the best warrior,
the chiefest Headpiece, and sole ringleader of all the Irish; and the said
Captain himself being a stout Soldier, a great Courtier, and a Traveller,
newly come out of France in the Equipage of a noble Peer of Ireland, meeting as
it were but by mere accident, the Irish Primate and Metropolitan in the Convent
of the Franciscan Friars of Armagh, judge whether it be credible but more than
ten words should pass between them, being together 48 hours, concerning their
very travels in Foreign Countries: But if met of set purpose, as it was, to
settle the Conclusion of that horrid and detested Conspiracy, I hope that then
I need not invite you to judge impartially. Plunkett adding further, As for
Captain Neill 's being in Charlemount or Dungannon, I never saw him in them
Towns, nor ever knew of his being in those places. I pray, good Reader, mark
these Protestations of a dying man and a worthy Prelate, the said Convent where
he and Captain Neill had an Intermedium, being within four miles of either of
those Forts, and Plunkett never knew of his being in those places. It Is to be
observed, that Plunkett was not charged to have been within those very Forts
with Captain Neill, for it was determined that Bishop Terrel, the said Captain
Neill's Brother, John-O-Neill Guardian of the said Convent, Patrick-O-Donnelly
Priest, and others, should repair to view the Situation and Fortifications of
those Forts. To spend no time idle, Captain Neill and Plunkett betook
themselves a contrary way: Terrel, with the rest of the Trustees, having
discharged their trust, returned back to the said Convent the very same day. I
hope all true hearts will impartially judge whether the Depositions of Mr.
Moyre as eyewitness of these passages be not most true or not. Further
protesting, That he never levied any money for a Plot or Conspiracy, nor ever
received any from the Clergy upon that account. Meaning thereby as before
mentioned; that in their opinion it was neither Plot nor Conspiracy, to bring
that Country into their second subjection. I pray construe his meaning, and
equivocal expressions, and see if the Depositions of Mr. Duffy and Mr.
Ma-Clave, (the former serving as Curate to a certain Parish Priest, collecting
and paying Vice-Pastors the Subsidy-Charge imposed on the Parish of Faghort in
the County of Lowth in Ireland, the other Vicar of the Parish of Aghen-mallen,
satisfying his divident proportion) be not true and not false, as he says.
Further saying, That he never received ought from any Clergyman in Ireland but
what was due to him by ancient custom for maintenance, and what his
predecessors these hundred years past, received; nay, that he received less
than many of them. To which I answer, that by no way less; For first, he was so
penurious greedy, that less than his due by one farthing would not satisfy
him. Secondly, his Symony and compulsive bribes did far exceed the maintenance
of his predecessors, for that all his Laws were grounded on this only Maxim,
The weightiest Purse the best and largest Parish: And although at his first
intruding to the management of his Primacy, the Clergy and Layety of that
Country were very tractable, yet within short time he had so hood-winked them,
that he set all the Clergy by the ears, and reduced all into the Chaos
antiquum, that the weakest was forced to appeal to Secular Backs, which bred
such a Dissension and hostility amongst his Majesty's Subjects, that it grew at
last unto the temerity of a Bellum civil, or a Civil Broil. None was Capable
of either Dignity or Parish under him, unless that in annuatim, he was able to
purchase it at one twelvemonths annuity; nor was that Patent of any longer
standing than till such time as another Dignitary or Prebendary came and
advanced the said annuity, then immediately was drawn for him a Lease of
Ejectment, without any Clause of the least savings for the Defendant: All the
satisfactory remedy he could get, was, to be told, That Plunkett cannot be a
slave to his word; which word lies on several Records in perpetuum in Ireland,
Indorsed by many an honest and learned man of the Romish Clergy, by him through
inexplicable Symony utterly deprived, whereof was Dr. Fitzsymon, Dr. Hanzatty,
after taking from him (upon great promises to instal him Vicar General of the
Diocese of Clogher) the sum of sixty pieces of Gold, Dr. Roman Magin, Dean
Mac-Colin, Dean Kelly, and many more of the very select and choicest of that
Church. So incomprehensible was the Symony of this worthy Patriarch. However,
it is true, it were possible he might dye a true penitent, yet you have hardly
observed any any man that lived and continued a Traitor, ever dying without a
Lie in his mouth. Further denying, To have caused a List to be drawn of the
Inhabitants of every respective Parish from the age of sixteen to sixty, for to
raise an Army, or at least to have them in a readiness against the landing of
the French Army; nor to have levied any Subsidies to support them. Whereas I my
self have seen and perused many of his Mandates, both for making the aforesaid
Lists, and levying the money: Nay I have seen a very considerable sum of the
money so collected, his said Mandates are still extant to be produced. Patrick
Darge-O-Donnelly Parish Priest of Donaghmore in the County of Tyrone, brought
in of his collection in July last, of the Plot-money, the sum of ninescore and
ten pounds; I have seen the money in the Town of Castle-Blayne. There are
further special proofs that were by when he paid it to Plunkett in Dundalke, at
the Assizes then held there, where he does most falsely allege to have
received his Trial. Which confirms that the Depositions of Mr. Moyre are most
true; and that he, Mr. Duffy and Mr. Ma-Clave swore most true, and not false,
as Plunkett sets out in his Speech. Further denying his surrounding the
Seaports, Forts, and Havens of Ireland, and that he was never at Carlingford
but once, not staying in it above half an hour, nor that Mr. Duffy was in his
Company; -- I answer that his Assertion is falsely grounded, for he was only
taxed for to have surrounded the Seaports, Forts, and Havens of the North of
Ireland, only which cannot unless Tropice comprehended all Ireland, whereof if
few left unsurrounded, he sent others to view, I likewise answer, that he was
more than once in Carlingford, and above half an hour, and that Duffy was in
his company there, and from thence to the House of one Mr. Brian Murphy in
Cooly, from whence again walking together with Duffy, Murphy and Terence,
Murphy a Secular Priest to take the prospect of Sea and Land; they chanced to
pass by an old ruinated Church, where the said Brian Murphy took occasion to
tell Plunket, that certain old people Natives of that place could prove, that
in their nonage they have seen the Burials there as liable to Church and Clark
duties as elsewhere, which custom (said he) is not observed now adays, whereat
Plunket desired Murphy to be very careful in advancing those things, for said
he, although they be at present possessed by the heretic Clergy, we expect a
sudden restoration of them. -- In order to his will it was so closely followed
and carried on by Murphy, that the place enjoys not the former immunity.

I suppose the testimony of the rest of the company to be of sufficiency to
prove that Duffy was in his Company, and has not swore false as Plunket in his
said Speech alleges. Further, I hope you will observe, if it was possible for
a Prelate of his calling to have dined in one House, and in another to have
drunk his share of ten Bottles of Wine, and all that in half an Hours time; --
As for the rest of the Forts and Seaports, which he viewed or sent others to
view them, and denies his so doing, I would have the Reader understand this to
be his Evasion; that there is hardly ever a City, Fort or Town Corporate in
Ireland, but takes its Denomination from either a Fort, Ford, Rock, Mount or
some other particular spot of ground, notified in that place, before the
building or planting of a City or Town there, as Dublin, which takes its
Denomination by Authentic Irish Presidents, from a Bridge made of wattle
hyrdles, to drive over the Lyffin water, the Sheep of a certain rich man by
name Atherne, then Inhabitant there; Drogheda from the like subject,
Carrickfergus from a steepy Rock whereon the Castle is Built, and Fergus called
the first King of Scots, the founder of that Castle, for the Irish word
Carrick, signifies in English a steepy Rock. Lisina Garvy from a Fort etc.

Now Plunket dare boldly protest with ample Conscience, that he was never in
those Towns, as not being within those very particular places, from whence they
receive their said several Denominations, which if a man with safe conscience
can depose, I leave the world to Judge. -- Further asserting that he was never
at any meeting of 300 Gentlemen, in any the Counties of Ardmagh, Monaghan, or
Cavan; which negative would extend to an admiration of the truth, were as well
known here as in Ireland, whereas he kept his Provincial Counsels in them
Counties, yet his wily Evasions are to be notified, meaning that all the Irish
Gentlemen in that Province are degenerated, as not possessed of any present
Estates or Patrimonies; yet for his life he would say, but that he was at an
Assembly of 300 Irish Gentlemen by Extraction.

Further adding in his said Speech, and it is well known, that there are not
even in all the Province of Ulster 300 Roman Catholics who had Estates, or
lost Estates by the late Rebellion, which is a mighty abominable and
unpardonable Lie, as evidently indisputable as the Sun sits in its Continents.
But Gentle Reader, to satisfy your mind further, of the late Horrid intended
Conspiracy, you shall understand, that those who lost their Estates there, 400
or 500 years ago, are possessed, with as fervent a thirst of recovery, as those
who lost it by the late Rebellion; nay the very Danes are ever still designed
for Ireland.

Further protesting, that he never knew or heard, that the French were to land
at Carlingford, and that he did believe there were none who ever saw Ireland
even in a Map, but would think it a mere Romance. To which I answer, that it is
to be observed the guilt of his horrid Crimes rendered him unmindful of his
former sagacity; so that he must needs bring out this uncolorable Lie, to
discover the Palpability of that his whole last Speech, to be most maliciously
false, and grounded only to bring revenge and aspersion upon the Witnesses; for
truly the very Irish Etimology of the word Carlingford verifies the Haven to be
doubtless as good (unless somewhat narrow) as any in England or Ireland. But to
define it, will not be so satisfactory to you, as the experience of the Haven.

As to the Word it consists of three syllables thus, Cath-ar-ling, Cath
signifies a Fight Fought, ar, signifies on, and ling the stream or Water,
viz. Cartharling in Irish, and Carlingford in English, and takes that name
from a great Fight fought on that Water, just at the Foot of the Castle between
the Irish and the Danes. I assure that any of His Majesty's best Ships even at
low water, may ride into the Bay there till it hook the very Castle wall.
Oliver the first Usurper had no small Fleet with which, notwithstanding the
Block-house with all its Artillery, playing as fast as a shower of Arrows, and
all other the Fortifications there, he landed in that place, which I hope
confirms the Evidence of the Witnesses not to be Romance.

However Oliver the second must be then no greater Slave to his word, then
during the rest of his life, it being his common apology when reproved about
his Lies. Nevertheless, the self partial are very apt and inclinable to believe
the last protestations of that dying Patriarch, and sweet Traitor, who never
before during his life time could tell any truth.

Further alleging, that if he should confess these crimes, or to have
acknowledged the raising of Seventy Thousand Men in Ulfter, or even in all
Ireland, it being well known that all the revenues of Ireland, Spiritual and
Temporal possessed by His Majesty's Subjects, are scarce able to raise and
maintain an Army of Seventy Thousand men; or the design of landing the French
at Carlingford, no wise man that knows Ireland would believe him, all would
laugh at him, no Protestant Jury would find him Guilty of the Indictment.

It is a great truth, that Ireland was never since the Creation of the World,
so populous as it is in these later days, and consequently indisputably true,
that Ulster could raise Seventy Thousand Men, set the rest of Ireland aside,
but mark herein how delivering the words possessed by His Majesty's Subjects,
has betrayed his Equivocations and mental reservation, as meaning His Sacred
Majesty of Great Britain not to be Supreme King of that Land, but the Pope, for
that Donaghy M. Brian the last of the Irish Kings, being defeated by conquest
brought the Crown out of Ireland, and delivered it to the Pope, so that
depriving the King of England of his Right and Prerogative of Ireland, his
Subjects there can raise but a small army. I pray observe the protestations of
that worthy Patriarch.

Yet I grant, that no wise man of his own Hellish and factious Crew would
resemble to believe him; that they would dissemble to laugh at him, for he is a
fool that would not cover his own nakedness, as also it is very true that no
formal Protestant Jury would Cast him. Adding further, that the Jury in Ireland
would no more believe him, then they would believe that he had flown in the air
from Dublin to Holy-head. -- Which is an extraordinary Hyperbolical lie; for
that the Jury there, such as he would have himself tried with all did believe,
and (as Guilty of the Fact) was well satisfied in their hearts of the one,
though they would proceed contrariwise, but of the other could not be satisfied
by proof or otherwise. Yet Plunket must not be a Slave to his word.

In his said last Speech he denies to have been ever acquainted with the Four
Laymen of the Witnesses, viz. Florence M. Moyer, the two Neals and Hanlon,
meaning me the first of the Four; to that point I can say nothing, my Surname
being Weyer, and not Mac Moyer, with whom, Plunket was very well acquainted
since first he went to Ireland, which I could make good by a thousand Witnesses
if requisite; the first time that ever I met him, was in the Fryery of Ardmagh,
where, was no less then three or four hundred Speculators, he did discourse
with me aside: In his going away, I conveyed him a good piece of his Journey,
he further discoursed with me, in several Assemblies held by him at the House
of George Blyke of the Fives, in pursuance of contriving that his detested
conspiracy, and very often made much of me in his own house, which kindness I
conjecture to have rather extended from fear that I should appear against him,
then from any hearty good will. I pray how could this man have the Impudency of
denying to be acquainted with me? Because he must not be a Slave to his Word.

Yet I shall pass over all further Justification on my own account, he having
vomited as grand Lies as that, arguing the Judges of Injustice done to him,
which I leave to the Judges themselves to vindicate or forgive.

He adds further, that there was a Judas among the Twelve Apostles, and a
Wicked man called Nicholas amongst the Seven Deacons; by which expressions it
may be easily understood, how that sweet Traitor pretends to be another Christ
on Earth, calling the Witnesses another Judas and another Nicholas, deeming
himself to be convicted by the Jewish Law, which property of Judas, he should
of all right attribute to himself and his confederates, who did intend
(although by Gods Providence obstructed) to betray his true and lawful King to
the hands of his Enemies, and to Massacre all his true Subjects, wherefore I
may boldly return him that which he tells of Judas and Nicholas for Exemplo
tangi non propriore potest.

Yet this man who thus fabricated the death of his Sacred Majesty; to subvert
the present Government, the tranquillity of His Majesty's true and Loyal
Subjects, who caused so many disorders among those of the Roman Catholic
Clergy committed to his Charge, so much misgovernment within his districts,
living by Treachery and Symony, even to the depriving of their rights, many an
honest and worthy Prelate not by him corruptible, must dye a Sanctified Martyr,
redoubling Guilt upon Guilt, till the pangs of death overcame his last Breath.

Gentle Reader, I have here made apparently appear unto the whole world, how
undeservedly the Kings Witnesses were Impeached by that Speech of Dr. Oliver
Plunket, I have justified their innocence, with what true zeal and integrity
they proceeded.

Yet Plunket pretending nothing to be so purgative as a Dying man's last
protestations, upon which principle equivocally, and with secret Evasions
asserting to have never acted any thing impugnant to His Majesty's Laws, Crown,
Dignity, nor Regal Government, there are Thousands in England and Ireland, and
those to be ingeniously multiplied by none of the vulgar Arethmeticians, who
will not scruple abounding with his accustomary indulgences, to swallow the
greatest of all Oaths to attest the unquestionable verity of those
protestations; and that for the ensuing reasons.

1st. To purchase their own Necks from the Halter.

2d, For that it is their impregnable opinion, that it is more meritorious to
dye involved with Mr. Perjury then to discover the Guilt of their disloyal and
factious Crew, ambitious to advance arbitrary Government, and that even to the
utter extinguishing of the Royal Line.

3d, To darken the worth and repute of the Discoverers of the Plot, who may be
Justly termed the second Ark, prepared against that execrable intended deluge
and devastation.

4th, Thinking to vilify the many good Services to be yet accomplished by them.

5th, To render them ridiculous, bring them into a general Odium, and that
which is the grandest Policy, to discourage all true loyal Hearts for the
future, from attempting any such bold and resolute undertakings, as the
preservation of the royal Progeny, and His Majesty's unfeignedly true Subjects.

However, let them censure the Witnesses as they will, certainly they cannot be
endued with so much impudency as to averr, that the supporting of an Agent in
Rome to introduce Popery, and Foreign Forces, to disenthrone His Majesty is
not High Treason, and punishable by the Kings Laws; that the enacting of
several Statutes to the same purpose, produced under his hand, and confessed by
him to be his own hand writing, is not likewise high Treason and punishable etc.

My dear Souls, what fervency of revenge? and what direful frency of
antipathizing, and instigating the insatiable Fury of the rest of the Traitors
against the Witnesses, possessed this Traitors heart so stiffly, even at the
point of death, to deny those things, which being on his Trial he confessed,
when he should stand most on justification, I leave to Judge as well by the
Partial, as the Impartial.

But whereas the devotedly religious at Tyburn the first of this instant, had
not their minds generally satisfied, as wanting Blood enough of Martyr Plunket
to color their Handkerchiefs. I hope if their devotion will still continue,
that before condign punishment be executed on the rest of the Traitors in
general in Ireland, if they will but take pains to repair thither, they may
attain to the full of their desires, by dipping the rest of their Handkerchiefs
in the Blood of many more of the reformed fellow Martyrs of Plunket, dying
still with a Lie in their mouths, till they breath their last Gasp.

Now to be brief, I protest by the Faith of a Christian, I could insert a great
deal more, of both the Treachery and Perniciousness of Dr. Plunket, apt to
infect curious Ears, but thinking this to be sufficient to confute his Lies,
and satisfy the stupidity of the indifferent, I do not desire to bellow farther
time on the Object. It Is well known, that in general we have many implacable
Enemies in our own Country, and I my self, most of all, so that we need not
undeservedly have any more in this Country, yet we are generally hated by many,
as suspected to be of the number of the Earl of Shaftesbury his Prosecutors.

Therefore, these are to declare, that Mr. Moyer, Mr. Duffy, I my self, nor
none of our Society would spare his Lordship, had we but known him Guilty of
any high Treason to our knowledge; and further, that we have never known him to
have infringed His Majesty's Laws, neither do we use of course to accuse any,
but this infamy we know, to have extended from a certain Parisite, who for
great sums of Money received, promised to invalidate our evidence, to the
saving of Plunkets life, who failing therein, indeavoreth to obscure our Names,
to bring upon us the high Displeasure of the Nobility, and Commonalty of this
Kingdom, and labors to foment all turbulency by attesting his own Fidelity,
but I hope that within short time he shall receive his Quietus est, by the
hands of Katch, at the foot of Mount Tyburn, but let Charon then have a care of
Sinking his Boat by ferrying over the Stygian streams to Prince Beelzebub, that
inconsiderable draught, the master Piece of all the Europian Knaves.

And we do now before the divine Majesty of Heaven further and lastly declare,
that what we have done in discovering the late horrid Plot, was neither for
self preservation, nor expectation of any worldly Lucre, but from the real and
sincere Allegiance we owe unto His sacred Majesty, and our natural Love unto
His Loyal Subjects, from which, the very fear of death, the contriving devices
of my Enemies, nor the greatest tortors of Execution shall never withdraw me
nor mine, but will expose my self, and mine, with all my Soul, Heart, Hand, and
Substance, to all imaginary hazards in pursuance of His Majesty's Service, and
maintaining of his Laws, and Government; Pulchrum and decorum est pro Patra
mori, multo vero pulchrius pro Rege; And for my tuition I throw my self on the
mercy and providence of the Almighty; and the wanted care of His Sacred Majesty
of Great Britain etc.

All which, is most humbly represented to the candid sincerity of the
impartial, by their most humble and most faithful Servant.

Florence Weyer.
July 26th. 1681.
FINIS.

