A SHORT HISTORY OF THE Life and Death OF The ACT made The 35th of Elizabeth,
Cap. 1. ENTITLED, An Act to retain the Queen's Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience.

AS ALSO, The ACT commonly called The Conventicle Act, Made the 16th of His
present Majesty, K. Cha. 2d. ENTITLED, An Act to Prevent and Suppress
Seditious Conventicles.

WHEREIN It plainly appears by the several Records, That both the said ACTS are
Expired, And have no FORCE IN LAW.

Published for Satisfaction of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects; By E. W.

London, Printed for Thomas Fox, at the Sign of the Angel, in Westminster Hall,
1681.

A Short HISTORY Of the Life and Death of the Statutes of the 35th. Q. Eliz.
And 16. K. C. 2d. against Conventicles, etc.
The INTRODUCTION.
I Make no doubt, but this Paper will meet with much opposition, especially
from such as are willing, these Laws should be put in execution, against
Dissenting Protestants; but the Author considering the miseries such an Act (if
it were in force) might bring, upon His Majesty's good and peaceable Subjects,
and being fully and clearly convinced in his Conscience, that the Act of the
35th. of Q. Eliz. is not in force, thought it his duty to the public, to state
the Case as in Truth it lies, without partiality, and there leave it to all
Reasonable Men, to Consider and Determine the Matter, as they shall find just
Cause and Reason: And hopes that upon a just Enquiry if they shall find him
Mistake the Case, some abler Person will better inform him and the World; in
the mean time he hopes the Integrity and Honesty of the Cause, will receive no
prejudice from the plainness and illaw-like Terms, made use of by him in the
following Lines.

THerefore to come to the Matter without further delay, the Reader must take
notice the Act made the 35 of Eliz. cap. 1. which is Entitled an Act to retain
the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience, was only a Temporary Act,
as appears plainly by the last clause of the Chapter, Viz.

Provided also that every Person that shall abjure by force of this Act, See 35
Eliz. cap. 1. Sect. 13.
or refuse to abjure, being thereunto required as aforesaid, shall forfeit and
loose to Her Majesty all his Goods and Chattels for ever; and shall further
loose all his Lands, Temements, and Hereditaments, for, and dureing the Life
only of such Offender and no longer: And that the Wife of any Offender by
force of this Act shall not loose her Dower, nor that any Corruption of Blood
shall grow by reason of any Offense mentioned in this Act. But that the Heir of
such Offender by force of this Act shall and may after the Death of every
Offender, have and enjoy the Lands, Tennements, and Hereditaments of such
Offender, as if this Act had not been made, and this Act to continue no longer
then to the end of the next Sessions of Parliament.

This Parliament began the 19th. Day of February, Rot. 35 Eliz.
in the 35 of the Queen, and was Dissolved the 10th of April following.

The next Parliament that followed, (which ended the Sessions mentioned in that
Act of the 35, Rot. 39. Eliz.
) began the 24th of October. in the 39th Year of the Queen, and there continued
until the Dissolution thereof, which was the 9th of February next following the
Year 1597, as by the Roll appears.

In this Sessions this Act was Revived with diverse others, See 39 Eliz. cap.
18. Sect. 26.
by an Act Entitled, An Act for the Reviving, continuance, perfecting and
repealing diverse Statutes; which Enacts that the 35 of Eliz. shall continue and
endure in form and Effect until the end of the next Parliament, Sect. 41.
next ensuing.

The next Parliament began the 27th of October in the 43 of Elizabeth, and
continued until the Dissolution ther^of, Vide Rot. 43 Eliz.
being the 19th of December then next following, 1601. as appears by the Roll.

In this Session the 35 of Eliz. is again revived, with others, by the Statute
Entitled, Cap. 9. Sect. 18.
An Act for continuing diverse Statutes, and Repeal of some others; which
enacts, Sect. 27.
That the same be continued and remain in force, until the end of the first
Session of the next Parliament.

The next Session of Parliament, began the 19th day of March in the first year
of King James, and ended that Session the 7th of July 1604. as appears by the
Roll. Vid. Rot. 1 Jac.


The 35 of Eliz. again continued in this Session, 1 Jac. c. 25. Sect. 13.
among diverse others, by the Act entitled An Act for continuing and reviving
of diverse Statutes, and for repealing diverse others.

Which Statute enacts, the same shall be continued, S. 24.
and remain in force until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

The second and next Session of Parliament, Rot. 3 Jac.
began and holden by Prorogation the 5th day of November, in the Third of King
James, and ended the 27th of May next, and was then prorogued to the 18th of
Nov. 1606.

Now observe, that in this Session there was no Reviver or Continuance of the
35th of Eliz. therefore it absolutely ceased, and was not in force, but as if
the same had never been.

The next Parliament began from the last Prorogation of the 18th of November in
the Fourth of King James, See the Roll 4 Jac.
and ended that Session the 4th day of July 1607. and then prorogued until the
16th day of November following.

See the Roll 7 Jac.
The next Parliament, being the Fourth Sessions, began and holden by Prorogation
the 19th day of February in the Seventh year of King James, and continued until
the 23d of July, and then prorogued until the 16th of October next following,
1610.

In all which several Sessions there was no manner of Continuance or Revivor of
the 35th of Elizabeth. So it is most plain, the Act was expired, and wholly
discontinued from the 27th of May, in the Third of King James to the 21th of
King James.

See the Roll 21 Jac.
Now the next Parliament that makes any mention of the 35 of Eliz. was the
Parliament which began the 19th day of February in the 21th of King James, and
was continued to the 29th day of May following, and then prorogued till the
second day of November 1624.

In this Session it is Enacted by the Statute entitled, 11 Jac. c. 28.
An Act for continuing and reviving of diverse Statutes, and repeal of diverse
others; in which is included the 35th of Eliz. this Clause, viz. shall, by
Virtue of this Act, be adjudged ever since the Session of Parliament in the 7th
year of his Majesty's Reign of England, to have been of such Force and Effect,
as the same were the last day of that Session, and from thenceforth until the
end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

Which Clause in the Act at first seems as if the same 35th of Eliz. were again
revived, but consider the words as they lie, and it cannot be so adjudged;
which appears plainly thus:

You have observed, as above is hinted, the last Revivor of that Statute was by
the 1 Jac. cap. 25. to continue to the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament; which Session, meant and expressed, was the second Session in King
James his Reign, and began the 5th of November in the Third of that King, and
ended that Session the 20th of May next, and then the Statute of the 35th of
Elizabeth ceased, as is most plain, because that in all that Session of 3
Jacobi, it was never revived; so that the Session which began and ended the 7th
of King James, spoken of in this Statute of the 21th Jacobi, in the words
before, viz. To have been of such Force and Effects, as the same were the last
day of that Session, did not retain or keep in force the said 35th of Elizabeth.

And how can it possibly be that the 35 of Eliz. was in force, either the
beginning or end of that Session, of the 7th of King James, spoken of in this
last-recited Statute, when it is plain, that it was expired long before? If so,
then this Statute of 21 Jacobi can no way set it up again; for this of the 21
of King James only sets up such as was in force in that Session of the 7th of
King James, and no otherwise.

But, to proceed. In the next Parliament, 1 Car. c. 17. The Roll 1 Car. prim.
begun and holden at Westminster, the 18th day of June in the First of King
Charles, diverse Acts passed to make it a Session; but, by a special Bill passed
in the same Parliament, it was Enacted, viz. And all Statutes and Acts of
Parliament which are to have continuance unto the end of this present Session,
shall be of full force after the said Adjournment, until this present Session
be fully ended and determined, etc.

So it is clear, all continued now as it was left the 21 of King James, but
this of the 35 of Eliz. was not then in Being.

The next Parliament began the 27th of March 1627. in the Third of Car. primi,
and continued to the 26th of June following, in which Parliament was made
diverse Statutes.

And amongst the rest, 3 Car. c. 4.
an Act entitled, An Act for Repeal and continuance of diverse Statutes; among
which is mentioned, Sect. 22.
the 35th of Eliz. which Enacts, viz. By Virtue of this Act shall be and
continue until the End of the first Session of the next Parliament, in Force
and Effect as the same were the first day of the Session of Parliament holden
in the first year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is.

All which cannot, in the least be construed to revive and set up the 35th of
Elizabeth, for this inforces no more than what was in force the First of Car.
primi; and, if the 35th of Elizabeth were out the Third of King James, and not
in force the 7th of King James, as is before made appear, then sure no man will
say the 35th of Elizabeth was in force the First of K. Charles the First; so
that this of the Third of Car. 1. can have no force or color to revive what
was so long before dead.

From the Third of King Charles to the sixteenth, there is no mention made of
any thing relating to the 35th of Elizabeth, but in the 16th Car. it is Enacted;

VIZ. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 16 Car. C. 2d.
That the passing of this present Act, or any other Act or Acts, or his
Majesty's Royal assent to them or any of them in this present Session of
Parliament, shall not be any determination of the said Session: and that all
Statutes and Acts of Parliament, which have their continuance, or were by an
Act of Parliament made in the Third Year of the Reign of His Majesty that now
is, Entitled, An Act for the Continuance and Repeal of diverse Statutes
continued until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, etc. Shall
be of the same force as they were the last Day of that Session, and from
thenceforth, until some other Act of Parliament be made, touching the
continuance of the same, etc.

Still this Act pretends to continue no more then such as was continued to the
Third of Car. Primi, which is just nothing to the purpose, and therefore it was
no Wonder that a Doubt was pretended to be made by the overlong Parliament,
commonly called, The Pentionary Parliament; Whether this Act of the 35 of Eliz.
was in force or not; I must confess it is a very great Wonder to me, that they
should in the least Question any thing relating to it, for by the same Rule
that once the Commons at a Committee Judged Fourteen more then Twenty-One about
an Election, they might as well make a Doubt, aye, and Judge and Declare it
too, That the Session ending the 3 of Jacobi, might reach three Sessions their
Judgment, especially at that time a day.

However there comes no Question about the 35 of Eliz. until the 16 Car. 2d.
and then the House of Commons having a mind to prosecute the Conventicklers,
made an Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventickles, and begins thus,
VIZ.

Whereas by an Act made in the 35 th Year of the Reign of our late Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, 16 Car. 2d. Cap. 4.
An Act to Retain the Queen's Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience, has
not been put in Execution, by reason of some Doubt of late made, Whether the
said Act he still in force, although it be very clear and evident: And it is
hereby Declared, That the said Act is still in force, and ought to be put in
due Execution; For providing therefore of further and more speedy Remedies
against the growing and dangerous Practices of Seditious Sectaries and other
Dissoyal Persons, who under pretense of tender Consciences, do at their
Meetings, contrive Insurrections, as late Experience has showed: Be it Enacted
by the King's most Excellent Majesty, etc.

And by the last Clause in this Statute, Sect. 23. Idem.
is as follows: VIZ.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid: That this Act
shall continue in Force for Three Years after the End of this present Session
of Parliament, and from thence forward to the end of the next Session of
Parliament after the said three Years, and no longer.

This being the whole that concerned the Statute of the 35 of Eliz. it does
appear, That this last Statute is but one entire Statute, and that part which
declares the Statute of the 35 of Eliz. to be in force, is joined and annexed
to the other part, and is but one Law, and has its period at the time before
prefixed; and that Declarative part dies with the rest, which had its end the
22d of this King, and that did continue the 35 of Eliz. but to the end of the
time prefixed in the Act, and no longer: now that Session being ended, in which
the Three Years (spoken of in the Statute) began the 16 and 17 of Car. 2d. See
the Role.


The next Session begun the 17 Car. 2d.

The next begun the 18th of September, 1666, in the 19 of Car. 2d. and ended
the 8th of February following.

The next Sessions began, after the Three Years was expired, See the Role.
the 10th of October, 1667. and ended the 9th of May, 1668, and then continued
by Adjournment to the 11th. of April, 1670, and to the 24th of October
following, when this Conventickle Act expired, Conventicle-Act exp. the 22d of
Car. 2d.
being the 22d. of Car. 2d. as is before expressed.

This being the Case, there is no longer any pretense for the 35 of Eliz. being
yet in force, notwithstanding an Objection made, which is, that although the
Conventickle Act be expired, and with it the Branch of the declaring part; yet
it being once declared, that Declaration stands good, notwithstanding the Act
it self dye: to which Objection, I answer, and first I would know if the
Statute of 35 of Eliz. be expired, as undoubtedly it is, as is above shown
before this Conventicle Act was made; if so, then I say the Declarative part in
this Conventickle-Statute, cannot enforce or give Life to any thing longer then
it lives it self.

And then again, I would ask if the Declaring part in this Conventicle Act,
after it self is extinguished, can be Read as a Law to enforce another, which
has no being of a Law in it self, for then it necessarily follows, that an
expired Law is as authentic as a Law in being.

But to finish this matter, as no Man of Judgment can imagine any such thing,
so no Man of Honesty, (I dare say) can overmuch grieve at the loss of two such
Acts, much less will he strain other Laws beyond their due bounds to enforce
such a pernicious Law as the 35 of Eliz. was.

FINIS.

