A Golden Topaze, OR, Heart-jewell. Namely, A Conscience purified and pacified
by the Blood and Spirit of CHRIST.

Written by FRANCIS WHIDDON Pastor of Morton-Hampsted in Devon.

Unicnique liber esse propria Conscientia, and ad hunc librum discutiendum, and
emendandum omnes alii inventi sunt.

S. Bernard. OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall. 1656.

TO MY FAITHFUL Flock, who love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity. Mercy unto
you, and peace, and love be multiplied.
MY Dear Children, for so I am bold to call you, though you have had many
teachers, yet not many fathers; if I may credit your own tongues, there is a
number of you will say, that in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. Let God have the glory: for what is Paul? or what is
Apollos: or what am I? But the weak Instrument by whom the all-sufficient God
has wrought faith in your hearts. I therefore according unto my Duty do here
present unto you a tender of my true Affection toward you; in this plain and
short Tract of Conscience. The subject is worthy of all Acceptance, Though the
Author be the meanest of all his Brethren. You may consider it as an Object
both to your ear and eye, your ear has heard it preached, and your eye may
see and read it, and if your heart Affect it, the Jewel is your own. And I
who am your Pastor may take the Boldness and say. I need no Epistle of
Commendation to you, or Epistle of Commendation from you: you are mine Epistle
known and read of all that have spiritual eyes, and are acquainted with you,
yea, you are the Epistle of Christ written not with Ink, but with the spirit,
Not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshy Tables of the heart. I hope I shall
not be ashamed of this my foolish Boasting, But that when I am gone from you,
this precious Jewel which now I present unto you, will then be found still to
abide within you, and if at any time through carelessness, this Jewel of a
good Conscience with in you, shall gather Dust and lose it is luster: Let this
little Tract, if better be wanting, be Assumed by you, Read it once and again
humbly and advisedly, so may you have hope, that your Dull and Dusky
Consciences will Recover it is former luster, with more peace and Purity.

And Now my dear children, knowing that shortly I must put off this my
tabernacle of Flesh, 2 Pet. 1.14. and be brought to the house appointed for all
living, Job. 30.23. I shall endeavor to give you some few Advertisme^ts before
I go hence and be seen, no more.

Know ( Dear souls) we are the people on whom the ends of the world are Come,
and our days very perilous and Dangerous, as says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2,
3, 4. In which we find Iniquite to Abound and Damnable Errors and Heresies to
Superabound. What Enthusiasticall fancy, what Anti-Scripturall opinions? What
Immaginary Raptures and Revelations have we now Amongst us? so that now to
Refrain from their evil opinion and practices, is to make our selves a prey.
Never were the times more Contagious; Opinions more Infectious, and practices
more Dangerous. So that every pious soul had need to be a Spiritual
Physician, and still to have Cordials to fortify his soul within, and
Repercussives to beat back the Infectious Venom of Sin and Error without.
Preservatives.

I. Be constant and sincere in the preformance of all holy Duties, both public
and private in the Congregation and the Family. Let your holiness appear unto
all, Be holy abroad and at home. Despise not ordinances neither in whole or
part. But receive them with all thankfulness as Love Tokens from your Father,
and acknowledge a Necessity of them all, and that as long as you are Below
Temptations, you cannot be above Ordinances, which will be as long as you carry
your Frail Tabernacles about you. They are more necessary then your Appointed
food; More to be Desired then Gold, yea then fine Gold; And sincere milk
sweeter then the honey or honey Comb, without which, you cannot be nourished up
unto everlasting Life.

2. Keep close to your God in a way of Prayer and praises. Be Constant in
Both: pray always and in all things give thanks. What Grace you want get it
by Prayer, and what good you enjoy wear it By Praise. If you thus draw near
to God in a way of Duty God will be still near unto you in a way of Mercy. The
least Dropp of the wine of mercy, should Inflame your hearts with true
thankfulness, and fill your Mouths with constant praises. So that you lay new
Engagement on the god of mercy to bestow more mercies; Not only to preserve you
from the evil of evils, But ever to Enrich you with the blessing of blessings.

3. Give not way to a customary Dullness in Duty, but perform every Duty with
all your power, with sincere Intention, with heat of Affection, and with
Diligence, and Delight. Especially be not slight in secret prayer, meditation,
and reading. Do not the work of the Lord deceitfully or negligently, least
the curse of God fall on you, Jer: 48.10. Mal: 1.14. but zealously and
heartily; watch to these duties, Ephesians. 6.18. Keep your hearts in a good frame
for them, undefiled with sin, untainted with the world; Endeavor to feel all
Duties at your hearts, inlivening, enlarging, and inflaming your affections.
Lay not out the chief of your zeal on Externals, opinions, and the smaller
things of Religion, but let soule-saving work be your maine and daily
employment. Exercise your selves in selfe-examination, look daiely into your
own bosoms by a serious scrutiny, and spare not those beloved Dalilah's, and
cursed Achans which are the troublers of our Israel.

4. Get true light in your Understandings, not only a speculative, but
spiritual light; not a notionall, but experimental light, the light of the
knowledge of God in the face of Jesus. Such a light whereby you may be enabled
to see sin to be the greatest evil, and God himself to be the chiefest good.
Such a light that melts the soul, that humbles the soul, that enlivens the
soul, that quickens the soul, and that quiets the soul. Nourish not an
head-light, but an heart-light. Let the word of truth dwell in you plenteously.
Weak judgments are easily misled both in opinion and practice, but a sound
judgment will preserve you in both. So fly one error that you do not fall into
another; it is easy to run into extremes, but very difficult to keep the
golden Mean.

5. Keep your hearts with all diligence. (4. Pro.) Watch daily to prevent him,
which watches ever to mischeife you, I Pet. 5.8. And let yours prayers be
frequent and fervent, Lord lead us not into temptation. Your enemies are many,
mighty, and malicious, which still lie in wait to break your peace, wound
your consciences, lessen your comforts, impair your graces, blurre your
evidences, and dampe your assurances; and unless you stand upon your Guard,
and set your selves in battell-array, to fight with those strong, subtle,
sedulous Goliahs, which come out to upbraid Gods little Champion. They (I mean
the Devil and his Agents, viz: the world and the flesh) will not only rage but
reign; not only assault, but take your souls captive at their will. Therefore
(as you love your own souls and the welfare of them unto all eternity) Get
unto you the whole armor of God. Ephesians. 6. 13. Be strong in the Lord and in the
power of his might. Give no fair Quarter unto foul tempations: make up
speedily every Breach between God and your own consciences, and let not
conscience loose its Tenderness, but shun every evil and the appearance of it.

6. Let thy life be the life of faith. Says Paul, the life that we now live in
the flesh, we live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved us, and gave
himself for us. Keep fresh the sense of his love, and always acknowledge a
continual need of his Blood, Spirit, and Intercession, and how much you are
beholding and engaged unto him. Labor to draw and derive from Christ by the
powerful attractive force of faith, spiritual ability, sufficient for every
days work. Act your faith daily in the promises of grace and strength. Go
unto Christ still for his wisdom to counsel you; for his righteoussness to
cover you, for strength to resist temptations; for the shoulder that must bear
our Crosses; for ability to perform all duties as duties.

7. Resolve with david Ps. 101. that you will not know a wicked person (i.e.)
approve of him. If out of your families, have not fellowship with them, but
reprove them; if in your families, let them not abide within your doors, but
remove him or her as persons most infectious and dangerous. We have sins enough
and too too many of our own, therefore let us not increase them by a base
connivency at others men's sins. Especially avoid that generation of men whose
grand design it is to undermine the Gospel, to ruin the Ministry, and to
robb them of that maintenance, which is due unto them by the law of God, and by
the Law of Nature, and by the law of Nations. These croaking frogs have
overspread our Egypt, so that they have made it stink with their damnable
Opinions and devilish practices. They creep into houses and lead aside silly
women, 2 Timothy 3.11. and by their fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple, Romans 16.18. And shall, if it were possible, deceive the very elect,
Mark 13.22.

8. Affect a faithful and powerful Minister, who does carefully look both to
himself and his Doctrine. Adscribe neither too much, nor too little to your
Teachers. Neither despise them, nor deify them, as the manner of some is.
Esteem him not as a principle Author, but as a subordinate Actor; not as a
Lord, but a Steward; not as a Master, but a Minister, and yet account him more
then an ordinary Servant, even a man of God, A servant of the most high God,
that shows you the way of Salvation. Look on him not only as a Seer, but
Over-seer, a Steward of Gods high secrets, a messenger of the Lord of Hosts,
by whose Embassage peace is concluded, and reconciliation ministerially made up
between God and man. He is Gods mouth to you by preaching, and your mouth to
God by praying. On that in special place stands before God, and ministers
to him upon earth, as the Angels do it in heaven. Woodnots Aphorisms 1. Cens.
p. 42. The Jews say, that he that dies in the displeasure of his Rabbi, shall
never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come. i.e. of his teacher
that has the charge of his soul.
Therefore take heed you fall not out with your Teacher, whom the most wise
God has thought fit to make your Pastor; forsake not the Levite as long as
thou live upon the earth, Deuteronomy. 12.19. Do not desire such a Teacher as thou
may rule him, but such as may rule you, Magistrates are chosen to govern
the people, not the people to govern them. So Ministers you are not to command
them but obey them. Therefore obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb.
13.17. And submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must
give an account, that they may do it with Joy and not with grief.

I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, let Death and Judgment possess your
most serious thoughts, wait for the one, and provide for the other. Dye
daiely, (with Paul) and you shall dye well. Have thine end ever in thine eye,
and sweeten the bitter cup of Death by a daily preparation. Get your tackling
all in readiness, that you may fail over the Sea of mortal miseries in
safety and security to the Port of happiness. You shall all of you ere long
lie gasping for death on your dying beds, and there lie grappling with the King
of fears, attended with Terrors. Therefore (as you love your souls) let the
whole course of your lives be a conscionable preparative to dye comfortably.
Look on every day as your last. So live that you may say with David, Though I
walk through the Valley of the shadow of death, I will not fear. Oh that you
would be wise and consider your latter end, before you go down to the chambers
of death, whence you shall never return. Would you dye willingly? would you
dye well? Then get a part in Christ, a Title to him, an Interest in him. Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling. Give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure. So live, that you may not be ashamed to die. So
number your days, that you may apply your hearts to true wisdom. So cast up
your Accounts, that you may give them up with joy and not with grief. Judge
your selves for your daiely Deviations, and you shall not be judged; condemn
your selves, and you shall not be condemned.

10 Lastly. Let this little Book be in your hands, heads, and hearts. Let a
good conscience be written on your souls with Characters indelible never to be
razed out, so that when death shall appear, thou may be able to say, I have
lived in all good conscience before God until this day.

Now whereas dull spirits are more quickened by Examples then Precepts. This
place has had a great advantage above other places adjacent. Mr. John
Southmead who is now a glorious Saint in heaven, and his Soul made happy with
the Spirits of just men made perfect. You know he was an old Disciple, and
served his Master faithfully in his generation for many years, zealously
striving for the inlargment of the Kingdom of Christ and demolishing the
Kingdom of Satan. A great Curb he was to profaneness, witness his great
pains and travel in overthrowing those Heathenish sports and pastimes, which
were too common even upon the Lords day. God made him the Instrument to abolish
Wakes, Revells, Maypoles and May-games, with their Apurtenances, Fiddlers and
superfluous Alehouses, not only in his own, but in many other Parishes
adjacent. So that not only the Practice, but even the Name of these sinful
Vanities is almost forgotten. Again, as he was a strong Curb to profaneness,
so was he as sharp a spurr unto holiness. Witness his great cost and pains
in getting a faithful Teacher to instruct the people. Very careful abroad to
warn the unruly, to comfort the feeble minded, 1 These. 5.14.
and to support the weak. And at home in his Family in repeating Sermons;
reading, opening, and applying Scriptures unto such as were under him;
constantly praying for a Blessing on them, and as careful in returning Praise
to God for every Blessing both public and private. But at last when the evil
days came on him, so that the Keepers of the house began to tremble, Eccle.
14.3, 4.
the strong man to bow, the grinders to cease, and the windows to be darkened,
he was willing for a Desolution, very ready to go hence, often saying, It is
time for me to be gone, my Master has no more work for me to do here upon
earth. Now shall we forget such a worthy servant of God? by no means. Let his
memory be ever blessed, and his Name as precious ointment powered forth. And let
us honor his remembrance in an holy imitation of his virtues. But should we
forget him, yet his God would not forget his place, his person, his zeal, his
labor of love: The Lord shall count when he writes up his people, that this
man was borne there. Ps. 87.6. even in the family of Wrey, within the Parish of
Morton, and in the County of Devon. Now you having such an excellent Pattern
and President, let it be your earnest desire and endeavor to run on and not be
weary, walk on and not be faint in those ways (paved ith holiness) in which
he has walked, that so your end may be everlasting life.

To conclude, look on this small Tract as a Dowry which your dying Pastor has
bequeathed unto you, whom he loves in the Lord. Receive this provision which he
has made for you of wholesome meat, not caring for concealed Cookery, or the
vain enticing words of man's wisdom. As it was intended for your Instruction,
delivered to your Attention; so let it be digested by your Meditation, and
practiced in your Conversation. So both Pastor and People shall behold each
others face with joy at the Bar of Christ; and have a most happy admission
into his most glorious presence, where there is fullness of joy, and at whose
right hand are pleasures for evermore, Amen.

Your most affectionate though unworthy Teacher, FRANCIS WHIDDON.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
HEre is presented unto thine eye a little small Tract, which in it is front
does promise great things, as precious Stones and Jewels: Possibly if thou with
an humble heart shall call and cry, seek and search, thou may find that
which will be better the^ Gold, more excellent then refined Silver, namely a
good Conscience. Let not any prejudice of person or parts cause thee to cast
it aside, as not worthy thy view, neither cry thou, Tush what is this Pamphlet
unto those many large and learned Volumes of those able and holy men, that have
for^erly written upon this subject. I do ingenuously confess, it is very
mean, my vintage less then others gleanings. But what of that; if thou be an
humble Christian; thou will acknowledge that Paul and Apollos are but
iustruments, and can do nothing without their principal Efficient, also we
find by daily experience, that the less of man, the more of God; he can work
as well by the weakest as ablest instrument, and draw as strongly with an hair,
as with a Cable rope. I must acknowledge the discourse is very short and very
plain, and both very needful: in these full and surfeiting times; who sees
not that great volumes are little regarded, and large discourses are easily
laid aside: men find much reading to be wearisome to the flesh, I therefore
affect brevity with perspicuity. Should I be long in my discourse, I am
confident thou would not read it over. But in so much as it is very short,
an hours labor or so; I may have hopes that thou will read it over and over,
and the oftener the better.

As for plainness of the style, I would have thee to know the Author is a
very plain man, and has written it for a very plain people in his own
Congregation. This was never intended to go abroad into the world, but to be
confined to the place and people where it was first preached; a people that
desire the plain evidence of the Spirit, and not the vain enticing words of
man's wisdom. Therefore if thy Brain run over with vain speculations, high
notions, and frothy expressions, and wilt be wise above what is written, 1 Cor.
4.6. remember that of Austin, Multi propter arborem scientiae amittunt arborem
vitae. Many with Adam so eagerly strive for the tree of knowledge, that they
lose the tree of life. A good caveat for such as are all for new discoveries,
new lights, but not new lives. To you therefore that with the Athenian cry,
quid novi? what new thing? I must answer, nec nova, nec nove, Theophilus.
here is nothing new, but vetus veritas iisdem verbis and iisde^ syllabis. The
old truth in its own words and syllables. If this do not like you, then lay it
gently aside, and it will not harm you.

But unto you that heartily desire to have and to hold, to use and exercise,
always, in all things, and to all persons, a Conscience void of offense: if
you want better helps take this for present. And because this little Book must
with little Benjamin, Genesis 43.14
be sent into Egypt, I shall with old Jacob, desire that it may find favor
where it comes. If others desire the like with me; I hope that neither they in
Reading, nor I in Writing shall lose our labor.

Thine as thou art Christ's F.W.

June 11. 1656. Imprimatur GERARD LANGBAINE Pro-Vicecan. OXON.

The TOPAZ.
HEB. 13.18. For we trust we have a good Conscience, Willing in all things to
live honestly.


I Find it reported of Saint Austin long since that a great desire possessed
him of hearing Paul to Preach.

Another like affected with him, seconds his desire with this of his own: which
was, that his Theme or Text might be Conscience. Doubtless these good men were
friends to Conscience, they saw how the Cause stood with her, namely that she
was in a languishing condition, and ready to die: what their thoughts were we
can only guess: but in these days of ours, these last and worst days, if we
ponder the ways and works, the opinions and practices of the most, we have
just cause to complain, that Conscience is not only sick and dying, but dead
and buried in the grave of habitual sin, with the stone of hardness rolled on
the grave, and that she has laid so long in the dust of oblivion, that her
name is become unsavory, and the very mentioning of Conscience, is nauseated by
every profane Belialist.

It Is high time, therefore, to crave the help of an Angel, yea the Angel of the
Covenant Jesus Christ the Savior; to roll away the stone, and to raise up our
dead friend Conscience, as sometimes he raised up his dead friend Lazarus.

This work of raising the dead is proper unto God only, yet may an omnipotent
God use impotent man in such a work; as Elisha in raising the Shunamites dead
son to life, 2 King. 4.34. Act. 9.9. Act. 40.
Paul in restoring Eutychus, and Peter in reviving Tabitha (alias) Dorcas. Now
he that employed men then, in raising dead bodies, can and will employ men
still in raising dead souls, dead consciences; who knows what God may do, if
we do our parts? if the Hebrews pray, and Paul preach, and God come in with a
blessing on both, what shall hinder but that the dead conscience should be
revived, the drowsy awakened, the weak confirmed, the troubled quieted, the
good bettered, and every elect soul return to his rest with some measure of
Paul's considence, and say, I trust I have a good Conscience, willing in all
things to live honestly?

The occasion of Paul's pleading a good Conscience, I find to be thus; Occasion.
there were certain ill-affected persons among the Hebrews who calumniated
Paul's doctrine, Theophilact in h. l.
as tending to the subversion of Moses law; so that many, who had formerly
given their Names to Christ began now to draw back from Paul as a Seducer and
false Teacher, and so their Affections alienated from him. He therefore (to
clear himself from such false aspersions and calumniations, and to confirm
and establish the Hebrews in the truth,) gives them to understand, that he had
not dealt fallaciously, but faithfully with them in what he had taught them:
and therefore advises them to continue constant in their obedience unto their
Teachers, and in servent prayer unto God for them. For says he, we are assured
we have a good Conscience, willing in all things to live honestly.

You may term this Text Paul's Triumph, or his choice Jewel, with which the
whole world compared and weighed in the Balance, will be found as light as
dross and vanity, and without this, all things are but loss, dung, and
vexation of spirit.

1. Analysis.
Paul's Conscience. 2. Paul's Considence.
In the first note the quality, it is a good Conscience.

In the second the propriety, it is his own good Conscience, I have a good
conscience.

In the second, viz. his confidence, you have 1. his Assurance, (we trust) 2.
the grounds of it built on four firm pillars, 1. His will, (desiring.) 2. The
Extent, (in all things.) 3. The Constancy of his will, ( to walk or live.) 4.
The Syncerity of it, namely (honesty.)


First of conscience in general; it would be very tedious to show you the
opinions of men upon the definition of conscience, all varying in term,
Habitus multis dispositionibus acquisitus: Habitus intellectualis, qua talis,
officium est unicum, inclinare ad prompte agendum; Conscientia vero multas
habet operationes, quas immedtate exercet, ergo non Habitus. Ames de Conscien.
and some in truth. Much ado there is amongst Divines to find out the Genus or
general term of it, as also the difference.

Some calling it an act, some an habit, some a faculty, some a power. As for
the two former, they are liable to just exception, that call it an act or habit.

1. It cannot properly be called an act, because conscience many times does not
act, as in sleepy men and seared consciences.

2. It cannot be properly termed an habit, because conscience is innate, not
acquired.

The two latter, a faculty, or power, are generally embraced, but especially
the last. Some leave out faculty, because the Scripture has not yet determined
it to be a distinct faculty, but calling it sometimes the spirit of a man, and
sometimes the spirit of the mind of man, therefore to avoid all exception, I
shall pitch upon the last term, namely power, as the true genus, and so define
it.

Conscience is an inbred light in the mind of man, teaching him to follow what
is good, and to eschew that which is evil: and it is called conscientia, quasi
concludens scientia; and it has a twofold Act, the first is to give Testimony
to things, whether we have done well or ill; if we have done them well, then it
gives testimony for us, Romans 9.1. My Conscience also bearing me witness; and
if we have done evil, then it testifies against us. Therefore Nazianzen used
to call the Conscience Pedagogu^ animae; for as a Pedagogue waits upon a
Child, and commends him when he does well, and on the contrary whippeth him
when he does evil; so the conscience, when a man sins, it stingeth him like
Hornets, Deuteronomy. 7.20. But when he does well, it allows him, bids him go on,
maugre all opposition, and to rejoice and sing, though in a prison with Peter,
or in stocks with Paul. (vid. Weemse divine exercitations.) But to define it
more plainly and fully.

Conscience is a Relative power in the reasonable Creature, Definition
which upon determination through the light of Gods law, does either excuse or
accuse.

1. A power, because of the many operations and workings which it daily
exercises in us.

2. Its a Relative power, not absolute, Conscientia i.e. scientia cum alia
scientia.

1. Cum Deo scire.

2. Cum seipso scire.

3. Cum aliis scire.

4. Cum rebus ipsis conscire.


because what Conscience does, it does it in Relation to another, and therefore
called conscience, because it knows with another, with one that is of
familiarity with it, and witnesses the truth with it, and this is God alone,
who only knows the heart, and tries the reins. Hence it is that Paul
calls the spirit of God to second his conscience, I speak the truth in
Christ, I lie not, my Conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost: where
you may see 3 witnesses produced by the Apostle, and all of them without
exception, namely Christ, the holy Ghost, and Conscience, which is mill testes
a thousand witnesses.

3. The subject in which conscience is seated, it is in the reasonable
Creature, I do not say it is in the Creator, for God being holiness and
righteousness it self, needs not Conscience to order, govern and direct
him. Neither do I say it is in the unreasonable creature, because Beasts and
Fowls wanting reason, must needs want conscience: but this I affirm;
conscience is in the reasonable creature only, whether they be men or Angels,
good or evil, Saints or sinners, blessed Angels or collapsed Devils, this
power of Conscience is in them all.

Q. In what part of man is this power seated?

A. Tota in toto and tota in qualibet part.
I will say of conscience in the soul, as Philosophers of the soul in the
body. It is in every part or faculty of the soul.

1. It has the understanding for its Throne and Palace, where it is chiefly
resident, and keeps a complete Court in the whole soul, commonly called
forum conscientiae, and there as a Judge sits determining and prescribing,
absolving and condemning de jure.

2. Its in the memory, and there it acts as Register or Recorder, readily
minding and recording, witnessing and testifying de facto.

3. Its in the will and affections, and there Conscience carries it self like
a Jaylour or Executioner, rendering, rewarding, plaguing and punishing every one
sine respectu, without partiality.

The 4th. thing in the definition of conscience is determination; Conscience
determines what is good, what evil, what is to be done, what not to be done,
and so excites or diswades accordingly. If conscience say, this must be done,
then must we do it for conscience sake. If conscience tells us it is evil,
Romans 13.5.
then must we forbear for conscience sake, i.e. out of an holy fear of God,
whereby our conscience may be preserved pure before him.

5. The rule by which conscience acts, namely, the light of Gods law; I do
not say by the light of the word, Gospel, or written Law, but more largely by
the light of Gods law, I mean the law of Nature, written in man's heart before
the word was written, or Gospel revealed. For as man had a conscience from the
beginning, so he had light from the beginning to regulate conscience, which was
the law of Nature written in his heart. Romans 2.15.


6. The last thing in the desinition of conscience is her acting or working
upon the light received; which is twofold, either acquitting, or condemning:
when by her light she determines what is done, that it is good or evil; she
accordingly does excuse or accuse, Romans 2.15. And thus have you conscience in
general defined and explained.

Having showed you what conscience is, and in whom, namely, in the reasonable
Creature; now in so much as every man has reason, I may safely conclude that
every man has conscience: The point of Doctrine is clearly this.

Conscience.

1. That there is in man a conscience, let our Apostle clear up this truth in
himself, how often does he call and appeal unto conscience upon all
occasions, when he was convented before the Counsel, and greiveous things
charged upon him, he appeals to conscience. Men and Brethren, I have lived
(says he) in all good Conscience before God until this day. Again when
Ananias commanded them that stood by to smite Paul on the mouth, Act. 23.1.2.
and Tertullus with all his Rhetoric before Foelix besmeares him, calling him
a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, a maintainer of the sect of the
Pharisees, a polluter of the Temple, and what not? He has no way to cast off
all this filth, but by flying unto conscience, showing his enemies how far and
free he was from these base aspersions, that it was his constant practice to
keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men. Act. 24.16.


And that you may not think it to be Paul's peculiar, but common to others with
him, we approve our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God. 2 Cor.
4.2.


Ob. Though good men have a conscience, yet wicked men have not.

A. It is an usual saying indeed amongst men here, when they meet with such as
are very hard in their dealings, or very vicious in living, to say this man
has no Conscience.

But you must understand their meaning, when they say he has no conscience:
they mean no good conscience, or no working conscience.

Be you therefore assured, that there is a Conscience in every man and woman,
be they good or bad. not only in Paul, but also in Pilate, not only in John,
but likewise in Judas. John. 8.9. Romans 2.15.
The accursed Jews, wicked Pharisees, and Heathenish Idolaters will all
acknowledge the being and working of Conscience in them.

To hold therefore that some men have no Conscience, is both dishonorable to
God, and injurious to man.

1. A dishonor to God, as if he had given man not a perfect, but imperfect
soul, defective in its principal power or faculty, we confess that the body
of man being generated, may be maimed, wanting a part or member, Genesis 2.7.
as an eye, an ear, a hand or foot, Anima infundendo creatur, and creando
infunditur. Tho: Aqu. 2. d. 3. q. 1.4.1.
because it comes mediately from man: but as for the foul, being created and
infused by God, this cannot be defective but complete in all this powers and
faculties, and therefore a great dishonor to God to question his workmanship,
as men do if they deny man to have a conscience, Anima humana non eseminis
traduce propagatur, sed immediate a Deo creatur.
which is a special power or faculty in the soul.

2. An injury to man. 1. Deny man conscience, you deny him reason, and so
confound him with a beast: but grant him a conscience, and you grant him
reason, and set him in his proper place as a Lord or master over beasts. Ps.
8.7.


2. Again deny him Conscience, you deny him a Soul, one of his Essentials,
and so confound his manhood, which were a great injury to him. We acknowledge
sin has brought us to a great loss, but not to such a loss as to loose our
being: we have by Adams sin lost our innocence, but not our essence; our
Excellency, but not our existence; our soul is defiled, not annihilated; our
powers depraved, not destroyed; man is man still, has body and soul, parts,
members, powers and faculties, all good quoad bonum natural; all naught quoad
bonum morale. The truth then still stands clear, that there is in every man a
power or faculty called Conscience.

2. The Reasons why God has planted this power of conscience in man are two.

1. R. To show his Justice, that he will judge righteously. God commands judges
here on earth to execute righteous judgment, Deuteronomy. 1.16
to proceed secundum allegata and probata, to do nothing but upon good evidence
and witness. Now shall not the Judge of all the world do right? God has
therefore set this power in man, that when God comes to judge him, he may have
sufficient evidence in himself, his own Conscience witnessing for him or
against him before Gods Tribunal. For God will not condemn without a witness.

2. R. Is to show his mercy unto man: He knows man is very frail, and labilis
memoriae, apt to forget his God; and to forget himself. Sometimes he goes
forth and forgets to pray unto God for protection and direction, sometimes he
returns home and neglects his duty of praise to God for his preservation,
therefore God has placed in him this power of conscience as a remembrancer
unto him.

Again sometimes men's Passions are very high, as in Jonah, Jonah 4.9.
who is ready to quarrel with God, and to fall out with him, as if he had
greatly wronged him; God says unto him, do thou well to be angry? yea
(says he) I do well to be angry even unto death. His words are very high,
words of a passionate spirit, blinded with anger, rather then with any express
rebellion. Very needful therefore is it that such should have conscience as a
Controuler to check them.

Again, others their Affections are disorderly placed on wrong objects,
likeing those whom they should dislike, and loving those whom they should
loath; such was the blind Affection of Jehoshaphat to Ahab, I am (says he) as
thou art, 2 Chronicles. 18 3. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
my people as thy people: its needful therefore that conscience say to such as
Jehn to Iehoshaphat, should then love them that hate the Lord?

Lastly many men's appetites are very wanton, wholesome meats and drinks
content them not, their meats must be mixed with hurtful condiments, and
their drink with noxious ingredients, therefore it is very requisite that
conscience play the Monitor, and advise them not to look on the wine when it
sparkles, Prove. 23.30, 31.
nor to seek after mixed wine: though it go down pleasantly, yet at last it
will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice. And thus you see how just
and how merciful God is, to plant such a power as conscience within us.

conscience in every man, then let every man learn to magnify his maker, not
barely for being his Creature, but for being such a Creature as none is like
him.

First look upon thy meanest part, namely, thy body, view that well, and thou
shall see such an exellency in it, that no visible creature is comparable unto
man's body. If we look unto our first Creation, we find them very excellent
creatures.

1. God made them with consultation and deliberation, Genesis 1.26.
(let us make man.) His advice argues a work of great weight and moment, and
this word of plurality (us) intimates the Trinity, Galen though a mere
Naturalist, when he saw the admirable frame and structure of man's body, was so
taken with it that he could not but adiudge the honor of an Hymn to the wise
Creator of it.
and minds us of the mystery of the three persons in one Godhead. God the
father seems to speak, as communicating by way of consultation with God the
Son, and God the holy Ghost in the work of Creation.

2. The wonderful endowments of the body in beauty, strength, nimblenesse,
activity, without deformity or mortality.

3. All other bodies made for the good of man's body, the heavenly to give light
unto it, the earthly bodies to nourish, cherish, and comfort it.

Again, if we consider the recreation or regeneration of our bodies, we find
them more excellent.

1. Purchased by Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 6.20.

2. Sanctified by Christ's spirit, 1 Cor. 6.19.

3. Assumed by Christ's person, Phil. 2.7. When he took our nature, he took our
body, and was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, so that we
are as near to Christ, as our bodies to our souls.

Having thus viewed our meanest part, namely, the body; let us in the next
place consider our best part, namely, our soul.

What the soul is: The soul of man is a spirit distinct, invisible,
immortal, infused by God.

1. A spirit. Thus much the Original word declares, as in John 11. 33. and
John 12. 27. we find soul and spirit promiscuously used by our Savior, my
soul is troubled, my spirit is troubled.

2. A distinct spirit, because it has its being not only in the body, but also
out of the body, Eccl. 12.7.
as it had its time of entrance into the body, so its time of return out. As
it is in us, so it can be without us, and will be after us.

3. Invisible. Because no more to be seen then an Angel or God himself.

4. An immortal spirit. Eccl. 12.7. And Christ tells us, that men may kill our
bodies, but not our souls, which made Anaxzarchus bold to speak unto his
Tormentors, who did beat him with clubs, lay on my Sachel, meaning his body,
you cannot hurt Anaxzarchus, meaning his soul.

5. A spirit infused by God, Genesis 2.7. How Adam came by his soul we all know,
namely, by inspiration, but as for our own souls we are at a great stand.
Some think by participation, Chrysippus de nature a. lib. 3.
as one Candle lights another. Some think by generation, Tertullian l. de
anim a ch 5.
that a man begets a man complete. Others say it is by infusion, Thom. Aquin. 1
q. 75.6. 1 m.
by a peculiar inspiration, when the child is first quickened in the womb. Much
is imagined little concluded concerning this question, St. Austin has writ 4
books of the original of the soul, in which he leaves this question
undecided. And his second book of Retractions does witness that he continued
in that doubt unto his death. cap. 56.
and no marvel, for who knows the way of the spirit, Eccl. 11.5.

The Scripture seems to warrant the last opinion, calling God the Creator of
the Spirit, Zach. 12.1. The giver of the Spirit, Eccl. 12.7. The Father of our
spirits, Heb. 12.9. It is not without consideration, if God by a peculiar elegy
and style, is called the father of spirits, that he might be opposed to the
father of the flesh; for if the soul be by traduction, then those that are the
fathers of the flesh would also be the fathers of the spirits: neither would
God by this title be distinguished from the father of the flesh, if he wrought
alike in both, and did not form men's souls otherwise then their bodies. So
then consider well your bodies and souls, and you may safely conclude that of
all the creatures that ever God made, there is more to be seen of God in man
then in them all, and in man, much in his body, more in his soul, but most of
all in his conscience, (as one says) this smells more of God, then the
heavens, the Sun, the Stars, or all the glorious things of the earth, gold,
precious stones, Rubies, or sweetest herbs, roses, or lillies. Oh how should we
magnify our maker, Ps. 139.14.
and with David say, I will praise thee O Lord, for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made; marvelous are thy works and that my soul knows right well.

conscience were at first very pure and excellent, but now like our selves they
are most sinful, yea our Souls and Consciences are defiled, Tit. 1.15.
therefore nothing worthy praise in them.

consciences which were pure and excellent at first, are by Adam's sin become
defiled and unclean. But let me tell you there is no part, power or faculty in
the whole man, that retains so much of its excellency in it as conscience
does, though the whole soul were defiled, and every part and power depraved,
yet conscience had so much life left in it, as (with Jobs messengers) to tell
sad tidings of man's great loss. There remains in it scintilla rectae
rationis, a little spark to show what great light has been extinguished, but
now this also through affected blindness and wilful malice is so smothered
and suffocated through a daiely custom of sinning, that I may say of
conscience in many as the Psalmist of an Idol, it has an eye and cannot see,
an ear and cannot hear, a mouth and cannot speak. Thus stands the cause whith
many a hardened sinner. The eye of their conscience is as the eye of a mole,
which serves only to decore the body, but not to guide the way. Their ears but
as the ears of an Addar, wilfully stopped at the best counsel that the
messenger of Christ can bring unto it, and the mouth of it as the mouth of a
viper, that sucks in and sends out nothing but poison and poisonous
expressions. Yet notwithstanding the natural Conscience will hold an
excellency beyond all other powers and faculties in the soul. So that thy
Maker still deserves praise from thee.

conscience, then let all acknowledge it and not dare to conceal what God has
given them. Its very dangerous to hide any Talent that God gives us in a
Napkin, Luke 19.
what God bestows on man, man is to employ and use it to the honor of him
that gives it: therefore let conscience appear in a conscientious walking
before him, be holy to thy God, Tit. 1.12.
upright to thy neighbor, and sober in thy self, walk so circumspectly in
thy place and calling, that all may say thou art a man of conscience. But woe
unto us we sojourne in Mesech, our habitations are in Kedar, we live among such
as are enemies to conscience, yea open and professed enemies unto it: yea the
very naming of conscience is very hateful unto them, ask them where their
conscience is, and they will desperately answer, what tell you me of
conscience? Conscience (say they) was hanged long ago. But let me tell thee
thou wretched Belialist, that say that conscience is hanged, wast thou the
Hangman? If so; then know God will be avenged on thee for this cruel act, he
will one day revive conscience, and then assure thy self thy conscience will
hang thee.

But hear me (thou foolish man) that thus talkest of hanging conscience, thou
speak not only profanely but most ignorantly think thou it is in the
power of any man to hang conscience, know thou, it is impossible, the work is
too hard for all the hangmen in the world. The Hangman may hang thee as he did
Haman, or thou may hang thy self as did Judas, but neither he nor thou art
able to offer such violence to conscience. Wer'st thou to live as long as
Methusalem, it will outlive thee; go where thou will, it will go with thee, nec
fugere nec fugare poteris, go up to Heaven, or go down to Hell, 'twill never
leave thee nor forsake thee.

Again I find some who are so maliciously bent against conscience, that they
resolve, if they cannot hang conscience, they will beat out her teeth, and
pluck out her tongue, so that she shall neither bite nor bark, if the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, the pride of life, if all the pleasures of sin
will do it, they will surely effect it. They will call for the harp with Saul,
for their Cup with Nabal, and their Harlot with Herod, and all to drown the
cries and complaints of conscience: but let me tell such, that thus labor to
make conscience dumb, possible it is that by a long custom in sin, or greedy
practice of it, men may prevail so far, as to silence her for the present, so
that she shall not speak: but know this, though you keep conscience from
speaking, yet not from writing, she will act the part of a Recorder and
Register, put down exactly every days deviations and aberrations, and when
she sees her time, will produce her Bill and read it aloud, making thine ears
to tingle, now a lie, and then an oath, this time drunkenness, that time
uncleanesse, such a day thou tookest away thy Brothers goods, by oppression and
theevery; another day his good name, by slander and calumny. In fine the Bill
will be so bigg, so black, that thou will not be able to endure to hear it
read. And then thy conscience whom thou have thus wronged, will be avenged for
all her wrongs, and act the part of a Judge, a Jaylour, and a Tormentour, and
join with her God in that black and most just sentence, take him, bind him
hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, where there shall be nothing
but weeping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, and that for ever. Oh consider this ye
that abuse Conscience, lest she tear you in pieces, when none shall deliver
you.

3. Use of Conviction unto all Atheistical persons that dare say with their
tongue, or in their heart, there is no God. Tell me thou Atheist, have thou a
conscience in thee, and yet no God over thee? how can this be? if thou will
suffer thy self to be lead by common reason, thou then wilt be forced to say
there is a God. Consider the operation of thy conscience, if it be not seared;
and thou shall find that upon some gross sin, it will be a witness and give
testimony against thee, but to whom? to men or Angels? that cannot be, for they
cannot hear the voice of conscience, nor receive consciences testimony,
neither can they see what is in the heart of man, It remains therefore that
there is a spiritual substance, most wise, most holy, most mighty, that sees
and knows all things, to whom conscience bears record, and that is God
himself. Let Atheists bark against this as long as they will: they have that
in them that will convince them of the truth of the Godhead (will they, nill
they) either in life or death. Let the dreaming Atheist consider the great
affliction that that severe Governesse of the life of man brings upon their
souls by affrighting horrors of Conscience, by puzzeling and befooling them in
the free use of their Reason; by curbing them in their natural and kindly
enjoyments in the life present, and making bitter all the pleasures and
contentment of it by some checks of Conscience: by anxious cares and
disquieting fears concerning their state in the life to come. Besides those
ineffable agonies of mind, dampes and deadness of spirit that they sometimes
undergo, so that to be buried quick were less torture by far, then such dark
heart-sinking privations of all the joys of life. And they cannot choose (did
they not shut their eyes against the light) but see that there is a
superintendent principle over nature, which is all one as to confess that
there is a God.

If thou be not convinced by the working of thine own conscience, then
consider the workings of conscience in others: what makes Adam to run into the
thicket, sarah to stand behind the Tent door, Jonah to lurk down in the side
of the ship, Cain to fear a mortal blow from every man he meets, 1 King. 20 1
King. 22 25.
and Benhadad and Zedekiah to be a terror unto themselves, and to run from
chamber to chamber to hide themselves. It was their conscience, and nothing but
conscience accusing and testifying unto God against them.

Again consider, how is it, that when God is pleased to give out unto us a
notable sign of is power and majesty, as in thunder and lightning, that the
very sound of the one, and the very sight of the other (though these be but
from Natural causes) should make a Barbarian, a contemner of God, to shake and
tremble. Again whence is it that there is a Religions Adoration and propension
to the worship of a Deity even in those Heathens themselves, who sacrifice
(...), to the unknown God. There being no nation under heaven, that does not do
divine worship to some thing or other, and in it to God as they conceive. So
that they worship many of them but stocks and stones, and some particular piece
of nature, as the Sun, Moon, or Stars, knowing that there is somewhat to whom
worship belongs. Therefore according to the ordinary natural light that is in
all men, there is a God. Oh therefore blush and bewail thy damnable Atheism.
Consider well these things, know and understand, see and say, verily there is a
God that judges the earth. thus far of conscience in general.

Having spoken of the faculty, namely, conscience, we now proceed unto the
Quality, namely, a good conscience. Had Paul only said, I have, or I am
assured I have a conscience, he had said no more then a Reprobate or Devil
might have said.

But in that he says, he has a good conscience, and that he is fully
persuaded of the same, in this he goes beyond all reprobates and Devils, who
neither have, nor ever shall have such a bosom friend within them.

We must now distinguish conscience into two species, namely, good and evil.

1. Honest bona, pacate bona.
A good Conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19. Holding faith and a good Conscience. This good
Conscience is sometimes quiet, sometimes unquiet.

2. Vitiose mala, moleste mala. Bern: Ames.
An evil Conscience Heb. 10.22. having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience. This is likewise peaceable or turbulent. Now how these two do
differ both in their peace and their trouble, I shall hereafter show you.

I am now to speak of the first, namely, a good conscience, and more especially
of Paul's good Conscience.

1. What a good conscience is? I answer.

1. A good conscience is a Conscience rightly informed and principled by the
word, so that it can truly judge and determine evil to be evil, and good to
be good.

2. By a good conscience I understand a conscience sanctified by the holy
Spirit of God, whereby we are incited to good, and diswaded from evil, and
does readily excuse us for doing well, but accuse us for doing evil.

3. By Paul's good conscience in the Text, I understand a conscience both
purified and pacifyed by the blood and spirit of Christ, so that upon a true
sight and sorrow for sin, and a full persuasion of the remission of the same in
and for Christ, he enjoyed that peace which passes all understanding, Phil
4.7. 2 Cor. 1.12.
(i. e.) a true spiritual and incomprehensible rest and quietness of mind,
wrought by Gods spirit in his heart, and so preserving him from terror,
anxiety, and trouble.

But to draw unto some profitable point of Doctrine, you hear Paul glorying in
a good conscience; not as his peculiar, as if he only were the man thus blessed
of God, but does acknowledge the like mercy to be showed by God unto others,
and therefore mentioning those that labored with him in the Gospel, speaks
in the plural number (we) are assured we have a good conscience. So that we
may safely conlude that as all men have a conscience, so there are some that
have a good conscience.

Some there are,

Of this some, I find Noah a just man and perfect in his generation, Genesis 6.9.
and one that walked with God (i. e.) sincerely in his profession of Religion
without hypocrisy. Moses the meekest on the earth, Numb. 12.3.
one that despised the vain and vanishing honor, riches, pleasures of the
world, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, Heb. 11.25.
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Job a nonesuch, none like him
on the earth, Job. 1.
so perfect, so upright, that feared God and eschewed evil; David a man after
Gods own heart; Nathaniel, a true Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile (i.
e.) a man of simple integrity. 1 John.
Paul a continual practitioner of a good Conscience, making it his daiely
practice to keep a conscience void of offense both toward God and toward man.
Act. 24.16.
Thus might I tire you out with a long Catalogue of blessed Saints, who lived
in all good conscience from their conversion unto their dissolution. Act. 23.1.


Q. How came these to have a good conscience, seeing all by nature have their
consciences defiled.

A. 1. They had the blood of Christ applied unto their consciences, whereby
they were purged from the impurity of dead works, Heb. 9.14.
it being the fountain for sin and for uncleanness, ( Zach. 13.1.) in which
poor loathsome, leperous souls wash and are cleansed: they were put into this
poole of Bethesda, and came out clean, being made white in the blood of the
Lamb.

2. They had the righteousness of Christ imputed unto them, whereby they were
discharged from the debt of sin, all hand-writings of accusations being
canceled, and they esteemed holy and unblameable in the sight of God, Romans 5.1.
Not for any thing wrought in them and done by them, but for Christ's sake alone.
Not by imputing faith it self, or any other Evangelicall obedience, but by
imputing the obedience and satisfaction of Christ as their righteousness,
received and rested on by faith.

3. They by diligence in Christian watchfulness do maintain their Covenant
with God, and if casually by any slip they seemed to break the peace, they were
careful to renew their Covenant by true humiliation and reformation, earnestly
doing their first works and redeeming their former negligence with double
diligence. Rev. 2.5.


2. Q. Whether a man may not have a good conscience, yet the same to be very
unquiet and much troubled?

Answ: You must know that there is a 4 fold conscience.

1. Good and quiet. Purifyed and pacifyed, which rests in a sweet feeling of
the mercies of God in Christ. Such a conscience had Paul that testified unto
him, that in simplicity and Godly sincerity he had his conversation. And
Hezekiah when he was upon his death bed (as he thought) his conscience gave him
a testimonial that commended him to God better then all the men in the world
could, that he walked before the Lord in truth and in a perfect heart, and did
that which was right in his sight. Is. 38.3 This sweet peace of a good
Conscience flows from a certain inexpressible assurance, that we are the sons
of God, a certain secret manifestatio^ that God has received us and put away
our sins.

2. Neither good nor quiet. When the heart is as full of sin, as hell of
darkness, and lies under a serious apprehension of Gods wrath, and a certain
looking for of vengeance and fiery indignation to devour, Heb. 10.27. and is
in a forlorn condition, not knowing where to go for help, but God is to him as
the burning fire to the withered stubble, and as the scorching flame to the
melted wax. Thus the cause stood with Judas, who after he had committed that
cursed fact of betraying his Master, he was so gnawed by the worm conscience,
that nothing but an halter could ease him; he hanged himself. And certainly
had not Hell gaped for him, he had got by the bargain. This made Cain go in
continual fear of killing, and the persecuting Tyrant to cast up his bowels
toward heaven and say, vicisti Galilaee, thou have overcome O Galilean.

3. Quiet but not good. This is common to the best of men, and they bless
themselves in it, that they never had a bad word from conscience all their
days, it does not trouble nor terrify them; certainly such a Conscience is
seared with an hot iron, and who ever is thus stigmatized, is marked for a
Rebbell against God. They sleep in their sins like Jonah in the storm, though
they are in greatest danger to be cast into the gulf and sea of Gods
everlasting wrath.

4. Good but not quiet. And such doubtless a child of God may have; Examples
are many, as in Job chap. 6. 4. The Arrows of the Lord are within me, Rev. 2.3.
the poison whereof drinks up my spirit: the terrors of the Lord do set
themselves in array against me. So David, thine arrows stick fast in me, and
thy hand presses me sore, Job. 6.4.
there is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither any rest
in my bones, because of my sin. Conscientia bona and turbata. Bern:
For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me. Thus Ezekiah and others. But at such times though they have a
good conscience, yet do they fail in Assurance, Ps. 38.2, 3, 4.
they have Paul's conscience, but not Paul's confidence, it is the latter, not
the former that makes it quiet and inoffensive: and such was Paul's conscience
not only good, but quiet and inoffensive. Christians have sometimes Clear
Sunshini days, and sometimes dark cloudy days, sometimes they are under a
cloud, and the light of Gods countenance does not shine on them; sometimes they
behold the face of God in righteousness, and his favor is better to them then
life. Sometimes (like Hannah) they are in the bitterness of their souls,
Conscientia and honest bona, and pacate bona Ames.
and drink of the bitter waters of Marah, which makes them go mourning all
their days; so then it may stand with a child of God to have a disquiet,
troubled Conscience.

1. Use for Trial, whether we be of that some that have a good Conscience, he
that will not try, wants it; he that tries superficially, has cause to doubt
it; but he that is exact and sincere may safely conclude, I am assured I have a
good Conscience: therefore search your selves as with Candles and Torches,
whether you can find this precious Jewel of a good conscience treasurd up
within you, yea or no. And the better to incite you to a true and diligent
Trial, take these 2 Motives.

1. The near resemblance between a Natural and Spiritual Conscience, Motives
to a diligent Trial.
and that in diverse respects. They both have their conflicts, both their
loathing of sin, they both seem to turn a broadside against sin, and to
complain against it. The Natural conscience says I see the better, but I
follow the worse; The Spiritual conscience says, the good which I would do, I
do not, but the evil which I would not do, that do I. See here the difference,
in the latter, there is a will striving against sin: but in the former no will,
no striving at all.

2. The Natural conscience is principled only by some general grounds of
Nature, acting and making conscience; so far as his rules and principles will
carry him, and so deceives the Natural man, making him to boast of what he
has not, namely a good conscience. Whereas the spiritual Conscience rightly
principled by Gods word, and sanctified by his Spirit makes the person to have
a good Conscience in all things, Heb. 13.18. making conscience of all that God
commands or forbids, Ps. 119.6.101. Be therefore careful in trying your
selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. And that you may not be deceived take these 5 marks.

1. He that has a good conscience, Notes of a good Conscience.
can truly say, that what he does, he does it for Conscience sake; Conscience
stirrs him up unto the duty, and he cannot satisfy conscience, if he neglect
it: He subjects himself to God, and he subjects himself to man, and this not
for wrath but conscience. See well therefore to this, and the rather, Romans 13.5.
because Many there are, whose Actions are very specious, and yet without any
regard to conscience. Solomon describing a good man, says, he is one that
fears an oath; he does not say that he is one that swears not, but one that
fears an oath: possible it is that a man may not swear and why, because he
has been well educated, or he stands in awe of his Parents or Governors, or
fears some mulct from the Magistrate; this is no testimony of a good
Conscience But if a man swear not, because he fears an Oath; this argues
that the man fears the commandment, and to fear the commandment is a sure
note of a good conscience. Prove. 13.13.
The least hair makes the eye weep, so the least sin makes the heart smite.
Now as in avoiding of sin, so in practicing piety, a man reads the Scripture at
home, hears the word preached in public, performs duties in his family. But
why does he thus? if to satisfy conscience in obedience unto God it is well; but
if base and sinister ends to please and satisfy his own carnal desire, this
is base and far from a good Conscience. We find the Shechemites gross
hypocrites in this, they will join with Gods people, and do as they do; be
circumcised as they are; had this been done out of conscience, it would have
rejoiced the hearts of all godly ones; but here is no such thing, they will be
circumcised indeed, but not to please God, but to please Hamor and Shechem
their Rulers, and to enrich themselves, (shall not their goods and their
cattle be ours?) Ge. 34.23.


Thus many now adays amongst us will make some show of religion, perform holy
duties both publicly and privately, not out of conscience but out of carnal
policy. They have learned Matchiavels maxim, to seem religious is a credit,
but to be neligious is a cumber. Its only a form without power, a show without
substance. They set not God before their eyes, neither do they with Moses see
him that is invisible: they look only unto men, and all their aim is how they
may please men, and advantage themselves in earthly things. Therefore if you
will be sure your Conscience is good, do what you do, for Conscience sake, not
because man thinks it fit, and you think it profitable or honorable, but
because God commands it.

2. Note. If you have a good conscience then will you suffer what you suffer,
for Conscience sake, yea to satisfy Conscience. This is praise worthy says the
Apostle, 1. Pet. 2.19.
1 Pet. 2.19. when a man for conscience toward God endures grief, suffers
wrong, and as his precept, so his practice; had rather be punished for doing
well, then praised for doing evil. See this in Daniel, he will suffer hunger,
feed upon Pulse, rather then defile his conscience. Dan. 1.8.
The three Children will choose rather to have their bodies burned in schorching
flames, then to have them bowed to a base Idol. And Paul had rather that
Ananias should smite him, then that his conscience should smite him.

Try thy self therefore by this Note, do thou suffer, and do thou so
suffer as to satisfy conscience, patiently bearing it, because God will have it
so, as David in the railing of Shimei, he curses me, because God has said
unto him, curse David. Not that God said so much by word, but by a command of
providence, so ordering and disposing of Shimei his malice, as to make it a rod
to correct and chastise David for his sin; 2 Samuel 16.20.
but as a Scorpion to Shimei to sting him to death and destruction. Thus did
Job in all his troubles, bear with them with wonderful patience, Job. 1.21.
he will not charge God foolishly, but says the Lord gives, the Lord takes
away, praised be the name of the Lord.

But alas how many now amongst us would be accounted men of a good conscience,
and yet will suffer nothing for conscience. They will suffer no grief, no
pain, no loss for it. See this in Amaziah King of Judah, he hires an Army of
an 100000 men of valor out of Israel, 2 Chr. 25.6.
for an hundred Talents of silver, but God dislikes his hired men, and sends a
Prophet unto Amaziah to dismiss them. The King tells the Prophet, what shall I
do for the 100 Talents? as if he should have said, I have disbursed a great
sum of monyes, and shall I now loose all? You may see how loath he is to
loose his money, 100 Talents of silver a great sum. But alas what is 100
Talents to a good conscience? yet look abroad in the world, and you may then
descend from Talents to pounds, from pounds to pence, and from pence to
farthings, and find some yea a multitude, that if a farthing and a good
conscience stand in competition, they will loose their Conscience to save their
farthing.

Hear this you Tradesmen, Typlers, Retailers, and all that have any commerce
in buying, and selling, witness this truth with me; how often have you, and
that upon the Lords day preferred your own houses before Gods house? your
t^pling guests and profane Customers before Gods ministers and servants?
choosing rather to gain a Trisle at home, then to gain salvation abroad in
attending on Gods holy ordinances. Yea let me say yet more unto you, how often
has your conscience blamed you for so doing, and you, whereas you should have
hearkened unto conscience voice, have stopped your ears and blamed conscience
for too much strictness, too much tenderness; what mean these words of yours?
If I should be so strict in my dealings as Preachers would have me to be, I
might soon pluck down my sign, shut up my shop, and sit still and do nothing.
Let me tell such, these words savor not of a good, but an evil Conscience.
God puts none of his into such streights, as that they cannot live except they
live unholily, unjustly. Believe it, as there is no calling, be it never so
high, that must call thee from God, so there is no calling be it never so low,
that must give thee a dispensation to dishonor God. And as in the greatest
calling men may live both fully and faithfully; so in the meanest calling, if
men use diligence with conscience, they may live honestly and yet comfortably.
Oh therefore my Beloved cast off such gain, as filthy lucre; such customers,
as your great enemies: and take up this holy resolution never to make have for
wealth, nor to use any unlawful means for this transitory Trash, but say, if
I beg I beg, if I starve I starve, I will loose all, rather then loose a good
conscience

3. Note of a good Conscience is boldness for God and in Gods cause. The
righteous are as bold as a Lion. Prove. 28.1
Prove. 28.1. When the conscience is good, the courage is great, it will make a
man to have a Lions heart and an Angels face; such an heart had Paul, when he
looked on the Council, Act. 23.1. such a face had Stephen the Proto-Martyr,
Act. 23.21 and 15.6.
Act. 6.15. All that sat in the Council looking steadfastly on him, saw his
face as if it had been the face of an Angel. This good conscience will make a
man's face as a flint against such as rebel against God. Ez. 3.8, 9.
Ezekiel. 3.8, 9.

Let but God call upon such, Is: 41.10, 13.14.
saying, fear not worm Jacob, for I am with thee, be not afraid, for I am thy
God: or let him stand by them, Act. 23.11
as he did by Paul, and bid him be of good cheer: They presently take such
courage unto them, that having God for them, they fear not who are against
them. Ps. 3.6.
David will not fear an host of men, Athanasius a world of men, and Fox in
the story of Martin Luther. p. 849.
Luther will not fear a multitude of Devils, were they in number as many, as
there were Tiles upon the houses of Worms.

But alas where are these valiant ones become? we have many very courageous for
themselves, and in what makes for their own interest: but as for God and in
his cause they are very Cowards.

They are bold for sin, but bashful for sanctity; they can plead for Baal, but
not for God: And yet such would be accounted men of a good conscience.

But let me tell such they do much deceive themselves, as they have not Paul's
courage, so neither Paul's conscience, and as they are strangers to a good
conscience, so are they strangers to a most good God, who will be so far from
blessing them, that he will surely curse them, and give such timorous and
fearful persons, which want the fire of zeal, their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimestone, which is the second death. Rev. 21.8. Rev.
21.8.


A Childlike heart can never be patient under Gods dishonor, though he is
always silent under his displeasure. Moses was cool in his own cause, but
hot when Gods credit lay at stake. When the children of Israel had wrought
folly in the golden Calfe, the zeal of God did so eat him up, that he could as
well contain fire in his bosom, as be patient, when Gods glory suffered.

Oh therefore try your selves upon this Note, and before you find your selves
more bold for God, be not so bold as to boast of a good conscience.

4. Note of a good Conscience is to love a Conscientious Teacher and
Instructor: he desires not to live under a cold, man-pleasing ministry, which
preaches liberty, not strictness of conscience; which sows pillowes under
men's armeholes, and cries peace, peace, so that none departs from his evil
way. The good conscience desires such a Preacher, who is not shaken with
fear, nor seduced with flattery, whose voice is the voice of a crier; his
sound as the sound of a trumpet; Vsai 58.1.
his words like sharp nails and piercing goads; Eccl. 12.11. Heb. 4.12.
his preaching an heart-pricking; his dividing of his Text and matter the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, of the joints and marrow. Such we find
amongst the Prophets, that cried aloud and did not spare to tell the people of
their transgressions, and the house of Judah of their sins. Such were amongst
the Apostles, who were sons of Thunder, and threatened judgments against the
wicked and rebellious: Yea Christ himself, who had the tongue of the learned
to speak the word in season to him that was weary, Isai. 54.4.
was also as a polished shaft, Isai. 49.2.
and his mouth as a sharp sword, his eyes as a flame of fire, and his coming
into the Temple none was able to abide: he was as a Refiners fire, and Fullers
soap, Mal. 3.2. Isa. 11.4.
and with the breath of his lips he did slay the wicked. Is. 11.4.

Such are the Teachers that a good conscience loves and delights in. But our
age can no more endure this kind of preaching, then the Israelites could endure
the shrill sound of the Trumpet, sounding louder and louder; He. 12.19.
and that terrible fire, and that voice of words, which they desired they might
hear no more. Christ's Ministers now are become Antichristian (say they) their
doctrine only legal; though indeed they trace Christ and his Apostles, and
observe their method, who first commanded Repentance to be preached, Lu. 24.47.
and then remission of sins to be promised: and Paul draws all his doctrine
unto these 2 heads, first repentance toward God; the second faith in Jesus
Christ. Act. 20.21.
Yet men are now become so tender, that they will not have their Dalilahs
touched, you may not come unto them, as the good Samaritan, with wine to search
and cleanse, but only with smooth oil to heal and comfort; it must be all the
riches of Christ, and a naked faith in Christ. If you touch with Obedience, you
are legal, and Physicians of no value. But let me tell such as follow such
Doctors, their cause is dangerous; when the blind lead the blind, Isa. 9.16.
you can easily conclude what will follow. The leaders of this people cause
them to err, and they that are lead of them, are destroyed. Wherefore would
you be assured that your conscience is a good conscience, do not with Ahab hate
Micaiah, nor with Ananias smite Paul, do not vilify those whom God does honor;
I mean zealous, honest and conscientious ministers, who labor in the word and
doctrine, and are examples to the flock in faith and love, in spirit and
purity; if you do, we are bold to challenge you for men of an evil conscience,
but on the other side if you honor them, as men sent of God, and highly
esteem them for their works sake, and readily obey their wholesome doctrine,
following them as they follow Christ, you may then safely conclude, we are
assured we have a good conscience.

Last Note of good Conscience is universal Obedience. This is an excellent
distinguishing note between truth and error, a good and an evil conscience.
God calls for this, saying, in all things that I have commanded you, be
circumspect. Exodus 23.13. Caute estote 1. magna
God will have conscience to be good to all persons, Act. 24.16. and good in
all things, Heb. 13.18. and to be good at all times. attentione. servate vatabl.
It must be our exercise daily to keep a conscience void of offense both
toward God and toward man. He that has a good conscience his heart is
molded into obedience, his will is cast into Gods will. He is ready to do what
God commands, and to leave undone what God forbids. Like the slower that opens
and shuts with the Sun. So it opens to God and shuts to sin. He desires to do
Gods will on earth, as the Angels do it in heaven, readily, sincerely,
constantly.

Let us now try our selves by this note, and we shall find a good conscience to
be very rare, we may run (with Jeremie) to and fro to find such a man; Jer. 5.1.
we may go into many families, towns and parishes and perchance miss him at
the last.

The profane and vicious will not own such good conscience; and the Civil
Justitia and formal Hyprocrite care not.

These two last have high conceits of themselves, but yet upon trial will be
found too light.

First the civil man thinks well of himself because he is kind unto his
neighbor, defrauds no man, but pays every man to a penny, and as for the poor
and needy, he is open handed ready to supply their wants at all times: and
therefore doubts not but his conscience is very good, but let me tell thee thou
civil man, thou art much deceived, if thy Conscience were good, thou would
be holy to God, as well as upright to man, how is it that thou art so ignorant
in the things of God and of thine own salvation, that thou make no conscience
of prayer in thy Family, of reading the Word, of hearing it preached unto
thee: no conscience of an Oath, of a lie, and of keeping the Sabbath day,
surely if thy conscience be not good to God as well as to man, it is void of
goodness.

Secondly, The formal Hypocrite is as high, if not higher, in his conceits of
self worthiness, He is one that labors to know God and to serve him, both
publicly in the Congregation, and privately in his Family, he is a professed
onimie, unto Ignorance and prophanes and prayseth God that he is not as other
men and so concludes that he has a good conscience.

But I must tell thee thou Hyporite, thou art as much deceived as the former.
Tit. 2.12.
The Grace of God that brings salvation teaches thee to be righteous as well
as holy. If thy conscience be good, how isit that thou art so deceitful in
bargaining; so false in promising; so unfaithful in paying: what is thy
dishonest religion better then the civil man's irreligious honesty, you both
come short of a good conscience and if you thus persist will come short of
heaven and all true happiness, let me threfore advise you to beware of others
harms, look upon Saul, Jehu, Hered, and the high priests, These in their own
eyes were very conscionable men. 1 Samuel 14.34.
Saul will not have the people to sin against the Lord in eating with the
blood: Jehu will be Zealous for God in rooting out Ahabs posterity. Mark. 6.26
Herod makes conscience of his Oath to Herodias, the HIgh Priest will not put
the price of blood into the treasury.

See and behold a Mess of Notorious Hypocrites, ahd these been sincere their
consciences would have been good to all, in all, and always.

If saul had truly made conscience of beast blood he would not have been so
prodigal of man's blood, as to destroy 85. of the Lords priests that wore the
lynnen Ephod.

If Jehu had truly made conscience of pulling down Ahabs Idols, he would not
have left Jeroboams Calves.

If Herod had truly made conscience of an Oath, he would not so easily have
granted John Baptists head unto his Herodias.

If the High priest had truly made conscienceof taking the price of blood,
they would not have been so ready to give a price for blood as 30 pieces to
Judas to betray his Master, but as they sowed, so they reaped: They sowed sin
and reaped shame, and so shall all that answer Gods commands in part but not
in whole.

If therefore: thou will beapproved of God, approve thy self to God in an
universal Obedience, be good to all, be good in all, or not good at all, and
thus much of this first use namely the use of Trial.

2. Use, is for reproof unto the ignorant and profane, who though they never
tried, nor yet intend to try themselves, by these forementioned Notes or
marks, yet will boldly tell you, they have a good Conscience.

But will you know upon what ground they build this bold Assertion?

Answer: It is upon a very false ground, and upon a very sandy foundation.
That is upon the stillnesse and quietness of their Conscience. Though they
swear, lie, steal, oppress, be drunk, and act uncleanesse and all manner of
villainy; yet their conscience does not molest or trouble them.

They do not check, or say unto them what have thou done? Jer. 8.6.
and therefore are ready to bless themselves to be most happy, and to
condemn others whose consciences do trouble them to be most unhappy.

But let me tell such, that Quietness or unquietness are no infallible
cha\racters of a good or evil conscience: possible it is that a quiet
Conscience may carry a man merrily to Hell, and on the other side an unquiet
Conscience may carry a man crying to Heaven. The one may never dream of Hell
before they fall into it, The other never be assured of Heaven before they have
the possession of it.

The old world were eating and drinking, revelling and making merry, when the
flood came and swept them away, Zimri and Cosbi in the very Act of
uncleanness, were thrust through with a Iavelin, and how many in these unhappy
wars have suddenly perished and come to a fearful end, when they dreamed not
of it. Their drunken health being their last draught, and their blasphemeous
Oaths their last words: so that we may truly say they went merrily to Hell.

Again on the other side, if men professing Christ may dye without assurance
and yet be saved (as Mr Chambers in Leicester, who cried out that he was
damned, Perkins Hildersham
and Francis Spira who would change his Condition with Cain, Sanl and Judas) If
such might be saved as some in Charity think, then may we say and that safely
that some go crying unto heaven.

Wherefore my Advise to such, is not to presume upon a still and quiet
conscience, but to see from whence this stillness and quietness arises, if
from a true knowledge of Gods holiness and their own vileness, if from a true
sight and sense of their sin and an unfeigned humiliation for the same, with an
Assurance of Gods free pardon in Christ, then is their peace and quietness of
the right kind, such a Quietness as neither does nor can accuse, them but
gives a Comfortable testimony of their holy walking before God since their
conversion.

Examples of such, we find in Obadiah who told Elijah, 1 Kin. 18.12. Heb. 11.5.
Hujusmodi conscientia est instarferae alicujus quae qua^din dormit videtur esse
cicur, and nemine^ laedit, Sed excitata in bominem involat and dilacerat. Sic
conscientiacauteriata, aegritudine alia graviore, vel ctiam morte
appropinquante excitatura Deo, and truculenta sua immanitate homine^ terret.
Alst. Thecl. Casuum. c. 2.
that he feared the Lord from his youth, and Enoch who before his translation
had from God more then an ordinary Testimony, that he pleased god, so Paul I
Have lived (says he) in all good good Conscience before God, until this day.
these had good Consciences indeed, such as speak peace with Gods allowance.

But if thy quietness or stillness which is in thee, do arise out of an
Ignorance of God and of thy self, not knowing the mind and will of God and how
Cross their ways and works have been unto the same. Or if out of
impenitency, not regarding sin, nor humbling thy self for sin. Then let me
tell thee thy conscience is not good but evil, thy quiet conscience is a
sleepie Conscience, a dull and drowsy Conscience, and if not timely prevented
will prove a dead, a seared and a caute rised conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2. and
though for the presentit sleep like a churlish mastife and neither bite nor
bark, yet at last it will be awakened and fly in thy face, and tare thee, as
the Devil did the man in which he entered Mark. 9.22, He rent him and threw him
into the fire. Belshazer was drinking wine in Bowls: But there came out
Fingers on the wall and his countenance changed, Dan. 5.5. When the eye of your
conscience shall be opened, and thou shall see a dismal handwriting against
thee, hell gaping, and the just Judge preparing Vengeance for thee, what
prodigious horror will surprise thee? had thou a world of worlds in thy
possession, thou would count them of too small Value to purchase a freedom
from these first fruits of Hell.

As a member that is Benumbed with sleep, is senlelesse and seems to be void
of all life. But yet when it gathers blood and awakens again, it Shoots and
pricks, and feels as big as Ten. So conscience may be past feeling; Ephesians. 4
19. (...) Remorselesse, Stupid, like a member that is benumbed, and has no
sense in it (as the word signifies) like a dead man that feels not the
heaviest Burden that is laid on him. But when it is awakned, Oh that Infinite
unexpressable torments, that will surround thy precious soul! At thy Right
hand, thy sins will be accusing thee. At thy Left hand Infinite Devils
expecting thee.

Under thee the fullness of hell burning; Above thee an Angry Judge, and within
thee hty Conscience tormenting. So that to live will be a torment, to dye will
be an Hell. Yea God himself will rowse it up, if not by his word as he did
Ahabs Conscience, or by his rod as he did Pharaohs, yet by his terrible
presence when thou shall stand before his Tribunal, then shall thou call unto
the mountains to fall upon thee, and the Hills to cover thee from the presence
of the Lord: Yea then shall thy conscience like a vulture gnaw upon thy heart,
and like a Scorpion sting thy very soul, and that rigorously, without
Commsseration: constantly, without intermission: and continually, without
cessation: then shall thou feel that worm that never dies, and that fire
that never goes out. Oh therefore do not content thy self which a false
peace, but labor for the peace which God approves, give no rest to thine eyes
or slumber unto thine eye lids before thou have gotten a good conscience.
namely A Conscience both purified and pacified by the blood and spirit of
Christ. 1 Cor. 6.11.


3. Use for Comfort to such as have tried and upon a truetryall have found
themselves to be enriched with this precious Jewel namely a good conscience,
let such magnify God and say, the Lord has dealt most bountifully with me,
praised be his great Name for his uuspeakable gift. Elkanah could say to Hannah
that he was better unto her then ten sons. But thy good conscience may truly
say to the that she is better then ten thousand sons then a world of earthly
friends, for under God and his Christ, conscience is the friend of friends the
truest, sweetest, constanst and most faithful friend.

1. The truest Friend, which will deal most truly with thee, earthly Frinds
come short both in reproves and comforts, they do what they do by half,
speak a little to thy face, but more behind thy back, and many times deal
untruly with thee; when thou do good, they will say thou do evil, and
when thou do evil, They will say well done, but thy good conscience will
not do so, will not daub with untempered mortar nor call good, evil, nor evil
good; but will deal very plainly with thee, accusing thee when thou do ill,
and so excusing thee when thou do well.

2. The sweetest friend, Phil. 4.
that will make thee ever merry, and always rejoice. to laugh under the whip,
to sing in the stocks, to joy even then when thy goods are spoiled, yea in the
sharp trials to rejoice that thou art accounted worthy to suffer for Christ
and to Complete thy Joy, thy Conscience will feast thee, nor once or twice but
every day, it will be a continual feast unto thee.

3. The constanst friend, In time of distress, when carnal friends fail
thee, this will abide with thee. Art thou in disgrace which men, hated
traduced, accused, condemned, do the Abjects mock thee, the drunkards make
songs upon thee, do Beliaste charge thee with lies and Falsities, does
Tertullus withal his Art render thee an odious and pestilent fellow. Again,
do thy own friends account thee an hypocrite as Jobs friends did him, and the
world value thee as the filth and of-scouring of all things, Job. 16.19.
yet comfort thy self in this; that thy testimony is on high, and thy witness
in heaven, yea thy witness is on earth, in thine own conscience, say with
Job, not with standing all their spite and lies against me, I will hold fast my
righteousness and will not let it go, Job. 27.6.
my conscience shall not reproach me whilst I live.

4. The faithfull'st friend, that will help at a pinch, and when thou art in
greatest need; Job tells us that he had friends, but they were unfaithful,
They deceived him as a brook deceives the weary and thirsty Traveller, he
comes unto it in Summer to quench his thirst and then behold it is dried up:
again he seeks unto it in the Winter season, and then behold it is frozen, so
that he is still disappointed of his hope. Thus deal my unfaithful friends
with me says Job, when I have most need of their help, then they fail me.
Job. 6.15.
Solomon compares such to a broken Tooth, Prove. 25.19.
and a foot out of joint, which will surely deceive such as trust unto them;
for when they go to eat, their tooth will hinder them; or when to walk, their
foot will pain them, and so to be of no use or profit unto them. But a good
Conscience is no such false friend, no thou may trust unto it in the
greatest pressures, in times of disgrace, poverty, sickness, death, and
judgment: when all forsake thee, then will thy conscience like a faithful
Jonathan stand by thee. Ruth. 1.17
Ruth's resolution to stick to Naomi in all changes was more then ordinary to
tell her that nothing but death should part them: But here behold a better
friend, death shall not part thee and thy Conscience, she will be with thee in
sickness and in health, in life and death, in judgment and before Gods
Tribunal. Therefore rejoice, and let thy God be ever magnified.

4. Use is to exhort all such as have not this Heartejewell of a good
conscience, to labor above all things for the enjoyment of it. This is that
unum necessarium, though generally neglected. Every man voluntarily of himself
desires a good Wife, good Children, good Servants, good Clothes, good houses,
yea all good; but as for a good conscience which is worth all, and without
which all these outward blessings will be but so many curses unto us, yet alas
how careless are most in the getting of the one, how earnest and laborious in
the other. Let me therefore advise you in the first place to labor for a good
conscience, so shall all these outward blessings be sweetened unto you. Now that
you may not be deceived in this rich commodity, I will briefly show you what it
is.

A good conscience is a conscience both purified and pacisied; What a good
Conscience is.
mistake me not, I deny not but that Conscience may be good, if only purified:
but it cannot be well completed, except it be also pacified, for without this
latter, there is many a sad soul so troubled, that they will not believe they
have what indeed they have, viz. a good Conscience. They are so far from Paul's
assurance of a good conscience, that they rather believe their consciences to
be very evil and defiled Therefore strive to get them both, namely a
conscience truly parified, and truly pacified. Means.


Now follows the means both to purify and pacify conscience.

1. For the purifying of conscience, it is the part of every one professing
Christ, to consider that his conscience naturally is defiled, Tit. 1.15.
and that there is a necessity of taking off this defilement, if we would be
saved, namely the ignorance, error, and hardness of conscience wherewith it is
polluted. The principal means are two.

1. The first means to effect it, Principal means.
is the blood of Christ: by this blood we must have our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience. Heb. 10.22. and 9.14.
This is a singular way to have our Consciences purged from dead works to serve
the living God.

2. Means is the Spirit of Christ. This is that mundifying water mentioned
Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be cleant from
all your filthiness. These two, Christ's blood and Christ's spirit will cleanse
the foulest sinner and the most defiledst conscience. Paul writing unto the
Corinthians tells them what filthy creatures they were, 1 Cor. 6.9.10.
namely Fornicators, Idolaters, effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind,
Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Railers, Extortioners, and then showed them by
what means they were cured and cleansed, namely by the blood and spirit of
Christ. v. 11.
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. This is the refiners fire and
fullers soap, Mal. 3.2.
this is that hysope which will make us as white as snow, yea more white then
snow, Ps. 51.7.

Other means there are, which though not comparable to the first, yet as
subservient, are likewise requisite to this purifying of Conscience, namely the
Word, Faith, Repentance. Less principal means.


1. The Word. Now are ye clean (says Christ) through the word that I have
spoken unto you, John. 15.3. That is to say, the word accompanied with the
power of my Spirit.

2. So Faith is of a cleansing nature, it will purge the heart and cleanse the
conversation, Act. 15.9.

3. And as for repentance, we find that when Judah had defiled her self with
sin, God calls her to repentance as a way of cleansing. Wash ye, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil, learn to do well, and then though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow. Is. 1.16.
Thus you see how a defiled conscience may be purified.

2. Next follows how conscience may be pacified. Consider first of all what it
is that troubles conscience. Means.
It must be one of these three, either sin, or Satan, or Gods anger. It was
sin that so troubled Paul, the law in his members that warred against the law
of his mind, that so disquieted him, that it made him to cry out, Romans 7.24
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me. 2. It was Satan that winnowed
Peter, and withstood Jehoshus 3. Gods anger that so molested David, as to make
him cry out, Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure, there is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger.
Therefore unto such as are troubled with the sight of their sin, the assaults
of Satan, or sense of Gods displeasure, if their consciences be unquiet
because of these, either one or all, be careful in the use of such means as
God has ordained for pacifying conscience.

Now that I may not be tedious, remember what were the means to purify
conscience, and thou shall find the very same means will pacify conscience.

I told thee before that the blood of Christ and the Spirit of Christ as
principal. 2. The word, faith, and repentance as less principal. These would
make a defiled conscience to become pure.

So now I must tell thee again to make thy conscience quiet thou must have

1. The blood of Christ. Paul tells us that Christ by the blood of his Cross,
Col. 2.20
i. e. by his bloody oblation made upon the cross, has made peace and
reconciled all things. Now rightly to understand this Text, you must know that
by sin, heaven and earth were set at variance, and the creatures in them: but
by Christ there is unity set, not only betwixt God and man, but also betwixt
men and the Angels that are in heaven, as also the creatures that are upon the
earth, now if Christ's blood be such a Catholicon to take off all enmity beween
God and man, between men and Angels in heaven, men and creatures on earth, and
to make peace, then let us acknowledge it an excellent means to pacify
conscience. This was typified in the blood of the Pascall lamb: where this
blood was sprinkled upon any door-post, there was peace and security against
the destroyer. So where the blood of Christ is sprinkled upon the soul, their
conscience is at peace, and has security against all the remaining guilt and
corruption of sin, the rage of Satan, and danger of Gods displeasure.

This blood givves the soul all boldness to enter in into the holiest of all
by a new and living way, Heb. 10.19.
and gives us assurance before God.

2. Means to pacify conscience is the spirit of Christ, As his blood is the
procuring cause, so his spirit the producing cause. For this cause Christ and
the holy Ghost are called by one and the same name, because their end and
business is the same, namely to procure peace to the soul. They both are
called (...) or Advocates, Christ is our Advocate and and the spirit is Gods
Advocate. Christ is our Advocate to the father to procure us peace: The spirit
again is Gods advocate to us to produce peace. As the one prevails with God
for granting peace, so the other prevails with us to entertain peace. See
this cleared in 1 John: 2.1. If any man sin we have a Paraclete with the father
Jesus Christ the righteous. Here Christ is our advocate: again Joh. 14.16. I
will pray the father and he shall give you another Paraclete. In this place the
holy Ghost is Gods advocate, so you plainly see how the blood and spirit of
Christ must make up this true and full peace. Now for the causes or means
less principal and subservient, as the word, faith, repentance.

First the word, it is a word of reconciliation and pacification. Thus Peter to
Cornelius and his company tells them, ye know (says he) the word which God
has sent to the children of Israel, Act. 10.36
preaching peace by Jesus Christ which is Lord of all. Now as the Scripture in
general may be said to be a word of peace, so more especially the Gospel:
This is called the word of peace. The Author of it the Prince of peace. The
minister the Messenger of peace, Romans 10.15.
and his preaching the gospel, the ministry of reconcitiation, 2 Cor. 5.18.
yea as one says it is Gods proclamation and our Charter of peace, containing
the largest concessions of peace. It is Gods act of oblivion and his act of
indemnity. Scheffeeld on conse: p. 42.

2. Means of pacifying conscience is faith. As the conscience cannot speak
peace with Gods allowance before it be purged, so not peace after it is purged
without faith; This is a grace that will do both, i. e. purify and pacify.

1. That faith will purify is clear, Act. 15.9. Faith purges the heart and
cleanses the conversation. 2. That it will also pacify, this appears Romans
5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Peace is the daughter of faith: This is that Dove that brings an Olive
branch of peace in its mouth, aed presents God a pacified and reconciled father
unto us. O how sweet is that peace which faith breeds? It is a Christians
heaven upon earth. A bunch of Grapes that grows on the true Vine, joy in life,
peace at death, prosperity in adversity, staff in affliction, ankere in
desperation, therefore Christ calls it (...), Anticipation of heaven.

3. The third and last subservient means is Repentance. The Apostle tells us
our consciences must be purged from dead works, Heb. 9.14
and we must have repentance from dead works. We must still acknowledge that
it is the blood of Christ that must purge our consciences from dead works, and
so work peace; yet know this, that this peace is not wrought in our
apprehension, neither do we feel this faith without further act. Therefore to
our faith must be joined repentance, though not making of our peace, yet for
the, feeling of this peace.

Let us now then briefly enumerate the causes principle and less principle. 1.
Christ's blood procuring. 2. Christ's spirit producing. 3. His word proclaiming.
4. Faith assuming. 5. Repentance declaring and evidencing. All these in their
order, not in a way of coordination, but in a way of subordination do effect
the sweet peace of conscience, which passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. And
is the sweetest companion that ever accompanied man in this vale of mortality.

Hitherto of the goodness of Conscience and how it becomes good, namely by the
blood and spirit of Christ, whereby it is both purified and pacified.

In the next place I must commend unto you these 3 things as specially to be
minded and endeavored by you.

1. Having of Conscience. 2. Holding of Conscience. 3. Well using of
Conscience.
1. First let it be your special care to have this good conscience, and that
you may have it take these few directions.

1. Be senseable of the want of it, albeit naturally we are all destitute of
this jewel, yet very few complain for want of it. Some are pure in their own
eyes, Prove. 30.12.
yet were never purged from their filthiness, their consciences as defiled as
ever. Others openly profane and wicked, that add drunkenness to thirst, yet
when a curse is pronounced against them, they will bless themselves saying, we
shall have peace: I must say to such, they are whole and need not the
Physician. Thele are not as yet in a capacity of receiving this blessing.

Therefore I advise you, first to see the filthiness of your consciences, how
defiled with ignorance, error and hardiness: and having seen it, with the
leper confess it, and say Master, I am unclean, I am unclean: when thy
disease is known, the cure is half wrought, Tit. 1.15.
therefore I say by all means to see how thy soul and conscience is defiled.

2. Seek out an able Physician that can cure thee, think not to find him here
on earth, thou must go to heaven for him, it is God that first made thy
conscience, and he alone it is that can remake it: and therefore address thy
self unto him, humbly and faithfully acknowledging his power, and in the
lepers phrase express the desire of thy heart and say, Master if thou will
thou can make me clean. And to quicken thee in this, I will say unto thee,
as the Disciples unto the blind man, go he calls thee. Mark. 10.49.


1. Christ's invitation; Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. All ye that more and more feel the burden of sin, and can
find no way to remove it, come you all to me, and I will ease you of your
burden of sin past, Ps: 32.1, and free you from servitude of it hereafter. Sin
shall not have dominion over you. Romans 6.14. Therefore as blind Bartimeus, when
Christ called him, forthwith cast off his garment, rose up and went to Christ;
so thou who have an evil conscience make no delay, shake off all impediments
and run to Christ the true Physician, and he will heal thee of thy disease,
and give thee a pure and peaceable conscience. There is water enough in Jordan;
there is balm enopugh in Gilead to pour into your wounds. And there is a
Physician there too, and desires thee to come, and will heal thee without
money or moneys worth. It Is but looking on this brazen serpent and be whole.

2. Motive. His promise is to cure thee, he has said he will give thee on
heart, put a new spirit into thee, take away thy stony heart out of thy flesh,
Ezekiel. 11.18, 19.
and give thee an heart of flesh. Now what is this less then to cure thy soul
and conscience, therefore thou may boldly go unto the Lord, plead the
covenant between God and thee, tell him thou have it to show under his hand,
and so hold him to his promise. Lord thou have said thou will give me a new
heart, a new conscience, therefore Lord create in me a new heart and renew a
pure conscience within me, let old things be done away and let all things
become new.

3. Direction is to observe what thy Physician shall advise thee, his
directions are plainly set down in his large Physic book, namely the book of
Scriptures, there thou shall find what thy disease is, the nature and symptoms
of it, the means to cure it also, what diet thou must keep in the time of thy
disease to be freed from it, and what diet afterward to prevent a relapse.

Take heed therefore when thy great Physician has advised thee what means to
use to take off this leprousy from thy soul. Do not slight it as Naaman did
Elisha's advice about the leprousy of his body: when he advised him to wash in
Jordan and be cured, the text says he was wroth, 2 King. 5.9.10.
preferring his own waters of Abanah and Pharpar rivers of Damascus as better
then all the waters of Israel. Take heed be not wiser then thy Doctor, credas
medico ut valeas, follow his directions and thou shall be healed. Eat and
live, wash and be clean. Thus far by way of preparative, proceed we now unto
the Physic it self, in which we find many simples compounded, as Naturals and
Spirituals added.

1. We are to add light to light, i. e. the light of Scripture unto the light
of Nature, without knowledge the conscience cannot be good, but as a blind man
drink poison as soon as wholesome liquor, and stand as securely upon the brinke
of a deep dungeon, as upon a broad pavement, and why, because he sees not the
venom of the one, nor yet the danger of the other. Even so the blind
conscience drinks iniquity as water, and stands fearelesly upon the brinke of
hell, without any fear of falling into it, and all because he sees not the
vileness of the one, nor yet the mischeife of the other, into which he
runs, therefore add I say unto the light of nature the light of scripture.

2. Add blood to blood, i. e. the blood of Christ, to thy sin-bleeding soul,
this is that blood which must cure thee and no other blood can do it. 1. Beasts
blood will nto heal thy conscience, the blood of bulls and goats cannot purge
away sin. 2. Man's blood will not as the blood of Abel, or the blood of Martyrs.
3. Thine own blood will not cure thee, Saul having an evil conscience might
think to ease him self by falling on his own sword, and shedding his own
blood; but alas this will not cure but kill. There Is nothing can cure our sick
polluted consciences, but only bathing in the poole of Bethesda. There is
nothing can make us white, but the blood of the lamb. It is Christ's blood only;
Zach. 13.
this is that fountain for sin and for uncleanesse; this is the blood that
must cleanse thee from all sin, 1 John 1.7, 8. See therefore thou add unto thy
bleeding soul this precious blood.

3. Add spirit unto spirit, i. e. unto thy spirit Gods spirit. When Gods
spirit comes into thy spirit, it will not only regenerate thy spirit, but
witness with thy spirits that thou art healed, and make thee with a joyful
voice to cry out Abba father, Romans 8.16.

4. Add faith to faith; unto thy general faith an applicative faith, thou
then wilt not only believe that these former simples and ingredients thus
compounded, and as it were mixed, will cure an evil conscience, but will
boldly say, my evil conscience by these means is purged and quieted. Where
these principles and simples are thus compounded and happily joined together,
there is a perfect cure; the evil conscience is become a good consceence, the
defiled conscience a purged conscience; the troubled conscience, a peaceable
conscience: thou art made whole, therefore as our Savior unto the Adulteress,
when she had received merecy, gave her this caveat, to sin no more: so say I to
thee that have a pure and peaceable conscience, go sin no more, but observe thy
Physicians rules in keeping a good diet: be holy to God, upright to man, and
sober in thy self; if not, thou will fall back into thine old disease, and so
thy condition will be more desperate then ever.

Now for preservatives, that conscience may keep its purity and peace.

1. Abstain from all appearances of evil. Account no sin little, but remember
that a little leake may sink a ship, and one spark of fire may burn a city,
it was but a wanton glance at first in David, when he looked on Bathsheba, but
if you mark it, many sins and many sorrows followed upon that glance of his,
so that which James speaks is here most true, behold how great a flame a
little fire kindles, therefore abstame from the appearance of sin.

2. Beware of intimacy with any ungodly person, take heed whom thou make thy
companion, the sweetest dispositions are soonest sowred by evil society,
wicked Ahab is no fit companion for godly Jehoshaphat, nor Cerinthus (the
Heretic) for John the Divine. Take heed of such as are either erroneous in
judgment, or vicious in conversation, will thou join with those that are
enemies unto God? do thou not know that one diseased sheep may infect an
whole flock, so on corrupt man may corrupt a multitude: as we find in
Alexander, 2 Timothy 2.17.
Hymeneus, Philetus, Phigellus, Hermogines, and others, whose word did eat as
does a Canker, which if not seasonably prevented will grow incurable.

The Original word is gangrene, (...).
which signifies to eat, as the disease called a wolf or a canker does, which
consumes not only the part where it is, but spreads farther in the flesh.
Such is the Nature of Heretical doctrine, if it be not stopped in the beginning
and cured by solid confutations and Ecclesiastical censures, upon those that
are obstinate; it will spread far, and run over the whole body of the Church.
Beware of such, a man that is an Heretic, Tit. 3.10, 11.
after the first and second admonition reject: knowing that he that is such, is
subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself, i. e. convinced in his
own conscience, that he shuts his eyes against the light, and resists and
opposes the known truth.

The like I say for profane and vicious persons; though they entice thee,
consent thou not: and if they say, come with us, or be one of us, oh come not
into the way of sinners, Prove. 1.10
nor enter into the counsel of the ungodly, Prove. 3.34
lest thou sit in the seat of the scorner, and at last become a scorn and a
derision unto God and the godly.

3. In doubtful things take the surest and safest way. All men have flesh, and
so consequently error in them. Great differences arise in things practical,
one holds recreations on the Lords day, and another denies it: This man for
usury, that man against it; some say Faith and Troth are no Oaths, others will
tell thee that they are more then yea and nay. The Multitude are for Cards,
Dice, drinking of healths, Math. 5.37.
long hair in men, and naked backs and breasts in women, but the fewest and
wisest are against all these. Judge thou therefore which is the safest way, to
use all these, or to refuse them, hear what the Spirit tells thee, abstain
from all appearance of evil: have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. Doubtless it will be safer for thee to
deny thy self in forbearing, Ephesians. 5.11.
then to take liberty in using them. Give no offense to tender consciences, but
follow Paul, who was so wary of giving offense to Gods people, that even in
things lawful he would deny himself, resolving to eat no flesh while the
world stands, rather then to make his brother to offend (i. e.) to put a
stumbling block before him, 1 Cor. 8.13.
or give an occasion of sin unto him. Wherefore walk on sure ground, and be
warranted from God for what thou do. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, pure, lovely, whatsoever things
are of good report, if there be any virtue, Phil. 4.8.
if any praise, think on these things.

4. Take heed of false and fantastical Teachers, who boast of the spirit of
God, when it is only their own proud and lying spirit. Ezekiel. 13.3
They are foolish prophets that follow their own spirit and have seen nothing,
i. e. they do meddle with prophesying of their own proper motion, being driven
thereunto by their own carnal affection, and declare nothing but their own
vain imagination, and frothy inventions. They would be accounted Physicians
for sick souls and wounded consciences, but as Job says they are Physicians
of no value. For they heal the hurt of Gods people slightly, saying, peace,
Jer. 8.11.
when there is no peace: they preach generally freedom and liberty, as
freedom from confession of sin, and freedom to the commission of sin, but
whilst they thus preach liberty unto others, they themselves are the servants
of corruption, beware of such: And beg of God Pastors according to his own
heart, that may feed you with wisdom and true understanding, whose lips may
preserve knowledge, Jere. 3.15.
and ye may sack it at their mouth, who may be ensamples unto the flock in life
and doctrine, faith and love, spirit and purity. England could glory she had
such Prophets such Pastors, and blesed be God she can yet say she has such
still; true it is they lie under a cloud, but it is not many years since that
they were highly esteemed, thought worthy of double honor, and consulted with
upon matters of greatest importment both in Church and State: yea Parliament
and People invited them to come into Macedonia, namely London, to help on the
great work of Reformation: but now are cast aside as of no value, and by many
accounted Antichristian, and enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and to the
power and purity of the Gospel. A sudden and strange change, but we will lay it
upon that envious one, whose rage is specially against Gods faithful
Ministers. You therefore that love a good conscience make much of such, and
have them in high esteem for their works sake, because it is the Lords.

Thus far of having: 2. Holding
now follows the holding of a good conscience. (...). 1 These. 5.2.
The Spirit of God does frequently press us to this holding. Try all things,
and hold fast that which is good, i. e. try exactly all doctrines concerning
faith or manners, and as thou find them sound and saving, so hold them. Tit.
1.8, 9
Again hold fast the faithful word, Heb. 4.14.
hold fast your Profession, hold fast till I come, hold fast lest another take
thy crown, Rev. 3.11.
i. e. the honor and glory promised to such as shall persevere. So say I, ( ye
not I, but the spirit of God) hold faith, and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19.
yea above all hold these, (...) hold against all adversaries that would
withhold.

holding as having, non minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta tueri. It cost
Paul dear to get a good conscience, and so it did to hold it. It Was his daiely
exercise to keep a good conscience, void of offense toward God and man. Act.
24.16.

2. R. Because many have made shipwreck of conscience as Hymeneus and Alexander
who giving the reins to a licentious course of life against the dictates of
their own conscience, God punished them accordingly, by taking away the light
of his spirit, that in the midst of their course they should lose their most
precious spiritual merchandise, and be drowned in error and heresy, 1 Timothy
1.19, 20.
as those who in a sea-tempest suffer shipwreck.

3. R. Because the world cannot abide a good conscience, as we may see in
Zedekiah his behavior toward Micaiah, and Pashur toward Jeremy, how uncivilly
and rudely do these men carry themselves, 1 King. 22, 24.
Zedekiah he smites Michaiah on the cheek, impudently and reproachfully before
the King and whole assembly; saying unto him, which way went the spirit of the
Lord from me to speak to thee? pretending that himself had the spirit of God,
and thereupon inferres that Micaiah had it not, because it could not be showed
how it should pass from the one unto the other. So Pashur smites Jeremy, and
puts him in the stocks, and herein shows himself a prime instrument of
Satan, perpetrating that against the Lords Prophet, which neither King, nor
Princes, nor people durst formerly attempt. Jer. 20.2.
Thus Amaziah the priest with Amos, and Ananias with Paul commands them that
stood by to smite Paul on the mouth: Am. 7.10.
what was the cause of this their rage and fury? had these men committed any
gross offense? surely no; it was only the goodness of their conscience that
did thus exasperate their rage against them. These were the faithful servants
of the Lord, that boldly declared the mind and will of God unto them, as in
conscience they were bound, and therefore could not endure them. There is an
irreconcilable Antipathy between the men of the world, and the Saints of God,
they can no sooner mingle, then oil and water; nor better agree then light and
darkness. The Spirit that is in you the world cannot receive, says Christ,
John 14.17. they are convinced that they are conscientious men, but as they
were wont to say in former times, CAIUS SEIUS was a good man, but he was a
Christian. So now, Caius Seius bonus virsed Christianus.
such are good men, but they are too strict, too conscientious, and therefore
cannot away with them. Thus you see how the men of this world cannot endure a
good conscience.

4. R. Because the Devil does more envy a good conscience then any other
thing. Let men be never so high in honor, great in wealth, abound in wit and
policy, the Devil dislikes it not, he knows the better how to make use of them
to serve his turn, as we sind in Pharaoh, Zenacherib, Achitophel, Herod, and
others: who in their Pomp and power were higher then their brethren by head and
shoulders, and accordingly more active and ready to do his work: That man I say
have abundance of these outward things, it does not disquiet but please Satan;
But when any have a good; a pure and a tender conscience, this madds the Devil
and makes him to set all his instruments on work to bereave such of their
Heartjswell, namely a good conscience; we may see this in Luther, his pure
conscience did vex both Pope and Devil; Melchior Adam in vita Luth.
what would not they have done to have strangled his conscience, if honor,
wealth, preferment, or any outward thing could have prevailed, the Pope would
have collated all these upon him, but one tells the Pope, that all these would
not do, for (says he) Germana illa bestia aurum non curat, that German beast
(meaning Luther) will not be won by any or all of these. And at another time
when great gifts were sent to him, he refused them with this most brave and
excellent speech. Valde protestatus sum me nolle sic satiari ab eo: I did
earnestly protest that God should not put me off with these things. Meaning
that he would not be satisfied with any thing here below: his spirit was too
noble to be tempted with Gold to the loss of a good conscience. Here then you
see what need there is to hold a good conscience, yea to hold it fast, as
Cynegrius his ship, with tooth and nail.

Means how to hold a good Conscience.

1. Get more light into thy understanding, thou have already a double light,
namely the light of nature and the light of Scripture, be careful to increase
this latter light. There is and has been many a tender hearted Christian who
for want of Scripture light has neglected many a good duty, and so lost much
sweet solace and comfort, which they might have enjoyed in the performance of
it As for example; many of the 'Fatriarchs for want of a greater light fell
into that sin of Polygamy, not understanding that place of Scripture, Lev.
18.18. Thou shall not take a wife to her Sister to vex her. They understanding
this only of a Natural sister, and not of a National) took unto themselves
the liberty of many wives, and so it is amongst us to this day, for want of a
greater light, not only what we ought to do is omitted, but oftentimes what we
ought not to do is practiced, therefore labor for a greater light in thy
understanding, let the word of God dwell in you plenteously. hide it within you
even in the midst of your heart.

2. Beware of multiplicity of imploiments, be not a busy body in other men's
matters, or as the Proverb, desire not to have an Oar in every man's Boat, such
busy persons are great enemies to their own consciences, and by their
superfluous wit and needless activity, their heads are filled with Queries,
and their hearts with cares.

3. Beware of unruly passions and disorderly affections: these if let loose are
like wild horses, which will never leave running till they have unhorsed their
Riders, and given them a dangerous, if not a deadly fall. Thus Saul's passion
toward 'David, and Ammons affection to his Sister Thamar, they were so unruly,
so disorderly, that they made them lose all working of conscience, driving them
headlong into sin and Shame.

4. Beware of wounding conscience afresh with any allowed sin: if thou be
healed, sin no more, lest a worse thing do befall thee. Relapses are very
dangerous; Bones, twice broken augment the pain, and difficilitate the cure:
so shall thou find in conscience. Has thy conscience been formerly wounded,
and has God in mercy cured thee? take heed of wounding it again, lest thy
pain be double, and thy cure made more difficult, and thou find in thy self
no difference between thee and a reprobate. Oh therefore take heed of every
sin, free thy conscience every day from the burden of sin, know that a pure
conscience can better bear a mountain of misery, then a mole hill of sin; if
thou carefully use these means, thou shall be sure not only to have but also
to hold a good conscience.

I told you formerly of 3 things which were especially to be minded and
endeavored by us. 1 The having of a good conscience. 2. The holding of a good
conscience. 3. The using or exercising of a good conscience. Of the having and
holding, we have already spoken: now in the last place we are to speak of the
exercising of a good conscience.

Paul having spoken of the goodness of his conscience and a assurance of the
same lest any should judge him a vain Boaster, and that it was some
fantastical opinion or fanaticall vision, and no well grounded assertion, he
goes to clear it by 4 sound Characters of a good conscience, set down in the
latter part of my Text, I know I have a good conscience, and upon this ground I
stand firm, because I am willing in all things to live (or walk) honestly.

1. His will (he says he is willing) 2. The extent or latitude of his will (in
all things.) 3. The constancy of his will, (to walk or live.) 4. The syncerity
of his will, (to walk honestly.)

If any shall come to Paul, as the Pharisees to Christ, saying, what do thou
do, that we may believe thee, thou talkest much of the goodness of thy
conscience, whereby do thou demonstrate the same, that we may believe thee:
to such Paul readily answers, I am sure of a good conscience, for I am willing
in all things to live honestly.

The first Character of his good conscience is his will; you may not understand
his natural will, for this being corrupt and carnal cannot will any thing
pleasing unto God, it being like himself altogether abominable. Man's natural
will is to please himself or others like himself, but not to please God, it
is not subject unto the will of God, neither indeed can be. Examples hereof are
many.

1. First in Saul's Courtiers, they had a will to please themselves but not God,
our tongues are our own, Ps. 12.4.
say they, and we will speak, we have still power and liberty to speak and are
able to persuade to whatsoever we take in hand. The like we find in those
worldlings that James mentions, Jam. 4.13.
to day or to morrow we will go into such a city and continue there a year, and
buy and sest, and get gain: Thus you see their will was wholly to please
themselves.

2. Their will is to please others like themselves: as Pilate, Mark. 15.15.
how willing was he to please the profane multitude in releasing Barrabas and
delivering Jesus to be crucisied. So was Foelix very willing to please the
Jews, and to give them all content that so they might not follow him with
complaints, his will was to leave Paul bound. Act. 24 27.
Thus you see what our own wills are, very corrupt, apt to please our selves,
but not God; and therefore such a will can be no character of a good conscience.

Know therefore that Paul's will in the Texe is better principled, a will
sanctified by the spirit of God, a will freely willing to do what God
requires. Such a will we find in Joshus, who assembling the Tribes at Shechem
and declaring a brief history of Gods benefits toward tehm, Josh. 2.4 14.
even from the days of Terah, exhorts them to the service of this God, and
to renew their covenant with him, saying, hear the Lord and serve him in
syncerity and in truth, put away the Gods that your Fathers served, and serve
the Lord: If your wills bind not to the true God, know ye that my will does; I
am resolved that I and mine household shall serve the Lord. Such a will was in
David, Ps. 119: 106.
I have vowed and will perform it to keep thy righteous judgments. And by this
will came Paul to be assured of the goodness of conscience.

will and willingness in us as was in Paul to please God. Me thinks I hear
you say, I would please God; you say you would, but tell me is it the very bent
of your heart and your constant endeavor so to do? if not, I must tell you,
your woulding is but a vain wishing and nothing worth. There is not the
poorest person, but he would be rich, the veriest Bankrupt, but he would be
thrifty, nor the vilest person, but he will say, he would be honest; but will
you believe such, because they say they would be such, when you see the bent of
their heart and course of life is contrary? surely no; neither may we believe
such to have a good conscience, which have only a woulding without endeavoring.

2. The second Character of a good conscience appears in the extent of his
will; Paul does not barely say: that he is willing in this or that particular
to please God, or with Herod willing to do many things, but he is willing in
all things, i.e. in all duties divine and humane of piety and charity. This
universal Obedience is an excellent distinguishing note between truth and
error, yea between a good and an evil conscience. Cauti estote. i.e. magnam
attentione^ servate.


1. God requires it, Exodus 23.13. saying unto his people, In all things that I
have said unto you be circumspect, i.e. be careful to observe withal
attention, Audacia est de bo no divini praecepti disputare, nec qula bonum est
auscultare debemus, sed quia Deus praecepit. Tertul. de poenit.
(Vatablus in H. C.) whatsoever I shall command you. There is reason enough in
Gods will, and his mere command requires absolute obedience.

2. Christ shows us a necessity of it, and tells us that whosoever is unjust
in the least, is unjust also in much: and James says, if he offend but in one
point, and allow himself in it, he is guilty of all, and he shall be the least
in the kingdom of God; i. e. be of no account in Gods Church here, Luke 16.10.
Jam. 2.10 Mat. 5.19.
nor have any part in heaven hereafter. So that you see that it is not enough
to be willing in something, but we must be willing in all things.

3. What is done for God must be done equally. If you do this duty and
neglect that duty, they both being commanded by the same wise, and holy God,
John 2.5.
there is no equality in it, neither is it accepted. Therefore as Mary to the
servants that waited on Christ, said unto them, whatsoever he commands, see
that you do it: So say I to all, that who so will have a sure character of a
good conscience, his obedience must be universal, whatsoever he commands we
must endeavor to do it. Quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit. You must
have an equal respect to all Gods commandments, Ps. 119.6. You must (with
David) fulfill all his will. (...).
The Original word is in the plural number; all his wills.

half hearted Christians, who coming into Gods Tabernacle here below, doubt
not but they shall ascend his holy mountain hereafter; and why, because they
are willing to hear many truths, and willing to perform many duties. I tell
thee if thou be not willing to hear all, and do all, thou will deceive thy
self at last. Look upon Herod, Ananias, and Saphira, were they not Professors,
did they not hear much, and do much, how was it then that they became such
sad spectacles of Gods vengeance, that the one was eaten up with worms, and
the other smitten with sudden death? I answer, though they were willing in many
things, yet not in all things: Act. 5.2.
Herod will keep his Herodias, and Ananias will keep back part of the price,
and by reserving a part lose all. Oh take it to heart all civil men and
hypocrites, you both are but half Chistians, you answer Gods voice but as the
Echo does answer the voice of a man, only in part not in whole, but God will
not be so answered, he will have all or none. Do not say with Naaman, The Lord
be merciful unto me when I go into the house of Rimmon: The Lord be merciful
unto me if I swear rashly, commit Adultery, oppress my Brother., or act this
or that wicked nesse. Know God will have no reservations, he will not have thee
swallow a Camel, nor yet a gnat. As he will have thee to tremble at wounds and
blood. so will he have thee to fear faith and troth: As to abhor Adultery,
so to hate Daliance. As to loath the shedding of blood, so to shun the taking
away of any part of thy Brothers livelihood. One speaking of conscience tells
us it is a Bo^ of precious ointment, that must not be corrupted with the least
Fly. Sam: Ward
So I say, take heed of any thing that may offend God an conscience, and let
it be thy care with Zachariah and Elizabeth to walk in the commandments of
God without reproof, Luke 1.6. so shall thou discover the goodness of thy
conscience with Paul, when thou art not only willing, but willing in all things.

3. Character of a good conscience is constancy in well-doing: Paul does not say
that he is willing to make a step or two in holiness, and then leave off: no
he is resolved to walk on, to make it his constant practice, yea to live
always in and with a good conscience. A little child may go a step or two
before he fall, yea a very drunkard may seem togoe steady at first, and yet if
you observe him, he will at last reele and tumble, this is no argument of
strength or streadinesse. Even so if men shall do good duties for a fit once
or twice etc. and give over and fall off, this is no sign of a good
conscience, as there must be an universality, in all things, so a constancy,
always: as in Paul Act. 23.1. and 24.16. He lived in all good conscience unto
the last; he kept his conscience inoffensive always, he walked without
tripping, without stumbling, ever the same in all actions and in all conditions.

hypocrites and time-servers who are constant in nothing but in inconstancy,
now for God, and then for Baal; this day holy, to morrow profane; to day you
will make a step or two toward heaven, to morrow as many and more large
strides to hell. Will the hypocrite pray always? will he be obedient in all
things? surely noe: he is a stranger to universal obedience, a stranger to
constant obedience, and so a stranger to a good conscience. Oh therefore as
thou desire a good conscience, so desire of God a right way to walk in, beg
of him to teach thee his way, i. e. such a course of life as might be pleasing
unto him, and to lead thee in a plain path, Ps. 27.11.
that thou may walk in it without tripping and stumbling. This way of God in
which thou art to walk in, it is the way of Gods statutes, if therefore thou
once get into this way, take heed of going out of it, let that resolution be in
thee which was in David, Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes and I will
keep it unto the end, Ps. 119.33. Resolve to be constant without tripping or
turning either to the right hand or to the left: so shall thou be assured that
thy conscience is good.

4. Character of a good conscience is sincerity, the word in the Original is
(...), and our Translators read it, honestly, the word is very comprehensive
and contains within it as much as any, or all other Adverbs in Scripture,
namely worthily, decently, accurately, circumspectly, lively, famously, and
praiseworthy. It notes unto us the luster of an action, and tells us that a
good conscience stands not so much in verbs, as in adverbs; not so much in
doing, as in Welldoing; if a Magistrate, he rules diligently; if a Minister, he
preaches willingly; if a hearer, he hears attentively; if a supplicant, he
prays fervently; yea whatsoever he does in the worship of his God he does it
faithfully, Romans 12.8. Phil. 2.20.

ear the word, read, pray, and practice some good duty of piety or charity,
you think you have done all, and all well: Oh remember that if it be not done
honestly, (that is) syncerely, in obedience to God both for matter and manner
and end, your conscience is not good.

Let me therefore advise you in every duty that you do perform, observe an
honorable decorum, I speak to Jew and Gentile, bond and free, male and
female, of what rank and condition soever: rest not satisfied in your doing of
any duty, except it be done honestly, faithfully, and praise-worthily.

1. Magistrates be you in the highest place of Judicature, or in the lowest
place of office: mind your Oaths, your places your trust, Jer. 48.10.
do not Gods work negligently, least a woe befall you, and Gods curse seize
upon you, but have respect unto your own conscience, and unto the consciences
of others, that your own may be preserved: and the consciences of others
rectified.

2. Ministers, I must speak to you as the Colossians were to speak to
Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which you have received, Gol. 4.17.
that you fulfill it, see you do your whole work in delivering the whole
truth, and in being an example in all holiness unto your flock, preach in
season and out of season, do the work of an Evangelist so fully and honestly,
that you may appear to be men allowed of God to preach the Gospel: and that
your preaching has not been to please men but God which tries the heart. 1
These. 2.4.
Thus shall you evidence a good conscience, when you seek to satisfy your
conscience in every duty of your calling.

3. Governors of Families, think it not enough that you have so many under
your command, and that you can say to this servant go, and he goes, and unto
that servant come and he comes; see well unto it that your commands and
countermands be all honest, do that which is just and equal unto them. Do
you first with Joshua serve God your self, Josh. 24.
and then resolve that your Family shall do the like. If any be ignorant, see
with Abraham that you teach them. If any be unteachable, untractable, see with
David you exclude them, let them not abide in your house, so shall your houses
be Bethels, houses of God, and your selves men of God, and men of a good
conscience.

4. Private persons, be you not Chams but Jonathans, Be you careful of your
own consciences, and then be careful of the consciences of your Brethren,
hate not your brethren in your hearts, but reprove them plainly, and suffer
not sin to rest upon them, Lev. 19 17. Yea thou must love thy neighbor as they
self v. 18. there must be a conformity in quality, though not a correspondence
of equality, thy love to thy brother and to thy self must be like in kind for
sincerity without deceit, and for efficacy without defect. If thou do thus love
thy neighbor as thy self, 1 John 3.18.
thou love thy God, and thou love a good conscience.

5. Lastly to every one of what sex or condition soever, whether rich or poor,
let conscience be your Totum, all that thou have to do is to look well to
conscience. Art thou rich, let conscience be thy bagg: if poor, let conscience
by thy cruse, if a wife, let conscience be thy glass; if a wayd, let
conscience be thy attire: whatsoever thou art, submit to conscience, let that
command thee, be ruled by it, and it will not wrong thee, be familiar with it,
and it will never deceive thee.

Thus you see what is to be done in the exercise of a good conscience. 1. A
willingness to please God. 2. To please him in all things. 3. To please him
always. and 4. to do all this truly, sincerely, and honestly. Thus to do is
the very life and soul of all practical piety.

As thou love thy soul, miss not one of these charecters, they are so many
golden linkes fastened by God himself, that he that has one of them, has
all, and if but one be wanting, assure thy self the rest are missing.
Acknowledge a necessity of them all, for as in a sound body there must be a due
mixture and composition of all the 4 elements and Humors: so in a sound
conscience there must be a due composition of all these 4 characters.

1. Use to such as have, hold, and thus exercise a good conscience, to
proclaim Gods bounty, that they with others may magnify God, we read that the
4 Lepers in Samaria, having found a sudden and happy change from penury to
plenty; they blamed themselves for being silent and not divulging this great
mercy: 2 King. 7.9.
We do not well (say they) this day is a day of good tidings, and we hold our
peace. So shall I say unto you that have found this great and gracious change
in your selves, that your evil conscience is become a good conscience. You
shall not do well to be silent, but with David, it is your part and duty
speedily to communicate unto others. Come unto me all you that fear God. and I
will tell you what God has done for my soul. Ps. 66.18. I say again its your
duty and you are very faulty if you do it not.

Acknowledge your misery by nature, and likewise your happiness by Grace; say
with all humility and thankfulness, I was by nature as vile as the worst, as
deeply guilty in Adams sin as any; as foully polluted with Original sin as the
veriest Reprobate, and had in me the seed of all sin, apt to be drawn unto the
foulest and grossest transgressions, and to run to the same excess of riot
with the worst, tit. 1.15.
yea my very soul and conscience was defiled. But blessed by my good God that
has stricken Covenant with me in my blessed Savior Christ Jesus, Ezekiel. 11.19.
and has put into me a new Spirit, given me a heart of flesh, and has changed
this defiled conscience, Heb. 9.14.
into a pure conscience, a conscience both purified and pacified by the blood
and spirit of Christ. Col. 1.20.
My greatest foe is now become my greatest friend, a most true friend, that
will not flatter me, but deal plainly with me, a most sweet friend that will
comfort me in the saddest and darkest times and seasons, yea a friend that will
make me to laugh under the whip. Sing when my feet are in the stocks and
rejoice when I fall into many Temptations; In a word, a most constant friend,
that will never leave me nor forsake me neither in this life nor in the life to
come. Death may part Naomi and Ruth. David and Jonathan, but death shall never
part thee and thy conscience, she will be with the in reproach and poverty,
in sickness and distress, in prison and restraint, in life, in death, in
Judgment, and before Gods Tribunal. Oh therefore relate thy happy and blessed
change unto others that so thou, and they may unanimously praise God: So shall
thy God be magnified and thine own thankful heart reallie and faithful
expressed.

2 Use; to such as have a good conscience to be such a friend unto them, that
they would be very Careful, to deal friendly with this friend, It is Solomon's
Advise; Prove. 18.24. That he that has friends must deal friendly: and that
there is a friend that sticks closer then a Brother. Now conscience is this
close friend, let Father, Mother, Husband, Wife, Child, and Neigbour, all leave
thee, This friend will never leave thee nor forsake thee, as I told thee
formerly; Oh therefore deal friendly with thy Conscience, give not the least
offense unto her, but remember she is very tender and will be senble of the
least wrong or injury done unto her: The Injury of a friend does stick closer
then the wrong of an Enemy. David could say, had it been an Enemy, that had
done me this wrong, I could have borne it, but it was thou my friend, Ps. 41.9.
yea my familiar friend, we took sweet counsel. Ps. 55.13.
Take heed therefore do neither disuse conscience, nor misuse conscience (1) I
say do not disuse consciene by estraunging thy self from her and refusing her
Advise and counsel. 2 Do not misuse her (1) Some by making her a cloak for
any erroneous opinion or sinful practice as too to many do in these our
days, who dare to set Gods Image and Supscription upon their own base coin,
Are there not many amongst us who impudently, and blasphemously affirm, that
their Mission, Message, Doctrine, and Spirit are all of God. They will tell
you, they are sent of God, the Doctrine they teach is the mind and will of God
The Spirit by which they teach, Is. 8.20.
it is the Spirit of God, But come you to the law and to the testimony,
consult the word of God and you shall find, there is no light in them. They are
very Traitors to the King of heaven, abusing his Image and Superscription, read
but the 23 of Jer. and 13 of Ezekiel. and you shall find that notwithstanding
their great Braggs, they are but gross impostours and seducers. God tells them
He never sent them, never spoke unto them, and calls them Dreamers whose
Doctrine is but chafe, and their Spirit, is not Gods Spirit, but their own
proud, lying, and deluding spirit.

2. Others make conscience a Cloak, for ungodly practices, that they may the
more clossely oppress, defraud and injure others, to the satisfying of their
ambitious lusts and Covetous desires, such were the Scribs and Pharisees of
old, of whom our Savior gives us a Caveat, that we beware of them and then
describes them, that people might the better know them. They are men says
Christ that carry a great show of Pyetie and holiness, they pray, Math. 23.14.
yea make long prayers and perform other godly exercises, Luke 20.46.
and all this they do not syncerely but hypocritically, that they may the more
easily devour widows houses, and consume their estates, who entertain them:
and doubtless many such there are amongst us at this time, who have very fair
pretenses for most foul practices; as Jezabel had, who was never more zealous
in prayer and fasting then when she intended to to take away the life and
livelihood of innocent Naboth; now what are these but great abusers of
Conscience.

3. To these I may Add a third sort who having abused conscience; by some
ungodly Art of whordome, drunkenness, blasphemy or the like, will call for
mercy and so be friends. It is reported of Jews the eleventh King of France,
that he wore in his Hat a Crucifix, and when at any time he had blasphemed God
or acted any wickedness; He would presently take down his Crucifix and Kiss
it, and then he had thought he had made satisfaction for all wrongs; even so is
it amongst us, There are many when they have done any thing against their
conscience, think it enough to Kiss Conscience and cry God have mercy and all
is well: but let me tell such, they are enemies to conscience, and let them be
assured that at last they will find Conscience an enemy to them, yea their
greatest enemy: Not only a witness, But their Judge and Tormentor.

Use of Exhortation unto all to be very careful how they deal with Conscience
not to dare to injure it in the least degree, conscience I must tell you is
very tender, soon sensible of the least wrong: if therefore you will hold
friendship with her you must resolve to be tender also, and that with an holy
tenderness, I say an holy tenderness, and the rather because there is too
much tenderness in the world which is very hateful unto a good Conscience.

1. Some are very ready for the practice of sin, Unholy Tenderness.
but they are so tender, as they cannot endure the least touch of reproof for
sin, They are like those whole bodies being full of boyles and botches cry out
unto such as come near them: Oh do not touch me and all because of the soars
and and the ulcers they bear about them.

Thus is it which many a wicked man and woman who having many ulcers of sin
running upon them will not endure their Christian friends nor yet their
faithful ministers and Teachers but cry out, like those in Isaiah, who said to
the seers see not, and to the prophets prephesie not unto us right things, but
speak smooth things, Is. 30.10.
prophesy deceit, They cannot endure to hear the truth of God, but a lie, not
to have Gods Judgme^ts threatened, but themselves to be slattered, though it
turn unto their own ruin: Such tender persons were Amaziah the prince, 2
Chr. 25.16.
and Amaziah the priest. The first was reproved by the prophet of the Covenant:
for setting up of false Gods: but the King tells the Prophet that he should
hold his peace, least he were smitten, he was so tender he could not bear it.
The like temper we find in Amaziah the priest when Amos prophesied the
rejection of Israel and the destruction of Jeroboams house by the sword,
presently. Amaziah goes to incense the King against Amos, and tells him that
the land was not able to bear his words, and bids him slay away and not to
come again unto Bethel, for it was the Kings chapel, Amos 7.10.
a place that he had Consecrated to the worship of the Calves, and therefore
not safe nor fitting for Amos to prophecy against him in that place.

2. Some are naturally tender, of such a soft and tender Temper, that they
readily yield unto any command of man, though countermaunded by god. Thus was
it with Ephraim. Hos. 5.11. Ephraim is broken in Judgment: because he willingly
walked after the Commandment, what Commandments, the wicked commandments of
their Idolatrous Kings and princes, therefore the Lord Threatens them that he
would be to Ephraim as a Moth, and to the house of Judah rottenness. i.e. He
would consume them by little and little as a Moth does a garment, or as a worm
does a piece of Timber, and surely this may be said to be our case: our
preferring man's mandates before Gods Commands, has broken us of this land in
pieces, and if God be unto us as he was to Ephraim a Moth and a worm gradually
to ruin us, it is but His Justice.

3. Others there are which are scrupelously tender, They will stick at strawes
and leap over blocks, make that a sin which God never made a sin, and stir
most in that, in which God is silent, Thus the Priests scruple their going into
the Praetorium, the house of an Heathen man, least they should be ceromoniallie
defiled and so held from the Passover, but yet made no matter of de filing
themselves morally with the guilt of innocent blood: again, they are troubled
in putting the price of blood into their holy Corbam, but not troubled to give
a price to shed innocent blood. How careful are they in washing of hands, of
cups, pots, and platters, how careless in washing their hearts and insides
from sin. One says well: such as these, they can dance amongst thorns and yet
know not how to walk upon even ground; Herod had too much of this rendernesse,
when he had passed his word and given his oath to grant his wicked Herodias her
unreasonable request, which was, to have John Baptist head in a charger. Note
the tenderness of this man, he may not break his Oath, and therefore
concludes that to go back from his word, would be perjurie: but to go on,
though it were to shed the blood of an innocent, this he accounts piety. Many
such we have amonst us who do more scruple an egg then an Oath, and like Esops
dog do so greedily catch at shadows, that they loose the substance,
therefore I would such would be more wise, following the Advice of Paul, who in
unnecessarie and vain scruples will have us to asks no Question for conscience
sake, 1 Cor. 10.25.
Beware of all such evil and sinful tenderness, as enemies to a good
conscience, and labor for such a tenderness as is holy and faultlesse which
will make you watchful against every sin, that may any ways molest or
disquiet conscience, thus far of an unholy tenderness, which cannot stand with
a good conscience, Now follows an holy tenderness which suits well with
conscience and keeps us and our consciences at peace.

Holy tenderness is such a tenderness as is wrought in us by the holy spirit
of God, Holy Tenderness. Sheff.
whereby we are made very watchful against whatsoever may molest or disquet
conscience.

Such a tenderness we find in Joseph, who when his Mistress tempted him to
lie with her, he presently refused it, and said unto her, behold my Master
wotteth not what is in the house with me, Genesis 39.9.
and he has committed all to my hand, and there is none greater in his house
then I, neither has he kept any thing from me but thee, because thou art his
wife, how then can I do this great wickedness and sinagainst God. As if he
should have said unto her, your desire is very wicked and I may not yield unto
it, I may not act the least sin against God; how then may I commit so great a
wickedness as to defile my Masters bed? is it not Adultery, a complicated sin
that contains many evils within it. In so doing, 1. I should be a Thief in
stealing from him the best jewel in his house, namely his wife. 2. Most
injurious in mixing a bastard brood with his legitimate children. 3. I should
be sacrilegious in taking my body which is the temple of the holy Ghost, and to
turn it to carnal pollution. 4. I should be most ungracious toward my God and
most ungrateful to my kind Master. The like we find in Job, a man very
fearful to offend conscience, he was a Nonsuch by Gods own testimony, Job.
1.8.
not any one like him upon the earth, so perfect, so upright, fearing God and
eschewing evil. He was one that resolved not to give conscience the least
offense, and that it should not reproach him all his days. Though men did
reproach him as Eliphas, Bildad, Zophar, who charged him with hypos crisy, yet
his conscience which was more privy to his ways, and could testify more truly,
Job. 27.6.
that should not reproach him, so tender was he.

Such must be our tenderness; the like was that in Joseph, Job, and others:
and that we may not be deceived, know how it shows it self to God, to others,
and to our selves.

1. To God, he that has an holy tenderness in him will stand for God in what
shall make for his truth, honor, and glory of his name, if he see any thing
unto which God is entitled or has interest in, such a one will not see his God
wronged in the least degree, but he will stand upon an hoof with Moses, and
upon an iota or title with Christ, he, will manifest his tenderness in all
things. As 1. to his precepts. 2. Exodus 10.26.
To his Threats. 3. His Judgments. 4. His Mercies. Of these in their order:
Math. 5.18
and First of the first, namely, Gods precepts. Cauti esto te. Vatab. in h. l.


1. He that has this holy tenderness in him will readily yield unto Gods
precepts, whatsoever he commands he will do it circumspectly, conscientia bona
non solum attendit quid praecipiat Deus, sed quid velit, quae sit voluntas Dei
bona, beneplacens et perfect. Bern. de vira solitaria ad fratres de monte D^i
p. 10 20.
i. e. warily and with attention, Exodus 23.13. Thus Moses is said to be
faithful in all his house, i. e. the Church of God in his time, and wherein
God was pleased to dwell; Moses was in all things very exact to obey Gods
precepts: Again we find Josias very tender in the observation of whatsoever
the Lord commanded, so that there was never a King before or after him that so
turned unto the Lord with all his heart according to the law of Moses. The like
may be said of Hezekiah and Nehemiah; the first walked before God with an
upright heart; the latter showed himself a most zealous man against sin and
sinners. How tender was he for the honor of his God, in the observation of the
Sabbath, in the maintenance of the Priests, and howsoever against the
prophaners of the Sabbath, and such as oppressed their brethren by usury. Read
the 5th. of Nehemiah, and the 13th. of Nehemiah.

2. He that has this holy tenderness, will quickly yield, melt, and break
under any threat of Gods word or sense of Gods displeasure. If Josias do but
hear the book read, in which the threats and menaces of Gods wrath are
recorded; he presently melts and thaws, he rents his clothes, 2 King. 22 19.
mournes and weeps, shall the Lion roar, and the Beasts not tremble? or a
trumpet sound, and the people not fear? So if God roar against a Nation and
people, shall they not quake? Jer. 36.24.
Let hard hearted Jehoiakim remain obstinate, yet good Josiah will rent his
clothes.

3. This holy tenderness will make a man to mourn under Gos judgments: He
that melts under Gos threats, will surely cry out under his judgments: Hezekiah
if he feel gods rod upon him, Js. 38.14.
he will mourn like a Dove, and chatter like a Crane. Let God take Job by the
neck ana shake him, and cause his Archers to compass him about, i. e. many
afflictions and troubles, it will make him to sow sackcloth upon his skin, Job.
16.12 15.
and defile his horn in the dust, yea it will make his face foul with
weeping, and cause the shadow of death upon his eyelids, i. e. to wax dim
and dark as if they were dying, and puts upon him such a stamp of true sorrow,
as it makes him to cry out, I abhor my self in dust and ashes. But on the
contrary it is neither threat, nor judgment, that works upon the uncircumcised
heart, he refuses the punishment of his iniquity, Job. 36.23
and cries not when the Lord binds him, i. e. afflicts him: but the more God
afflicts, the harder he grows, and does revolt more and more. Is. 1.5.

4. This holy tenderness makes him humble under Gods mercies. The more
merciful that God is to him, the more tender he is for God, he fears God and
his goodness. As Ice contracted with cold dissolves of it self under the
warm rays and beams of the Sun, so does his Soul melt and thaw under the
sense of Gods favor, Ezra 9.14
like those in Ezra who having received a great deliverance from their enemies,
said one to another, seeing our God has been so gracious, shall we again
break his commandes ments. Luke 7.47.
Thus in Mary Magdaline, we read how she stood behind Christ and wept, that she
to wept and mourned for her sins, as that she washed Christ's feet with her
tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head, yea kissed his feet, and
anointed them with ointment: and why so? how comes this tenderness upon her?
what should cause it? truly, Christ his great mercy unto her, in pardoning her
great and many sins; this is the testimony which Christ gives of her, she loved
much, because much was forgiven her. So that you see how holy tenderness will
yield unto Gods mercies.

2. This holy tenderness will show it self to others; it will make a man very
careful not to offend others, it will give no offense to Jew nor Gentile, nor
to the Church of God, i. e. no occasion of offense of scandal unto Jew or
Pagan or Christian, neither within, nor yet without the Church. 1 Cor. 10.32.
As it was Paul's precept, so likewise his practice; who is offended (at least
through my default) and I bvrne not, i. e. 2 Cor. 11.29.
burn with sorrow and holy indignation and ardent zeal for the glory of God,
and falvation of those that are scandalized? Paul was a man always for peace,
and presses it upon others: As much as in you lies have peace with all men,
but especially with the godly; as for himself his conscience was so tender,
that he would neither say nor do any thing, that might give offense to weak
Brethren, if eating of flesh would offend, 1 Cor. 8.13.
he resolves to eat no flesh while the world stands. So it is with all such
as are truly tender, if their meat, drink, apparel, if their hair, carriage,
company, or any other thing, shall give an offense unto their Brethren, they
resolve with Paul to cate no more flesh, drink no more wine, wear no more
long hair, keep no more such company, leave off all rather then give any
offense or be a stumbling block unto their brethren.

And as this tenderness appears to all, so especially unto such as stand in
any near relation unto them, as wife or child, and how tender was Joseph of his
wives reputation and salvation, when she was with Child, and he knew not how it
should be so, and fearing the scandal that might come upon so gracious a
woman, and loath she should be made a public example, Math. 1.19.
his resolution was to put her away privily, to leave her to the disposing of
her friends and not to consummate the Marriage. The like tenderness toward
Children we find in Job, he fearing least in their feasting they had gone
beyond their bounds, Job 1.5.
and so dishonored God. He offered a burnt-offering for them unto God every
morning. i. e. an offering of reconciliation. which declared his religion
toward God and care of his children. So Austin reports of his Mother Monicha,
that she was so tender of the salvation of her children, that if she heard that
any one of them had dishonored God, it wrought such an impression of grief
upon her soul, that it pained her as much as the new bearing of another child.
Thus you see how an holy tenderness will show it self to others.

3. How an holy Tenderness appears to our selves. he that is tender indeed
will not, displease his own conscience, he resolves with David to sly all sin
and sinners: I abhor (says he) every evil way, and I will not endure a
wicked person: such persons and such practices are very hateful unto him; he
cannot brook sin, in any degree, great sins, little sins, apparent sins, or
sins in appearance, he declines them all, he considers that remarkable speech
of our Saviors, Luke 16.15. That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is an
abomination in the sight of God. And therefore he dares not always to
adventure upon that which has appearance of good, but brings it to the touch,
1 These. 5.22.
tries all things, and so holds fast (not what seems good,) but What is good.
lastly the render conscience will take heed of what he knows to be lawful, he
dares not to do all that he may do, least he should do what he ought not to
do. Consider you that are Gamsters, merry come panions, fashion-mongers. and
all flesh-pleasers, which are lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God. I
know you will stand upon your justification, and plead strongly for your
dicing, drinking, carding, your long hair, your fantastical fashions, and pot
companions, though there be enough recorded in Gods book against them in all of
these. Me thinks I hear you say there are many great Scholars will maintain
the lawfulness and that it is condemned only by a company of strict lacea
Puritans, and men of mean parts and learning. Give me leave to speak the words
of truth and soberness: you say cards, dice, drinking, and merry company are
things lawful; 1 Cor. 6.12.
but answer me, 1. are they expedient. 2. Do they edify you. 3. Are they not
brought under the power of these things, these practices. Alas who sees not
such as thus seek to please the flesh that they do displease God, their merry
company makes them to distaste the society of Saints; their dicing and drinking
makes them to loath the hearing and reading of Gods word; yea Bible and the
pack of Cards are like the Arc and Dagon, they will not stand together. Let me
therefore advise you not to be too presumptuous upon the lawfulness of these,
but consider expediency and edification, that all be done so that God may have
glory, and your selves may be edified more and more in Christ. If you look not
to this, that which is lawful in it self will be found unlawful in you. You
will soon be brought under their power and be captivated by what should be your
servants.

Remember therefore what on says and that most truly, licitis perimus omnes,
the Whole world is undone by lawful things. i. e. lawful things abused or
misesteemed. Was it not so with the old world, when our Savior speaks of the
destruction of the old world by water, what does our Savior charge upon them
as deserving this great and general judgment? he mentions only things that
were both lawful and necessary: They did eat, hey drank, they bought and
sold, they built and planted, they married and were given in marriage: See you
any unlawfulness in any of these? notwithstanding the giving themselves up to
these things, Luke 17.27.
suffering such practices to call them off from God. God was highly displeased
and themselves fearfully perished. Oh therefore do not presume upon the
lawfulness of such things, but if you have this holy tenderness in thee,
examine all circumstances least God be offended, and thy conscience so wounded,
as that thou can find no peace within, but in thy apprehension a very
reprobate.

One word more by way of comfort unto you that are thus tender, Use of Comfort.
possible it is that though you desire tenderness and to hold a firm peace
with conscience, yet your conscience may frown upon you, and so you conclude
against your self that God is angry with you, according to that of the
Apostle, 1. Joh 3.21. If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart,
and knows all things, i.e. if our conscience condemn us, then God will
condemn us much more, but your Conscience you say does condemn you, and
therefore your condition is very sad before God. To give you satisfaction in
this, I must confess it is most true, that when conscience does check, accuse,
condemn, upon right information, there is no hope of avoiding the sentence of
God by any close carriage by which we may think to shift and hide our selves
and our actions from his eyes. Yet this hinders not but that sometimes the
conscience may condemn, where God does not. For though it always judge for
God, and on his side, yet it does not always judge with God, and according to
his direction: but sometimes it may be that with Jobs friends it makes a lie or
God: and yet not purposely, but through misinformation or prejudice, while it
looks on the worst and not on the best: that is to say on the present and
particular indisposition of the heart, and not on the sincere and general
disposition of it. Such for want of better light in that particular may fear
where no fear is, but let me tell such they have a most gracious God, that
takes no notice of such failings, but pardons and passes by the
transgressions of his people, as if he saw is not. Mic. 7.18
Therefore let such tender ones support their spirits upon that sweet and
gracious promise of Christ, Is. 42.3.
not to break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, i.e. God will
not deal harshly with such weak and feeable ones; but support and comfort
them: for though their light be little and burn dimly, yet the Lord will not
extinguish it, but snuff it and make it burn more clearly.

Consider when your Conscience does accuse, whether it proceed from sufficient
light out of the word of God, or from wrong information. If from light received
out of the word of God, her sentence is divine, and we are to regard it: but if
otherwise upon wrong information, it is the error of conscience, and our remedy
is by sending conscience to seek the warrant of her sentence out of the word of
God.

Again if conscience present unto you sins which you committed many years
ago, and whereof you have repented. (For we are to know, that albeit after
Repentance the Lord forgives the guiltiness of sin, yet he will have the
memory thereof to remain in that conserving faculty of Conscience, called
(...); that it may both serve to humble us for the evil we have done, as also
to preserve us from sin for the time to come.

Again if conscience accuse us for sin committed and not repented, it is Gods
great mercy, who by inward troubles wakens us to judge our selves here, that we
may not be condemned of the Lord hereafter.

profane Belialist shall at last say, what need all this ado concerning a
good conscience: have not all men a good conscience?

have a good conscience, namely a conscience which is metaphysically and
naturally good: and so they may and yet go to hell.

But the conscience that brings with it a continual feast. and is accompanied
with grace in this life, and glory in the life to come. It is more then
metaphysically or naturally good. It is spiritually and supernaturally good.

1. A conscience purged and pacified by the blood of Christ. Heb. 9.14


2. A conscience habitually exercised to inoffensivenesse both to God and man,
Act. 24.16.

3. A conscience that desires to be completely good in all things and always,
Act. 23.1.

4. A conscience that will approve it self good even in the sight of God, Act.
23.1. 1 Pet 3.21.

5. A conscience that will give testimony of thy hearts simplicity and godly
sincerity, and sopport thee under greatest troubles and distresses. 2 Cor. 1.8,
9.10, 11, 12.

Now if upon a serious search, thou can evidence such a conscience, I must
tell thee thou have obtained great favor from the Lord, and art enriched with
so rich a Jewel, that far surpasses all the wealth of the world, and can
never be worn by the men of this world. Rejoice therefore in the Lord always,
and acquaint thy Christian friends with it, that you may rejoice together, yea
eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart for God has
accepted thee, Eccl. 9.7.

The conclusion is this, Conclusion.
( Christians) Conclusiour Consciences are all obscured, corrupted, and
depraved through Adams fall. It is the part of every one to labor to reduce
conscience to its prime purity again. When a Compass is out of frame we touch
the needle of the Compass with a Loadstone, that the stone may draw it right
to the Pole again: So let our minds be touched with the Loadstone of the
Spirit of grace, that they may come back to the Lord as to the Pole, and quiet
themselves in Christ as their true, sole, and perfect Savior. Let this be your
daiely prayer unto God, and constant endeavor, who only can sanctify us
throughout in spirit, soul and body; who can make every part and member of our
bodies, with every power and faculty of our souls, weapons of Righteousness
to do him service.

Now unto him that is able to make you to stand upright before him, and to keep
you from falling, Jud. 24.25.
and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy, to the only Wise God our Savior be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power,
now and for ever, Amen.

April: 5th. 1656.
FINIS.

