AN ANSWER TO A late BOOK Written against the Learned and Reverend Dr. BENTLEY,
relating to some Manuscript Notes on CALLIMACHUS.

Together with An EXAMINATION of Mr. Bennet's APPENDIX, to the said Book.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1699.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT IS but a poor Invitation to the Reader, and an uncommon way of prefacing, to
tell him, that he is presented with a Book not worth the perusal. But as the
matter is past Denial, and as I am certain to hear of it from other hands; it is
not so much Ingenuity as Policy to confess it. Some little Account however I
think my self obliged to give of the Motives that put me upon intermedling in
so insignificant a Debate. There is a Passion called by the Latins, Indignatio,
which of all others my Nature has left it least in my Power to resist. one
Property of which is not to be able to behold with Patience Lions teased by
Gnats: If any thing can justify such a Passion in so little a Creature as my
self, the rude Insults offered to an extraordinary Man, one of whose most
impotent Adversaries I have in the following Papers taken upon me to bring
under Examination, and the Applause with which the Party received them; I
should think will do it. What drew this Storm of Criticism upon that Reverend
Person, the Reader will find not obscurely intimated to him in the
Animadversions I have bestowed upon Mr. Bennet's Appendix. It Is no wonder, that
a War so unjustly begun should be prosecuted by not much more Honorable
methods; and the Littleness of the Instruments made use of in executing their
Revenge added to the Contumely. The Assurance with which their young Hero took
the Field, Mr. B s praef p. 6.
that Air of Superiority with which he every where treats his Adversary, the
Acclamations with which the Party, nay the Applauses with which he Himself
proclaimed himself Conqueror, made the World begin to look upon the Dr's Case
as desperate; and 'twas in every Bodies mouth, Mr. Boyle's Book is an
unanswerable piece. Nor was it enough, that Mr. Boil had posted his despised
Dr. Bentley at the top of two hundred and ninety Pages; that he had made him
the Jest and Sting of I know not how many thousand Periods, the Common Chat of
Coffee-houses and Taverns: He threatens him with yet more dismal things to
follow: That there should be a Book written against him in Latin; P. 229.
that Foreign Universities should in due time be informed, what a Man the King
of England had to his Library Keeper; and particularly Monsieur Spanheim, and
Monsieur Graevius be instructed how to choose out some more deserving Person to
place their Civilities upon. Nay, and, P. 289.290.
to put him beyond all Hopes, he plainly tells him, that he was fallen into the
Hands of an whole Body of Men, whose Hatreds and Revenges were Immortal; who
when once they begin with a Man, there is no knowing when they will leave him;
and who were resolved to use him as unmercifully with their Pens, as ever
Phalaris did poor Innocents with his Musical Bull.

Had not the Dr. been either very Conscious to himself of the Goodness of his
Cause, or very insensible of Danger, he would tamely have quitted the Field,
and have striven by Patience and Silence to have mitigated their Displeasure.
But to the surprise of the Town it was soon got abroad, that the Dr. did not
yield; nay, that he did but Laugh at them, and would certainly give them an
Answer. This, we may suppose, created them some Disturbance. For I cannot
imagine, that they did ever in their Hearts believe Dr. Bentley to be so very
manageable an Adversary as in their Writings they had every where represented
him. However, one considerable Advantage they had gained in their first
Adventure. The Town and common Fame were on their side, which when once they
have fallen in with a false Cry will not easily change their Note. Supported
with this Comfort, they were resolved to stand their ground, and if the Dr. was
for answering them, they would be sure to find him work enough. I very well
remember, that some Months before the Dr's last Book was published, I heard it
in these very Words and Syllables from a certain Person, whom I suppose no
stranger to the Secrets of the Party; Let the Dr. come out with his Answer as
soon as he will, they are in a readiness for him; to my certain knowledge,
says he, they have Rods in Piss against him. Accordingly, within not many
Weeks after the Dr's Answer was published (but just time enough for the Club to
patch up Mr. Bennet's Appendix) it was followed by this Rod in Piss of a
Vindicator: as indeed well it might, all the Sheets (or I am misinformed)
being wrought off before. And here was another piece of work for the Dr.
wherein they had him upon an unlucky Dilemma. If he answered it, the Littleness
of the Subject, as well as the inequality of the Antagonist, must needs have
exposed him to Contempt: If he answered it not; that had been interpreted a
submitting to the Charge, and would have kept some Life in the Cause. And
again; if he answered This, they might have had another piece against him, and
after That another; and after That another, and so on; verifying Mr. Boyle's
Prediction, that there were an whole Body engaged against him, who when once
they begin with a Man, there is no knowing when they will leave him. Nay, I have
heard it more than once, that they gave out, they would write a Book against
him once a Month as long as he lived. Nay, and I can produce my Witnesses, to
whom Mr. Bennet, hearing, it seems, that there was something of an Answer
designed to the Vindicator, said with his own mouth; That they were best let
his Appendix alone: If they Printed any Reflections upon him, he would be even with
them, and have them exposed all the Town over, both in Verse and Prose. And
these are the Methods by which the Gentlemen of the Half Moon are resolved to
humble the Library Keeper at St. James's, and terrify the rest of Mankind from
opening their Lips on his behalf.

And must therefore Men and Books, like Dr. Bentley, and Dr. Bentley's Books,
be run down merely by noise and numbers? Shall Banter so securely Triumph over
Learning, and Phrase and Confidence over Sense and Truth? Must Men of Worth (as
I think, I have somewhere or other expressed it in the following Papers) be made
the mock of Fools, because they that make them so write things so wretchedly
trifling, that a Man who has any regard to his own Reputation, would be
ashamed of having so mis-employ'd his time as to answer them?

As 'twas this Consideration, and this only, drew me into this Dispute; so I
must desire the Reader to consider, that it is not the Subject Matter of the
following Lines which I recommend to his Observation, but the manner of these
Gentlemen's managing their Controversy with Dr. Bentley. And because it is
scarce to be hoped that many should be found, who will give themselves the
trouble of examining every particular, I shall point out some few Instances of
our Vindicator's Allegations against the Dr. by which the Reader may give a
guess at the whole, which upon Trial I can assure him, he will find all of a
piece. The chief Design of the Vindicator's Book, is to charge the Dr. with
Plagiarism upon account of a certain MS. from whence it is pretended Dr.
Bentley borrowed a great part of his Collection of the Fragments of Callimachus
published in Mr. Graevius's late Edition of that Author, and put them off for
his own. As I may pretend to have examined this part of his Accusation, more
nicely than I can expect many others will do, I sincerely declare, that I see
not the least Reason to believe, that the Dr's Collection was one line or hint
the richer for his having seen that MS. The true State of the Controversy is
given in the first Sheet and half, ending at page 23. To which, he that shall
have the Curiosity of going to the Half Moon and collating the Original
Evidence it self there to be shown against the Dr. is desired to add the
Cautions laid down, page 51, etc. If he would without losing the time of going
over the whole see some particular Exemplifications of our Vindicator's
Ingenuity in prosecuting his Charge against the Dr. and of the Validity of his
Proofs, he may consult these following Passages. Remark the first upon Proofs
6, 7. p. 25. and p. 33.62, 63.116, 117, 118. and especially, p. 79.80.81.86. As
for a choice Observation of our Vindicator's (though indeed not his own, but
taken up at second hand from Mr. Boil) upon the Extent of the Dr's Reading, I
referr him to p. 37, etc. He that would take the measure of his Learning and
Judgment, will find it, as in all his most judicious Animadversions upon the
Dr's pretended mistakes, so more especially in these Observations of his own,
p. 88, 89.91, 92.102, etc. and in his Supplement, p. 120, etc. 125.128, etc.
And here let me give (which was omitted in its proper place) the English of
those two Greek Lines, page 89. by the help of which even the Wits and the
Fools of Parts (who are indeed the support of the Cause) may be able, without
the help of more Learning than what their Mother tongue affords them, to give
some guess at the profundity of our Vindicator's Judgment, and how proper a
Person he is to set up for a Corrector of other Men's Writings; (...) etc.
According to Stephanus, and Dr. Bentley's Emendation in English thus. I also,
as well as Pythagoras, command you to abstain from the feeding upon Beans, or
the Flesh of any living Creature. But according to our Learned Vindicator's
Correction thus. I also, as well as Pythagoras, command you to abstain from
feeding upon Beans, and that you sit still without speaking a word.

As for the Veracity of our Honest Vindicator, his whole Book is one continued
Proof of it. The very Design of his Book being to prove; that the Dr. stole the
best part of his Collection from their MS. But, He having perused and collated
that MS. with the Dr's printed Collection, he could not but know this to be a
most notorious Falsehood. ( vid. p. 64.118.) And he that shall prefer an
Indictment, the very Matter of which he knows to be false, cannot design Truth
in his Proofs. But to point the Reader to one full, clear, and undeniable Proof
of our Viudicator's Veracity, let him turn to page 114. line 15. Dr. Bentley to
Conceal, etc. and his very next Allegation against the Dr. p. 115. is much of
the same stamp.

As for the other part of his Accusation against the Dr. Dr. Bentley's
Injustice and Inhumanity to the Authors that lived before him, I have
dispatched the whole in so few words, that the perusing of it will be but
little loss of time, p. 133. etc. Which when the Reader shall have done, to his
own Judgment I leave it, whether I had not Reason to address my self to him in
the manner I there do. P. 141.

Observe it, Reader, and consider the Consequence; when once Banter has broken
in upon a Man's Reputation, how securely Ignorance will follow its Leader.

Mr. Bennet's Appendix being about that Matter of Fact, which has filled the
mouths of the Party with such Clamours, if any thing I have written shall find
a Reader, I may presume it will be my Examination of that Appendix; to which
therefore I shall not here say any more, than that I am even amazed at Mr.
Bennet's Confidence in concluding his Appendix with so serious and solemn a
Protestation, P. 133.
That those things were written by him with the same Sincerity, and Care as if
he had been upon his Oath; that he had no where made use of any false Colors,
nor willingly mislead his Readerin any the least trifling Circumstance of that
tedious Story. Which, taking his words in the plain and natural Sense they seem
to Design, I dare pronounce, to be a most notorious Falsehood.

And now upon the whole, after all the Pains these Gentlemen of the Half Moon
have taken upon the Dr. and his Writings, there is not, I think, any thing
material advanced against him, either as to matter of Fact or matter of
Learning, which has not received a through Examination, that part of Mr.
Boyle's Book excepted, which the Dr. has reserved to his own farther
Consideration; though I believe they could be very well content to dispense
with him for the performance of his Promise. And all the black Accusations
hitherto preferred against him of Ignorance, Plagiarism, Falsehood, etc.
appearing upon Trial (as I think they plainly do) both frivolous, false and
malicious: They may, if they please, still go on with their landable Design of
Printing things upon the Dr. and write a Book against him once a Month as long
as he lives: I dare say, they will neither give him any Disturbance in his own
Thoughts, nor injure his Reputation with others. Since they stand already
convicted of so many notorious Prevarications; whatsoever they may hereafter
advance, I shall not scruple to pronounce that Reader, not only Simple and
Credulous, but also Partial and Unjust, that shall trust them upon their own
bare words, or give any heed to the most specious of their Pages till they have
stood a Trial. And what I assume on the behalf of the Dr. the same Privilege I
think, I have a Right of claiming for my self; who having showed my self so
fearless of their Displeasure, may reasonably expect the worst of Revenges that
the Pen can execute: V. Mr. B. p. 220.
And as for any rougher Instrument, I shall soon be placed out of their reach.

ADVERTISEMENT.
LATELY published The Epistles of Phalaris, translated into English from the
Original, by the Author of this ANSWER.

TO THE Author of the Remarks UPON Dr. Bentley's Fragments OF CALLIMACHUS.
SIR,
THAT part of your Book which I have now under consideration bears this Title.

An Honest Vindication of Tho. Stanley, Esquire, and his Notes on Callimachus.
To which are added some other Observations on that Poet. In a Letter to the
Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire. With a Postscript, in relation to Dr.
Bentley 's late Book against him.

This Title promises two things.

First, An Honest Vindication of Tho. Stanley, Esquire, and his Notes on
Callimachus.

Secondly, Some other Observations on the same Poet.

But withal here is special care taken to give the Reader notice of a certain
Postscript in Relation to Dr. Bentley's late Book against Mr. Boil: by which
late Book of Dr. Bentley against Mr. Boil, I understand the Doctor's late Book
in Vindication of Himself, and his Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris
from the Objections made by the Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire, against Both

Though it is your Honest Vindication of Mr. Stanley and his Notes on
Callimachus I am principally concerned with: yet since you have been pleased to
bless the world with some Things of your Own; P. 34. lin. 7.
Those your own Observations I shall separate from those of Mr. Stanley, and,
to make them the more observed, present them to the view of the Reader in a
place by themselves. And as for the Postscript, it will give me as little
trouble, as I believe it did you.

That the Vindication of the Dead, P. 25.
and speaking for them who cannot speak for themselves, is a Generous and
Honorable Undertaking, I freely grant you. But if this Vindication of the Dead
was wholly Unnecessary; if there was not the least manner of Injustice offered
by Dr. Bentley to the Manes of Mr. Stanley requiring such a Vindication; P. 74.
the Doctor never omitting the mention of his Name, where there was just
occasion for it, nor ever mentioning it without the regard due to his Merit;
Dr. Bentley's Answer to Mr. Boil, pref. p. 93. p. 232. and Epist. ad fin.
Malel. p. 45.
if this your Vindication of the Dead be in reality nothing else than an
Accusation of the Living, and that Accusation altogether frivolous, false and
malicious; if upon due Examination this should appear to be the truth of the
case: an indifferent Reader will be much tempted to doubt, whether or no in the
whole management of this Affair you were indeed acted by those noble Principles
you profess of Conscience, Honor, and Religion, Pref. p. 1, 2, and P. 25, 76,
77.
and not rather put upon it by some very unjustifiable Motives of a quite
different Nature. As perhaps the mean view of making your Court (though at the
Expense both of your own Modesty, and your Neighbors Good Name) to a Young
Gentleman, P. 54.
or the vainglorious Ambition of falling in with a Triumphant Party and
dividing with them the Spoils of a^ already (as you too soon thought) conquered
Enemy.

But the Controversy in which I am engaged is too trifling to bear the
Solemnity of an Introduction. I shall therefore without farther Ceremony
forthwith enter into the Merits of the Cause; which I hope in not many words to
dispatch with that Clearness and Evidence, that even you your self shall be
willing to let the matter drop, and wish it had never been started.

To try the force of your Allegations against Dr. Bentley upon the account of
Mr. Stanley's MS. I shall begin with the first of them, Callimach. op. Edit.
Graevian p. 305. Vindicator. p. 34. Harpocrat. Suidas.
and under that plead to the whole Indictment.

(...) -- as in Dr. Bentley, p. 305.

This Citation out of Suidas ( which Mr. Stanley only hinted at) the Doctor
has transcribed and printed in words at length.

These are your words. By the Parenthesis here ( which Mr. Stanley only hinted
at) is implied, I suppose, that if Mr. Stanley had not hinted at it, Dr.
Bentley had not transcribed it.

Thus have you drawn up the Charge, which reduced into form lies thus.

The Citations out of Harpocration and Suidas are in Mr. Stanley.

The Citations out of Harpocration and Suidas are in Dr. Bentley: ergo,

Dr. Bentley stole the Citations out of Harpocration and Suidas from Mr.
Stanley.

Now of the self same stamp are all and every one of your Proofs that follow;
as thus.

The Citations, Number. 2, 3, 7, 8, 12. and so of the rest, are in Mr. Stanley.

The Citations, Number. 2, 3, 7, 8, 12, etc. are in Dr. Bentley: ergo,

Dr. Bentley stole the Citations, Number. 2, 3, 7, 8, 12, etc. from Mr. Stanley.

Thus lies your Argument, nor can you say, but that I give it its whole force.

And these are those Proofs, to which you give the Epithet of Undeniable, and
upon which you pronounce the Doctor a Convict of Notorious Plagiarism. P. 76.
Were I minded to express my self ingeniously upon this occasion, I could not
do it in better words than in those of an Approved Author, for whom you
doubtless have a particular Esteem. Either our Vindicator must be a very
Thoughtless Writer, Mr. B. p. 259.
or he must hope to meet with very Thoughtless Readers; and such I am sure they
must be, if this way of arguing passes upon them. Never was that bold Epithet,
Undeniable, more miserably abused in the Press, or placed in a Post where it
could less maintain its Ground. But it has been the peculiar Happiness of some
Books to meet with very Thoughtless Readers. Nor can I imagine what other
Consideration could have given our Honest Vindicator also the Heart to set up
for an Author. I could pinch you somewhat close upon this your Undeniable. But
I scorn to take a weak Enemy at Advantage. That would be a Disparagement to the
cause I have in hand: and Dr. Bentley might well think himself a man as unhappy
in his Advocate, as he is happy in his Adversary, were this the best defense I
could make for him, that your Proofs against him are not Undeniable. No, Sir,
I Will freely abate you that strong word. If you can but make them, even to the
lowest degree of Probability, Probable; I Will allow you a little heightning of
your Style, and you shall call them Undeniable.

Now the Probability of your Proofs depends upon the Probability of the
Supposition upon which they stand: and that Supposition is this; That Dr.
Bentley never met with those Citations which you charge upon him as stolen from
Mr. Stanley's MS. either in the Authors themselves, in whose Names they are
published, or in any other Book whatsoever, save in your MS. For had he met
with them any where else, he might as well have transcribed them from thence as
from your MS. Mr. B. p. 101, etc.
Now to suppose this reduces the industrious Dr. Bentley's Polymathy and
multifarious Reading into a very narrow compass. Or else you must suppose, that
though he might have met with them elsewhere, yet he would never have observed
them, so as to have drawn them together, and presented them to the World in the
manner he has done, had he not found them readily collected to his hands by
Mr. Stanley; which to prove will put you as hard to it as the former. Concess.
8.9, infr. p. 11, 12.
This I think is a clear case. So that the Controversy depending between us is
plainly this. Whether it be more probable that the Doctor should have both seen
and observed those Citations in some other Books besides your MS. which is that
part of the Question I take. Or, whether it be more probable, that he had never
met with them any where else, or never would have observed them, had not your
MS either presented him with them in words at length, or at least directed him
to the Books where he might find them; which is the point you are to maintain.

Having thus, I think, very fairly and clearly stated the Case, and as much as
possibly could be done to your advantage; let us calmly and deliberately argue
it out. In the doing of which, for method sake, I shall proceed in this Order.

First, I shall produce your own, and your Friends Concessions on behalf of the
Doctor.

Then I shall compare your Concessions with your Assertions, and from thence
raise some just and reasonable Exceptions deeply affecting the whole Body of
your Proofs. Which being, in the last place, applied to the particular
instances, I shall think this Controversy at an end.

But this one thing I must observe to you before I go any farther, that
hitherto I am but upon the Defensive, nor as yet any farther concerned in the
Doctor's interests, than barely to discharge him of the Accusation you bring
against him; so that I am willing to stand upon the very lowest Terms with you,
and shall be content to take up with that indifferent Account of the Doctor,
which you and your Friends are pleased to give me, and make the best I can of
it.

To begin therefore with your Concessions. And here I am forced to Subpoena in
two or three Witnesses for the Doctor, whose Testimonies will be of so much the
greater weight in this cause, by how much the less they can be suspected of
Partiality in his Favor. As for that Honorable Gentleman, whose name I must
somewhat often make use of upon this occasion, considering how necessary his
evidence is to me, and ho will I could have spared it, I hope he will the more
readily pardon my presumption in producing it.

CONCESSION I. Dr. Bentley is a Person of Singular Industry.
Witness 1. The Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire, Examination of Dr. Bentley,
p. 285.

And to give him my opinion, what He (sc. Dr. Bentley) is fit for, I think that
the collecting of Greek Fragments and Proverbs would be a proper Employment for
him.

And presently after, I am the rather apt to think, that such works as these
might thrive in his hands, because the well executing them depends chiefly on
two Qualities, which he must be allowed to possess; Application and a
Willingness to be employed in such sorts of Studies, as only load the Memory
without improving the Understanding.

Witness 2. Honest Vindicator, p. 42. Notwithstanding his (sc. Dr. Bentley 's)
Accuracy and great Diligence in searching after the Fragments of Callimachus.

Witness 3. The Author of the Postscript to the Honest Vindication of Tho.
Stanley, Esquire, lin. antepenult. I am neither afraid, nor ashamed to declare
that I have a great Esteem for Dr. Benley 's Learning and Industry.

Next to Industry, in order to the carrying on any great design is required
Leisure, and the opportunities of pursuing it. And that I think it is well known
the Doctor's Circumstances have happily afforded him. But since we have an
express Testimony for it, I Will make that

CONCESSION II. Dr. Bentley is a Person who has enjoyed Leisure and the other
Opportunities of pursuing his Studies.
Witness Mr. Boil, Pref. p. 3. where these words lin. 5. The Person, who by
the help of Leisure and Lexicons shall set up for a Critic, are manifestly
designed as part of the Doctor's Character, vide and p. 187, 189. But how was
this Industry and Leisure employed? why, which makes Concession the third.

CONCESSION III. Dr. Bentley is a Person well read in Dictionary-Learning.
In turning over Greek Vocabularies, Onomasticons, Etymologicons, Lexicons,
Glossaries, Nomenclators and Scholia.

Witness 1. Mr. Boil, loco jam dicto, Concess. 2. P. 197, and 208, 213, 223,
286, etc.
and the places referred to in the Margin. But two of these Lexicographers are
singled out from the rest, and therefore well deserve it, to have a particular
mark set upon them, sc. Suidas and Hesychius.

1. With Suidas the Doctor is very conversant, p. 197, and 2. Hesychius is one
of the great Storehouses of his Alphabetical- Learning, p. 183.
Witness 2. Honest Vindicator, p. 9. A Volume as big as the Lexicons he designs
to publish.

ANd if he designs to publish them, surely he must very thoroughly have Read
them. Conser cum Mr. B. p. 223.

Idem iterum, p. 33. Dr. Bentley is the man who has sisted the Lexicographers
and Scholiasts, both printed and in MS.

Witness 3. One A. Alsop late Bachelor of Arts of Christ-Church College in the
University of Oxford, Prefat. to his Fabularum Aesopicarum Delectus Gr. Lat. e
Theatro Sheldoniano, School, lin. 3, 4 RICHARDUM quendam BENTLEIUM virum in
volvendis Lexicis satis Diligentem, i.e. One Richard Bentley, a Man Diligent
enough at turning over Lexicons. For this Sir Alsop's Richardum quendam
Bentleium, I take to be the very self same Person, whom Mr. Boil, p. 195, more
respectively styles Richard Bentley, Doctor of Divinity, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to his Majesty: and that R. Bentley, D. D. is most certainly Mr.
Graevius's RICHARDUS BENTLEIUS Potentissimo Regi GULIELMO a Bibliotheca, novum
sed splendidissimum Britanniae Lumen, i.e. RICHARD BENTLEY, that New but
Brightest Star of Britain, Keeper of the Library to the most Potent King
WILLIAM.

CONCESSION IV. Dr. Bentley is well versed in the Indexes of Books.
Witness 1. P. 68, 145, 165.
Mr. Boil in the places referred to in the margin, and more especially that
Quotation out of Quinctilian, as applied to Dr. Bentley. Nec sane quisquam est
tam procul a cognitione eorum remotus, ut non Indicem certe ex Bibliotheca
sumptum transfer in Libros suos possit: which words it was designed, I
suppose, we should understand to this purpose. No man can be so great a Dunce,
P. 220.
but that by turning to Indexes in a Library he may collect Authorities in
abundance, p. 68. Confer cum Dr. B's Answer, p. 421.

Witness 2. Honest Vindicator, p. 83. -- Harduin, whose Indexes directed Dr.
Bentley to those Quotations, sc. out of Pliny.

CONCESSION V. Quotation was once thought the Doctor's peculiar Province; and
particularly the Quoting things lying out of the common way of Reading.
And if once so, I see no reason why his after Performances should sink his
Reputation upon that Account.

Witness Mr. Boil. I thought Quotation had been the Doctor's peculiar
Province, p. 29. Confer cum Dr. B 's Answer, p. 5, and 13.

Idem, p. 45. As much out of the way as the Doctor loves to read; and p. 226.
The Doctor is one that distinguishes himself, by finding out Hints in the odd
Corners of Books, where it is probable, no body else would look for them.

CONCESSION VI. Dr. Bentley consults the several Editions of Books.
Witness Mr. Boil, to consult the several Editions, to collate the MSS, to
turn over Dictionaries, p. 223. This is spoken of Dr. Bentley.

CONCESSION VII. Dr. Bentley is presumed to have read all Authors in Critic.
Witness 1. Honest Vindicator, p. 38. in the words now named.

Witness 2. Mr. Boil, a man of the Doctor's Polymathy, and great Reading, p.
101, 23, and al.

CONCESSION VIII. In reading the Ancients, Dr. Bentley digests his Observations
and Collections into the method of Commonplace.
Witness Mr. Boil. For so I suppose he would have us understand him, when p.
27. he joins Stobaeus and Suidas together, the one an eminent Common-Placer,
the other a no less eminent Dictionary-Writer, as the two sorts of men for whom
the Doctor has a particular Regard, q.d. the Doctor has no less a Talent at
Common-placing than he has at Dictionary-making. Confer cum p. 223.

CONCESSION IX. Dr. Bentley had long since formed a Design of Collecting the
Fragments of all the Greek Poets.
How long since to a point of time we cannot tell. That he had not only formed
the Design, but made considerable Progress in it before the year 91, is certain.

Witness 1. Mr. Boil, p. 194. where he quotes, and by building an argument
upon it, subscribes to the following passage out of the Doctor's Letter to Dr.
Mill, printed at the end of Malela, Anno 1691, p. 20. Nam in his rebus verba
mihi dari haud facile patior; qui, ut scis, fragmenta omnium poetarum Graecorum
cum Emendotionibus ac notis, grande opus, edere constitueram. In which words
(as Mr. Boil truly and fairly represents the meaning of them) the Doctor
boldly declares his opinion of himself that he thought he could not easily be
deceived in knowing whether a Greek Verse were ascribed to its proper Author,
and that because he once had it in his intentions to have published the
Fragments of all the Greek Poets, with Emendations and Notes upon them; which,
should he have finished it, would have made a large Work.

Nor had he formed the design only, but made considerable Progress in it.
Witness the many pregnant Instances of it in the forenamed Epist. ad fin.
Malel. and more particularly the Specimen there given upon the Tragic Poet Ion,
p. 50, and seqq. and Mr. Boyle's own Confession, p. 285. In one of these ^s^.
the collecting of Greek Fragments) he has succeeded well.

Witness 2. Honest Vindicator, who, p. 94, calls the Collecting Greek
Fragments, the Doctor's old beloved Studies.

CONCESSION X. Dr. Bentley has been Critically exact in Correcting the
Fragments of Callimachus.
Witness Honest Vindicator, p. 42. Notwithstanding his Accuracy, his great
Diligence in searching after the Fragments of Callimachus, and strictness in
Correcting the Failures of others.

CONCESSION XI. Dr. Bentley has made some Additions of his own to Mr.
Stanley's MS.
Witness Honest Vindicator in the place just now referred to, p. 42. It ought
to be confessed that Dr. Bentley has made some Additions of his own, to what was
collected to his hands so readily. And p. 33. It ought to be acknowledged that
Dr. Bentley has made some Additions to Mr. Stanley 's Collections; and it must
have been a Prodigy, if a Man, who had sifted the old Lexicographers and
Scholiasts both Printed and in MS, should not have found out some Passages,
which had escaped the Diligence of that Learned Gentleman; of whose Notes it
must be observed, That they are an imperfect Draught of a more complete work.

Mr. Stanley's MS. being but an imperfect Draught of a more complete work; from
a Man who had sifted the Lexicographers and Scholiasts both Printed and in MS,
and sifted them with a design of Collecting the Fragments of all the Greek
Poets, one might reasonably have expected Additions deserving a better Title
than that Diminutive Epithet SOME; SOME Additions, sc. some few inconsiderable
ones, here and there an odd Quotation. So cautiously do you express your self.
But as I am as yet upon the receiving hand, I must content my self with what
you are pleased to give me, only desiring of you, that what you here not over
liberally grant, you would not elsewhere retract, but still allow these some
Additions to be the Doctor's own.

I shall make bold to borrow of you yet one Concession more, in which, though
the Doctor be not immediately concerned, yet it will be of some use to me in
the managing of his Cause. And that is this.

CONCESSION XII. That besides what had been formerly printed upon this Author,
the Illustrious Spanheim has done some service to Callimachus both in his
Collection of Fragments, and in an entire Volume of Learned Annotations upon
that Poet; hand in hand, with whose Collection Dr. Bentley's Collection
appears, and in multiplied Instances concurs.
Witness Honest Vindicator, p. 32. in the words here expressed.

Thus have I gained of you a competent number of Concessions, with which I am
got up to the very Throat of the Cause, and have little more to do now, than to
sum up the Evidence, and apply it to the matter in hand. And if you do not by
this time apprehend the danger which threatens all your Vndeniables, you are a
person of that happy Constitution, which renders a man secure and fearless.

Dr. Bentley is a Person of singular Industry and Application, V. supra the
several Concessions, and the places there referred to.
and by the very make of his Nature particularly addicted to these sorts of
Studies, upon which he is now called into Question: has met with the most
encouraging opportunities of pursuing them: Is extremely well versed in the old
Lexicographers; Nor less familiar with the Scholiasts: Knows no man better how
to make his Advantage of an Index: Quotation is his peculiar Province: When he
reads an ancient Author, Greek or Latin, is for consulting the several Editions
of him, and Collating the MSS: Is a man of vast Polymathy, and presumed to have
read all Authors in Critic: Digests his Lections and Observations into the
method of Commonplace: Had long since formed the design of Collecting the
Fragments of all the Greek Poets: Has been critically exact in correcting
those of Callimachus in particular: has made some Additions of his own to Mr.
Stanley's Collection: Was in this work of Collecting the Fragments of
Callimachus, as preceded by Vulcanius and Dacier, so accompanied with his
Excellency Spanhemius; Hand in hand with whose Collection the Dr's Collection
appears, and in multiplied Instances concurs. All which notwithstanding, after
all this Industry and Leisure, so employed as is before described, and upon a
design so long since formed: this self same Dr. Bentley is a most notorious
Plagiary. But how so? why because Mr. Stanley also had fallen upon the same
design of Collecting the Fragments of Callimachus, and had made some little
Beginnings in the work, an imperfect Draught of which is still preserved: and
this imperfect Draught of Mr. Stanley's Collections the Doctor had the
Misfortune to have put into his hands; and in this imperfect Draught there are
(in a considerable number of Instances) the same Quotations, and (in some very
few) the same Corrections as are in the Doctor's more finished Piece. Building
upon this, you conclude your work is done, and to place the matter beyond
Dispute, invite the Reader to Mr. P. 32.
Bennet's Shop in St. Paul's Churchyard, where he will see the self same words
and Syllables in Mr. P. 76.
Stanley's Manuscript as in Dr. Bentley's printed Collection. This seems so
fair an Appeal that the unwary Reader is presently taken with it. For what
farther satisfaction would one desire in such a case than Ocular Demonstration?
What fuller Conviction than so apparent matter of fact? All which
notwithstanding, I shall not scruple to pronounce that Reader very Thoughtless
upon whom this way of arguing shall pass for Demonstration. For both Mr.
Stanley and the Doctor having fallen upon the same Thought of Collecting the
Fragments of Callimachus, that there should be some of the same Quotations in
the one as in the other is so far from being a convictive Evidence of the
Latter's having Transcribed them from the Former, that the nature of the thing
render it impossible to have been otherwise: unless we must suppose some
strange chance so to have divided the course of their Reading, that they should
not so much as have dipped into the same Books. For if they both read the same
Authors, and both with a design of collecting the same Fragments; it is
impossible, but that so far as from the time of their having entered upon that
Design, they kept pace with each other in the course of the Reading, they must
also (allowing for here and there an oversight) have transferred into their
Collections the same Quotations. And had Mr. Stanley carried on his work
farther, Dr. Bentley's Collection must also of necessity, though without his
ever having seen Mr. Stanley's, have fallen in with it oftener than now it does,
and his some Additions, as you call them, have been proportionably fewer than
now they are. So that (to remind you of the state of the question) to make good
your Accusation of Plagiarism against Dr. Bentley upon the account of Mr.
Stanley's MS. one of these two points ought to have been more particularly
insisted upon; either that Mr. Stanley's Collection was a very complete one,
those some Additions of the Doctor's being but few and inconsiderable in
comparison of what he is supposed to have found readily Collected to his hands
by Mr. Stanley; the direct contrary to which is the truth of the case: Or else,
that those other some Quotations, which you charge upon him as borrowed from
Mr. Stanley, were such chosen pieces, and lying so much out of the way of the
Doctor's Reading, that he would certainly have missed of them, had he not found
them in your MS. of which I say the same as of the former; the Citations of Mr.
Stanley's MS. being the most easily come at of any in the whole Set, and lying
so full in the Doctor's daily walks, that he could not but have stumbled upon
them, even whether he would or no. And yet you run on from the beginning to the
end upon your wild and groundless Supposition, Sup. p. 5.
which you take for granted, without offering one Syllable in proof of it, That
the Doctor had never met with those Citations any where else, or never observed
them, till he lit upon them in your MS. This is that grand Supposition which
supports all your Proofs: which therefore, when upon a Review of the
Concessions before laid down, you shall see so miserably betrayed, you will
find cause to blame your own Incircumspection, and wish you had been more
sparing of your Complements.

And now Sir, as for the Promise which I made you of a comparison between your
Concessions and your Assertions; I think I may save my self that labor, and
leave it to the Reader from what has been already said to collect how far
those Liberal Encomiums bestowed upon the Doctor for his Industry, and the
several other peculiarities of his character, so happily qualifying him for
Undertakings of this nature, will go to discharge him of the foul Imputation of
Plagiarism; and how inconsistent the one part of the character you give us of
him is with the other part of it.

It Is not for that the necessity of the cause requires this Precaution and
Exactness, that I am thus grave, and (if I may so say) Mathematical in making
my Approaches to the Argument, but out of the respect I bear to your person,
whom being altogether unknown to me, I would not willingly Affront; which
construction might be made of it, should I answer your Suggestions in so
slighty and superficial a manner, as if they did not deserve a more through
Consideration. And besides, those so Emphatick terms in which you press on your
Accusation upon the Doctor, will plead my excuse, if I be at more pains than
otherwise could have been judged necessary to bestow upon it so serious and
operose a Reply. Undeniable Proof, Ocular Demonstration, matter of Fact,
Manifest Conviction: These, sure, are too weighty things to be passed over with
a loose Harangue. The nature of your Evidence in general, I think has been
already sufficiently considered. I proceed now in due form and manner to lay in
(which was the next thing proposed) my Exceptions against your Proofs in
particular. All your Allegations therefore against the Doctor I admit to pass
for good Evidence, (or if you will have it so) Undeniable Proofs; those only
which fall under these Exceptions following, excepted.

Exception I.
The several Passages taken out of the old Lexicographers and Scholiasts: Supr.
p. 8. and seqq.
with whom the Doctor being so familiarly acquainted, cannot be supposed to
have overlooked those Quotations with which those Authors must needs have
supplied him.

Exception II.
The Passages marked out in the Indexes of Books. For the Doctor being presumed
to be so well versed in Indexes, cannot be presumed, when he was upon
Collecting the Fragments of Callimachus to have been at a loss for such of
them, as those Indexes would most readily have directed him to.

Exception III.
The several Fragments or Testimonia relating to Callimachus extant in
Vulcanius and Dacier's Editions of that Author. Antw. 1584, 12o. Paris, 1675,
4o.
For the Passages there extant the Doctor, whose practice it is to consult the
several Editions of Books, must needs have seen: which yet make up a
considerable part of the instances you produce against him, as Proofs of his
Plagiarism from your MS.

Exception IV.
Those Quotations which the Doctor had actually printed before ever he saw your
MS or which are taken from Authors with whom it plainly appears he was before
then very familiarly acquainted. In Ep. ad fin. Malel.


Exception V.
Those Citations or Corrections in which Mr. Stanley's Collection, Mr.
Spanheim's, and the Doctor's concur. For if Mr. Spanheim could without the help
of your MS. light upon many of the same things which are in your MS. Why, might
not Dr. Bentley do the like? unless we must suppose the Doctor to have been
less diligent in searching after the Fragments of Callimachus, or less curious
in correcting the failures of others: which both your own words, and the plain
matter of Fact (as will appear to any one that shall compare the Doctor's
Collection with any of the other Collections printed together with his)
manifestly confutes.

Exception VI.
Such Passages which are not to be met with in any Book whatsoever, whether
printed or MS. save only in Mr. Stanley's Collection. For the Doctor taking
such delight in Quotation, having been so long upon this Collecting Design,
Treasuring up his collections into Commonplace, being presumed to have read
all Authors in Critic, spending his time in turning over old MSS, and fetching
his Quotations out of the odd Corners of Books, where scarce any body else
would look for them: I cannot imagine what One of all your Proofs may be
presumed to have escaped so Diligent a Search; unless produced out of some such
Books, whether printed or MS, which the Doctor never had the Possibility of
seeing.

Exception VII.
And lastly, I except also out of the number of Proofs those few Corrections in
which Mr. Stanley's Manuscript Collection, and the Doctor's printed one concur,
though not to be shown in any Book in the world, saving in those two. For the
Doctor having been so Critically exact in correcting the Fragments of
Callimachus, and having proved the exactness of his Judgment upon so many
difficult places untouched by Mr. Stanley, he cannot reasonably be presumed to
have overlooked those other so manifestly corrupt Lections, which no As that
of (...) for (...), n. 52. v. Spanhemii fragm. p. 278.
man that understood any thing belonging to Callimachus, could have passed by
unobserved; nay, which any Schoolboy, that had but Grammar enough to scan a
Greek Verse, would have As that of (...) for (...), n. 49.
rectified. And of this kind are most (if not all) of those Corrections, which
you charge upon him as stolen from Mr. Stanley. Though both Mr. Stanley's and
Dr. Bentley's Talent at these sort of studies being well known, it had been so
such strange jumping of Wits, if they had in more Instances of this kind hit
upon the same Conjectures, which: yet they have so rarely done (and then only
in places of the most obvious Emendation) that there was no need of laying in
this Caveat.

And thus much for the Exceptions I had to make against your Proofs, all of
them founded upon your own Concessions; which you cannot in honor retract:
though indeed you have given little more than what I might honestly have
assumed for the Doctor without becoming your Debtor. But since you were so over
and above obliging, I was willing to close in with you upon your own Terms.
Especially most of those things being delivered with such a peculiar
Gracefulness and Decency of Style, which my unpracticed Pen could never have
attained to. Nor can you now say, that I have any-where abused or
misrepresented you, having all along recited your own Words and Syllables, put
no forced Interpretation upon them; nor charged them with consequences which
they do not naturally bear. And it is but agreeable to the Law of Arms, if one
can make ones self Master of the Enemy's Artillery, to turn it upon themselves:
and if your Testimonies for the Doctor must be of no weight; It Is a most
unequitable demand, that your Testimonies against him should be of greater. So
that till you can produce some such Proofs as will not fall under some or other
of these Exceptions, the Doctor may still be, for all his having seen your MS,
as free from the Crime of Plagiarism as the man that never saw it.

There are some sorts of Transactions, wherein the Preliminaries rightly
adjusted, the whole Affair is soon brought to a Conclusion: of which kind I
take to be our present Controversy. The Reader, who understands any thing of
the nature of the Subject we are upon, cannot but by this time begin to
perceive how the case stands between the Doctor and your MS. and where things
are like to end. I must however, were it only for form sake, enter into the
Detail of particulars, which I shall do in this method.

First, I shall take some Decads of your Proofs just in order as they lie, and
try them by the Rules before given, subjoyning to them at convenient Distances,
some proper Remarks, which added to those general Observations already made,
you will have no cause to think your self neglected, or complain that I have
done my work but by halves. And by that I shall have taken this course with
three or four Decads of your Proofs (for they are a great number of them in
all) I shall presume upon it, that both you and my Reader will be well enough
content I should hold my hand, and dispatch the rest of them by wholesale. To
place things under an easy view to the Eye, I must make use of two of the
Letters of the alphabet, the one to represent (as it were) the Plaintiff, and
head the Allegations, the other to represent the Defendant, and father the
Replications. The former shall be V. standing for Vindicator, the other, from
its order in the Alphabet, W.

The First Decad of Proofs.
V. Proof 1.
The Citation out of Harpocration, (...) -- as in Dr. Bentley, p 305. n. 1.

W. And as in Mr. Spanheim, p. 293. n. 11. Exception 5. Harpocration is a
Lexicographer. Exception 1. It Is marked out in the Index to Harpocration. L. B.
1683. 4 to.
Exc. 2.

V. Pr. 2.
The same Citation out of Suidas, ibid.

W. With Suidas the Doctor is very conversant, Conc. 3. Exc. 1.

V. Pr. 3.
An Epigram out of Martial, n. 2.

W. In Dacier 's Callimachus inter Testimonia Veterum, Exc. 3.

V. Pr. 4.
The Citation out of Clemens Alexandrinus, n. 2.

W. Index to Clem. Alex. Exc. 2.

V. Pr. 5.
Another of the same, n. 3.

W. Index again.

V. Pr. 6, 7.
Two Citations out of Didymus upon Homer, n. 5.6.

W. Not Proofs.

V. Pr. 8.
A Quotation out of Servius upon Virgil, n. 7.

W. 4 to, 1648.
Index to Servius upon Virgil, Exc. 2.

V. Pr. 9.
Another of the same, n. 8.

W. Index again.

V. Pr. 10.
A Citation out of Stobaeus, n. 11.

W. Index again, Exc. 2. in Vulcanius his Callimachus, p. 138. or in Dacier 's
p. 152. Exc. 3.

Remarks upon Decad 1.
Leaving the rest of your Proofs to answer for themselves to the several
Exceptions clapped upon the back of them; Remark 1.
two of them there are of so peculiar a Complexion, that I cannot but make a
stop at them, sc. Pr. 6, 7. The two Citations out of the Scholiast upon Homer,
Dr. B. fr. n. 5, 6. To which I returned no other Answer than Not Proofs. Which
whether it were sufficient let the Reader judge from what follows. With them
therefore I begin my Remarks.

Remark I.
Putting your sense into words at length, and making it intelligible, you
allege them in this Form. P. 35.
From Parrhasius, to whom the Doctor is referred by Mr. Stanley 's MS. he had
his Information that the Scholiast upon Homer often cited the Aetia of
Callimachus. From whence the Inference is; ergo, Dr. Bentley stole his two
Citations out of Didymus upon Homer, n. 5, 6. from Mr. Stanley's MS But how so?
Are they in your MS? No, not so. But Mr. Stanley directed him to Janus
Parrhasius, and so he came by them. To Janus Parrhasius therefore I go, and by
the help of Gruter's Index to the first Volume of his Fax Artium, I readily
turn to the place you intend, and there, p. 874. I find these words, Ex Aetiis
praeterea Callimachi vetustus and innominatus interpres Homeri, qui in Publica
Vaticana Bibliotheca Romae legitur, saepissime testimonium petit, i. e. There
is to be seen in the Vatican Library at Rome, an old nameless Scholiast upon
Homer, who often quotes Callimachus's (...). And this is every word that
Parrhasius says to the matter. And now let us see how deeply the Doctor is
endebted to your MS. upon the account of these two Quotations. Just thus much
and no more. Mr. Stanley, he sends him to Parrhasius; and Parrhasius, he sends
him to Rome, telling him withal, that 'twas but going into the Vatican
Library, and enquiring there for a certain old nameless Scholiast upon Homer;
and so, if he had the luck to hit upon the right Book, he would meet with
somewhat to his purpose in it: And so the Doctor came by his two Citations out
of Didymus. An Information much like that which the old man in the Fable gave
to his Son of a Treasure buried under ground in the Vineyard, but not telling
him the place where, the young Heir was fain to dig the Vineyard all over, and
so he found his Treasure indeed, not what he expected, Pots of Money, but what
his Father designed, the fruit of good Husbandry. After the same manner, the
Dr. having (by the help of your MS.) heard somewhat of an old Scholiast upon
Homer, that quoted somewhat out of Callimachus his Aetia, was resolved,
whatever it was, and whatever pains it cost him, he would have it. But that
Scholiast upon Homer being a nameless one, least he should not hit upon the
right, he turns over all the Scholiasts upon Homer: and so he gets not only
these three Citations belonging to Callimachus his (...) (for there is another
of them to follow in the next Decad) but about half an Hundred more some way or
other belonging to the same Author: but all by the help of your MS. which first
put him upon the Quest. For had not your MS. sent him to Janus Parrhasius, the
Doctor had never thought of any of the old Scholiasts upon Homer. But to be
serious with you, Sir; would you have offered such things as these for Proofs
against the Doctor, but upon the presumption that no body would have been at
the pains of tracing you? The Doctor is a Notorious Plagiary. And why? why,
because the Doctor has three Quotations out of Didymus upon Homer, referring
to Callimachus his (...); and before the Doctor had printed his Fragments, he
had seen Mr. Stanley's MS; and Mr. Stanley's MS. takes notice of Parrhasius,
who takes notice of an old Scholiast upon Homer, who takes notice of
Callimachus his (...), ergo Dr. Bentley is a Plagiary. A surprising
Consequence! But, Sir, before you can bring this Proof to bear, there may be
made several Queries, to which it behooves you to give a punctual Answer. As do
you think the Doctor would never have looked into Didymus upon Homer, had it
not been for this special Information, which at second hand he received from
your MS? Or would not Gruter's Index, which litera C. has these words,
Callimachi Aetia, quo argumento Parrhas. p. 873. have sent him as strait to
Parrhasius as your MS. could have done? Or are you sure that Parrhasius his old
nameless Scholiast of the Vatican was ever yet committed to the Press? or that
Didymus was it? For there are several old Scholiasts upon Homer both printed
and in MS. As besides Eustathius and Didymus, whom every body has heard of,
Gruter's Index to the 5th Volume of his Critics refers me to H. Stephani
Schediasmata, lib. 4. c. 21. where I find mention of Quaedam in Homerum
Scholia, quae nondum edita sunt, and quae quam paucissimis legere datur. In the
Epistle printed at the end of Malela's Chronology, p. 63. I find the Doctor
himself quoting Joannes Tzetzes his Ilias interpretata Allegorice, quae nondum
edita est. And in number. 135. of this his Collection, I find him producing a
Fragment of Callimachus with a large Quotation out of Porphyrius in Homericis
Quaestionibus. And these indeed have been printed over and over, but in
Holstenius his Notes upon Porphyry's Life of Pythagoras you will find mention
of other old Scholia upon Homer, bearing also the name of Porphyrius, which
have never been yet printed. And other old MS. Scholia upon Homer undoubtedly
there are in the world more than either you, or I, or the Dr. or Mr. Stanley,
or Parrhasius, or any one man else whatsoever may have seen. Now to which of
all these did Parrhasius send the Doctor? To that which is now known by the
name of Didymus you suppose, but it might be to any other nameless Scholiast as
well as to him I might farther ask you, Sir, how many Quotations out of all or
any one of these Scholiasts are there in your MS? In the Doctor's Collection,
taking them all together, there are (for I have been at the pains of counting
them) above half an hundred Quotations out of the old Scholiasts upon Homer. As
far as you have carried on the comparison, I find not so much as one single
reference directly out of your MS. to any one of all these Scholiasts, and
therefore very much question, whether in the drawing up this Imperfect Draught
Mr. Stanley made any use of any one of them. And yet by a strange fetch these
three Quotations must be stole from your MS. But if he came by these three by
the help of your MS. how came he by the other half hundred? were they from your
MS too? a compendious way of making him as Notorious a Plagiary as you please.
For you might as well have charged him with the whole as with part. And do such
Proofs as these deserve a better answer than what I gave them? Not Proofs, nor
any thing like Proofs, but mere Suggestion, and altogether groundless. And now
as for that Sentence out of Parrhasius with which, as it were by way of
Epiphonema, you back these two Proofs, and by the help of which translated into
English, you call the Doctor Plagiary in two Languages, I have no more to say
to it, than that I believe the Transtation to be your own: which is more than I
dare venture to say for that choice piece of an Aesopick, which adorns your
Title Page. There seems to be too much of the Spirit and Style in that for a
person of your Gravity and Seriousness. I am almost as confident as if I had
seen the hand that did it; that in your Title Page and Postscript you had the
assistance of some Second. 'Twas pity he did not take the same care of you
throughout your whole Book. Your Style stood in great need of mending. I fear I
have already detained the Reader too long upon this particular. But I was
willing to let him see how resolved you were to make the most of your Cause.
And Remark the second, as for another instance of your plain dealing, and a
bold stroke of the Pen, he will find not at all inferior to the first; but (as
to the former part of it at least) of a more general Concern.

Remark II.
Just after the Titulus (...), you have these words. The two Epigrams out of
the Anthology are omitted by Mr. Stanley, with which the Doctor makes a
flourish; but the Epigram out of Martial is in Mr. Stanley's Collections.

With which the Doctor makes a flourish.

Which the Doctor quotes you mean; for the one of which he produces of fresh
Authority, and upon the other of which he bestows a Correction. this is all the
flourish the Dr. makes with them; and this is the Dr's way of making a
flourish: scarce any thing passes through his hands, but he leaves it better
than he found it. Nor can you your self forbear now and then offering at such
kind of flourishes: with what success we shall see in its proper place. But
whether the Doctor has the same things with your MS. or has not the same
things; something must be said to him. I might also ask you, since we are here
allowed to suppose the Doctor to have fought these two Greek Epigrams out of
the Anthology it self, why may we not also suppose him to have fought Martial's
Epigram out of Martial himself? Is it because Martial is a common Book, and the
Dr. loves to read out of the way? So let it be then. But this Paragraph is
fruitful of Observations of a more important consideration. I shall deliver
them as succinctly as I can; yet so as to make my self thoroughly understood,
and set things in a full Light.

First then I observe that we are but just got over two of your Proofs against
the Dr. ( sc. the Quotations out of Harpocration and Suidas) but that he
matches them with two Additions of his own, ( sc. the two Epigrams out of the
anthology) to the one of which the new Authority added makes the Dr's some
Additions, Three; to this supposed Plagiarisms, Two. You see, Sir, you have
lost ground at the starting-Post, and I dare say you will be distanc'd out and
out ever you reach half the Course. I might farther observe that this new
Authority produced by the Dr. (which if any body had done before him, it is more
than I know) for part of one of these Epigrams, gives it with something of
difference in the reading from that of the Anthology. It Is true, that
difference is not in this place very material, the sense in both coming to the
same And yet this cannot be said to be an Insignificancy; since though not
here, yet in many other places the same Fragments produced out of several
Authors, what from the variety of the Lections, and other circumstances is
rescued from that obscurity in which it must otherwise for ever have remained
unintelligible. And this is a case which happens so very often in the Dr's
Collection, that there are but few Pages, which afford not instances of it in
abundance; proving at the same time the compass of his Reading, and the
exactness of his Judgment. Or however if any one should (as none that
understands any thing in Affairs of this nature will) censure this multiplying
of Authorities to the same purpose for a vain and fruitless Curiosity: yet at
least it clears him from the Imputation of Plagiarism. For if in some, nay in
many places, the Dr. and your MS. fall in with the same Quotations: Supr. p. 17.
that, as has been before said, the nature of the thing renders impossible to
have been otherwise: But if your MS. produces a Fragment attested (as is
generally the case) with only one Authority, or suppose two, and the Dr. adds
one, two, or three more; how is he a Plagiary? if he could out of his own
Stores produce four, three, two, nay or but one Authority to which your MS.
directed him not; why may we not suppose him as able to have produced those
other also which are to be seen in your MS? Since the same Reading of the
Ancients required for the former would have done his work for the latter

And here I cannot but give the Reader notice of a common Fallacy put upon him
throughout the whole course of your Book: which is this, That you generally
allege your Proofs against the Dr. by the Tale of the Number of the Fragments:
and these Figures in many places stand crowded together so thick one upon the
other, that they make a formidable appearance. Thus p. 36. under the Title
AITION A' ((...) it should have been, as in Dr. Bentley, (...)) you run on
strangely with your Numbers; as, N. 12, 13, 14, are taken from Mr. Stanley, as
is also the 17th; the 18th from Parrhasius, to whom he was directed; 21st from
Mr. Stanley; 27, 28, 29, from Mr. Stanley. But what a Shoal of them is there in
p. 42, No. 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60. And what of all these? Why
all taken from Mr. Stanley. But this is a most Notorious Illusion; the
Quotations produced by your MS. under the several Numbers, or other References
to the Dr's Collection making sometimes not the half As N. 2, 27, 38, 40, 42,
46, 50, etc.
, sometimes not the Quarter As N. 52, 67. tit. (...), n. 86, etc.
, nay sometimes not the 10th As tit. (...), vid. Dr. B. p. 324. and 228, and
Graevii Pro^^m. p. 5. and tit. IIS Dr. B. p. 345.
, nay sometimes not the 20th (...), ut supra, and (notwithstanding our
Vindicator's Caveat, p. 54.) tit. (...), Dr. B. from p. 327, to p. 337.
part of those produced by the Dr. in the places so referred to. He that thinks
I am upon the stretch let him collate the Dr's Collection with Mr. Stanley's
MS. upon the places pointed out in the Margin; where under the first of those
References he will find the Dr's Additions to be at least three to two, under
the second at least five to one, under the third at least ten, and under the
fourth twenty to one to what he is supposed to have found ready collected to
his hand in Mr. Stanley's MS. And yet so have you printed the Case that the
Reader who understands no more of the matter than what he sees of it in your
Book, and never gives himelf the trouble of looking into the Dr's Collection,
takes it as if all that was under those Numbers were transcribed from Mr.
Stanley: and goes away satisfied of your Ingenuity, because you acknowledge the
Dr. to have made some Additions of his own; sc. the addition of those simple
Numbers omitted in your Tale; as between Number 50 and 60, the Addition of that
single Number 56. whereas the Addition of the simple Numbers does not upon the
whole (and I am sure I speak within compass) make up a quarter part of these
some Additions which you ingenuously allow the Dr. to have made to Mr.
Stanley's MS. Nay I am inclined to believe, that upon a just Calculation, all
that is in your MS. will scarce be found to bear the proportion of one to
twenty to what is in the Dr's Collection: taking in all, I mean, that the Dr.
has done upon Callimachus, either by way of Addition of fresh Epigrams,
Fragments, or Testimonia; or the Addition of fresh Authorities to those already
produced (as effectual an Addition as any) or by way of Emendation and
Explication of the Text in his Notes upon the several parts of that Author: his
Translation of almost all the Fragments, and many of the Epigrams I put not
into the accounts, though a work requiring the exercise of some other faculty
besides that of Memory. Sup. p. 7.
All these things, I say, laid together, I am pretty confident the Dr's some
Additions will be found more than twenty to one to what is in your MS. But
there is no need of my running things so high. Suppose we stood upon the Par,
and the Dr's Additions did but just keep up with your MS. yet even so, why must
he have stole his half share from Mr. Stanley? Since the same Industry that
supplied him with the one half part, not in your MS. would in course have
supplied him with thy other half which is in your MS. As for instance, in p. 37
of your Book, the quotation out of the Scholiast upon Sophocles, n. 21. you
charge upon the Dr. as directly stolen out of your MS. in these words, n. 21.
from Mr Stanley. But another Quotation out of the same Scholiast, P. 310.
and standing in the same page of the Dr's Collection, n. 26. you leave him in
full possession of: nay, and yet another Quotation out of the same Scholiast,
n. 209. you allow him to have transcribed from that Scholiast himself, adding
in express terms, whom the Dr. had consulted. P. 71.
But what reason can you give for the difference here? why n. 26. and n. 209.
should have been (as you elegantly express it, P. 30.
) the genuine Offspring of the Doctor's own Brain; but n. 21. directly taken,
as you positively aver, from Mr. Stanley? So again, in p. 42. I find you
bringing in the Dr. Debtor to Mr. Stanley for a Quotation out of the Scholiast
upon Apollonius Rhodius, n. 49. but another Quotation out of the same
Scholiast, Dr. B. p. 355. you frankly allow to be his Own. But why the one
rather than the other? your words in that place are so very express and
significative, that I think them worth the transcribing, p. 68. under the Title
(...). P. 68.
the passages out of Athenaeus and Harpocration are transcribed from Mr.
Stanley; the other two out of the Scholiast upon Apollonius and Eustathius are
the Product of Dr Bentley 's own Observation in reading the Ancients. And with
this you conclude (as to the Fragments) your Detail of Particulars: and more
unluckily you could not have done it. Thus much I must needs say for you, that
you are no Artist at managing an Accusation, nor much practiced in this way of
writing; which I assure you I am far from objecting against you as a
Disparagement. I wonder that some or other of the Party did not spy this flaw,
and put some better Disguise upon the matter for you. But it is plain, from the
many mistakes in the first Edition of your Book not corrected, or colored over
in the second, that they took no manner of care of you. 'Twas ungratefully done
of them thus to neglect a person who had discovered so forwardly a Zeal for the
cause; P. 21.
and ventured his all to serve them. But it is strange, that you your self
should not have perceived it, that these last words overthrow all that you had
been doing before. For I cannot conceive any Reader so very Thoughtless, as not
to catch you up here of his own accord: If the Passages out of the Scholiast
upon Apollonius and Eustathius were the Product of the Dr's own Observation in
reading the Ancients; why then, why might not the two Passages out of Athenaeus
and Harpocration be so too? Or by what strange fate were the Dr's fingers
directed, that should thus have led them directly to the very Book, Page, and
Line, where lay any of those Fragments of Callimachus, which Mr. Stanley had
not meddled with; but bound them up from so much as once touching upon any one
of those which Mr. Stanley had before impropriated? This is so obvious a
Reflection, that upon second thought you cannot but blame your own Indiscretion
in laying it so full in view. The untoward way of your concluding your Detail
of Particular puts me in mind of the words with which you conclude your whole
Book, P. 95.
If this will not convince and amend him, I resign him to better management.
And really, Sir, that you must do. If it be resolved that Dr. Bentley shall be
confounded, it must be done by some hand more accustomed to these sorts of
Exercises.

This Article of the Dr's some Additions I looked upon to be a most material
point, and such wherein the very substance of the cause is very nearly
concerned; and therefore gladly laid hold on the first opportunity of
considering it somewhat particularly.

At the beginning of this Remark, I made mention of a bold stroke of the Pen,
and what that is we shall see in the observation I am now going upon. It
naturally arises from this same Paragraph, and is one of the choicest of the
whole Set: and therefore I cannot but usher it in with a special Recommendation.

I observe therefore, that the other Book, besides the Anthology, out of which
the Dr. fetches part of one of these Epigrams, is that known Lexicographer,
Suidas; nay, but Suidas in the Letter (...)? If you remember a certain passage
in your Book, the very mention of these words cannot but a little startle you:
perhaps you have forgot it: turning therefore to your 82d page, you will find
your self thus directing your Speech to your Honorable Patron.

These two Quotations (your meaning plainly is, the Omission of these two
Quotations) from so known a Lexicographer incline me to believe, that the
Remark is very true, p. 245. (m. 244.) of your Learned Examination of his
Dissertation, that he is got no further than the Letter (...) in Suidas.

Those two Quotations you speak of are out of Suidas, lit. K. vv. (...), which
being in Mr. Stanley's MS but not in Dr. Bentley's Collection; from thence you
infer, that the Dr. has not read Suidas beyond the Letter (...): now from
thence should I have inferred, That the Dr. did not transcribe Mr. Stanley's
MS. for had he transcribed Mr. Stanley's MS. he could not have missed of those
two Quotations. How these two passages out of Suidas came to be wanting in the
Dr's Collection I know not. It Is most likely it was purely by oversight in his
digesting and transcribing his Collections for the Press, Summa festinatione,
not. in Epig. 49. P. 40.
which he tells us was done in great have. And I am the rather inclined so to
believe, because in the Dr's Collection I find the Title GLAYKOS (as you well
observe) wanting in its proper place: which can have been only an oversight;
that Title, with several others being preserved by Suidas, v. (...): and
accordingly, though wanting in the Body of the Collection, yet we find it
standing among the rest in the Catalogue which the Dr. has given us of all the
Works of that Poet. P. 304.


As you refer us to the very page where that Remark is to be found, and indeed
that Honorable Gentleman himself seeming desirous that his Penetration upon a
like occasion should be taken notice of; I presume I shall oblige you Both by
transcribing it. Not every one that reads these Papers may have that Book by
him: and besides, I were ambitious of having in this silly Piece of mine some
few Lines at least, that will be Unexceptionably Good.

And this (to his Eternal Scandal be it spoken) is a Plain Proof that he has
not read over all Suidas. Mr. B. p. 244.
Nay, I have reason to suspect, that he is got no further than (...), which I
observe I see that little word here, and guess at the meaning of it; but how
that alters the case, I see not.
here to be the utmost Line of his Citations. I would not have the Reader
slight this Discovery of mine, for it is as considerable as any of Dr. Bentley
's, that are purely his own.

No, Sir, I do not slight it, nor did I at the first reading of it. And though
there be so many Peculiarities in that ingenious Gentleman's way of writing,
that no man who has read through (so as to know what he is doing) but one half
quarter part of his Book can be much surpised at any thing that follows: yet
when I came to this particular passage, both the matter of it, and that Air of
satisfaction with which it is delivered, struck me with fresh Admiration. How!
thought I; the Dr. so very familiar with the Lexicographers, Vid. p. 197.
so conversant with Suidas in particular; and yet not got beyond the Letter
(...) in Suidas? It Is strange. I cannot suppose that Honorable Gentleman, when
he wrote his Examination of Dr. Bentley, not to have thoroughly read that Piece
of the Dr's which he so often quotes, P. 147, 158, 166, 170, 191, 192, 193,
194, 196, etc.
sc. his Letter to Dr. Mill, printed at the end of Malela's Chronology: where
he could not but have seen the Dr. p. 32. upon the Letter l. in Suidas, v.
(...), and p. 62, 68. upon the Letter o. vv. (...): upon the Letter p v. (...),
p. 85. and p. 12. upon the Letter s v. (...). After all which I cannot see what
reason he had to suspect that the Dr. was got no further than the Letter (...)
in Suidas.

But there is a certain Proverbial Gnoma in our Language, Mr. B p. 140, 285.
Vind. p. 26.
which by the help of an Extensive Charity will cover a Multitude of that
Ingenious Gentleman's (...), viz. Good Wits have short Memories. How you should
have been so forgetful, is a thing not so easy to be accounted for. With what
Grace could you say, That you are inclined to believe, that the Dr. is not got
beyond the Letter (...) in Suidas, when in the very first page of his
Collection, you find him in the Letter (...)? 'Twould be unmannerly in me to
say, to your Eternal Scandal be it spoken: but if your Complexion will bear a
Blush, you cannot read these Lines without changing Countenance. You tell us,
that the Dr. ought not to be angry at it, if he be greated as he deserves, P.
30.
and that you have done it in a plain unaffected Style, P. 95.
calling a Spade by its right Name. Should I, upon this and the several other
occasions, which almost every Page of your Book presents me with, treat you as
you deserve, and call things by their Right Names; I know what I should be
called my self: unmannerly would be too sost a word for me, Mr. B. p. 220.
and perhaps the Pen too gentle a Weapon for my Chastisement. But I am for
sleeping in a whole skin, and therefore shall only in the plain unaffected
Style tell you; That what you say you are inclined to believe, you are not, you
can not be inclined to believe: at least you cannot be inclined so to believe
upon the Reason here given. For if the Dr's having omitted those two Quotations
out of Suidas, vv. (...), inclined you to believe, that he was not got beyond
the Letter (...) in Suidas: then his having quoted Suidas in v. (...), should
have as strongly inclined you to believe, that he was got as far as the Letter
(...) in Suidas. Give me leave here to trifle with you a little, Sir, and
answer you in your own way: For why may not I now and then make a flourish with
my Numbers as well as you? Turning to Number. 245. in the Dr's Collection you will
find him upon the Letter l. in Suidas. In Number. 46, 144, 350. and p. 431. Upon
the Letter m. Upon the Letter n. Number. 345. and p. 431. In Number. 2. and 92. upon
the Letter o. In Number. 48, 84, 227. and 344. upon the Letter p. In Number. 49, 59,
71, 299. upon the Letter s. In Number. 210. upon the Letter t. In Number. 42. upon
the Letter u. In Number. 50. and p. 349. upon the Letter PH. In Number. 193. upon the
Letter In Number. 184. upon the Letter PS. And lastly, in page 352. upon the
Letter (...).

And now, Sir, what think you of the matter? Are you still inclined to believe,
that the Remark is true, That the Dr. is got no further than the Letter (...)
in Suidas? Is not this what I called in the beginning, Sup. p. 3.
making your Court to a Young Gentleman at the Expense of your own Modesty?
Nay, and is not that Honorable Young Gentleman himself most deeply obliged to
you for your bringing the scapes of his Pen also under a review?

I wonder what the Reader thinks of me. Certainly it is that I am an Idle Man.
What a parcel of Figures have I been at the pains of drawing together here? And
to what end or purpose? What Is any body the better for reading such stuff as
this? Upon my word I am perfectly ashamed of my self. But who can help it? If
men will put such things as these into Print, in Print they must be told of
them again. For there is no reason in the world for it, That Impertinence
should be a Protection to Impudence: or that Men of worth should be made the
Mock of Fools, because they that make them so write things so wretchedly
trifling, that a man of any Regard to his own Reputation, would be ashamed of
the Scandal of having so mis-imployed his time as to answer them.

To come off handsomely with your (...) Observation, you have no other way left
you, than to plead that the Dr. stole all his Quotations out of Suidas, beyond
that Letter from Mr. Stanley's MS. In answer to which, I need give my self no
farther trouble than to turn you back to except. 1. to the special mark
standing at the top of p. 9th, Supr. p. 19.
to the Dr's familiarity with this Lexicographer before ever he saw your MS.
Except. 4. and to several other things before said. But the case of SUIDAS is
somewhat particular, and therefore I cannot think it foreign to our purpose to
bestow upon it a special consideration.

This Undertaking therefore of collecting the Fragments of Callimachus I have
reason to suspect was not with that Learned Gentleman, Mr. Stanley, Supr. p. 12.
as it was with Dr. Bentley, a Design long before premeditated, and therefore
of a long time carried on throughout the whole course of his reading; but a
late and sudden Thought taken up upon some special occasion, as probably upon a
prospect of publishing a new Edition of the Works of that Poet; which had he
finished, it would in all probability have superseded the Labors of those
Learned Persons that came after him, Dacier. Graevius.
and Mr. Stanley's Callimachus might have stood to this day (as his Aeschylus
still does, and is like long so to do) the last Edition of that Poet.

His first Essays toward this work appear in those Papers with which you make
such a stir, which were once (without his seeking) put into the Dr's hand, and
which are now put into other hands to be shown as Evidence against the Dr. at
the sign of the Half Moon in S. Paul's Churchyard. Sup. p. 14.
That they are an imperfect draught of a more complete Work you your self
acknowledge. But the method in which he proceeded in drawing up this imperfect
Draught, is perhaps more than what you may have yet observed. I must confess I
could willingly have seen the Original it self, but as I think I can do my work
without it, I were not over eager of satisfying an unnecessary Curiosity at the
hazard of venturing into a place where it is so dangerous a thing to express
one's self too familiarly. I think I have even without the sight of your MS.
made a Discovery, which if I can make out; let me tell you, Sir, I shall not a
little value my self upon it, but judge it altogether as considerable as that
upon which your Learned Friend so much applauds his own Sagacity: and as it is
purely my own, I hope the Reader will not slight it.

Mr. Stanley therefore having once entered upon this design of Collecting the
Fragments of Callimachus, he does, as upon the like occasion another man would
have done; that is, he fetches in his first Materials from such places where
they were the most readily found: he turns over the Indices Authorum at the end
of several As Clem. Alexandrinus, Stobaeus, Strabo, Athenaeus, Etymolog. Magn.
Stephan. Byzant. etc.
Books, and from thence hastily transcribes into his Papers the several
passages pointed out to him, v. Callimachus, reserving (as you your self in
part acknowledge) a more diligent perusal of the Authors themselves, P. 60.
and a more accurate Examination of the passages taken out of them to his
second Thoughts. There was not any one Author more proper to his purpose than
Suidas. But Suidas having no Index Authorum annexed to him, with him Mr.
Stanley begins, and turns over all that Lexicographer himself fro the beginning
to the end: as for the rest contenting himself, for a time, with what the
Indexes supplied him with. This I confess is mere Conjecture: but a Conjecture
so manifestly founded upon matter of fact, that I dare boldly pronounce it next
to a Certainty: and whether I am too confident, I shall submit to the Judgment
of the Reader upon an instance or two by and by to be produced. Now Mr. Stanley
having taken this course with Suidas in particular, it is impossible but that
the far greatest part of the Quotations out of Suidas in the Dr's Collection
should have been anticipated by Mr. Stanley. And had that Learned Gentleman in
these Papers of his taken the same course with many other Authors, you would
have had, though not more of Truth, yet a better Color for your Accusation.
But if you will still resolutely maintain it, that the Dr. having seen your MS.
therefore all the Quotations out of Suidas in the Dr's Collection shall have
been transcribed from Mr. Stanley, I know not how to clear my self of you, but
by the help of a Distinction. And this Distinction of mine, Sir, I desire you
well to consider, and withal to remember, that it will perform the same upon
any other Author, as upon Suidas: and therefore though Suidas be the name we
are here upon, yet the Argument extends to the whole body of the cause: which
will excuse me in insisting the more particularly upon it.

Of the Quotations out of Suidas therefore I observe some of them to stand in
that Lexicon with the name of Callimachus affixed to them in words at length:
others of them to contain some Fragments of that Poet, or to refer to some
passages in him, but without express mention of his Name. Those of this later
sort (as they are not numerous) I will be at the pains of marking out to you;
viz. one Quotation, Number. 2. one of the Quotations ( sc. that v. (...)) Number. 42.
another Number. 48. Two Quotations, Number. 50. and another 88. Now, Sir, there are
in the Dr's Collection (as far as you have carried on the comparison, that is
from Number. 1. to Number. 103. in all about thirty Quotations out of Suidas, to
every one of which, saving those in the Numbers here mentioned, you will find
added the Name of Callimachus standing in words at length: and every one of
those Fragments, to which the Name of their Author is so added, I find you
charging upon the Dr. as stolen from Mr. Stanley; that single one v. (...), Dr.
B. p. 352. excepted, though even that also (however by you omitted) I am apt to
believe upon further search would be found in your MS. But of these latter
sort, which have not the Name of Callimachus so added to them, I do not find
you mentioning any single one of them as taken from Mr. Stanley, and therefore
have some Reason to suspect that Learned Gentleman to have overlooked them.
Upon this point I have endeavored to express my self as plainly as I could,
and I desire the Reader to look over these Lines again, till he fully takes my
meaning.

Now, Sir, if this Observation of mine should hold as to all or but the major
part of those Quotations, it would do me considerable service, and that upon
more accounts than one.

1. It absolutely confounds your (...) observation, since in several of even
these Quotations from Suidas, not (as I presume) to be found in your MS. we
find the Dr. advanced far beyond (...), as in the Letter o. Number. 2. p. Number. 48.
n. Number. 42. ph. Number. 50. with others I could name. But of this I think you have
had enough already.

2. It effectually clears the Dr. from having stolen from your MS. those
Quotations which are in your MS. For if he could of his own Sagacity fetch out
of Suidas such Fragments of Callimachus as had not the name of their Author
joined with them, he cannot be supposed to have overlooked those where the very
word (...) staring him in the face, could not but have put him in mind of his
Commonplace Book. Supr. p. 11.


3. We have here yet another instance of what I have so very often observed in
the Writings against Dr. Bentley; That there is scarce any one single Article
any where advanced against him by way of Accusation or Reproach; which, when
thoroughly sifted, does not turn to his Acquitment and greater Approbation. As
in the present case, what a plain proof is here of his extraordinary Readiness
at these sorts of Studies, Supr. p. 12.
and with how just an assurance he might make that Boast (for so, to be sure,
you will call it) beforementioned that he thought he culd not, easily be
deceived, in knowing whether a Greek Verse were ascribed to its proper Author;
since in so many instances here given, meeting with a poor straggling Fragment
of this Ancient Greek Poet, though in a lost, and as it were orphanized
condition; yet he presently knew (so well was he acquainted with the whole Race
of them) to whom it belonged, and returned it to its right Parent. Thus while
you prefer against the Dr. an Accusation of Plagiarism, you do but the more
fully prove to any one that will be at the pains of examining into the matter,
how rich he is in his own Stores, and how little a loser by being placed in any
comparison.

Cease therefore, let me beseech you, this your Critical War, or rather go on
still writing till you shall have made him, as generally observed and admired
at home as he is abroad.

So Diamonds take a luster from their Foil,
And B -- y owes his Honors to B -- e. Dispensary.

4. But fourthly, and that which I principally intended in making this
Observation, it has given me that hint of putting the Reader, who is minded to
be satisfied in this Affair into the method of doing it for himself more
effectually than I could have done it for him. But in order to that, I must put
my Distinction upon a little farther Trial. How the case stands between the
Quotations from Suidas of the former and of the later sort; and between the
Dr's Collection and Mr. Stanley's upon that Distinction from Number. 1. to Number.
103. has been already considered. From Number. 103. to the end of the Dr's
Collection there may be thirty or forty more Quotations out of Suidas; of which
all the rest are of the former sort, sc: standing there with the name of their
Author added to them: but these few following are of the later sort, sc.
referring to passages in Callimachus, but without any mention of his Name. The
Quotations under Number. 103, 128, 193, 227. ( vv. (...)) 233, and 304. ( v.
(...)) Now to show the Use and Application of this Distinction.

In that pithy Peroration which, p. 68. you make upon the main body of your
Proofs against the Dr. you have these words. Thus have I passed through many of
those Fragments that are capable of being placed in their several Classes. --
And for the rest the Reader may, as his Inclinations lead him, collate the MS.
Copies ( in which great variety offers it self out of Athenaeus, the
Lexicographers, and Scholiasts) with Dr. Bentley 's printed Collection.

With all my heart: most gladly do I join with you in your Appeal to the MS. it
self, and I hope these Papers may fall into the hands of some Readers, whose
Inclinations may lead them to make the Experiment you propose. I would desire
no fairer play in this cause than to have the Jury bring in their Verdict upon
View.

Let the Reader therefore take these Papers along with him, go to the
Bookseller's Shop at the Sign of the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard, call
for the Manuscript to be shown there against Dr. Bentley, and leisurely collate
Mr. Stanley's Collection of the Fragments of Callimachus with the Dr's. And
though I have never seen that MS. nor know any thing more of it directly or
indirectly than what, Sir, I have learned from your Book: yet I fancy I can
pretty nearly tell the Reader what he will find there, and what he will not
find there. Mr. B. p. 98, 232.
A profound Scholar this! (will you say of me now) as well read in what he has
not seen as in what he has. But such things may be done, Sir. You haveled me
part of my way: and you know the Proverb, ex ungue leonem. How far I go upon
sure grounds, sc. upon the Authority of your Book, shall be marked out by this
stroke (): and though for what follows, (saving for here and there a Number) I
shall be purely upon the Conjecture; yet I hope the Reader will not find me
very often mistaken in my Guess.

Of the Quotations out of Suidas in Dr. Bentley's Collection of the Fragments
of Callimachus these following Numbers.

In Mr. Stanley.
Number. 1, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 49, 50, 53, 59, 66, 68, 71, 82, 84, 92; and 110,
144, 182, 184, 210, 227, 232, 238, 249, 279, 288, 289, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303,
304, 307, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 338, 339, 340, 344, 345, 350. with five
or six more Quotations out of Suidas, Dr. B. p. 430, 431.

Note, Some of the Fragments under these Numbers being produced from both the
Etymologicon and Suidas, perhaps Mr. Stanley may have contented himself with
one of those Authorities for them, and so have omitted the Reference to Suidas:
and others of them containing only single and independent words, perhaps he may
not have thought them worth the transcribing But this is mere guess.

Not in Mr. Stanley.
The Quotations under. Number. 2, 42, 48, 50, 88, 103, 110, ( vv. (...)) 128, 227,
233, 245, 304. supr. p. 45, 48.

And now, Sir, could you your self, had you pursued your Topic to the end of
the Chapter, have made more of your MS. against the Dr. than I have made of it
for you? having scarce left him throughout his whole Collection one single
Number not voluntarily surrendered up to Mr. Stanley: which yet is so far from
Convicting him of Plagiarism, that the more it appears against him, the more it
proves for him. For Mr. Stanley having (as it is plain he had) read over all
Suidas, and read him with a Design of Collecting the Fragments of Callimachus;
few of those Fragments which stood there marked out to him with the Name of
their Author written upon them can be supposed to have escaped his Observation:
but if many or the greatest part of those of the later sort not so marked out
to him; which are to be seen in the Dr's Collection shall not appear in Mr.
Stanley's; my Inference is already made: P. 46.47.
therefore those Fragments which are in Mr. Stanley the Dr. did not transcribe
from Mr. Stanley. For since for the Quotations of this latter sort he must have
read Suidas himself, he cannot have wanted the help of your MS. for those of
the former. So that the Conclusion from the whole is this; That Mr. Stanley had
read Suidas thoroughly, but Dr. Bentley had read him more thoroughly.

It Is time now that I let you see what I have been doing all this while in
making such a stir with the Quotations out of Suidas.

Great variety, say you, P. 68.
of the same passages which are printed in Dr. Bentley 's Collection will the
Reader (whose inclinations shall lead him to make the Trial) find in Mr.
Stanley 's MS.

Yes, Sir, great variety of that kind undoubtledly he will find. But have you
many Authors that will present him with greater variety than Suidas?

Out of Athenaeus.

Yes; for Athenaeus has an Index Authorum made to him.

Out of the Lexicographers.

And most of those Lexicographers too have such Indexes printed with them; and
some of the Lexicographers (of one it is certain) Mr. Stanley may have turned
all over.

And out of the Scholiasts.

For some of the Scholiasts also have the like Indexes; and with other of the
Scholiasts Mr. Stanley may have taken the same course that he has with Suidas.

Here therefore to the Reader, who shall have the curiosity to make the
experiment you propose, and who shall be endued with the patience to go through
with it, I shall offer some few Cautions, by the help of which he may be
secured from passing a mistaken judgment.

1. In the first place therefore, he is not to judge of the Dr's Collection by
the great variety of its Coincidences with Mr. Stanley's as to those Fragments
of Callimachus which are taken from such Books as have their Indices Authorum
printed with them. These indeed, were they all mustered up together, with our
Vindicator's -- in Mr. Stanley, bringing them up in the Rear would make a
terrible show against the Dr. as.

Harpocration, The Quotations in Dr. Bentley, n. 1. p. 352, 353, 354. and n.
319. -- in Mr. Stanley.

Clemens Alexandrinus, The Quotations. n. 2, 3, 87. p. 337. and n. 133, 145,
187, 188. -- in Mr. Stanley.

Strabo, The Quotations, p. 337, 354. and n. 104, 112, 113. p. 430, 431. -- in.
Mr. Stanley.

Hesychius, n. 58. and 229, 230, 231, 232, 352, 353, 354, 355, 357. -- in Mr.
Stanley.

Pindari Scholiastes, Q. Is not n. 48. in Mr. Stanley, though omitted in the
Vindicator's tale of the Numbers.
n 77, 80. p. 352. and n. 108, 112, 119, 120, 121, 122, 136, 138, 188, 195,
196, 197, 198. -- in Mr. Stanley.

Etymologicon, n. 12, 17, 19, 28, 36, 40, 44, 53, 66, 67, 86, 96. p. 349, 351,
467, 469. and n. 129, 130, 131, 132, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 154,
155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170,
171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, -- 240,
241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, 255, 256,
257, etc. in Mr. Stanley.

All or at least the greatest part of these Numbers in the Dr's Collection,
with their leading Fragments, I little doubt, but that the Collator will find
in Mr. Stanley's MS. with far greater variety of the same kind out of
Athenaeus, the Lexicographers, some of the Scholiasts, Servius upon Virgil,
Stobaeus, Priscian, Hephestion, and some others. But then he must consider,
that all these Authors have Indices to them, in which (v. Callimachus) all
these Fragments were ready pointed out to him. So that Mr. Stanley, in drawing
up this imperfect draught, having taken (as most certainly he did) that method
of fetching in his first Materials from the Indexes of Books, where those
Indexes were tolerably perfect: the Dr's Coincidencies with Mr. Stanley must be
proportionably frequent; and, as to those particular Authors, far outnumber his
Additions to it.

Here therefore the Collator is to apply the Distinction before made upon the
Quotations out of Suidas, and the Inference from thence drawn: and to consider
whether or no those some Additions of the Dr's own are not such which
necessarily imply his having read, and that thoroughly too, the Authors
themselves, out of whom he produces his Quotations, and consequently such as
place him far above, wanting the help either of the Index or of your MS. As for
instance; the Fragment, n. 50. is in Mr. Stanley; but in Mr. Stanley (I
conjecture) from Athenaeus, whose Index supplied him with it. Is it in Mr.
Stanley from Suidas, vv. (...) (or at least from the later of them) in both
which it stands without the name of its Author? The Fragment, n. 48 may be in
Mr. Stanley. But in Mr. Stanley from the Scholiast on Pindar, an Index'd Book.
Is that manifest reference to this Fragment, Suidas, v. (...) in Mr. Stanley?
So that Fragment, n. 227. from Suidas, I doubt not but that the Collator will
find in Mr. Stanley, but from Suidas, v. (...) will he find it also from
Suidas, v. (...), where it stands without the name of its Author? The Fragment,
n. 245 he will find in Mr. Stanley, but from the Etymologicon, whose Index
directed him to it: will he find the Authority of Suidas for the same Fragment,
who has it, but without the name of its Author. The Fragment, n. 169. he will
find in Mr. Stanley from the Etymologicon; but will he also find the Emendation
and Explication of that Fragment from the Scholiast on Theocritus, and from
another place in the Etymologicon. If not, therefore that other place in the
Etymologicon the Dr. read himself. But this is a thing so very certain, that no
man who has but once dipped into any chance place of the Dr's Epist. ad fin.
Malel. who has but just glanced over some few pages of his late Answer to Mr.
Boil (though as hastily and heedlesly as the man that read it all over in a
day) who will but cast his Eye upon this his Collection of the Fragments of
Callimachus, Mr. Bennet's Appendix, p. 134.
can entertain the least scruple concerning it. However, since I have to do
with men who will not be content with a moderate Conviction, I shall desire the
Reader, who will be at the pains of making the experiment, to collate, and that
somewhat nicely, the Dr. with Mr. Stanley upon these following Numbers.

Number. 13, 14, 18, 29, 32, 51, 54, 55, 57, 75, ( v. (...)), and n 4, 15, 16, 23,
30, 31, 33, 56, 73, 75, ( v (...)) 126, 168, 186, 207, 218, 234, 238, 259, 260,
306, 314, 334, 351, 362, 367, 368, 369, 370, 417.

Upon this List of Numbers the Reader is desired to observe, that all the
Numbers standing before, together with the Quotation produced by Dr. Bentley in
his Notes on the Epigrams of Callimachus Ep. 39. p. 210. are in Mr. Stanley; P.
36. N. 18. from Parrhasius. n. b. not from Stephanus.
excepting Number. 18. ( v. (...)) which Fragment I have as great an assurance as
it is possible for a man to have in a matter of this nature, and which our
Vindicator himself with a simplicity truly simple acknowledges, Mr. Stanley
transcribed from that forementioned passage in Parrhasius, marked out to him in
Gruter's Index. But of the Numbers following there is not one of them so marked
out in the Index to Stephanus. Here therefore Query, How many of these Numbers
after are there in Mr. Stanley? Upon this the Collator is to make the Scrutiny.
And if the Experiment answers my expectation my inferences are plain. 1. That
Mr. Stanley did indeed take this method of fetching in his Fragments from the
Indexes of Books. 2. Dr. Bentley read over the Books themselves, and was above
both the Index and Mr. Stanley's MS. Here are in all, Quotations out of
Stephanus Byzant. forty; of which Eleven index'd, sc. ten in the Index to
Stephanus; and the other in Gruter's Index: all these -- in Mr. Stanley. -- Not
index'd twenty nine, -- in Dr. Bentley. -- Not, I suppose, in Mr. Stanley.

And if this Conjecture of mine should hold, I think it is pretty much to the
purpose. But where the Indexes are completely drawn, the like experiment cannot
be made. In such cases a great part of the Dr's Quotations must of necessity
have been anticipated by Mr. Stanley. Nor need I, I think, say more to show the
reasonableness of this Caution, not to judge of the Dr. by the great variety of
his Coincidencies with Mr. Stanley, as to his Quotations out of such Authors,
where the Fragments of Callimachus are marked out in the Indexes. Nor,

2. Secondly, is he to judge of the Dr. by the great variety of his
Coincidencies with Mr. Stanley, as to his Quotations from some few particular
Authors, who may have no such Indexes made to them. For with some particular
Authors Mr. Stanley may have taken the same course as he has with Suidas, and
if so, the same effects of it will appear in his MS. As for example, I find the
Scholiast upon Nicander once produced by Dr. Bentley, n. 60. and that the same
Fragment is in Mr. Stanley. Nor within the line of comparison do I find any
thing more of that Scholiast. But from after n. 103. I find the Dr. producing
out of him several Fragments, as n. 139, 140, 201, 228, 253, 267, 268, etc. Now
if Mr. Stanley had after his having began his Collection read over this
Scholiast, those Numbers of the Dr's must also be in Mr. Stanley. The like may
be conjectured of the Fragments from Ammonius, (...), etc. But the Vindicator
has not carried on his comparison far enough for me to go here upon any
certainty. Now such Coincidencies, though never so constant, prove no more
against the Dr. than that Mr. Stanley and he had read the same Books, vid.
supr. p. 17. And here, since I have been at the foolish labor of drawing them
up, I shall present the Collator with a list of Authors.

Apollonius Alexand. Artemidorus, Athenagoras, Censorino adjectus scriptor,
Johannes Charax, Cheroboscus, Cicero, Diogenes Laertius, Dionysius Halicarnass.
Sextus Empiricus, Erotianus, Eusebius, Fulgentius, I lanciades, Galenus, A.
Gellius Helladii Chrestom. Herodiani Parecbol. Hyginus, Julianus, Lucianus,
Macrobius. MSS. etc. Codd. inediti, ut Photii Lexicon, ineditum, etc. Phlegon
Trallianus, Plinius, Plutarchus, Proclus in Platonis Timaeum, in Parmenid.
inedit. in Hesiodum, Chrestomathia. Quinctilian, Solinus, Statius Poeta.
Terentianus Maurus, Theodoretus, Tertullianus, Tzetzes (uterque) Varro.
Scholiastae in Homerum, Supr. p. 26.
Didymus, Eustathius, Porphyrius; in Aeschylum, Aratum, Aristophanem,
Euripidem, Ibin Ovidii, Theocritum.

Thus have I chosen rather to expose the Dr. to the repeated Censure of being a
Polymathist, Supr. p. 11.
(that is, a Great Scholar, and one that has read a great many Books) than to
be wanting in my Instructions to the Reader, whose Inclinations shall lead him
to collate the MSS. Out of all these Authors will he find in the Dr's
Collection somewhat (more or less) either by way of Fragment or Testimonium,
properly belonging to Callimachus. Qu How many of these Authors will appear in
Mr. Stanley's MS. and how often? Some of them ('it is likely) will be found
there, for some of them (for ought I know) he may have made use of toward his
Collection, and some particular Passages out of others of them his course of
reading may have casually presented him with. But not many of them, I presume,
will appear there, nor very often. If so: then I hope the Reader will see the
reasonableness of this Caution; not to judge of the Dr. by the (though
constant) Coincidencies of his Collection with Mr. Stanley's MS. as to some few
particular Authors, though unindex'd. For if the Dr. shall be found to have
turned over so many more Books, than (after his having began his Collection of
the Fragments of Callimachus) Mr. Stanley had; surely he may be allowed to have
read those other few of the same with Mr. Stanley.

N. B. I have ventured to insert the name of Plutarch into this List. For
though the Quotation out of Plutarch, n. 86. be in Mr. Stanley; yet I rather
suppose it to have been taken immediately from the Etymologicon; as n. 103.
from Hadr. Junii Animadvers. lib. 4. c. 21. marked out in Gruter's Index to the
fourth Volume of his Critics. Q. is n. 25, 137. there.

The Scholiast upon Aeschylus I have also (though perhaps too boldly) put into
this List The Reader will not, I hope, suppose me so unacquainted with the very
Titles of Books, as to make a question of Mr. Stanley's having read (and that
most thoroughly) the Scholiast upon Aeschylus. But the question is, whether he
had turned over the Scholiast after his having began this Collection? For I am
not here making the comparison between Mr. Stanley and Dr. Bentley, or
enquiring which of them had read the most Books; but between Mr. Stanley's
imperfect Draught of a Collection of the Fragments of Callimachus, and Dr.
Bentley's most finished Collection of them that has ever yet appeared; Supr.
p. 42.
and who had read most Books from after their having began their Collections.
And let this answer serve once for all to what I should otherwise certainly
have heard of, that I am reflecting upon the Memory of Mr. Stanley; which he
that shall say of me, will say a falsehood.

These two Cautions preceding will justify the Reason of the two following, as
that,

3. He is not to discount from the Dr. every Number, the Fragment of which he
may find in Mr. Stanley's MS. And so without more ado report it abroad, that he
has been at Mr. Bennet's Shop, collated the MS. and finds matters to stand
just as the Vindicator has related them; that out of the 417 Numbers in the
Dr's Collection there are so many Hundreds, Tens, and Unites in Mr. Stanley.
What a numerous appearance of this kind he will be sure to meet with, I have
given him so fair notice of beforehand, that I hope he will not be surprised at
it. For where a Fragment is preserved but in one Author, and in him correct,
there the Dr's Collection and Mr. Stanley's must fall in with the same Words
and Syllables: for let two men transcribe the same Quotation from the same
Author, I cannot see why it should be to any one, P. 76.
as it seems to have been to our Vindicator, a matter of Admiration, that they
should hit upon, not only the same sense, but the same words. The reason of
this Caution therefore, I hope, the Reader is satisfied in; that he ought not
to discount from the Dr. every Number, the whole and only passage under which,
without the least Syllable of variation, he will find in Mr. Stanley. Much less
is he, in the

4. Fourth place, To abjudge from the Dr. every Number, of which only the
leading Fragment is in Mr. Stanley; and so, which is the Vindicator's method,
for the sake of half a line in Mr. Stanley's MS. to cashier, it may be, a whole
Page, or two, or more, in the Dr. vid. supr. p. 33. But here also he is to
remember and apply the distinction before made upon the Quotations out of
Suidas, and to take into the account the many Additions of the Dr's own making
under every Number, and to consider not only the Quantity of his Additions, but
the Quality of them also. And particularly, whether or no those Additions are
not such as would have supported the Number it self, though the Fragment,
supposed to have been taken from Mr. Stanley, had not been there. As for
instance, the Fragment, n. 179. is (...). This Fragment the Collator will
undoubtedly find in Mr. Stanley: for it is (with only a little difference in
spelling the word (...)) in both the Etymologicon and Stobaeus, and index'd in
both these Authors. And yet the Dr. did not steal it from Mr. Stanley; for it is
in both Vulcanius and Dacier's printed Collections, vid. supr. p. 20. Exc. 3.
But in the Dr's Collection this same Fragment is produced from a new Authority,
sc. Artemidorus his Oneirocriticks: which new Authority is not in any of the
other Collections. Qu. Is it in Mr. Stanley? If not: then this Fragment would
have been in the Dr's Collection, though it had not been either in the
Etymologicon, or Stobaeus, or Vulcanius, or Dacier, or Mr. Stanley: Therefore
this Number must not be cashiered. Changing the name of Artemidori
Oneirocritica into Eusebius Praep. Evang. The case is exactly the same with the
Fragments from Clemens Alexandrinus, n. 87, 133. Now in such cases, though the
Fragment it self be in Mr. Stanley, yet the new Authorities from whence it is
produced makes it the Dr's own, and secures to him even the Tale of his
Numbers. Instances of this kind I could produce by Scores, where the Fragment
it self would have been in the Dr's Collection, though it had not been in any
of the others. If therefore so many Fragments would have been in the Dr's
Collection, though they should have escaped the Observation of all that went
before him; it is not very likely that many of those Fragments collected by them
would have escaped the Dr.

And thus much by way of Caution to the Collator of the MS. the justness and
reasonableness of which I submit to the judgment of the Impartial, nay, or even
the most partial Reader. Many more of the like nature and tendency may he
collect for himself from the whole Tenor of my Discourse foregoing; but I have
satisfied my self in particularizing upon these few. Furnished therefore with
these Instructions, let him go to the Half Moon, collate the MS. and speak as
he finds. And so good an opinion have I of my own Performance, as to hope, that
he will find, that I have done even more than my work, and answered as well
what I have not seen, as what I have.

This Suidas has carried me on (such is the Chain of Thought) a wide
circumference, and made me lanch out into unknown Seas. But our Vindicator's
Appeal to the MS. was a Temptation I found my self unable to withstand: and
whether my Discoveries will prove Land or Clouds will soon be known; unless
upon some sudden occasion or other the MS. should chance to the called in.

I made a kind of promise of managing three or four Decads of our Vindicator's
Vndeniables in the same manner I have this first. But the Reader must needs be
weary before now of reading such a Parcel of unedifying Lines as these, nor can
he think me less weary of writing them. But who can help it? Such is the Book I
am answering. And since I am fallen upon so dry a Subject, I were willing to
give it a through Examination, and write a Book for egregious Dullness, and
elaborate Insignificancy, out-doing (if it be possible) even our Honest
Vindicator himself. And so, for a Brace of Controvertists I defy the Age to
match us. I cannot however pass over this Decad, without bestowing upon it yet
one more Remark.

Remark III.
Upon Proof 8, 9. (to return at last to our Vindicator himself) you are
pleased, Sir, thus to express your self. P. 35.
His two Quotations out of Servius upon Virgil, are transcribed from Mr.
Stanley, verbatim. Upon which, I cannot but Remark to you, that you Style is
somewhat too positive and emphatick. Are transcribed from Mr. Stanley: Mr. B.
p. ^09.
Nay, verbatim transcribed from Mr. Stanley! I remember I have some where or
other met with an hard, and indeed (when rightly placed) just Censure past upon
such Writers, with whom positively to aver, and assume the thing in question,
Id. p. 67.
is to prove it. You must give me leave, Sir, upon this occasion, to ask you, I
will not say an insulting question or two, though I know who has been asked a
great many such: but that would be an unmannerly thing in such an one as I am,
to ask you an insulting question: a modest question or two, I hope I may
without offense put to you. Did you see Dr. Bentley transcribe these two
Quotations out of Servius upon Virgil from Mr. Stanley? Had you a peep-hole
into the Dr's Study? Or did you hang your head over his Shoulder, when he
transcribed these two Quotations? May he not have transcribed them out of
Servius upon Virgil himself? Or are the Dr's shelves, or is the King's Library
unprovided of a Servius upon Virgil? Let me tell you, Sir, to be thus positive
upon Uncertainties, is, even in the most trifling and indifferent matters,
foolish and ridiculous; but in such cases, where my Neighbor's good name is
concerned, highly criminal. And yet this, with little variation, is the Style
of your whole Indictment: This, and that, and the other Number or Quotation, is
transcribed from, or taken from, or (with a transcribed, or taken Subintellect)
from Mr. Stanley; which the Dr makes his own; P. 46, 64.
which the Dr. claims for his own; which Dr. Bentley, without naming his
Benefactor, has confidently made his own. Yes, confidently, Sir. But there I
shall meet you again by and by. And then will it be seen who is the confident
man.

I had also designed to have made something of Remark upon your Proof 4. The
Quotation out of Clemens Alexandrinus, n. 2. you positively aver is in Mr.
Stanley's Collection. But that Quotation out of Clemens I verily believe is not
in Mr. Stanley. That Quotation begins with these words, (...), etc. Now I
desire the Reader to collate the MS. Is the word IIS in Mr. Stanley? If not:
then are you taken positively averring not only an Uncertainty, but an Untruth.
For if that Quotation be not there the same, as it is in Dr. Bentley, it is (as
to our present Argument) the same thing as if it were not there at all. If the
Dr. both produces it from a new Authority, neither in Mr. Stanley, nor referred
to by him; and with a Lection materially different both from Mr. Stanley's MS.
and from all the printed Copies of Clemens Alex.; the consequences from thence
are plain: ergo. 1. The Dr. did not transcribe it from Mr. Stanley; and ergo,
you are a false Accuser. 2. The Dr. did not fetch it from the Index; since he
gives it differently from all the printed Copies to which alone the Index could
have referred him. 3. Though this passage had escaped both Mr. Stanley and all
the other Collectors, yet the Dr. would have had it, since he produces it from
an Authority which none, as far as I can find, ever so much as thought of
besides himself. And therefore this Quotation also out of Clemens Alexandr. n.
2. must be added to those two others from the same Author, n. 87, 133. Sup. p
60. and what is said upon them be repeated upon this; which the Dr. would have
had, though he had never had the sight of a printed Clemens Alex. vid. Dr.
Bentley's Collecion, p. 345. Thus have you again alleged against the Dr. as an
Undeniable Proof of his Plagiarism from Mr. Stanley, an instance, which
undeniably proves the contrary, and verifies what I have before observed upon
the Writings against Dr. Bentley, that the more is alleged against him, the
more (to any man that will be at the pains of examining into the matter, and is
capable of doing it) is proved for him. I have read, Sir, your Page 85. but
that is so far from helping you out, that it does but sink you the deeper in
the Mire, and afford still fresh Demonstration against you: as perhaps, if I
can find Paper-room for it (for I have almost exceeded my bounds already) I may
particularly show you in a place by it self.

I shall detain the Reader no longer upon this Decad the first, nor trouble him
with any more of these tedious Remarks. I may now leave it to himself, to
imagine what work might have been made with the Vindicator's Vndeniables, should
I have examined every particular as specially as I have done these few. And
there are abundance more of the same kind. I shall now just cast up the
accounts, and see how the case stands between the Dr. and Mr. Stanley upon this
Decad the first, and then dispatch the remainder of my work with all the
expedition imaginable.

The Accounts of Decad the First.
Within the compass of Decad the First, there are in all, Quotations 16. Of
which in Mr. Stanley 7. For that Quotation just now named from Clemens
Alexandr. n. 2. and those two from Didymus upon Homer, n. 5, 6. for the reasons
before given, I shall make bold to bring over to the Dr's side. Of these 7. in
Mr. Stanley, every one, (but that from Suidas,) n. 1. Index'd: sc. 5. of them
in the Books from whence they are taken; and the other, viz. Martial's Epigram
in Parrhasius, by Gruter to his Fax Artium, ut supra.

In Dr. Bentley, Quotations 9. not one of them, that I know of, so index'd.
Corrections 5. ^his right accenting the word (...) I count for one) not in Mr.
Stanley. In Mr. St. and Suid. (...).
So that though the Dr's some Additions rise up but very thin here in
comparison of what they do in the following part of his Collection, yet they
are even here two to one for what is in Mr. Stanley; to which the consideration
of index'd and not index'd added will give a farther advantage. Nota speciatim,
n. 4. Stephanus Byzantinus, not index'd; in Dr. Bentley: not in Mr. Stanley,
vid. supr. p. 54, 55.

The Second Decad of Proofs.
V. Proofs. Pr. 11.
A Quotation out of the Etymologicon, n. 12.

W. A Lexicographer, Exc. 1. Index, Exc. 2. in Spanheim, Exc. 5.

V. Pr. 12.
Out of Stephan. Byzant. n. 13.

W. Just as before, Exc. 1, 2, 5.

V. Pr. 13.
Another of the same, n. 14.

W. Index.

V. Pr. 14.
Out of the Etymologicon, n. 17.

W. As Proofs 11, 12. Exc. 1, 2, 5.

V. Pr. 15.
Out of Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 18.

W. Gruter 's Index, Exc. 2. vid. and sup. p. 54, 55.

V. Pr 16.
Out of the Etymologicon. n. 19.

W. Index'd and in Vulcanius, Exc. 1, 2, 3.

V. Pr. 17.
A Quotation from Didymus upon Homer, n. 20.

W. N. B. No Proof. Not in Mr. Stanley, vide supr. Dec. 1. Rem. 1. p. 26, etc.

V. Pr. 18.
Out of the Scholiast upon Sophocles, in 2^.

W. A Scholiast, Exc. 1. in Spanheim, Exc. 5. vide and supr. p. 35.

V. Out of Priscian, or Hephaestion, n. 27. Pr. 19.


W. Index, Exc. 2. Spanheim, Exc. 5.

V. Out of the Etymologicon, n. 28. Pr. 20.


W. As Proofs, 11, 12, 14, Exc. 1, 2, 5.

The Accounts of Decad the Second.
In Dr. Bentley, Quotations 23: in Mr. Stanley 10. or (perhaps) 11. In the Dr.
Corrections and Explications 14. not in Mr. Stanley; though indeed several of
these Corrections being but the same Emendation repeated ( sc. (...) into
(...)) I am content to discount half the number.

N. B. Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 13, 14. index'd; in Mr. Stanley, N. 15, 16, 23,
24, not index'd; in Dr. Bentley: not in Mr. Stanley.

The Third Decad of Proofs.
V. Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 29. Pr. 21.


W. Index.

V. Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 32. Pr. 22.


W. Index.

V. Hephaestion, n. 36. Pr. 23.


W. Index. Exc. 2. Spanheim, Exc. 5.

V. Athenaeus, n. 37. Pr. 24.


W. Index, in Vulcanius, Dacier, and Spanheim, Exc. 2, 3, 5.

V. Another of the same, n. 38. Pr. 25.


W. Answer the same, Exc. 2, 3, 5.

V. Pr. 26.
Etymologicon, n. 40.

W. Index, Spanheim, as Proofs 11, etc. Exc. 1, 2, 5.

V. Pr. 27.
Petronius Arbiter, ibid.

W. Dacier, inter Testimonia Veterum, Exc. 3.

V. Pr. 28.
Suidas, n. 41.

W. Suidas.

V. Pr. 29.
Suidas, n. 42.

W. Suidas.

V. Pr. 30.
Suidas, n. 43.

W. Suidas.

The Accounts of Decad the Third.
Quotations in Dr. Bentley between 30 and 40. in Mr. Stanley 10. Emendations
and Explications (direct and incidental) in Dr. Bentley about a dozen, of
which, I presume, in Mr. Stanley none.

N. B. Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 29, 32. index'd; in Mr. Stanley. N. 30, 31, 33.
not index'd; in Dr. Bentley: not in Mr. Stanley.

The Fourth Decad of Proofs.
V. Pr. 31.
Suidas, n. 44.

W. Suidas.

V. Pr. 32.
Suidas, n. 46.

W. Suidas.

V. A Quotation out of Suidas, Pr. 33.
with a reference to the Scholiast upon Apollonius, n. 49.

W. Of Suidas enough already. As for the reference to the Scholiast upon
Apollonius Rhodius, vid. supr. p. 35.

V. A Fragment out of Athenaeus, Pr. 34.
(I suppose) n. 50. (Q. is it out of Suidas too? vid. supr. p. 45, 53.)

W. Index to Athenaeus, Exc. 2. in Spanheim, Exc. 5.

V. Etymologicon, n. 51. Pr. 35.


W. Index, in Vulcanius, Exc. 1, 2, 3.

V. Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 51. (repetito.) Pr. 36.


W. Index.

V. A Fragment from Olympiodorus, n. 52. Pr. 37.


W. In Vulcanius, and Dacier, Exc. 3.

V. Etymologicon, n. 53. Pr. 38.


W. Index, Vulcanius, Exc. 1, 2, 3.

V. Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 54. Pr. 39.


W. Index.

V. Stephanus Byzantinus, n. 55. Pr. 40.


W. Index.

The Accounts of Decad the Fourth.
Quotations in Dr. Bentley between 30 and 40. in Mr. Stanley 10. (or perhaps
one or two References more,) Emendations in Dr. Bentley more than a dozen, of
which there are three in Mr. Stanley, sc. those two ( n. 49, 52. mentioned
above, p. 22. marg. and a third of (...) into (...), n. 46. which is also in
Mr. Spanheim, p. 275. ( vid. Exc. 5.) confirmed by Mr. Spanheim, with one
Quotation from the Scholiast upon Homer, by Dr. Bentley with two from the same
Scholiast, vide and Except. 7. In Dr. Bentley, Explications several, of which
in Mr. Stanley, I presume, none.

These four Decads have taken in more than half of our Vindicator's Proofs. The
Remainder of them I promised to dispatch by wholesale.

V. Number. 57, 58, 59, 60, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 75, 77, 79, 82, 84, 86,
87, 92, 93, 96, -- from Mr. Stanley.

W. N. 57. Stephanus Byz. Index, 58. Hesychius, The very Storehouse of the
Dr's Alphabetical Learning. Supr. p. 9.


2. Vide and Mr. B p. 197. and Dr. B's Answer, Pref. p. 80. and Epist. ad fin.
Malel. cum passim, tum maxim p. 33, 34. and seqq. It Is index'd. n. 59. Suidas.
60. Nicandri Scholiastes, Exc. 1. vide and supr. p. 56. n. 65. Scholiast on
Callimachus, Exc. 1. But who'd have thought it? The Dr. so busy in collecting
the Fragments of Callimachus, and making his Observations upon him; and yet not
read the Scholiast on Callimachus? Prodigy! N. 66. Suidas, Vulcanius, Dacier,
Spanheim. 67. Etymologicon, index'd. 68. Suidas and printed in all the Editions
of Callimachus. 69. Athenaeus; index'd, Vulcanius, Dacier. 71. Suidas. 72.
Athenaeus, Index, Spanheim. 75. Stephanus Byz. index'd. 77. Scholiast upon
Pindar, index'd, Dacier. 79. Zenobius, a known Paroemiographer, Vid. and n. 360.
and the Dr. is a great Dealer in Proverbs of all Languages, especially Greek,
Mr. B. p. 285. supr. Concess. 1. p. 7. n. 82. Steph. Byzant. index'd, Spanheim.
84. Suidas. 86. Etymologicon, index'd, Vulcanius, Dacier, Spanheim, (all with
the Correction (...)). 87. Clemens Alex. index'd, Spanheim, vid. and supra. p.
60. n. 92. Suidas. 93. Ammonius (...). a little Alphabetical piece of about an
hour's reading and culling, printed at the end of Scapula's Lexicon, Exc. 1.
vide supr. p. 56. n. 96. Etymologicon, index'd, Vulcanius.

The Dr.'s some Additions in this part of his Collecion, sc from. n. 57. p.
321. to n. 103. p. 355. are so numerous, and so very unproportioned to those
few things in Mr. Stanley's MS. that there is no stating Accounts between them.
And yet as I have (after our Vindicator's method) drawn up the Numbers, n. 57,
58, 59, etc. they make an handsome show against him. But as for that, let the
Reader see what has been said before p. 33. and let the Collator turn to n.
66, and consult Mr. Stanley's MS. p. 35. There he will find a little Scrap of a
Fragment from out of Suidas. But the putting this Fragment into its proper
measures, the correcting the Etymologicon, the reducing it to its proper place,
the confirming it from Tzetzes, and from that place in Plutarch, from whence
Tzetzes produces it; this is all the Dr's own. From all which it appears that
this Fragment would have been in Dr. Bentley, though it had escaped all the
other Collectors, ut supr. p. 60. Then Follows in the Dr. about a Page and half
of Quotations, Corrections, and Explications, of which but one Line, and that
from the Etymologicon, index'd, in Mr. Stanley; at least but that one line in
this place. For I am apt to believe, that all the four Veries of this Fragment,
n. 67. as from Stobaeus, may be in Mr. Stanley, but misplaced, sc. among the
Epigrams. Then three Quotations in Mr. Stanley, sc. 68. out of Suidas, printed
with all the Editions of Callimachus, 69. Athenaeus, index'd, n. 71. a Fragment
out of Suidas, corrected indeed by Mr. Stanley but crudely, and in such a
manner as sufficiently shows how hastily and incuriously he drew up this
imperfect Draught. For these three Quotations in Mr. Stanley, about as many
Pages in Dr. Benthley. N. 75. in Mr. Stanley, one Quotation out of Steph.
Byzantinus, index'd, in Dr. Bentley two out of the same Lexicographer, not
index'd. Then in Dr. Bentley about 9 or 10 pages, small Letter and close print;
for which only a little marginal Reference (by and by to be considered) in Mr.
Stanly. From thence n. 76. p. 337. to n. 100 p. 345. He will find the Dr's some
Additions bearing much the same proportion as before under the several Decads.
After n. 96. p. 344. to n. 103. p. 355. The Dr's some Additions do so drown the
some Quotations in Mr. Stanley's MS. that one must look very hard to get now
and then a sight of one of them, saving some of the large Capitals, that is,
the Titles of some of Callimachus his Works from Suidas and Athenaeus, in Mr.
Stanley, and in Dr. Bentley, and in Vulcanius, and in Dacier, and very few of
them not in every Edition of Callimachus, that has yet come from the Press,
and yet, says our Vindicator, transcribed from Mr. Stanley; Yes, transcribed
from Mr. Stanley, in whom had not the Doctor met them, in vain had they been in
every printed Callimachus.

Thus have I gone through all those Proofs of our Vindicator, which lie in the
direct line, and examined them one by one. I have considered them all with
great Fairness, I am sure, and, Mr. B. p. 181.
I fear, with more exactness than they will be thought to deserve. And now,
without mincing the matter, I dare boldly pronounce my self Victor in this
Cause. No Reader, I am sure, that understands any thing of the Subject we are
upon, can think any one of all these Proofs against the Dr. Undeniable. And as
for him that understands nothing of it; let him hold his peace, and not run on
(as has been of late the humor of the Town) clamouring upon Dr. Bentley for he
knows not what. Only because Mr. B. has the Talent of telling a Story very
prettily, therefore Dr. B. is a Dunce, a Clown, a Pedant, and all the rest of
Mr. B's Book.

But one demonstrative Argument you have against the Dr. not as yet so much as
once touched upon by me: and that is the method in which his Collection is
digested. The Dr's Fragments and Quotations are a great part of them printed in
the very self same order and method in which they stand in Mr. Stanley's MS.
And though two men might light upon the same Quotations, yet how should they
hit upon it to set them down in the same order, without having written the one
after the other? This indeed to a man that knows nothing of the matter bears
the appearance of an Argument, and you seem to lay a great stress upon it.

I shall prove, say you, that Mr. Stanley 's Locks were picked, and his Trunks
rifled; P. 32.
and that (among other things) Dr. Bentley 's method, in Marshalling his
Fragments, was taken from that very Learned Gentleman. And in the next Page,
But it is remarkable, that to manage the affair dexterously, Dr Bentley has in
some places (it may be believed wilfully, and to conceal the Fraud) inverted
the order of the MS. And much to the same purpose, but somewhat more
satyrically, do you deliver your self, p. 78.

Now what is this Method? what deep contrivance was there in it, that Dr.
Bentley could not have reached it himself? This Method is purely Alphabetical;
that is, the several Titles of the lost pieces of Callimachus are set down in
the order of the Alphabet; as, A. (...).. (...). T. (...), etc. and under these
Titles are placed the several Fragments or Quotations properly belonging to
them. But there being many Fragments bearing no Title, nor carrying in them any
plain Indication to what Tracts of that Author they belonged, these are thrown
together promiscuously at the end of the other, under the common Character of
Fragmenta incerti loci. This is that method which our Vindicator makes so
strong an Argument against the Dr. than which, a more obvious thought could not
have entered into any man's head, than to put things which have no dependence
one upon the other into the order of the Alphabet. In this Alphabetical order,
long before Mr. Stanley drew up his imperfect Draught, were collected and
digested the Fragments of Aristophanes, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides,
Theophrastus, Varro, Nigidius Figulus, Lucilius, and several others. So that
the Dr. how natural soever it may be to him to transgress the Rules of Method,
P. 78.
when he is solely under his own Government; yet he had here Precedents enough
before him besides Mr. Stanley's MS. to have given him this lucky hint. And
this I think may suffice for that mighty Argument of yours, the regular
Digestion of his Fragments.

But it is very remarkable, that to manage the affair dexterously, Dr. Bentley
has in some places (it may be believed wilfully, and to conceal the Fraud)
inverted the order of the MS. But this, You say, will be remembered in due time
and place.

In the plain, unaffected Style, Sir, nothing in the world could have been more
nonsensically suggested. Dr. Bentley (to conceal the Fraud) takes the directest
course in the world (had there been any Fraud in the matter) to have discovered
it. For could he have laid himself more open to a Discovery, than by
transcribing Mr. Stanley 's Method? and setting down his Quotations in such
order, that every one that was so minded, might, without being at more pains
for it, than just to turn over the Leaves one by one, trace ^im line by line?
^^e^trous management! Besides, what need at that time had the Dr. of such
Precaution? I presume, when that MS. was, in so friendly a manner, put into his
hands, he had little apprehension, of its being likely ever to be given in as
evidence against him.

But he has in some places inverted the order of the MS.

Yes, Sir, in some places; and you have been pleased to mark them out: and such
they are, as will at the same time sufficiently show both what a precions
Vindicator Mr. Stanley's Manes have met with, and how hastily that very Learned
Gentleman (as the wisest men may do) committed his first Thoughts to his
private Papers. But the name of Mr. Stanley is too well known to suffer any
thing by such a Vindication.

Your Instances are these that follow.

V. That Citation out of Stobaeus, (...), which Mr. Stanley has given under
the head (...).

W. But Mr. Stanley would never have printed it so as you have done it for him.
That Citation begins,

(...).

(...) are Hexameters, this is Elegiack. The Dr's Correction of (...) into
(...) is certain; your Learned Story of the two Trincavells, p. 48 nothing to
the purpose.

To this Class of the Dr's wilful variations from Mr. Stanley's MS. on purpose
to conceal the fraud belongs also that Omission of the Tit. (...), omitted (say
you) by the Dr. for what reason I know not.

The case, I presume, exactly the same with that of Tit. (...), supr. p. 38.

V. APAPIKA (...), vind. p. 40. So Suidas gives the title agreeable to Mr.
Stanley 's MS. (Mr. Stanley's MS. you mean, agreeable to Suidas) But Dr.
Bentley having made the Citation is own, p. 349. has inverted the order of the
words, for what reason himself best knows.

W. I fancy I can give a shrewd guess at his reason, sc. because such
Quotations standing as Titles, whether in Indexes or elsewhere, must stand with
the leading word (which is generally the Substantive) foremost. Mausacus in his
Dissert. Critic. in Harpocrat. cites this Title at least a dozen times, and
always with the word (...) standing first. So does A. Schottus in his Adagia,
p. 164. not. in loc. Callimachus in Nomimis Barbaricis. What Fraud were these
two Critics interested to conceal?

You have another of them, p. 43, 44 which happily afforded you the opportunity
of bringing in that most prodigiously Learned Parenthesis of near a page long.
I pass it over; leaving Casaubon and Dr. Bentley to maintain their ground
against your self and Natalis Comes.

Dr. B's n. 192. is placed by Mr. Stanley under Tit. (...), probably, you say.
But there is no other guessin at a Probability here, than than Hephaestion
mentions it as an (...), that is, as his design there plainly implies, Numero
elegiaco. It may have belonged to his Epigrams or any other piece of
Callimachus, written in long and short Verse, as well as to his Book of Elegies
properly so called: and therefore Dr. B. had reason to fling it amongst his
Fragm. inc. loci.

V. The Quotation out of Steph. de Urbib. ( vind. p. 52.) which Dr. Bentley
has omitted, but inserted in his Notes on the entire Epigrams.

W. And to the it belonged, vid. Indicem in Stephan. v. Callimachus.

V. Ibid, Dr. B. n. 103. The Fragment beginning (...). of which Mr. Stanley
says, Cogitandum an non ad (...) haec pertineant, an ad librum (...).

W. It being but a cogitandum an non, it is still an incertum, and therefore
properly placed by the Dr. amongst the Fr. incerti loci.

There is another of them also, p. 51. sc. Dr. B;s n. 142. But upon that
Fragment you having bestowed some Observations of your own, at present I pass
it by.

Dr. B's n. 299. of which you say, p. 56. under this Head ( sc. of IAOI and
(...)) Mr. Stanley ranks Number. 299. in Dr. Bentley's Collection, ad Choliambos
isthaec refero. Certainly, Sir, you must have been mistaken in transcribing
your MS. Mr. Stanley could never have held the Pen in his hand in so dreaming a
condition, as to have written what you print upon him. Put on your Critical
Spectacles, and look on your MS. again. Is it not ad Iambos isthaec refero?
That Fragment is only these three words, (...), which is manifestly the end of
an Iambick. A Choliambick, Sir, always ends in two long Syllables. And yet thus
it stands in your second Edition. No body takes any care of you.

P. 59. you have these words, Why so plain a passage should be transported (
transposed another man would have said, but Metaphors are elegant) let the
Reader judge.

Innuendo, to conceal the Fraud. This so plain a passage, (a passage so plainly
belonging to the Tit. (...), you mean) is in Dr. B. n. 321. (...), which Mr.
Stanley with great judgment (say you) has placed under the foresaid Tit. de
Avibus. In great have would another man have said. For Callimachus his Book of
Birds was manifestly (as any one may collect from the Quotations referring to
it produced by Dr. B. p. 349, 350.) written in Prose, and this Fragment is as
manifestly the end of an Hexameter, as appears both from the Feet and the
Epithet (...). which is purely poetical. So that this Passage plainly appearing
not to belong to the Tit. (...); and it not appearing to what other piece it
might belong, Dr. Bentley had good reason to throw it among the Fr. incerti
loci.

An instance or two more, of this kind perhaps I may have overlooked: but these
already produced, are, I think, sufficient to satisfy the Reader, that the Dr.
might have some other reason for inverting (if he did invert, or so much as
took any notice of it) the order of your MS. Nor need I say more to this mighty
Argument: the Dr's Collection stands in the same order as Mr. Stanley's. Being
both drawn up Alphabetically, it must be so, as far as that Alphabetical method
holds, and saving in some few places, where Mr. Stanley had not so properly
disposed his Collections; and there we find the Dr. has inverted the order of
the MS.

I was speaking even now of a confident man, and promised you a meeting again
upon that point. Though I am somewhat in have, I am unwilling to balk your
Expectation. Let the Reader look over once again this List of Numbers.

Number. 11, 19, 34, 37, 38, 40, 41, 42, 46, 51, 52, 53, 66, 67, 68, 72, 77, 86,
87, 92, 96.

These Numbers make up at least one third part of your direct Number-Proofs
against the Dr. now let the Reader turn to p. 20. Exc. 3. Let him cast his Eyes
over the several Decads, and that List of Numbers at the end of them, and
observe how often he will find there the name of Vulcanius and Dacier. All and
every one of these Numbers are to be met with in the one or the other of those
printed Collections: and this methinks is somewhat confidently done of the
Vindicator to charge them all upon the Dr. as stole from Mr. Stanley, vid.
supr. p. 72. One or two of them, Sir, to explain my meaning by, I shall single
out for you.

Upon Dr. B.'s n. 86. you have this Remark, The third out of Plutarch with the
Correction (...), P. 56.
n. 86. i. e. Both n. 86. and the Correction (...), stole from Mr. Stanley.
But, Sir, this Correction (...), is no Correction, nor is it taken from Mr
Stanley's MS. (...) it is printed in all the Editions of Plutarch, (...) it is
printed in the Scholiast upon Theocritus, (...) it is in Vulcanius, P. 266.
(...) in Dacier, (...) in Spanheim, (...) it is I believe in all the Books you
can show me, saving in the Text of the Etymologicon (or in other Books as
directly transcribed from thence) where the Lection (...) is manifestly
corrupt, making neither Sense nor Verse, and accordingly was, long before Mr.
Stanley's time corrected by Sylburgius, not. in loc. And yet is this Correction
(...) charged by you upon the Dr. as stole from Mr. Stanley's MS. And have I
not reason to say of you, that you are either a man of very little Reading, if
you did not know this; or if you did know it, then I do not abuse you in giving
you the character of a Person of a ver singular Confidence.

To conclude with that which forced me upon making this Animadversion upon you.
p. 46. Elegia de com. Berenices, (...), in Mr. Stanley, which Dr. Bentley, say
you, without owning his Benefactor, has confidently made his own. Have you
never read any Books, Sir, but Mr. Stanley's MS? Is not this to affront your
Reader? To suppose him so careless, so credulous, so unvers'd in Books, as not
to know how very common this Quotation out of the Scholiast upon Apollonius, as
applied to this very passage in Catullus is grown ever since the time of
Politian? It Is printed in Vulcanius, Miscellan. c. 68.
and in Dacier's Callimachus, in Muretus, in Scaliger, in the Catullus cum not.
var. In usum Delphini. Is. Vossii. Nay, I very much question, whether there be
a Catullus printed for above this hundred years, if with Notes upon him, in
which this Quotation is wanting: which Dr. Bentley, without naming his
Benefactor, has canfidently made his own.

But there is another Quotation, Sir, just after this is Dr. Bentley, which
though common enough in it self, yet as corrected and applied to another
passage in this same Elegy in Catullus, perhaps you will not find in any body
else save in the Dr. sc. (...), quod sic latin vertit Catullus, v. 40. --
Adjuro teque tuumque caput. And since he could out of his own Observation refer
this later Fragment of Callimachus to its proper place in Catullus, which none
before him had done; it is very probable, he would have done the like with the
former himself, had he not been prevented by other hands.

To this Class of Confidentisins I shall also reduce another little parcel of
the Dr's Quotations, and with them conclude this tedious work of counting
Figures.

The Quotation out of Suidas, v. (...). Dr. B. p. 339. out of Harpocration, v.
(...), p. 352. Out of Athenaeus, Tit. (...). p. Out of Clemens Alexandr. Tit.
IAOI, and (...). p. 337.

All these Quotations also I find you charging upon the Dr. as taken from Mr.
Stanley. But, Sir, every one of these Quotations are to be met with in the Dr's
Epist. ad fin. Malel. And that Epistle was printed before he ever saw your MS.
I need not paraphrase any farther upon this. vid. supr. p. 20. Exc. 4. You must
give the Dr. leave, Sir, to play the Plagiary a little upon himself.

Vide Mr. B. p. 192. confer cum Dr. B's epist. ad fin. ad Malel. lin. 1.
Memini. His Dissertation at the end of Mr. Wotton, lin. 1. I remember. vide and
seqq. M. T. Ciceronis Epistolas. ad Fam. lib. 7. ep. 28. Memini. and lib. 5.
ep. 13. Quanquam. lib. 10. ep. 19. Quanquam. and lib. 5. ep. 16. Etsi, ibid.
ep. 18, 19. Etsi. and lib. 6. ep. 12. Gratulor tibi. ibid. ep. 15. Tibi
gratulor. and lib. 7. ep. 19. vide quanti, lib. 16. ep. 5. vide quanta. and
fam. lib. 7. ep. 27. Miror. ad Attic. lib. 13. ep. 10. Minime miror. ad Attic.
lib. 13. ep. 35. O rem indignam! ibid. ep. 38. O incredibilem vanitatem!

As to the Dr's numerous Coincidencies with Mr. Stanley in his Quotations of
the Ancients, I think, I have given a tolerably fair account of them. But you
have not yet done with him. There are still behind his Notes and Animadversions
upon this Poet, P. 32.
a great part of which, you assure us, are taken from that very Learned
Gentleman. If you could make out this, you would do somewhat. But this great
part you speak of, I am inclined to believe the Collator will find to be scarce
one in fifty, and those very few, wherein they do concur to be either such with
which the Index here also supplied Mr. Stanley, or else so very obvious in
themselves, that no man tolerably versed in these sorts of Studies could have
missed of them, vid. supr. Exc. 7. As you have been merciful to the Dr. upon
this point, and not over-loaded him with Numbers, I will take them in order one
by one, as you have given them.

V. In the Dr's note on the Hymn in Jov. ( v. 3. p. 458.) the Correction of
(...) into (...), upon the Authority of the Etymologicon, P. 69.
and Hesychius; from Mr. Stanley.

W. Index'd in the Etymologicon, who sent him in course to the same word in
Hesychins. Besides the Quotations from these two Lexicographers, Dr. Bentley
has seven more. Qu. how many of them in the MS? A correction of the Text of
Hesychius, sc. (...) into (...). Q. Is that also in Mr. Stanley? Qu.

V. The Correction of (...) into (...), Ibid.
upon the Authority of the Scholiast upon Callimachus, of Aldus's his Edition,
and of the like examples from Callimachus himself; all transcribed from Mr.
Stanley's excellent Notes.

W. This seems to be spoken somewhat too confidently. May not the Dr. have seen
Aldus his Edition of Callimachus? May he not have read over the Scholiast on
Callimachus? Supr. p 70
May he not have transcribed those passages out of Callimachus from Callimachus
himself? the Dr. alleges Frobenius his Edition also, gives an Authority out of
Homer, offers a second Conjecture upon the Text of Callimachus, with a
Grammatical reason for it. Is all this transcribed from Mr. Stanley? Yes, all
you say. Qu.

V. His third Note of the same Hymn is much ^f the Complexion with that of Mr.
Stanley, as ^re others that follow.

W. Those that follow make up near eight ^ages. Are they all in Mr. Stanley? or
the ^reatest part of them? or any of them? For in saying, they are much of the
Complexion with those of Mr. Stanley, you speak as much nothing as it is
possible for a man to speak. Either they are the same, or they are not the
same. If the same; undoubtedly we should have heard of it: if not the same with
Mr. Stanley, not transcribed from him. That two men, well versed in the same
sort of Studies, writing upon the same Subject, should not in some, nay in many
Instances, hit upon much the same things is next to impossible; which makes me
wonder, that even the first strokes of Mr. Stanley's Pen should not, throughout
the whole, have afforded you more instances of this kind against the Dr. vid.
supr. Exc. 7. p. 21. But a very small variation in matters of this nature, be
it but of a Word, or Syllable, or Letter or two, giver a clear different
Complexion to the whole. Afther a leap of 8 pages in comes Mr. Stanley again
with

V. The Correction of (...) into (...), not. in Hymn Lavacr. Pallad, Dr. B. p.
466.

W. The sense absolutely required this Correction; 'twas to a man never so
little versed in these Studies, an easy and obvious Correction. The Dr. gives
the Grammatical reason for it, and confirms it by two or three Authorities for
the like mode of Expression: Q. Are they all in Mr. Stanley?

V. Dr. B. not. ibid. in v. 130. A Quotation out of the Etymologicon magnum
with another out of Lactantius.

W. Both which the Dr's own Industry may have supplied him with, as well as it
did with the other Quotations to the same purpose from Athenaus, Hesychius,
Nicander, with the Epigram out of Gruter's Inscriptions, an exquisite
Correction and Explication of that Epigram, attempted, but not with like
Success by Scaliger. Q. Are all these things in Mr. Stanley? Mr. Spanheim's
Notes upon the same passage are much of the same Complexion. P. 642.
Had he also the hint from your MS? v. Exc. 5. supr. p. 20.

Toward the lower end of the third page following, we meet with Mr. Stanley
again.

V. In Dr. B's Notes in Hymn in Cerer. v. 133. p. 469. a Correction of the Text
upon the Authority of the Etymologicon, and Hesychius, P. 70.
and of an old Edition of Callimachus.

W. Index'd in the Etymologicon; to turn to Hesychius in the same word was no
very laboriour Search; in consulting the several Editions of Books Dr. Bentley
is not less curious than was Mr. Stanley. In the Dr. I find the Etymologicon it
self twice corrected; the Grammatical analogy of the word (...) very nice and
particular; a Quotation out of Eusebius; a Censure upon Luc. Holstenius, his
mistaken Correction of that passage in Eusebius in his Notes upon Porphyry; a
very pertinent Quotation from Theocritus, with an Epigram of Crinagoras never
before published. Qu. Are all these things in Mr. Stanley?

Thus much for the Dr's Notes and Animadversions upon the Hymni, wherein the
accounts between him and Mr. Stanley stand thus. The Dr. has upward of 12
pages, for which I very much question, whether the Collator will find ^o many
lines in Mr. Stanley's MS. and even of them, the first hint (as to the greatest
part of them) taken from the Index to the Etymologicon, and pursued by turning
to the same word in Hesychius. As for the Dr's Notes and Animadversius upon the
other part of this Poet (as his Epigrams and Fragments) I pretty confidently
presume they will be found to exceed the MS. in yet a far greater proportion.
And yet has our Honest Vindicator the Confidence to say of the Dr's Notes and
Animadversions, a great part of them taken from Mr. Stanley. Not a line for a
page, one place with another, I dare say. I am not able to comprehend the
nicety of your distinction between Notes and Animadversions. P. 32.
A great part of his Notes, you say, and some of his Animadversions. But taking
them in both together, of the Dr's I know not how many Scores of curious and
(if we may believe Graevius) very valuable Notes and Animadversions upon the
Epigrams, Praoem. p. 5.
I do not find so much as one charged upon him as borrowed from Mr. Stanley: of
his I know not how many Scores of the same upon the Fragments within the line
of your comparison, as far as I can recollect, but four; three of them already
accounted for; sc. that of (...) into (...), of (...) into (...), and that of
(...) into (...) in this Quotation out of the Scholiast upon Apollonius.

-- (...)
(...).
Scan the Verse, Sir. ( vid. and supr. p. 22, 70.) To which you have here added
a Fourth.

V. The Critic upon N. 85. is taken from Salmasius de Usuris, p. 494.

W. That Book, Salmasius de Usuris I have not by me, and therefore can say
nothing to it.

V. Only the Dr. reads (...) for (...), which might have been spared.

W. Which might have been spared! So far from that, that the whole stress of
the Correction lies upon that very word (...), without which there is no sense
to be made of that Fragment. And the Correction (...) you allow to be the Dr's
own. As for the other part of the Correction, of (...) into (...) he took it
(with the easiest change imaginable) from Vossius MS. vid. loc. n. 85. Dr. B.
p. 339.

From n. 85. you take a leap to n. 148. P. 26.
Was it out of the mercifulness of your Inclinations that you were so
forbearing of the Dr. or for want of matter against him? He that is half so
well acquainted with you as I am, will suspect the latter.

V. The Reading (...), P. 72.
n. 148. is from the same Author.

W. It Is not from the same Author, Sir; But from Helladius, in whose very words
and syllables the Dr. gives this Lection, Corrigenda sunt ex Helladio. The
Correction is of (...) into (...). Scan the Verse again. It Is an Elegiack.

(...). Now from n. 148. another leap to n. 242.

V. (...) for (...), n. 242. which Dr. Bentley assumes ( to himself, P. 72.
should have been added) is taken from the MSS. of Ammonius.

W. Were I in company with you, I would ask you, how many MSS. of Ammonius have
you seen? I believe you mean, from Ammonius in the MS. sc. in Mr. Stanley's MS.
not MSS. Such little scapes of the Press your Book is full of.

The Lection (...) was natural, easy, unavoidable, ready pointed out to him in
the Etymologicon, and in Ammonius himself.

Thus have you done with all the Dr's Notes and Animadversions stole from Mr.
Stanley. Which what they are both for Number and Quality, let the Reader judge,
and the Collator farther inquire into. You go on.

V. To which I shall add a probable Correction or two of some other Fragments.

W. Very opportunely! And so have you fairly brought me to those Observations
of your own. Which I promised you to set in a place by themselves: P. 2.
and it is pity I cannot afford them more Room, for they are most incomparable
things.

V. Number 128. P. 72.
Suppose it were read thus, (...), and silentes sedere, Hesych. (...) And the
Pythagorean Silence is too well known to be disputed.

W. 'Twould be a dangerous thing for a person of that old Comic Poet, V.
Lucian. (...). versus fin.
Philemon's Constitution, to read such a piece of Criticism as this. Or was it
your design to print a Banter upon your self? For had a man premeditated how to
write learned Nonsense, he could not have done it more effectually. The
Fragment here spoken of is taken from A. Gellius, lib. 4. c. 11. who introduces
it thus, Opinio vetus falsa occupavit and convaluit, Pythagoram -- It has been
of a long time a current Tradition, but false, that Pythagoras the Philosopher
abstained from eating the Flesh of Animals, and from Beans. Ex hac opinione.
'Twas in Conformity to this vulgar Error, that Callimachus wrote these two
Verses.

(...)
(...)
In the first of these lines the word (...) is a manifestly false Lection, and
makes no possible sense. So that there being a necessity of some Correction,
Stephanus gives it thus, (...) Dr. Bentley thus, (...). These two Corrections
of the Dr. and Stephanus agree in exactly the same sense; and which offers the
less violence to the Text, the Eye may judge. After them both comes our
judicious Vindicator with his Correction And what is that? why, (...), and
silentes sedere: for (...) in Hesychius is (...), silentes; and the Pythagorean
Silence is too well known to be disputed. But, good Sir, what signifies the
Pythagorean Silence to the Pythagorean Abstinence, the only thing here spoken
of, which you are content to drop as nothing to the purpose. It Is a wonder to
me how such a piece of Criticism should enter into an head that has Brains in
it. A. Gellius is producing a couple of Verses directly relating to Pythagoras
his supposed Abstinence from Flesh: by the help of your Correction they no more
relate to it, than they do to his Golden Thigh. What an easy thing were it for
me here to ask you an insulting question or two? but I Will not be unmannerly.

V. I am sure (...) in Dr. Bentley's sense is a pure Anglicism, and I cannot
think that Callimachus pretended to our Language.

W. Were I the spitefullest man that ever took Pen in hand, I could not retort
this Accusation upon you. I must do you that Justice to confess, that of all
the Books I have ever seen in our Language, I never yet read one with fewer
Anglicisms in it than yours. That the Signification here given to the word
(...) is uncommon, Dr. B. owns; Rara quidem, fateor, est, ea verbi
significatio: sed, etc.
but withal observes, that Callimachus was a great Innovator in Language; and
that Suidas after the more common interpretation of the word, gives it this
less usual one; (...). Callimachus therefore being a great Innovator in
Language, and Suidas having manifestly some-where or other met with this word
used in this sense; it is not improbable, but that in writing his Lexicon he
might have this very passage of Callimachus in his Eye: an Author whom he
refers to more than once without express mention of his name, vid. supr. p. 45.
and speciatim Suidam, v. (...), conf. cum Dr. B. n. 48.

V. Number. 200. Dr. Bentley reads it, (...) etc. and solus adolescentum comedebat
tutorem, (one of the worst of crimes and worthy the Dr's considering.)

W. What a biting Parenthesis is here? Wit and Satyr all over. But suppose a
man should ask you the question; what Thought, Sir, what Meaning had you in
your mind when you wrote it down? Could you answer him?

V. But suppose we read, (...).

W. But suppose there be no such Greek word as (...), (...) there is, not
(...). I question, wheter (...) be ever contracted into (...).
then I suppose we must not read it so. And if you cannot maintain your (...),
then your (...) falls to the ground of course, and with (...) your Julius
Firmicus, and with Julius Firmicus your known Story of Saturn's devouring the
Immortal Infants before they were a day old. And thus I think your second
Correction is as insignificant as your first was ridiculous.

To fetch in the rest of those learned Observations of your own, I must return
to the beginning of your Indictment.

V. Dr. B's Correction of Fulgentius Planciades was needless. P. 35.


W. That Correction was none of the Dr's. The Dr's words are, viri eruditi
emendant. So that if it was needless, those learned men are to blame, not Dr.
B. But why was it needless?

V. For why should he cite a faulty Edition?

W. The Dr. cites it from the Edition of Jos. Mercerus, Par. 8 vo. 1613. which
all men of Learning esteem as the best Edition of that Author. Gothofred did
well in correcting the sense of his Author, but in supplanting his words, and
making his own Conjecture though just) part of the Text of his Author, he
exceeded the Bounds of a Commentator. The Dr. could have done the like upon
Malela; but he better understood the Laws of Critic. Another little shrivelled
Observation you have here, at which I cannot afford to make a stop. Perhaps
there is nothing in it.

If any Bookseller's Shop in Town could present me with a page more fruitful
of mistakes than is your 38th and 39th, it must be Mr. Bennet's; but I Will defy
even his to match you here. Passing by your unintelligible (I am sure it is so
to me) Story of that old Edition (you are speaking of Hephaestion) and this
last; and your idle Cavil upon a escape of the Dutch Printer, in putting a v for
an v, I come to your own Remarks, or at least those which you espouse and make
your own.

V. The Dr's Quotation out of Terentianus Maurus was long since cited by
Lactantius in his Notes on Statius his Thebais, P. 38. Lib. 3. v. 479.
and much more correctly, and to better purpose, thus, Branchi meminit
Terentianus de metris, Hymnum Branchiadae Phoebo --.

W. Let the Reader, if he pleases, see it at length in your Book, and compare
it with the Dr's out of Terentianus himself, n. 36.

Much more correctly, you say, and to better purpose. How a Quotation could be
more incorrectly given, and to less purpose, is scarce to be imagined. If any
Mortal can make either Sense of Grammar of it, as it stands in that Lactantius,
I Will lose the whole cause.

V. For as the Verses are now read, P. 39.
I cannot excuse them: Chronology it self cannot defend them.

W. Chronology! -- Stuff.

V. For Branchus could not sing an Hymn of Callimachus. Ibid.


W. Nor could you construe Terentianus, which therefore I Will do for you.

Nec non and memini, pedibus quater his repetitis,
Hymnum Battiadem Phoebo cantasse Jovique
Pastorem Branchum: quem --
Nec non and memini, And I also remember, Battiadem, that Callimachus,
cantasse, composed, Hymnum, pastorem Branchum, an Hymn (called) Branchus the
Shepherd, pedibus quater his repetitis, with these (...) Choriambick feet four
times repeated, Phoebo Jovique, in praise of Jupiter and Apollo. And though
Chronology will not admit Branchus, who lived so many years before Callimachus,
to have sung an Hymn composed by Callimachus, yet Callimachus may have composed
an Hymn in praise of Jupiter and Apollo, and given to that Hymn, from, it is
probable, the principal Fable of it, the Title of Branchus. And of that very
numerical Hymn there is scarce any doubt to be made, but that this Fragment was
part, and probably the first verse, it being in that Meter Terentianus speaks
of, and with express mention of Jupiter and Apollo.

(...). Here Is the Pentameter, which Hephaestion and Terentianus speak of,
after the 4 Choriambics ending in a Bacchius.

V. Branchus, says the same Commentator, Ibid.
was a Thessalian. Branchus Thessalus fuit, dilectus Apollini -- illinc
Branchiades Apollo dictus.

W. But here this same beloved Commentator of yours is no less than twice
mistaken. First, Branchus was not a Thessalian, but a Milesian: vide inter
Historiae Poeticae scriptores Conon. Narrat. 33, Statii oper. Par. 4to. 1618,
Vol. 1. p. 143.
and 44. and Bernartius in loc. takes notice of Luctatius (al. Lactantius) as
the only Authority for Branchus his having been a Thessalian. Nor secondly, was
Apollo ever called Branchiades, though you will find it so in some
Lexicographers and Epithet-mongers, into whose hands it first came from this
Lactantius, and so passed downward by Transcription. I find it in Hoffman, but
Baudrand has rectified this mistake. For Apollo to have been called
Branchiades, or rather Branchides, he must have been the Son, not the Father of
Branchus. For that termination -- (...) or -- (...) determines the Patronymick
to the Descendants. There was indeed an Oraculum called from the Successors of
Branchus (...) or (...). but Apollo, as related to that Oracle, took his name
from the place of it, Didymaeus. As is implied in this very Fragment.

V. I question not therefore, Ibid.
but that Branchiades is the better reading.

W. And I as little question, but that the reading Branchiades is most
ridiculously absurd.

V. It carries its own Credentials with it. Ibid.


W. It carries its own Confutation with it. It is against Grammar, Chronology,
and common Sense; has been long since condemned by Brodaeus in his Notes on the
Anthology, lib. 3. cap. 23. and by Nic. Brissaeus Montevillarius in his Notes
upon the passage in Terentianus now produced, Paris, 4to. 1531. Never, I
believe, approved of by any man before your self.

V. Nor is there any need of playing the Corrector, Ibid.
and changing quum into quem.

W. So much need of it, that without changing quom into quem (an easy change)
there is no construing those Lines.

V. And to this head I question not, Ibid.
but the Quotation, p. 337. in the Dr's Collection ought to be referred.

W. And upon this point I question not, but that you are again as much as ever
mistaken. For most certain it is, That that Quotation cannot belong to this
head. For this Poem called (...) was all of it written in that sort of
Pentameter just before mentioned, and therefore the Quotation, p. 337. which is
Hexameter, cannot belong to this Head. As Virgil's Tityrus being all of it
written in long Verse, that cluster of short ones, sic vos non vobis -- cannot
belong to his Tityrus. Had you construed that Greek you transcribed to the
Press in the page just before, P. 38.
you could not have fallen into this mistake. (...) OLON (...) --

I think you have made me work enough in one page: what have we in the next?
why another, I question not.

V. The Book ((...)) was written, P. 40.
(I question not) after the example of Aristotle, whose Treatise under that
Title is cited by Varro.

W. This is brought in for no other end or purpose, but to create in the Reader
a good opinion of your Learning. And therefore purely for the humour-sake, I
shall tell him that this Learned Remark is Scaliger's in his Notes upon Varro,
which our Vindicator, without naming his Benefactor, has confidently made his
own. And yet whether or no Varro did indeed cite any Treatise of Aristotle
under that Title, is still a question. The Copies of Varro have it Nomina, and
the Nomima is but a Conjectural Emendation of Scaliger, which though not
improbable, yet is it not altogether unquestionable. See the forementioned
Mausaci Dissert. Critic. in Harpocrat.

V. Natalis Comes, n. 45.

W. I Will have no concerns with Natalis Comes, supr. p. 77. P. 45.


V. Joannes Franciscus Trincavellus, -- Victor Trincavellus, -- Cardinal Bembo,
-- with a Tristich.

W. A Tristich, beginning with a short Verse. sed vid. supr. p. 76.

V. The Dr. has, I doubt not, studiously omitted those entire Epigrams which
had been collected by [ Himself and] others --.

W. Here the [ Himself and] is added in your second Edition; the only instance
I have observed in you of a second Thought. But a strange kind of Omission
this, methinks; the Omission of the Epigrams collected by Himself: and n. b.
collected by Himself; q. d. not by others, ergo the Collection his own, ergo,
not stole. Your meaning, I suppose, is he studiously omitted the inserting
these entire Epigrams among the Fragments, and, to conceal the Fraud, placed
the entire Epigrams among the entire Epigrams. Studiously, I doubt not. This
ought to have been referred to the Class of Transportations, supr. p. 78.

V. A Critic so curious in what did not belong to his Poet. P. 50.


W. The name of Callimachus did belong to his Poet: which name therefore being
falsely ascribed to a wrong person, 'twas no unnecessary Curiosity in the Dr.
but full to the Subject he was upon, to rectify that mistake: for which a man
less litigious than your self, would have thanked him.

V. The Dr. might have been so careful as to have acquainted the Learned World
with what was genuine and presumed to be truly his Authors. Ibid.


W. Which the Dr. has amply done. But is that Latin Epigram you are here
speaking of in Mr. Juret's Collection of Epigrammata veterum genuine, and truly
Callimachus's? If you can have had any other meaning in this than purely the
contradicting Dr. Bentley, it must have been a very silly one: and in that you
all along come off so scurvily, I hope we shall hear no more of you.

V. Natalis Comes, (...). Ibid.


W. I tell you again, I Will have nothing to do with Natalis Comes.

V. Mr. Stanley having --. P. 51.


W. Here begins a Paragraph, but where it ends I know not, nor how to construe
it. It Is big of Accusations against the Dr.

V. Mr. Stanley reckons the Dr's n. 142. among the Fragments of the Epigrams;
which seems very likely.

W. But for what reason, Sir, does it seem so? I see none.

V. And that the Title of this Epigram was (...), as Suidas averrs. Ibid.


W. Whether your meaning be, upon the skin of a Lion, or upon the skin of
Leontius, (for either or neither of these you may mean, for ought I know)
Suidas averrs neither the one nor the other. The Greek Preposition (...), Sir,
in this place signifies de (de pelle) not in (in pellem.) And all that Suidas
averrs, is, that the word (...) is sometimes applied to the skin of a Lion, or
that the skin of a Lion is sometimes called in Greek by the name of (...). For
which signification of the word he produces the Authority of Callimachus in
this Fragment. This is all that Suidas means, Sir, by his (...).

V. As his despised Aemilius Portus had corrected his Author.

W. It Is no presumption in Dr. Bentley to despise Aemilius Portus.

V. Dr. Bentley takes it from Aemilius Portus. Ibid.


W. Dr. Bentley takes it not from Aemilius Portus.

V. Not to mention the Doctor's changing (...) into (...). Ibid.


W. The Dr. does not change (...) into (...). This Fragment stands in two
Authors: in Suidas, and in the Scholiast on Sophocles. In Suidas it is given
with the word (...); and therefore with the word (...) from Suidas did Mr.
Stanley transcribe it. In the Scholiast on Sophocles it stands with the word
(...); and so from him has the Dr. given it. So that the Dr. did not change
(...) into (...), but as he sound it in his Author; so without any change at
all he wrote it down.

V. Whereas both words are genuine.

W. And therefore the Dr. might use either of them. Qu. Is not this cavilling?

V. That the Reader may judge whether the Corrections, P. 52.
(...), be Dr. Bentley's, I will transcribe the Fr. n. 103. from the MSS. [MS.
write like a Scholar.]

(...).
(...) --.
W. I do judge that Dr. Bentley took not those Corrections from Mr. Stanley's
MS. As for the (...), the Verse required that Lection, and I do judge that Dr.
Bentley knew the Rules of the Greek Prosody before he saw Mr. Stanley's MS. As
for the other two Corrections ((...) and (...)) the Dr. has many very material
variations from your MS. upon which variations from your MS. those two
Corrections altogether depend; in Conjunction with which therefore they must
have been made. The Dr. comes nearer to Junius his Lection, Had Junii animad.
lib. 4. c. 21. Gruter, Vol. 4.
than to that of your MS. And therefore if we must suppose him to have been
beholding to either of them, it was to the former. The mistaken Lection of your
MS. (...), lin. 1. (...), lin. 2. make its true Lection (...) lin. last of no
use, and in the same last line the Lection (...), (as you have given it) can
never be brought to bear either Sense or Construction. But the Dr. having
established every one of his Lections upon Reasons and Authorities rendering
them certain, has thereby made all the parts of the Fragments consistent, and
given a very learned and perspicuous Explication of it; which according to the
Lections of your MS. could never have been done. So that upon the whole, my
Judgment is, That the Dr. was no more beholden to Mr. Stanley for his (...) and
(...) here, than he was for his (...) and (...) before. Supr. p 70, etc.
But this is the way of you; it is but arming forth your Pages with a set of
Greek words against the Dr. and throwing them off with a confident Turn; and
so, with your Readers, the work's done.

V. The Reader is left to compare the Dr's n. 71. out of Suidas, beginning with
these words, Ibid.
-- (...), etc. with the same Fragment in Mr. Stanley's MS. beginning with
these words, (...); and to pass his judgment upon the Dr's Assertion, Quae
antea corruptissima feliciter nunc restituimus.

W. And my judgment is, that the Dr. had very good grounds for his Assertion.
Dr. Bentley's Lection comes much nearer to the Text in Suidas: and there be
almost as many flaws as lines in Mr. Stanley's. He begins with a too licentious
^nversion of the order of the words; his second line (...) -- were there no
Exception lay against the Grammar of it, runs, methinks, very heavy and
unpoetical.

(...) The word (...) would not make (...) verse 4th, but (...). The Conjunct
(...) (so I suppose it should have been printed) seems in this place somewhat
too impetuous for the Verb (...), to which it cleaves, besides that it is a
farther departure from the Text ((...);) instead of which, the Dr's
Interj^ction of Lamentation (...) seems to be demanded by that expression of
Suidas 'OIKTI'ETAI (...), which I take to be as much as miserabiliter
repraesentat. What Mr. Stanley means here by his (...), I know not. But Dr.
Bentley has given us a fair account of his (...). Such is the Justice which is
done to the Manes of the Deceased, when their Papers are put into the hands of
them that know not how to use them. But it is no Imputation to any man that his
first thoughts are not correct.

Besides, Sir, if Dr. Bentley were such a Plagiary as you would have us believe
of him, what a Prize had here been for him? And why did he not make have off
with it, and forthwith to beating about again for more Prey? That Is the way of
them that live upon the Plunder. What another instance have you here given us
of your unskilful management? So often telling us of his transcribing your MS?
So fully demonstrating how little he regarded it? The character upon which you
spend the former part of your Book, a most supercilious Corrector, is not very
consistent with what you give us in the latter part of it, a most notorious
Plagiary. Who'd imagine both these belonged to the same man?

V. In n. 86. the Correction of (...), P. 56.
was long since made to his hands.

W. Nor does the Dr. lay any claim to that Correction. But the Observation that
that fault in the Copies of Plutarch had been of so long standing as to have
misled Eusebius and Theodoret the (former of which Praep. Evang. l. 13. and the
later Therapeut. Graec. Ser. 2. follow that corrupt Lection of (...)) and
consequently the rectifying the mistakes of those Ancient Writers, this was the
Dr's own.

V. And whether (...) be not a genuine Reading, and (...) be not as likely as
(...), Ibid.
I refer him to Sam. Petits Miscellan. observat. l. 1. c. 2. p. 9, 10.

W. And I refer him to Richardus Bentleius, in not. ad Fragmenta Callim. number.
86. p. 340. For, Sir, do you think your so often saying, I refer the Reader to,
etc will pass any where, but among your selves, for a Confutation of Dr.
Bentley? Though this Sam. Petit being a Critic from whom as little is to be
learned, as from any of those whose Books have the good luck to bear a price, I
am apt to believe you may have read him.

V. Callimachus may have written a Tragedy called Daedalus, of which Tragedy,
P. 65, 66.
this Fragment, ( n. 305.) may have been part.

W. No, Sir, that cannot be. But that you were resolved to be an Author, you
might, perhaps, have passed for a Scholar. This Fragment is part of an
Hexameter, a sort of Meter which a very moderate Antiquarian would have told
you the Ancients never made use of in Tragedy.

(...). V. The Dr. n. 139. cites among the Fragment a incerti loci, P. 67.
that known passage out of Athenagoras, (...), etc. which Verses are no
Fragment, but part of that entire Poem, Hymnus in Jovem

W. This looks like cavilling. Athenagoras his Reflection upon Callimachus is
not so vulgarly known, and for the sake of that alone did the Dr. I presume,
produce this passage, (...), etc.

Besides these learned Observations of your own, and your many judicious
Animadversions upon the mistakes of the Dr. You have been pleased to present
the Learned World with some farther Discoveries by way of Supplement to the
former Editions of Callimachus. After my having been at such pains to disclose
some of your Failures, 'twere Injustice to conceal your Improvements. But
before I come to them, there is another part of your charge against the Dr. not
immediately concerning Mr. Stanley's MS. upon which I am obliged to bestow some
few Reflections.

Not content to have made the Dr. so notorious a Plagiary upon the account of
Mr. Stanley's MS. you intermix here and there some Proofs of Plagiarism upon
him from some other printed Books. It Is resolved, I see, the Dr. shall be a
Plagiary. Mr. B. p. 143, 171, 183, and 54, 138, 216, 226, 233, 248, 261, 262,
etc. Vid. and Dr. B's Answ. p. 213, 333, 383, etc.
The work is begun and it must be finished. If any of the same passages be to
be found in any other Books-whatsoever, whether printed or MS. as in the Dr.
from thence shall the Dr. have stole them. According to which method I
challenge you, Sir, to name that modern Writer, writing upon a Subject wherein
the producing the Authorities of the Ancients is necessary, whom I shall not
(even without the assistance of a Club, and with no more than one set of
fingers to turn over Books) prove a Plagiary. And yet this is the way of these
Gentlemen's (I Will venture to put it in the Plural number) managing their
Controversy with Dr. Bentley. But as for you your self, Sir (such is your
reading) you are very sparing of your instances of this kind; and in these few
you do produce as obliging to the Dr. as heart could wish.

In p. 72. supr. I took notice of about 9 or 10 pages in Dr. Bentley's
Collection, small Letter and close Print, sc. from p. 327. to p. 337. for which
only a little Marginal Reference in Mr. Stanley; the consideration of which I
then post-poned, and shall here take it up. It is indeed at first sight the
most plausible thing against the Dr. in the whole Indictment, and seems to make
him directly beholden to Mr. Stanley for a little hint at least, though the
working it out was left to himself. Were I at a loss for an answer here, our
Vindicator (which, P. 54, 55.
I thank him, he seldom fails to do) has supplied me with one. But I need not
crave his affistance. The case is this

In Mr. Stanley's MS. over against the Title (...), in the Margin, stands,
Meurs. in Antig. c. CXLIV. That Chapter in Antigonus begins thus. (...); i. e.
Callimachus of Cyrene has made a Collection of things strange and wonderful,
the most remarkable of which I shall transcribe. And so he begins his
transcribing, (...), etc. He (Callimachus) says, that Eudoxus relates that,
etc.

Now upon this Mr. Stanley had made this Remark. Quibus ex verbis omnia quae
sequuntur usque ad finem libri ex Callimacho deprompta esse conjicere licet; i.
e. From which words one may conjecture that all that follows in Antigonus to
the end of the Book is taken from Callimachus. And good reason had he so to
conjecture; for Antigonus in his cap. 144. entering upon transcribing from
Callimachus, and it not appearing (his Book being imperfect) where he ended,
the inference is very fair, that all that follows in that Book, as it now
stands imperfect, is taken from Callimachus. An instance of the same kind we
have before in the same Book, Antig. c 32. (...), cap. 33. (...). etc. i. e.
The several other wonderful Sagacities of certain Animals one may find most
accurately described in the writings of Aristotle, out of which, before I go
any further, I shall make this following Collection. cap 33. He says that the
Wolves about the Lake of, etc. And so he goes on still transcribing out of
Aristotle to cap. 127. which he thus concludes, (...), etc. i.e. But Aristotle
has left behind him many Books, out of which, what I have here given is all
that I could at present recollect. And so he breaks off his transcribing out of
Aristotle. After the same manner does he begin his Collection out of
Callimachus, c. 144. But where he ended, his Book being imperfect, we know not.
Therefore says, Dr. Bentley, p. 328. and profecto ut omnia, quae deinceps,
etc. As all that is in Antigonus from, cap. 32. to cap. 127. is transcribed
from Aristotle, so all from cap. 144. to the end of the Book is taken from
Callimachus. And accordingly all those passages he transfers into his
Collection. Upon which our Vindicator cries out shame upon him. I cannot acquit
him, says he, either of being vainglorious, or a Plagiary, when he avers (as
it is true he does) that he himself was the first who restored those noble
Fragments to their true Author. For how can Dr. Bentley have the face to say,
that he was the first, when Mr. Stanley had observed it before him. But had Mr.
Stanley also observed the like of Aristotle? But to let that drop. Pray, Sir,
will you please to read your own words immediately following your Transcription
out of Mr. Stanley. Quibus ex verbis etc. And with Mr. Stanley agrees the
Learned Johnsius in his second Book of the Writers of Philosophic History,
cap. 12. p. 176. P. 55.
If therefore Johnsius had observed it as well as Mr. Stanley, then Mr. Stanley
was neither the first man nor the only man that had observed it. And why may
not our Learned Critic (a Title, which, P. 61.
since some Books lately published against him, no wan will deny to Dr.
Bentley) have observed it without the help of Mr. Stanley's MS. as well as had
the Learned Johnsius, whose right to the same Title is as little disputed? But
in the words immediately following, P. 55.
and in several other places of your Book, you tell us over and over, and that
very emphatically, that the Dr. had thoroughly read that piece of Johnsius. P.
61. and seqq. Mr. B. p. 142.
You have over-done your work, Sir, and laid the Indictment in two places. The
unhappiest man at managing an Accusation, that ever took such a piece of work
in hand. Pray, Sir, will you please to certify the world in your third
Edition, from whom did the Dr. take this hint first? Did he take it from
Johnsius first, and afterward from Mr. Stanley? or first from Mr. Stanley, and
afterward from Johnsius? This, Sir, is a point upon which you ought to be very
determinate, P. 76.
the Province you have taken upon you obliges you to restore every Paragraph
to its right Author. And therefore you must let the world know precisely, if
Dr. Bentley's name must be expunged, whose name must be put in the room of it
in the next Impression of Callimachus: P. 74.
whether Mr. Stanley's or the Learned Johnsius. For without a more particular
information than you have yet given, Mr. Graevius will not be able to do
justice between them.

But I Will maintain the Dr's right. His name must not be expunged out of the
next Impression. I very confidently presume the Discovery was of the Dr's own
making, and (not to flatter him) it is one of the meanest in his whole Book.
Antigonus himself had laid it so full in view, that no body, reading him with
attention, especially having that Greek Poet, Callimachus in his thoughts,
could have passed it over unobserved. Let the Reader cast his eyes back upon
the (...) -- and the (...). Callimachus made a certain Collection -- He says
that -- Now, Sir, dip upon what Chapter you will in Antigonus after c. 144. to
the end of his Book, (abating here and there an Intersertion of the Collectors
own, easy enough to be distinguished from the rest) you will find this (...)
either express or subintellect before the Infinitive Mood: for the Dr's
Correction of (...) into (...), c. 145, and of (...) into (...), c. 147. with
others of the like kind, I suppose no body (unless perhaps your self) will
dispute with him: And that (...) must have some Nominative Case, and that
Nominative Case can be no other than (...). So that the utmost of the Dr's
Discovery here was only finding out first the principal Verb, and the then
Nominative Case to it: which it is a strange thing if he could not have done
without the help of your MS.

But why then is the Dr. so vain glorious upon his performance here if it was
so easy a thing? P. 54.
Haud male, opinor, de Callimacho meritus jum, qui primus tam luculenta (...)
illi restituo. I think Callimachus is not a little obliged to me for being the
first who restore to him so fair a quantity of Fragments.

Because the thing is true. For how obvious soever the Discovery might lie, yet
no body having before given the Public any notice of it, (no not, in express
terms, Johnsius himself) or taken care to restore these Fragments to their true
Author: to the Dr. alone does Callimachus owe his Obligations. Besides which,
Callimachus is not a little obliged to the Dr. for the commendable pains you
your self acknowledge him to have bestowed upon these Fragments: Ibid.
For his having restored them to their genuine Lection, and for his having
justified our Poet's Narrations from the concurring Testimonies of so many
other good Authorities. And if you will please to look over the many
improvements which (after the learned and accurate Meursius and Xylander) the
Dr. has made upon that part of Antigonus, you will find that he might well
think Callimachus not a little obliged to him, and that I spoke within compass
when I said before, Supr. P. 33.
bringing this very instance for a proof of it, that in many places for one
single line which you allege against the Dr. as stolen from Mr. Stanley, the
Dr's Additions are more than twenty to one. As in this present case is very
manifest, taking in your marginal Reference in its utmost extent.

Ay, that is true indeed, in this place. But to whom is the Dr. obliged for all
this? To the learned Johnsius, P. 55.
who advised his Reader to consult Stephanus, Pliny, and Suidas. And it is plain
by the comparison, that Dr. Bentley followed his Advice, though he will not own
his kindness.

As much as to say; That Dr. Bentley would never have read Stephanus, Pliny,
and Suidas, had not the Learned Johnsius put him in mind of it, that there were
such Books in the world, and that he ought to read them. For this Advice and
Advertisement is it that the Dr. is so deeply obliged to the Learned Johnsius,
and (ungrateful man as he is) has not told the world who told him of those
Books.

It Is plain, by the comparison, you say, that the Dr. followed his Advice. That
is, To a man that will read over the Dr's Collection it will plainly appear,
that the Dr. has read Stephanus, Suidas and Pliny. As for Stephanus and Suidas
we have had enough of them already. Supr. p. 39, 54, 55.
But has the Dr. read Pliny too? Yes, it is plain, you say, he has. Now, pray,
Sir, turn to the 83d page of your Book, and there you do as good as say the Dr.
has not read Pliny. For the Dr. having produced several passages out of Pliny,
as n. 392, 393, 394, etc. Harduin's Indices, say you, directed Dr. Bentley to
these Quotations out of Pliny, q. d. Dr. Bentley did not meet with these
Quotations in Pliny himself, but just turned to the Index Authorum, v.
Callimachus, and so came by them. But if the Dr. followed Johnsius's Advice,
and turned over Pliny himself, as it is plain he did; what need was there of
running to Harduin's Indices? It Is a plain case, Sir, from the beginning of
your Book to the end of it; that you know not, or matter not what you say, so
that you can but fling out somewhat against the Dr. And this is the way of all
of you. Calumniare fortiter, is the rule you go by. But there should be a
little wit in it. I wonder how your Book comes to bear a second Edition. In p.
65. I find you upon Harduin and Pliny again. His Quotation out of the Scholiast
upon Apollonius Harduin in his Notes upon Pliny supplied him with. Ridiculous!
as if the Scholiast upon Apollonius himself were not sooner read over than a
Pliny with Harduin's Notes, or as if that were the only Quotation out of the
Scholiast upon Apollonius in the Dr's Collection. Vid. supr. p. 35.
But that Quotation is not in Harduin's Index. So that all that is in Harduin's
Index, from the Index the Dr. stole it: but what is not the Index, for that he
is obliged to Johnsius, who advised him to read over Pliny himself, which
Advice, it is plain, the Dr. followed. Are you not ashamed, Sir, of putting such
stuff as this into print? I do not answer these things, as if they deserved an
Answer, but to let the world see how these men manage their Controversy
against Dr. Bentley. The Dr. must have what is in the Index, or not have what
is in the Author, vid. supr. p. 55.

But you are a person as unlucky in your Memorandum's, as you are inconsistent
in your Allegations. Let me lay down this as a rule: it is not for a young
Writer to despise an Index. It Is but comparing the Author of Dr. Bentley's
Dissertation, upon the Epistles of Phalaris examined, p. 164. with Dr.
Bentley's Answer, p. 229. And with the Index to a very common Book, Aelian.
Var. Hist. litera x. and you will find out my meaning.

V. P. 57.
The Quotation out of the Learned Scholiast upon Aristophanes, n. 101. was
ready brought to his hands by the Editor of Aristaenetus his Epistles, ep. 10.
p. 229.

W. I had reason to observe of you, that you are the most unhappy man to your
Friends, and the most obliging to your Adversary that ever took Pen in hand.

The Dr. stole his Quotation out of the Scholiast upon Aristophanes from the
Editor of Aristaenetus his Epistles.

Answ. 1. Compare your Learned Patron, p. 31. Marg. with Dr. B. Answer, p. 21.
and Mr. B's p. 164. again with Dr. B's Answer, p. 229, 230. and you will find
that the Dr. was too well acquainted with the Scholiast upon Aristophanes, to
have borrowed his Quotation out of that Scholiast from the Editor of
Aristaenetus.

2. The Dr. in this very place rectifies a mistake of that Learned Scholiast,
which the Learned Editor of Aristaenetus transcribes into his Annotations
without taking any notice of it. So that you have here marked out an instance
for the Reader to reflect upon: That the Dr. how notorious a Plagiary soever,
yet he is none of your Pedanious Critics, a literatim Transcriber of other
men's Mistakes, and making them him own. The Dr. is able to correct the faulty
Opinions of the Ancients, as well as the faulty Copies of their Works.

3. The Dr. also rectifies a little mistake of that Learned Editor of
Aristanetus ( Josias Mercerus, Sir, the Father-in-Law to Salmasius) who
misquotes this piece of Callimachus under the Title of Aiontius, whereas it
should have been (...); as the Dr. from the Authority of Ovid establishes it.
And that I put the Reader in mind of this other second little advantage, which
(as to this particular) Dr. Bentley has over the Learned Mercerus, is owing to
your self, who were so friendly to the Dr. as to point it out to me.

4. You. have supplied the Dr. with a fresh Authority here for that new Lection
which he gives of this Fragment, and justified his Correction of the Learned
Scholiast upon Aristophanes. The Fragment it self is this.

(...)
(...).
In the Scholiast upon Aristophanes, for (...) it stands (...): and as that
Lection is admitted by him for genuine; so from him in the same words is it
transcribed by the Learned Mercerus: and otherwise than with that Lection I
presume it is no where to be found, nor was there ever, perhaps, before the Dr.
any suspicion entertained concerning it. But the Dr. than whom ('it is plain by
the comparison) no man reads Books more intently, discovered some thing of
incongruity in this Lection (...), and therefore ventures, by a conjectural
Emendation, to restore it (...). And was at some pains to justify the
Correction both from Reason and Authority: but the most proper Authority in the
world to his purpose he had (I know not how) omitted. In comes our most
obliging Vindicator here, and supplies him with it. Nor could one that had
studied for it, have given a fuller demonstration of the Dr's happiness at a
Conjecture, than has this very man, who is writing a Book against him; having
pointed out to us the very place which establishes beyond control every thing
the Dr. has said, Aristaenet. ep. 10. ( m. p. 46, 49.) (...), etc. (...), n.
b. (...), not (...), words coming as near to those of the Fragment according to
the Dr's Correction of it, as Prose and Verse would fairly admit. Sir, the Dr.
is obliged to you, and (in his name) I presume to return you Thanks. This
Discovery (the very best in your whole Book, though made without your knowing
any thing of it) will, I doubt not, be inserted in the next Impression of
Callimachus. And therefore,

5. From hence I infer a Negative directly contradictory to your Affirmative,
viz. The Dr. did not take his Quotation out of the Scholiast upon Aristophanes
from the Editor of Aristaenetus. For if the Dr. had then had Aristaenetus in
his view, he would not have omitted an Authority so direct to his purpose. You
may cavil; but the Inference is undeniable.

I have drawn out my Answer to this your Allegation into so many particulars,
to show you, first, How imprudently you have acted in putting one so often in
mind of things which were better forgotten: though indeed let the best Pen that
can be found engage any farther in this Cause, it will be next to impossible to
escape splitting upon the same Rock. And secondly, to let you see how much it
turns to the Dr's advantage to have his writings brought under a close
Examination.

V. P. 61.
The greatest and best part of those numerous Quotations which adorn Dr.
Bentley's Edition under the several (...), p. 351. and seq. were before
collected by Johnsius.

W. At which least the Reader should be surprised, you spend no less than three
pages to show with what Judgment and Accuracy that Learned Person has treated
of these. Catalogues, Ibid.
Indices, or Tables of Callimachus. So that all that you prove here is, that he
must be a very extraordinary man indeed, who can so exhaust his Subject as that
Dr. Bentley coming after him shall not find room for improvements. And if you
could have said not only the greatest and best part, but all and every one of
the Quotations in the Dr's Collection were before drawn together by Johnsius,
yet even so it would have amounted to no more than this; That two very Learned
Persons treating upon the same point of Antiquity, neither of them had made any
material Omissions. If you had known how to have managed your cause, you should
have spared your elaborate Elogies upon Johnsius, P. 55, 61, etc.
with which you have but made a Garland for Dr. Bentley. Like the Monarch, who
spent the greatest part of a long Reign in gathering Trophies only to place
them all at last upon his Neighbor's head.

But you will not part with Johnsius so. If you can have read me hitherto
without a Blush, prepare for one now.

V. Dr. Bentley to conceal his transferring Johnsius's Correction of Antimachus
for Callimachus into his own Stores, P. 64.
cites the passage ( n. 390.) out of Eusebius, whereas in the Edition of
Tatianus, from whom Eusebius had it, the names are as they ought to be read.

W. Good Reader, look over these words again; Dr. Bentley to conceal, etc. Here
does this Man, P. 19, 25, 76.
who quotes Scripture and Councils, charge Dr Bentley with having stole a
Correction from Johnsius, and with using a certain Artifice to conceal the
Fraud. Every Syllable of which is as wilful a falsehood as words can express.
Turn to the Dr's n. 390. p. 423. Tatianus apud Eusebium, Praep. Evang. lib. 10.
(...), etc. After the Quotation given at large the Dr has these words. Ex hoc
loco Vossius in libello posthumo de Poetis laudat Collimachum, Colophonium: sed
lege apud Eusebium (...). Ut recte habetur apud ipsum Tatianum, sed hoc video
doctissimum JOHNSIUM ante me animadvertisse. It Is true the Dr. transcribes the
passage out of Eusebius, but the tells us how it stands in Tatianus. The reason
of his transcribing it out of Eusebius, was, I presume, to take this
opportunity of giving the Reader notice of a false Lection crept into the
Copies of that Author, and of a mistake from thence transferred into Vossius
his posthumous Piece de Poetis. No, says the Vindicator; he did it on purpose
to conceal his having stole this Correction from Johnsius. Oh Confidence!
Construe it, Sir. Sed hoc video doctissimum JOHNSIUM ante me animadvertisse. To
conceal! as plain as Pen can put down words on Paper, it is declared that the
Learned Johnsius had made that Correction before him. Here are your Writers
against Dr. Bentley! And will you still believe them, Reader? But take another
instance.

V. The Corrections of the Fragment, P. 71, 72.
n. 233. were ready made to the Dr's hand by Salmasius, and in Is. Vossius his
MS. The old Translator of Pollux had given the true rendering of (...). Fluto
Aristophanes: which Dr. Bentley calls his own.

W. Confidently! Dr. Bentley does not call the true rendering (...) his own. So
far is the Dr from claiming to himself the Corrections ready made to his hands
by others, that in express terms he disclaims them. The Dr's words are these:
Qui quidem locus, in vulgatis codicibus mendosissimus, recte ita emendatus est
a ^iris eruditis. -- and ita sane Codex qui fuit Isaaci Vossii. Is this calling
things his own? Twere Charity to believe you cannot construe Latin. But the
rectifying the mistakes of the Scholiast, and the correcting the Text of
Aristophanes himself: a Correction just and necessary, and which perhaps was
never so much as aimed at before the Dr. and without which, neither could the
Poet, nor his Commentator, nor J. Pollux have been understood; This the Dr.
does call his own, and his own it is, vid. loc. Fragm. n. 233. p. 395.

V. P. 85.
Salvagnius Boessius in his Prolegomena to his Commentary upon Ovid's Ibis,
has inserted the Epigram out of the Anthology (which Dr. Bentley has
transcribed number. 2.) with the Emendation of (...) for (...) (claimed as his own
by the Dr.) though he confesses that the admirable Critic Eustathius reads it
(...).

W. Of all this I do not understand one word. The Emendation of (...) into
(...) the Dr. does (both here Fragm. n. 2. and Ep. ad fin. Malel. p. 71.) claim
as his own, and his own I believe it is. In Salvagnius Boessius's Prolegomena I
find not a Syllable of that Epigram either with an Emendation or without. Who
confesses, that the admirable Critic Eustathius reads it (...)? Salvagnius or
Dr. Bentley? in neither of them do I find the least mention of Eustathius
relating to this matter. My Salvagnius Boessius is 8vo. Lugd. 1661. There may
be some later Edition for ought I I know, in which may be the passages you
speak of: but I have never seen any such Edition, nor (as I have a reason, not
worth the telling, to believe) has Dr. Bentley. So that how many soever
Editions of Salvagnius Boessius there may be, what Dr. Bentley here calls his
own is still his own.

V. In those Prolegomena also is to be found the Epigram of Martial upon the
(...).

W. In Dacier's Testimonia veterum also is to be found the Epigram of Martial
upon the (...): and in Farnaby's Martial also is to be found the Epigram of
Martial upon the (...). Stuff!

V. In Salvagnius Boessius his Commentary upon Ovid's Ibis are many other good
Observations, which Dr. Bentley has read.

W. It Is more than natural Stupidity: it looks like a kind of Infatuation, that
a man should be so constant in confuting himself. Compare, Sir, these two pages
of yours; page 35. with page 85.

Page 35. The Epigram out of Martial ( n. 2.) is in Mr. Stanley's Collection.

Page 85. The Epigram out of Martial ( n. 2.) is in Salvagnius Boessius ( m. p.
48.) And Salvagnius Boessius Dr. Bentley has read.

Page 35. The Quotation out of Clemens Alexandrinus ( n. 2.) is in Mr.
Stanley's Collection.

Page 85. But Salvagnius Boessius Dr. Bentley has read: and in Salvagnius
Boessius is that Quotation out of Clemens Alexandrinus, verbatim, p. 47.

Page. 35. Supr. p. 62.
The Quotation out. of Servius upon Virgil, n. 8. is transcribed from Mr.
Stanley, verbatim.

Page 85. Salvagnius Boessius his Commentary upon Ovid's Ibis Dr. Bentley has
read: and in that Commentary, p. 301. is that Quotation out of Servius upon
Virgil.

How will you look your Honorable Patron in the face, after having thus
discovered to him how carelessly you read his Book, and how little you minded
the caution he gave you, Not to lay your Indictment in two places. Mr. B. p.
142.


And this is what I before promised you to take some particular notice of.
Supr. p. 64.
Read what is there ( p. 63, 64.) written upon that Quotation out of Clemens
Alexandrinus, (...), etc. I here repeat my charge against you, Sir, and in the
plain unaffected Style I call you false Accuser, and prepensely such. You knew
these several passages to be in Salvagnius Boessius; Salvagnius Boessius you
knew the Dr. to have read: how then durst you charge these particular passages
upon him as Proofs of his Plagiarism from ^ir. Stanley's MS. all of which you
knew the Dr. to have met with elsewhere; and one of which you knew, you could
not but know, your own Eye sight assured you, that the Dr. did actually
transcribe, not from Mr. Stanley, but from Salvagnius Boessius? I say, which
you could not but know, that the Dr. did not take from Mr. Stanley. For that
Quotation out of Clemens Alexandrinas, as it is given us in the Dr's
Collection, I am very confident is not now (whatsoever it may be ever long) in
Mr. Stanley's MS. nor, I believe in any other printed Book whatever save in
Salvagnius Boessius; and therefore only from him can the Dr. have transcribed
it. And this you cannot have been ignorant of, since both Salvagrius Boessius,
and Dr. Bentley himself have given express notice of it: Salvagnius, p. 47. Sic
and Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 5. Strom. (...), etc. Sic enim Manuscriptus meus
pervetustus Codex cum in omnibus Editionibus desint haec verba (...) IIS and in
Dr. Bentley, p. 345. Tit. IIS it a Codex MStus Dionysii Salvagnii: in vulgatis
IIS abest. I do therefore again and again repeat it upon you, Sir, though your
whole Book be a Proof of it, yet more especially from this particular passage,
as being an irrefragable Demonstration; that you are a false Accuser, and that
you are prepensely such. First, In telling the World, that that is in your MS.
which is not in your MS. and secondly, in placing among your Proofs of things
transcribed from your MS. that which you knew was not transcribed from your MS.
and upon both these Articles I bring in your own Salvagnius Boessius for
Evidence against you. And this you have gotten by over-doing your work, and
laying your Indictment in two places. And the Man once convicted of wilful, I
cannot say Perjury, because it is not in a Court of Record, though you have
kissed the Bible upon it more than once; yet of wilful Prevarication is become
for ever afterward (at least, as to that cause) an incompetent Witness. And
how far this Sentence may extend, I leave it to those who are most concerned in
it to consider: desiring them withal, out of pure Compassion to themselves, not
to be over eager in tempting a no very unwilling man to discover all he knows.
For the letting the world know, how far Busy men are to be credited, I take to
be doing a good piece of Service to the Public; which he that shall venture
upon, as he must incur the Displeasure-of Many, so he deserves the Thanks of
more than One. I have complied (and not many more so obedient Readers can he
boast of) with Mr. B's unreasonable Request, with which he concludes his
Preface to his Examination of Dr. Bentley. But as for you your self, Sir, I
have now near upon the matter done with you. For as for your wre^^^ed
commonplace Railery, and your blunt (...) upon the Dr. (most of them stole
from ^our Honorable Patron, but spoiled in the telling: I scorn to take any
notice of them. But there is still behind your SUPPLEMENT.

And that Supplement of yours must not be passed over in silence Then might you
call me a partial Writer indeed, if I took no notice of you Supplement. This
Supplement of yours you have set forth in a place by it self; and, the more
effectually to draw the Reader's Eye upon it, marked it out into XIII Capital
Figures. You introduce it thus.

V I expected, when I looked on the last beautiful Edition of Callimachus, to
have found every little passage of the Ancient Writers, wherein but his Name
was mentioned, gathered to my hands by Dr. Bentley.

W. Then you could not but have expected to have found in Dr. Bentley all those
Quotations out of the Ancient Writers which are in Mr. Stanley's MS. whether
ever he had seen that MS. or not. It Is Fate; The Dr. shall be acquitted by the
same Mouth that accuses him.

V. But I have met with a few, which, I presume he either had not seen or
forgotten.

W. A few.

V. And because I am persuaded it will not disserve the Learned World, I shall
insert them.

W. Sc. By way of Supplement to the former Editions of Callimachus. For
otherwise, what service could it be to the Learned World? And so you explain
your self when upon Number. XII. you expressly say ( p. 49.) that that Epigram,
Quaenam haec forma Dei, etc. was (you thought) omitted in the late Edition.
Here therefore we may expect to see the whole extent of your Reading, and what
Services the Learned World may promise it self from your Pen. I shall take them
one by one in order as they lie.

Number. 1. Suidas v. (...), etc. formerly cited at length, p. 42, 43.

W. Supra, p. 38.

V. Number. II. v. (...), etc. in the same page.

W. In the same page.

V. (...) Mr. B. p. 245.

W. (...) supra, p. 39.

V. Number. III. Natalis Comes's his Citation out of Callimachus's Hecate,
accounted for already, p. 44.

W. I Will have nothing to do with Natalis Comes.

But why should I be so angry, will you ask me, with Natalis Comes? P. 50, 51.
That Italian Critic was a famous man in his Generation, and had read no body
knows how many MSS. P. 45.


I Will tell you, Sir, there was a certain Italian Critic, a man of vast
Learning indeed, V. Mr. B. p. 225. confer. cum Dr. B 's Answ. Praef. p. 100.
but withal so horrible unmannerly, that the world ha^ed and despised him at
the same time that it was ^rofiting by him; one Joseph Scaliger. And he ^ath
given me such an Idea of this Italian Cri^ick of yours, that makes me apt (at
first sight) (...) think the worse of any Book ( yours I except) wherein I do
but meet with so much as the name of this Natalis Comes. It Is in one of his
Letters to Sethus Calvisius, Scaliger. Ep. 309.
where he tells that great Astronomer with what satisfaction all men of
Learning received that excellent Book; his Chronology. Upon which he
immediately adds; Qui unum, ac cum illis ego, a te petunt, ut scriptorum
quorundam minorum gentium mentione, qualis est Natalis Comes, homo
futilissimus, abstineas. Dolet enim magnis viris illos pannos tuae purpurae
assui: Tu haec in secunda editione curabis. That it grieved all men of Learning
to see the name of so wretched a Trifler as Natalis Comes standing in so
excellent a Book as Calvisius his Chronology, and therefore Scaliger begs of
him, that in the next Edition he would strike him out; which accordingly was
done. This passage of Scaliger, Mausacus in his Dissert. Critic. (referred to
more than once before) repeats, and expresses himself even to a passion upon
it. It raised an indignation in him, that there should be found men in the
world so weak as to pretend to establish any thing upon the Credit of such
beggarly Scriblers as Natalis Comes, and set up for Critics and Authors by
stuffing out their Books with such borrowed Authorities. So that whether the
Dr. had never seen this passage in Natalis Comes, or whether he had forgotten
it, or whether (which is more likely) he neglected it, I am not able to
determine: But that this Natalis Comes is an Author with whom you are extremely
we acquainted, is a plain case. There Is not any one Name in your whole Book
come so often over as Natalis Comes. Docto^ Bentley takes his Fragment, n. 110.
from the Etymologicon ( Nicas some call him -- turn to it, Reader, in the
Vindicator's Book, p. 43, 44. P. 43, 44.
It Is a Learned Parenthesis) but Natalis Comes had published a larger Fragment:
Dr. Bentley takes after Cosaubon's Lection; P. 45.
but Natalis Comes gives them more correct, and translates them better: and who
knows what MSS. Natalis Comes may have seen? Natalis Comes gives another
Epigram too as from Callimachus, P. 50.
and though I know not, whether that Italian Author was Critic enough to
determine the Controversy; [what Controversy?] yet Dr. Bentley might have
been so fair, as to have mentioned him. Natalis Comes has given us a handsome
Commentary upon the Fragment, number. 209. int. P. 71.
Bentleian. But Dr. Bentley transcribes it (and that but abruptly) from the
Scholiast upon Sophocles: and that Book indeed, the Scholiast upon Sophocles
the Dr. had consulted: but as for Natalis Comes, one knows not whether Dr.
Bentley has ever so much as seen that Italian Critic. And here again, Number
III. we have Natalis Comes: and Number. XI. Natalis Comes again. Mr. B. p. 26.
confer. cum Dr. B's Answ. p. 5, 6.
And may not a man say of this Natalis, your Darling Author: This Natalis
Comes, Sir, is an erranter Pedant than Dion Chrysostom himself. But,

Pro captu Lectoris habent sua fata libelli.

The sense of which words I find happily alluded to in a late excellent Poem.

But each vile Scribler's happy on this Score, Dispensary.


He Will find some Draucus still to read him over.

After Natalis Comes your next darling Author is Lactantius Placidus. In page
36. we have had Lactantius, or (as you well observe) Lutatius Placidus; in page
38, 39. You have run on score with the same Lactantius Placidus for a
considerable parcel of mistakes of the first size. Here n. IV. Supr. p. 93.
you are in with your Lactantius again, and n. IX you will even Account with
him, making as many mistakes, and as foul ones upon Lactantius, as Lactantius
had before made for you.

V. N. IV. Lactantius Placidus, etc.

W. Enjoy it. The other three you are beholden to your MS. for. For though I
doubt not, but that Mr. Stanley had read all Suidas over, yet for Mr. Stanley's
Vindicator I cannot make out the like Evidence. Lactantius Placidus is a
Critic so stooping toward your hight, that I am apt to believe you may have
read him. And therefore this Number IV. (though I think I could dispossess you
of it) yet I am willing to let pass for your own.

But here (as you cannot forbear him) you occasionally bring in another Remark
upon the Dr. which should indeed have been referred to the Class of
Transportations, supr. p. 78.

V. P. 82.
To that Book of Callimachus, entitled, (...); that is, The foundation of
Cities and Islands, and the change of their Names; I would also refer all those
passages in Pliny, cited by Dr. Bentley, n. 392, 393, 394, 395, 397. in which
there is an express mention of the change of the names of those places.

W. In not one of these passages out of Pliny is there any such express
mention. There is indeed express mention of the Names of several Places and
People, and sometimes of several Names of the same places: but not of the
(...), the Change of those Names. That which comes the nearest to your purpose,
is n. 397. Eam (Samothracen) Callimachus antiquo nomine Dardaniam vocat. But to
have answered your design, it should have been, antiquo nomine. (or rather
antiquitus) Dardaniam vocatam (fuisse) tradit. Express mention, you say, of the
change of those Names. But, pray, Sir, what express mention of the change of
the Names do you find in this Fragment, n. 393. inter Corcyram and Illyricum
Melita; unde Catulos Melitaeos appellari Callimachus Auctor est. Here is, you
say, express mention of the change of the Names. Were the Melitaei therefore
formerly called Catuli, or the Catuli, Melitaei? For the one or the other of
these you must mean. There were, Sir, of old a certain Race of Lap-dogs called
Catuli Melitaei; and this name, says Callimachus, was given them from the
Island Melita; that is, from this Island Melita lying near Corcyra (Corfu:) not
that other Island of the same name lying near Sicily, now called Malta. And
this is all that Pliny means. But by one dash of your Pen are an whole Nation
of Islanders metamorphos'd into a breed of Lapdogs. A man that was minded to
deal less tenderly with you, than I am, would not have parted with this choice
piece of Lap-dog Criticism for two or three pages together. But I cannot imagine
you to be so wretchedly ignorant, as to have taken the Catuli Melitaei for a
People. Mr. B. p. 45.
No, certainly, Sir, you are a greater Scholar than so. This was put down only
to carry on the humor of contradicting Dr. Bentley. But as you have got
nothing by it hitherto, let me advise you to give it over.

V. P. 83.
I am of opinion that the Fragment number. 399. may belong to Callimachus the
Statuary.

W. Here you are at it again; Dr. Bentley must be corrected. There can no other
reason in the world be given for any man's being of that opinion, but because
that Fragment relates to a Statue. Pliny tells us a story of a certain person,
that had, during his lifetime two Statues, erected to him, both of which
Statues, though standing in places far distant the one from the other (the one
in Italy, the other in Greece) were struck with Lightning on the same day.
This, says Pliny, Callimachus looked upon as next to a Prodigy. And might not
Callimachus the Poet wonder at so strange an Accident as well as Callimachus
the Statuary? But however this serves to expose the Dr. who (with Harduin) was
so injudicious as to refer this passage to Callimachus the Poet.

V. Number. V. A Quotation out of Diomedes Grammaticus.

Number. VI. The like out of Atil. Fortunatianus de Priapeio metro.

W. The only Discovery with which you have in these two Numbers obliged the
Learned World is, that as among the Romans, Propertius, Tibullus, and Gallus
wrote in Elegiac Verse: So before them did Callimachus and Euphorion among the
Greeks. And that Callimachus in his Epigrams had, as to the choice of his
Meter, some Peculiarities of his own ('it is not said what) as had also
Bacchilides, and some other Poets, theirs. And this is one of those Discoveries
omitted by Dr. Bentley; P. 49.
the bringing of which to light, you are persuaded is no Disservice to the
Learned World. Certainly so; Sir, no Disservice. Your Quotation of Atil.
Fortunatianus is out of Putschius his Grammatici Veteres, p. 2676. In the Dr's
Answer to your Honorable Patron, p. 227. I find him within three pages of you
in the same Atil. Fortunatianus, sc. on p. 2679. de Saturnio versu. Which
passage in the Dr. with the occasion of his producing it. ( p. 226.) I
recommend to the perusal of the inquisitive Reader. So lucky are you all along
in your Memorandums, though I take notice of but few of them.

V. Number. VII. Atilius Fortunatianus, p. 2680. de Saturnio versu.

W. Much to the same purpose as the two former, only with this difference, That
as in them you did no Disservice to the Learned World, so in this you do no
Service: this very passage being printed in Graevius's Callimachus, and placed
by Spanheim, where it should be, amongst the Testimonia, p. 302.

V. Number. VIII. A Quotation out of Caecilius Minutinnus Apuleius from Caelius
Rhodiginus.

W. In the forementioned Salvagnius B^essius his Prolegomena, p. 16. which our
Vindicator, without naming his Benefactor, has confidently made his own. But
those Prolegomena of Salvagnius Boessius Dr. Bentley has read, Supr. p.
and therefore cannot but have seen this Quotation. It Is a known Story, and
produced by the Dr. over and over, ( p. 345.) and that from far more certain
Authorities, than that unknown Caecil. Minutianus Apuleius, upon whom
Salvagnius sets this mark; Qui nondum lucem vidit, unique Caelio Rhodigino
^otus fuit.

V. Number. IX. Lactantius Placidus.

Your darling Author Lactantius Placidus. There was no occasion in the world
for your exposing your self here. In the first place you do not contradict Dr.
Bentley. In the next, when you were only making a Supplement to Callimachus,
you should have let those things alone which were already done to your hand.
The passage here produced is printed with a large Commentary upon it, by
Spanheim in his Volume of Learned Observations upon this Author, p. 571, 572.
And a little Modesty might have taught you not to have meddled with a subject
before exhausted by so masterly a Pen. But to do you Justice, I verily believe,
you did not know of Mr. Spanheim's having said any thing to it.

V. P. 86.
Were I allowed to play the bold Critic, I would for Arcados read Argivi, (for
Tydeus, the Father of Diomedes --.

W. Bold Critic! Most properly spoken, and since it is an Epithet of your own
choosing, may it be your Character. The Bold Critic. Such a number of gross
Absurdities crowded into the compass of so few Lines (one short Parenthesis) I
defy any man to show me in any Book in the whole world again. And they are all
your own: not one of them here, as before in the case of Branchiades Apollo,
borrowed from Lactantius Placidus. Supr. p. 92, 93.
In the first place, Sir, Spolium signifies the Spoils (as the Armor, and
Badges of Honor) taken from off the Body of an Enemy slain in open fight; as
in Virgil, Actoris Aurunci Spolium; and not the Armor worn by a man while
living. So that according to your Correction of the Poet. This Diomedes the Son
of Tydens must have been (as indeed afterward he was) a famous Warrior, must
have performed all his Exploits, must have been slain in the Wars; and all this
long before he was born; nay, he must, after he was slain, and before he was
begotten, have danced in Armor at his Father's Marriage. For secondly, Sir, if
you had took time to look into the Author upon whom you were commenting, you
would have found that these words were timed at Tydeus his Marriage with the
Mother of Diomedes. And thirdly, If you had looked into any of your Poetical
Dictionaries, you would have found, that there were two Diomedes, that is,
Diomedes the Thracian, slain by Hercules, and this Argian Diomedes the Son of
Tydeus; and that 'twas the Thracian Diomedes, who was so famous for his
Man-eating, Chimney-nos'd Horses. Impius humano viscere paevit equos, Ovid.
And consequent from these Premises you will find; Et Diomedis equi spirantes
naribus ignem, Lucret.
First, That your Argos (...) is nothing at all to the purpose. Secondly, That
Euhippus was substantial Flesh and Blood, and not a mere Noun Adjective. And
thirdly, From hence may the Reader take this Information, that a Book may have
a great many Greek and Latin words in it, and bear a mighty show of Learning,
though written by a Man that understands nothing of the matter he is writing
upon; and withal, that some of the pages written against Dr. Bentley are of
this kind.

V. Manuscript -- p. 87. P. 87.


W. Stuff!

V. Number. X. A Quotation out of Photius.

W. A bare mention of the name of Callimathus with something of a cenfure
passed upon him with several other Writers in a Lump.

V. Number. XI. A choice Epigram out of Natalis Comes.

W. Ill have nothing to do with Natalis Comes.

V. Number. XII. An Epigram out of the Collection of the Epigrammata veterum with
this Title.

Callimachi Imagini inscriptum Jovis. Quaenam haec forma Dei? cur versa est?
Fulgura lucis.

Divinae non fert debilis haec acies, etc.

Which Enigram ( p. 49.) if I am not mistaken, the late Editors of Callimachus
have not mentioned.

W. You are mistaken, Sir, It Is in both the last Edition of Graevius's, and in
the Edition last before that of Dacier; in both of them inter Testimonia
veterum. Oh shameful! Not so much as turned over the very first Leaves of the
Book you were making your Comments upon!

V. N. XIII. A Citation out of Malela.

W. Omitted by the Dr. (I confidently presume) for the same reason, as were
those out of Natalis Comes.

V. The Learned Editor of that Historian for Etesiis reads Aetiis.

W. The Learned Editor of that Historian faith not a word of the matter.

V. Perhaps it should be (...).

W. An easy Correction of (...) into (...). For there be two of the same
Letters in both words, (...). And besides what have the Etesian Winds to do
with the Racing-Chariots? Did those Chariots go with Sails? vide loc. Malel. p.
221.

V. Callimachus wrote of Winds, and therefore perhaps the true reading is in
the Text, and should be translated de Etesiis.

W. What need therefore of such a forced Correction. (...) we know Callimachus
wrote, but I never yet heard of any Book of his Entitled, (...).

V. And it is not altogether improbable, (but) that Suidas might mention his
(...), if a small Correction be allowed, and instead of (...), we read (...),
etc. But this opinion wants the Countenance of a Manuscript.

W. There was no manner of occasion for this Learning of yours in this place.
You Will never meet with any such thing in a MS. Or if you do, I Will venture to
tell you beforehand, that MS is faulty. He that has the least Gust of the
Greek Language will tell you, that the (...) and the (...) cannot here be
parted. But somewhat you must be a doing. A Critic without his Corrections,
Editions, and MSS. is like a Beau without his Wig, vid. Mr. B. p. 146. (...),
and Dr. B's Answ. p. 113.

And here ends your Supplement, upon which let us now cast up accounts, and see
how deeply the Learned World stands indebted to you.

This Collection of yours, as you call it, P. 88.
consists of XIII Capital Figures; of which Number. I, II. transcribed from Mr.
Stanley's MS. are somewhat to the purpose, and will, it is likely, be inferted
in the next Impression of Callimachus. III, VII, IX, XII, printed in the last
Edition. IV, V, VI, X. a bare mention of the Name of Callimachus. The Epigram
of XI. no more Callimachus's than your own. VIII, XIII. the substance of them
both in the Dr's Collection over and over. But as for those indifferent names
which you have tacked to them, Dr. Bentley scorned to make use of such
Authorities. So that, Sir, not to flatter you, the service you have done to the
Learned World by presenting it with this your Supplement is just none at all:
or the very utmost you can pretend to, is the having transcribed from Mr.
Stanley's MS. the two Quotations out of Suidas. But as for those useful and
accurate Observations which you have added, as that of the Catuli Melitaei, and
Diomedes's his Armor, they are purely your own. And if Mr. Graevius, or any
one else shall think fit to insert them in the next Impression of Callimachus's
Works, it is pity but that the world should be informed to whom it is obliged
for them. P. 74.
In the mean time, I have not been wanting in my Endeavors to blazon your.
Atchievments, and make the Learned World take notice of them.

I have now performed all that, as far as you are concerned in it, my Title
page promises. For upon the former part of your Book I had once designed a
separate consideration. But I am weary of my work, and, I fancy, both your
self and the Reader think it high time for me to have done with you. Yet since
it might look somewhat suspiciously to take no manner of notice of it, I shall,
with all the Brevity imaginable, bestow upon it a cursory Reflection or two.

That former part of your Book contains in it a most grievous Accusation. Dr.
Bentley's Injustice and Inhumanity to those Authors who have written before
him. Upon which I cannot but in the first place observe to the Reader; that had
one designed to have written a Panegyric upon the Dr. one could not have
pitched upon a more proper Subject for it, than what this man makes choice of
for matter of Reproach against him: All this Injustice and Inhumanity of the
Dr. to those Authors who have written before him terminating in this point;
That Dr. Bentley has observed some mistakes that have dropped from the Pens of
several Great Men, who have written before him, and corrected them: a service
for which he has received the public acknowledgment of persons altogether as
considerable in the Commonwealth of Learning, as any of the Retainers to the
Half Moon Club. But if the Dr. does (as indeed he pretty often does) disagree
from the opinions of those Great Men, who have written before him, it is,
though sometimes with the assurance of a man that knows what he is speaking of,
yet always, with a due respect and deference to the worth of the persons from
whom he Dissents. But let us proceed to particulars.

V. Dr. Bentley calls Aemilius Portus, P. 7.
hominum futilissimum, the greatest of Triflers, op ad fin. Mal. p. 51.

W. Aemilius Portus was but a puny Critic, Vide quae de Aemilio Porto
Pearsonus in Prolegom. ad Hierocl. Aemilius Portus, qui Suidam adeo
infoeliciter transtulit, etc.
and to persons of his Character there is no Epithet oftener applied, than that
of futilissimus. We have had it once before, supr p. 122.

V. Ibid.
Nor can Gerard Vossius, and Johnsius escape being treated by him with the like
Language.

W. It Is a most notorious falsehood.

V. Ibid.
Who suffered themselves to be led into an Error through their Ignorance.

W. In errorem inscii inciderant, D. B. ep. p. 51. The word inscii, here is to
be translated unwarily, incogitantly, not ignorantly. And but that these great
men were guilty of a strange Incogitancy as to the matter the Dr. was speaking
of, is a thing which cannot be denied, vide locum. You must learn to construe a
piece of Latin, before you write another Book against Dr. Bentley.

V. Ibid.
The same most Learned Vossius he severely arraigns in another place of
committing a great mistake without Consideration and Judgment.

W. You misconstrue the Dr. again, and turn his words to a sense directly
contrary to what they intend, Dr. B. ep. p. 83. non certo judicio, sed
inconsiderate, preterque morem egisse videtur. The sense of the Dr's words is
plainly this, That though Vossius had written the Name Malela without an s, yet
'twas not his certum judicium, not his own Judgment, or his own standing
opinion, that it ought always to be so written; for that his own practice
contradicted: but he wrote it so, inconsiderate, praeterque morem,
inaccurately, incuriously, or (if you will have it so) inconsiderately;
praeterque morem, and contrary to his usual practice. For the whole stress of
the Dr's argument is, that 'twas not Vossius's his standing opinion, that the
name Malela ought to be written without an s. and consequently, that his
writing it so, could not be through ignorance, or mistake, or for want of
judgment; but purely either through inadvertency, or rather with a contented
unexactness in compliance with some other Authors who had usued that way of
writing it. So that you here charge the Dr. with charging Vossius with want of
judgment, when the Dr. is arguing directly the contrary, and discharging him
from that suspicion. Here Is Justice and Judgment joined together!

V. P. 8.
He speaks of the most Learned Man of the later Greeks, Leo Allatius, as if he
were [a Brute] not so much a Man, as a composition of Ill Nature and Envy.

W. The flourish of [a Brute] is of your own making. The Dr. allows him the
Title of eruditissimus, ep. p. 50. As for the other part of his character, ep.
p. 51. See how, after Bochart, the Learned Dr. Th. Smith speaks of Leo Allatius
in his Narratio de vita, etc. Cyrilli Lucarii; as in many other places, so
particularly, p. 113. Leo Allatius -- suspectae fidei testis, and ad
convitiandum propensissimus. An unlucky Quality, Sir, especially where there is
no good one (which was not Allatius's case) to counterbalance for it.

V. He endeavors to prove. Erasmus, Ibid.
Scaliger, and Grotius, men of no Palate in matters of Learning; or Fools.

W. A most notorious falsehood.

V. And accuses them of a most foul error.

W. But it is a most foul error in you to say so. He accuses not them of a most
foul error, but the Copies of Plutarch of a very faulty Lection, which he
wonders indeed none of those great Men should have observed. Here follows your
own Correction of the Dr's Correction. It Is like all the other things that are
your own. You don't understand what the Dr's at, Sir, (...). The Dr's Criticism
runs more upon the (...) than the (...). And therefore your Marginal Learning
is (like every thing else you write) nothing to the purpose.

V. P. 9.
He allows not Florus Christianus, Scaliger, or any other of the Moderns to
have understood the true measures of an Anapaestick Verse.

W. Of which presumption Mr. Boil long before your self had accused the Dr.
and in a much livelier manner; and before your Book came out had received the
Dr's answer to it. Mr. B. p. 159. Dr. B's Answer, p. 132. and seqq. Is not the
republishing boffled Objections without taking a Syllable notice of the Answer
which had been before given to them, a piece of Impertinence?

V. P. 10.
He speaks very coursely of Lilius Gyraldus, and Monsieur Menage.

W. It Is false. He never speaks of them otherwise than very respectfully.

V. Ibid.
He takes occasion frequently to quarrel with, and correct Isaac Casaubon.

W. That he quarrels with Isaac Casaubon is falsely spoken. It Is true, Dr.
Bentley has observed that great Man to have made (as the greatest of men have
done) some mistakes; and some of them he takes occasion to correct; but this is
not quarrelling with him. Dr. Bentley admires Isaac Casaubon, and never speaks
of him out in terms of respect.

V. He censures the Commentators upon Pliny. Ibid.


W. The worst you can make of his censure upon the Commentators upon Pliny is,
that they were Learned Men, but not omniscient. He takes notice of a particular
passage in that Author of which the Commentators had failed to give a right
Explication, but says he, (...), No man sees all things. A severe Censure!

V. He condemns Meursius of Ignorance. Ibid.


W. It Is false. The Dr. has indeed, p. 40. these words concerning Meursius,
Horum versuum ignoratione tota via erravit Joannes Meursius. The meaning of
which is this: Julius Pollux, l. 7. c. 33. produces upon a certain occasion the
Authority of that Ancient Comic Poet Eubulus, and gives it in Eubulus his own
words. That Quotation being written in Iambic Verse (a sort of Meter next to
Prose) and having nothing in it of a Poetical Air (as containing only a
Catalogue of Names) and standing in Pollux continued with the rest of the Test;
Meursius mistakes it for the words of Pollux himself, and not of the Author
whose name Pollux cites to it: and horum versuum ignoratione, mistaking this
Quotation for Prose, whereas indeed it was Verse; and taking it for the words
of Pollux, whereas they were indeed Eubulus's; upon this mistake, tota via
erravit, he was quite out in ^his Explication of that passage. But that, Sir,
was a mistake (as any one that shall consult the place will see) more easily
committed than corrected. And Dr. Bentley's taking notice of it was no
condemning Meursius of Ignorance. Show me where in any of his writings, Dr.
Bentley calls Meursius an ignorant Man, and I Will retract every word I have
spoken on his behalf. Sir, I must tell you again, that before you write any
more Critical Books, you must understand Latin a little better, and learn to
translate properly.

V. ibid.
He condemns Quintilian too: As if Quintilian did not know the true reading of
a word in Cicero, as well as Dr. Bentley. But I thought Quintilian a creditable
Authority.

W. Credible, Sir, you mean. But I have mended your Form for you upon this
Article. What you speak of is this passage in Tully, De inventione, hujus
constitutionis Hermagor as inventor esse existimatur. And Ibid. Quod si magnam
in his Hermagor as habuisset facultatem. In both these places Quintilian reads
it Hermagora. I dare say, the ingenious Mr. Boil, who, it is plain, by his
Style, has a Musical Ear; after all which (rather than lose a flourish) he
has said upon the matter, is on the Dr's side against Quintilian. With the Dr.
stand all the MSS. and so would any man that has aures non Asininas. But I
believe, as to this affair, you are sincere, and do think the Dr. too
presumptuous.

V. Nay, the Dr. says, that though Tully himself should affirm he had written
so; yet the Dr. would not believe Tully himself. No, Dr. Bentley would not
submit to Tully himself. Tully the Master of Elcquence and Standard of good
Language.

W. It Is true the Dr. does say, ( p. 80.) Ego vero Ciceronem ita scripsisse ne
ipsi quidem Cicernoi affirmanti crediderim. Bold words, I confess. But Sir, you
must allow the Dr. to rhetoricate now and then. I have known an whole Book, as
large as yours and mine put together, made up of nothing but Rhetorications;
and yet it took very well and turned to better account to the Bookseller, than
the best that ever he printed.

V. He calls Malela a Mule

W. Nay the Dr. is very rude to Malela, P. 11. V. D. D. H. Hodii, Prolegom. in
Malel.
that is the truth on it. Make a Collection, Sir, of the Dr's Complements upon
his Author Malela, and print them by way of a second Appendix to the next
Edition of your Book. You Will expose him most terribly. Amabo te, Syrisce;
serione haec an joco? Quae te enim larvae atque intemperiae agitabant cum haec
scriberes? (...); Muli sunt ista, non hominis -- Os hominis! Oh hominis
stuporem! ab is it a pecude, etc. These are the Dr's Civilities to the Author of
the foregoing Papers. But as for your own Civilities, Sir, in the following
part of the same page (11.) I leave them to be fairly divided between your self
and your Friends.

V. He indites and arraigns the Reverend Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Eusebius, Theodoret, and Athenagoras of Forgery.

W. It Is a most notorious falsehood.

V. He flies higher and brings the Rational and Learned S. Paul under his
Pounces. P. 17.


W. Very clumsily expressed, Sir. Dr. Bentley is not the first man that has
offered at a Conjectural Emendation of the Text of the New Testament. I hope,
Sir, though you talk so much of Scripture, Fathers, and Councils; yet you are
no Clergyman. I should be very sorry to hear, that a man who takes such
delight in reviling his Betters belongs to the Gown.

V. P. 23.
He falls foul upon his most beloved Friend Dr. Hody, exposing his Exposition
of the Orphic Ericapaeus with an air peculiar to himself.

W. The Reverend and Learned Dr. Hody is Dr. Bentley's most beloved Friend.
Amicissimus noster atque eruditissimus HODIUS are the Dr's own words, ep. p. 1.
to which he adds, p. 93. cui multum olim debebit historia Ecclesiastica.

But what a strange thing is this! That a man should set up for a Critic and
Censor of other men's works, without having ever read so much as the very Title
page of the Book upon which he is making his Reflections. Sir, if you had but
read so much as the Title Page to Malela's Chronology (as it is very plain
Latin, I believe you could have construed it) you would have found, that Dr.
Hody was no more concerned in this Exposition of the Orphic Ericapaeus than
your self. The Title Page of that Book bears, JO ANNIS ANTIOCHENI, etc. cum
interpret. and Notis EDM. CHILMEAD^ -- Praemittitur dissertatio de Authore per
HUMFREDUM HODIUM. Dr. Hody, you see, Sir, was neither the Interpreter nor
Commentator upon that Book, but only the Editor, and Writer of the Dissertation
concerning the Anthor. And yet this same most horrible Blunder you have over
again, p 89. Or if you had turned to the place it self, that you are speaking
of, Malel. Chronogr. p. 90. you would have found, that this Exposition, as it
was not Dr. Hody's, so neither was it Mr. Chilmead's, but Mr. I. Gregory's,
taken out of his Miscellany Tracts published in English 4 to. p. 147. Here Is a
Critic for you, as well read in what be has not seen, as in what he has.

V. Despising the Author as well as the Criticism with an, it is not my
province to trample on what lies prostrate at my feet.

W. But (...), is, mortuis insilire, Sir. To trample on those that lie
prostrate, as dead men in their Graves, not as vanquished Enemies at the feet
of the Conqueror. You must learn to construe Greek and Latin, Sir, before you
write any more Books in Critic. Yet even did this man think himself good
enough to undertake Dr. Bentley.

Observe it, Reader, and consider the consequence: when once Banter has broke
in upon a man's Reputation, how securely Ignorance will follow its Leader.

I have done with you, Sir. And I think there is not one single Article
advanced against the Dr. throughout your whole Book, of which I have not given
a fair account. Or if some little things may have escaped me, I promise you, to
give them, upon demand, the regard they shall deserve. As for what I have
written, some few little odd Exceptions you may make to here and there a
particular passage: I saw them, and I passed them over; I was willing to leave
you here and there a Cavilling Gap, and 'twere but on purpose to draw you on,
and lay before you the Temptation of exposing your self to fresh Disgraces. But
take my advice, Sir, Fas est and ab host doceri: P. 3.
Return your Sword into its Scabbard, and let us hear no more of you. You are
not a person made for the humbling of Dr. Bentley. You have not the way of
doing these things; The Style, the Wit, and the Delicate Turn: nothing in you
but blunt Confidence. Your Friends (if you have any that will deal freely with
you) will tell you the same.

One word to the Postscript, and I have done. That that Postscript is not of
your own writing, I have before told you, I am certain. My reason for it is,
because it is written in English, in a Style and Language that a man may
understand it. Be the Author of it who he will; all that I shall say to him is
this; That since he has so officiously made all the Malice and Ignorance of
your Book his own: all that is said to you let him take to himself.

I had designed in imitation of your Honorable Patron's charitable
Instructions to Dr. Bentley, to have concluded my Address to you also with two
or three Articles of Advice. But I am afraid 'twould be lost Labor. And
besides, several hints of this Nature you will find loosely scattered abroad in
the foregoing Papers, which you may easily draw together, and make what use of
them you please. One thing let me most seriously and importunately beg of you,
which is this; If you are resolved still to go on writing in this kind, let the
Bible alone. For in good earnest, it is a most scandalous thing, to see a man so
gravely quoting Texts of Scripture, when he is upon so unchristian a work as is
that of bearing false Witness against his Neighbor. I am,

SIR, Your Unknown, etc.

APPENDIX.
TO the Reader whose Curiosity shall lead him to collate the MS. at the
Half Moon with the Dr's printed Collection, I have yet a farther Request to
make, which is this; That he would at the same time collate the Countenance of
the Bookseller there with his Appendix. This Appendix of Mr. Bennet's, I hear,
is looked upon as an unanswerable piece, and such as sticks harder upon the Dr.
than any thing that has yet been printed against him. As for my part, I have a
clear different notion of it, and think that Mr. Bennet could not have done the
Dr. a greater piece of service than he has by writing this Appendix, wherein
he has so fairly driven the matter to an head, and let such light into the
cause, that it can be no longer a Dispute, where the Quarrel began, and what
was that unsufferable affront which rendered the Dr. an Enemy unfit to receive
Quarter. As it principally relates to some private Transactions between the Dr.
and himself, it cannot be expected that I should account for every Particular.
I shall only select out of it some of the more remarkable passages, and raise
my Queries upon them.

Mr. Bennet's Appendix, p. 99. I applied [ my self to the Dr. for the use of
the MS. not as his Majesty's Library Keeper, but] as a Friend very conversant
in these things, who lived not far from the Royal Library, and could procure
the MS. for me: n. b. as a Friend.

Ibid. p. 102. The Dr. called in every now and then at my Shop, for we were
then in good term; together, and he was pleased to consult me sometimes about
Matters in my way.

Hereupon let the Collator look Mr. Bennet full in the face, and ask him a
civil Question or two.

Query. And were not those disobliging Expressions relating to Mr. Boil and
the work he was upon, uttered by Dr. Bentley during the time that the Dr. and
your self, Mr. Bennet, were very good Friends together, and while the Dr. was
so familiar and confiding with you, as to consult you sometimes about Matters
in your way? And particularly was it not within this Period of time that the
Dr. threw out that capitally great and caetera Reflection which you speak of,
page 131? And is it not enough to make a man afraid, Mr. Bennet, of calling in
at the Sign of the Half Moon? and ought not a man to have a care how he moves
his Lips there? least his words should be caught up as they drop from his
Mouth, and afterward, it may be, affidavited against him, put into print, and
made part of a Lampoon upon him. These are dangerous Considerations, Mr.
Bennet, and a sufficient caution to a man, how he enters into too near a
familiarity with the Bookseller at the Half Moon. For though you and I may
stand at present in good terms with each other, yet who knows, who and who may
be together a Twelvemonth hence?

Upon this I expect Mr. Bennet should reply to this purpose.

Mr. Bennet. What a malicious Suggestion is here? Why have I not told you
already in print, that I did all I could to avoid the doing what you charge me
with? And Sincerely, Sir, and I protest, and I solemnly declare, and all that I
say is true to a Title: and I hope you will believe me, Sir, sooner than you will
Dr. Bentley; I all along concealed from Mr. P. 107.
Boil the many slight and injurious things Dr. Bentley threw out now and then
both of him and the work he was about. And sincerely, Sir, P. 113.
I sincerely endeavored as much and as long as I was able to have prevented
the breach. For though this Controversy has turned to good account to me: yet
I wish with all my heart I could have kept clear of it my self. For in the way
of my business, you know, P. 106.
it had been more to my advantage to have preserved the good will of both of
them.

Collator. But of the two, you were like to be less a loser by losing the Dr.
than by losing Mr. Boil. For it is well known, Mr. Boil is not in this affair
a single man, and had he gone to another Shop, he would have carried off an whole
shoal along with him.

Mr. B. You mistake me, Sir, I am above those things.

Coll. Why did you mention them then?

Mr. B. But how could I help it? Mr. Boil calls me to account over and over,
and examines me so strictly, Mr. (...)
there was no avoiding telling the world all I knew. For, Sir, Mr. Boyle's
whole Book, in a manner, turns upon mine and Dr. King's Depositions. For had
not we made out the Affront for him, how would he have been able to have made
out his Book?

Coll. Very true. But methinks your Depositions lean a little on one side.

Mr. B. Sincerely, Sir, and I protest, all that I have said, is punctually
true, true to a Title, Sir. If Dr. Bentley tells stories of me, God forgive him
for it. But as for what I have deposed; Sir, I have set my hand to it, and am
ready (if duly required) to take my Oath upon it.

Coll. All these Asseverations might have been spared, and the cause have fared
never the worse. But you have given two accounts, Mr. Bennet: which of those
two accounts is true to a Tittle? The first account given in Mr. Boyle's Book,
or the second account of your own Appendix.

Mr. B. Both of them, Sir; true to a Tittle both of them. And I am ready to
take my oath upon it. Sincerely, Sir, I am: I solemnly affirm.

Coll. But Mr. Bennet, he that takes upon him to speak as a sworn Witness ought
to declare the whole Truth, as well as nothing but the Truth. In such cases
purposely to conceal any considerable circumstance is next of kin to the
inventing of one; since the Truth may be on both sides equally disguised. And a
wilful disguising of the Truth, whether it be by Substraction or Addition,
with the Solemnity of an Oath, or of an Asseveration equivalent to an Oath,
deserves an harder name than I will give it. And so Mr. Bennet, let us compare a
little your first account with your second.

Mr. B. They are both of them punctually true, true to a Tittle. Coll. Truth is
one; and I am sure these are two.

Mr Bennet's first account in Mr. Boyle's Book, p. 6. I was employed by the
Honorable Mr. Boil (and by him only) to borrow the MS. of Phalaris from Dr.
Bentley. After about nine Months. solicitation it was delivered into my
Custody.

Coll. Was Dr. Bentley Library Keeper, Mr. Bennet, during this nine Months time
that you were soliciting for the MS?

Mr. B. I crave your pardon for that, Sir: you don't find me saying any such
thing.

Coll. Ay, but Mr. Bennet, to deal plainly with you, here were you guilty of a
very fraudulent Concealment. No honest man, or one that had been minded to do
Justice, would have expressed himself to loosely when he was speaking as upon
Oath. This was a very gross Omission, Mr. Bennet, and it is to be seared, a
wilful one. The Dr's being Library Keeper, or not Library Keeper during that
nine Months time, is so material a circumtance, that it gives a clear different
cast to the whole matter of fact, and makes all Mr. Boyle's Book run upon a
very foul mistake: and it is scarce to be imagined, that the Omission of a
circumstance upon which so much depended, and which expressed would have
spoiled all Mr. Boyle's Book, was purely an Oversight.

Mr. B. This business of the nine Months Solicitation is fairly stated in my
Appendix.

Coll. Ay, Mr. Bennet. But that was not till Dr. Bentley had first stated it
for you, and stated it upon such Authorities there was no contesting. Otherwise
the Town might still have been, by the help of your faithful relation, with
Mr. Boyle's Paraphrase upon it, no less than eight Months in nine out in their
reckoning. But let us see how Mr. Boil manages your first account, and what
Explication he gives of it.

Mr. B. p 2. About four or five years ago, the worthy Dean of Christ-Church,
Dr. Aldrich, desired me to undertake an Edition of Phalaris. In order to it a
Manuscript in the King's Library was to be consulted. I sent to Mr. Bennet, my
Bookseller in London to get the Manuscript, and desired him to apply himself to
Dr. Bentley in my name for the use of it, not doubting in the least a ready
compliance with such a Request from one of his Station and Order. After an
expectation of many Months, Mr. Bennet sends me at last a Collation of part of
the MS. with this account, that he had with a great difficulty, and after long
delays, got the MS. into his hand. And again, p. 19. The Reader is desired to
take notice, that there was about nine Months Solicitation used to procure it;
a longer time than -- the Ceremony of his Inauguration to his Library-Keeper's
place could require.

Sparkling Lines! in which, if there be any design beyond Phrase, it must be
this, to intimate to the Reader, that the Dr. was, for at least, a great part
of that nine Months time Library Keeper, and had the MS. in his custody. Or if
we must not look for meaning here, where he is only pouring out words, yet in
the former passage he seems to speak plain Sense, and in the more simple and
historical Style.

Query Therefore; what Station can Mr. Boil there intend? must it not be that
of Library Keeper to his Majesty? Nay, is not this made the aggravating
circumstance of the whole matter of fact, that one in the Dr's Station should
refuse so common a favor, Mr. B p. 9.
(such Mr. Bail esteems the use of the King's MSS.) to a person of his
Quality. That a Library Keeper should be no more obliging to a Gentleman
Scholar. Id p 11, 17. Id. p. 15, 267, conf. cum 20, 40, 105, and p. 220. etc.
passim.
That the Library at St. James 's should be, next to that at Fez, (a strange
leap of Thought the most inaccessible in the world; that there should be no
approaching the King's Library without a Fee; that the King of England's
Library should have such a Dunce for it is Keeper, so poor a Scholar, and so
little knowing how to behave himself to a Gentleman, that he ought to be turned
out of his place. But I need not tell any one who has but once cast his Eyes
upon Mr. Boyle's Book, how plentiful he is of his Civilities to the
Library Keeper at St. James's. So I am sure the Town took it, that the whole
ground of the Quarrel between Dr. Bentley and Mr. Boil lay in the Dr's
refusing to a person of Mr. Boyle's Quality the use of a Book out of the
Library of which he was Keeper, and consequently the proper person to whom such
an Application was to be made. This false representation of the matter of fact
was necessary in order to the use Mr. Boil had to make of it, which was to
justify the peculiar Liberties it was resolved that young Gentleman should
take with one of his Majesty's Servants. This mistake Mr. Bennet's first
account favors, and upon that first account of Mr. Bennet does Mr. Boil build
his whole Book. The disobliging delays, and great difficulties Dr. Bentley put
them to in procuring the MS. and when at last they had it, the little time he
let it lie in their hands. All which being a partial, disguised, and distorted
relation of the matter of fact, and so contrived on purpose to mislead the
Reader, he that shall publicly attest it, by giving it under his hand in
print, and make an offer of affirming it upon Oath for a faithful relation,
Append. p. 93.
deserves as course a Complement as the Dr. gave him.

But let us proceed to Mr. Bennet's second account, and see how he qualifies
the matter there.

Mr. Bennet's Appendix, p. 99. There was not a single word in my relation, that
does in the least imply me to have thought the Dr. Library Keeper the whole
time I asked him for the MS. I only applied to him as a Friend, very conversant
in these things, who lived not far from the Royal Library, had an interest
there, and could have procured the MS. for me.

Idem, p. 103. I never went to Dr. Bentley upon the Errant of borrowing the MS.
I only spoke to him about it sometimes as he stopped at my Shop, or passed by it.
Though I asked him so often (twenty times at least) that I might well say I
solicited for it.

Idem, p. 109. I admit so far of the Dr's account, that the MS. was delivered,
used, and returned within a Month (or rather five weeks) after it was in his
Custody. But I applied to him seven or eight Months before he was
Library Keeper.

Idem, p. 110. He had interest enough to have procured it me, etc.

Idem. p. 111. I do not say that the Dr. could have LENT me the Book much
sooner than he did. But that he could have GOT the Book to (...) be lent to me:
or at least, that so he pretended: and that be did so I most sincerely affirm.

Upon this first and second account of Mr. Bennet's, the Collator might teize
him with a world of troublesome questions. As Coll. Had you orders, Mr. Bennet,
from Mr. Boil to procure the MS. for him nine Months before you got it into
your hands? Mr. B. At least Coll. And he directed you to Dr. Bentley for it,
and to make use of his name to the Dr. for it? Mr. B. Yes. Coll. Nine Months
before you obtained it? Mr. B. Yes. Coll. This was necessary to put a fair
gloss upon the matter, but it looks somewhat suspicious. The Dr. was not
Library Keeper nine Months before you had it? Mr. B. No. Coll. Or in prospect
of being Library Keeper? Mr. B. That he might be For there was a Rumor of his
standing fair for that Office some considerable time before he actually entered
upon it. Coll. What nine Months before? Mr. B. Perhaps. Coll Scarce so, Mr.
Bennet. For I am apt to believe, that for some part of those nine Months, Mr.
Justel, the Dr's Predecessor in that Office, might be living. And Mr. Boil
being a perfect Stranger to the Dr. it does not look very probable, that he
should send you to Dr. Bentley in his name, for a MS. out of the Royal Library,
when the Dr. neither was Library Keeper, nor at that time so much as in
prospect of being so. I am rather inclined to believe, that upon Recollection
you would find, that Mr. Boil for some of the former of those nine Months,
only gave you orders in general to procure him the MS. and being so long
delayed, in casting up the accounts draws the whole into one Sum, and, to
avoid Fractions, throws it all upon the Dr. Recollect your Thoughts, Mr.
Bennet, and judge of the probability of the thing. But again, Mr. Bennet. Did
Mr. Boil ever write any thing himself to Dr. Bentley about the MS? Mr. B. Not
that I know of. Coll Why then Mr. Boil was not affronted by the Dr. to near
that degree he would make the world believe. How can he make such a stir about
being refused a favor which he never condescended to ask? Mr. B. But he
employed me to ask it for him: and that is the same thing. Coll. No, Mr. Bennet,
not altogether the same thing. But to let that pass. How long was the Dr.
actually Library Keeper and in possession of the Key, before you had the MS?
Mr. B. Not long actually Library Keeper. Coll. But how long? Mr. B. A
Fortnight, or three Weeks, it may be, or thereabouts. Coll. What a fall is
here, Mr. Bennet? This nine Months delay, I find, is sunk into a Fortnight or
three Weeks: Is this your faithful Relation? Mr. B. But he lived at that end
of the Town, and he had interest enough there to have procured it for me, if he
had been so minded. Coll. But suppose the Dr. did not think himself obliged,
Mr. Bennet, to runs on your Errands? Mr. B. My Errands? 'twas Mr. Boyle's
Errands. Coll. My. Boil never wrote a word to him about it. Mr. B. But when I
spoke to him of it, he promised that he would help me to it, p. 100, 111.
and that I sincerely affirm. Coll. That is, he would help you to it, when it
should come to be in his own power to help you to it. And so he did. For no
sooner was he actually possessed of his place, than that he delivered it to you.
Did he promise to run about from one to another to BORROW it for you? But how
long was it after he was actually in possession of his Office ever you had the
MS? Mr. B. About a Fortnight or three Weeks, I tell you; or it may be, somewhat
more. Coll. But how long do ye think at most? Mr. B. Why, it may be, a Month.
See what I have written, p. 105, 106. Coll. I have read those pages you refer
to, and considered them. There Is nothing there but wild and groundless
Supposition, all of your own making. And as for every word you have said there,
I am as much at liberty to suppose the direct contrary to what you suppose. And
how then would you help your self? And therefore passing over that for a
Nothing, let me ask you, How many times were you with the Dr. about it after he
was Library Keeper? Mr. B. With him about it? I was never with him about i^ at
all, either before or after. I only spoke to him of it, as I met him now and
then by chance, P. 103.
There was no need of my taking journeys to him, 'twas but just giving him a
word or two, now and then, as he stepped into my Shop or passed by it. There was
nothing at all of trouble in it. Coll. So us in your second account indeed, but
in your first account which you sent to Mr. Boil to Oxford, 'twas not without
great difficulty, that after long delays, at last you got it into your hands.
Mr. B. Why, I asked him for it so often, twenty times at least. Coll. But
without ever stepping twenty Inches out of your way for it. A great difficulty!
And yet both your accounts are true to a Tittle. Well! but after he was
Library Keeper you soon had it. Mr. B. But not what he Dr. says, as soon as he
was Library Keeper. There I think I have caught the Dr. But see the whole
matter in my Appendix it self, p. 104, 105. Coll. But to shorten the matter,
tell it your self by word of Mouth. Mr. B. Why then I say I have caught the Dr.
in a falsehood, Sir, and can prove it upon him out of his own Mouth. Coll.
That Is a Complement very familiar with you. But how? Mr. B. Why, he says, that
as soon as it was in his power he gave it me. But it was not till three Weeks
after, or, it may be, more. And is that as soon as? Coll. Why no truly. In
strictness of Speech, he should as soon as ever he had received the Key,
immediately, forthwith, the very same Minute have run into the Library,
Snatched up the MS. clapped it in his Pocket, and without staying so much as to
comb his Periwig, have posted away with it to the Half Moon. And then he might
have said as soon as. Mr. B. Do you banter me? It may cost you dear. I have
them that can banter with you for your ears, in Verse and Prose. Coll. But how
long was it after he had it in his power ever you received it? Mr. B. Why three
Weeks, I tell you, or, it may be, more. And is that, as soon as? Coll. But how
did you come by it at last? Mr. B. Why I met him in the Street, I renewed my
Request to him about the MS. He told me I should have it, bad me send my
Prentice to him, I sent him, and he delivered it. Coll. And so you had it? Mr.
B. And so I had it. But not as soon as -- There the Dr's Memory failed him.
Coll. But had you seen the Dr. after he was Library Keeper any time before this
time that you asked him for the MS and had it? Mr. B. I had asked him for it
twenty times before. Coll. What, after he was Library Keeper? Had you so much
as once seen him, or spoke to him, or sent to him about it, after he was
Library Keeper, before this time that you asked for it, and had it? Mr. B. Not
after he was Library Keeper, but I know not how many times before. Coll. That
is before it was in his power to lend it you. But after it was in his power you
no sooner asked than received. Mr. B. But he might have procured it for me
before. Coll. And that is all you have to say for your self. There Is not a word
of this procuring it for you in your first account. A poor come-off, Mr.
Bennet. Mr. B. But how will you reconcile the Dr. with himself? In one place he
says, As soon as it was in my power, I went voluntarily and offered it him: in
another place; Mr. Bennet meeting me again renewed the former Request, and I
readily granted it; and in another place, that he ordered me to send my
Prentice to his Lodgings for it. These are Inconsistencies which Dr. Bentley
may perhaps reconcile, but I dare say, no body else can. Coll. You have learned
the confident Turn, I see. But how, where, what are these Inconsistencies? Mr.
B. How could the Dr. voluntarily come and offer it me, and yet not grant it,
till meeting him again I renewed my Request to him? Coll. In the first place,
Mr. Bennet, I must observe to you, that this little variation of circumstance
in the Dr's relating the matter is very inconsiderable, and such as does not
affect the main of the cause; And therefore not worth the while of having a Lie
made for it. And, Mr. Bennet, after all the pains that you and your Friends
have been at to prove the Dr. a Liar in print, you must still give me leave to
believe of the Dr. what you desire the Reader to believe of your self, P. 120.
that he is not a man, who loves to tell Lies for no manner of purpose. For
whether the Dr. ( after his being actually Library Keeper) first spoke to you
of the Manuscript, or you first spoke to the Dr. the case remains still the
same, that, after he was Library Keeper, you no sooner asked for it than you
had it. But secondly, I see not that Inconsistency in the Dr's relation upon
which you make such a Flourish. For let me but suppose what I believe to be in
fact true, that this meeting was the first Interview the Dr. and you had after
his being possessed of the Keys: then, Mr. Bennet, there is nothing more
natural on both sides, than either for you to have renewed your Request to the
Dr. about the MS. or for the Dr. to have made the offer without your renewing
it. So that the whole matter lies upon the chance of who should speak first.
Let me feign a little Dialogism between your self and the Dr. upon this
occasion. Meeting him therefore by chance in the Streets (as Fleetstreet
suppose) you make a stop, and thus accost him.

Mr. Bennet. Sir, your humble Servant. Mr. Boil has wrote to me again about
the MS. he begins to grow impatient.

Dr. Bentley. That Is the business I were coming to you about, Mr. Bennet: I
have now at last got the Key of the Library. Send but your Prentice to my
Lodgings for it, it is at your service.

Or let us turn it a little otherwise.

Dr. Bentley. Oh, Mr. Bennet, I am glad to meet you. I were just a coming to
you. Well, I have got the Key into my hands at last, and now if you will send to
my Lodgings for it, the MS. is at your Service.

Mr, Bennet. I am glad of that, Sir. I were just a going to have put you in
mind of it. We have been waiting for it a long time. Mr. Boil begins to be
impatient.

Dr. Bentley. I could not lend it before I had it to lend. As soon as it is in
my keeping, you see, it is ready for you. And pray let the Gentlemen know as
much.

I confess this is a feigned Dialogue; but, I think there is nothing streined
or unnatural in it, and, though I go upon pure dint of Conjecture; yet I fancy
it comes as near to the truth of the fact as any thing you have written, Mr.
Bennet. Upon such an occasion it is scarce possible but that both you should
speak to the Dr. and the Dr. to you about a business which had been so long
depending: and much after the manner I have represented it. And take it which
way you will, whether the Dr. first spoke to you, or you first spoke to the Dr.
the matter comes much to the same; and the Dr. might justly enough at one time
say, that he voluntarily offered it to you; and at another time, that you
renewed your Request to him about it. For both of them may be literally true.
Mr. B. Yes, truly; if you will put words into my Mouth for me, you may make what
you please of me. Coll. Not worse of you than you have made of your self, Mr.
Bennet, by printing such an Appendix to such a Book. Let a By-stander judge
whether there be any thing unnatural in the matter, as I have represented it,
Mr. B. But how can you bring him off as to the other point. I went voluntarily
to him, says the Dr. and offered it him. And yet in another place, I bad him
send his Prentice to me, and he should have it. How could he bring it me
himself, and yet bid me send my Prentice for it? Coll. Bring it you himself?
Mr. B. Yes, bring it me himelf, for that his words were evidently designed to
imply, Coll. What words? Mr. B. These words, I went voluntarily, and offered it
to him. Coll. Do those words evidently imply, that he brought it to you
himself? Mr. B. Yes, marry, do they. Coll. Not at all, Mr. Bennet. Mr. B. But I
say they do though. Coll. But I say they do not though. What do these words, I
went voluntarily, and offered it to him, necessarily imply, that he put it up
in his Pocket, and delivered it to you with his own hands? Mr. B. I say, that
he designed the Reader should understand it so. Coll. But, I say, he designed
no such thing. For, pray Sir, what did he design in these words; He sent his
Prentice to the Library for it by my Appointment. Mr. B. The meaning of those
words is plain enough. Coll. And these words, coming from the same mouth, make
the meaning of the other words plain beyond the possibility of a
Mis-construction. I voluntarily went and offered it to him. That is, I
voluntarily went and told him, that now the MS was in my keeping Mr. Boil
might command the use of it, and, Mr. Bennet, if you will send your Prentice to
the Library for it, you shall have it. In all this, I defy any Mortal to find
out any Inconsistency or Contradiction. Is there? Syllable here, that implies
the Dr. to have brought it to the Half Moon himself? Mr. B. I say, the Dr.
evidently designed them to imply so. Coll. I say, that is a Lie, Mr Bennet.
Accept of some of your own Civilities. You and your Friends together have given
the Dr. the Lie in Print, and printed Lies upon the Dr. over and over. Accept
of some of your own Civilities. You may have more of them in time, if you go
on. Mr. B. These are gross words and might tempt me (etc p. 109.) but that it is
in my own Shop Coll. True words, Mr. Bennet.

Come, come, Mr. Bennet, after all your Shufflings, and double telling your
Stories, this business of the nine Months Solicitation, the great difficulty,
the disobliging Delays, the rude, uncivil, unmannerly Library Keeper at St.
James's is foul play all over, and direct Misrepresentation. And all Mr.
Boyle's Book, and all the noise it has made in the word, runs upon this foul
account of yours. And that I could out of your own words more palpably confute
and confound you than hither to I have done; put it upon the Trial and I Will
convince you: for (to speak like a Fool) he that draws his Sword in this cause,
throws away the Scabbard. Vindic. p. 31.
What is said already is enough to satisfy an impartial Reader. And as for
them, who having once fallen in with a false Cry, are resolved to persist in
it; let 'em go on: I cannot think it worth the while to wast more Paper in
stopping their mouths. The case is plain; the Dr. accommodated Mr. Boil with
the use of the MS. as soon as 'twas in his power to lend it, and chose rather
to trespass upon the duty of his place, Vid Dr. B's Pref. p. 23.
than to be guilty of any thing that might seem want of Respect to a person of
that Honorable Name.

This Story of the MS. is all in all in Mr. Boyle's Book, and therefore I could
not balk the opportunity of considering it somewhat particularly, though I have
passed by many Arguments, which Mr. Bennet's own words afford against himself;
and particularly as to his careless management of Mr. Boyle's Affairs, and his
unjust charging the Consequences of his own Negligence upon Dr. Bentley. The
sum of the whole is this; that the Dr. lent them the SM. as soon as it was in
his power to lend it; or if they will not admit of that, as soon as; then, that
the only neglect of the Dr. was, that he did not, strictly and literally
speaking, as soon as ever he had gotten the Key of the Library into his
keeping, presently, the first thing he did, put the Book into his Pocket, and
run to the Half Moon with it. For after he was Library Keeper, as soon as they
asked for it, they had it. And before that, the only Omission of the Dr. was,
that he did not upon Mr. Bennet's and no body's else speaking to him of the MS
(and that only now and then by the bye, as he met him by chance) employ his
Interest at the other end of the Town to borrow it for him: that is, That Dr.
Bentley was not more diligent in subsolliciting for Mr. Bennet, than Mr. Bennet
was, in soliciting for Mr. Boil. And if Mr. Bennet cannot out of both his
faithful Relations, his first faithful Relation, and his second faithful
Relation, make any thing more of the matter than this: he must even to work
again, once more expose himself in print, and fall to clubbing for a third
fiathfull Relation. The matter of fact (and I know what I say) in all this
Controversy with Dr. Bentley, when once it comes to be squeezed, contracts
into as narrow a compass as the matter of Learning, and is (I am not afraid to
speak it) all over Misrepresentation.

But the grand Article of their Accusation against the Dr. in reference to the
MS, and that with which Mr. Boil was pleased to commence his Critical War upon
the Library Keeper at St. James's, is still behind, his Rude and hasty way of
recalling it. Not till after nine Months Solicitation could they get it into
their hands, and in less than so many Days it was taken from them again. And
here Mr. Bennet undertakes to prove, that the Dr. Lent them the MS. with a
Design of disappointing them of the use of it. A most unaccountable management!
To Lend a thing with a Design of disappointing the Borrower of the use of it.

Mr. B. I do not directly charge him with having such an Intention. P. ^^^, 127
He himself gave me the hint; and I may, I hope, without offense repeat his own
words. Coll. What that he Lent you the MS. but with a private Design of
disappointing Mr. Boil of the use of it? Mr. B. He made a show of lending it
us. Coll. Made a show of lending it you? I thought he had actually lent it you.
Mr. B. He made a show of lending it us. But that was only to avoid the Scandal
of refusing it; managing things in such a manner, as that he might seemingly
oblige Mr. Boil, and yet certainlainly defeat him. Coll. As how? Mr. B.
Lending us the MS. indeed, and so seemingly obliging Mr. Boil; but taking it
out of our hands before the Collation was finished, and so certain, by
defeating him. Coll. But suppose the collation had been finished before the MS.
had been taken out of your hands; then you had certainly defeated the Dr. And I
think he lost it in your keeping more d^^^ than you ^^eded to have had (...)
hours. So that ^^less the Dr. had known beforehand, that Mr. Bennet would have
proved so Negligent a Man as indeed he did, and have taken no manner of Care of
Mr. Boyles Affair; it is impossible he should have had the least imagination of
disappointing Mr. Boil of the use of the MS, But sure, Mr. Bennet, you did not
write these things to be believed, but to be laughed at.

Mr. B. But why, P. 111.
unless he had had some such Design in his Head, should he not have ordered me
the MS. till just at that particular nick of time, that he was leaving the
Town? and then too, without any Intimation how soon it was to be restored?
Which is a Circumstance that I am very positive in. Coll. I Will tell you why,
Mr. Bennet. Because 'twas but just before just that particular nick of time
that he entered upon the Possession of his Office of Library Keeper to his
Majesty, and consequently not much before just that particular nick of time was
it in his Power to have lent it you. And I think it was very obligingly done of
the Dr. just after he was possessed of the Key of the Library, and just before he
was leaving the Town for some Months together; just at that particular nick of
time, I say, finding that Mr. Bennet had so far forgot his honorable Friend,
as never either to come or send to him about the MS. himself to go to Mr.
Bennet, and put him in mind of sending for it. This is the truth of the Case;
and this does not look as if he had a Design of disappointing Mr. Boil.

But why, Ibid.
when he did at last trust me with the MS. did he not, at the Delivery of it,
give me some Intimation, how soon it was to be restorel, that so I might have
taken Care to have gotten the Collation finished in due time?

Coll. And why, was not that Care taken, whether he had given you any such
Intimation or not? But he did give you such Intimation, and expressly ordered
you to bid your Collator lose no time, for that he was going out of Town for
two Months. Mr. B. This I utterly deny: P. 127.
He gave me no such notice; I protest he did not; No, not the least Intimation
tending that way; No, not so much as in General, or that, I should make what
Dispatch I could. He did not, I solemnly affirm. Coll. A very unlikely thing;
That he should lend you a MS. out of the Kings Library, Dr. B's prof. p. 21.
to keep it as long as you pleased. Men do not use to lend MS. at that rate:
And the Dr. solemnly affirms the contrarry. Mr. B. This is a Circumstance that
I am very positive in. Coll. Yes, Sir, There was an absolute necessity for your
being very positive in this Circumstance. The whole of your Defense depended
upon it: For if the Dr. as soon as it was in his Power, took Care to supply you
with the MS. if he let it lie in your hands more days, than the Collating it
would have taken up hours; and if withal at the Delivery of it, he gave you
notice how soon it was to be restored, and expressly ordered you to lose no
time; then the Consequence is too plain; and that Mr. Boil was disappointed of
the use of the MS. must lie at some other Door than the Dr's. This is a
Circumstance therefore there was a necessity of your being (...) positive in.
And it is very remarkable, and (...) M^. can have read Mr. Bennet's. Appendix
with the least manner of Attention, (...) s^rved it; That Mr. Bennet's (...)
and (...) just as the occasions of the C^^se require. No Man has his (...) at
Command that Mr. Bennet, or better knows his Seasons where to be positive, and
where suspending,

Mr. B. To confirm what I say, here is the Certificate of my Collator.

I do declare, P. 108.
that when Mr. Bennet delivered me the MS. of Phalaris's Epistle, there was no
time set me for the return of it. Geo. GIBSON.

From whence I argue thus. If the Dr. had set me so short a time, when he put
the MS. into my hands, it is utterly improbable, that I should not have given
notice of it to Mr. Gibson; especially apprehending the Collation to be a work
of more trouble than really it was, and knowing Mr. Gibson's hands to be so
full of other Business But that Mr. Gibson had no such notice from the appears
from this Certificate. Coll. Your Argument reduced into Form, I think runs
thus. If Dr. Bentley, at the Delivery of the MS. had given me any notice how
soon it was to be restored, and bid me lose no time, but make all the Dispatch
I could; it is utterly improbable, that I should not have given the like notice
to Mr. Gibson; but no such notice did I give to Mr. Gibson; therefore it is
utterly improbable, that Dr. Bentley should have given me any such notice.

Now in this same Appendix of Mr. Bennet's p 107. I meet with part of a Letter
from Mr. Boil of Christ-Church to his Solicitor of the Half Moon, dated May
the 1st. 1694. and beginning in these words.

I am almost ashamed to trouble you any more, Mr. Bennet, about the MS. I wish
I had it: But, if at all, I must have it very quickly.

From whence I argue thus; if Mr. Bennet had received any such Letter from Mr.
Boil, requiring the Collation of the MS. to be transmitted to him with the
utmost Expedition, it is utterly improbable, that he should not have given some
notice of it to Mr. Gibson; but no such notice did Mr. Bennet give to Mr.
Gibson; therefore no such Letter did he receive from Mr. Boil.

I think this Argument of mine runs exactly parallel with that of Mr. Bennet.
But it is certain, Mr. Bennet did receive such a Letter from Mr. Boil,
requiring the Collation of the MS. to be procured for him with the utmost
Dispatch, and yet gave Mr. Gibson no such notice; therefore it is not at all
improbable, but that, at the Delivery of the MS. he may have received the like
Intimation from Dr. Bentley with the like indifference.

Upon this Certificate of Mr. Bennet's Collator therefore I may remark. First,
that it does not prove what Mr. Bennet affirms, that is, That the Dr. did not,
at the Delivery of the MS. given Mr. Bennet any Intimation how soon it was to
be restored: Which this Certificate of Mr. Bennet's Collator no More proves,
than it does, that Mr. Bennet never received any such Letter from Mr. Boil.
What Mr Bennet therefore affirms, That this Certificate of his Collator does
not prove; No, not so much as to an appearance. But Secondly, what Mr. Bennet
would fain deny; That it does prove beyond the Possibility of Contradiction.
Which is, that though the Library Keeper at St. James's bears the blame, yet,
it is as clear as the San, the Bookseller at the Half Moon was the only Person
in fault, that Mr. Boil was disappointed of the use of the MS. Witness. Mr.
Boyle's Letter, Mr. Gibson's Certificate.

Here Is a Letter from Mr. Boil to his Solicitor, requiring the Affair of the
MS. to be expedited for him with the utmost Dispatch; I must have it, if at
all, very quickly. Who'd have expected now upon the receipt of this Letter but
that Mr. Bennet should forthwith, the first thing he did, have posted away to
Westminster, to have acquainted the Dr. with Mr. Boyle's occasions? But no such
thing was done. P. 103.
The Dr. lived at a Distance from Paul's Church-Tard; and 'twas not (as he
himself has told us) Mr. Bennet's way of Soliciting to take Journeys, or run
on other Body's Errands. His way of Soliciting was only to speak to the Dr.
now and then about the MS. occasionally, and as he met him by chance Nor could
the pressing Instances of this Letter of Mr. Boyle's, of May the 1st. put him
out of his Pace. He is still content to wait till the Dr. should chance, to
come that way, and either step into his Shop, or pass by the Door, and he
should chance to be in the way to speak to him. And yet, all this while Mr.
Boil in haste for the M^ I must have it, if at all, very quickly. (...) but as
Mr. Boyle's Letter was luckily dated just about that particular nick of time,
that the Dr. was entering upon the full Possession of his Office, it being now
in his Power to lend the MS. accordingly, not many days after the receipt of
this letter, the Dr. comes to Mr. Bennet, Orders him to send his Prentice to
the Library for it, and delivers it. And what does Mr. Bennet do with it when
he has it? He commits the Collating of it to a person whose hands he knew to
be so full of other Business, that he could not make any tolerable Dispatch
with it: a Corrector to a Press, who could allow (as Mr. Bennet most
Hexametrically expresses it) no part of his days from that laborious Service,
P. 127.
and had only some few Evening hours at his own Disposal: Nay, P. 128.
and into His too, without giving him any notice in what haste the young
Gentleman at Oxford was for the Collation. P. 126.
For the true Reason of Mr. Gibson's being so much behind hand in the
Collation, was because the Press employed him, and left him no hours to
himself, but in the Evening: And because he had not been careful to make the
[very] best use of those. And the true Reason why, Mr. Gibson made not the best
use of his hours, was, because Mr Bennet had not, when he delivered him the MS.
limited him in his time.

Mr. B. No, For Dr. Bentley had not in That matter so limited me. I mean, P.
127.
not tied me up to days or hours; or given me any notice of the time fixed, for
his Worcester Journey. And that is all my Collator says, that there was no time
set him for the Return of it. That is, no time set him to a day. Coll. Nay, but
you say, That the Dr. had not given you any Intimation; No, not so much as in
General, That you should make what Dispatch you could with it. And as much at
large, it seems, you lest you Collator. For when the Dr. at near a Weeks end
called upon you for the MS. there was not so much of it Collated, as might have
been done, and that leisurely too, and without making very great haste, P. 129.
at one Evenings sitting. But as for you and your Collator, divide the Fault
between your selves upon as equal Terms as you can; though, I think, you have
fairly discharged Mr. Gibson. That Dr. Bentley should bear the blame, is
altogether unreasonable. But 'twas not Mr. Boyle's business to see Faults in
their right places.

We have seen here one Instance of Mr. Bennet's Talent at denying a thing very
positively: I cannot forbear presenting the Reader with another of the same
kind.

The Dr. had said, That when the MS. was delivered to him, He had not the least
Suspicion, that the Collation was not finished. They had, had more days to
compare it in, than they needed hours; the Bearer at the Delivery of it
intimated nothing to the contrary; if they had had any occasion for the farther
use of it, he might have expected, upon his Return to the Library, which was
several Months before Mr. Boyle's Book was Printed, to have heard farther from
them; which he not having done, what reason had he to think, but that they had
finished their whole work with it?

This however was a Circumstance, there was a necessity of their Denying, and
that very positively. Which therefore Mr. Bennet has done in the following Form
of words.

With what Conscience can the Dr. pretend to say, That when the MS. was carried
down to him at Westminster [a little afterwards] he had no Suspicions, that
the Collation was not finished? Unless he means, That he did not suspect it,
because he most certainly knew it. GOD forgive him this Untruth; which with
several others, I hope, before he goes out of the World, he will be so just, both
to himself and me, as to retract publicly.

And is not this denying a thing very positively? Now must I crave Mr. Bennet's
Pardon if I tell him, That what he here so positively avers for a certainty, is
not only an uncertainty, but an absolute Impossibility.

But how can that be? Will Mr. Bennet say, V. p. 124
Does not the Certificate of my Collator expressly confirm it? -- I very well
remember -- Here we find, that when the Dr. called upon me for the MS. and I
sent my Man to the Collator's for it, word was brought that he had not finished
the Collation: Notwithstanding which, the Dr. utterly refuses to spare it any
longer, but sends my Man a second time for it with express Orders, to have it
brought to him immediately; himself staying in my Shop and waiting the Return
of it. And that, That was the true Reason, why Mr. Gibson could Collate no more
of the Epistles. With what Conscience then can the Dr. pretend to say, that
when the MS. was sent down to him at Westminster (a little afterward) he had
no Suspicions, that the Collation was not finished? For could my Collator go on
with collating the MS. when the MS. it self was taken out of his hands?

But hold, Mr. Bennet; you are somewhat too hasty in your Conclusions. P. 98.
From your own Account it appears, that it was on a Saturday Noon, That he
called upon you for the MS. and was told, that the Collation was not then
finished. He did not thereupon forthwith, Dr's praef. P.
and immediately take it away with him, as most certainly he would have done,
had he had a private Design of disappointing Mr. Boil of the use of it. He
only ordered you, without fail to send it to his Lodgings some time that
Afternoon; beyond which time he did indeed, (and he has given a good Reason,
why) refuse to leave it in your hands. So that you had still half a day good;
in less time than which (as the Dr. has proved by an Experiment of his own
making) the whole Book might have been collated, though not one stroke had been
set to it before. Nor need we suppose your Collator able to Dispatch such a
piece of work altogether, as expeditiously as the Dr. since having had it in
his hands for so many days before, the Dr. might reasonably then presume him
nearer the end than the beginning. Nor can I imagine, but that had you
represented to him the pressingness of the occasion, your Collator would have
found means of borrowing from the Press three or four hours even of Daylight,
to have devoted to the Service of Mr. Boil. If the MS. was taken out of your
Collators hands at Noon, and if the Dr knew as much (though that is more than
the Dr. remembers) yet it being left in your hands, in three or four minutes
space it might have been put into your Collator's again; which that it was not,
was more than the Dr. could certainly know, or more than he had any reason to
suspect. Unless he had then most certainly known, that Mr. Boyle's Solicitor
would have taken no more Care of Mr. Boyle's Concerns, than he now appears to
have done. So that the Dr. though he was told indeed, when he called upon you
for the MS. at Noon, that the Collation was not then finished; yet having left
it in your hands at Noon, not knowing how much of it then remained unfinished;
nay, the Collation of the whole MS. (which is much shorter than the printed
Book) being the work of less than half a day: Whether it were sooner or later,
in the Afternoon, that the Book was sent to his Lodgings, it is Impossible
(unless the Bearer had given him such Information) for him, to have known, that
the Collation of it was not then finished. Nothing less, I say, than absolutely
impossible, that he should certainly have known it, and most highly
unreasonable had it been in him to have suspected it. And for a Man to averr,
and that so very positively as Mr. Bennet here does, for Certainties, not only
Uncertainties, but Impossibilities, argues as great a want of common Sense as
of Conscience.

Ay but, faith Mr. Bennet, here the Dr's Memory has failed him as to one
particular. The Dr. says, that the MS. was not returned, nor required to be
returned more limitedly than only some time that Afternoon. But that, says Mr.
Bennet, is another slip of the Dr's Memory: he demanded it out of my hands at
Noon, and refused me the use of it any longer, but ordered it to be sent to his
Lodgings out of hand, as it was, a little afterward, immediately just after
Dinner.

Another slip of the Dr's Memory. But this slip of the Dr's Memory, Sir, is a
Circumstance in which he is as positive as you can be to the contrary. And can
you give me any tolerable reason for it, why I should more depend upon your
Memory, than upon the Dr's? In the next place, the Dr's Account of this Affair
entirely agrees with your own first Account given us in Mr. Boyle's Book, and
with the Certificate of your Collator. And how comes the. That day of your
first Account to be in your second shortened into a little afterward, out of
hand, immediately, even just after Dinner? And in the next, let any Man of
common Sense judge of the Probability of the thing. If the Dr. was in such
mighty haste for the MS. that he must needs have it returned to him so
instantly out of hand, immediately, just after Dinner; why did he not take it
away with him himself? Or why did he not order your Man to carry it to his
Lodgings out of hand, immediately before Dinner, as well as immediately after
Dinner? Or, did you desire him to let your Man stay and take his Dinner first?
His Victuals would do him more good when 'twas hot.

Mr. B. Pish!

Nay, who can help it? Is there any other way of answering such stuff as this,
than by laughing at it? Or must they go on uncontradicted, because there is no
answering them without making one's Self ridiculous?

And now let me make some few Remarks upon this terrible Sentence, which our
Bookseller of the Half Moon passes upon the Dr.

In the first place, this Sentence is pretended to be founded upon the
Certificate of your Collator. But how can that Certificate of your Collator
convict the Dr. of so notorious an Untruth, who Denies nothing that is in it?
Or, must I believe the Dr. to be so grievous a Liar, because Somebody has
lent Mr. Bennet a Figure in Rhetoric, called, Exclamatio, to clap into his
Appendix against him?

In the next place I observe, that there is nothing in this Certificate of your
Collator, not fully answered in the Dr's Preface, saving that new Circumstance
in your second Account, quite forgot to be remembered by you in your first. And
to what purpose then was that Certificate of your Collator reprinted? To none
other in the world, but to keep the Cause in heart, and dazzle the Eyes of your
Thoughtless Readers, by making a show of Hands against the Dr. And what end is
there of contending with Men. who go on Printing and Prating the same baffled
Stuff over and over again, and will not accept of an Answer?

And Thirdly, Let any Man judge whether or no, that new Story of just after
Dinner, be not a perfect Fiction of Mr. Bennet's second Memory, altogether
absurd and improbable, and framed for no other end or purpose, than to patch up
a breach in their true Story of the MS. And yet

Fourthly, The Plaster is still too narrow for the Sore. For how did the Dr.
know (as he tells you himself) when your Collator sent him word, that he had
not finished the Collation indeed, but was at work upon it, that he was above
two or three Pages short of the end? And if so; they might have been collated
while your Man was eating his Dinner. And what a leaky Cause have you got in
hand? The more it is patched the more it draws water. But a rotten Bottom will
not bear mending.

And now upon the whole, let the Reader once more look upon that peremptory
Sentence which this Bookseller passes upon the Dr. his, With what Conscience
then, and, GOD forgive him this Untruth; and make what Reflections he pleases.
These Gentlemen of the Half Moon may go on with their printing things upon the
Dr. as long as they pleased; but they must not expect to be much longer
believed for their bold speaking.

But admitting your Postulatum; suppose that the Dr. had most certainly known,
that when the MS. was returned to him the Collation was not finished? What then?

Why, was not the Dr. a very uncivil Man then, in forcing the Book out of our
hands, and that though he knew the Collation was not finished, and
consequently, cou^^ not but know what is Disappointment his refining to let us
keep it any longer would be to Mr. Boyle's* And (...) not (...) Dr. a very
uncivil (...)

Not at all, Sir. For the Question is not, whether the Collation was finished,
or not finished, when he called in the MS. and refused to leave it with you any
longer; nor whether the Dr. knew, or not knew as much: but whether he did not,
as soon as it came to be in his Power, voluntarily supply you with the use of
it; whether or no you had it not in your hands long enough to have collated it
over and over, and by whose Fault it was, that the Collation was not finished
before the MS. was called in; whether or no he had not some other Reason for
his calling it in when he did, than a Design of disappointing Mr. Boil of the
use of it; and whether or no his refusing at that time to leave it in your
hands any longer, ought in Reason to have been interpreted as want of Respect
to a person of that honorable Name and Quality. These are the Queries to which
you ought to give a more satisfactory Answer, than I have yet met with, e're
you will be able to justify the Clamours you have raised upon the Dr. for his
refusing you at that time the farther use of the MS. Mr. Boil himself is
pleased to acknowledge, P. 20.
that when the Dr. came to demand the MS. of Mr. Bennet again, he then (no, not
before; that was very positively to be denied; but he then) told him, That he
was to go into the Country, and gave that for his Reason, why he could allow
him no more time to collate it in. And a very good Reason, I think, it was.
Ibid.
But what says Mr. Boil himself to it* It was a mighty Treasure, it seems;
the Credit of the King's Library depended upon the Alexandrian MS. and That;
and therefor he would not Trust it out of those Walls one day longer. And
here is a Flourish for you, and that is all. One day longer! No, Sir; not one day
longer, but some Months longer; passing from hand to hand, and not without
Danger of miscarriage. I would seriously ask Mr. Boil, and let his own
Thoughts make the Answer; ought the Dr. to have left the Library for so many
Months together, without seeing the MS. returned into it before he went? Would
he himself, had he been in the Dr's place, have ran such a risk? Why then, does
he fall so foul upon the Dr. for doing That which in the Dr's place, no Man
would not have done? The Trusting the MS. out of those Walls at all, was
somewhat adventurously done of the Dr. and ought not to have been received for
so Common a Favor; the calling it in again upon the occasion he did, would
not, I dare say, have been resented by any Man in England, save Mr. Boil, as
an Affront; nor, to deal plainly with him, by him neither, but that he was
resolved to pick a Quarrel with the Dr. and wanted a better Pretense.

There was no need therefore of the Dr's inventing that Story, That when the
MS. was delivered to him, he had not the least Suspicion, but that the
Collation was finished. His Reply to Mr. Boil, had been sufficient without it.
That as soon as it was in his Power, he voluntarily supplied them with the use
of it; that they had it in their hands, more days than the collating of it
required hours; that when at near a Weeks end (and the whole was not the work
of half a day) he called upon them to have it restored, he could not have
expected to have found the Collation unfinished; that he was not then at the
Liberty of sparing it them any longer; but that they might have had it again
for asking. This had been Answer enough of all Conscience to the Passage in Mr.
Boyle's Preface. There was no need therefore of the Dr's having recourse to
Fiction, when he had Truth enough to have served his turn. But though there was
no necessity of the Dr's feigning this Story, if it had been really true; yet
Mr. Boil being resolved to stand to what he had done, there was a necessity of
his denying it, and that as Authentically as possible. And the Dr. having in
his Preface shown, that Mr. Boyle's Evidences were nothing to the purpose, a
necessity also there was for Mr. Bennet's, in his Appendix, betaking himself to
his Recollecting Faculty, and starting up that new Circumstance. Upon which, I
shall only make this short Reflection; that if the Dr. feigned this Story, he
is one of those Men who delight to tell Lies to no manner of purpose: But upon
Mr. Bennet, as to this particular, I cannot pass the same Censure. If this
after Story of just after. Dinner be a Lie, as I verily believe it is; I can
not say as the Dr. upon alike occasion did; that it is a Silly one: No, 'twas a
Necessary one, and the only Refuge he had left him.

Well, says the Dr. and suppose the Collation was not finished, when the MS.
was delivered to me, could they not upon my Return to the Library, which was
several Months before Mr. Boyle's Book was Printed, have asked me for it again?

To this by way of Answer they return a parcel of words; and nothing but words.

The Dr. says Mr. Bennet, P. 98.
gave me not the least Hopes, that if applied to him upon his Return out of the
Country, I should have leave to get the Collation finished.

That is, the Dr. did not bid you borrow the Book of him again. As why should
he, when he thought you had done your whole work with it?

And besides, P. 131.
Mr. Boil had given me no Order to make a fresh Application to him.

But why not?

Because I had given him an Account of the Dr's parting Civilities.

Very well; we shall see by and by, who set the Christ-Church Men upon Dr.
Bentley.

But what says Mr. Boil himself to it? P. 3^.
Yes, I could (have asked for it again) and have been denied it again, which I
was not very willing to venture. I neither thought my self so little, nor Dr.
Bentley so Great, nor the MS. so considerable. That I should make a Second
Application for it, after such a Repulse; no, not though I had been sure of
obtaining it; much less could I ever think of asking it again, when, by what
Mr. Bennet had told me, I had all the Reason in the world to believe I should
be again denied it.

Handsome English, I confess, and Majestically delivered; but false Suggestion
all over. If you thought your self too Great to ask the Favor, with what
Conscience can you complain of a Denial? Your second Application (if an
Application so widely made may be called yours) was altogether as necessary as
your first; and as you received no Repulse in the one, you might have promised
your self the like Success in the other. Your not vouchsafing to renew your
Request, nay, or so much as to signify your Desire, and yet proclaiming your
self in Print denied the farther use of it, is an Action which all the Phrase
in the world cannot excuse from being unjust.

Nay, and after all suppose the Dr. had absolutely refused to lend them the MS.
at all: Suppose (as a Man less obliging than himself would have done) he had
cut off Mr. Bennet with this short Answer: Mr. Boil is a Peron known to me
only by the name of his Family, a Name for which I have the greatest
Veneration; but I wonder that Mr. Boil should understand things no better,
than to think, that it lies in my Power to part with a MS. out of the King's
Library without some better Warrant for it, than barely a young Oxford
Scholar's sending his Bookseller to demand it of me. Suppose, I say, the Dr.
had given such an Answer, and thereupon Mr. Bennet had sent his Letter of
Complaint to Christ-Church: Mr. Boil might indeed have interpreted it as a
kind of Reprimand to himself, for his being a little too uncourtly in his
Applications: but durst he thereupon have printed a Book upon the Dr.? Durst he
have Libelled and Posted his Majesty's Library Keeper, for keeping to the Rules
of his Office, and refusing to be at the Command, I will not say of Mr. Bryle
himself, but of Mr. Boyle's Bookseller? Or could the bare Denial of a Favor,
have justified such a kind of Retaliation: a Favor, according to the methods
Mr. Bail took of obtaining it, so unreasonable to be expected? A Favor so
carelessly, so coldly, so superficially asked, that the not receiving it could
scarce deserve the Name of a Denial. I shall not scruple therefore to say, how
much soever a Paradox it may seem to those who have been so artificially
possessed with the contrary Story, That Dr. Bentley was obliging even to an
Excess to a Person, who neither knew how to request a Favor like a Gentleman,
not (as the Event has proved) to requite it but with Injuries. I had not
allowed my self this Freedom of Speech with a person of his Quality, had not he
himself been pleased to accumulate his first Act of Unjustice, by a greater one
of defending it; not only by suffering his Popular Name to stand in the
Frontispiece of so wretched a Libel as is that I have been considering, but
also by persisting to patronize this Lazy, Saucy Bookseller of his, who begun
that unhappy Quarrel, with which neither of the Parties have much cause to be
satisfied, but which, without the Spirit of Prophecy, I dare adventure to
foretell them, when they have done their worst, will end little to the advantage
of the Aggressor.

And what does Mr. Boil mean by his so common a Favor? Are therefore MSS. so
Common Ware? Is the Loan of a MS. out of any Library; out of the King's
Library, so common a Favor? Dr. B's pr^^f. ^.
The Learned and Reverend Dr. Mill found it otherwise in the time of Dr.
Bentley's Predecessor; the great Seldom found it otherwise, Dr. Burnet's Iafe
of Sir Matthew (...)
when he wanted the use of a MS. out of the Bodleian Library: And otherwise, I
presume, would Mr. Boil himself have found it, had a person less obliging than
Dr. Bentley been in possession of the Key; and otherwise, perhaps, would
another person than Mr. Boil have found it even from Dr. Bentley himself. But
the Dr. was resolved to trespass even a little beyond his Line, rather than not
oblige a person of that honorable Name; for which the requital he has
received will perhaps for the future make such Favors less common, and render
it a greater Difficulty to obtain a MS. out of the Royal Library, than just
sending one's Bookseller to the Library Keeper, to tell him, that such a one
wants such a Book out of the Library, which upon pain of being Lampoon'd in
Print, he must forthwith deliver to the Bearer. Either the Library Keeper must
be less obliging than Mr. Boil would have him, or what between Mr. Boyle's
Learned Foreigners, Mr. B. p. 14.
and the Christ-Church Editors, the Library will soon be naked of its
Manuscripts.

And now I cannot but by way of Recapitulation observe to the Reader, how often
they are forced to double tell their Stories.

The Library Keeper of St. James's, uncivil Man as he was! 'Twas not till after
nine Months Solicitation that we could procure so common a Favor as the Loan
of a MS. out of the King's Library. (Mr. Boyle's Book, and Mr. Bennet's first
Account.)

How can that be, says the Dr. That Library Keeper you speak of was not so
much as one Month, no, not half a Month Library Keeper, before he voluntarily
came and offered it (Dr. B's Preface.)

Who says he was Library Keeper all that while? But he lived near the Royal
Library, he was acquainted with those worthy Gentlemen that then had the
keeping of the Key, and bore them Company sometimes when they went into the
Library. (Mr. Bennet's second Acount.)

The Library Keeper at St. James's denied a person of Mr. Bayle's Quality so
common a Favor as the use of one of the King's MS. (Their first Account.)

How could I lend them the MS. before it was in my Power to lend it them? (The
Dr's Preface)

Who says, you could have lent it us much sooner than you did? But you might
have got it to be lent to us. (Mr. Bennet's second Account.)

'Twas not without great Difficulties, that we at last procured the MS. nor
till after a long Solicitation. (Mr. bennet's first Account)

What does this Man mean by his great Difficulties? The greatest Difficulty
that even I put him too was that of sending his Man to fetch it. Solicitation!
One would imagine that he had worn out the Streets with frequent Journeys to
solicit for the MS. I don't remember that either he or his Apprentice came
once to my Lodgings, or to the Library for it, till the time that he sent for it
by my Appointment, and received it. (Dr. B's Preface.)

Who says, I did? That was not my way of Soliciting, to take Journeys. But I
spoke to you of it I know not how many times as you came in my way, not either
stepped into my Shop, or passed by the Door. Twenty times at least. (Mr. Bennet's
second Account)

He took the MS. out of our hands before the Collation was finished, and though
he was told as much, yet he utterly refused to leave it with us any longer, but
demanded to have it sent to his Lodgings that very day (Mr. Bennet's first
Account.)

True: For I was obliged to see it returned into the Library that very day. But
'twas according to your own Account at Noon, that I called upon you for the MS.
and was told that Collation was not then finished. I had not the least
Suspicion, but that when it was delivered to me, the whole was then collated
(Dr. B Preface.)

Oh! This Liar! Not the least Suspicion! He most certainly knew the contrary?
My Collator expressly sent him word, that he had not finished the Collation.

Ay, but that was Noon, I did not (even according to your own Account)
forthwith and immediately take it away with me; I left it in your hands, only
ordering you to send it after me some time that Afternoon without fail; and the
whole might have been collated twice over in half a day.

Oh abominable!

Why that is all you your self say, in your first Account. That I refused to
spare it you any longer, that is, any longer than that day: which is true; for
that Evening is part of that Day.

That Evening! Oh this wicked Man? Well; God forgive him. He commanded me to
send it to his Lodgings forthwith, out of hand, immediately, just after Dinner;
I protest. And he says, not till the close of the Evening. God forgive him this
untruth.

Why, Sir, time was when you your self said no more. (Mr. Bennet's first
Account.)

Ay, but when I saw the Dr's Preface, I presently recollected the matter a
little better. 'Twas just after Dinner, I sincerely declare. (Mr. Benner's
second Account.)

But does not a Cause look very suspiciously, that is always changing its
Colors thus? Has Sincerity so mutable a Face?

And thus much for this tedious Story of the MS. that Matter of Fact with their
Flourishes upon which the Terraef filius's of the Half Moon have raised such
Huzza's upon the Liorary-kerper at St. Jomes's. There is not, I think, any
material Circumstance in the whole, upon which I have not bestowed as much (and
I fear more) Consideration as it deserves. And as for the Siliy Suggestions
with which Mr. Bennet has stull'd out every Page of his Appendix, to have
answered them more particularly, had been an Impertinence almost as inexcusable
as that of writing them. I have endeavored to set things in a clear Light, and
disrobe them of those false Colors, with which Mr. Bennet, and his honorable
Friend have extremely disguised them. As I go all along only upon the bottom of
their own Prints, and as I have no where represented the matter otherwise, than
exactly according to my own Apprehension concerning it: So I cannot but
persuade my self, that any Man who shall give himself the trouble of comparing
their Accounts will fall in with me in the same Opinion; that throughout this
whole Phalaridan Controversy, the Learning, the Civility, Vindie,
and the Ueracity are all on a side.

Having dispatchd this grand Affair, the Matter of Fact, I might now think my
work at an end with Mr. Bennet and his Appendix. Some few straggling Calumnies
however there are here and there intermixed with his faithful Relations, which
to pass over altogether unobserved might still leave the Reader under the
Opinion, that there are in this Appendix of Mr. Bennet's at least one or two
Truths: Especially when he finds them not only so considently averred, but some
of them also, to appearance, so firmly attested.

For this is one of the methods by which the Gentlemen of the Half Moon so
successfully carry on their Controversy with the Dr. They procure a number of
Hands, and Depositions against him. This serves to set a Gloss upon the Cause,
and put's off the most false and foolish Suggestions with an appearance of
Certainty. Mr. Boil is somewhat merciful in this kind, and contents himself
with the Testimonies of three Witnesses; P. 9.
but those Persons of Probity and Worth, he tells us, (as much as to say, not
like Dr. Bentley and such whose word he doubts not will be much sooner credited
than the Dr's. Thomas Bennet, Bookseller, at the Sign of the Half Moon in S.
Paul's Churchyard; GEO. Gibson, Thomas Bennet's Collator; and William King, J.
C. D. of the Commons. But Mr. Bennt himself is more plentiful in his Evidences.

Two Letters from the Honorable Charles Boil, P. 101; 107. 124.128.119; 134.
Esquire; two Certificates of CEO. Gibson, Collator; another from Nich. Hooper,
Beadle to the Comany of Stationers; another from John Crook, Bookseller; a
Letter from the Learned and Honorable Sir Edw. Sherburue; another from the
aforesaid Will. King, of the Commons; and another (Soldier-like, the strongest
in the Rear) from Sir. P. 120;
W. Temple; nay, and amongst the rest something out of a Letter of the Dr's own
Handwriting given in in Evidence against himself.

And these are Mr. Bennet's Evidences; a formidable appearance, and, by a Name
or two, too many; whom I an heartily sorry to see joined in so foul a Cause,
and so unequally matched. But as we are upon a Trial of Fact, I may, I hope,
without trespassing upon the Respects due to their Persons examine into the
Validity of their Testimonies, and enquire how far they will serve the Ends for
which Mr. Bennet produces them. For who will think the Cause determined, unless
the Witnesses are heard?

To begin with the two Letters of Mr. Boil, in the first of which he Charges
the Dr. with Falsehood, in the other with Rudeness.

Mr. Boyle's first Letter, p. 101.

Mr. Bennet,

I am glad you had the good Fortune to preserve any of my Letters relating to
the Manuscript Phalaris in St. James's Library. -- I am as fully satisfied of
the Truth of what You have said upon that Occasion, as I am of the Falsehood of
what Dr. Bentley has said upon That, and several others.

It may be counted an Uncivil thing in me, to disturb Mr. Boyle's
Satisfactions; but since he is for so plain English, I must as plainly tell
him, That what Dr. Bentley has said upon that Occasion is most undoubtedly
True. For the Occasion Mr. Boil is here speaking of, is that false Account of
Mr. Bennet's, Printed in Mr. Boyle's admired Phrase-Book upon the Library
Keeper at St. James's, concerning the nine Months Solicitation. In answer to
which Dr. Bentley in his Preface has said (nor has he said it only, but
proved it also) that that uncivil Library Keeper Mr. Boyle's whole Book runs so
hard upon, was not so much as one Month Keeper of the Library at St. James's
before he supplied Mr. Bennet with the MS. for the use of Mr. Boil: And that
as for that Solicitation Mr. Bennet speaks of, with all his Soliciting, he
never so much as once gave himself the trouble of going or sending to the Dr's
Lodgings upon Mr. Boyle's Concerns, saving that one time, when by the Dr's own
Appointment, he sent his Man to the Library for the Book, and received it. This
is all the Dr. has said upon that Occasion; and both these things are most
certain, confessed, and undeniable Truths As for that after Distinction of Mr.
Bennet's in his Appendix between the Library Keeper at St. James's, and a
Nigh-dweller to the Library, and that after Explication of the word
Solicitation, that he did not mean giving himself the labor of taking
Journeys, or any other trouble whatsoever, but barely the speaking to the Dr.
of it Occasionally, and as he chanced to fall in his way: these after
Emendations of the Story, I say, in Mr. Bennet's second Account the Dr. could
not answer before Mr. Bennet had conceived them. I again therefore, after the
Dr. affirm it; that Mr. Bennet's first Account, in Justification of which Mr.
Boil here appears, is (at least as it is managed in Mr. Boyle's Book) a false
Account, at least, a foul, partial, and disguised Account; and being so
contrived on purpose to mislead the Reader, Ap. p. 133.
and that not in a Trifling, but in the very Principal Circumstances of the
Fact, to which it belongs; it may very justly be called a false Account, as
directly designing to create in the Rader a false Opinion. And such most
plainly and undeniably it is. I might also observe, that could Mr. Boil have
produced a Copy of any Letter of his own, written to the Dr. himself upon the
Occasion of the Manuscript Phalaris at St. James 's, it had been much more to
the purpose than his referring us to Mr. Bennet's File. I might also Query, how
early does the name of Dr. Bentley appear upon Mr. Bennet's File? What? nine
Months before they had the MS. But all this we have had over before Sup. p.
147.151. And thus much for the Evidence of Mr. Boyle's first Letter. No, Sir;
what Dr. Bentley has said upon that Occasion is not a Falsehood, but an
undeniable Truth. But I cannot leave this first Letter without one Remark upon
Mr. Boyle's very cautious way of expressing himself. I am as fully satisfied,
says he, of the Truth of Mr. Bennet's Account, as I am of the Falsehood of Dr.
Bentley's. Now, with the Gentleman's good leave, I would ask him, what this
amounts to? I my self and every Man in England, are as fully fatisfied of the
one, as of the other; and yet Mr. Boil must not infer from hence, that we are
at all satisfied of either of them: I am as fully fatisfied, that Mr. Boil
writ the late Defense of Phalaris, as I am that Mr. Bennet writ the Appendix
that he has set his hand to. This I can truly say I am fully satisfied in; and
yet notwithstanding this full satisfaction, I have some Scruples concerning the
true Author of that Defense of Phalaris; especially when I consider this very
Letter, and a certain Copy of Verses before the Dispensary.

Mr. Boyle's second Letter, p. 107.
I am almost ashamed to trouble you any more, Mr. Bennet, about the MS. I wish,
I had it: But, if at all, I must have it very quickly. And though I can do
pretty well without it, yet Dr. Bentley's Rudeness is not the less.


And here is another Complement upon the Dr. Dr. Bentley's Rudeness. But wherein
consisted this Rudeness of the Dr's? Mr. Bennet has been pleased in the words
immediately following to explain it. A little before this, it seems, I had
given Mr. Boil an Account of Dr. Bentley's disobliging Delays and Expressions.
The Rudeness therefore, here complained of consisted in; First his Disobliging
Delays, and Secondly, his Disobliging Expressions.

And first as to his disobliging Delays. Now this Letter of Mr. Boyle's was
dated, Oxford, May 1st. when the Dr. was not yet actually entered upon the
Possession of his Office. And that Information which Mr. Bennet had sent down
to Christ-Church against the Dr. was drawn up some time before. So that the
disobliging Delays of which Mr. Bennet had been making his Complaints to Mr.
Boil, were the Dr's not Lending them the MS. before it was in his Power to
lend it them: Of which enough already.

But here might I ask Mr. Bennet a Question or two. 'Twas not you say till
after nine Months Solicitation, that you at last obtained the use of the MS.
Nor till after at least twenty times asking for it. But why did you not after
your having been one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight Months delayed
by the Dr. try some other methods? Why did you not after having been once,
twice, thrice, twenty times disappointed by the Dr. make some Enquiry where the
matter stuck? This had been the part of a faithful Scllicitor, and had
prevented this unhappy Controversy in its Original. And a little Enquiry would
have informed you, where the Key of the Library was lodged for the greatest
part of those nine Months, and who had been the proper Persons to whom to have
made your Application. If therefore you did not know the then State of the
Royal Library, it must have been for want of Enquiry, and a Proof of your Sloth
and Indifference as to Mr. Boyle's Concerns. If you did know it, and yet wrote
such a Letter to Mr. Boil against the Dr. what can we call it but a delight in
doing mischief? But I hvae Charity enough to impute it to the former; your
Laziness only. For 'twas an easier thing to sit still behind the Counter and
write Letters to Mr. Boil, than to take Journeys, and run from Paul's-
Churchyard to Westminster a borrowing the Book for him your self. Your Letter,
to which this of Mr. Boyle's is an Answer, was written, you tell us, probably,
in the very latter end of April: But a Letter then written, to have given a
fair Account of the matter; should have been to this purpose. I have spoken to
Dr. Bentley several times about the MS. and he has faithful promised to help
me to it: But his Patent has not yet passed all its Formalities, so that he is
not as yet possessed of the Key of the Library; But hopes within a short time
to be so. And then we shall take Care to answer your Expectations. Though by
the bye, as I have been speaking to him of the MS. I have heard him now and
then pass an untoward kind of Ceasure upon your Author. It Is a Spurious and
contemptible piece, he says, and not worthy of a new Edition, and thinks, as I
have sometimes heard him say, you might better besrow your time than in
throwing it away upon such an unedisying undertaking. Had Mr. Bennet written
such a Letter as this, it had been a fair Account, nor could Mr. Boil have
justly taken offense at it: And if he wrote more than this, I very considently
presume he was a false Informer. For,

Secondly, what can we reasonable suppose to have been these disobliging
Expressions the Dr. used concerning Mr. Bail. The Dr. was at that time a
perfect Stranger to Mr. Boil and his Qualities, and Mr. Boil the same to the
Dr. It cannot therefore have been any personal Pique against him, and sure he
cannot have despised him for the sake of his Name. What then can have been
these disobliging Expressions? None other, I dare say, than what I have been
just now touching upon; the Censure the Dr. may have passed upon not Mr.
Boyle's person, but his Author; and so Mr. Bennet himself, both in this very
Page (107.) and in his first Account is pleased to explain it. The many slight
and injurious things Dr. Bentley threw out now and then, both upon him ( Mr.
Boil) and the Work he was about: and, the Reflections the Dr. made from time
to time, when I spoke to him from Mr. Boil for the use of the MS. (p. 99.) And
after the same manner is the matter reported in the Depositions of Dr. King.
These Reflections therefore all along terminate upon him, with regard to the
Work he was about, the collating of MSS. and the Editing of a spurious and
contemptible Author: Mr. B 's praef. p. 2.
A Character, which had the Dr. been asked his Opinion, I presume, he would
have given it to this mock Phalaris, whether Mr. Boil had been put upon a new
Edition of him or not And if the Dr. may perhaps have yet further reflected
upon the Collating of MSS. and the nea Editing, and translating of Greek Books
(a Work requiring a maturity of Judgment, and a Palate by long use habituated
to the Niceties of the learned Languages) as an improper Employment for young
Students to begin the first Essars of their Pens upon: Ap. 131.
neither does this stick upon Mr. Boil, but where 'twas placed, the Directors
and Coadjutors of his Studies; Mr. B. p.
who cannot but be thought to have merited some kind of blame, first for their
having put that young Gentleman upon a Work somewhat above his then Capacity;
and Secondly, for affording him so slender an Assistance in it: nor is the
Scholar answerable for the mistaken methods of his Teachers. And for a Man
either to feign an Affront where there is none given, or to aggravate things
beyond measure, only to execute the Revenges of a party, or to expose to the
World his Stock of Phrase and Witticisms, is as ungentleman like an use of the
Pen, as picking Quarrels in the Streets is of the Sword.

And thus much for Mr. Bennet's two first Tesimonies against the Dr, these two
Letters from Mr. Boil, the Falsehood charged upon him in the former, and the
Rudeness in the latter. I might indeed have spared my self the Labor of
answering them so particularly: it had been sufficient to have excepted against
Mr. Boil, as too much a Party in this Cause to be admitted for an Evidence. I
might withal take occasion to remind the Reader of what is somewhere before
hinted to him; that we are not now any longer to seek, who 'twas that began
this unhappy Contest, and first set the Christ-Church Men upon Dr. Bentley. For
I cannot yet see, what necessity there was for Mr. Bennet's informing Mr. Boil
of the Dr's disobliging Expressions, whatever they were, as well as his
disobliging Delays. Let Mr. Bennet write it over his Door, Quid de quoque viro,
and cui dicas, supe caveto, Sup. p. 144.

The two Certificates of the Collator, Sup. p.
I very very well remember, and, I do declare, That -- another considerable
part of Mr. Bennet's Evidence against the Dr. have been already considered.

Here follows another Certificate against the Dr.

This is to Certify, That Phalaris 's Epistles, in Greek and Latin, put out by
the Honorable Charles Boil, Esquire, were Printed by me at my own Cost and
Charges; and neither Mr. Bennet, nor any other Bookseller was any ways
concerned in it. As soon as the Book was Printed, I sold near the whole
Impression to Mr. Crossly Bookseller in Oxon. Witness my Hand

JOHN CROOK.

This Certificate of Mr. Crook is produced to prove another Untruth upon the
Dr. upon Account of a certain passage in his Preface given in these words. P.
36.
The Bookseller once asked me privately, that I would do him the Favor to tell
my Opinion, if the new Edition of Phalaris then in the Press would be a
vendible Book, telling me that he was concerned in the Impression, and hoped it
would sell well. To which the Dr. replied, That as for the Sale of the Book, he
need not question it; the great names of those that recommended it would get it
many Buyers. But however, under the Rose, the Book was a spurious piece, and
deserved not to be spread in the World by another Impression. This private
Discourse Mr. Bennet betrays to the Christ-Church Editors: And what follows
upon that every Body knows. And good reason for it; must the methods of a
Learned Society be reflected upon? Mun Booksellers be whispered in the Ear,
That -- puts his young Men upon Printing, spurious Books? Hine illae Lachryma!
And this the Dr. declares is all the Reflection he made to the disadvantage of
Mr. Boil.

This Discourse between himself and Mr. Bennet the Dr. very well remembers. But
here again Mr. Bennet is very positive to the contrary. P. 118.
I utterly deny, says he, That ever I spoke a Syllable to him tending that
way, and it is improbable to the highest degree that every I should. And so
comes in Mr. Crooke's Certificate, to show, That the Book was Printed
altogether at another Man's Cost and Charges, and near the whole Impression,
when finished, Sold to Mr. Crossley Bookseller in Oxford; from him had Mr.
Bennet fifty Books at first; and a few more, some years afterward, from
another hand; but in the whole a far less number than he commonly uses of any
Oxford Impression: Therefore there can have been no such Discourse between him
and the Dr. as that, He should have asked the Dr's Opinion concerning the Book,
whether he thought it would be a vendible piece, and that he should tell the
Dr. That he had a Concern in the Impression, and hoped it would Sell well. I
utterly deny, that ever I spoke a Syllable to him tending this way, and it is
improbable to the highest degree that ever I should.

But in the first place, that Mr. Bennet should have had so very frequent
occasions to Discourse with the Dr. about the Episties of Phalaris when they
were in the Press, and yet never have asked him his Opinion concerning them;
that Mr. Bennet, I say, during his nine MOnths Solicitation for the
manuscript-Phalaris, and in all the at least twenty times asking him for it;
yet all this while should never so much as once speak one Syllable to him
tending toward the learning his Opinion concerning the Book: This, to my
Apprehension, is improbable, even to the highest Degree. The Dr. was pleased to
consult Mr. Bennet some times in his way of a Bookseller: And is it not
somewhat strange that Mr. Bennet should never have taken his turn of consulting
the Dr. sometimes in his way of a Scholar. This was an Omission scarce any
Bookseller in England, besides Mr. Bennet, would have been guilty of. And this
is the Circumstance upon which the very stress of the Dr's Relation depends,
Mr. Bennet's asking him his Opinion concerning the Book; for 'twas that part of
the Discourse occasioned the Dr's passing that Reflection upon Mr. Boyle's
undertaking. Whether Mr. Bennet told the Dr. that he was concerned in the
Impression or not, and that therefore he hoped, ti would Sell well, is little
material. Upon which I must take the Liberty of repeating Mr. Bennet's own
words upon this very occasion. P. 120;
If the Dr. invented these little Unnecessary Circumstances, we must believe
him to be out of his Wits, and that he loves to tell Lies to no manner of
purpose, and when it is in every Bodies Power to trace him.

But Secondly, was Mr. Bennet never concerned in the Sale of a Book, and
interested to wish it might prove a vendible Commodity, which was altegether
Printed at the Cost and Charges of another man? The Book was Printed at the
sole Cost of Mr. Crook, and yet Mr. Crossley ventured to take off near the
whole Impression. And may not Mr. Bennet himself have had some such Design in
his Head? And may not that have been the meaning of his asking the Dr's Opinion
concerning the Book? And may he not thereupon have mentioned his Hopes of its
proving a Saleable piece? And may not that indifferent Character the Dr. gave
him of the Book have made him more wary how he over-loaded himself with Copies
of it, and have proved the occasion of his using a fewer number of them than he
commonly does of other Oxford Impressions? And what signifies it, whether he
said in express and direct Terms, I am concerned in the Impression, or, I think
I shall be concerned in it, or, I would be concerned in it, if I had but good
Hopes, it would prove a vendible Book? May not Mr. Bennet as well have
expressed himself losely in any tone or other of these, or such like Terms, as
the Dr. has related it in one of them? And what difference does this make as
to the substance of the thing, and the occasion for which the Dr. produces it?
I can only Query Mr. Bennet upon this Head. There is not, I think, in any of
these things an utter Improbability. But that Mr. Bennet should never have
spoken one Syllable tending toward his asking the Dr's Opinion concerning the
Book, which is the Clause upon which the whole stress of the Dr's Allegation
depends, and which Mr. Bennet utterly denis; this certainly every Man must look
upon as an utter Improbability. And as to that, Sir, upon which all depends,
Mr. Crooke's Certificate speaks not a word. This Evidence therefore, I think,
we may dismiss as frivolous and insignificant. And notwithstanding Mr. Bennet's
utterly denying it; yet I shall believe the Dr's contrary Affirmation, That Mr.
Bennet did, sometime or other ask the Dr's Opinion concerning the Book; which
occasioned the Dr's Reflection upon Mr. Boil, and the Work he was about.

Next after this Certificate of Mr. Crook, Mr. P. 128.
Bennet gives in the date of a certain Letter of the Dr's own Handwriting in
Evidence against himself by the help of which, with a more than ordinary
Assurance he borrows a Phrase or two of the Dr's own to call him Liar in: nay,
and desires the Reader, who is not capable of examining the Learned part of the
Controversy, to judge of That by the most palpable Errors the Dr. is guilty of
in plain matter of Fact; nay, and to place the matter beyond doubt, he tells
us, that we shall in time have the Letter its self Printed at large, and the
Dr. confounded by the words of his own mouth.

And who would imagine now, P. 121.
to take my turn of borrowing a Phrase from Mr. Bennet, but that a matter of
Fact which he is so full of, should really be as he has represented it? The
Case indeed is somewhat puzzled, and would have appeared more so, but that Mr.
Bennet, I thank him, has been at some Pains to unravel it, and in the same
breath he accuses the Dr. to acquit him.

In the Dr's Presace is this passage, p. 5, 6. The first time I saw Mr. Boil
's new Phalaris, was in the hands of a Person of Honor, to whom it had been
presented, and the rest of the Impression was not yet published. This
encouraged me to write that very same Evening to Mr. Boil at Oxford, and to
give him a true Insormation of the whole matter; expecting that upon the
Receipt of my Letter, he would put a stop to the Publication of the Book, till
he had altered that passage, and Printed the page anew, which he might have
done in the space of one day, and at the Charge of five Shillings.

This the Dr. mentions as an Aggravation o^ Mr. Boyle's injustice, that he
would not alter that passage in his Preface, though he had time notice given
him, how he had been imposed upon by the Mis representations of his Bookseller,
and might have stopped the farther spreading of that injurious Reflection; the
Impression being not yet dispersed.

Now, says Mr. Bennet, this Story of the Dr's I shall demonstrate to be a most
notorious Falsehood by one of those Notes of time, which the Dr himself well
observes to be the truest and surest Helps toward detecting Impostures. The
Dr. pretends in this Letter, to have given Mr. Boil notice timely enough, to
have altered that passage, and stopped the Books in the Printing House. Now,
says Mr. Bennet, this Letter, which is still preserved, bears Date Jan. 26th.
1694/5. a good while before which Mr. Boyle's Book was certainly Published, and
publicly sold in Oxford, London, and other poaces. The first of that Month
above one hundred of them were dispersed in Christi-Church, according to a
Custom which Dr. Bentley appears to be no stranger to; and in the twenty five
days between this and the Date of the Letter they were distributed into all the
Booksellers hands that deal that way. And yet Dr Bentley would have the World
believe, that he writ so early, that Mr. Boil might have stopped the Books in
the Printing-bouse.

I answer: The Dr. did know, that a good quantity of them were dispersed in
Christ-Church, and 'twas probably, one of those New years Gifts that he saw in
the hands of that person of Honor. But the rest of the Impression either was
not published, or not so published as for the Dr. to know it. You say, they
were distributed into all the Booksellers hands that deal that way? I deny it?
where are your Proofs? Here you ought to have come in with your Certificates. I
do not believe that the Books were publicly Sold in the Shops till some time
after the Date of this Letter. If otherwise, the Dr. must have been not only a
Liar, but a Fool; to desire the Books to be stopped in the Printing House, when
yet he knew, they were all got out of the Printing House. Or how, and in what
manner was the Book so published, as that the Dr. should not know of the
Publication? Quary, in which of the public Prints was the Publication of
Phalaris's Epistles first Advertized? And when? was it before Jan. 26th. 169
4/5? If not, what Proof have we that the Book was published before? Query, were
the Copies so dispersed, as that Mr. Boil, had he been minded to do Justice,
might not have printed one Page anew, and altered that passage in the Preface?
If not, then Mr. Boil had notice early enough to have done it. Mr. Bennet has
these words upon the Dr.

Indeed not only the Date, P. 122.
but the whole Course of the Letter is an evident Proof, that Dr. Bentley, when
he writ it, could have no such aim in his Eye as he pretends.

Query, What Aim could he have then? The Letter was written on purpose to
desire Mr. Boil to stop the Books in the Printing house; and yet the Dr. had
no such Aim in his Eye. This I cannot understand.

Why, that Letter all runs upon the Supposal, Ibid.
that the Afffont had been publicly given, and was past recall.

Monsters! The Dr. writes a Letter to Mr. Boil, the very Subject of which, was
to desire that Gentleman to recall the Affront: And yet all that Letter runs
upon the Supposal, that the Affront was past recall. These are Inconsistences,
which if Mr. Bennet cannot reconcile, I dare say, No Body else can. I can say
no more to this Affair, but that you are wanting in your Proofs: We have
nothing but your bare word for it, that the Book was certainly Published and
Sold publicly in Oxford, London, and other places before Jan. 26. Which till I
shall see in what public Prints the Publication of it was advertised, I shall
not be able to believe. Is it to be imagined, that the Dr. should have written
a Letter to desire the stopping of the Books in the Printing House, when yet he
knew, that before his writing that Letter, they were all got out of the
Printing House? So that after all that Assurance, with which you deliver your
Self upon this Article, either you have not proved the Dr. to be a Liar, or you
have proved him to be an Idiot.

Another of Mr. Bennet's Evidences.

Being ordered, and appointed by the Masters and Wardens of the Company of
Stationers to Collect from the Booksellers three Books of each sort Printed,
which were due to the two Universities, and the King's Library: I received of
Mr. Tho. Bennet a great many Books upon that Account, without any Dispute
whatsoever. I find likewise by my Accounts, that his Books, and those from most
of the other Booksellers were delivered in before the 13th. Day of July, 1693.
And on that Day part of them were sent to the Universities.

Nich. Hooper. Beadle.

The Dr. in his Preface, P. 30^
upon a certain occasion not worth the repeating, had said, That after he was
nominated to the Library-Keepers Office (before his Patent was finished) he was
informed, that one Copy of every Book Printed in England, which were due to the
Royal Library by Act of Parliament, had not of late been brought into the
Library according to the said Act -- upon which (passing by for Expedition sake
the rest of the Story) he called upon Mr. Bennet, and demanded his share
toward it, which was then but very small. But Mr. Bennet, instead of complying
with the Demand, answered very pertly, That he knew not what Right the
Parliament had to give away any Man's Property. The Company of Stationers were a
Body, had a common Purse, and he hoped they would stand it out at Law, etc.

It Is for the Disproof of this Story, that Mr. Bennet got this Certificate of
the Beadle. Upon which let me only desire the Reader to take particular Notice
of, First, this Expression of it, Delivered in; and Secondly, the Date of the
Year, when the Books were so Delivered in. In both which Particulars we shall
find Mr. Bennet guilty of a little slight of hand. The Books were Delivered in;
but who is Mr. Bennet's Deponent here speaking of? of the King's
Library Keeper, I think. And what is he speaking of? Of the King's Library. And
where are we to understand these Books to have been Delivered in? Into the
Royal Library! And when were they so Delivered in? before the 13th. Day of
July, 1693. Very few Readers would understand this Certificate of the Beadle,
in the Connection it bears, and according to the occasion for which it was
produced, in any other meaning. But to our Surprise we find that none of these
things were intended by Mr. Bennet.

This Appendix of Mr. Bennet's had not been long out e're he gets some inkling,
that all the Abuses offered to the Dr. by that Saucy Bookseller would scarce be
put up so tamely as he expected, and fearing thereupon, that some Body might
re-examine their Beadle upon this lame Account of his; Mr. Bennet presently
takes care to be beforehand with them, and with all speed posts out a Second
Edition of his Appendix; and there, just after this, Certificate of his Beadle,
he slides in, by way of farther Explication of himself, a little Paragraph
wherein the whole Story is new made.

Since the First Edition of this Book P. 116^
, etc. Let the Reader, that thinks it worth his while, see the passage at
large; and there he will find, That neither is the Library Keeper at S. James's
at all concerned in this Certificate of the Beadle, but the Treasurer of the
Stationers Company; neither was it the King's Library, the Books were Delivered
into, but the Company's Warehouse; neither had the Dr. any Account of what
Books were Delivered in, or from what hands they came, but the foresaid
Treasurer: All this appears from Mr. Bennet's own Second Edition: The puzzling
Account Mr. Bennet had given of this Affair, and the Knowledge I had of his
methods, put me indeed upon making some Enquiry into this Story about the
Beadle. For seeing such very unfair Dealings from the Half Moon in all the rest
of this Controversy; I made no doubt, but here was as much trick and faise
Color in this too, if I could but come at the Truth: And so indeed it proved;
for a Friend of mine, of Mr. Bennet's Trade, got me this following Certificate
from the same Beadle, which I have now by me Signed by himself. Its consistent
indeed with what he deposed before, but it will fully refute the false
Inferences that Mr. Bennet drew from it.

September 12th....... I Delivered to the Reverend Dr. Benthley, then
Library Keeper at St. James' s, a parcel of Books gathered for the King's
Library, and I never delivered any before, either to Him, or to any of his
Predecessors; having been Beadle to the Company of Stationers ever since the
26th. of March 1692.

Nich. Hooper. Beadle.

The Reader may take notice, That the Beadle is positive as to the day of the
Month, September 12th. when he delivered the Books at St. James's: But he does
not tell the Year. The Reason was, That he had entered the day of the Month in
his Book of Accounts, but he had omitted the Year; and though he believes it
was 1694, yet in his Affidavit he would affirms no farther, than he could be
absolutely sure of. In which he acted like a Man of Conscience; and if Mr.
Bennet had been as scrupulous in his own Testimonies, I dare say, this
Phalaridan Controversy had never been started. But however, as to the Year,
when the Books were Delivered, we need to Testimony of the Beadle: for it could
not possibly be before 1694. because September 12th. 1693. Mr. Justel the Dr's
Predecessor was still alive, and no Successor then named to him; and its
certain from the Date of the Dr's Patent, and from several other authentic
Testimonies, that he had no Power, nor Custody of the Library till above half a
year after.

Now to Examine Mr. Bennet's Inferences from his Beadle's Certificate, and to
compare them with this other from the same hand.

Dr. Bentley had said, That he was informed, that one Copy of every Book
Printed in England, which was due to the Royal Library by Act of Parlioment,
had not of late been brought into the Library according to the said Act. Upon
this I made Application to the Master of the Stationer's Company, and demanded
the Copies. The Effect whereof was, that I procured near a 1000 Volumes of one
sort or other, which are now lodged in the Library. Now the Truth of this is
confirmed by the Beadle himself: For he Deposes, that he had never Delivered
one Book to the Library till after the Dr's Application.

But then comes Mr. Bennet by Dint of Logic to disprove this Account of the
Dr's. The Dr. P. 114.
says he, Would be thought, to have first set a-foot this Collection due to the
Royal Library; and again, P. 116.
he Dr. says, he set about this Project of getting the Books due to the King's
Library, Collected; for so he would have us understand him. And this he
disproves, because there was a Collection made in July before, 1693.

Now this is so exactly like Mr. Boyle's way of refuting the Dr.; that one
would be apt to suspect, the same hand was employed in drawing up both that
Examination, and this Appendix. The was is to Charge the Dr. with saying, what
he never said; and then to be sure they must have a great measure of Dullness,
if they cannot confute what they invented on purpose to be confuted.

The Bookseller has the Confidence to tell his Readers, That the Dr. would be
thought to have First set a-foot the Collection. And yet the Dr. in words as
full as can be desired, has plainly implied the contrary. For he tells us, The
Books had not of late been brought into the Library; which is a manifest Proof,
that he believed himself, and would have his Reader suppose, that they had
formerly been brought in according to the Act. For the Act commenced soon after
the Restoration of K. Charles II. The Books therefore might have been gathered
for many years; and yet of late have been neglected.

We have one plain Falsehood then in the Bookseller's Representation of this
matter; and we shall presently have another. For he talks of the Dr's setting
a-foot the Collection; and his Project of having the Books Collected; for so,
says he, the dr. would have us understand him. How the Gentlemen of the
Half Moon are used to understand the Dr's Writings, the World is now pretty
well satisfied: But if I may measure other Readers from my self, I durst be
bold to affirm, that not one of them could put that Construction upon the Dr's
words, unless he either carelessly read him, or wilfully misrepresented him.
For the Dr. whose words I have cited above, has not a Syllable about Collecting
in all that passage: He only says, The Books had not been brought into the
Library; which is true beyong Contradiction. But whether some or all of the
Books had been Collected from the several Booksellers, and laid up in the
Stationers Warehouse; that was more than he could pretend to know. He found,
they were not in the Royal Library; and like an honest and careful Man, he did
the Duty of his place, and took care to see them lodged there. And without such
a Care they might have lain long enough, before the King's Library had been the
richer for them. But besides all this, it will appear presently, that all the
Books which were Printed from June 93, to April 94. might even be uncollected,
as well as not brought in till the Dr. demanded them.

After two such notorious Stretches that the Bookseller has made here in
representing the Dr's words, we may easily guess what will become of the rest
of what he has brought on this Head. He attempts to prove, That no such
Discourse ( i.e. when the Dr. says, He asked Mr. Bennet to give his share of
Books to the King's Library, and Mr. Bennet refused it) could happen between
the Dr. and him; because it appears by the Beadle, that Mr. Bennet complied to
give his share without any Dispute whatsoever, July 13th. 1693. which was
before the Dr. was nominated to his Office. P. 116.
And the Act of Printing expiring about April, or May 1693.; after that time no
Body could pretend to demand Arrears from particular Booksellers.

I must confess, if I had not been pretty well acquainted with the Half Moon
Sincerity, I should have thought this Argument a strong one, and very pinching
upon the Dr. But beign fully persuaded from the rest of their management, that
this too was all of a piece; I began to cast about, if I could find any flaw in
the Proof; and seeing the main of it depended upon the Act of Printing's
expiring in May 1693; I fansied the Deceit must needs lie in that Particular. I
know, my Reader will think now, that this was a very unlikely Guess of mine;
for how is it credible, that they would falsify an act of Parliament, where
any Body that had a mind to Examine the matter, might easily discover the
Cheat? This I own, was something choking: For I argued so to my self at that
time; but however, since it came into my way, I was resolved to consult Keeble
upon the Statute for Printing; and there I found, Keeble's Statutes, p. 1658.
that the Act of Printing, when it was last revived, commenced from the 13th.
of February 169 2/3, and from thence continued to the End of the next Session
of Parliament, which was May 1694.

Let the Reader now reflect a little upon the Impudence of this Bookseller, and
those that assisted him; who, rather than say nothing against Dr. Bentley,
would tell thus in the Face of the Sun the most palpable Falsehood. The Act of
Printing, says he, expired in April or May, 1693. Therefore the Dr. could not
demand Books of me after that time (as he says he did) upon that Act of
Printing. But the contrary of this, Sir, is most evident from the Act it self;
for it did not expire till May 1694. And the Dr. says, that he demanded the
Books of you, after be was nominated to the Library-Keeper's Office, and before
his Patent was finished, that is, as you your self calculate it; Mr. Ben. p.
113.
sometime between December 23d. (93) and April 18th. (94) so that he demanded
the Books of you while the Statute was in force: And I make no doubt, but he
did really demand them of you, both because it became one in his place to do
so, and because he made the same demand upon some other Booksellers at the same
time, and because you do not offer to disprove it, withiout telling such
manifest Untruths, as all the World may discover.

But you think it utterly incredible, that you should deny the Books to the
King's Library upon Dr. B's asking, when you had granted them without any
Dispute to the Beadle. Why, truly Sir, as you by falsifying an Act of
Parliament have stated this matter, there appears some Reason on your side. For
you make the Dr. and the Beadle demand them at or near the same time. But as
Mr. Keeble has assisted us to put the Case truly, there is nothing at all
improbable in the Dr's Account of this Story. For you might deliver some Books
in June 1693. to the Beadle; and yet your Opinion, or your Humor might be
changed before April 18th. 1694. You say, The Discourse that the Dr. puts in
your Mouth, is all over so absurd and senseless, P. 118.
that no Body that knows you will think you capable of it. But for me, that do
not know you otherwise, than from your share in this Controversy, you will
excuse me, if I think you capable of it, because I find you actually guilty of
worse. And I persuade my self, that every Body else, if he take your Character,
as I do, from the Papers that carry your Name, will be of my Opinion.

As for that Honorable Gentleman, Sir Edward Sherburn's Letter, which he sent
to Mr. Bennet, P. 134.
and ordered to be imediately Communicated to the World; all that I shall
presume to say of it is this; that the Reader, who shall give himself the
trouble of perusing the Dr's Praef. P. 46, etc.
Account of the Matter of Fact, to which that Letter refers, will find it so
well attested, that he will scarce know how to Charge the Dr. with Falsehood,
without bringing some other very great Names under the same Suspicion.

And as for the Letter of the aforesaid William King. J. C. D. of the Commons,
a part of it transcribed, may serve you for Answer to the whole. It Is reputable
both to Men and Books to be ill spoken of by him, and a favorable Presumption
on their side, that there is something in Both which may chance to recommend
them to the rest of the World. Witness, The Journey to London, The Dialogues of
the Dead, and this Letter, all supposed to come from the same hand.

The last of Mr. Bennet's Testimonies the Reverence due to the Memory of the
Dead, obliges me to forbear meddling with.

At the Entrance of my Examination of Mr. Bennet, Sup. p. 143.
I was observing, that he could not have done the Dr. a greater piece of
Service than he has, by writing this Appendix, Wherein he has so fairly
driven the Matter to an Head, and let such light into the Cause, that it can be
no longer a Dispute, where the Quarrel began, and what was that unsufferable
Affront, which rendered the Dr. an Enemy unfit to receive Quarter. For if Mr.
Boil was not affronted by the Dr. or at least, not to that high Degree he
pretends, as I hope, by this time sufficiently appears; there must have been
some other Cause of this Disturbance; which what it should have been Mr.
Bennet, has been pleased at parting, to give us an enlightening Instance. The
Dr. had, P. 131.
it seems, Let slip some untoward Reflections upon a certain, very eminent
Person, for setting People at work upon, etc. Nay, and that, if we may believe
Mr. Bennet, in very homely Language too. Upon which occasion he tells us, what
he once heard a very great Man say of the Dr. etc. And were I for telling Tales
out of School, as Mr. Bennet is, I also could tell, what I have heard some not
very little Men say upon a certain occasion, not hard to be guessed at,
concerning a certain very great Man. It Is a Strange thing that the... of...
should so encourage his young Men in their, etc. But great Men may make as free
with one another as they please: P. 132.
It becomes me to consider my Distance; and so I will; for I shall make no
Reflections my self. But if the Gentlemen of the Half Moon are resolved to go
on in their Insults upon the Dr. at the rate they have hitherto done,
representing one of the greatest Scholars in the Land for a Dunce, Fabular.
Aescopic. Delect. p. 128.
a Man that neither understands Books himself, nor knows how to be Civil to
them that do; they may perhaps in time, (as I fancy they begin to do already)
hear what many very great Men say of Them.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 47. l. 47. r. writing against Dr. B. I. 21. r. to a B. p. 48. l. 19. r.
Copy. p. 50. l. 10. after number, add, out of Suidas, p. 54. I. 32. after 210.
add, as they are in Mr. St. are also marked out in the INDEX to Steph^nus, etc.
p. 56. l. 31. r. Fulgentius Planciades. p. 57. l. 13. r. M.S. p. 93. l. 12. for
u r. v. p. 99. l. 16. r. Eragment. p. 100. I. 12. r. (...) p. 111. l. 20. r.
Acontius. p. 129. l. 6. for Marriage r. Wedding. p. 130. l. 19. r. that, of. p.
131. l. 26. r. (...) p. 138. l. 14. r. Inventione, Hujus.


