An ACCOUNT of the CHURCHES, OR Places of Assembly, OF THE PRIMITIVE
CHRISTIANS; From the Churches of Tire, Jerusalem, and Constantinople.


Described by EVSEBIVS.

AND Ocular Observations of Several very Ancient Edifices of CHURCHES yet
Extant in those Parts.

WITH A Seasonable Application.

By Sir GEORGE WHELER, Preb. of Durham.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for R. Clavell at the Peacock, at the West End
of S. Paul's, 1689.

To the Reverend Dr. GEORGE HICKS, DEAN of Worcester.
Dear and Honored Sir,
I Send You this to express my hearty Wishes, That You may enjoy a Happy
Christmas and New-Year. And also to let You know, That the kind Letter You
writ me long since (wherein You desire me to consider the Description of the
Church of Tire, of the Holy Sepulcher, and of the Apostles at Constantinople,
mentioned and described by Eusebius, in his Ecclesiastical History, etc.) came
again lately to my Hands, with some imperfect Essays of Schemes, that I then
drew of those Noble Structures. These I have now again reviewed and finished,
and have added a short Discourse to them, containing some general
Considerations on the Ancient Churches, or Public places of God's Worship; as
an Introduction to my Observations on these Magnificent Structures.

For the more clear Illustration of all which, I have added a Plane of the
Ancient Greek Church; according to my own Observations of Several very Ancient
Structures, with an Explication of the use of Each part: And then I may
Conclude with an Application, relating to our Own Religious Assemblies; which
may be useful to those who shall come to Consider of proper Mediums, to
Reconcile the Small Differences that are between the Dissenters and Us,
concerning these Matters. For by these things, it is most manifest; That the
Primitive Christians did endeavor to perform the Public Worship of GOD, with
as great External Reverence and Magnificence, as possible; joined to the
Internal Truth, Fervency of Spirit and Mind.

I wish You could have seen these Papers before I Published them; either to
Alter, Correct, or Amend what You may find Amiss, or less to the Purpose. For
You are a Person upon whose Judgment, I shall ever Entirely Rely; knowing the
Great Candor, Perspicuity, Learning and Faithfulness of it. But since I cannot
easily have that Satisfaction, I shall present You with them as I may; as a
Token of the Great Respect and Value I have for You, upon many Accounts;
Especially the Education I had under You, and the Friendship You have ever
Expressed toward me.

If it be a Thing that may prove Acceptable to You, and useful to the Public,
as You intimate; I shall be highly pleased with the Undertaking; as I shall be
always to show the Value I have for You, in any thing You Recommend to my
Studies within the Capacity of

Your Most Obedient Pupil, Most Affectionate Friend, and Most Humble Servant,
G. WHELER.
Westminster. Dec. 20. 1688.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 1. read acknowledged, p. 6. l. 1. Mary's. p. 22. l. 5. (...), l.
17. (...). p. 30. Catechumenoi, p. 31. l. 17. Bishops his, p. 32. Marg. (...),
ib (...), p. 44. l. 10. Capitels, p. 46. l. 10. as Zozomen, p. 66. l. 3. (...),
p. 67. Marg. (...), p. 74. l. 1. (...), p. 75. Marg. (...), p. 76. penult.
(...), p. 86. l. 12. Vessels, p. 89. Marg. (...), p. 97. antepenult. Front, p.
119. l. 12. dele to.

These are the most material Errors, that I have observed to escape the
Printers and Correctors Notice.

CHAP. I. Concerning the Primitive Churches, or Places of God's Worship.
The Introduction.
TO give a just Account of the Public Places of God's Worship in the Christian
Church, it will be fit to begin our Observations from the Practice of the first
Author and Ministers of Christianity.

For tho it be manifest, that GOD is Omnipresent, and the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain him; because he contains both them and the Infinite Abyss of
Space; yet, that he appointed the Separation and Consecration of a Peculiar
Place, to place his Name there; to be Worshipped and Glorified therein, by
those that acknowledged his infinite Power and Authority over them, is so
manifest, that it needs not to be more than mentioned.

That This in the time of their Travel to their Promised Country, and whilst
their unsettled State of Warfare lasted, was like themselves, moveable and
unfixt also.

But so soon as They were arrived to a settled State, and to the glory and
happiness of the highest Pitch of Empire, They began immediately to resolve, to
give all possible Glory to GOD, by establishing the Place of His Public
Worship with the greatest Magnificence they were able.

This David made the Subject of his Zeal and Vows, and his Son Solomon, whom he
made sole Successor to his Throne and Piety, accomplished it.

When again this most Glorious Edifice suffered Destruction and Desolation in
the Punishment of the King and People for their Sins, it was again Rebuilt by
Prophesy, and was honored with the Glory and Presence of the Eternal
High Priest himself.

Who always performed his Public and Stated Devotions to his Father and our
Father, To his God and our God, There.

And when at last he had offered up the only true and real Propitiatory
Sacrifice of himself, and was entered into the Real Holy of Holies, with his own
Blood, ever to make Intercession for us; Those that he left to be his
Successors in the Ministry of Holy things, did not desist from doing their
Devotions there, so long as It and They continued on Earth.

Besides this, it is observable, That our Savior and his Apostles never
forsook the Synagogues, but ever joined in the External Worship of God,
Doctrine and Discipline of their Country, and as often as occasion offered,
taught the People there.

And when afterward (by God's Appointment and the Persecution of their own
Countrymen) they were dispersed into all Nations, They still Repaired to the
Synagogues and Oratories of the Jews, and there first Preached the Gospel.

And when they were no longer suffered to continue their Assemblies with them,
Act. 19. 9.
then only we find that they separated the Brethren, and taught them in another
Place.

Indeed there is no doubt, but in such Cases they still made provision for some
other Places, as those Times and Convenience would permit.

And that There they did their Peculiar Devotions as Christians, to wit, the
Celebration of the Lord's Supper.

For we read in the 2d of the Acts, that they which believed were Baptized,
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, Fellowship, Breaking Bread, and
Prayers.

Tho they continued daily in the Temple with one Accord, yet they Brake Bread
(...), at Home, or every one at his House; or Domatim in each others House by
Turns.

But we find them soon in great Assemblies, which must take up great and large
Places. For in the 4th of the Acts, we find them Return from the Council to
their own Company; which were Assembled at a certain Place, which was Shaken
upon their Prayer, by the Holy Spirit of God.

And in the 21st of the Acts we find, that such Places were Capacious enough to
receive the whole Multitude, who (as St Peter tells St. Paul) must needs come
together.

Their Assemblies at Troas seem to be at a Stated Place, Act. 20.
as well as a Stated Time.

This Place was generally at the House of the Chief and most Pious of the
Faithful Believers.

As at James and Mary's at Jerusalem; at the House of Aquila and Priscilla at
Philippia. So the Church in Nympha's House at Colossea; and in Philemon's
House: Not that their Family was the whole Church of those Places; but that
their Houses were the Stated Places of the Meeting of the Congregation of that
City.

Whether they set apart any particular Part of those Houses, to the Worship of
God and Service of his Church, the Scripture is silent.

Tho the Recording of Christ's Correction and Correption for the Profanation
of the Temple; His Direction how men ought to Approach to offer their Gifts at
God's Altar; 1 Cor. 10. 18, 21.
And the Apostles opposing the Table of the Lord and the Altar they had, Heb.
13. 10.
both to the Jewish and Gentil Altars, does strongly suppose, That they either
had or should have such Separate Places; when they were in Circumstances to do
it, where this Table of the Lord or Christian Altar was kept.

St. Paul is the most plain concerning the Place in 1 Cor. 11. where in the
18th Verse he seems very plainly to have respect to the Place.

(...), When ye come together in the Church. For first otherwise, it would be a
Redundancy in words; When you come together, would be enough* And next he
himself interprets that by the Place, ver. 20. (...), When ye come together
therefore in one Place, or rather In that, or the same Place, with Relation to
(...), for so the Particle (...), Therefore, does join them.

And in the 22th Verse he opposes Private Houses to the Church of God which
may most properly be interpreted of the Place of the Assembly; because he there
mentions the People Assembled, or at least part of them in the same Period. And
so the opposition of Private Houses (in which they had the Liberty to eat and
drink any thing at their pleasure, and not in the Church or House of God) is
most clear and perspicuous.

And thus it is most plain, That these Places set apart for Sacred use, ought
not to be profaned by any Vile or Common use.

What, have ye not houses to Eat and to Drink in? or despise ye the Church of
God, and shame them that have not?

In the Succeeding Ages immediately after the Gospel, there is nothing more
plain, than that they had their Certain, Stated and Appointed Places to worship
God in.

S. Clemens, who Lived in the Apostles time, and whose Epistle to the
Corinthians was anciently Read in the Churches, as part of the Scriptures,
tells us plainly, That Christ appointed both the Times when, the Persons by
whom, and the Places where God should be solemnly worshipped.

Lucian, tho a Heathen, and what he writes is to expose Christianity; yet we
are beholding to him for this, That he describes the Christians met in an upper
Room, adorned and guilt with Gold.

Justin Martyr lived immediately Succeeding these Times: And he describes,
Great Meetings in one place Every Sunday, Apol. 2.
from all the Neighboring Countries to the great Towns and Cities; which must
needs suppose a known and usual Place.

It is Evident, That as it was naturally Necessary, that they must needs Meet
in some Place, and that known; so it cannot be doubted, but that they were as
Great, and as Decent as their Circumstances and the continual Persecutions they
were in would permit.

For Eusebius informs us, That in the beginning of the Reign of the Emperor
Dioclesian, That the Concourse to the Churches was so great, that in every City
they were not content with their Old Edifices, but built New ones, and greater
from the Foundations.

And the Beginning of the Persecution in this Emperor's Reign, entered with the
Destruction of their Churches.

But when Constantine Entered upon the Government, they soon recovered
themselves, and then it is hard to describe the Glory, Splendour, and
Magnificence, where with he caused the Churches or Houses of God to be Rebuilt,
Endowed and Adorned every where.

Eusebius gives us a Specimen of some of them, which he doubts not to compare
with the Temple at Jerusalem.

At the Dedication of that at Tire, he was present, and made an Oration in
Praise of It and Paulinus the Bishop its Founder; and had the Superintendency
of the Building of that over the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem. Of both which I
shall draw you the most exact Platform I can, both from those Lines he has
left us, and what by others I have observed.

CHAP. II. The Description of the Church of Tire, Described by Eusebius, Lib.
10. Cap. 4.
WHen our Present and most Worthy Zerobabel understood by his accurate Wisdom
and Divine Judgment, that it should come to pass, that those Places, which for
Gods sake were made Desert, should in a short time Enjoy those Blessings
according as it was foretold: He did not in the least neglect this Dead
Carcass, after this sharp and grievous Captivity, and Abomination of
Desolation. But when first of all with Supplications and Prayers, by your
mutual Assistance and Suffrages, he had made Atonement to God the Father, and
had gained The Plane of the Church of Tire.

the help of him who only raises the Dead unto Life, He again reared this
fallen Tabernacle. And so soon as he had cleansed and healed it from all Evil,
he invested it again* not with the Old Robe, but so as he had been taught by
the Divine Oracles, speaking expressly to this purpose.

And the Glory of this Latter Hagg. 2. 9.
House shall far exceed the Former.

Therefore taking a far larger compass of Ground, (...)
he Walled it;

Then toward the Sunrising he raised a most magnificent Porch or Gate; (...)
vastly great and first Entrance cast their Eyes upon it: Insomuch, that if any
one do but pass by in the Street, he may be astonished both at the Remembrance
of the past Ruin, and the Glory of the present Mavelous Work; and so he hoped
to draw them to Enter in, to see what is within by that Glorious Prospect from
without.

But when you are Entered within these Gates, our wise Architect suffered not
every one presently with unsanctified and unwashed Feet, to Rush in unto the
Holy things within: But leaving a large Space, as between the first Entrance
and the Temple, he Enclosed and Beautified it with a Portico or Cloister on the
Four Sides, (...)
supported

He left the middle Space of this Quadrangle open to the view of Heaven, to let
in the cool Air, and to be adorned with the resplendent Rays of the Sun.

In this he placed the Sacred Symbols of holy Cleansing; is e. Two Fountains
opposite to

This is the first place, that presents it self to those that enter, every way
most Splendid and Beautiful to behold. And is a proper Mansion either to those
that have need of Institution or are admitted to Prayers.

Being past this Spectacle, by several other more inward Portico's he made the
Entrances into the Temple; which again toward the Sunrising is by Three Doors
on the same one side.

Of which that in the middle is by far the greatest both for height and
widness, and Adorned with Brass Plates, engraven with various Figures, and
bound on with Iron; to which the other two seem joined as Royal Attendants.

In like manner ordering the same number of Porches to the Cloisters, on each
side of the

But he built the Royal House it self with far Richer and more precious Matter,
(...).
sparing no Cost nor Magnificence.

It seems superfluous to describe the Length and Breadth of the Building, and
this resplendent Beauty and Grandeur, a Sight beyond expression; who can
describe the dazzling Variety of each Work, whose Roofs mount up to Heaven; and
upon all these the most precious Cedars of Libanus? Of which even the Divine
Oracles have not been silent: In which it is said, The Trees of the Lord shall
Rejoice, even the Cedars of Libanus, which he has planted.

To what purpose is it now to speak of the admirable Art and most wise
Composure of the whole, and further to discourse of the surprising Convenience
and Beauty of each part: Especially when Ocular Testimony excludes any thing
that can be perceived by the Ears?

Furthermore, when he had thus finished the Temple, and adorned it with
Thrones, which The Thrones.
he erected in the highest or chiefest Place in honor of the Presidents, and
also with lower Seats, placed in Decent Order all over the Temple.

He at last placed the Holy of Holies, to wit, the Altar, in the

Nor did he neglect the Floor, but Adorned and Paved it in a sumptuous manner
with Marble; and then to conclude, returning to those things without the
Temple, (...).
he built Large Apartments

Which Buildings our Truly Peaceful Solomon, the Founder of this Temple, built
for the sake of those who had need of Expiation and Purgation by Water and the
Holy Spirit. Insomuch that, that Heavenly Prediction we formerly mentioned,
subsists no longer in bare words, but now is verified and accomplished indeed.
For now it is truly come to pass, That the Glory of the latter House excels the
former.

CHAP. III. Observations on Eusebius his Description of the Church of Tire.
(...), etc. The Outward Court, in the midst of which the Temple stood. This I
suppose was Square or Oblong, according to the form of the rest of the Temple.
Whether it was open or to shut, with an Outward Gate or Gates joined to the
Wall, Eusebius does not mention; but undoubtedly it was adorned with Entrances
proper to the Place, and proportionable to the Magnificence of so great a Work;
and was either so Low, or with such open Work, as might give a Prospect of the
Front to all that passed by it; i. e. By the Street or Highway; as Eusebius
affirms, (...). Passing by the former Entrances; which the Translator not
observing seems to confound them with the Magnificent (...), Vestibulum or
Porch he speaks of.

(...), etc. This undoubtedly was a Great, High and Magnificent Building, and a
considerable distance from the outward Entrance; because he says expressly,
That not only those that were standing afar off might by it behold what was
within, but also those that cast but their Eyes that way, as they run by the
first Entrances. So therefore I shall place it in the Scheme or Plane of it, I
am to delineate. But with what kind or manner of Architecture it was Built,
Beautified and Adorned, Eusebius has left scope for Fantasy to work, but no
Pattern for the present Describer to Copy. But as to the Situation it was
toward the Sunrising, as I take it, to him going toward it.

(...). But taking a Large Space, as between the Temple and first Entrance.
This again the Translator does not express exactly as it should, but by missing
(...), and (...), renders the whole obscure, and seems to confound the (...),
and this inward Cloister enclosed with a Portico, as follows:

(...). The Perimeter of which he Adorned Transversis Porticibus, i. e. ad se
invicem transversis, with Portico's built Crossways to each other, so as to
enclose the Place in the form of a Square. That is, This Square Court was
enclosed at the four Sides with covered Walks, we call a Cloister.

(...), Inter columnia, as the Translator rightly translateth it; i. e. The
Spaces between the Pillars were enclosed with Wood, of a proportionable height,
wrought in the form of a Net. That is, a kind of Latice-work to look through
into the Court, to have a sight of what was there, without entering into the
Place.

(...), etc. Fountains opposite to each other toward the Front of the Temple.
These I suppose were two Fonts for Baptism; and were placed at each hand in the
open Court, enclosed with the Cloister, one on the Right hand, and the other on
the Left; as one went through the Vestibulum into that Court, toward the
Church or Temple it self; which must needs look very stately. There are two
very fine Fountains placed in this manner in the Court before St. Peter's
Church at Rome.

(...). Pluribus aliis adhuc Porticibus interioribus aditus ad Templum fecit.
He made the Entrances into the Temple with yet more inward Porches. I suppose
this Cloister met up to the Front of the Temple, which was Adorned, Beautified
and Enlarged with several other Ranks of Pillars between it and the Doors of
the Temple. As that of Sancta Sophia at Constantinople is; and indeed every
considerable Church among the Ancients had such a Porch or Pronaos, or (...).
As that at Corfu, built by the Emperor Jovian: That at Troas, if it was a
Church, and at the Covent of St. Luke under the Helicon, built by the Emperor
Romanus. Tho they seem to be much lesser than this of Tire, by Eusebius's
Pompous description.

This therefore as I have observed it in Ancient Buildings, I shall accommodate
to Eusebius his Description.

(...), etc. To this Porch Eusebius joins three Doors on the same side; one
great one in the middle, and two lesser on each hand. This exactly agrees with
that great Building at Troy; which has three great Arches remaining at the
Front of the Building. That in the middle is much bigger, than those that are
on each hand. These three Doors led into three Divisions of the Church, made by
the two Ranks of Pillars, or four great Supporters of the Cupalo in the midst.

(...), etc. If I understand this right, there were three Cloisters, if not
four to this Temple; One in the Front, which he had before described, and two
others, at each side of the Temple one. Which must needs make the whole very
Magnificent and Glorious; yet (...), seem to me more than on both sides of the
Temple. I should rather translate it, On each side of the whole Temple. And
then there must be also one at the East end; and so the Symetry is full. But
this would make an extraordinary difference in the Scheme from other Churches,
that are now extant. For if so, it might probably have four Doors at East,
West, North and South; which none of those Ancient Churches, I ever saw yet
extant, will permit me to be positive in.

(...), etc. On high above these Portico's he contrived several Windows, to let
in much Light into the House, etc.

This shows that these Portico's were of a moderate height; so that Windows
might be made above them, and also that they were on one side contiguous to the
Sides of the Temple.

(...), etc. Ipsam vero aedem Regiam, The Royal Edifice, i. e. The Church: For
so we shall find the Famous Churches (Cathedrals especially) often named by
Eusebius and others.

Ensebius gives us not a perfect Platform of this; so that we must be forced to
Collect from others to make up this Defect. Eusebius leaves us at the Entrance
of the three great Doors, which were it seems at three sides, if not four. If
at four sides, then the Platform must be an exact Square, with a great Cupalo,
or Dome in the middle, sustained by four great Pilasters, as that of Jovian at
Corfu; which to my best Remembrance has but four Pilasters sustaining the
Cupalo; and I think Sancta Sophia, at Constantinople has no more. But if it
was an oblong Square, then I suppose there were more Pillars between those that
held up the Cupalo and the great Doors. I shall suppose this to be an exact
Square; because of the equal Number of Cloisters and Doors at each side.

(...), With Thrones on high, or in the highest or chiefest place. Where, or
how these Thrones were placed in this Church, Eusebius his Rhetorical Style
renders difficult to determine. If he means in the Highest or Chiefest place,
it must be at the Eastern-side of the Church, under the half Cupalo making a
Semicircle. As there are several in Greece, remaining to this Day. As at
Athens, in the Temple of Minerva: At Prossia, in the great Church turned into a
Mosque: And as Monsieur Grelot describes it in Sancta Sophia at Constantinople.
But if there were Doors and Cloisters on each of the four Sides, this could not
be. And he must only mean Altissimis Thronis, as the Translator understands it*
If so they must be placed under the Circle of the great Cupalo, which was
separated from the rest of the Church with Latice work of Wood, wrought most
curiously with various Figures. See Dr. Beveridg. Annot. in Can. Nicen. XI.
sec. 14.
For this (...), Synthronon (as it was also called) was placed within the
Sacred Place toward the Eastern End, against the Wall. But here it was placed
probably only near the Latice Separation, which kept off the People every way,
and was placed in the middle.

(...), etc

At last he placed the Holy of Holies, the Altar in the middle; which he made
every way inaccessible to the Multitude, by a Separation of Wood, etc.

So that if he means by the Middle, the middle of the whole Church, the (...)
must be about it. And, as I believe* in a Semicircular form, as I have seen it;
only with this difference, That in those it is against the Wall at the East
End; but here a Space was left between it and the East Wall without it, as
between it and the South, North and Western Entrances, for the ^ate^umenoi to
come and hear the Word of God; Either at the several great Doors, or a little
within them.

So I shall place the Altar in the Middle, under the great Cupalo; which I
conceive was separated from the rest of the Church by Cancelli, or open work of
Wood, curiously carved and wrought in various Figures and Flowers. And and at
the Eastern side of this Circle I shall place the Thrones, or the Synthronon;
because it was the General use of the Primitive Christians to Worship God
toward the East: And in figure like that remaining at Athens, which is thus:
Three large Degrees or Steps of White Marble, one above another, in a
Semicircular form; high enough to sit upon, and broad enough for the Feet of
those sitting above, and for the Seat of those sitting thereon beneath. Upon
the uppermost Step, is a large Chair of beautiful White Marble* in the middle
of the Segment, alone against the Window, which I suppose was for the
Archbishop. The uppermost Step, I suppose, was for the Bishop's Colleagues, when
they met upon Consecrations of Bishops, Synods, etc. as the Ancient Canons
ordain; and the next for the Presbyters: For that they use to sit with the
Bishops is evident from Zonaras, on the LVIII. Apostolic Canon. (...), etc

For this Reason it is Ordained, (...).
That the Bishop sit on a Seat on High in the Holy Place, to show the Duty of
his Office, to look down upon the People committed to their Charge from above,
and narrowly to watch, observe and oversee them

(...), etc,

There also the Presbyters are commanded to assist the Bishop, and fit with
him, that they also from these High Seats may be induced with Prudence to
inspect the People, and to instruct them, as given to be Fellow Laborers to
the Bishop.

From whence we learn not only, That the Bishop and Presbyters sat together on
High Seats or Thrones; but also that this was placed within the Holy Place, he
calls (...), which plainly in this place signifies not the Altar, or Holy
Table; but the Place where it stood: Tho sometime it signifies no more.

And so (...) in Eusebius may (for ought I see) be understood. And if so, then
the placing of it in the Middle of this Church becomes necessary: But it must
be acknowledged, that this place and the Holy Table are indifferently called by
the same Name (...) in such places as the sense distinguishes them. See Dr.
Beveridg. ibid. N. 12.
And this Holy Place was called also (...), either from the Steps ascending to
it, or the Degrees that were placed in it; And was ordinarily the most remote
place and part of the Church toward the East, as I shall show afterward. But
in this Famous Church of Tire, it seems to be placed in the Middle of the
Church under the great Cupolo also, by its being (...), every way separate from
the Vulgar by Latice of Wood.

From this Passage of Zonaras we are also informed, that from hence the Bishop
and Presbyters use to Preach and instruct the People; which may also be proved
by several others as great, if not greater Authorities. And so the placing of
it here in the Middle was most convenient for a great Multitude of Auditors, to
stand round about him; the Faithful nearest, and the Katechumenoi and Penitents
next to them. So therefore I will place it in this Scheme of the Church of Tire.

(...).

What these Exhedrae and great Edifices were, I find the Learned Valetius is at
a stand to determine: He supposes they were the Baptistory, or place where
they used to Baptize; or Secretarium, the Vestery; Salutatorium, or the Place
to keep the Sick in, an Hospital. Indeed in several Ancient Western Churches, I
have seen the Baptistory by it self a distance from the Churches, as at Piza
and Spalato; but I never saw it in the Eastern. Besides Eusebius speaks of
them, as the two Fountains in the Inner-Court or Cloister; which he calls
(...), the Symbols of holy Cleansing or Purifying. He also assigns the use of
them, to wit, for Mansions for those who have need of Baptism, and those that
have need of Expiation; to wit, the Katechumenoi, who staid there for to Study
and to have Instruction; and the Penitents, who staid there, to entreat the
Church for Absolution, and to do the Penance appointed by the Canons of the
Church.

But some of these Buildings indeed might be assigned for Hospitals for the
Poor and Sick; and especially for Ancient Widows for whom the Ancient Church
had all the Care and Veneration imaginable.

I do not doubt, but among these also were Apartments for the Ministers
attending the Divine Service and Prayers Night and Day; if not for the Bishop
himself: Such as are mentioned by Eusebius, to be annexed to the Portico about
the Church of the Apostles at Constantinople; to wit, Palaces Baths, Lodgins
for Strangers; and several other Necessary places, for the use of those that
kept the Temple; that is, the Ministers thereof, which were built to the
Cloisters.

The Placing of these (as near as I can guess) was parallel to the Great
Vestibulum or Porch on each side; and from thence in a single Row, or in two
Quadrangles, to join up to the Basilico or inward Temple. For so he makes them
on the one part to be joined to the Basilico, (...). And at the other to the
Gates of the Middle Edifice: (...). I have made them therefore to fill up the
vacant Angles, between the Courts on each hand; so that they might have Doors
into the several Cloisters, or Portico's to the Temple; as Eusebius seems to
intimate before, when he says, Those Cloisters were a convenient Habitation,
for those that yet had need of the first Institution or Instruction.

Whether the other two Spaces at the East End were filled up with Buildings, is
not certain; but to fill up the Beauteous Symetry, he every where expresses, I
am apt to believe, they were either for Houses for the Ministers, or Hospitals
for the Poor, Sick and Widows.

And now I think every one must needs confess, That they never saw any thing
more Beautiful, Magnificent and Uniform than this Primitive Cathedral of Tire;
which was built immediately, as soon as they had either Capacity or Liberty to
do it. And we read of no Murmurers, that envyed the costly Devotion of those
Pious Bishops and People bestowed on GOD their Savior and Mighty Redeemer: Nor
were they by any charged with Superstition (either upon that or any other
account) in that Glorious Age of the Church.

The Plane of the Church of the Holy Sepulcher.





CHAP. IV. Of the Church of the Holy Sepulcher.
THIS by the Piety of the Emperor Constantine, was built over the Place where
the Body of our Savior was laid, from the time of his Death to his
Resurrection.

This Place (as the most Eminent Monument of the Truth of the Christian
Religion,) the Heathens had defiled, covered it all over with Rubbish and
Earth, and then built a Temple to their most unclean Goddess Venus.

But the Memory of it being preserved by the Christians, this Profane Temple
was demolished, and the whole unsanctified Materials quite carried away, and
cleansed to the Rock, by the Command of the Emperor; where they found that
Venerable Monument entire and perfect after so many years.

Which gave great Joy to the whole Church, and especially the Pious Emperor;
who resolved there to erect a Glorious Church, beyond any extant in any City in
the World; to be a Triumphant Trophy of the Glorious Victory of Christ over
Death, the World, and the Devil.

And to that end wrote Letters to Macarius the Bishop of Jerusalem, to consult
about the Matter and Form of it. And to all the Presidents and Governors of
those Parts, to be assistant with things Necessary, and with all the most
Precious Materials, and ablest Architects and Workmen. And this Eusebius
describes at length by the Epistle it self; and then in the 33d Chapter of his
Third Book, goes on thus:

Those things the Emperor wrote, Eusebius. lib. 3. De vita Constable. c. 33. How the
New Jerusalem, and the Church of Our Savior was built.
and the effect followed immediately after his words: for in the very place of
our Savior's Sufferings was built the New Jerusalem, over against the Old
Famous City. Which after the Impious Murder of our LORD, suffered the utmost
Desolation, for the sake of its wicked Inhabitants. The Emperor right over
against it, Erected the Trophy of Our Savior's Victory over Death, adorned
with Riches and Beauty. And perhaps this was that New Jerusalem spoken of by
the Prophets, which the Blessed Words in many places in the Spirit of God does
celebrate.

First he Adorned the Holy Cave as the Chief Head and Principal part of the
whole Work; to wit, the Divine Monument, beside which the Angel clothed with
Celestial Light, declared the Glad Tidings of Regeneration by our SAVIOR to
all the World.

This I say, as the Chief of the whole Work, Cap. 34. Of the Building of the
Holy Sepulcher.
His Imperial Majesty adorned with wonderful Pillars, with admirable Beauty,
and with all kind of Ornaments.

Thence you pass into a vast Cap. 35. The Description of the Court and
Portico's.
great Court open to the pure Air; curiously Paved with Beautiful Stones,
encompassed at three Sides with long Portico's.

Because the Royal Temple was joined to that side* toward the Sunrising, Cap.
36.
opposite to the Sepulcher: A wonderful Work, The Description of Walls, etc.
raised to an immense height, He covered the Roof on the Outside with Lead to
keep out the Winter Rains: The Inside he adorned with Carved Work, and with
Planches curiously joined together, that it represented a Great Sea spread all
over the Temple, and so covered all over with Gold, that it makes the whole
Church shine with incomparable Splendour.

About both sides also of the Temple were two Rows of double Portico's, Cap. 37.
containing an upper and a Lower Story; The Description of the double Portico,
etc.
which extended themselves the length of the whole Temple, Pedestals made very
Beautiful without: Three Gates well placed toward the Sunrising, the Entering
Crowd of People.

Opposite to those Gates was the Hemisphere or Cupolo, Cap. 38.
which is the Chief of the whole Work, The Description of the Hemisphere etc.
raised up to the highest part of the Church:

Thence going forward, Cap. 39.
toward those Entrances placed before the Temple, Description of the Courts,
etc.
there is an Open Porticoe's, and beyond the Court-Gates Prospect of those
things that are to be seen within.

This Temple the Emperor built to be a Salutiferous Testimony of the
Resurrection; Cap. 40.
which he adorned with Furniture very Magnificent and Princely. Of the Number
of the Offerings.
It is not to be expressed with what Gifts and Offerings he Enriched it, of
Silver and Gold, and Precious Stones. Of which Time will not permit
particularly to describe the Curiosity of the Work; and the singular Greatness,
and Number, and Variety of them.

CHAP. V. Observations on the Church of the Sepulcher.
(...), Cap. 34.
Eximiis Columnis. What Figure this Magnificent Structure was built in,
Eusebius leaves us to find out some where else; only he says, It was adorned
with fine Pillars.

If the present Building be the same that was built by Constantine (as
Eusebius, or by his Mother Helena a^ Zozomene, and as in all likelihood this
part is, tho not the whole) then it was thus, according to Mr. Sands's Figure:
Sands's Trav. lib. 3. p. 162.


Upon a Circular Foundation is raised a very large and wide Cupolo, with a
double Portico or Gallery sustained by many Marble Pillars surrounding it
within, with upper and lower Story. The number of the Pillars, according to his
Platform, is Sixteen, besides those that support a Great Door entering into the
Body of the Church.

Between the Upper Story and the Roof is a Border of Niches, containing Figures
of Saints in Mosaic Work; which we may suppose of later Date.

The Roof shuts up in a Cupolo, covered within with Beams containing whole
Bodies of Cedars, so as to leave a Round Hole in the Center on the Top, that
lets in both Light and Air; Just under which is the Holy Monument.

(...), Cap. 35.
etc. Thence you pass into a vast Great place into the open Air, i. e.
Eastward; as he goes on with his Description.

At the East Side there is a great Gate, but now it opens only into the Body of
the Church: But in Eusebius's Time it seems there was a great Court between,
encompassed on Three sides with Portico's, or Cloisters sustained with Pillars.
And the Fourth toward the East, and opposite to the Sepulcher, was the Front
of the Basilica or Church; which according to his Description was a vast Great
Church: Cap. 36.
But now must be either much. Bigger than it was then, or it must have been
built further Eastwards; but the Rock of Mount Calvary, to the Foot of which
this Temple reaches, seems to hinder this: So that where the present Body of
the Church is built, I take to be the place where that great Court or Cloister
was.

(...), Cap. 36.
etc. Toward the Sunrising; i. e. Eastward from the Sepulcher, on the
opposite side of the Court was the Church; which he calls here, (...), The
Kingly or Royal Temple.

(...), Cap. 37.
etc. About both sides of the Temple were two rows of double Portico's,
containing an upper and a lower Story or Gallery; to wit, One Row or Gallery
even with the Pavement of the Church, and another above that. Like that now
about the Sepulcher: And so is Sancta Sophia, and St Lukes.

But I do not know, but that by double Portico's, he may mean below as well as
above; like that which Mr Sands describes at Bethlem, Lib. 3. p. 178. which has
two Rows of Beautiful Marble Pillars of one piece, on each side of the Body of
the Church: But here is no upper Portico at present.

(...), etc. Three Doors toward the Sunrising. I suppose he means in the
Front, as they went from the Sepulcher Eastwards by what follows; tho that
there were also Doors at the East End will be manifest by and by.

(...). Opposite to these, i. e. The Doors and the Portico's, was the
Hemisphere; i. e. that the Italians call a Cupolo, and the French a Dome.

(...). Valesius seems much out in this matter, thinking that Eusebius calls
this improperly so; and would rather have it a Hemicyclus, or rather a
Hemicylender: For Eusebius means not that sort of a Quadrant of a Sphere, as is
to be seen at the East End in some Churches; as Sancta Sophia, etc. where the
Altar was placed in such Churches; but properly a Cupolo, which is a Hemisphere
and was here sustained by Twelve Pillars; under it indeed I suppose was the
Altar placed in the Center of the Circle; as at that of Tire: But more plain
here, for at the East End were also Doors to this Church, more evidently than
that of Tire. And in Reality here is yet a great Cupolo standing, as Mr.
Sands's Draft describes it, and may be the same Eusebius speaks of, for ought I
know. Tho there seem to be many other Alterations now from the Ancient Church.

There is indeed a Semicircle below; but Eusebius speaks of its reaching up to
the Summit of the Building, where I doubt not but it was properly a Hemisphere.
But I do not think with him, that it was the furthest Eastern part of the
Church; but so that there was place to go about it without side, where the two
double Portico's met, as the Figure I have made of it, or as it is on the
East End of Westminster-Abby: For,

(...), etc. Thence going forward to the Entrance before the Temple, he placed
an open Court.

Thence going forward, shows plainly, That there were Eastern-Gates or Passages
that led into a great Court, or Cloister; which led to outward Gates, and so to
the Street and Market in a continued Series. Therefore I take it to be plain.
That the Altar was here placed under the Cupolo, but more toward the
Eastern-End, than that I described at Tire; but so with a Semicircle at the
bottom, as the Synthronon might there be placed. And by a Walk under the double
Portico (on each hand) was a Space both about it, and between it and the
Eastern Wall, and there Doors to go out into the Eastern-Cloyster, Gates and
Street. The present Platform does not altogether answer this; for all the
Cloisters and Courts are gone, and the Entrance now is only South.

(...), The first Court. I take this to be the same that he calls (...), in the
10th Book of his Description of the Church of Tire, (...), with a Wall about
the whole Circuit of Ground, to be the Fence of the whole; which it seems was
also Beautified here with covered Walks or Cloisters, sustained with Pillars,
as well as the Inner Courts, he calls here (...), and in the Title (...), as
Valesius observes.

(...), Exedrarum. It seems by this Title, there were also Outhouses and
Buildings to this as well as to that of the Church of Tire; tho he describes
them not; and we may suppose joined to the (...), or Outward Court; or else to
the Outsides of the other Courts. Things are now so transposed and blended here
by the Little Fables, Legends and Superstitions of the Romans, that there is
now but a Little of the Ancient Glory, Beauty and Splendour of this Magnificent
Edifice remaining.

CHAP. VI. Of the Building of the Martyrium of the Apostles at Constantinople.
Eusebius de vita Constant. Lib. 4. Cap. 58, 59.
AFTER this the Emperor Fig. 3.
began to build the Martyrium in Memory of the Apostles, in the City called by
his own Name. And when he had built the Temple up to an immense Height, he
rendered it most Splendid with various sorts of Stone, Casing it all over from
the Bottom to the Roof therewith. The Roof Within-side he adorned with fine
small Work, embelish'd all over with Gold. The Roof Without-side he covered
with Brass instead of Tiles, to secure the whole The Plane of the Church of the
Apostles at Constantinople.



Building from the Rains; which also he made shine with Gold, insomuch that it
dazelled the Eyes of them that beheld it afar off, by the Repercussion of the
Sunbeams from it. The circular Chancel or Cupolo was enclosed about with
Network of Brass, gilded with Gold.

And this Temple by the Emperor's Great and Pious Care, Cap. 59.
was yet Adorned after this manner: About it was a Great open Court, letting in
the fresh Air: Portico's making a Cloister, encompassing the Court and Temple
in the Middle. Portico's,

There he placed Twelve Cases, Cap. 60.
as it were Sacred Pillars in Memory of the Apostles,

CHAP. VII. Observations on the Temple of the Apostles.
WHat Form or Figure this was built of, Eusebius, gives us no account; only
that it was placed in the midst of a large Square and open Court, adorned and
accommodated with a Cloister on the four Sides, to which were joined Palaces,
Baths, Places to Lodge Strangers, and other Conveniences. But Valesius out of
Gregory Nazianzen (In Carmine de Insomnio Anastatiae) shows us, That the Temple
it self was built in form of a Cross.

(...),
(...).
And the Magnificent Temple of Christ's Disciples, divided in four Parts, with
Sides in Form of a Cross.

That is, I suppose, Square without, and Divided within into four Parts, in
Form of a Cross; as most of the Ancient Churches I have seen in Greece, and now
extant, remain to this day: As that of Sancta Sophia, at Constantinople;
Jovianus at Corfu; of Romanus at S. Luke's Convent under the Helicon; that at
Heraclea, etc. Which have a Cupolo raised in the middle; with half Cupolo's
joined to the East, West, North and South; and small Cupolo's filling up each
Corner. Which being covered with Brass, and Gilt with Gold, must needs make a
most Splendid show to all that beheld it afar off, and near at hand.

Indeed Mr. Sands gives us a Platform of One built by the same Emperor, or his
Mother Helena, much Longer than Broad, and so more like our Western Form of the
Cross.

(...). This Valesius thinks was either the Cupolo, or place for the Altar. I
take it to be both, that is, the whole Chancel, from the Top to the Bottom;
which was of a Circular Figure, (...), or as I think it should be written
(...), Circulari forma, to wit, a Circle at the Bottom, and covered with a
Cupolo or Hemisphere on the Top.

(...). This Network round about the (...) was made of Brass and Gold, i. e.
Brass gilded. This I take to be the Cancelli, or Separation of the Holy Place
or Chancel from the rest of the Church. Of which Network Separation he has
spoken in the Church of Tire, and elsewhere.

(...). The Perimeter, Round or on every Side, or every way about. This
intimates that the Chancel was not against the Eastern-Wall, but had a Space
between; as those of Tire and Jerusalem.

(...), Capsas, quasi sacras Columnas. These Monumental Pillars, I suppose,
were such as that of the Emperor Marcianus, remaining now at Constantinople,
with a Vessel or Urn on the Top; unless they were the Pillars sustaining the
VestiBulum.

In what part of the Church this was placed, Eusebius gives no Account. One
would think they were in the Middle under the Great Cupolo, by the placing of
Constantine in the Middle, but perhaps in the Body of the Church; because he
says, they were placed six on the one side, and six on the other. Tho S.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. Hom. 26. in Ep. 2 ad Cor. 7. p. 41
That Constantine was Buried, In Vestibulo aedis Apostolorum, quasi Eorum
Janitorem, In the Porch of the Church of the Apostles, as their Doorkeeper. If
so, then these Monumental Pillars must be placed there also, according to
Eusebius his Description. That which Valesius brings out of Zonaras to
reconcile Eusebius and S. Chrysostom, only proves in my Opinion, That this Part
of the Church that Constantine built, both for the Memory of the Apostles and
his own Monument, was the Vestibulum of the Church.

(...). This I Translate Palaces; because it is in the Plural Number, and
because they were joined to the other Conveniencs of the Place, for those that
had the Care and Government of it. For there is no likelihood that there were
more Churches than One, which was the Famous great Building he is describing,
Dedicated to the Remembrance of the Apostles, and which in the beginning of the
Chapter he calls (...). Tho in the Singular Number it is generally used for a
Chief Church, to wit, a Cathedral, or some Great and Magnificent Building.

These Accommodations in this Church were joined to the Peribolus, or Outward
Court, and the Cloisters about it. And I believe were Houses for the Bishop,
Presbyters, and the other Clergy that had the Government of the Church of
Constantinople.

CHAP. VIII. A Description of the Ancient Churches and Assemblies of the
Primitive Christians.
FRom these several Particulars, and my own Observations of several Ancient
Buildings, I think I may now venture to make a General Description of the
Ancient Church. Of which I shall first Present you with a Scheme of the
Prospect and Platform of it, Fig. 4, and 5.
and then descend to the Particulars.

The Church Yard.
The Ancients usually built their Churches in the midst of a Large piece of
Ground, which (...)
they called (...), or the Court or Yard that encompassed the A Plane of the
Primitive Churches. Fig: IIII.

A Prof^^ect of the Ancient Church. Fig: V.

Whole, The Outward Court, in allusion to that of the Old Temple of Jerusalem.
This we find belonged to all these Three Magnificent Structures, we have out of
Eusebius described: Nor was this particular to the Jews and Christians, but was
also usual among the Pagans about their most Famous Buildings; to wit, their
Temples and Gymnasiums; as Pausanias, Vitruvius, Paus. Attic. Temple. Jovis.
Vitruvius Lib. 5. c. 11. Wheeler's Trav. in Attic. and Corinth. Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. Lib. 3. c. 39.
and Ancient Inscriptions inform us. This is called (...), The first Court, by
Eusebius, in his Description of the Church at Jerusalem. These we may suppose
were the same that sometimes they called their Martyria, the places where their
Martyrs were Buried, and where they often Met to celebrate the Memory of their
Famous Martyrs, Aug. Lib. 8. De Civit. Dei.
tho their Churches were Demolished: And there they Buried their Dead. And
being Walled about, as Eusebius describes it, was to secure it from the
Profanation of Man or Beast.

This Wall had sometimes a Cloister about it; as the Church (...)
of the Apostles of Constantinople. And to these Cloisters were built
Apartments for Various Occasions of those that appertained to the Church; as
Houses for the Bishop and Presbyters, for the Poor, Widows, etc.

(...), or (...).

From the Entrances of this Outward Court, you went strait forward Porch, or
Portico of the Church, which the Greeks called (...), or (...), which
undoubtedly were very Magnificent; both by Eusebius's Description, and the
Remains and Ancient Ruins of many I have seen. That of the Emperor Jovian at
Corfu is sustained by Corinthian Pillars of Marble; That at Troy with vast
Pillars of Marble, with all the parts of most Beautiful Architecture to
accompany it: That of Sancta Sophia at Constantinople is double, but seems
somewhat Encombred with Modern Buildings of a Little Brick Steeple, and others
unproportioned to the Magnificence of the rest of the Fabric. The inward Roofs
of them are Arched and Encrusted with Mosaic Work in diverse Figures, and the
Groundwork gilded.

The Reverend and Learned Dr. Beveridge seems to make this distinct from the
Three parts, that the Ancient Church was divided into; according to Simeon
Thessalonicensis, cited by him: And for another Reason the Divine Temple is
divided into Three parts. To those without or before the Temple; the Temple;
and the Bema, or Chancel (...). Sym. These. de Templ.
. But (...), seems manifestly to me* to point out the same thing with (...),
the Porch or Gate of the Temple See Pausanias Boeot. p. 557. Ed. Han. (...).
Schol. in Sophoclen. That in the Front of the Temple. Virtuvius, Lib. 4. c. 4.
: So (...) was used by the Ancient Greeks, to signify the Porch or Entrance
into their Temples, and not as a Part within their Temples; but the first part
at the Entrance. This Symeons Periphrasis of it makes manifest; (...), Those
without, or before the Temple. The same also that Zonaras makes (...), Without
the Church; and (...), Without the Churchyard; and interprets (...), by (...),
in the 46th Canon of Carthage, Balsomon makes to be (...), upon the 87th. Can.
in Trullo.

Besides I see no part of the Ancient Buildings accommodated to make them
distinct, no more than the present: So that I can no longer doubt, but that
they were the same. Whether there were any other Separation within or no made
of Wood, I cannot determine, perhaps in Lesser Churches, where there was no
Portico, it was divided into Three parts within the Doors, as Dr. Beveridge has
designed it.

From this Portico, the Entrance The Church Doors.
into the Church was by Three large Doors; the biggest of which was in the
middle. These were those (I suppose) that were called (...), The Great Doors;
and sometimes (...), (...). Cod. de Ob. Cur. Constable. aut cap. 15.
The Beautiful Gates. But I suspect the Moderns confound those often with those
of the (...), or Chancel, which are sometimes called by that name. These Doors
at the Entrance of the Church, Eusebius speaks of in his Church of Tire; and
compares the middle Door to a Queen, (...). Eusebius. Lib. 10. cap. 4.
with her two Royal Attendants on each hand.

These Three Doors led into three General parts of the Church; extended in
Length from West to East: The great Middle Door leads into the Body or Nave of
the Church EFG.
, and the two Lesser ones (at each Hand) into the Isles N G.
.

And now you are entered into the NAOS, NAOS.
or CHVRCH, properly so called; which was variously divided into diversity of
Stations, according to the different Sex, Qualities, (...). In Eucholog. in
Ablutione Sacrae mensae.
and Degrees of the Assembly. The Men in the Middle or Body of the Church, and
the Women (as to this day) on each Hand, in the (...), or Isles: The Married
Women on one hand, and the Virgins on the other. And in some places in
Galleries over those Isles, separated from the View of the Men by a Latice. That
the Men were Anciently separated from the Women; and the Men again Subdivided
in the Latin Church also, is manifest from that Fragment of an Inscription
found at Rome, and mentioned by Dr. Cave.

-- EX DEXTRA PART VIRORUM. This Division of the Church appears in all the
Ancient Churches I have seen.

That the Ancient Churches were also divided into diversity of Stations,
according to the different Christian Qualities, or Ecclesiastical Degrees of
the Persons, is also manifest; tho to place each particular Order exactly,
there is some difficulty. I have not observed any Separation in Ancient
Churches, between the Great Doors and the (...), or Chancel, but those Doors
that let into the Chancel. Tho undoubtedly, as there was a Separation by
Cancelli, or Open work, between the Stations of the Clergy and their holy
Ministry from the Laity; being the Station of the (...), or Faithful: So
likewise there was a Separation between the Station of the Faithful, and the
Penitents and Learners.

And this we find plain, That the Penitents and Learners were placed next to
the Door; the Faithful next to them, Eastward; and the Clergy in the (...), or
Chancel, in the most Eastern part of the Church.

Eusebius makes none, but the Faithful to enter within the Doors, and assigns
his Portico's and Cloisters for the Learners and Penitents. But that some of
them, if not all, were likewise permitted to come within the Church-Doors, is
also evident by that Passage of Gregory Thaumaturgus (...), etc. Greg.
Thaumaturg. Can. 11.
: The Place of the Hearers is within the Gates in the Narthex.

But Balsamon permits them not to come into the (...), (...). Bals. Syn. Ancyr.
Can. 17.
or The Gates of Salvation; yet still places them in the Narthex. So that
either there must be some Separation of Wood between the Station of the
Faithful and the Great Doors: Or by Narthex must be meant the same with (...)
and (...).

Perhaps in Lesser Churches, where they had not these Outward Porches, they
made use of some Separation of Wood within instead thereof: The Space between
which and the Outward Doors they called (...). And there probably sometimes
they placed the Font or Columbethra: Tho Eusebius places it in the Quadrangle
of his Cloister in the open Air. It was in the Porch at Athens; and in the
Court of Sancta Sophia.

There are some Passages in their Liturgies and Pontificals, (...). Eucholog.
(...). Euchol. in Ord. S. Minist.
which seem to make the whole Body of the Church, between the Great Doors and
the Chancel, to have been called the Narthex, as their often coming out of the
Holy Doors, i. e. from the (...) into the (...), does imply.

But I doubt not but this Variety arises from more Modern Custom; since they
retain not those several Stations they had in Old time; all Men now mixing
together in the Body of the Church, and the Women on each side in the Isles.

But however that was, this is evident, that the (...), or Learners, and the
several Degrees of Penitents, had their Station at the Entrance of the Church,
nearer to the Doors than the Faithful, and in this order; according to the
several Degrees of the Penitents; which were Four:

First, Those who began their Penance, or came first to do their Penanco,
desiring Pardon of God and his Church; who were called (...), or those that
Wept without the Church, and were not yet permitted into any part of it.

The next Degree were the (...), Those who had done a certain prescribed time
of Penance by the Canons; and so were permitted to come and hear the Scriptures.

The Third Degree were called (...), or Substrati, Those who were Humbled, and
had performed their Penance a Degree of time longer, and were permitted to
stand within the Church some part of Divine Service.

The Fourth, (...), were permitted to stay and partake of the Prayers with the
Faithful* but, not to Communicate with them.

Each of these had a proper Place assigned them.

The (...) were manifestly without the (...), or (...), if not without the
(...), or Outward Court; which was not accounted so Holy as the (...) or (...),
as Balsamon observes (...) -- Bals. in Dionys. Alex. cap. 2. That (...). and
(...), were the same, is plain by Eusebius, in his Description of the Church of
the Holy Sepulcher.
. So then the (...), or Porch, must remain to some others; who we find were
either the (...), or Learners, and the (...), or those Possessed with Evil
Spirits Vid. Church of Tire. Eusebius.
.

Then the (...), and the (...), or Substrati: For in this Order we find them
generally numbered (...) Eccl. Hierarch. cap. 3. Dionys. Areop.(...). Ibid.
. So that counting backward from the (...), who were next to the Faithful,
behind the Pulpit (...). Bals. In Schol. ad 15. Can. Laodic.
it is evident that the (...) were next to them; and next to them the (...);
and then the (...); who probably stood as near each other, and to the Station
of the Faithful, to hear the Scriptures, etc. as the Number of them would
permit; but so as without confusion either of Sex, or of their own Rank. So
that those that were Women, stood in the Station of Women; and Men in the
Station of Men: And so that upon the Notice of the Deacon, each of them might
go out without Disorder to the rest* when their Respective Services and Prayers
were performed, according to the 19th Canon of the Council of Laodicea.

Between the (...) and the Faithful, (...).
stood the AMBO, or Reading Desk (...). Blast. in. lit. M. Schol. Hermen.
. It stood opposite to the Holy Doors of the Chancel (...). Sym. These. de
Sacram.
, and the Beautiful Gates of the Entrance: So we may suppose, it stood about
the Middle of the Church; and either by some Steps or Separation of Wood
distinguished the Station of the Penitents from the Station of the Faithful;
viz. the (...); whose Station was behind; that is, Westward.

This Pulpit, or Desk, had a double Ascent to it; one toward the (...), and
the other toward the Entrance (...), Cod. de Off. Cur. Constable. c. 17.
; and therein sometimes the Emperor had a Place.

I have seen no Marks of this, either in the Ancient or Modern Greek Churches;
for the Ambo is now placed on the North-side of the Nave of the Church, nearer
to the Outward Gates than the Bema; as I observed in the Temple of Minerva, at
Athens, one yet remaining of white Marble curiously wrought; which seems to
stand so in the middle of the whole Church that it is as near to the (...) or
Portico, as to the Bema or Chancel. Therefore it may be supposed to stand near
the Entrance of the Station of the Faithful.

The principal use of this Ambo was, to Read the Scriptures to the People;
especially the Epistles and Gospels. They Read the Gospel there yet, and not at
the Altar. The Singers also were placed there, to begin and lead the Tunes of
the Psalms. St. Chrysostom was the first, that Preached to the People from
thence, as I before observed, by reason of the great Number of People that
crowded to hear him.

On the oher side of the Pulpit was the Station of the Faithful,

Eusebius, seems to hint. That (...)
this was adorned with Seats or Benches in Order all over the Church; as the
Bema or Chancel was with Thrones, for the Bishops and Presbyters. But now the
Body of the Church among the Greeks is accommodated with Stalls, and a Throne
for the Bishop at the Right hand, at a little distance from the Bema; much
resembling our Quiers with Doors on each hand into the Isles: But the Bishop and
Clergy sit, or rather stand next to the Bema, to Sing and Officiate; and in the
rest, the Laity of better Sort; and in the middle the rest; as I observed at
the Catholicon at Athens, as they now call their Cathedral Churches. But in the
Ancient Church, this was the Station of those only who lived a Godly, Righteous
and Sober Life; and therefore were called the Faithful. And those who had so
long persevered in Repentance, that they were raised again to that degree of
Holiness, required by the Word of God and the Church; tho they were some time
Longer proved, before they were permitted to participate of the most Sacred
Symbols, being in their last degree of Penitence. From their admission into the
Assembly of the Faithful, (...) Greg. Thau. Can. 9.
they were called (...), or (...), and staid and were partakers of the Prayers
of the Faithful, but did not Communicate of the Holy Sacrament with them.

The Station of the Faithful was divided into several Parts, as I hinted
before; and is evident from that old Fragment of an Inscription before
mentioned,

-- EX DEXTRA PART VIRORUM. So that there were Stations for the Men on the
Right hand, and on the Left. And that the Station of the Men is mentioned, it
shows evidently there was a distinct Station, or Stations, for the Women. For
the Virgins also had a distinct Station from the Married Women, Orig. Tract.
26. In Matthaeum.
as Origin shows. Which were undoubtedly either the Isles on either hand, or the
Galleries over them, or both; as it is in the Greek Church to this day. Which
seems not only very decent, but now adays (since Wickedness so much abounds)
highly necessary: For the General mixture of Men and Women in the Latin Church
is notoriously Scancialous; and Little less is their Sitting together in the
same Pews in our London Churches.

These Parts of the Church the Pious and Learned Dr. Beveridge shows were
called (...), out of the Euchologium or Greek Ritual. And (...)
Eusebius calls them (...), or Porches, both the Upper and Under, in the Church
of the Sepulcher at Jerusalem. The Latin Church called them Alae, Wings thence
the French, Les-Ailes; and we more cor^uptly, Isles, from their resemblance of
the Church to a Dove.

Next to the Station of the Faithful is the (...), (...).
or that we call CHANCEL, tho differing very much from Ours in Bigness, being
much Less than Diaconicon, or Prothesis, and the Apothesis, from North to
South. It Is proportion is about the same with the Altar? within the Rails in
Our Church.

This was ever esteemed the Most Sacred Place of the whole Church; being
appropriated to the Most Holy Mysteries, Ministry and Function of the Christian
Religion: And therefore is called (...), or Chancel, (...).
The Holy of Holies by the Ancients, with respect to the Temple at Jerusalem
The Holy (...), or Place of Sacrifice or Altar: The (...), The Mercy Seat:
(...), The Tribunal: (...), The Throne of Christ, and Altar of God; according
to the diversity of Respects and Ministerial Functions performed therein; as
the Greeks Typically interpret it. (...).


This was divided from the rest of the Church by Open-work of Wood; as Eusebius
describes it, (...), With Nets or Network made of Wood; which only kept off
the Crowd, but hindered not the Sight, nor Voice from being distinctly heard.

This Separation in the Temple of Minerva at Athens, was made of Jasper and
Serpentine, and other curious Colored Marble Pillars, Small, and at a
convenient distance from each other: And at Prussia also, it is divided with
Small Pillars.

They called this Separation (...), Greg. Naz. Orat. ad 150. Episc. Eucholog.
and (...); which the Western-Church called Cancelli; whence we take our word
Chancel.

This has usually now Three Doors, to go into the (...), as it is divided into
Three Parts. The Three Doors are commonly called together, (...), The Holy
Doors: And I believe in Latter days the (...), The Beautiful Gates. For that of
the Euchologium seems plainly to me, (...). Euchol. in Ord. S. Minist.
to be coming out of the (...), by the Beautiful Gates, and returning again by
them into the (...); because he is there to Perfume the Brethren with Incense;
whose Station is from the Choir-Doors, or Step downwards toward the Great
Doors. And so I take the Modern signification of Narthex, to be in general the
Nave or Body of the Church; there being no Separation now between that and the
Three Doors that go out into the Porch.

This Separation now is made of Boards and Wenscot, instead of the Network of
the Ancients; and is Painted with the Pictures of our Savior, and Blessed
Virgin, and the Apostles; absolutely against the Practice and Precepts of the
Primitive Church: As that famous Act of Epiphanius, of Renting a Painted
Cloth-hanging, only as a Curtain over the Door, makes manifest. Nevertheless,
the Middle Door into the (...) is so large now, that it discovers whatsoever is
done within, tho not so well as when it had only Open-work of Wood. It is much
larger than the other Two; and I believe it is that which is called the (...)
in the Typicon, (...). In Typ.
The Royal or Kingly Door. This leads into the Holy of Holies, the (...), or
Thusiasterion, peculiarly so called; for the other Doors lead into two other
small Apartments on each Hand, for the Preparing the Sacrament, and Laying up
the Ve^^^ls and Garments.

This is now; and I believe also many times Anciently, was placed at the
farthest Eastern-side of the Church, under a Concave or half- Cupolo, like a
great Nich; being a half-Sylender, Semicircular at the Bottom, and covered with
a quarter of the Sphere at the Top, and there joined to the Great Cupolo by an
Arch; just below the Hemisphere of the Cupolo; taking up the whole Breadth of
the Nave of the Church; being usually of the same Diameter with the Cupolo.

But that this was otherwise in some Churches Anciently, is manifest from those
we have described out of Eusebius; especially that of Jerusalem, where there
are both Eastern and Western Doors into the Church: Therefore most probably the
(...) was there placed, under the Great Cupolo, as he says expressly in the
middle; which when they Preached from thence, was manifestly the most
commodious for the Hearers It is observable, That that of Troy, where the (...)
was at the furthest Eastern side, that the Length from East to West, is but
half so much as it is from North to South, undoubtedly for the sake of Hearing.
.

I have seen this in some Churches raised up from the Plane of the Church by
one single Step, and in others Equal to it; whence some have thought it to be
called Bema, or Step.

But This, as far as it was without the Separation, was called (...), or
Solium, or Throne; because the Emperor had there his Seat or Throne; as the
Worthy Dr. Beveridge most probably Conjectures.

The first thing that presents it self within this Sacred place, is the Holy
Table of the Lords Supper; which they call generally (...), The Holy Table; and
sometimes (...), The Altar: From whence the whole place was also Anciently so
called, and that most frequently.

It is generally of Stone, sustained Athens seems to be placed something
without this Concave, according to the Scheme I then took of it: So that there
are two Rows of Pillars; one on the Western, and the other on the Southern side
of it.

This had (I know not whether very Anciently or no) a Canopy over it, sustained
by four Pillars. At Athens, it was sustained by four Beautiful Pillars of
Porphyry, with Corinthian Capitals of White Marble, which were very stately.

This Canopy was in the shape of a Cupolo or Hemisphere; and therefore the
Mystiologists compared it to the Heaven, and the Table to the Earth in the
midst of it, figuring our Savior's Descent and Ascent from Heaven.

The Unity of the Altar was Sacred in the Primitive Church, and is so to this
day in the present Greek Church. They never had any more than one Altar in one
Church, (...). Ign. Ep. ad Phil.
no more than more Bishops than one; as S. Ignatius says: As there is one Body
of the Lord, (...), etc. Ign. Ep. ad Magnes.
and One Cup for the Union of his Blood; so there is One Altar and One Bishop.
They never Crammed their Churches with Altars against every Pillar and Post and
in every Corner of the Church, dedicated to every Saint and Angel in Heaven and
Earth; as the Romans do now.

Beyond this was the Holy Throne, (...), together with the Consistory; as I
think I may call it. This was placed against the Wall of the Semicircular
Concave, consisting of several Steps or Degrees Semicircular also. I remember
they are in number Three, and of White Marble in that of Athens and Prussia;
which are so High and Large, that they are fit both to sit on; and for those
that sit a Degree higher, to place their Feet on.

These Degrees were the (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. ad 150. Ep.
(...); The Throne (...). Balsam. in 2. Can. Syn. Constantinop.
.

This might well be called also (...), from the Degrees or Steps; but most
properly as (...) signifies a Tribunal or Judgment Seat (...). Dio. Lib. 44.
. It signifies also Surgestum, or a Pulpit, whence Orators use to plead, as
Monsieur Goar observes out of Demosthenes, who speaks of himself (...), as
going up into the (...), or Pulpit, to speak an Oration.

Upon such a high Tribunal or Scaffold we often see the Emperor standing, and
sometimes sitting in Medals and Ancient Bass-Relieves; both in Adlocutions to
the Army. and in distributing their Bounty to the People: But these are of a
different Figure from those in the Church; for those were Square, and these
Semicircular.

This was looked upon in the Christian Church as the Tribunal or Throne of
Christ and his Apostles, and as the Mercy Seat of God in the Temple; and
therefore was also called (...), (...). Typ. Sab. cap. 5.
The Mercy Seat.

Codinus informs us, (...). Cod.
That the Emperor Justinian covered this with Gold, Tho not, as he says, for
the Priests to stand upon to Reverence the Table: But piously to Adorn the
(...), or Throne as the Chair of Christ, and his Apostles; In opposition to the
Chair of Moses, and conformable to that Glorious Throne, or Mercy-Seat. erected
in the Temple, Adorned with Cherubims on each hand; as Seraphick Attendants
thereon* And not to be Worshipped, as the late rather Subtle, than Ignorant
Bishop of Oxon would Insinuate to the World.

On this Throne, and so on the High Seat, was placed the Written Word of God,
or Bible; as Mr. Goar, by the Connection of his Discourse, seems to intimate out
of Symeon Thessalonicensis. Sym. These. de Temp.
And so indeed it was placed in the Holy Council of Nice, on a Throne;
intimating, That that was the Law of God, whence all true Judgment, concerning
either Faith or Manners, must be taken: And according to that, we must both be
judged by Christ, and as his Ministers, Judge in the Church of God for
Edification, and not Destruction.

On this Throne and Synthronon, both the Bishop and his Presbyters use to sit
together; and that very Anciently as S. Ignatius intimates in almost all his
Epistles: Where he compares the Bishop in the Church to Christ, and the
Presbyters to the Apostles. And Eusebius tells us, That the Chair of S. James
of Jerusalem (wherein he Taught the People) was kept till his time.

But whether the Bishop did always sit in the Highest Seat, or Throne, or in
the middle of the Synthronon may be questioned, from that of Balsamon; (...).
Balsam. in 2. Can. Constable. (...).
in his Commentary upon the 2d Canon of the Council of Constantinople: Wherein
he says, It was granted to some Bishops, even to sit upon the Throne, in the
Holy (...) of the Church committed to his Charge. But that They did sit on the
(...) together, is evident from the LVI. Canon of the Council of Laodicea.

But this was not in Ancient times, to make a Vain glorious and Pompous show in
the Church; but besides the Representation of Christ's Judgment. Seat, to put
the People in mind of the Great Judgment to come, it was the Chair of Christ
and Seat of the Elders; from whence the Bishops and Priests use to Preach to
the People, in the Name, and by the Authority that Christ committed to them.

So Zonaras tells us, (...). Zonar. in Can. Apost. 58.
That the Bishop was placed in a Seat on high, in the (...), or Holy Place;
signi^ying, That he ought ( according as the Canon prescribes) to take care of
the Clergy, and teach the People Piety; to inspect, and diligently to observe
the People under him from that Sublime place. --

-- And that there also the Presbyters are commanded to assist, and sit
together with the Bishop; that they also may be admonished from that High Seat,
to Teach and Instruct the People in holy Life and Conversation, as they are
given to be Fellow Laborers to the Bishop.

Socrates also and Zozomen inform us* Socrat. Lib. 6. c. 5. Zozom. Lib. 8. c. 5.
That this was the Ancient Custom; showing, That S. John Chrysostom was the
first that Preached in the Ambo, or Reading Desk of the Church, by Reason of
the Multitude of People, that Crowded up to Hear him. On which Valesius brings
us an old Constitution or Law of King Childebert, importing the same thing;
Baron. An. 407. n. 17. (...). Greg. Nazian. Orat. 32. ad CL. Ep.
and then sends us to Baronius; who shows us. That Gregory Nazianzen Preached
within the Bema in the same Church that Chrysostom Preached in the Ambo, or
Pulpit. The place he mentions is at the Latter end of his Epistle to the 150
Bishops; where he bids all his Church, his People, and every thing in it. Adieu.

Adieu, O my Chair! This Envied Height, and this Dangerous Council or
Consistory of Chief Priests: Priests become Honorable as well by Reverence, as
by Age. And you, whoever you be, about the Holy Table in any other Ministry of
God, and coming nigh to God, who in near at hand --

And a little after:

Adieu, ye Lovers of my Sermons, and you who run and concur with me; and you
both Public and Private Writers; and thou Oppressed Chancel, by those that
Crowd about the Word of God.

Those Verses of Prudentius prove also the same thing: Prudent. Peristeph. him.
11. de S. Hyppolyr.
Font sub adversa Gradibus sublime Tribunal
Tollitur, Antistes praedicat unde Deum.


This manner of Sitting together, and both Preaching to the People; and I
believe Judging, and pronouncing the Church Censures from thence; was also the
Reason that the Assembly, or consistory of the Bishop and his Presbyters, was
called Math. 26. 59. Mar. 14. 55.
(...), and (...) 1 Timothy 4. 14.
, mentioned in the Scripure, and often in S. Ignatius's Epistles, and here by
S. Gregory; as if they were Successors of the (...), or Council of the Chief
Priests and Elders among the Children of Israel.

On each hand of this (...), or Tribunal, or Chancel; viz. to Cupolo; as there
is in like manner over the four Corners of the Temple; which makes the whole
Symetry of the Roof of it most Beautiful and Uniform. Each of these have Two
Doors; one to Enter in from the Isles, and another into the (...). That toward
the North was called (...); as the Reverend Dr. Beveridge shows at large; but
it is now called (...) by the present Greeks* and in the present Rubricks both
of S. Chrysostoms and S. Basils Liturgies. There is usually a little Table in
it, and a Nich in the Wall; where they lay up the Bread that is offered by the
People, or brought in for the Sacrament. There also they prepare the Sacrament
with some Ceremonies, before they carry it solemnly in to the Altar; and
thither they carry it again, to Eat and Drink up the Remains, when the Liturgy
is finished. Which Table they call (...), as well as the Bread, (...); and
thence it is they carry it solemnly into the (...), coming first out by the the
Door toward the Ilo; and thence enter in by the Great Door in the Middle. The
other on the South side they at present call (...); which is commonly furnished
with Shelves one above another; whereon they lay their Books, their Vestments,
and holy Vessels, in such places as they dare keep them in the Church.

I have observed these Places in very Ancient Churches; as at St. Luca and
Corfu. And those vast Ruins of Troy seem much to have been a Christian Church,
from this conformity of two Lesser Concaves on either hand of the Great one in
the Middle.

The Material Church of the Ancients was thus Prepared and Adorned, for the
Solemn and Public Worship of Almighty God. And thus Contrived for the
Accommodation of every Class of the Spiritual Building, to the Edification of
the whole in Faith and Love; according to the Measure of Grace that every one
had received from the Lord. Here you see Magnificence without Gaudiness;
Splendour and Gravity mixed together; Comeliness and Beauty, with Order and
Reverence: And all far from Foppery and Superstition. The Edification of the
whole in Love, was the chief Concern of those truly Great and Zealous Pastors.
Tho they neglected not the External Reverence, Decency and Order in their
Assemblies; yet it was with Regard to the Purifying the Flock of Christ; even
as he had given them Precepts and Examples to be Pure; knowing this, that
without Holiness (in Christ) no man should see the Lord. And this They
zealously pursued, without looking for the Recompense of Reward that Man should
give them; but that Crown of Immortal Glory, that the Righteous Judge should
give them in that Day.

CHAP. IX. The Order the Christian Assemblies were held in.
AS Their CHURCHES were Grave, and yet Magnificent: so was the ORDER of their
Assemblies managed with great Simplicity, and yet with great Authority and
Spiritual Vigor; with great Order, yet with useful Plainness. Their Ritual
seems to be but short; yet much better than the Great Volumes of Ceremonies,
the World has since seen in both the Eastern and Western Churches. The Order of
their Assemblies seem to be comprised in that short, but excellent Canon of the
Council of Laodicea, Can. 19.

That Men ought first to perform Conc. Laod. Can. 19. (...)
their own Devotions privately, alone, or by himself; After that the Homilies
of the Bishops, and the Prayers of the Catechists is to be performed: And after
the going out of the Catechists, the Prayer of the Penitents is to be
performed; and after these are Ministered to, and departed, thus shall the Three
Prayers of the Faithful be made: One, to wit, The first in Silence; but the
second and third shall be performed with a Loud Voice. After which, thus shall
the Peace be given: After the Presbyters have given the Peace to the Bishop,
the Laics shall give the Peace; and so the Holy Offering or Sacrament to be
celebrated. And it is fit that only the Clergy should enter in unto the Altar,
and there to Communicate.

Justin Martyr describes the Christian Assemblies to be held in much the same
manner; only he mentions the Reading the Scriptures before the Sermon.

On the Day which is called Sunday, Just. Apol. 2.
there is a Meeting together in one place, of all that remain in the Cities and
Countries: And there they Read both out of the Apostles, and out of the
Writings of the Prophets, so much as is sufficient for the time. Then when the
Reader leaves off, the Bishop or President Preaches a Sermon, Exhorting them to
the Imitation of those Good things. After which, we usually all stand up and
pour forth Prayers: And (as I said before) when we desist from Praying, Bread
and Wine, and Water is offered, and the Bishop according to his ability offers
Prayers and Thanksgiving, and the People with a cheerful Voice say, Amen. Then
follows the Giving and Receiving of the Eucharist to Every one; And to those
that are not present, it is sent by the Deacons. Those that are Rich, and
willing, every one, according to his own Pleasure, gives what he pleases. What
is Collected, is deposited with the Bishop or President, and he disspenceth it
to the Orphans and Widows, Sick, or those who upon any Account are in want, etc.

This Order seems very natural, proper, and most useful; especially for those
Times, when the World was to be taught, and not forced (as by the Romans) to
profess what they either cannot understand; or the more they do, they see it to
be Error, Nonsense, and Contradiction.

And concerning the Truth it self, Children may; but Men will not be forced to
learn. Therefore truly, since so great a Part of Mankind are, and ever will be,
either Ignorant, Prejudiced, or Invincibly Obstinate, and so very much
incapable of Instruction; or at least, being so perfectly Instructed in the
highest Mysteries, that they will be hardly Reconciled to what even their true
Spiritual Guides and Superiors judge most Agreeable to the Glory of GOD in His
Worship, and fittest for their Edification.

Therefore, I say, it would certainly be very happy for the Christian World,
That some such Rational Method were Ordered, as may with more Ease Lead them
into Christ's Flock, rather than Drive them. For Mankind was ever naturally
averse to Force and Violence. It is only Force of Argument, that can convince
the Rational Soul.

And what better ORDER can be Invented, than this Ancient Tried Method; By
which the World was overcome, and became Christian? For tho we have not the
same sorts of Men in all points now-adays, now the World is Professedly
Christian; yet in some sort all are so, who are not Reconciled, or do not
consent to the Universal Doctrine and Practice of Christ in Unity and Charity;
who have not attained to the Perfect Building up in the most Holy Faith. Yet so
far as they have obtained, I am persuaded that this Method would be the best to
Incite them to such a Unity, as so far to Walk all by the Same, if such a Rule.

CHAP. X. The Application to the Church of England.
THis ORDER might with as much Ease be Accommodated to Our Church, as it was to
the Primitive; since it is so happily Restored to the Purity of the Primitive
Doctrine and Government; and not a little Advanced toward the Ancient
Discipline.

For, Blessed be God, we have an Orthodox and Learned Clergy; consisting of
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons: And to these adhere as Pious, Noble, and
Well-informed; not to say as Learned a Laity, as any Age of the World can boast
of, and few Equal.

Who both Delight and Rejoice in the Regular Reformation of Our Catholic, I
mean Orthodox Church; who in a Pure Conscience, and Upright Sincerity, embrace
Her Reverend Form of Worship, Appointed and Ordained by the Church and State,
after mature Deliberation in diverse Synods and Parliaments. That admire the
Prudence, Moderation and Temper of Our Reformers, and so fervently Love to
perform their Devotions in Sincerity and Truth, accompanied with that Beauty of
Holiness that She directs; for the setting forth the Glory of God, and setting
forward the Salvation of All Men. These ought to be looked on as the (...), or
(...), the Faithful, and Perfect of the Ancients; of whom the Scripture speaks,
and the Ancients are not silent.

But there are some, who tho they are well Instructed, and Believe well, and
Externally conform to the Rules of the Church; yet are highly wanting in the
Practice of Holiness of Life and Conversation. These ought (in great Compassion
to their Souls) to be made sensible of their Danger; and for their Recovery
ought to be Considered and Entreated as Penitents.

There are yet Others, who acknowledge the same Orthodox Faith that We do, and
are (as far as we know) Pious and Devout; yet Divide from Us upon the Account
of Discipline, and Form of Worship: Who having been Misinformed concerning Us,
have thereupon forsaken Our Communion in Prayers and Sacraments: Yet I know
they would be contented to hear Sermons, and the Holy Scriptures, Read with Us.
Therefore why should we not have Our Sermons at such a Convenient time of the
Service, as may Invite Them to come and be Our Auditors, for their further
Instruction, concerning both Themselves and Us? Which might in time Reconcile
them Entirely to Us; being the Thing We so much wish and desire. This requires
but the Alteration of One Indifferent Rule, and no Substantial part of the
Liturgy.

And what more Convenient Time than the Beginning, either before Morning or
Communion-Service, when Men's Senses are fresh, and open for Instruction?

After These are several Others, as Quakers, etc. who want Instruction; and tho
Aged, yet are Children in the Knowledge and Grace of Jesus Christ. These are
truly Catechumeni, and are by all means, to be Invited to hear Reason and
Religion, and to be instructed in their Dissenting Articles of Faith and Good
Manners: For whom Sermons and Catechetical Discourses (such as are usually
discoursed to Children, and are most plain and easy) are most Proper. For to
such all Sorts of Mankind might properly come, who may not be Admitted to Holy
Mysteries, nor Devotions, without Impiety and Profanation of them. Yet such
ought, and perhaps would be willing to hear the Holy Scriptures a Sermon or
Catechizing; which might prove for their Edification, and in time their
Effectual Conversion. So that if I were worthy to be heard, That Rubric, and
that Part of the Act of Uniformity (concerning Sermons) should be the first
that I would beseech the Church to alter; as the only absolutely Necessary one,
I know, to be Altered in our present Circumstances; whereby all that are not
Reconciled, so as to be in Communion with Us, might have the Liberty orderly to
leave the Congregation, when the Sermon or Catechetical Discourse is ended. As
to Penitents, They might be Assigned another Time, as the Synod (with Respect
to this Canon, and our Liturgy) might Advise

But because the mixture of the Assembly makes great Disorder and Confusion in
their Leaving the Congregation; therefore it would yet be more commodious, if
Dissenters had a particular Place assigned them for that Reason.

It would not be a matter of any great Difficulty, or Charge, to Accommodate
Our Churches according to the Manner of the Primitive Church: Especially the
Cathedrals, where they have Space enough to do this many ways: They being
neither Encumbred with Pues, nor otherwise straightened. It is but Removing their
Shrines or rather Screens in most of them. And the Holy Table stands where it
Anciently did; and setting a Reverend Pulpit, Adorned with the Commandments, in
the place of the Throne.

Thus within the Choirs would be sufficiently Capacious for the Faithful, and
within the Rails for the Clergy and other Ministers: And then there would be
sufficient Place for Dissenters of all Sorts in the Isles, with Liberty to come
and go when they think sit; or rather by the Admonition of the Minister.

Or as it is in some Churches yet: The Sermon might be first Preached in the
Body of the Church, according to S. Chrysostom's Way: which prevailed in
After-Ages; and then the Clergy and Faithful might retire thence to their
Devotions: First to the Choirs for Morning-Service; and then at last within the
Chancel, or Rails for the Communion.

The Church of Canterbury (till within this two or three years) had the Morning
Prayers at Seven or Eight of the Clock in the Morning; the Sermon at Ten in the
Audit house; and then the rest of the Communion-Service, and Communion, in the
Choir.

At Worcester the Morning-Prayer is yet Early; also the Litany at Ten of the
Clock, and then, follows the Communion Service; and then the Sermon in the Body
of the Church, whence they Return to the Communion in the Choir.

Parish Churches might also (without any great Difficulty or Charge) be in like
manner thus Accommodated. The Complaint is now with some Reason. Thar the
Choirs are so long and so distant from the Bodies of the Churches, that when
the Communion-Service is Celebrated there, it cannot be well heard. Tho indeed
for this there is a Remedy provided by the Rubric; to wit, that the Holy Table
shall stand either in the Body of the Church, or in the Chancel: So that no New
Rule need be made for this. And in many Churches the Pulpit is already thus
placed, at the Upper-End of the Body of the Church: So that there only needs a
Decent Place, with a Rail to be before it, to place the Communion Table in.

As this is agreeable to the most Ancient manner; so has it also Modern
Example to warrant it: For this was the Form of most of the Protestant Churches
beyond the Seas. The Great French Church of Charenton, had the Pulpit (which
they properly call the Chaise, or Chair, it being the Chair of Christ, in
opposition to that of Moses) placed about a fourth part of the whole Length of
the Temple from the East End, with a Large Square place before it; fenced in by
a Low Wenscot, accommodated with Seats about it within for the Ministers, and
whole Consistory.

The Cathedral at Geneva is just so accommodated (to the best of my
Remembrance;) which perhaps was the very same manner with the Ancients, till
they had the Magnificence of the Empire, to accommodate them with Richer
Materials, and greater Splendour.

In some of their Churches, I have observed their Communion Table kept within
this; especially at Blois; and, as I am since Informed, in several Places.
Therefore, I wonder that their Learned Monsieur Colomies, Parallele de la
Practique de l' Esglise Ancienne, and de celle des Protestans de France, etc.
should make this a matter of Reproach to them, as therein to dissent from all
Antiquity. I must needs avow with all the Respect I ought, that that whole
first Chapter is a great Mistake: For the French Churches have this Separation
from the rest of the Church, for the Ministers and Consistory, which are their
Clergy. And Women and Men do not sit promiscuously together, but on Benches by
themselves: And in many Churches, in a Part of the Temple by themselves; as at
Blois (I remember) the Women sat in the Middle of the Church, and the Men as
their Guard round about them, nearer to the Walls. But he makes the best Amends
he can now make, by confessing his Error, and the Juvenility of the Treatise.

I believe this Division of Sex was formerly in our Churches: For in many
Country Churches (where the Grandees have not deformed them, by making some
High and some Low, to be Tenements to their whole Families) is yet to be seen
not only Dextra and Sinistra Pars virorum; but also the Right and Left Hand
Seats for the Women. The Seats for the Men being next to the Chancel, and the
Seats for the Women, next from the Middle-Doors to the Belfery; with an Alley
up to the Middle of the Church, and another Cross that to the North and
South-Doors.

There is also a Rubric, Requiring the Men decently to Place themselves at the
Right Hand, and the Women at the Left, at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper,
in the first Common Prayer Book of King Edward the Sixth.

But the General Mixture of all Ages and Sexes, as in most of the London and
Westminster Churches, is very Indecent; not to say (as some say, and others
make it) Scandalous.

I think it may not be impertinent here to give a Specimen, to show how Our
Liturgy might be Accommodated to the Ancient Manner, as it is already to the
Ancient Matter of Divine Service.

For the Weekdays, when only the Assembly of the Faithful, or Penitents of our
Communion are Expected, I see no just Reason to Alter any thing in Matter or
Order, in Morning or Evening Prayer: Only the Penitents, by the Admonition of
the Deacon, might Leave the Congregation, if any there, after the Belief. On
Sundays also, when they say the Morning Prayer. Early, between Six and Nine the
same Order might well still continue.

But when the Assembly of the whole Congregation is expected, it might well be
done in the Ancient Order, with these few Alterations:

At the Appointed Hour, whilst the Congregation is coming together, might be
Sung a Psalm in Meter; either out of those already in use, or rather another
better Edition, set forth by Authority, collected out of the best of the
Several Editions of them; done by several Hands. As I do not doubt, but there
was Authority for those in use, when first set forth. For not only that at the
Front of them testifies as much, in the oldest Editions; but also there is a
Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving set forth by Queen Elizabeth, and Her Council,
wherein one of those Psalms are ordered to be Sung, not long after that
Edition, in the same Reign in which they came forth.

After this might follow a Lesson out of the Old Testament, as Appointed; and
then the Epistle and Gospel as Appointed; either from the Pulpit, Reading-Desk,
or as in Cathedral Churches.

Then might follow the Sermon.

After this, the Minister might Conclude with some such Sentence as This:

He that comes to God, must Believe that he is; and that he is a Rewarder of
all them that diligently seek him.

With the Heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth confession
is made unto Salvation.

Let us therefore make Confession of our Christian Faith.

Then might follow one of the Creeds, either to be said or sung distinctly.

Then might follow the Commandments, after some such Sentence of Scripture as
this:

Ye say, Jam. 2. 19,
you believe there is One God; ye do well:

The Devils also believe and Tremble; ver. 26.
as the Apostle S. James assures us. And that,

As the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also.

Let us therefore also keep God's Covenant, Psalm. 103. ver. 18.
and consider his Commandments to do them.

Which are the same which God spoke in the Twentieth Chapter of Exodus; Saying,

I am the Lord thy God etc.

1. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

Answ. Lord have mercy, etc.

The Sum of all which is Love.

Let us therefore Love the Lord, our God, with all our Hearts, with all our
Souls, with all our Powers, and with all our Strengths.

And, Let us love our Neighbors as our selves; by doing unto all men, as we
would they should do unto us: For on these two depend the whole Law and the
Prophets.

Then might follow an Admonition for those that are thus minded to Stay; and
for those that are otherwise minded, to Depart and Leave the Congregation in
Peace.

Then might follow the Litany in the Morning; and Dearly beloved Brethren,
Confession and Absolution in the Afternoon.

After the Litany, all under Censure might be admonished to Depart.

Then the Exhortation for the Communion. Then when there is, and where there
ought to be a Communion, may follow the Sentences, Collection and Offering,
etc. as Appointed. When there is none; after the Offertory, the Lord's Prayer,
the General Prayer, Collects, and General Thanksgiving.

Then to Conclude with, The Peace of God, etc.

At Evening: After a Psalm, as before; or the Psalms, as Appointed; or both;
might follow the Lessons out of the Old and New Testament, as Appointed; the
Catechism, and then the Sermon.

Then the Belief, and Commandments, as before; or instead of the Commandments
the Commination, as in the 27 th Chapter of Deuteronomy.

Then the Dissenters to Depart.

And then one or more of the Sentences of Scripture for Repentance. Then the
Exhortation, Confession, and Absolution.

Then the Penitents admonished to Depart; And then the Salutation of Peace.

The Lord be with you.

Answ. And with thy Spirit.

Then the rest as follows, and according as it is Appointed.

So you see that the Primitive Order of Divine-Service, might be adapted to our
Present Liturgy without altering any thing of the Matter, and not very much of
the Manner of it.

Now that such things, for the Glory of God, and the Peace of his Church, may
(by the Lawful Authority of the Church and State) be Altered, and otherwise
Established, Our Church acknowledges in that excellent Preface to the
Common Prayer Book, Concerning Ceremonies; why some be Abolished, and why some
are Retained. Which is so Pious, Discreet, and Rational an Account of those
things, that it seems wonderful, that it did not satisfy all Men of either
Piety, Learning, or Reason.

And indeed, I see no Reason why Men should fall out at all about Innocent
Ceremonies, since we find the Earliest Times of the Universal Church, did not
concern themselves about such small Differences in Indifferent Practices of
diverse particular Churches. As is manifest from that Excellent and Pious
Epistle written by S. Irenaeus to Victor Bishop of Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5.
c. 24.
Rome, touching the Observation of Easter. Wherein he shows various Uses of
diverse Provincial Churches, in Fasts, Prayers Socrates, Lib. cap 22. p. 287. D.
, Building of Churches, Worshipping of God in them, and keeping Easter it self.
And yet they did not fall out about that, nor make a Schism in the Church upon
such Frivolous Accounts.

I wish our Dissenting Brethren would be followers of that Excellent Example
and Temper; and not Divide their own Church upon such Accounts, but strive
together with Us to keep the Unity ^^ the Spirit in Bonds of Peace.

Now lest I should grow Tedious about Small Matters, at a time when such great
and weighty Concerns are under Consideration in Church and State I will come to
a Conclusion; hoping that I shall not be overmuch censured with Impertinency,
for spending so much of my own, and the Readers time, on this Subject: Since it
was so wise a Man that said,

He that despises Small things shall fall by little and little.

Those that consider, that it is about such small things, if the Reverend and
Decent Worship of God may be so called, that a very Great part of our Nation
have Separated themselves from the National Church, will be of another mind.
For if Mediums might be found out, to bring us to such a Right understanding
with each other, as would bring us to Agree (...) Worship God together, in
Unity of the Spirit; in the Bonds of Peace; in Reverence and Godly Fear; in the
same Spirit with Truth, without excluding Decency and Comely Order. Certainly,
as there is nothing more desirable in this World; so nothing should be more
earnestly Endeavored by those that have the Weighty Charge of Christ's Sheep
and Lambs, committed to their Charge, than to bring them into Christ's Fold; to
be at perfect Unity in Faith, and Charity in Doctrine and Practice. And I must
profess my Ignorance to all the World, of any more Effectual Means, than the
Laying before the World, the Practice of the Apostolical and Primitive
Christians, next to the Scriptures, concerning these Things, to bring this to
pass.

Those certainly are the Aliquod tertium, in which if we could (as we ought)
Agree, we might have hopes in a short time to Agree with one another.

Which I beseech God of His Infinite Mercy to grant, for the Healing of Schism,
and Preventing of Vain-jangling, Heresy, and the Effusion of Christian Blood
in all Lands; through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, Our Lord and
only Savior.

FINIS.

