A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The Idolatry OF THE CHURCH of ROME: WHEREIN That CHARGE
is Justified; AND The Pretended Refutation of Dr. STILLINGFLEET's Discourse is
Answered.

By DANIEL WHITBY, D. D.

Mirum videtur quare in uno articulo qui non est principalis artriculus fidei
debeat talis intellectus asseri, propter quem fides pate at contemptui omnium
sequentium rationem. Scotus in 4 sent. did. 11. q. 3. lit. B. LONDON, Printed
for Tho. Basset, at the George near St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, and Ja.
Magnes near the Piazza in Covent Garden, 1674.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God GILBERT LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.
May it please your Grace.
IT is the Custom of the Adversaries of our Church to thrust out their Errors
into the World, under some great name; that by the Protection of some honorable
Person, to whom they Dedicate their Books, they may render them more plausible
in the Eye of the World, and add greater weight and Authority to their gross
Falsehoods.

My Lord, We live in such an age, in which Truth stands in greater need of a
Patron than Falsehood it self: and though this little poor Treatise be not
worthy to bear your great name in the front, yet the Truth I here defend, will
I doubt not, be owned and supported by your Grace; whose great design in this
World is to support the Church of England. It Is the same Faith, and the same
Doctrine I here deliver which your Glorious Predecessors in both your Sees of
Canterbury, and London; Cranmer and Ridley owned and asserted even unto Blood.
It Is a defense of that great learned man, who has made it his business, now for
some years, to defend the Writings of the renowned Archbishop Laud; for whose
memory and writings you have often expressed so great Veneration. These
considetions are enough alone to prove the fitness of this address. But besides
these, your Grace may justly challenge the labors of all your own University;
You have obliged them to that degree, that the Gifts of half their Benefactors,
amassed into one sum, would scarce equal your famous Theater. And as they
fail not to give God thanks for so great a Patron, at the times of public
solemnity, so am I under the same Obligation, for that support you bestowed on
me for some years together, whilst I was a member of Trinity College, and
before I had the happiness and honor to be related to my Lord of Sarum.
Whosoever knows this, will certainly excuse my boldness: and if to make this
address be impudence; yet not to have done it, would have been ingratitude.

God preserve your Grace for the Chruches sake. I am Your Graces humbly devoted
Servant. D. W.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader.
I Think my self obliged to give thee an account, 1. Why I undertake to answer
this Discourse. And 2. Why having undertaken to return an Answer to it, I have
omitted, part, the first; of which, the true account is briefly this, since the
Printers would not undertake the Printing of the whole, before the Term
expired, I was contented do defer that part, which I conceived to be least
material, to the Term ensuing. That which first moved me to frame this Answer
to T. G. was this, having perused this Author, and having found him laying the
most scandalous accusations and imputations of Sophistry and Legerdemain,
Falsehood and Contradiction to the Doctors charge, I knew not how to think that
any person, who professed Christianity, or valued either his credit or his
cause, should lay such imputations upon others, and be himself the person
Guilty: Nor yet could I be easily persuaded, that any person in so good a cause
as ours, in which Authorities and Arguments do press for an admittance, and Men
of ordinary Capacities, must be abundantly supplied with them; much less that
the incomparable Dr. Stilling fleer, that prodigy of Ingenuity and Learning,
should betake himself to such dishonorable Arts. Besides I knew that his
Integrity and sense of honor was so great, that he must scorn such sordid
dealing; and that it was his business to detect the Frauds and religious
Cheates of Rome; and therefore I presumed he would not imitate her when he did
confute her. Wherefore my curiosity engaged me to examine all that was devised
to blast his Credit, and having found it to be written in the old Roman Style,
and to contain nothing, but the pure quintessence of Calumny, I thought it
charity to ease the Doctor, and to declare unto the World what was the fruit of
this inquiry.

And should this work be so unhappy, which I hope it will not, as to rob the
World of the Ingenious and Triumphant Labors af the Learned Dr. yet I have two
things to apologize.

1. That the Dr. has given us the greatest evidence, that he can write most
admirable Books upon the meanest Subjects, and in answer to the most trifling
and inconsiderable Scriblers; so that what ever Adversary he vouchsafes to
answer, he almost equally obliges and instructs all that read him, but most
of all his adversary, whose Name he rescues from obscurity, whilst he
vouchsafes to mention it.

2. That with I have performed will give us this advantage to the common cause,
viz. That through the strength and goodness of it, a little inconsiderable
David may worst the best Goliath of the Roman Church.

In prosecution of this subject, I have set down the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, not from the sayings of her private Doctors, but from her Councils,
Catechisms, and Authentic Liturgies, that so I might obstruct all possibility
of pleading, that I do falsely represent her Tenets. But though I use this
method, I do not think it either sophistical or useless, to represent unto the
World what are the Doctrines and Practices, which have so far obtained in the
Church of Rome, as to be Doctrines and Practices of no small Credit and
Authority amongst them they being held and defended by their most able Writers,
and taught and practiced with as much freedom in the Church of Rome, as are
the contrary Doctrines. And to omit those many instances which do not so
immediately concern the present Controversy.

It is a very common and prevayling Doctrine, among the Doctors of the Church
of Rome, that the blessed Virgin, is the Mother of Mercy, not only by virtue of
her intercession, but by way of distribution, and of Dispensation, and that
Christ having reserved the Kingdom of Justice to himself, has granted the
Kingdom of mercy to his Mother; and that he has given to her what Assuerus
promised to Queen Hester, viz. The half of his Dominions, or his Kingly Office:
This Doctrine is delivered by Thomas Bonaventure, Gerson, Gabriel Biel,
Antoninus, Bernardinus, Gorrhan, Holcoth, Rutilius Benzonius, Blasius Viegas,
Osorius, Paulus Cararia, and many others whose words are cited by Dr. From p.
356. to p. 363.
White, p. 321.323.398.399. p 478.481. p. 480. p. 486.
Crakanthorp, and Bishop Usher in his Answer to the Jesuits challenge, from
page 478 to page 496. Where also you may find them teaching, that the Dominion
of the blessed Virgin is equal to the Dominion of her Son, that all power in
Heaven and Earth, was given to her, that she is constituted over every
Creature, and whosoever boweth his knee unto Jesus, does fall down also and
supplicate unto his Mother: so that the glory of the Son may be judged not so
much to be common with the Mother, Ibid.
as to be the very same. That the mighty God did (as far as he might) make his
Mother partner of his Divine Majesty and power; giving unto her of old the
Sovereignty both of Celestial things and Mortal. p. 478.
That in the redundance of effusion of Grace upon the Creatures, the Lords
power and will is so accommodated unto her that she may seem to be the first in
that, both Diadem, and Tribunal. p. 481.
And that all things are subject to the command of the Virgin, even God
himself. p. 482.
They also teach, that by sinning after Baptism, men seem to have contemned
and despised the Passion of Christ: That so no Sinner does deserve that Christ
should any more make Intercession for him to the Father; without whose
Intercession none can be delivered either from Eternal Punishment or the
temporal, nor from the fault which he has voluntarily committed. And therefore
that it was necessary that Christ should constitute his wellbeloved Mother a
Mediatrix betwixt us and him. And so in this our Pilgrimage, there is no other
refuge left unto us in our tribulations and adversities, but to have recourse
unto the Virgin Mary our Mediatrix that she would appease the wrath of her Son.
Ibid.
That as he is ascended into Heaven, to appear in the sight of God for men
(Heb. 9.24.) So she ought to ascend thither, to appear in the sight of her Son
for sinners: that so mankind might have always before the face of God a help
like unto Christ for the procuring of his Salvation. And that she is that
throne of Grace, p. 484.
whereof the Apostle specketh, Heb. 4.16. Let us go boldly unto the Throne of
Grace that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need.
That she comes before the Throne of Grace not entreating but commanding. p. 486.


In the Psalter of our Lady we have these Addresses, Blessed are they whose
hearts do love thee, Ps. 31.
O Virgin Mary; their sins by thee shall be mercifully washed away. Have mercy
upon me O Lady, Ps. 50.
who art called the Mother of Mercy; and according to the bowels of thy
Mercies, cleanse me from all mine Iniquities. Save me Lady, by thy name; Ps.
53. Ps. 71.
and deliver me from mine unrighteousness. Give the King thy judgment, O God,
and thy mercy to the Queen his Mother. Oh come let us sing unto our Lady; Ps..
94. Cant ad Virg. M. post Psalm.
Let us make a joyful noise to Mary our Queen that brings Salvation. Oh our
Omnipotent Lady, thou art my Salvation, thou have freed me condemned to death;
thou art the beginning and the finisher of my Salvation. There you may find
them teaching that by her, Ps. 118. Ps. 41. Ps. 136. De Arcan. Ca. thol. verit,
l. 7. c. 10. White, p. 357.
Sins are purged; by her, true satisfaction is made for sins, the Death and
Passion of Christ, and of the blessed Virgin, says Petrus Galatinus, conduced
to the redemption of Mankind. The Stellarium Coronae beatae Mariae, says, she
bought us; and as Christ Redeemed Mankind by his Flesh and Blood, so she
redeemed the same with her Soul.

These Doctrines and many other of the same Blasphemous stamp, are taught and
held by many Doctors of the Roman Church: these books and doctrines are written
and licensed by that Church, and so have Catholic permission; no censure ever
passed upon them, no Expurgatory Index has cleansed them from these horrid
Blasphemies; but it is still left free for any of the Doctors of that Communion
to maintain and propagate them; and for any of the members of that Church to
practice sutably to these conceptions. To ascribe all this power and Authority
to the Blessed Virgin, and all this virtue to her Death, to give her the
praises of it, and accordingly to trust in her, to pray unto her for the
blessings she has purchased, and for the distribution of those Favors, which
naturally do result from this advancement; and when they address themselves
unto her, to use the most extravagant expressions contained in the Ladys
Psalter, and in other books of the like nature with it. Whence it will follow,

1, That any person, who acts according to these Doctrines, and puts up these
Petitions, does not deviate from that Tradition, which the Catholic conceives
to be his only rule of Faith (id est) a person may be guilty of horrid
Blasphemy and Idolatry, and notwithstanding be a good Roman Catholic.

2. It follows that no man ought to be condemned for writing or asserting any
of these Tenets, or for using any of the forms contained in those books, for
Oral Tradition cannot be conceived to condemn what is allowed and practiced,
without censure in the Church of Rome.

3. Hence evident it is, that private Catholics may unavoidably be subject to
these evil practices; for seeing in these matters they cannot have the
judgment of the Church, and must not be permitted to act according to their
private judgments, what remains but that they follow the judgment of their
Priest, which as we have seen, is often impious and Blasphemous.

4. Hence evident it is, that neither these opinions, nor practices can ever be
condemned by the Church of Rome; for to make the contrary Tenets pass into
Tradition, or to make them Articles of Faith, is to empower the Church to coin
new Articles, and to pretend Tradition where it is not to be had: So that all
these Blesphemous and Idolatrous Devotions must be as lasting as the Church of
Rome.

Secondly, I have observed this method in my whole discourse. 1. To confirm the
propositions which I have laid down by Scripture, and by reason, and then to
introduce the Judgment of the Fathers. Whereas T. G. is very sparing both as
to Scripture and Reason, and does endeavor to supply his want of Reason and of
Scripture, by some impertinent citations from the Fathers. This I conceive to
be a very weak and disingenious way of arguing; for, if the Testimonies of some
few Fathers be not sufficient to confirm an Article of Faith, and to give us
the true sense of any text of Scripture, he must confess, that what he thus
discourses is weak and infufficient to prove what he has undertaken to
demonstrate: but if he shall assert this method to be good and cogent, then it
will clearly follow,

1. That the Doctrine of the Trent Council must be false, for they have
certainly decreed that Doctrine which was asserted by Pope Innocent the first,
S. Austin, and which was the current Doctrine of the Church of Christ for many
hundred years. I wave the Opinion of Austin and of Innocent the first, says
Maldonate which flourished in the Church six haundred years, In Joh. 6. n. 116.
viz. that the Eucharist was necessary even for Infants, the things is now
unfolded by the Church, and by the use of many ages, and the decree of the
Trent Council that it is not only unnecessary for them, but that it cannot
lawfully be given to them.

2. It must be false which is defined by the Council of Florence, and is
received by the whole Church of Rome, that Saints departed before the
Resurrection do see the face of God in Glory, for we have proved, and Sixtus
Senensis does acknowledge, that this definition was, Bibl. l. 6. An. 345.
Repugnant Ingenti numero illustrium Ecclesiae Patrum.

3. Hence it will follow that the Trent Catechism and all the Roman Doctors who
generally urge that of Jacob, The Angel that redeemed me from all evil bless
the Lads, to prove that Angels may be Invocated, embrace that exposition of
these words of Scripture which is heretically false; as I have proved, Chap.
10. Sect. 6.

Thirdly, I have not entered into that deep dispute betwixt him and the Doctor,
whether jubere does signify to command or entreat; and whether imperare be to
enjoin or supplicate. I Judge it is sufficient advantage to our cause, that, if
Jubere and imperare should not be rendered to entreat and supplicate, but to
command, the Romanists must unavoidably be guilty of Idolatry. T. G. indeed
informs us, that it is not the dead words, but the intention of the speaker
that makes them to be prayer; for otherwise a Parrot might be taught to Pray as
well as a Christian, and thence he manfully concludes that in these
expressions, Nos a peccatis omnibus solvite jussu quaesumus. Cassand. Consult.
tit. de meritis and intercess. Sanctor. p. 971.
Jube filio O foelix puerpera, jure Matris Impera Redemptori, etc. They only
pray to Saints to pray for us. As if a man should call his Prince a Tyrant, and
his Brother Knave, and being brought before the Judge should plead, that by a
Tyrant he meant only a King, and by a Knave a Servant; and since it was not the
dead words, but the intention of the speaker that made them significative (for
otherwise a Parrot might be hanged for speaking what he did) he hoped that he
had spoken nothing which might give offense, especially seeing he had more
Authors ready to produce to justify this sense and acceptance of these words,
than had the Church of Rome for this interpretation of jubere and imperare; if
when the Sentence were thus passed upon him, Jubemus and imperamus hunc
suspendi, he should plead that it did only signify that they entreated him to
be hanged: I say should such a plea be made, it would be as significant as is
this Answer of T. G. And all that any man can say against the Plea of such a
trifling Sophister will equally conclude against this pitiful defense which he
has offered, Josh. 10.12, 14.
and has confirmed by a false citation of that place of Joshuah which does not
say that God obeyed, as from the Vulgar he translates it: but that God
hearkened to the Voice of man.

Fourthly, In this discourse I have not waved any thing which had the least
appearance of an argument, but have returned a full (and as I hope, a
satisfactory) Answer to all that has been offered by T. G. and all that I
desire of him is, that if be should be pleased to Reply he would not nibble at
some few Expressions, as is the manner of the Roman party, but would return a
perfect Answer to the whole, and then I do not doubt, but, he will Suffer me to
rest for some convenient Season.

Thy Friend and Servant D. WHITBY.

Errata.
Page 4. l. 5. for Surerstition r. superstition. p. 11. l. 12. honerem r.
honorem. p. 33. l. 18. mby r. may. p. 40. l 27. from r. for. p. 45. l. 5. (...)
r. (...) p. 55. l. 16. overthrows r. overthrow. p. 56. marg. configere r.
confingere. p. 60. l. 23. of r. of. ibid, marg. creatura r. creaturam. p. 78.
(...) r. (...) p. 86. l. 23. sguiritual r. spiritual. p. 90. Marcarius r.
Macarius. p. 91. Symbol a r. a Symbol. p. 93. po r. do. p. 340. Chap. 11. r.
Chap. 12.

THE IDOLATRY Of the Church of ROME.
CHAP. I.
The CONTENTS.
That according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, Rome is Guilty of
Idolatry. 1. In Worshipping the Host,. 1. And 2. In Praying to departed
Saints,. 2. The Method used to Justify this Charge,. 3. The Notion of Idolatry
considered Negatively in two Propositions. 1. That to render any Person Guilty
of Idolatry, it is not Requisite that he should Conceive the Object of his
Worship to be the Great Creator, or the chiefest Good,. 4. 2. That Worship may
be Guilty of Idolatry which is not Given to a Creature, with an Intent to
Ascribe unto it that Worship which Agrees to God alone,. 5. Idolatry is then
Committed when any Honor due to God alone, is Attributed to, or is Conferd on
that which is not God,. 6.

THe Doctrine of the Church of England as it is Delivered in her Injunctions,
Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, her Liturgies, and Public
Homilies commanded to be Read in every Parish Church, and to be Subscribed and
Received by all that Exercise the Ministerial Function, and by them to be
acknowledged to contain a Good and Wholesome Doctrine, and Needful for the
Times in which those Homilies were Published, is this:

That the Church of Rome is Guilty of Idolatry in Worshipping the Host: Rubric
after the Communion, speaks thus: The Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still
in their very natural Substances and therefore may not be Adored, for that were
Idolatry to be Abhorred of all faithful Christians. The Constitutions and
Canons of the Convocation held A. D. 1640. Can. 7.
and Published by the Authority of our Royal Martyr Charles the First, affirm:
That at the time of Reforming this Church from that gross Superstition of
Popery, it was carefuly Provided that all Means should be used to Root out of
the Minds of the People, both the Inclination thereunto, and Memory thereof:
Especially of the Idolatry committed in the Mass, for which cause all Popish
Altars were Demolished.

That the Church of Rome is Guilty of Idolatry by Praying unto Saints
Departed:. 2.
Idolatry, we have these words. Terrentius Vorro shows, That there were 300
Jupiters in his time, I think we had no fewer Saints to whom we gave the Honor
due to God: Then follows this Apostrophe. Oh Heaven, Earth, and Seas, what
Madness and Wickedness against God are men fallen into! What dishonor do the
Creatures to their Creator and Maker! And if we remember God sometimes, yet
because we doubt of his Ability, or will to help us, we join to him another
Helper, using these sayings: Such as Learn, God and St. Nicholas be my good
speed: Such as Neese, God help and St. John: To the Horse, God and St. Loy save
thee. Thus are we become like Horses and Mules, which have no Understanding.
For is there not one God only, who Governs the same? and by his goodness
maintains and serves them? be not all things of him, by him, and through
him? Why do thou turn from the Creator to the Creatures? This is the manner
of the Gentil-Idolaters: but thou art a Christian, and therefore by Christ
alone have access to God the Father, and help of him only. These things are not
written to any reproach of the Saints themselves, but against our foolishness
and wickedness, making of the true Servants of God false Gods, by attributing
to them the Power and Honor which is Gods, and due to him only. And for that
we have such opinions of the power and ready help of Saints, all our Legends,
Hymns, Sequenses, and Masses did contain stories, Lauds and praises of them,
and prayers to them; and this we do altogether agreeable to the Saints, as did
the Gentile-Idolaters to their false Gods. If answer be made, that they make
Saints but Intercessors to God, and means for such things as they would obtain
of God: That is even after the Gentile-Idolatrous usage, to make them of Saints
Gods, called, Dij medioximi, to be mean Intercessors and helpers to God. This
is the Doctrine appointed to be read and taught in every Parish Church of
England. In the Injunctions of Edward the Sixth, published 1547. All Pastors are
enjoined to teach for the reproof of Surerstition and Pilgrimage made to
Saints, that all goodness, health, and grace, ought to be both asked and looked
for only of God, as of the very Author and Giver of the same, and of none
other. And in the Injunction of Queen Elizabeth 1559. We have the same
reiterated, viz. To the intent that all Superstition and Hypocrisy crept into
diverse men's hearts, may vanish away, they shall teach, that all goodness,
health, and grace, ought to be both asked and looked for only of God, as of the
very Author and giver of the same, and of none other.

And now to evidence the Truth and Justice of this imputation;. 3.
we shall first show what is the nature of Idolatry; and what actions may be
duly charged with it. Next we shall faithfully relate the Doctrine and
Practice of the Church of Rome from her own Catechism, Church Service, and
Authentic Councils. Thirdly, we shall consider what T. G. and others of that
Church have offered to excuse her practice from this imputation; And then shall
leave it to the judgment of all impartial and discerning Readers, whether we
have not such convincing clear and pregnant reasons to pronounce her guilty of
this most heinous sin, that the most subtle wit cannot evade, nor the most
obstinate deny.

And first to show wherein the nature of Idolatry consists, and to confute and
baffle all the tricks and Salvo's which the adverse party has of late invented
to excuse their practice in this matter from this heinous guilt, we assert, as
follows.

That to render any person guilty of Idolatry, Prop. 1.
it is not necessary that be should conceive the Creature which he worships to
be the great Creator, and the chiefest good, the end and the beginning of all
things, or to conceive that which he worships is no Creature. For first, if
this were requisite to render any person guilty of this crime, then no man
could commit Idolatry, who knows, and does acknowledge the true Jehovah to be
the only God; Though he should Sacrifice to Devils, and to stocks and stones;
Though he should worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all the host of Heaven,
with all the Rites and Ceremonies that have been used by the Heathen world: nay
should he have as many petty and inferior Gods as Egypt, Rome, or the whole
Heathen world did ever own; and should perform that homage, which according to
the custom of those Nations where they were received was due unto them; yet
would he not be guilty of the least Idolatry, because he could not possibly
conceive them to be the great Creator, or the highest God, and yet conceive the
true God to be only so.

2. Hence it would clearly follow; that those Christians who refused to
Sacrifice or offer Incense unto the Images and Statues of the Heathen Emperors,
and to those Demons which they worshipped as inferior beings, and subject to
that being, whom the Heathens style (...), or the Supreme and highest God were
miserably out, and wretchedly deceived in their apprehensions, for it is
evident by all their writings, and by the accusations of their Adversaries,
that they refused to pay this homage to them, because they thought it was
Idolatry: whereas according to this Rule it was not possible that they who
owned the true Jehovah in contradiction to all others, could commit that sin,
or justly be suspected of it. 3. The Christians constantly pronounced the
Heathens guilty of Idolatry in worshipping their lesser Deities. And when the
Arians and Nestorians sprung up, they with one voice pronounced them guilty of
the like heinous crime; because, by giving that homage which the Orthodox
conceived due to God, to him whom they affirmed to be only man; they did Basil
Hom. 27. Ed. Paris. P. 510.
(...), (i.e.) they introduced that Idolatry the Heathens practiced; the
Angelitae, as Nomo Can. Tit. 12. c. 8. Cod. Can. Ecc. Univ. Cant. 139. (...).
Epiph. Haer. 79. p. 1061. B.
Photius, or the Angelicks, as St. Austine styles them who prayed to Angels,
and by them thought to have access unto the Father, The Church of God did
anciently condemn (...), as being guilty of occult Idolatry. The Collyridians
who offered Cakes unto the blessed Virgin, were said to do a devilish work, and
introduce a custom which made them guilty of Idolatry; and yet it is exceeding
manifest, that neither any of those Heathens did conceive those petty Gods as
they are pleased to style them, the supreme being, or the great Creator of the
world; nor could the like conceptions of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or the
Angels be any ways consistent to that Christianity which the Arians, Angelicks
and Collyridians did constantly profess. As for the Heathens their Demons were
accounted Plutarc. de Def. Or. p. 416, 417.
(...), the Ministers of God (...), Secundary Gods, (...), Ministering Spirits,
(...), sen Apuleus de demon. Socratis. p. 45.
potestatis Mediae, a middle sort of Intercessors, Sen Ep 110. p 840
inferioris notae and de plebe Dii, inferior vulgar Gods. Secondly, they held
them to be Austin de C. D. l. 9. c. 3.
D^i facti and a summo Deo conditi (i.e.) such as received their beings from
the supreme God, who therefore by the Latins was so often styled Divum Pater,
and by the Greeks, (...), and the like. And Thirdly, they say the Heathens had
their (...). Julian. apud Cyril. Alex. l. 4. p. 115.
Commission from God, and only were his undergovernours, and by him placed over
Towns and Countries. Fourthly, they held the worship due unto them, to be a
middle and inferior kind of worship, (...), says Hierocles: that is, God must
be worshipped with Latria: but those inferior Demons with Dulia; and that to
worship them (...). Hieroc. p. 10.
according to that Dignity they had received from their God and Father, was the
true worship due unto them: and hence they gave this caution in paying homage
to them, (...), Hierocles, page the 10. not to give more than was consistent
with their Dignity. The This was their Doctrine (...), Theodoret in c. 2. ad
Coloss.
Angelicks did not doubt but that those Angels, whom they used as Intercessors,
were the Creatures and Ministers of God, nor could they hope to reap advantage
by their Intercession; had they intended by so doing, to confer upon them the
worship proper to that jealous God, who will not give his glory to an other.

The Arians had the same apprehensions of Christ Jesus, they style him Dei
instrumentum, (...), his Ministers, his Creature: from whence it follows, that
they could intend to offer up no other worship to him, but what was proper to a
Creature: And hence the Fathers tell us, that they performed to the Sacred
Trinity, honorificentiae imparis officium Rulg. l. 2. ad Monim. c. 2.
unequal honors, and could not be induced to worship Christ, (...), with
worship equal to the Father. (...). Gregor. Nyssen. l. 4. Contr. Eunom. p.
588.13.
And that if any man conceived these words of the Evangelist St. John, that all
should worship the Son, as they worshipped the Father; to contain a precept or
injunction, to give unto the Son a worship equal unto that we give the Father,
he was exceedingly mistaken.

4. The Apostle tells the Church of Corinth, that he who in the Temple of an
Idol did eat and drink of what was Sacrificed to the Idol, did drink the Cup of
Devils, and was made partaker of the Devils Table, and had Communion with them.
1 Cor. 10.20, 21. and so was guilty of Idolatry: to introduce and to confirm
this charge, he lays down this assertion, verse. 7. that they who did sit down
to eat and drink of what was offered to the golden Calf, were by so doing guilty
of Idolatry, and upon this account he thus exhorts those persons who endulged
themselves in this unlawful practice, be ye not Idolaters as were some of them.

Whence it is clear, that St. Paul judged this practice well deserved that
imputation, and yet it is as certain that they who used it, were induced to do
so upon this presumption, that they conceived the Idol to be nothing, 1 Cor.
viii. 4. x. 19.
and therefore not the great Creator, and the chiefest good.

Hence therefore we infer the vanity and falsness of those descriptions of
Idolatry, which are delivered by the Doctors of the Roman Church, who being
conscious to themselves and having openly confessed, that to the Constans est
Theologorum sententia imaginem eodem honor and cultu honorari and coli quo
colitur id cujus est Imago Azor. Instit Moral. To. 1 l. 9. c. 6.
Images of Christ and of the Cross, and of the blessed Trinity, they give that
worship which they style Latria, and which is properly Divine, excuse
themselves from this enormous guilt, by saying that they do not give this
worship to them as to God, and make the formal reason of Idolatry consist in
giving Divine worship to the Creature, upon this apprehension, that it is a
God. Idolatry, says L. 2. de Idol. c. 1.
Gregory of Valence is a Superstition, whereby we tender Divine honor to the
Creature, as to God: Latria, or that Adoration which agrees to God alone, is
the most profound prostration and inclination of the will attended with an
apprehenssion of God as the first principle, last end, and chiefest good. So
Bellarmine L. 2. d^ Ecca Triumph. c. 12. p. 1503 B.
Those words of Christ, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc. must thus be
understood: Thou shall not worship false Gods, as the Heathens do, but that
true God who is but one, to whom alone theou shall exhibit Divine worship, as
to the true God: So Manual l. 1. c. 7. qu. 1.
Becanus, whence he infers, they are not to be counted guilty of Idolatry by
Invocation and Adoration of Saints departed, quia non adorant eos tanquam Deos:
Just weights, chap. 19.
The like mistake to say no worse, we find in Mr. Thorndike when he asserts,
that this is requisite to make the Romanists Idolaters, Viz. to take the
Elements for God.

That worship may be guilty of Idolatry, Prog. 2.5.5.
which is not given to a Creature with an intention to make that Creature be
esteemed for a God, or with an intention to ascribe unto that Creature the
excellency which agrees to God alone; This proposition may be confirmed by what
we have discoursed upon, the first, being certain that the Eunomians, Arians,
Nestorians, did not intend by any worship they performed to Christ, to work in
any this estimation that he was a God, but that above all things they did
endeavor to persuade the contrary, and they who sat at meat in Idols Temples,
and by partaking of things Sacrificed to them were guilty of Spiritual whoredom
or Idolatry. Believed themselves, and taught to others this assertion; that an
Idol was nothing in the world. And it is apparent also that according to this
principle the holy Martyrs might have worshipped with all kinds of honor, not
only Emperors and Kings, but even there Prince of Devils, without the imputation
of Idolatry; Provided they did not inwardly intend by any act of worship to
procure unto them the estimation of a Deity. 4. They who resort unto the Hag
and the Peccant in primum preceptum qui somniss, auguriis caecerisque
vanissmais is rebus fridem them habent. Catech. Rom part 3. c. 1. ss. 7.
Magician, the Sorcerer and Wizard, do not believe, much less endavour to work
this estimation in the hearts of others, that they are truly God. And yet the
Chuch of Rome condemns them, who (thinking they can do what they pretend to)
consult these wicked Artists, as persons guilty of Idolatry. T. By the like
reason, no married man commits Adultery by lying with another woman, provided
he intends not to con verse with any other under the notion of a wife: a fine
expedient in this debauched age, to make new converts to the Church of Rome.
And in like manner no Subject will he guilty of Rebellion though he desert his
Prince, follow the Ensigns of his Enemy, and fight in his defense against his
Sovereign, provided he intend not by so doing to procure to his Enemy the
estimation of a King.

These false opinions being thus removed, 6.
we assert, That Idolatry is then committed, when any honor due to God alone
is attributed to, or is conferd upon any thing that is not God: and that all
actions which give unto the Creature the honor due to the Creator only, are
Idolatrous: And this description of Idolatry, is that which was received by the
ancient Schoolmen, till the disputes of Protestants constrained them to
renounce and vary from it. Thus in the judgment of 2a 2ae. qu. 94. Art. 1.3.
Aquinas it is Idolatry, cuicunque Creaturae divinum cultum exhibere, honerem
divinum Creaturae impendere divinum cultum exhibere, cui non debet exhiberi; To
impart divine worship to any Creature, or any thing to which it ought not to be
given. All divine worship given to a Creature is Idolatry: So Part. 2. qu. 160.
Alexander Halensis, to omit divens others. This also is the definition, or
description of Idolatry we have received from the ancient Fathers of the
Church. Vid. voss de Idol. l. 1. c. 3. p. 9. Rainold de R. Ecc. Idol. l. 2. c.
9.. 4.
Tertullian and Nazianzen, St. Augustine, and almost all the Greek and Latin
Fathers with one voice consent to this. Idolatry is then committed when divine
honor is ascribed to another; hence that of Hilary the Deacon, Idolatry usurps
the honor hue to God, and gives it to the Creature: Idololatria Dei
honorisicentiam usurpat and vendieat creatuax in cap. 5. ad Ephesians.
This Thirdly may be evidently proved from Scripture, for that the Gentiles
were guilty of this heinous crime, cannot be doubted by the Christian: now
their Idolatry did in the judgment of St. Paul consist in this, that they did
homage to those beings which by nature were not Gods: but Creatures only.
Secondly, the first commandment in the affirmative, Gal. 4.8.
commands us to have the true Jehovah for our God, and consequently to give
unto him that worship which is due to God; when therefore in the Negative it
does enjoin us to have no either God besides him, it must be deened to enjoin us
also to give unto no other that worship which we owe unto him; and by which we
acknowledge him to be our God: and even reason will instruct us, that he who
does ascribe Gods worship, he gives his glory to another; and acknowledges
another God, as much as any man can do. For we know no other way whereby we can
acknowledge any thing to be a Deity, but by ascribing to it in our thoughts or
actions that worship which is due to God alone.

CHAP. II.
The CONTENTS.
Prop. 1. That if the Sacrament continue after Consecration to be Bread, the
Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry. Prop. 2. That if it really be doubtful
whether it be Bread or not, she cannot be excused from that Crime. Prop. 3.
That we have just cause to doubt of every particular Host, according to the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that it is not duly consecrated, and
consequently, that the Sacrament is after Consecration, Bread and Wine. Prop.
4. That were it certain that every particular Host contains Christ's real Flesh
and Blood, yet have we no just warrant upon that Supposition, to adore it with
Latria.

THe Church of Rome expressly does enjoin us to give the Worship of Latria
Nullus itaque dubitandi locus relinquitur quin omnes Christi sideles Latrix
cultum qui vero Deo debetur huie Sanctissimo Sacramento in veneratione
exhibeant: neque enim ideo minus est adorandum quod fuer it a Christo Domino,
ut sumatur, institutum. Council. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 5.
huic Sanctissimo Sacramento to the Holy Sacrament, 1.
as the Trent Council has defined, that is, unto that very being which the
Priest puts into the mouth of the Communicant, and which he must swallow
down into his Stomach, for that they call the Holy Sacrament. Hence presently
they tell us, That this Holy Sacrament ought not to be the less adored, because
our Lord commanded that it should be taken: This practice we conceive to be
Idolatry, and to make good the charge we lay down these preparatory
Propositions.

We may be guilty of Idolatry in paying divine Homage to a Creature, Prop. 1.
though we conceive that Creature to be God, and sointend to give that worship
only to God; for if such a vain conception which we may have just reason to
reject, but can have no inevitable and certain reason to embrace can be
sufficient to excuse this guilt: then he who thus conceits touching the vilest
Creature, cannot justly be charged with Idolatry, what ever act of worship he
should pay unto it; admit we then the Heathen Jupiter, the World, the Sun, the
Earth and whatsoever else was worshipped by the ignorant and superstitious
world, as their supreme Creator, to be the vilest Devils: pity we may their
ignorance and folly, but no man should accuse them of Idolatry, for paying
Adotation to a Subject which in their apprehensions did so well deserve it; p.
363.
and what T. G. so often mentions as an Aggravation of that worship which
Pagans gave to their inferior Demons, viz. that they esteemed them to be Gods,
would be their best excuse, and the extenuation of their guilt. And those
expressions of the Prophets which reproach the Jews and Heathens for saying to
a stock or stone thou art my God, Jet. 2.27. Hos. 4.12.
if they be literally understood, as many Roman Doctors do conceive they ought
to be, will be so far from proving that they were Idolaters, that they will
perfectly excuse them from this crime; because, according to that supposition,
they worshipped only that which they conceived to be God. The Collyridions, if
we be well informed by Baronius, conceived the blessed Virgin was a real
Deity, and yet St. Epiphanius calls them a Sect of Idol-makers who offered
their Cakes unto her. Haer. 79. p. 1061. B.
The (...) Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 69.
Samaritans who worshipped Simon Magus; The Romans, who, if Justin Martyr may be
credited, p. 91,
in honor of him did erect a Satue with this inscription Simoni Deo Sancto, to
Simon the Holy God, and many others, who, as Hic sgitur a multis quasi Deus
Glorificatus est, Iren adv. Hears. l. 1. c. 20. Imaginem quoque Simonis habent
factam adfiguram Jovis, and Helenea in figuram Minervea and has adorant.ibid.
Irenaeus tells us, did glorify him as God, and had his Image made like to
that of Jupiter, which they adored; all these I say must be excused from
Idolatry, for they all did it upon this presumption that be was the highest
God, God over all Principalities and Powers, and all other virtues. Thirdly,
If this were so, this error in the understanding would equally take off the
guilt of other Sins. This would excuse the theft of him who robbs his wicked
Brother of his goods; provided that he think with our Phanatick, that all
Dominion is founded upon Grace, and that avvicked person has no right to any
thing he possesses; for, as he that worshipeth the Host upon this false
presumption that it is no Creature, but the great Creator, conceives he
worshipeth only God, and does not give his worship unto another: So this
Phanatick conceives he takes only what is his by right of grace, and what his
wicked Brother has no right unto, and so cannot be guilty of that theft, which
necessarily is the taking of what is another, and is not mine own; Again the
Rebel who unsheathed his Sword against his King will not be guilty of
Rebellion, provided he erroniously conceived as did the Presbyterian; That the
Kings Majesty was not the highest power, but that the power of the Parliament
was equal with him, and Coordinate, or if (...). Just. Dial. cum Tryph. p.
349. c.
or if he think, as did the Irish Rebels, that being excommunicated by the
Pope, he becomes presently a Tyrant, and has no further right to his
Dominions: For if the Adorer of the Host (provided that it be a Creature) must
be excused from Idolatry, because he therefore only worships it; because he
^al^ly thinks it to be God, why may not both these sorts of Rebels be absolved
from such an heinous imputation? Since though the King is really the highest
power, and not withstanding the interdiction of the Pope, continues so to be;
yet they do only fight against him under the notion of a Tyrant, or of a power
Coordinate. Fourthly, St. Austin speaks of some who worshipped the Sun, as
thinking it was Jesus Christ, or that Christ was in the Sun, and yet he sticks
not to condemn this worship as a contempt of the Creator. To this example
(urged by Dr. St. to evince, that if the Host after the Consecration did
continue Bread, the Romanist must be guilty of Idolatry in paying of Latria to
it, as were the Manichees in giving of that worship to the Sun) T. G. returns
this answer, that the disparity is so clear, p. 327.
that not to see it was in the Dr. a very gross mistake, and he appeals unto
the Reader for the truth of what he frith, viz. That they worshipped the Sun,
whom they falsely thought to be Christ (even as the Papists worship the
Sacrament which they falsely think to be Christ) i. e. what they had in their
minds and purposes to adore was the Sun, but the Catholics do not believe the
bread to be Christ, or worship the Bread which they believe to be Christ; no
their mistake, if there was any, would be that they believed the Bread not to
be there at all, and therefore what they would have in their minds and purposes
to adore would not, nor could not be bread, but the only true and eternal Son
of God -- Answer, even so the Manichees did not conceive the Sun to be a
Creature only, Manscheai dicebant se colere Deum Patrem and filium ejus
Christum, sed quia per deum Intelligebant lucem corpoream, per Christum solemn
istum Corporeum nihil habebant Dei and Christin^^^ solum nomen. Bel^ larm.
nor did they worship that Sun which they conceived to be a mere Creature; nay,
their mistake, if there were any would be this, that they believed no Creature
to be there at all, or else that Christ resided in the Creature; what therefore
they had in their minds and purposes to adore would not, nor could not be a
Creature, but the true and eternal Son of God; but Secondly, this senseless
pitiful excuse will free the Heathens from this imputation, for they did not
believe their Jupiter to be an evil Spirit, or a Creature, but the God of all
things: they did not worship him whom they believed to be an evil Spirit; no,
when they appeared before his Image, and there addressed their worship to him,
they believed no evil Spirit to be there at all; and therefore what they had in
their minds and purposes to adore, would not, nor could not be an evil Spirit,
but the true and only God. T. G. proceeds to say the difference then in the
mistakes is this; That the Manichees had for the formal Term of their worship
an undue object, viz. A Creature instead of the Creator; but Catholics in case
of a mistake would have no other formal object of Adoration in their minds, but
the Creator himself. Answer, 1 What means this ignorant and simple Tattle of
the formal term of worship, but to amuze the Reader, and make him hope that he
faith something, when he has nothing but a mess of nonsense to return unto
the Doctors argument? Divinity and Metaphysics are wholly strangers to this
rude expression; in Logic a material term is the word. Homo, The formal term
is what the word does signify, so then the sense runs thus, the Manichees had
for the signification of this word, worship, an undue object, admirable
nonsense. (2) What is the formal object, but the reason for which the outward
or the material object is Adored? This being so, is it not clearer than the
Sun, that they who had this apprehension in their minds, that what we call the
Sun was also Jesus Christ, and for that only reason did Adore it, had equally
no other formal object, as they who had this apprehension that the Host was
Christ, and therefore did Adore it: and if the Host continue Bread, must not
the Adoration terminated on it, be terminated on a Creature, must not the
formal term of the Latria or worship which is given to it, be an undue object.

If this erroneous conception will excuse the Authors of it from being guilty
of Idolatry, then first the Israelites could not be rightly styled Idolaters
for worshipping the golden Calf, for many of the Roman Doctors assert, they did
it upon this presumption, that the Calf was God, and yet the holy Scripture
does expressly say they were Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10.7.
by doing thus, and that they offered Sacrifice unto the Idol, which sure is
little better than Idolatry. 7 Act. 41.
To this instance of the golden Calf, he answers thus, The Israelites believed
the golden Calf to be God, P. 329.
but Catholics (though supposed to be mistaken in their belief) would not
worship the Bread for Christ, because their mistake would not be in taking the
Bread for God, as the Israelites did the Calf: but in this that they conceived
the Bread not to be there at all, but in place thereof the only true and
eternal God; and so although the object (or rather Subject) materially there
present would in such a case be Bread, yet their act of Adoration would not be
terminated formally upon that, but upon God. Answer, as if this also were not
their mistake who held the Calf to be God, that they conceived no Creature to
be there at all, but in place thereof the only true and eternal God, (for can
it be possible that the Israelites should conceive the Calf to be God, and not
conceive that when they worshipped him as God, they had no Creature to be the
object of their worship) and so although the object materially present would in
such a case be the golden Calf, yet the act of Adoration would not be
terminated formally on that, but upon God?

5ly. T. G. proceeds to tell us in the words of Dr. Tailor, that if they
thought Christ were not present, P. 329.
they are so far from worshipping the Bread in this case, that themselves
profess it to be Idolatry so to do, which is a demonstration that their Soul
has nothing in it which is Idololatrical. Answer, even so had not the Heathens
thought that a good Spirit was present in their Images, had not the Manichees
and the Egyptians thought that God and Christ were present where we see the
Sun; had not the Israelites thought that God was present where they saw the
Image of a Calf, they would have been so far from worshipping the Calf or the
material Sun, that they themselves would have professed it to be Idololatrical
to do so; which is a demonstration that their Soul has nothing in it which is
Idololatrical. And whereas he proceeds to add from Dr. Tailor, P. 330.
that before they pass an Act of Aloration, they believe the Bread to be
annihilated, or turned into his substance who may lawfully be worshipped, and
they who have these thoughts are as much enemies of Idolatry, as they who
understand better: it is manifest this does as much excuse the Heathen, as it
does the Papist, for they also before they pass an Act of Adoration, do believe
that what they worship, is the God of Heaven, who lawfully may be worshipped;
and having such conceptions, they according to this argument must be esteemed
as much enemies of Idolatry, as were those Christians, and those Prophets which
reproved them for it, and passed so wicked and unjust a censure on them.
Baronius tells us that the Collyridians conceived that the blessed Virgin was a
real Deity, Apparat. 43.
and that she had nothing humane in her, and so before they ventured to Adore
her, they believed her humane nature was annihilated, or turned into his
substance who may lawfully be worshipped; and yet, if we may credit Epiphanius,
it was no better than an Idol-making Heresy and they were Diabolical
Idolaters: So that those passages of that ingenious and learned Prelate, serve
only to demonstrate that the highest judgment, and the most pregnant subtle
wit must strangely shuffle, and most assuredly miscarry, when it endeavors to
excuse the Church of Rome from being guilty of Idolatry: when the same Reverend
Person undertook to show the vanity and folly of what he had delivered on that
Subject to excese the Papist, when he proceeds to show the grourds by which his
judgment was established, Real presence. p. 347.
no man could more apparently assert, or more convincingly demonstrate what the
Roman Catholics alleged to free them from this Sin, 1 b. p. 340.341, 342.
would free the worst of Heathens, For he entreats them to consider, first,
that no man without his own fault, can mistake a Creature so far as to suppose
him to be God; (especially not such a Creature as a piece of Bread.)

Secondly, That when the Heathens worshipped the Sun and Moon, they did it upon
their confidence that they were Gods, and would not have given to them Divine
Honor, if they had thought otherwise. Thirdly, That no man in the world upon
these grounds, except he that is malicious and spightful, can be an Idolater:
for if he have an ignorance great enough to excuse him, he can be no Idolater;
if he have not, he is spightful, and malicious, and then all the Heathens are
also excused as well as they. Fourthly, That if good intent and ignorance in
such cases can take off the crime, then the persecutors that killed the
Aplstles, thinking they did God good service, and Saul in blaspheming the
Religion, and persecuting the Servants of Jesus, and the Jews themselves in
Crucifying the Lord of Life, who did it ignorantly, as did also their Rulers,
have met with their excuse upon the same account.

T. G. proceeds to urge from Mr. Thorndike thus, P. 332.
(and truly he has nothing worth consideration in his whole discourse, but
what is borrowed either from Dr. Tailor or Mr. Thorndike) they who know that
the Godhead of Christ is the reason, for which his Flesh and Blood is
worshipped in the Eucharist, cannot take that worship for Idolatry, because his
Flesh and Blood is not present in the Eucharist, as they who worship it there,
think it is: For they know, that the Flesh and Blood of Christ is no Idol to
Chistians wheresoever it is worshipped. Answer, This argument is so ridiculous
and childish, that I am tempted to believe this worthy person was deserted in
this matter by God, because he had deserted the Doctrine of the Church of
England; for so far are we from knowing that the Flesh and Blood of Christ is
made no Idol by the Christian wheresoever it is worshipped, that we do know
that the whole Church of Christ condemned the Arian, Photinian, Nestorian, and
Eunomian as Idol-worshippers, because they did Adore his Flesh and Blood, this
argument therefore is built on that foundation which gives the lie to the whole
Christian World.

Secondly, This argument does as much excuse the Heathens and the Manicheans as
it does the Papist, for they that know the Deity of Christ, is the reason why
he was worshipped in the Sun, have as much reason to excuse the Manichees for
worshipping the Sun, upon this supposition that Christ was there, as they have
to excuse the Papist for worshipping the Sacrament, upon a like false
supposition that Christ is there.

But now comes in a Demonstration, P. 329.
so full of dazzling light, that nothing can withstand its evidence, and thus it
runs; what ever is taken for an object of worship, the understanding must
affirm to be.

But Catholics in the belief of Transubstantiation do not in their minds
affirm the Bread to be. Therefore the object of their worship is not Bread but
Christ: Answer, what T. G. ignorantly styles a Demonstration, is such a
miserable Sophism, so childish and ridiculous that nothing can be more: what
Freshman knows not, that a true Syllogism has but three terms, and cannot
possibly admit of more, it being built on this foundation, that quae convenient
in aliquo tertio, etc. But he has been so liberal as to afford us five of six,
and give us a conclusion from the premises, which never was contained in them.
Let us put it into to better form, and see if it have any strength or evidence;
thus then, what ever is taken by the Roman Catholic for any object of his
worship, must be offirmed by the Roman Catholic to be. But Bread in holy
Eucharist is not affirmed by the Roman Catholic to be. Ergo, Bread in the holy
Eucharist is not taken by the Roman Catholic for any object of his worship.
This Demonstration is so exceedingly convincing, that we grant the whole. For
though we do unanimously judge that Papists in the Eucharist do worship Bread,
and so are guilty of Idolatry; yet no man ever thought that they imagined they
did worship Bread, or take Bread for the object of that worship which they call
Latria; to show the vanity and folly of this pretended Demonstration, let us
see what service it will do unto the Heathens: what ever is taken for an object
of Divine worship the understanding must affirm to be so, for neither the
Egyptians had made the Sun the object of that worship, nor yet the Israelites
the Calf if their understanding had not first affirmed them to be so. But
Heathens do not in their minds affirm an evil Spirit, or a Creature to be an
object of Divine worship, but do conceive the object of their worship to be
God: therefore the object of the Heathens worship is not an evil Spirit or a
Creature but God. This is that weighty Demonstration which our Author boasts
of. Having now fully answered all the exceptions of T. G. I will assume the
confidence to say, that notwithstanding all his outcries of a clear disparity,
and his malicious imputations of want of Reason, and Conscience, in the Dr. who
asserts the contrary, I have made it clearer than the light, that he has not
been able to say one word which is not manifestly false, or does not equally
excuse the This consel^^d by Gatherings in these words. Audi in hos^in com
adoratur Christus ad Deus, non simplicitur, sed ut existens ful^ his speciebus;
cum igitur ibi non existat Christus, sed Creatura pro Christo invenitur, cui
exhibetur Latria; Idolatria est, Idoloatre enim etiam hae errant ratione, qui
caelum, puta, aut aliquid aliud adorabant, putantes se ibi adorare Deum, quem
animam mundi dicebant juxta Varronis Theologiam. Cathar: advers. nova dogmain
Cajetani Tit de veneratione storump, 134.135.
Heathen and the Roman Catholic; and consequently that the discourse of Dr.
St. was strong and nervous, and such as only Rats can answer, and shall content
my self with this one corollary, that T. G. may be highly confident and boast
of Demonstration, when he vents nothing besides plain nonsense, and apparent
folly.

And now to put an issue to this proposition, if men may properly be said to
do, and equitably may be charged with doing what they did not intend, because
their action in effect is that which they conceived it not to be, as is
apparent from a Thousand Scripture instances, then may the Papist be equitably
charged with Idolatry, and properly affirmed to commit it; provided the
material object of his Latria should be only Bread, although he does not in the
least intend to give the highest worship to Bread, for since Idolatry is only
Latria given to, or terminated on the Creature, and seeing Bread is most
assuredly a Creature, Latria terminated upon Bread can be no other than
Idolatry. but if men must be thought to do only what they intend, then every
action must be good, provided it be well intended; and Murder, Theft,
Rebellions, Perjuries, Equivocations must be sacred actions, provided they be
done for the promotion of Gods glory, and the propagation of the Roman says;
which Doctrines thought they are taught, and daily practiced by the members of
the Roman Church, yet are they villainies too dangerous to be espoused by the
English Papists.

To attribute by way of honor, Prop. 2.. 2.
worship, or respect, that knowledge to a Creature, which for any thing we know
unto the contrary, is only due to the Creator, is to be guilty of Idolatry. For
first, That which is not of Faith is Sin. Romans 14.23. what therefore is a sin,
because it attributes to the Creature what may be due to the Creator only,
must be the sin of giving to the Creature what is due to God; and so, being an
Act of Worship, must be the sin of Idol Worship; for as the man who does assert
what he conceives to be uncertain for a certain truth, is by all Casuists
esteemed a Liar, though what he does assert should prove a truth, because he
does assert that for a certain Truth, which he conceives may be a Lie: And as
that Woman who performs the duties of a Wife to any person of whom she doubts
that he is not her Husband, is to be esteemed an Adulteress, although he be
indeed her Husband with whom she thus converseth, because by doing of this
Action, whilst the doubt remains, she does that Action, which for any thing
she knows unto the contrary, may be plain Adultery. So he that performs that
honor to a Creature, which he suspecteth only to be due to God, must be
pronounced guilty of Idolatry, however he perform that Worship only which is
due unto the Creature, because by doing of it whilst any cause of doubt
remains, he shows an inclination to perform it to the Creature, though it
belonged not to him; and in effect does say. I have just reason to suspect this
Worship does belong to God alone, yet will I give it to a Creature.

Suppose the Bread, when duly consecrated, Prop, 3.. 3.
were certainly converted into the Body of our Lord, yet since, according to
the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, this consecration often is, and may be
hindered by many secret defects which do not fall under the Cognizance of him
that Worships; a man may rationally doubt of every particular Host presented to
his adoration, that it is only Bread. This Carnettus quidem, cum tale quid ab
eo quaeretetur, respondisse dicitur, Merito dubitari de eo posse, nec vel se,
vel alium quenquam teneri, temere credere, aut salutem suam credendo in
diserimen adducere; quod vel ipse seilicet, vel alius quis in individuo
sacerdos; vel hoc, vel certo alio consecrationis suae rempore, panem
Transtubstantiando Christi corpus conficiat. Sratui forsitan posse in genere,
atque indefinite, quod Transubstantiatio sit, and quod ab aliquo, alicubi
Sacerdore tale quid, aliquando fieripossit. Epistopus Eliensis, Respon ad Apol.
Bell. page 7.
Garnet openly confessed, and therefore though they stand obliged to believe
that the Bread is Transubstantiated some where or other, at some time or other,
by some Priest or other, yet they think no man is obliged to believe, that any
Priest now, or at any one certain time, does consecrate effectively. And this
concession is not very liberal, if we consider what is acknowledged by Suarez,
Multae sut causae propter quas potest accidere, ut Christus non sit praesens:
ut si sacerdos non sit baptizatus, vel non sit rite ordinatus, quod pendet ex
multis aliis causis, quibus fere in infinitum progredi possumus; ut ex part
materiae saepe accidit defectus. Suarez in 3 Thom. qu. 79. Art. 8. Disp. 65.2.
That we may almost infinitely proceed in the enumeration of the defects, which
will obstruct Christ's presence in the Holy Sacrament. For as we are informed by
the Roman Missal, if the Si aliquid desit ex iis quae ad integritatem verborum
in ipsa consecratione requiruntur. Verba autem consecrationis, quae sunt forma
hujus Sacramenti, sunt haec, hoc est enim corpus meum, and hic est enim calix
sanguinis mei novi and aeterni Testamenti, misterium fidei, qui pro vobis, and
pro multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum: Si quis autem aliquid
diminueret vel immutaret de forma consecrationis corporis and sanguinis, and in
ipsa verborum immutatione, verba idem non significarent: non Conficeret
sacramentum. Miss. Romans de Defec. Miss. p. 35.
Priest happen to diminish, or alter any of the words of Consecration, so that
the sense be varied, or any word belonging to the form of Consecration be
ontitted; in all these cases Christ is not present in the Sacrament, but it
remains Bread, now since the form of Consecration of the Cup contains 11
words, and so is the more subject to diminution or alteration, seeing the
Priest does always speak the words of Consecration in a Si quis dixerit
Ecclesiae R. ritum quo submissa voce pars canonis and verba consecrationis
proseruntu^ damnandum esse, aut lingua tantum vulgari missam celebrari debere
anathema sit Council. Trid, Sess. 22. Can. 9.
secret voice, and not to be heard, and in the Latin Tongue, none of the
People can be certain that he speaks the words of Consecration so fully and so
regularly as to secure them from Worshipping a piece of Bread.

Secondly, Si panis non sit triticeus, vel, si triticeus, sit admixtus granis
alterius generis in tanta quan titate, ut non maneat panis triticeus, vel sit
alioqui corruptus: non conficitur Sacramentum. ibid. page 34.
If the Bread be corrupted, or if it be not Wheaten-Bread, then is it not
converted into Christ's Body; and if the Wine be sour, or turned into Vinegar,
if it be made of unripe Grapes, if it be mixed with so much Water as will
corrupt the Wine, then is it not converted into the Blood of Christ. Now by
what means the person that adores the Sacrament, can be assured that the Bread
and Wine is subject unto none of these defects, it is not easy to conceive. Si
vinum sit factum pe nitus acetum, vel penitus putridum, vel de uvis acerbis,
seu non maturis expessum, vel admixtum tantum aquae, ut vinum sit corruptum,
non conficitur Sacramentum. ibid.


Thirdly, Siquis non intendit conficere, sed delusorie aliquid agere non
consecrat, quiarequiritur inten tio ibid. P. 35.36.
If the Priest have uo intention to consecrate the Bread and Wine, if in this
matter he acts dilusorily, if he be asecret Atheist, a Moor, a Jew, in all
these cases the person Worshipping must give Latria to a Creature; if none of
all this happen, yet Quicquid horum deficit, scilicet mat eria debita, for ma
cum intention, and ordo Sacerdotalis in conficiente, non consicitur
Sacramentum. ib. p. 34.
if the Consecrated Priest were not Baptized with due form of words, or if the
Person that Baptized him, does not intend to do as the Church does, if he be
not a Priest, (which often happens says Pope In quaest, quodlib. quaest. 3.
Adrian) and certainly falls out, when he that does Ordain him, does noth not
intend to do so, or faultreth by diminution of, or by addition to the form of
Ordination, so that the sense is changed, or made imperefct; or lastly, if the
Bishop that Ordained this Priest that does now Consecrate, were not himself
Ordained and Baptized with due matter, form, and intention, or if this happened
to any Priest to Bishop before him, or any one in the same Line of Ordainers
till you come unto St. Peter; that is, if this has happened out in sixteen
hundred years, then will the Elements remain still Bread and Wine, as wanting
Consecration by a real Priest, for Baptism and Ordination being necessary
requisites to Priesthood, he who by the defect of these is only a supposed
Priest, can give but a supposed Priesthood, and they that do receive their
Priesthood, or do derive it from such as have received it from them, can
receive nothing but a shadow, it being undeniably certain, that the
unsupplyable defect of any necessary antecedent, does cause a nullity in all
those consequences which depend upon it. So that no R. Catholic can be assured
he does not Worship Bread, without he can have no assurance, there being no
necessity that they should be true.

From the consideration of all these defects, it is exceeding evident, That all
that live in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and daily practice the
adoration of the Host, are unavoidably subjected to the continual peril of
Idolatry, and have just reason to suspect (although the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation should in the general be certain) that the material object
of their Worship is but Bread and Wine. On this Objection T. G. reflects with
so much insolence and triumph, as if it were the vainest scruple that a tongue
could utter, and had been managed by the Dr. with the greatest. weakness: And
yet so little reason had he to be thus insolent and pert, that by his first
reply unto it, he has quite overthrown the Roman Cause, and given all
considering persons, such a clear convincing motive to desert the Church of
Rome, that nothing can be more prevailing. For thus he speaks, The absurdness
of the assertion, that another man's defect and wickedness should make me incur
the Crime of Idolatry, whether I will or no, might suffice to make any
reasonable man depose so Chimerical a seruple. This I confess is a most clear
and certain truth, that it is infinitely absurd to say I should be guilty of so
great a Crime, only by reason of another fault or wickedness: But then it must
be more absurd to think I shall be damned only by reason of the defect or
wickedness of others, which yet all R. Catholieks stand bound as firmly to
believe, as any other Doctrine of that Church; for it is certainly the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, Quoties infans aut adultus versatur in vitae periculo,
potest sine solemnitate a quocunque Baptizari servata tamenforma and intention
Ecclesia, Ritual. Romans de Bap. P. 7.
That where the perfect form of Baptism, or the intention of Quicquid enim
horum deficit, scihect materia debita, forma cum intention non conficitur
Sacramentum. Miss. Romans p. 34.
doing what the Churth does, is wanting, the person that is brought unto the
Fout is not Baptized: And it is also the definition of that Church, Siquis
dixerit, Bapti^mum liberum esse, hoc est, non necessarium ad salutem; anathema
sit. Coxcil. Trid. Sess. 7, de Bept. Can. 5.
That Baptism is necessary to Salvation, and consequently, that no unbaptized
person can be Saved; and hence the Roman Ritual speaks thus, Ritual. Romans de
Bapt. p. 5.
That Holy Baptism, the Gate of Christian Religion and Eternal Life, Nihil
magi^ necessarium videri potest, quam ut doceatur omnibus hominibus Baptismi
legem a Domino praescriptam esse, ita ut niu per Baptifmi gratiam Deo
renascantur, in sempirernam miseriam, etc interitum a parentibus, sive illi
fidles, sive infideles sint, procreentur. Igitur saepius a Pastoribus
explicandum crit, quod apud Evangelistam legitur; Nssiquis renatus suerit ex
apua and spiritu non potest int^oire in reguum Dei. Catechis. Romans part. 2.
Cap. 11.5.31.
is necessary to the Salvation of all Men, is testified by truth it self in
these expressions, unless a Man be born again, etc. and therefore in the due
ministration of it, the greatest diligence is needful. (2) It is most
certainly the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that Sinners are not absolved by
the Priest, unless the Nihil magis necessarium videri potest, quam ut doceatur
omnibus hominibus Baptismi legem a Domino praescriptam esse, ita ut nisi per
Baptismi gratiam Deo renascantur, in sempiternam miseriam, and anteritum a
parentibus, sive illi fideles, sive infideles sint, procreentur. Igitur saepius
a Pastoribus explicandum crit, quod apud Evangelistam legitur; Nssi quis
renatus suerit ex aqua and spiritu non potest introire in regnum Dei. Catechis.
Romans part. 2. Cap. 11.. 31.
Priest intend to do it; and yet that Church defines, That this Siquis
dixerit, in ministris, dum Sacra mentum conficiunt and conferunt non requiri
intentionem saltem faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, anathema, sit. Council. Trid.
Sess. 7. Cap. 1. Can. 11. f Est autem hoc Sacramentum Paenitentiae lapsis post
Baptismum ad salutem necessarium. ut nondum regeneratis ipse Baptismus. ibid.
Stss. 14. Cap. 2.
Sacrament of Penance is necefsary to Salvation to those that after Baptism do
fall; and tells the penitent, Non debet poenitens adeo sibi de suaipsius fide
blandiri, ut etiam si nulla illi adsit contritio, aut sacerdoti animus serio
agendi and vere absolvendi deslt; putet tamen se, propter suam solam fidem,
vere and coram Deo esse absolutum. Nec enim fides fine penitentia remissionem
ullam peccatorum praestaret: Nec is esset, nisi salutis suae negligentissimus,
qui sacerdotem joco se absolventem cognofceret, and non alium, serio agentem,
sedulo requireret. ib. Cap. 6.
he must not so far flatter or deceive himself, as to expect to be absolved by
God, by reason of his Faith, if the Priest does not in his mind intend truly to
absolve him, and to act seriously in the matter. So that T. G. and all of his
persuasion, must recant this principle which he has here laid down, and which
shines with the brightest evidence, or else he must renounce the Church of
Rome, and one would wonder at the stupidity of our R. Catholics, that they can
think of this without the greatest horror and amazement: for if this be not
true, then their Religion must be false, and if it be, then how great soever be
the Piety and Virtue of their Lives, yet if their Priest be a secret Atheist,
if he be impious enough not to be serious; or if he be so negligent, or so
malicious as not to intend their absolution, they must infallibly be damned to
all Eternity. Secondly, His instances are all impertinent, and insufficient to
take off the scruple upon several accounts, as for example, P. 259.
T. G. asks what certainty has a Husband that the person he takes for his
Wife, is so indeeds and yet a Husband may pay the conjugal debt.

Answer, The case is no way parallel, for here is no apparent cause of doubt,
for otherwise the duty ought not to be paid, but there is almost infinite
reason to suspect Christ is not present in the Sacrament; once in a Thousand
instances perhaps it happens that a Man may be cheated with another Woman;
but here it is an Hundred to one that we are cheated in our supposition of
Christ's Real and Corporal presence. For since the power of the Priest to
Consecrate, depends upon the due Baptizing, and due Ordination of all that Line
which was before him; should we allow to every Ordaining Bishop 16 years, yet
must that Line contain an Hundred Bishops at least, and if but one neglect in
matter, form, or the intention of the Priest, has been committed in the
Baptizing, or Ordaining of one of the whole Hundred Bishops, the Bread must
certainly be Bread; so that the want of due intention, form or matter, being as
common, and as like to happen in any single instance, as a cheat put upon the
Husband; the disparity in this must be as great as that of One to an Hundred;
and if we do again consider that according to the Canon of the Nicene Council,
One Bishop, and Two Priests are requisire to the Ordaining of a Priest, then
the disparity runs thus; as Three hundred to one, so is the possibility of
being cheated in the Sacrament, to that of being cheated in my Bed: But then if
we consider that throughout the Cent. 9.

In eodem concilio de vita and honestate sacrificulorum, quorum mores a
Disciplina Majorum lapsi ad luxum libidinemque plus quam profano licet,
tendebant, leges latae sunt. Avent. lib. 4. p. 359.

Isti octo Pontifices sequentes brevi tempore sederunt, nescio notabile aliquid
de ipsis dicere, quia non nisi scandalosa de ipsis reperi. Fascic. p. 67. Quod
proinde seculum ab Historicis infaelix inscribitur. Genebrard. ad Ann. Christi.
899.


Ninth, Cent. 10. Quo tempore ipsa Romana Ecclesia casura and interitura
penitus videri potuisset, tot improbis, sceleratis, impudicis, Praedonibus
invasorbus, sanguinariis and grassatoribus hoc seculo (ut audisti) sedem
Apostolicam invadentibus. Cbron. 1000.
Tenth, and Cent. 11. Quam tunc deploratus fuerit status Ecclesiae, and ferme
monstro simillimus, cernere licet apud sigebertum, Vincent. and Antoni.
sacerdotes crant moribus depravatissim is, and propterea ipsi and res sacrae
populo contemptibiles; quilibet ex plebe audebat de sacris mysteriis disputare;
Sacramenta etiam ab Infantibus turpiter tractabantur; in extremo vitae viaticum
Dominicum contemnebatur; decimae presbyteris debitae igne cremabantur. Corpus
domini saepe pedibus conculcabatur and sanguis effundebatur, multaque alia
scclera in Ecclesia patrabantur. Genebrard. Chron. 1079.
Eleventh Ages. The Priests and Bishops of the Roman Church were so abominably
wicked, that Tongue cannot express sufficiently their vileness; that by their
own confession 50 succeeding Popes were rather Devils, and Apostates, than
Apostolic Persons, that their Sacrificators were Sacrificuli principibus a Deo
datis, non solum non parendum esse, verum etiam fraud, vi quov is modo
tollendos, populum Christianum docere audent; per juria, homicidia, civilia
bella, caedes, perfidiam, pietatem vocant, fidem frangentes, faedera
dissolventes, pactum praevaricantes, juramentum vjolantes, perfidos, atque
perjuros non esse, sibi credi postulant, Quin cos, qui fideles sunt, qui
rebellionem, incendia facere, stup, a, incestus committere praedas agitare,
proximos opprimere, occidere, compila^e, sanguinem Christianum effundere
summopere cavent, in numero sceleratorum atque impiorum computant, etc.
Aventinus Annal. Bojar. lib. 5 page 591.
Antichrists, Magicians, Invaders of the holy Function, guilty of Simony and
Perjury, Monsters and Prodigies of vice, and that on those accounts the Ages
mentioned are called the unhappy and the most desperate times, wherein the very
Praefari aliquid necessarium duximus ne quid scandali pusillus auimo pateatur
si quando videre contigerit abominationem desolationis in Templo. Baron a An.
900.
Abomination of Desolation had usurped the Temple. If we consider that their
ignorance was so exceeding great, that Multo jam Tempore indoluit paternitas
tua tantam in Ecelesia Dei invalescere inscitiam atque tam Crassam little qui
Sancto ministrant altari, and divinas ex officio personant lauds, ignorantiam,
ut rari admodum inveniantur, qui exact and integre quae legunt aut canunt,
intelligant, aut little, quae ore expromunt, sensum capiant aut rectam teneant
percipiantve sententiam. Clichto v. pre^at. Elucidat. Eccles. vid. Nich. de
Cleman. p. 16. Hotting de necess. Reform. p. 65.
few knew what it was they read. I say if these things be impartially
considered; it must be highly probable to men of ordinary reason, that if the
forementioned defects do certainly obstruct the Sacrament of Ordination, there
is not any Priest now living in the whole Church of Rome. This answer also
shows that all his other instances are also wretchedly impertinent, and
therefore cannot possibly deserve to be particularly considered.

Were it most certain that every particular Host were duly Consecrated, Prop.
4. Sect. 4.
and certainly contained Christ's real Body, yet have we no good warrant upon
that supposition to Adore it with Latria: P. 127.
For as the Dr. excellently argues, the reason of all Adoration given to the
Sacrament is this, that Christ has said, this is my Body, which words if they
imply Transubstantiation cannot be understood of any other change than of the
Bread into Christ's Body; and if this sense were to be put upon them, why mhy I
not imagine much more agreeably to the nature of the Institution? That the mere
humane nature of Christ is there, then that his Divinity should be there in a
particular manner present to no end, and where it makes not the least
manifestation of it self: To this discourse T. G. returns this Answer, P. 23^
That where there is a General command without exception to Worship the word
made Flesh, there he has given a sufficient indication of doing it wherever we
are certain by faith, that he is so present. Answer, But what is this to the
Doctors Argument, which proceeds upon this ground, that the presence of Christ's
Body in the Eucharist is no sufficient evidence, that in the Eucharist it is
united to the word; for if Christ's Body may be eaten, and not eaten, eaten by
them who have received the Host, and not eaten by them who have not yet
received it; If it may be under the species of Bread, and not under the species
of Bread, under the species of Bread, as it is in the Sacrament, and not under
the species of Bread, as it is in Heaven; why may it not be united to the word,
and not united to the word, united to the word, as it is in Heaven; but not
united to the word as it lies senseless on the Altar. And therefore the belief
of Catholics, that the Divinity is thus united to the Sacrament, is no
sufficient motive to Adore it with Latria, because I can have no sufficient
reason to think it true.

Secondly, P. 113.
The Dr. Argues thus, if the Bread be converted into that Body of Christ which
is hypostatically united with the Divine nature, then the conversion is not
merely into the Body, but into the person of Christ; and then Christ has as
many bodies hypostatically united to him, as there are Elements consecrated.
This clear perspicuous Argument is says T. G. A notable piece of new mystical
Divinity, p. 141.
and expres'd in hard words; and attended with a contradiction. Answer, can it
be expected that any man should speak of a Subject that is it self made up of
infinite contradictions, and not speak sutably to the Subject? if T. G. would
assert the contrary to what the Dr. argues, must he not say that all the
Consecrated Elements (perhaps a 1000) are but one Body, and seeing all these
Elements are Christ's Body, must not he say that a 1000 Christ's bodies are but
one Christ's body? is it not impudence and disingenuity to cry out of hard words
upon the mention of Consecrated Elements, and Conversion into the person of
Christ, when we are speaking of that change which they all Transubstantiation,
and say that it is made by Consecration of the Elements; or because we use that
term of hypostatick union, when we are speaking of that union which is so
called by all Divines that treat upon that Subject? and is delivered to us in
that very word by the whole Church of Christ? P. 241.242/
It does not follow says T. G. any more then because the Bread the Flesh, the
Fish which he eat upon Earth were converted into the substance of his Body, and
hypostatically united to him; it follows, That there were as many Bodies
hypostatically united to him, as there were several meats eaten by him: no
says he, this Argument carries not the show of probability. Rep. Sure I am,
this answer has but the show of a similitude; for the Elements of Bread are
changed into Christ's whole Body, but all the several meats Christ eat were not
changed into Christ's whole Body, but only into some part of it; but the
similitude is good against him, for as the several meats which by Conversion
became parts of Christ's Body, were not the self same parts, but diverse: So the
several Wafers which by Conversion become Christ's whole Body, are not the same
whole Body, but diverse; thus does T. G's. similitudo turn tail upon him. And
that the Doctors Argument is perfect demonstration is most evident, for it
depends upon this proposition, that if one Consecrated Element by one Christ's
Body hypostatically united to him, then must Two, be Two, and Ten be Ten, and
many Consecrated Elements many Bodies; which is a evident as this, if one Twenty
shillings in a bag be one pound, then must Two, be Two pound, and many Twenty
shillings in a bag, must be many pounds.

CHAP. III.
The CONTENTS.
Prop. The Bread and Wine are not Transubstantiated, 1. Because we do not drink
blood. 2. Because we do not eat man's Flesh. 3. Because mankind was not redeemed
by the first Sacrament. 4. Because the Scripture after Consecration calls it
Bread and Wine. 5. Because our senses have no evidence of such a change.

IN the participation of the Eucharist we do not eat the humane body of our
Lord which suffered on the Cross; nor drink of humane blood, Prop. 1. Sect. 1.
but what we eat and drink is true substantial Bread and Wine: for, 1. If
Christ had given to his Disciples blood to eat, he must have taught them to
have done what was forbidden in the Law of Moses, whereas he both exactly did
observe that Law, Mat. 23 3.
and taught his own Disciples to observe what ever by the Scribes and Pharisees
was taught them from the Law of Moses, which was in force till all things were
fulfilled by the death of Christ. Secondly, Christ's own Disciples after his
Resurrection were strict observers of the Law of Moses for a considerable time;
and so were also many Thousands of the Jewish converts. 21 Act. 20.
St. Peter was so nice in observation of the Jewish Customs, that till a vision
had informed him better, 10 Act. 14.
he thought such meat was utterly unlawful as was forbidden by the Law: and
when in a vision on he was bid to stay and eat, he presently cries out, as a
man tempted to an unlawful act; not so Lord for I have never eaten any thing
that is unclean. St. James gives an account to Paul of the great zeal that all
the Jewish Converts had for the Law of Moses, Act. 21.20.
in these words; Thou see Brother how many Thousands of Jews there are which
believe, and they are all zealous of the Law; he declares how highly they were
all offended with him, because they were informed that he taught that they were
not obliged to yield Obedience to the Constitutions and customs of the Jewish
Law, verse. 21. They are (says he) informed of thee, that thou teach all the
Jews which are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, that they ought
not to Circumcise their Children, neither to walk after their Customs: And
Thirdly, he exhorts him, for their better satisfaction; so to act, v. ^4.
as that he might induce them to believe that he also walked soberly and did
keep the Law. And yet St. Peter before this vision, had assembled to celebrate
the Holy Sacrament, and all these Jewish converts so zealous of the observation
of the Ceremonial Law did very frequently receive this Cup of Blessing; Act.
20.7, 11.
and upon every Lords day at least, did meet together to break Bread; Whence
evident it is that they did not look upon that action as any violation of the
Law of Moses, and so could not imagine that by participation of this Sacrament
they drunk what properly was blood. For they could not be ignorant that blood
was by this Law forbidden, Lev. 3.17
it having said, it shall be a perpetual Statute for your Generations
throughout all your dwellings, Lev. c. 7. v. 27.
that ye eat neither Fat nor Blood; and that, whatsoever s^^^l it he that
eats any manner of Blood, even that soul shall be cut off from his People.
Nor could they be both zealous observators of the Law, and quarrellors with
those that did not keep it, and yet transgress it themselves. The Sect of
Nazarens continued in the Church of Christ 400 years, for of the Sectae illius
meminit H^^ronymus in Epist. ad August and August ipse l. 4. con. Crescon.
Danaeas in August. de Haeres. p. 75.
Nazarens, St. Jerome and St. Austin do make mention, they multiplied and spread
themselves throughout the Eastern Church; and yet this Sect observed Nazaraei
cum Dei filium confireantur esse Christum, omnia tamen veteris legis observant.
August. de Heresibus Cap. 9. vid. Epipha^^um Haeres. 29. 7.
all the Law of Moses, and held it necessary to Salvation so to do, and
therefore none of them did think that by participation of the Holy Sacrament
they fed on blood, and so transgressed it.

Again, when the Disciples met together to consult of what was needful to be
observed by the Gentile Converts, the better to avoid the Scandal of the Jews,
they strictly charged them to avoid things strangled, and abstain from Blood;
Acts 15.28, 29.
and judged it necessary so to do: Now had they fed on Blood in Holy Mysteries,
no Christian communicant could have observed this precept, and nothing could
have been more foolish than to give injunctions to avoid that Scandal, which in
their Holy Rites they daily ministered. This therefore is a signal and
triumphant evidence, that they who first imposed this Decree, and they who
undertook to keep it, were utter strangers to this idle dream of
Transubstantiation. The ancient Christians did for many Centuries abstain from
Blood, and look upon it as a thing forbidden by this Canon, which enjoins this
abstainance, and reckons it amongst (...), or things necessary, of which we
have sufficient Testimony from that Law of Leo the Emperor, where having
forbidden the use of Blood stuffed in the entrails of Beasts, he affirms, That
in the Old Law and in the Gospel, it was always esteemed impious to eat it: and
in the Canons called (...). Canonum Apestol. cap. 62.
Apostolical, it is forbidden to a Clergyman to eat Blood, under pain of
deposition, to a Layman under pain of Excommunication: And hence the
Penitential Books had warrant enough to impose Canonical Penances upon them
that did taste this forbidden Dish: And that they did so, is known and confessed
by Pamelius, Rhenanus, and de la Cerda upon these words of Tertulian, Ne
animalium quidem sanguinem in epulis ^s ulentis habemus; and being charged with
the eating of the Blood of Infants, they, to evince the impudence and falseness
of that charge, did constantly return this answer, Nobis homicidium nec videre
sas nec audire tantumque abhumano sanguine cay^mus ut neceduilum peccorum in
cibis sanguinem noverimus, Minu^. par. 34. cum notis Ouzel. porro quale est ut
quos sanguinempecoris hor^ere confiditis humano inhiare credatis? Tertul. Apol.
c. 9. vid. Eusib. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c 1.
That they who held it utterly unlawful to eat the Blood of Beasts, could not
be guilty of Feasting on the Blood of Men: whereas, had they conceived that, by
partaking of the consecrated Cup, they drank of humane Blood, this answer could
not have excused them, nor could it with sincerity be urged by them, since
notwithstanding their abstaining from the Blood of Beasts, they daily fed upon
his Blood, who was the Man Christ Jesus, and to depose a Priest from eating
(...), (i.e.) Flesh that contains the Blood, as the forementioned Canon does,
would in effect, be to depose him for pertaking of the Holy Sacrament, that
being most emphatically (...), or Flesh with Blood, according to the Roman
Doctrine. And therefore this opinion, that it was lawful for Christians to eat
Blood, found little or no countenance in the Church of Christ, till the time of
Berengarius, when this prodigious Doctrine came in voge; besides, the ancient
Fathers objected this against the Heathens as a most horrible reproachful
thing, Quod Saturni fili^dignum est mali and nex^^ hominis ^ang^in^^ g^natur
ipso^^ credo decu^sse sanguinss foedere conjurare catalinam, and Bellonam
sacrum suum haustu humani cruoris imbuere, and Comitialem morbum hominis
sanguine, id est, ^orbo graviore sanare. Minuc. p. 34. de sanguinis pabulo and
ejusmodi^t ag^es serculis legite nec ubi relatum sit, (est apud Herodotum
opi^^^) defusum brachiis sanguinem ex alterutro degustatum nationes quasdam
foederi comparasse, nescio quid and sub Catilina tale degustatum est Tertul.
Apol. C. 9.
That they made Covenants by drinking humane Blood, and used that barbarous
custom, as a fit cure of the Falling Sickness, now had this been the Christians
daily practice to bind themselves by the participation of humane Blood, to the
performance of all works of Piety, as Pliny says they did, by the
participation of the Holy Sacrament. Had they thus used humane Blood to cure
the diseases of their Souls, and of their Bodies too, as Erat apud nos Acatius
quidam honesto apud suos ortus loco qui clausis oculis natum se esse dicebat.
Sed quia intus sani palpeoris cohaerentibus non patebant, medicum eos ferro
aperire voluine neque hoc permisisse religiosam matrem suam, sed id effecisse
ex Eucharistia Cataplasmare cum jam puer quinque aut fere ampliu^ esset annorum
unde hoc se satis meminisse narrabat August. l. 3. Sec. adv. Julian. Op. S. 164.
they did use the Holy Sacrament, what had been more a condemnation to the
Christians then their own words and arguments; and what could lay upon them an
imputation of greater impudence and folly, then to reproach the Heathens for
doing what they daily practiced? Besides, this they insisted on as a most
pregnant evidence, that many of the Heathen Deities were wicked and pernicious
Spirits, because Hodie istic Bellonae sacratos sanguis de femore proscisso in
palmulam exceptus esui datus signat. Tertul. Apol. c. 9.
a draught of humane Blood, or the Oblation of the Blood of Man, was deemed an
acceptable service to them, and that which would appease their anger, and
because their Priests were Consecrated by drinking humane Blood. Now if the
Christians did daily offer humane Blood to God as a most acceptable Sacrifice;
and if both Priest and People did as often drink it, as they did celebrate the
Sacrament, what could these charges be, but indications of the stupidity and
impudence of those that made them?

Had Christ commanded his Disciples to eat his real Flesh, Arg. 2.. 2.
and feed for ever on that very body which suffered on the Cross, he had
delivered that which could not have been thought of, and much less practiced
without the greatest horror: For had he only taught them to eat humane flesh,
he had enjoined them to do that which is repugnant unto humane nature, and has
been constantly esteemed by the more sober Heathens, a barbarous and inhumane
thing. Hence that expression of our Savior Christ, That they who would be made
partakers of Eternal Life must eat his Flesh, was by the unbelieving Jew,
rejected as a thing impossible, Joh. 6.52.
how can this Man say, they give us his Flesh to Eat? And if they deemed it a
thing impossible, that the whole Nation of the Jews should eat of one man's
Flesh, well might the Gentiles think it impossible that they should do so. Nay,
when his own Disciples heard it, verse 60.
they presently cried out, This is an hard saying, who can hear it: they judged
it so absurd a Proposition, and were so highly scandalized at it, that
notwithstanding all the conviction they received from their Eyes and other
senses, that he was the true Messiah, they think this one proposal a sufficient
motive to reject him, verst 66.
for from that very time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more
with him. So that our Blessed Savior, to obviate and to remove this Scandal,
does in the judgment of the Fathers, presently expound himself in a Spiritual
sense, and does assert, that this corporal eating was unprofitable, and not the
thing he did exhort them to, for thus Eusebius does paraphrase his words,
(...). Eusebius. l. 3. Eccles. Theol. contra Marcell. Ancyr. M. S. Bibl. Oxon.
do not think that I speak of that Flesh where with I am compassed, as if you
must eat of that, neither imagine that I command you to drink my sensible and
bodily Blood, but understand well, that the words which I have spoken unto you,
are Spirit and See Bishop Ushers answer to the Jesuits, p 48, 49, 50, 51.
Life; This also is the Exposition of Tertullian, Origin, St. Augustine,
Athanasius, to omit diverse others: And of this Exposition they give this
account, August. de Doct. Christiana l. 3. c. 15, 16.
that those expressions taken literally, command what is an impious and Est in
N. Testamento litera quae occidit eum qui non spiritualiter ea quaedicuntur
adverterit, si enim secundum literam sequaris hoc ipsum quod dictum est nisi
manducaveritis carnem meam, etc. occidit haec litera Origin in Lev. c. 10. Hom
7. p. 87.
wicked think, and are a killing Letter, and therefore must be taken in a
Spiritual sense. And we are informed by Horum ergo nefarii ritus Christianis
imputati: ca autem immanitas coepit a Simone Mago, ut Narrat. Clem. de rebus
geftis Petri, qui perperam intellexerat illa Johannis cap. 6. nisi comederitis
carnem filii hominis, and biberitis ipsius sanguinem, etc. Not. in Min. p. 34.
vide Elmenhorst. in haec verba Minuc. infans far contectus, ut decipiat
incautos, apponitur.
Wowerius, out of the Writings of Pseudo Clemens, that that accursed practice
of the Pepuzians, Quintilians, and others, who mixed the Blood of Infants with
the Eucharistick Bread, had its first rise from Simon Magus, misunderstanding
those very words of John, except you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink
his Blood, etc. Now if this oral manducation of the Flesh of Christ seemed so
repugnant at the first view and apprehension to all that heard it, can we
suppose it would pass down so glib, not only with the Jewish, but all the
Gentile converts? and yet we do not find, that ever Jew or Gentile was offended
at the participation of the Holy Sacrament, or that any Heathen or Apostate did
object unto the Christians, that they were Canibals on this account, or that
they did devour humane Flesh. When Christ was careful to prevent this gross
conception in the Jews, can we believe that he should institute this oral
manducation of his Flesh and Blood? or had this Doctrine been delivered by
Apostolical tradition, and so received by the Church of Christ, could those
renowned Fathers have pronounced the literal and proper acceptance of the
words to be a killing Letter, and the injunction of the greatest wickedness?
could they have thought that place of John was misinterpreted, by being used to
countenance the eating humane Blood? or could those Heretics have any need to
fly to such accursed arts that they might truly eat Christ's Blood? But then if
we conceive this person, we thus devour, to be also God, and therefore look
upon this action as (...), or the devouring of our God and Maker, it is so full
of horror, scandal and amazament, that nothing can be more; for what this
Doctrine does assert, was in the judgment of the Ecquem tam amentem esse putas,
qui illud quo vescatur Deum credat esse? de natura Deorum. C. 3.
Orator, such an incredible madness, as humane nature never could be guilty of:
And Averroes upon this single score pronounces, that Qui dicit se Sectam
Christiana deteriorem aut ineptiorem nullam reperire, cujus sectatores suum
quem colunt Deum denibus discerpunt and devorant. Vide Perron de Euch. l. 3. c.
29. P. 973.
among all Religious Sects, the Christians were the worst and most ridiculous,
because, that God they Worshipped, they with their Teeth devoured and tore in
pieces, Hence as the highest Calumny which the Mahumetan can cast upon us, we
are by them reproached as Christianos atrociores esse in Christum quam Judaeos
(ait Akmed Ben. Edris Mahummed:) hos enim Christum occisum reliquisse, illos
vero carnem ejus edere and sanguinem bibere, quod ipsa expeperientia test
trucu lentius esse affirmat. V. Hotting. Apol. de Luch.. 14. p. 220.
(...), or the devourers of our God; and they are wont to say, that by thus
eating of his Flesh, we use him worse then did the Jews that Crucified him. The
ancient Fathers do agree in these, with Cicero and Averroes, and say with them,
That to adore what we do eat, is the extremest sottishness, and hence we often
find this objected to the Heathens, as the most pregnant evidence of the
absurdity of their devotions, and of the Gods they Worshipped, that what they
Worshipped, they did also Sacrifice, and that they did devour him whom they
adored, as Tatian and Minutius suggest. And Origin does represent it as a most
foolish thing, That any Men should Worship that which was the food of other
Nations. Theodoret also does affirm, That (...) Quaest. 55. in Genesin.
God foreseeing Men would fall to such extremity of madness, as to Worship
Beasts, the better to restrain that Wickedness, did suffer us to eat them,
which he conceived to be the greatest bar unto this gross Idolatry, because,
says he, it is the evtreamest of all folly, to Worship what we Eat. He again
adds, That Quaest. in Genesis 55. and in Lev. Qu. 11. p. 124.
God divided Beasts into clean and unclean, that Men abhorring what they judged
unclean, and eating what they called clean, might Worship neither; for can any
Man of sense, says he, Quaest. in Genesis 55. and in Lev. Qu. 11. p. 124.
conceive that to be God, which he abominates as unclean, or which he offers to
the true God, and himself does Eat. Thirdly, he adds, That God enjoined the
Jews to Eat and Sacrifice those Creatures which the Egyptians Worshipped as
Gods, Sermon. 7. de Sacrif. To. 4. P. 585.
that they might be induced to despise what they did Eat and Sacrifice, and not
be guilty of such extreme stupidity and folly, as to conceive them to be Gods.
Had therefore this been the received Doctrine of the Church of Christ, it must
have given greater scandal, and been a fitter matter of reproach to Christians,
then was the scandal of the Cross, and therefore had it been the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, they would have been as careful to have removed this
scandal, as that other of the Cross. The Jews and Heathens, who cast this
always in their Dish, That they did Worship him who lately suffered on the
Cross, would not have stuck to load them with this more heinous Crime of Eating
and Devouring that very God they did adore, at least when this was frequently
objected to them, as the extremest madness, they must have presently retorted,
That you Christians confessedly do the same, your God is also deemed your
Sacrifice, and you do first adore, and then devour him: The ancient Fathers of
the Church, who spent so many Writings and Apologies in vindication of that
honor which they paid unto a Crucified Savior, would surely have afforded
some Apology for that, which in the Judgment of Heathens, Turks. and
Christians, seems the greatest folly that can be charged on any Sect. Since
then we never find, that Christ's Disciples, or the Ancient Fathers were in the
least concerned to remove the Scandal, since no malicious Jew, or subtle
Gentile, did in the least accuse the Christians of what they all conceived a
crime so monstrous; although they were not wanting to seek occasions of
reproach against them, and to divulge false stories of them, and were
particularly upbraided with doing (what if this Doctrine had obtained amongst
them) must be the Christians constant practice. Lastly, Seeing the ancient
Fathers did pass as deep a censure on this (...) or God-eating, as the Heathens
did, and looked upon it as an instance of the greatest madness and stupidity to
Worship as a God what they did Eat and Sacrifice; And upon all occasions did
upbraid the Heathens for being so exceeding mad and stupid. It must be
infinitely certain, that they neither did nor could conceive this Doctrine to
be the mind of Christ or his Apostles, or the received tradition of the Church
of Christ.

If Christ when he administered this Sacrament did give to his Disciples his
natural Body, Arg. 3.. 3.
and his proper Blood, then was his natural Body broken, and his Blood actually
poured out before his Passion; for he administered this Sacrament before his
Passion, and what he then administered was, if we may believe his words, (...),
(i.e.) his broken Body, and (...), or (...), (i.e.) his blood shed or
extravasated; now since his body was then whole, and not yet broken on the
Cross for us, seeing his Blood remained still in its proper Chanuels, and
neither Heart nor Hand were pierced to let it out; and therefore what he did
then administer, could not in any natural and proper sense be styled his body
broken, and his blood shed for us, his words must necessarily be interpreted in
such a Tropical and Sacramental sense, as Protestants do plead for. Add to
this, That if Christ gave his Body in the natural sense at the last Supper,
then it was either a Sacrifice propitiatory, or it was not; if it was not, then
it is not now: and then their Dream of the Mass is vanished, if it was
propitiatory at the last Supper, then God was reconciled to all the world, and
Mankind was redeemed before the Passion of our Blessed Savior. For Christ
expressly says, that he then gave unto them his body, which was given for us,
Luke 22.19 Mat. 26.28
and his Blood shed for many for the remission of Sins: which if we literally
understand, his future passion must be vain and needless, so dreadful are the
consequences of this portentous Doctrine.

If we may credit the Apostle Paul what we receive in the participation of the
Holy Sacrament is Bread, Arg. 4.. 4.
for after Consecration he so styles it, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
at the least five times: The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of
the Body of Christ, for we are all partakers of this Bread. Let a man examine
himself, 1 Cor. 11.28.
and so let him eat of that Bread, for as often as you eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, you show the Lords Death, etc. Wherefore, verse 26.
whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup unworthily, shall be guilty
of the Body and Blood of Christ. In which expressions it is five times said,
that what we eat and do partake of, what is unto us the Communion of Christ's
Body, and shows forth his Death, and therefore what is Consecrated in this
Holy Sacrament, is still bread. And is it not a wonder that one passage
mentioned by our Savior, whilst he was alive, and had his blood within his
Veins, should be esteemed sufficient to make us all believe that his whole
body, and so his hand was in his hand, and that this Living Christ was also
Dead and Sacrificed, and that his blood was shed before he suffered on the
Cross, and also that the same Body which was whole before the Eyes of his
Disciples was also broken for them, and many thousand contradictions more? and
yet that what the Holy Ghost, who knew the meaning of our Saviors words as
well as any R. Catholic, has called so often Bread, and seems to all our
senses so to be, should not be deemed sufficient to make us think it Bread. If
Christ had said, This is my Body, and the Holy Ghost had never said that it was
Bread, we might have had some reason to suspect our senses in this matter: But
when it is so often in Scripture affirmed to be Bread, and is but once affirmed
to be the Body of our Lord, and it is absolutely necessary, that one of these
two affirmations should be acknowledged to be Tropical, that as great evidence
as sense and reason can afford in any case whatsoever, should be of no effect
at all or have no influence to move or to instruct our Judgments how to pass
sentence in this case, but that it should be thought as rational, all other
circumstances being equal, to determine against the greatest evidence of sense
and highest reason, as to determine according to the verdict of them both, is
most apparently absurd. Add to this, that the Apostles buisness in this place,
was to reprove those persons who profaned this Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28.
and used it as Common Bread, and so discerned not the Lords Body; and to
convince them of the greatness of the Sin committed by their unworthy eating of
this Bread: and therefore it concerned him the better to convince them of so
great a Crime, and to discover the vileness of this profanation, to have
expressly told them, That what they thus profaned, was the very Son of God that
suffered for them; this being a most signal aggravation of their guilt; whereas
to say so often that it was Bread, was to extenuate the Crime, and therefore we
may rationally presume St. Paul would have expressed himself not as we
Protestants are wont to do; but according to the Judgment of the Roman
Catholics, had he believed as they do.

God never wrought a miracle in confirmation of the Faith of any body, Argum.
5. Sect. 5.
but he still represented it unto their senses, and made it apparent to their
eyes, ears, feeling, or their experience that he wrought it; there is not one
instance to be given to the contrary from Scripture, or any humane Writer; the
Devil himself is not so impudent as to require his servants to believe he works
a wonder without some cunning slight to cheat their senses, and make them seem
to see, hear, or taste, what really they do not. To this convincing evidence and
demonstration, T. G. returns this sorry answer, P. 293.
that such miracles as are done for the Conversion of unbelievers, ought to be
objects of our sense, but this is not done upon such an account, but for the
Sanctification of those that believe already, and for these it is enough, that
Christ has said it is his body, they know very well the danger of not
believing him more than their senses: Answer, 1. We have in Scripture many
instances of Miracles done not for the Conversion of unbelievers, but for the
benefit of those that did believe, and such were all the standing Miracles that
are recorded in the Book of Moses, the Manna, the water of Jealousy, the Vrim
and Thummim, etc. Such also were all the Miracles that the Apostles wrought on
the diseased Christians; if then in all those Miracles we cannot find one
instance which was not made apparent to the senses of mankind, what reason have
we to esteem this so? Besides is not a Miracle, (...), or a sign? sure I am the
Scripture often calls it so, and is not every sign declared by St. Signum est
res praeter speciem quam ingerit sensibus aliud aliquid, ex se faciens in
cogitationem venire. De Doctrina Christiana, l. 2. c. 1.
Austin to be something sensible, whereby we do perceive what is not sensible,
what therefore is no object of the sense, can be no sign or Miracle. Secondly,
we cannot possibly obtain a greater evidence that any Revelation is Divine,
than is the evidence of sense, whence it does follow, that we can have no
reason to believe a Revelation more than we do our senses: as T. G. asserts;
for all the certainty we have of any object of our Faith depends on our
assurance, that the deliverers of it were infallibly assisted by the Divine
Wisdom in that delivery: and is not this attested by the Miracles they wrought,
the Prophesies they delivered, the Doctrine they taught? and that by sense?
should any of them be questioned, must not we recur unto the senses of the
Primitive Christians to confirm them? and must they not then be the ultimate
foundation of our Faith, and our Traditions? must we not be surer of the proof,
than of the thing proved? And consequently of the evidence of sense, than that
of Faith, which deriveth from it? if not, why, Secondly does our Lord pronounce
them rather Blessed, who believe and have not seen, 20 Joh. 29
than Thomas who first saw and felt, and then believed? is it not because they
do it upon lesser (though sufficient) evidence? and so their Faith is more
illustrious and praise worthy. Thirdly, should it be otherwise, how comes it
to pass that men are equally assured of what equally they see, but have not the
like fullness of persuasion in what they believe? That being once assured of the
objects of sense; they can admit of no greater certainty, whereas after all our
boasts of a Plerophory of Faith, we have still need to strive and labor to
increase it? Since then the certainty of Faith is proved inferior to that of
sense. It is not possible we should have greater reason to believe a
Revelation, or any matter of our Faith, than to believe our senses as T. G.
suggests: hence also it does follow that we can have no greater reason to
believe that these four words, this is my body, are contained in Scripture, or
that they do assert the Sacrament to be Christ's Body, than that assurance which
the senses of all Christians do afford us, that it remains Bread. And
Thirdly, hence it follows, that we can have no greater reason to profess the
Christian Faith, than we have to reject the Figment of Transubstantiation.

Answer, 3. As for that vain pretense that Christ has said, this is his Body,
and therefore we stand bound to think that he does work a Miracle to make it
so, although it be against the sense and reason of mankind that he should do
it: This will oblige us also to believe, that by some other like prodigious
Miracle before his Incarnation he was Transubstantiated into the Rock, which
ministered water to the Jews during their Travels in the Wilderness, for of that
it is expressly said (...), 1 Cor. 10.4.
or that Rock was Christ; 2. This will oblige us to believe that Christ has
neither Flesh nor Blood, because the Scripture does assure us that Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.
which yet Christ Jesus does inherit. We unbelieving Protestants perhaps might
think it strange that Christ should have neither Flesh nor Blood; and yet the
Sacrament should be his very Flesh and Blood, but as for you, you know the
danger of not believing God more than your senses, and your reasons, and
therefore this and many thousand contradictions of like nature can be no reason
why you should not embrace the Letter. 3. This will oblige us to be
Anthropomorphites, and to confess that all the arguments which have been urged
against that Tenet by the Church of Christ are vain and ineffectual, for
Scripture has not only said that man was made after the likeness and
similitude of God, but also does in very many places attribute unto him the
parts and members of an humane body, what then will you oppose against them?
sense, and reason? T. G. will give this answer for them, that they well know
the danger of not believing Holy Scripture more than their senses, or their
reason. Will you confute them by a Text of Scripture, which seems to contradict
their Doctrine? alas! that which is often styled Bread must not be thought to
be so, because Christ has once said it is his body, and can we be so vain as
to imagine that one ambiguous passage (...), which may be rendered, God makes,
or searches, God loves, or seeks the Spirit, 4 Joh. 24.
should carry it against so many which more expressly do ascribe unto him the
members of an humane body? or shall we fly unto Tradition; alas! is it not that
which is derived from the senses of those men which in the matter of
Transubstantiation have been all constantly deceived? and if their hearing be a
sufficient ground of Faith against the Doctrine of the Anthropomorphites, must
not their eyes, and taste, and smell, and feeling be as cogent against the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation? Fourthly, This must oblige us to believe what
is the greatest Blasphemy, viz. That Christ by all the Miracles he wrought
among them, gave no sufficient motive to the Jews to own him for the true
Messiah, for all his Miracles were only motives to believe that Law should be
abolished, which God has often said should last, (...), or for ever. Does nor
he tell them that the things he had revealed belonged to them, and to their
Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Exodus 12.17.
that they might do all the things of this Law. Does not he call the Passover
an everlasting Statute; Has not he said the Law of their first fruits shall be
a Statute for ever throughout their Generations? 23 Lev. 14
And if you answer that this word Gnolam does not always signify an infinite
duration, but is sometimes used for such duration as admits a period. and so
must not be urged against so great conviction of their sense and reason. Will
not this answer justify the Protestants when they produce so many instances to
show, that when a thing in Scripture is styled this or that, the meaning only
is, that it does signify what it is said to be: for to omit those passages so
often cited, 40 Genesis 12. 41 Genesis 26. 7 Dan. 38. 8 Luke 11. 13 Mat. 38, 39.
viz. The three branches are three days: The seven Kine and seven ears of Corn,
are seven years: The four great Beasts, are four Kingdoms: Thou art that Golden
head: The Seed is the word, the Field is the World, the Reapers are the Angels;
the Harvest is the end of the World; the Rock is Christ, etc. Should we omit, I
say all these, and many other instances of this familiar Trope, it would be
easy to produce many expressions of the like import with them: For does not
the Scripture say of that same hair which by Ezekiel was burnt, 5 Ezekiel. 5.
and cut, and bound up in his skirt, this is Jerusalem? And of that water which
the three mighty men procured for David, 2 Samuel 23.^7.
this is the Blood of the men that went in Jeopardy of their lives? Have we not
clear and pregnant instances of Sacramental Tropes in Scripture, and in Jewish
Writers? does not our Savior call the Paschal-lamb the Passover? does not he
say the Cup is the New Testament? and was it not familiar with the Jews to say
of their unleavened Bread, this is that Bread of affliction which our Fathers
did eat, and of the Lamb that it was Corpus Paschatis, or the memorial of the
Passover: Buxt. de Caena Dom. 25.
And is it therefore any absurdity to think Christ should affirm of Sacramental
Bread, designed to signify and represent his Body broken for us, and to
conveigh the blessings he had purchased, by the oblation of it on the Cross,
This is my Body?

Fifthly, This Answer will render us unable to confute the Marcionites, the
Valentinians, and the Manichaeans, who thought Christ's Body to be only the
appearance of a Body, and so denied the Article of his Incarnation and his real
Passion. This fond imagination, the ancient Fathers did confute by Mediums,
which overthrows this answer, and the whole Doctrine of Transubstantiation; nor
can it be sufficiently confuted by men of T. G's. Principles. 1, The ancient
Fathers did confute it from this principle, that we must certainly believe the
evidence of Sense; and that to doubt the certainty of what our senses
apprehend, is to endanger all Religion.

Tertullian discourses thus, Non licet nobis in dubium sensesistos revorate,
ne and in Ghristo de fide little deliberetur. Ne forte dicatur quod salso patris
vocem audierit de ipso testificatum. Recita Johannis testa ionem quod vidimus
inquit quod audivimus, quod manibus nostris palpavimus etc. falsa utique
testatlo si oculorum and aurium and manuum sensus natura mentitur. de anima
Cap. 17. B. C
it is not lawful to doubt of our Senses, least the same doubt be made
concerning Christ, least peradventure it should be said, he was deceived when
he heard the voice of his Father testifying concerning him. Recite the
Testimony of St. John,, what we have heard with our Ears, and our Eyes have
seen, and our Hands have handled of the word of Life, that declare we to you.
The Testimony verily is false, if nature do deceive us in the Testimony of our
Eyes and Ears, and Hands: And in his Book de Carne Christi, he speaks thus, Sed
and qui carnem Christi putativam introduxit aeque potuit nativitatem quoque
phantasma configere, ut and conceptus, and praegnatus and partus Virginis and
Ipsrus exindeinfantis ordo (...) haberentur, eosdem oculos, eosdemque sensus
fefellissent quos carnis opinio elusit. cap. 1.
He that does introduce the Tenet of the Imaginary Flesh of Christ, has equal
reason to introduce an imaginary Nativity, and to assert the Conception,
Pregnance, and the Virgins Birth, and the whole Order of the Infant was
Fantastical: for they would only have deceived the same Eyes and Senses which
were deceived by the opinion of his Flesh. 2. They argue thus, that if Christ
had no real Flesh, and if he did not suffer really, the Sacrament cannot duly
be styled the Image, Figure, Symbol, Type, Similitude, Memorial or
Representation of his real Flesh. Acceptum panem and distributum Discipulis
corpus illum suum secit, hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est figura Corporis
mei. Figura autem non suisset, nisi veritatis esset Corpus. Caeterum vacua res,
quod est phantasma, figuram capere non possit. Quid tune voluerit significasse
panem satis declaravit corpus suum vocans panem Tertul. contra Marcionem l. 4.
c. 40.
Christ (says Tertullian) said, This is my Body, (i. e.) the figure of my
Body; but it had been no figure, unless the Body had been true: for a Phantasme
can have no figure. But what he would have Bread to signify, he has
sufficiently declared, calling Bread his Body: and therefore thus he sums up
his discourse Panis and calicis Sacrimento jam in Evangelio probavimus corporis
and sanguinis Dominici veritatem adversus phantasma Marcionis. l. 5. c 8
against the Phantasme of Marcion; We have proved the verity of Christ's Body
and Blood by the Sacrament of Bread and Wine: And Maximus, who flourished Anno
Dom. 190. discourses thus, Apud Orig. Dial. 3. part. 2.
If Christ, as these Men say, were without Body and Blood, of what kind of
Elesh, or of what Body, or of what kind of Blood did he give the Bread and Cup
to be Images of, when he commanded his Disciples by them to make a
Commemoration of him? Theodoret against the Eutichians, disputes thus: (...).
2. (...). 4. p. 84, 85.
That the Flesh of Christ was not transformed into the nature of the Godhead,
because that Christians do participate of the Signs of his Body. Now had this
been the Doctrine of the Church of Christ, that this blessed Sacrament
contained his very Flesh and Blood, they had much weakened their argument by
those expressions; for what is more convincing then this inference, if
Christians in the Sacrament, do eat Christ's real Flesh and Blood, then must his
Flesh and Blood be real; if they do eat Christ's real Body, he had a real Body.
Secondly, Why do they so absurdly and untruly set the Sacrament in opposition
to Christ's real Body, as the Figure stands opposed to the Truth. Thirdly, why
do they all expressly say, the Bread and Wine are Types and Symbols, and
Remembrances of his Body and Blood; and that of them he said, This is my Body
and my Blood, seeing such Speeches cannot properly be true, but must admit a
Figure. But Secondly, These Heretics can never be confuted by Men of T.G's.
Principles, for has the Roman Catholic one Text of Scripture to build his
Dream upon, so has the Marcionite that passage of St. Paul, which tells us,
that as in the Eucharist we have the shape of bread, and yet no real bread, so
Christ was (...), in the shape of Man, and yet no Man, as we have there the
likeness of Wine, and yet no Wine, so Christ whilst he conversed in the World,
was (...), in the similitude of Man, but yet no Man. If you should urge against
them sense and reason, they will answer with T. G. Christianity has taught
them to renounce them; or if you urge against them all those places of
Scripture which affirm Christ to have a Body, they may answer, it was in
Scripture called a Body, because it seemed to be so: For this is that very
answer which R. Catholics do give to all those places of of Scripture which
say the Sacrament is after Consecration Bread and Wine.

But Chrysostom and Cyril seem to say,. 6.
we must not in this matter trust the Judgment of our our Senses. Hom. 82.
The words of Chrysostom are these, Let us obey God in all things, and not
gainsay him, though what is said, seem to contradict both our Imaginations and
our Eyes. Let his word obtain more credit from us, then our thoughts or sight.
And let us behave our selves in the Mysteries, not beholding only those things
which lie before us, but holding fast his words. For his Word is infallible,
but our senses are easy to be deceived. That never fails, but this most
frequently mistakes. Because therefore the word says, this is my Body, let us
obey and believe, and behold him with the Eyes of our understanding. Answ.
These words are Hyberbolical and high, but must be soberly interpreted, viz.
That we must not finally resolve all into Sense, but we must certainly believe,
that howsoever the Senses do perceive nothing but common ordinary Bread and
Wine, yet by Gods power they are changed into a supernatural use and operation,
and that by those sensible things, spiritual blessings are conveyed unto us.
That this is the true sense of this expression, and that it cannot be designed
to intimate the change of Bread into Christ's Body, so that the accidents of
Bread alone remain, is evident, First, from the words immediately following:
(...). Hom. 82. in Matt. p. 513. l. 41.
For Christ delivered to us nothing sensible, but by things sensible, things
which are intelligible; for so it is in Baptism by thing sensible, viz. Water,
the gift, to wit, Regeneration and Renovation is performed. Where note, I, That
the (...), or the intelligible thing conveyed in the Sacrament, is said to be
conveyed (...), by things sensible, (i.e.) by such things sensible as Water.
Wherefore the things sensible are no more Transubstantiated, then is that
Element in Baptism. Secondly, the thing intelligible, or the (...), conveyed
by Baptism, makes but an accidental change, a renovation, consisting not in the
conversion of the nature, but in the addition of Grace to Nature. So the (...)
conveyed by this holy Sacrament, must not impart the Transubstantiated Bread,
but Bread converted in its use and operation by the addition of Spiritual
Grace. And therefore what he here declares touching the Holy Eucharist, he
elsewhere does apply to Baptism in these words, let us believe Gods word, for
it is more certain then our sight; for the sight is oftentimes deceived,
whereas Gods word can never fail. And speaking of the poor he says, when we
are charitable to them, let us be so affected as is we gave to Christ himself,
for his words are more certain then our sight. So that we may from these
expressions with equal reason argue, that the Baptismal Water is Tran.
substantiated, and that the poor man is truly changed into Christ, as that the
Sacramental Signs are changed into his Body and his Blood. This is apparent
Secondly, from what he does affirm of all good Christians, viz. (...). p. 514.
l. 16. (...). 1 B. l. 13. (...). p. 513. l, 21.
That their Tongues are red with the Blood of Christ, that they are nourished
and so mixed with him, that they are Christ's own Flesh and Body' and that the
whole multitude is the Body of Christ Thirdly; from what he adds of wicked Men,
viz. 1. (...), p. 514. l. 27.
That Christ does not give his Body to them by the Mysteries, which is
impossible, if both the Bread and Wine contain his Body. And Secondly, That the
Table, and the place which they resort to, is (...). p. 514. l. 38.
that same very Table, and that same very upper room in which Christ with his
own Disciples did eat the Passover, viz. because it does contain the same
Spiritual Viands. And therefore may he not be thought to say his Sacramental
Body is indeed the same which suffered on the Cross, because it does conveigh
unto us the same Blessings which he purchased by it? Hence in this Homily, he
does not only call the Bread and Wine P. 510. l. 36.
the Symbols of Christ's Body, but he confutes the Encratitae by asserting, that
in those Holy Mysteries our Lord delivered Wine, (i.e.) the fruit of the Grape.

The words of Cyril, Catech. Mist. p. 237, 238.
viz. Consider this is not mere Bread and Wine, for it is the Body and Blood of
Christ, according to the words of Christ himself. And although sense do suggest
this to thee, (viz. that it is (...), Common Bread) yet let Faith confirm thee.
Do not judge of the thing by thy taste, but know, and hold for most certain,
that this Bread which is seen of us, is not Bread, though the taste judge it to
be Bread, but the Body of Christ, and that the Wine which is seen by us,
although it seem Wine to the sense of tasting, notwithstanding is not Wine, but
the Blood of Christ. I say, these words. if we consider well the context,
cannot admit of any other sense then that which we have given to the words of
Chrysostom: For 1. he does expressly tell us, that Christ pronounced (...), of
(...) Cotech. Mist. 4. p. 237. D.
the Bread, this is my Body, and immediately before these words he gives this
caution, look not upon these things as upon common Bread and Wine. Now even
Romanists themselves confess, Beharm. de Ench. l. 1. c. 1. and l. 3. c. 19.
that if the words, this is my Body did make this sense, This Bread is my Body,
this Sentence must either be taken tropically, that Bread may be the Body of
Christ significatively, or else it is plainly absurd and impossible: for it
cannot be, that Bread should be the Body of Christ. It is the nature of this
Verb Substantive Est, or Is, says Tom. 7. c. 20.
Salmeron, that as often as it joineth and coupleth togehter things of diverse
natures, which by the Latins are termed Disparata; there we must of necessity
run to a Figure and Trope. And therefore should we have been constrained to fly
to a Trope: if he had said, this Bread is my Body, this Wine is my Blood,
because this had been a predication of Disparates, as they call it. 2. That you
may be assured that by denying it to be (...), and (...), he only meant to say
it was not Bread without the Grace of Christ, and the assistance of his Spirit
to conveigh the Blessings Christ has purchased, but did not mean that it was
Bread converted into the real Body of our Lord; He tells us the mutation is
like to that of Ointment used in Baptism, Be careful, says he, that you do not
think this is mere Ointment: Catech. Mist. 3. p. 235. A.
for as the Eucharistick Bread, after the invocation of the Holy Ghost, (...).
is not yet mere Bread, but Christ's Body: Even so that Holy Oil, (as one may
say) is not after the Consecration mere and common Oil, but it is the Grace or
Gift of Christ, and is effective of the presence of the Holy Ghost: It is not
common Bread, says he, it is therefore Bread, it is Christ's Body, as the
Ointment is the Grace of Christ: but Grace it is, not by Conversion, for it
remains Ointment still, but by the Accession of Grace unto it, and by the
presence of the Spirit with it. 3. He adds, That when Christ said, Catech.
Mist. 4. p. 287. c.
except you eat my Flesh, etc. the Jews were scandalized, as thinking, that he
had advised them to Sareophagy, not understanding his words Spiritually. This
Eating of Christ's Flesh must therefore be Spiritual, and not Sarcophagy, or
Eating of Christ's real Flesh, which yet we cannot rationally deny, if we do
literally interpret that passage of St. John; or with the Romanists, conceive
that what we in the Holy Sacrament do eat, is that same Flesh of Christ which
hung upon the Cross.

Lastly, if both these Fathers had intended to assert, that notwithstanding the
Judgment of our Senses to the contrary, we stand obliged to believe the
Sacrament to be that very Flesh and Blood which Christ did offer on the Cross:
We have two others to oppose against them, who do expressly argue, that it
remains still Bread and Wine, because our senses judge it so to be, Quod ergo
vidistis panis est and Calix quod vobis etiam oeuli vestri ren^^tiant, Aug. in
Ser. de Sacr. apud Bedam in 1 Cor. 10. and Ratranum de Corp. and Sang. Domini,
vel in Sermon. de verbis. Domini ut citatur ab Algero l. 1. de Sacr. c. 5.
That which you see (says St. Augustine) is the Bread and the Cup which your
very Eyes do declare unto you. The Sacramental Signs do still retain their
Essence and their Nature, says (...). Theod. Dial 2. c. 24.
Theodoret, And both our Eyes and Feeling tell us, they are what they were
before. We conclude then with that of Chrysostom, Hom. 29. in Joh.
by these Senses we exactly learn all things, and we are conceived worthy of
credit in teaching what we have received from the informations of our Eyes and
Ears, as not being guilty of fiction or falsehood in those matters.

CHAP. IV.
Contains 1. The judgment of Antiquity against Transubstantiation. 2. An answer
to T. G's. allegations from the Fathers. 3. The pretended Confessions of the
Protestants. 4. The Confessions of many Roman Catholics, that
Transubstantiation is a novell upstart Doctrine. 5. The Judgment of Antiquity,
declaring with unanimous consent, that the Sacrament is but the Figure, Type,
the Symbol, or Memorial of Christ's Blood and Body, and not that self same Body
which suffered on the Cross, and that same Blood which he then shed, as to the
Nature and the Substance of them. 6. A Corollary in vindication of the Dr. from
the vain Cavils of T. G.

HAving thus confirmed our Doctrine from Scripture, Common Sense, and Reason,
we might by infinite Demonstrations show, that it has also the perpetual
consent of all Antiquity: Why else do they inform us, That (...). Justin. Dial.
2. p. 28. A. Ed. Paris. 1636.
the substance of our Flesh is nourished and augmented by this Holy Sacrament.
(is a truth so clear, that Species Sacramentales per candem rationem possunt
converti in corpus humanum per quam possunt converti in Cineres vel in vermes
and ideo manifestum est quod nutriunt, Aquin. part. 3. qu. 77. Act. 6.
Roman Doctors do confess it, and there needs nothing but experience for
confirmation of it to any that dares question or dispute it.) For neither can
the accidents augment or nourish; nor can we without Blasphemy assert, That
Christ's whole Body is properly converted into the substance of all those that
do receive it. Why do they tell us, that albeit the Sacramental Signs do
change their names after the Consecration, yet do they still Sacramenta, quae
sumimus corporis and fanguinis Christi, divina res est propter quod and per
eadem divinae consortes efficimur naturz; and tamen es^e non desuat substantia
vel natura panis and vini. Gelas. contra Eutychen.

(...). Ephrem. apud Phot. Bib. Cod 229.


retain their former Natures? Why do they tell us, That August. in pars 98.
Decr. did. 2. consecr. Can. de Haec.
of that Sacrifice which Christ did offer on the Cross, we neither do nor may
partake? why do they say, that bread is by our Savior styled his body, f
Quando Dominus corpus suum panem vocat de mul rum g^anorum adunatione
congestum, and quando sanguinem suu^^ (...) appellat de botris atque acinis
plurimis expressum and in unum coactum gregem nostrum s^gnificat commixtione
adunatae multitudinis copulatum, Cyprian. Ep. 76. 4. p. 247.
which is made up of many Corns, and that Wine his blood, which is pressed out
of many Grapes? Why do they frequently pronounce, that Christ affirmed of the
bread, this is my body, and of the Wine, Et quoniam ^^embra ejus sumus and per
creaturam nutrimur, creatura avtem ipse nobis praestat solemn suum oriri faclens
and pluens quemadmodum vulr, eum calicem qui est Creaturae N. B. suum sarguinem
qu^effusus est, ex quo nostra auget corpora; Et eum panem qui est a creat^ura
suum corpus confirmav^^, ex quo nostra auget corpora. Quando ergo and mixtes
calix, and fractus panis percipit verbum Dei fit Eucharistia sarg^inis and
corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur and consistit carnis nostre substartia.
Quomodolcarnem negabunt esse capacem ^onationis Dei qui est vita aterna, quz
sanguine and corpore Christ nutritus; Iren. l. 5. c. 2. Pd. Colon. 1625.
this is my blood? I might be endless in these Interrogatives, but I shall only
add three things.

First, That when the Encratitae held it unlawful to drink Wine, the Fathers
did confute them by this very Argument, That Christ himself drank Wine, and did
appoint it to be received in the Sacrament. Wherefore did he not drink Water
after his Resurrection but Wine, says Chrysostom, that he might pull up by the
Roots another wicked Heresy: for, because there are some who in the Mysteries
use Water, declaring, that when he delivered the Mysteries, he delivered Wine;
and that when he rose and spread a Common Table without the Mysteries, he used
Wine, he says, I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine. Now the Vine
produces Wine, not Water. Chrysostom. Hom. in Mattheum 12. p. 511. l. 12. Edit
Eton. (...), Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 2. p. 158. B. Ed. Paris. 1641.
Be ye sure (says Clemens to the Encratitae) he also did drink Wine, for he
blessed Wine when he said, take, drink, this is my Blood, the Blood of the
Vine; but that the thing which had been Blessed was Wine, he showed again,
saying to his Disciples, I will not drink of the fruit of this Vine, till I
drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Illud quod lex dicit quia sanguis
est anima esse positum dicimus sicut alia multa, and paene ^mnia Scripturarum
illarum Sacramenta lignis and ^guris N. B. plena sunt suthrae pradicationis,
quae jam per Donm ^^strum Jesu d^clatate est. Contr. Adiman Coy. 12. Sic est
enim sanguis anima quo modo Petta erat Christus, sicut dicit Apostolus bibehant
enim de spirituali sequence eos Petra, Petra autem erat Christus Notum est
autem fil^s Israel Petra percussa bibisse aquam in cremo, de quibus loquebatur
Apostolus cum haec diceres, nec tamen ait Petra significabat Ch^istum, ^sed ait
Petra erat Christus, quz rursus ne Garnaliter accipererur, spiritualem illam
vocat. Ib. Cap. 12.
Now had not the Sacramental Cup been truly Wine, this Argument would have been
frivolous and vain. Had not they held as the Church of England, their answer
must have been a contradiction to the Doctrine of the Church of Christ.

Secondly. The Manichees to prove the contradiction betwixt the Gospel and the
Law opposed to that saying of our Savior, that none was able to cause the Soul
to perish, that of Moses, that the Blood was the Soul. To this St. Austin
answers, those words may be expounded thus, the Blood is, that is, it signifies
the Soul: this he confirms. 1. by this general assertion, that almost all the
Sacraments of those Scriptures are full of signs and figures of the future
Preaching, which is now declared by Christ: and I am apt to think they were
such signs and figures as were not properly converted into what they signified.
Seconly, this he illustrates by a double instance. So is Blood the Soul, as the
Rock was Christ, they drank of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and that
Rock was Christ, he said not the Rock signified Christ, but the Rock was
Christ. 2. I may expound it thus, says he, * Blood is the Soul, that is, it
signifies the Soul, because our Savior did not doubt to say this is my body,
when he gave the sign of his body, since then as the Rock is Christ, and as the
signs and figures of the Old Testament are what th^^ Typified in the New, so is
the Bread Christ's Bo^^; It is wonderfully evident that in St. Austin's Judgment
it is Christ's Body, not by conversion into Christ's real Body, but by
signification of it: Nam ex ^o quod s^riptum est sanguinem pecoris animam ejus
esse possum interpreta^i preceptum illud in signo esse positum, non enim
Dominus dubitavit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret sui corporis. bl.
yea by such signification as excludes Christ's body from being corporally
present under the accidents of Bread; for, else the Manichees might have
replied upon St. Austin, and given him the baffle thus, as the sign not only
signified Christ's real Body, but contained it too, so must the Blood not only
signify, but really contain the Soul: Therefore it is apparent that in St.
Austin's time the words of Christ were so interpreted by the Orthodox as to
exclude Transubstantiation; and to confirm the exposition of the Protestants.
Thirdly, The Nestorians and Eutichians asserted that Christ's humane nature was
absorpt and changed into the Deity, this some of them affirmed to be done after
his Resurrection and Ascension only, but others that it was thus changed at his
Conception, whence they affirm, that whilst he lived on Earth, he had the form
and shape of man, but not his proper nature. For Illustration and Confirmation
of these Heresies, they urge (...) OPTH. (...). EPA. (...). OPTH (...). EPA.
(...), OPTH. (...). EPA. (...), OPTH. (...), Theodoret. To. 4. Dial. 2. p. 84,
85.
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and had the Bread and Wine by Consecration
lost their natures, had they been really changed into Christ's Flesh and Blood,
no greater Confirmation of their Heresy, no fitter illustration of their Tenet
could be well imagined. for thus the similitude would run.

First, That as in the Eucharist there is only the outward shape and form of
Bread, and not the real substance; even so, in Christ there was the shape and
form of Flesh, but not the very nature.

Secondly, Even as in the Eucharist, the essential form and material substance
of Bread and Wine are swallowed up and converted into the Body and blood of
Christ; so likewise after Christ's ascension, the humane nature is absorpt, and
converted into the Deity. What is it therefore that the Fathers answer, do they
confess the thing, and say Transubstantiation was the Tradition of the Church,
and was the Doctrine of the Scriptures, but that no like Tradition, nor
evidence from Scripture can be produced in favor of the Doctrine of the
Eutichians and Nestorians; which is the only thing that can be answered by men
of T. G's. principles? No, they expressly say, and that in words as plain, and
full, as any Protestant could use, that this similitude does overthrow the
Doctrine it was brought to justisie; Certe imago and similitudo corporis and
sanguinis Christi in action Mysteriorum celebrantur, satis ergo nobis
evidenter ostenditur hoc nobis in ipso Christo Domino sentiendum quod in ejus
imagine profitemur, celebramus, and sumus. Ut sicut in hance, scilicet in
divinam transeant (Sacramenta) Sancto Spiritu perficiente substantiam,
permanentes tamen in suae proprietate-naturae, sic illud ipsum mysterium
principale cujus nobis eff^eientiam virtutemque veraciter representant,
Gelasius de duabus naturis in Christo contra Euthich: -- sicut enim panis
divina illum Sanctificante Gratia liberatus est quidem ab appellatione panis
dignus autem habitus est dominici corporis appellatione etiam si natura panis
in ipso permansit, and non duo corpora sed unum fili^ corpus predicatur, sic
and hic divina natura in corpore, insidente (Gr. (...) Mss. Exemp. Bibl.
Florent.) Chrysostom. ad Caesarium Monachum. (...) Theod. Dial. 1. p. 18.
Because the Bread and Wine, though after consecration they become signs and
Images of Christ's true body and his blood, yet they abide in their proper
substance, and still retain the nature of Bread and Wine, and that the change
is wrought upon them, not by destruction of their natures, but by addition of
grace to nature, and so (...) Theodorit 2 p. 84.85.
the Heretics (say they) are caught in their own Nets. For then the parallel
runs thus, as the Symbols are called another thing, because Gods grace is added
to them, but still retain their proper nature, and the same substance which
they had before, Even so Christ's humane body, although by reason of its union
to the Godhead, it may sometimes have those names which signisie the nature
and properties of God ascribed to it; yet must it continue in its former
nature, reality and substance. And as the Bread and Wine are not converted into
Christ's real body by reason of the grace annexed to them, but do retain their
former natures: so neither is Christ's body changed into the Deity by reason of
its union with it, but still retains its former substance, nature and
proprieties.

Having thus showed the judgment of the ancient Fathers, we now proceed to the
consideration of those Testimonies which T. G. cites from them to evince the
contrary. And here we have just reason to complain, that nothing is produced
which is not answered in Morton, Down, in Bishop Tailor, White, and all our
modern Writers on this subject: and that if we lay aside his spurious Authors,
and his false citations, we have but little left to answer. And

First, P. 152.
That the passages of St. Ambrose de Sacramentis are supposititious, is proved
already by Albertinus de Sacramento. Euch. p. 507. So is that book de Caena
Domini, which bears the nam of Cyprian by the confession of the Author Sermon's
de caena Domini non est Cyprianus sed aliquis posterior Be larm^. 4. de
Eucharist. c. 26. Author Sermonis de caena domini est ignorus. Garetius de
ver^itate corporis Christi Fol. 181. v. Cochum p. 75.
Roman Doctors: the same we have just reason to assert of Cyril, (for if we may
believe James Bastardy of the false Fathers p. 12. Biblioth
Gesner or Samler, sundry written Copies entitle them to John Bishop of
Hirusalem, one, who lived well near Eight hundred years after Christ,) and of
Eusebius Emissenus, as is confessed by Bellarmine, Baronius, and by Antonius
Quae vero qui hunclibrum imprimendum cura-vit maxim inovit Homil. 5. in pascha
ca etiam non potest es^e Eusebii E^issent quia loquitur adversus Pelagium qui
multo post tempore suit D. (...) atact: Apparat, To. 1 titul, Eusebius. Emiss.
vide Rivet Crit. Sa^r^. 3. c. 1.
P^ssevinus, who having told us the chief reason that moved them to the
Printing of this Book, was this fifth Homily which T. G. cited; he adds that
the said Homily must be spurious, because it speaks against Pelagius who
flourished in the days of Austin; (i.e full Forty years after the death of
Eusebius) and happily it was upon this account that T. G. cites this passage, not
by the name of Hom. 5. de Pasch. as in Eusebius it is: but as it is in Hierom,
under the name of Sermon. de Corp. Dom. that so we might not take it for that
Homily, which is so manifestly spurious.

Secondly, were they assuredly the works of these Renowned Fathers, whose names
they have usurped a Title to, by false Translations, and by concealing of those
words, which make against the Doctrine of the Roman Church; they, almost all of
them, are made to say the contradictory to what they really affirm. Thus
Tertu^ian is suborned to say, that Acceptum panem and dlstributum Discipulis
corpus illum iuum fecir dicendo. hoc est corpus meum (...) far T. G. then
follows) id est, figura corporis mel. Figura autem tion ^uiset nisi veritaris
esset corpus. Caeterum vacua res, quod est phanta^pia figuram capere non
posset. Cur autem panc^m corpus suum appallat and non magis Peponem quem
Marcion cordis leco liabuit? non intell^ gens veterem fuis elstam figuram
corporis Christi dicentis per Hiere miam, adversus me cogitaverunt cogitatum,
dicentes, venite, conjiciamus lignum in panem ejus, scilicet crucem in corpus
ejus. Advers. Marcionem. l. 4. Cap. 40. vid. etiam. l. 3. c. 19.
our Lord having taken Bread, made it his own Body, by saying, this is my Body:
but these words must be concealed, that is, it is a figure of my Body; whereas
it could have been no figure of Christ's body, unless that body had been real:
and those that presently ensue must not be mentioned, viz. Bread was an ancient
figure of Christ's body, it being said by Jeremy, come let us put wood into his
Bread (i.e.) the Cross into his body.

Moreover it is told us that St. Ambrofe says, that when the Consecration is
performed, the Bread is made the Flesh of Christ -- he spoke the word and it
was made; but then we must not know the words that do immediately follow, to
inform us that it is so made Flesh, as we are made new Creatures, and that that
change is a like instance of the power of God; the words are these, Mandavit
and creatum est. Tuipse eras vetus creatura, postea quam consecratus es nova
cretura esse accipe ergo Huemadmodum Sermo Christi creaturam omuem mutare
consuevit, and mutat quando vult inslituta naturae. Ambros, de Sacram, l. 4. c.
4.
Thou thy self was it an old Creature, but after Confecration thou beginst to be
a new: see then after what manner Christ's words do at his pleasure change all
Creatures, and alter natures Institutions. Agreeably to this St. Non solum nos
Christianos factos esse sed Christum in Job. Trasc. 21.
Austin says, that we are made not only Christians, but even Christ himself.
And De pass. Sermon, 14.
Leo that the body of the Regenerate (fit caro Crucifixi) is made the Flesh of
the Crucified. And (...). in Act Hom. 23.
Chrysistom that after Baptism of men we are made Angels, and Epist. 16,
Paulinus, that we are made the blood of Christ. From all which passages we
have just reason to conclude with Cyril, (...), that to be made does not
continually import a change of nature; and therefore that this passage of St.
Ambrose cannot with any certainty be thus interpreted.

Secondly, we must not know what follows in that very Chapter to explain these
words, and to confute the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, viz. Si tant a vis
Sermon Domini Jesu ut inciperent esse quae non erant, quanto magis operatorius
est ut sint quae erant, N. B. and in aliud commutentur, ibid.
if there be so great force in Christ's words, that by it things begin to be,
that which before they were not; how much more operative must it be, to cause,
that things be what they were, and yet be changed into another. Which words are
extant thus in all the Ancient Maniscripts and old Editions of St. Ambrose, and
are thus cited by Guitmund, Yvo, Algerus, Gratian, and Anselm, and in the old
Editions of Lanfrancus, though in the late Editions of St. Ambrose they are
corrupted; and to abet this fraud, Lanfraneus in a new Edition is produced
affirming that some Copies did admit a diverse lection. We must not know what
also here he does affirm, That Sed forte dicis speciem sanguinis non video. Sed
habet fimilitudinem, sicut enim similitudinem mortis sumpsisti, ita etiam
smilitudinem pretion sanguinis bibis, ut nullus horror cruoris sit, and pretium
tamen operetur redemptionis, ibid.
as we do receive (in Baptism) the likeness of his death, so (in the holy
Sacrament) do we receive the likeness of his precious blood.

Again we must be told St. Ambrose says, T. G. p. 305, de Sacram. l. 6: c: 1.
That as our Lord Jesus Christ is the true Son of God, not as men are by Grace,
but as the Son of the substance of his Father; so it is his very true Flesh, as
him self has said which we receive, and his very true Blood, which we drink.
But then we must not know what follows to explain this passage and to confirm
our Doctrine, viz. That In similitudinem quidem accipls Sacramentum, sed vere
naturae gratiam virtutemque consequeris. de Sacr: l, 1, c. 6.
we receive this Sacrament in a Similitude, but truly do obtain the grace and
the virtue of the nature: whence it is evident, that it is therefore said to be
Christ's very Flesh and Blood, because it does convey the virtue of them; which
is more evident form that which follows, to wit, that Quomodo discendit panis
vivus de Caeso. Resp quia idem Dominus noster Jesus Christus consors est and
divinitatis and corporis and to quia accipis Panem N. B. Divinae ejus
substantiae in illo participaris alimento. ibid.
our Lord Christ being partaker of the Divinity and humane nature, thou who
receivest Bread, dest in that nourishment partake of his Divinity. And let it
be observed that Ambrose does indeed affirm, that as Christ said, that which we
receive is truly Flesh, and is true drink, but he does not affirm that we
receive it truly and substantially; and as when Christ declared, that unless we
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, etc. That Flesh and drink he spoke of, was
true Flesh and drink; but the receiving, the eating, and the drinking of it,
was Metaphorical; so may it be here: and hence De Baptismo Aethiopum c. ult.
Cyril. Glaphyr, in Exodus l. 2.
Fulgeutius and others tells us, that we do eat it in our Baptism, and
therefore as we are said to eat it there, so also, may we be conceived to eat
it in the other Sacrament.

Lastly we must be told, how the same Ambrose does assert, that the Word of
Christ, which of nothing could make that to be, which was not, can change those
things which are, into that which before they were not; And yet that this
mutation was not a change of nature, but of signification, and of the virtue of
the Sacrament, is evident from that which follows in this Chapter, viz. That
T. G. p. 304. Non corporealis esus sed spiritualis est ante benediction in
verborum caelestium alia^pecies nominatur post consecrationem corpus Christi
significatur. c. 9. de his qui initiantur.
it is not Corporal meat, but Spiritual, and that before the benediction it is
named another kind, but after Consecration it signifies Christ's body; or that
elsewhere he tells us, that the power of God so operates to change them, as
that they still continue what they were before. Nay this is also evident from
the words cited by T. G. viz. That word of Christ, which of nothing could make
that to be which was not, can it not change those things which are, into those
things which they were not; For it is not a less matter to give new natures to
things, than to change their natures? where evident it is, that this new
nature given to the Sacramental Elements is opposed to the mutation of their
nature; and therefore it is evident, that in the judgment of St. Ambrose this
change was made not by mutation of the nature of Bread and Wine, but by
addition of a new nature to them, (i.e.) by the addition of new qualities and
virtues, in which familiar acceptance of the word St. Peter tells us, that by
the promises of Christ we are all made partakers of the divine nature. And the
Fathers frequently affirm that by faith, and by the holy spirit we are changed
into another nature, and that after the Resurrection we shall thus be changed.
Or this kind De Sacr. Euch. l. 2. p. 489.504.
Albertinus has collected above Thirty instances.

Ob. The change which is made in the nature of Bread, is here illustrated by
the examples of those miraculous changes, T. G. p. 304.
which were wrought by holy men of old in the natures of things, as of Moses
his Rod being turned into a Serpent the waters of Egypt into Blood, etc. Answ.
But this etc. conceals three instances produced by Ambrose, which only signify
an accidental change, viz. Jordanus retrorsum conversus contra naturam in sui
fontis revertltur exordium nonne claret naturam vel maritinotum fluctuum vel
fluvialis cursus esse mutatam? Marath fluvius amariss^mus erat ut sitiens
populus bibere non posset. Mifit Moses lignum in aquam, and amari tudinem suam
aqua rum natura deposuit, quam infusa subito gratia temperavit. Sub Haeliseo
propheta, uni ex filiis prophetarum excussum est ferrum de securi, and statim
mersum est. Rogavir Helisaeum qui amisserit ferrum, misit etiam Helisaeus
lignum in aquam, and ferrum natavit. utique and hoc praetet naturam factum esse
cognoscimus. cap. 9. de his qui initiantur.
The sweetning of the waters of Marah, the swimming of the Iron, and the
returning of the waters of the River Jordan. Whence it is evident that all the
instances produced leave it uncertain, whether St. Ambrose did intend a proper
change of substance, or only a change of qualities and virtues. Secondly, had
Ambrose only given instances of a substantial change, it would not hence have
followed that he did intend to prove the Sacramental Symbols were so changed,
but only a majori, to prove that he who was the Author of such substantial
mutations could certainly effect that change, which was but accidental: Thus
from the substantial conversion of water into Wine, he proves, Credendum jam
est, ex hoc mortalem hominem in immortalitatem posse converti, quando vilis
substantia in pretiosam conversa est substantiam. Sermon. 19.
we ought to think that God can change our mortal into a glorious and immortal
body, which change is only accidental, and from Si ergo inquit, superveniens
Spiritus Sanctus in virginem, conceptionem operatus est and generationis munus
implevit non utique dubitandum est quod superveniens in fontem, vel super eum
qui Baptismum consequitur, veritatem regeneratiouis cooperetur. cap. 9. de his
qui initiantur.
the supernatural production of our Lord by virtue of the holy Ghost, he in
this very Chapter proves, we must not doubt but the same Spirit can Regenerate
the Baptized person. So that we see it is familiar with him to prove the
possibility of accidental changes, by examples of a change substantial.

Ob. St. Ambrose says, (...), in Act. Hom. 23.
the Symbols are not what nature formed them, but what the Benediction
consecrated them. Answ. True, because they are not only so, but by this more
excellent and Spiritual change, obtain a name which is more excellent,
denominations being taken from the better. Thus Chrysostom affirms, That such
is the power of Baptism, that it does not suffer men to be still Men. And Leo,
De Pass. Dom. Ser. 14.
That the Baptized person is not the same-before and after Baptism. And
Epiphanius, That when we are endowed with Temperance, the Flesh it no more
Flesh. (...) Haeres. 66.
Whence yet it were ridiculous to argue, that either Baptism or Te^perance
offentially change either the flesh or nature of a Christian.

Ob. He affirms further, That by this Benediction nature is changed. Answ.
True, but then that word, not only in the Authors before mentioned, but in St.
De Virg. l. 2. Haxamer. l. 3. c. 2.
Ambrose, does very often signisie only a change of quality and virtue: For he
affirms, That Thecla changed the nature of the Beasts that were designed to
devour her, and that the Beasts themselves had changed their nature (i.e.)
their fierceness and rapacity; and in this very place he says, That the Nature
of the water of the River Jordan was clearly changed, because that it was
driven back.

We must be told that Chrysostom does say, T. G. p. 303.
that things that lie before us are not the works of humane power, we only hold
the the place of Ministers, but he that Sanctifies changes them is Christ.
But then we must not know, that in this very Homily the Consecrated Elements
are styled the Symbols of Christ's Body; In Mat. Hom. 82. p. 510. l. 36
and that disputing against Marcian and Valentinian, who held Christ had no
real Body; he confutes and stops their mouth by saying, That in the Blessed
Sacrament we have the Symbol of that Body. Whereas, could he have truly said,
we have their real Flesh and Blood, he had then spoken what would have more
effectually confuted their absurd position.

2. We must not know that in that very place he confutes the Heresy of the
Encratitae, P. 511. l. 10, 15.
by showing, That when our Lord delivered the Mysteries, he delivered the Wine,
and that after his Resurrection he drank wine to verify this saying, I will no
more drink of the Fruit of the Vine, till I drink it new with you in my Fathers
Kingdom.

Nor Thirdly, That Christ in those Holy Mysteries does give himself unto the
Faithful, but to none other. P. 514. l. 28.
But had we no such indications of the mind of Chrysostom, the words themselves
are very insignificative and unconcluding; for that which Chrysostom affirms
of the Eucharist, that these things are not the works of humane power, we
Protestants acknowledge, as knowing that it is no work of humane power to cause
the virtue of the Holy Spirit to attend these Mysteries, and to make that to be
food of the Soul, which naturally can only feed the Body. He that thus
Sanctifies and changes these material Symbols must be God. And hence St.
Chrysostom informs us the case is just the same in Baptism, That it is not an
Angel who there moves the Water, Hom. 35. in Joh In 1 ad Cor. Hom. 8.
but that it is Lord of Angels (...), who works all things there. That man does
nothing (...); but that it is the power of God that works all things. And
whereas he adds, that it is he who Sanctifies these things and changes them.
St. Cyril does inform us, Catech. Mystag, 5.
that whatsoever the Holy Spirit touches is Sanctified and Changed. St.
Paedag. l. 3. c 2. In Cant. Hom 4. In Genesis Hom. 41. vid Albert de sacr, Euch.
l. 2. P. 545.
Clemens, That the Devil does (...), (i.e.) transmute Women into Whores.
Nyssenus, that Regeneration, (...). (i.e.) does change us into the Sons of
Light, and of the day. And Chrysostom himself informs us, That to make the
barren Womb to bear, is an example of this Transmutation. Such therefore we may
rationally conceive that change to be of which St. Chrysostom here speaks.

Gaudentius must tell us, T. G. p. 306.
That the Maker and Lord of natures, who produces Bread out of the Earth, does
again of Bread, (because he can and has promised to do it) make his own Body,
and he who made Water of Wine, makes of Wine his own Blood. But then we must
not know, Tract. in Ex. 2.
that in the same place he asserts, That when our Savior said, This is my
Body, he gave to his Disciples Consecrated Bread and Wine: Or that because our
Savior in the Gospel says, I am the true Vine, he did sufficiently declare,
that all the Wine he offered in the figure of his Passion was his Blood; or
that we eat his Flesh, when we receive his Doctrine: which does sufficiently
confute the Roman Doctrine, and show the change of which Gaudentius speaks, to
be Spiritual and Mystical. For if the Consecrated Signs be Bread and Wine, they
are not properly Christ's Body, if what is offered be a Figure of his Passion,
it is not the Truth: For as Gandentius there tells us, figura non est
veritas, sed imitatio veritatis, (i.e.) a figure is the imitation of the truth,
but not the truth. Wherefore Gaudentius does argue a majori, thus, he that made
Water to be substantially Wine, can certainly make Wine to become Sacramentally
his Blood. T. G. p. 507.


We must be told that St. Ignatius confesses Eucharist to be the Flesh of
Christ which suffered for our Sins. (...). p. 2.
But then we must not know, that this Epistle is intended against the Simonians
and Menandrians, who held, that Christ suffered only in appearance, and had no
real Flesh, and therefore could not confess that the Eucharist was
Sacramentally Christ's flesh, least admitting the figure, they should be forced
to admit the truth and substance; and therefore his Interpolater disputes
against them thus, V. usher Not. in Epist. ad Smyr. p. 50
That incorporeal things have neither shape nor character, nor figure of a
Living Creature that has form which may be seen, whereas, when Christ shall
come to Judgment, they who have pierced shall see him. Secondly, We confess the
Eucharist to be Christ's Body and his Flesh; and only do dispute the manner how,
of which Ignatius says nothing. We do acknowledge that it is truly and indeed
Christ's flesh and Blood, as knowing that it may be truly, what it is
Spiritually: for Christ is the true Vine, Job. 15.1. Joh. 1.8. Heb. 8.2. Luke
16.12
and the true Light; Heaven is called the true Tabernacle, and Spiritual
Blessings, the true Riches; and of this we have innumerable instances both from
the Fathers and the Church of Rome, produced by Albertinus de Sacramento Euch.
p. 218. 854.

Moreover it is objected, T. G. p. 306. Orat. Mag. Catec. c. 37
that Gregorius Nyssen does affirm, That he believes (...), (i.e.) The Bread
Sanctisied by the Word of God to be transmuted into the body of the word. Answ.
True, but then it is as true, that this transmutation may be as well by the
addition of Grace to Nature, as by the substantial mutation of that nature, it
being evident from the abundant testimonies of Bafil, Vid. Alb. de Sacr. Euch.
l. 2. p. 487.
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, and Cyril of Jerusalem, and other Fathers, that (...),
and transmutari, are terms indifferently used as well of a mutation, which only
does respect the qualities, States and conditions of the Subject, as the nature
of it; and of this we have many instances in the undoubted works of Gregory:
Who tells us, That the Soul made virtuous, is In Inscr Psalm. c. 8.
(...), transmuted, and that (...) in Cant. Hom 8.
Regeneration is a transmutation of it into that which is Divine; and that
ibid. Hom. 9.
when we appear in Glory, we shall undergo this transmutation: nay, in this
very place he twice asserts, That the mortal Body of Christ being received into
our body, does change our body into its self, or its own nature. (...), ibid.
So then, these words cannot infer, That the Sacramental Bread and Wine receive
by Consecration any other change.

He tells us further, that the virtue of the benediction does (...), change or
transelement the nature of things which do appear. Answ. This word is also used
ordinarily, to signify not any change of substance, but of qualities and
virtues only: and of this kind you have in Albertinus many instances produced,
l. 2. p. 488
of which no less then twenty are cited from Gregorius Nyssen, declaring, that
by Regeneration and Baptism we are transelemented or changed to a Spiritual
Nature; and that the Resurrection will thus transelement and change our
Natures; So that it may with equal reason be concluded from this word, that in
Baptism our Natures are Transubstantiated, as that the nature of the
Eucharistical Bread is changed into Christ's real and substantial body. And so
much for that spurious or doubtful passage of Gregorius Nyssen.

The passage cited from St. Cyril says, T. G. p. 306.
That our Savior sometime changed Water into Wine, and shall we not think him
worthy of our belief that he changed Wine into his Blood. But then the same St.
Cyril does also say, Catech. 2.
he who raised Lazarus when four days dead, can he not much more easily raise
thee, (viz. from a death of Sin unto a life of Righteousness) who do live and
breath? And again, Catech. 4.
the rod of Moses was changed by the will of God into the dissentaneous nature
of a Serpent, and shall not dead Man be restored unto himself again? And both
Ambrose and St. Sermon. 12. ex 40 a Sirmundo editis.
Austin do argue from the conversion of Water into Wine, That God can change
our mortal into immortal Glorious bodies. If then it be ridiculous from any of
these passages to argue a substantial change wrought in us by Regeneration, or
the Resurrection, it must be also vain to argue a substantial change from the
like instance, used to illustrate the change, which is by Consecration made
upon the Eucharistick Symbols. (2) The words immediately preceding do clearly
evidence, that Cyril argues a majori: For says he, If God could make this
change from Water into Wine (...), Catech. 4. Mist.
shall it not much more be confessed that he does give us the fruition of his
Body and his Blood: whereas had he conceived the mutation of the Eucharistick
Symbols to have been equal to the change of Water into Wine, that phrase had
been improper and absurd; for of two equal changes it cannot reasonably be
affirmed, he that is able to perform the one, is much more able to perform the
other. (3) I have already largely proved, that Cyril here intended only an
accidental change, and shall yet further make it evident from two
considerations. 1. That in the following Catechism he speaks thus, we pray unto
the God of Mercies, (...)
that he would send his Spirit into the things that lie before us, and would
make the Bread the Body of Christ, and the Wine his Blood: For whatsoever the
Holy Spirit touches is sanctified and changed: not that it is substantially
changed; for he affirms of the Baptismal Oil and Water, that they are
Sanctified by the Holy Spirit: And yet no Romanist will hence infer, that they
do not retain the nature both of Oil and Water. 2. In his first Catechism he
affirms, that as the Eucharistick Bread and Wine before the Consecration,
remains mere Bread and Wine, but afterward is made the Body and Blood of
Christ, (...). After like manner truly are the mea^^ used in the Pomps of
Satan, in themselves (pure or) simple, but by invocation of the Demons, they
are made impure. As therefore the mutation of these meats, is only a mutation
of their qualities, not of the substance of them: so must the change of Bread
and Wine, with which it is compared and equalled, be supposed to be. In fine,
P. 2^.
to set before us the danger of nor believing Christ more then our senses; and
to make others know it as well as Roman Catholics, he promises to set before
them the words of Epiphanius, viz. We see the Sacrament is neither equal nor
like unto the fleshly Image, or the invisible Deity, or the Characters of his
Members; for this is of a round form, and insensible according to power. And
yet because he was pleased to say, through Grace, This is my Body, every one
believes his saying, For, who believes not that it is his very true Body,
falls from Grace and Salvation. Answ. by this Translation of the words of
Epiphanius, we are like to see, and others to know, nothing but the detestable
fraud and falsehood of T. G. For Epiphanius does not say as T. G. translates
him, That who believes not that it is his very true Body, falls from Grace:
But his words are these, (...) Epiphanius Anch. p. 60
He that believes not that Christ is true, does fall from Grace. Now he that
differs from another Church or Person in exposition of Christ's words may yet
believe, that Christ is true in all his sayings, as much as they from whom he
differs. Secondly had he considered well the context, he would have found this
passage is a strong argument against him: For Epiphanius in this very Section,
affirms Man to be like God, (...), (i.e.) in a similitude or figure, but not
according to nature; for, says he, men have not the Image of God (...), or
equally; and yet what God has constituted we will not substract, (...), ib.
for he is true, who by his Grace has given to man to be like unto him, and we
have many like examples; and then immediately follows the example of the
Eucharist. Now the force of Epiphanius his argument consisting in this, That we
are like unto God after his Image, but yet not according to nature, even as the
Sacramental Bread is like the Body of Christ, it is plain, that the Sacramental
Symbols are the Body of Christ and his Blood, (...), according to the Image or
representment, not according to nature. Thridly, St. Epiphanius affirms, that
Christ pronounced of Bread and Wine, this is mine, his words are these, (...)
ipsum panem. Petav. (...). Now since that (...), or the things Christ took and
blessed, confessedly were Bread and Wine; the (...) which does answer to them
must be so. I might have added many other answers produced from these Fathers,
but I have chosen only to answer what the very places did suggest, that so the
Reader might perceive that T. G. either never read the places cited, or else
did choose to cite them, though he saw they held the contrary to that Doctrine
for which he does produce them: and to convince the Reader, that the Judgment
of the Fathers must be clearly for us, seeing the strongest passages the
Romanists cite against us do confirm our Doctrine.

We have now done with his Fathers, and briefly shall consider what he has to
^ay from Protestants.

And thus he begins, P. 299.
That Transubstantiation was a Doctrine received in the Universal Church from
the time of Berengarius, that is 600 years ago, is scarcely denied by any I
know of. Answ. One of the Protestants you cite will be sufficient to help your
ignorance, I mean the Reverend Bishop Morton, in the Treatise of the Mass: Lib.
3. c. 2.. 3, 4. A.D. 1159
Where we have this confession of Peter Lumbard, Master of the Sentences,
whether the conversion be substantial or not, I am not able to determine. And
Scotus affirming, Si quaeratur qualis sit conversio (viz. panis in Eucharistia)
an formalis, an substantialis. an alterius generis, definire non sufficio.
Lomb. Sent. l. 4. Destruct. 11. Lit. a.
that the Article of Transubstantiation was no Doctrine of Faith, before the
Council of Lateran. And Suarez saying, that some Schoolmen held, that
Transubstantiation was not very ancient; Scotus, to wit, and Gabriel Biel among
others. And Erasmus, that it was but lately determined in the Church. And
lastly, Cardinal Perroon, (who did not look upon it as Scotus dicit ante
consilium Lateranense non fuisse dogma fidei Transubstantiationem. Bellar. Lib.
3. de Euch. Cap. 23. ss. sed tamen
In Synaxisero definivit Ecclesia Transubsiantiationem, di^iatis erat credere
sub pane quocunque modo adesse verum Co^rpus Christi. Erasm. in 1. Cor. 7. p.
373.
a thing very commendable to oppugn the received Doctrine of the whole Church
of Christ) asserts, Card. Perroon. En. Sa. H^rrang. Auti^rs Estates p. 33 De
Christ. Eccles Suc c^^s. p. 19 208.
That if it had not been for the Council of Laterane, it might be now lawful to
oppugn it. Pious and Learned Bishop Usher shows out of ancient and authentic
Records, That after the times of Berengarius many continued, even there where
Satan had his Throne, who privately employed both their Tongues and Pens in
defense of the truth against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Hamelman and
Chemniitus are most impertinently cited, T.G. p. 301.
for they only do confess, that St. Ignatius said what we all grant, and what
does not in the least confirm the Roman Doctrine, as we have already proved. p.
300.
Perkins is also falsely and impertinently cited: for he does not affirm, that
this particular Heresy of Transubstantiation was spread over the whole world
during the space of nine hundred years. Nay, he expressly does assert, That it
was not concluded in the days of Lumbard, Problem. p. 155, 156
nor then received as an Article of Faith, and that for a whole thousand years,
the Church of Christ taught Sgiritual Manducation, and that the Ancients did
interpret the institution by a figure. That the Centuriators do affirm of
Origin. T.G. p. 301.
Cent. 3. p. 260. and of Tertullian, p. 58. that they speak not commodiously of
Transubstantiation, is a notorious falsehood: what the Centuriators cite from
Tertullian, p. 58. is most expressly for the contrary; and of Origin, p. 260.
they speak thus, recte in Caena Domini sub pane and vino sumi asserit corpus
and sanguinem Domini, (i.e.) Origin rightly does assert, that in the Supper of
the Lord under the bread and wine, we take the body and blood of Christ. What
they cite out of Ambrose Cent. 4. p. 294. is from the Author, precationis
primae Praepar. ad Missam, which is a spurious piece, as they themselves have
noted from Erasmus. Erasmus non esse Ambrosii censuit.
The true Ambrosius is reckoned among the Fathers, that maintained the pure
Doctrine in this point, p. 242. Of Hamphrey and Camerarius I can say nothing,
because I know not where to see them: But we have great reason to suspect, that
they also are cited more Romano (i.e.) with great impertinence and falsehood.
And I am certainly informed from Oxford, that what is cited as from Vrsin, is
really the words of Vrsins Adversary. Such ingenuity we meet with in the
Citations of the Roman party.

Having produced these Testimonies of the Fathers, which I have proved to be
impertinent or spurious, and these confessions of the Protestants, which are
insignificant or false, or only such as do assert that Cyprian de Caena Domini,
Eusebius, Emissenus; and such spurious pieces seem to speak in favor of this
Idle Dream. He thus concludes, that to deny what is confirmed by the Testimony
of so many Ancient Fathers, P. 308, 309
and strengthened by the confession of our Brethren is most unreasonable. But
alas, this flourish does most assuredly confound the Church of Rome, and
evidently confutes that Doctrine it was intended to confirm. For First, it is
confessed by many Doctors of the the Church of Rome, that Transubstantiation is
no ancient Doctrine, viz. Peter Lombard, Scotus, Biel, Erasmus and Peroon. And
Secondly, In Primitiva Ecclesia non erat de fide substantiam panis in co pus
Christi converti Job. Yribarn. in 4 Sent. Did 11. Q. 3. Disp. 42. Sect. 1.
That in the Primitive Church it was not any Article of Faith. Thirdly, Scotus
in 4 Distinct. 11. Q^aest. 3. s. 1 ^. A^^^m.
That were it not for the authority and Determination of the Roman Church, the
words of Christ might more simply, plainly and truly be understood and
expounded. Fourthly, the Cardinal of Distinct. 4. Qu. 6. A. 2.
Cambray adds, that the opinion which holds the substance of bread not to
remain, does not evidently follow of the Scripture, nor to his seeming of the
Churches determination. Fifthly, Your Secular Discourse Modest. p. 13.
Priests affirm, that it was concluded among the Fathers of the Society, (and
what Catholic would not believe them?) that the Fathers have not so much as
touched the point of Transubstantiation. Sixthly, It is no wonder, says
Antequam quaestio illa de Transubstantiatione in Ecclesia palam agitaretur
minime mirum est, si unus aut alter aut etiam aliqui ex veteribus minus
considerate and Recte hac de re senserint and scripserint de Transub l. 2. c. 7.
Gregory de Valentia, if one or two, or more of the Ancients have thought or
written of this matter not so considerately and rightly. And Hinc discimus non
essemirandum si Augustinus Theodoretus, and alii Veteres quaedam dixerint, quae
in specitem videntur favere haereticis L. 2. Euch. c. 25 p. 649. B.
Bellarmin confesses it is not to be wondered at, if St. Austin, Theodoret, and
other of the Ancients, speak something which in show seems to favor the
Heretics. The sayings of the ancient Fathers which interpret the words of
Christ, This is my Body, in a figurative sense, as much as any Protestant can
do; and which forced these Confessions from so many Cardinals, Bishops,
Schoolmen, Priests and Jesuits are these; Pane corpus suum representat l. 1.
adv. Marcion. c. 14.
by Bread Christ represents his Body, says Tertullian; and again, Panem corpus
suum appellat ut and hinc jam eum intelligas corporis sui figuram pani dedisse,
L. 3. c. 19.
Christ has called Bread his Body, that thereby thou may understand, that
he has given to Bread the Figure of his Body. And again, L. 4. c. 4 c.
This is my Body, that is, the Figure of my Body. St. Ep. 63.. 6. p. 175.
Cyprian notes, That it was Wine, even the Fruit of the Vine, which the Lord
says was his Blood. Our Lord, says St. Paedag. l. 1. c. 6. p. 100, and 106.
Clemens, did bless Wine when he said, Take drink this is my Blood, and that it
was Wine which was blessed, be shows again saying, I will no more drink of
the Fruit of the Vine. 2. Paedag. l. 1. c. 6. p. 100. and 106.
Our Lord in the Gospel of St. John, does otherwise expound Meat by Symbols,
when he says, Eat my Flesh, and Drink my Blood, an evident Symbol of Faith and
the promises. And again, there is a donable Blood of the Lord, Paed. l. 2. c. 2.
one Carnal, by which we are redeemed froim destruction, and another Spiritual,
by which we are Anointed. Origin speaks thus, Nec materia panis sed super illum
dictus sermo est, qui prodest non indigne Domino comedenti illum, and haee
quidem de typico Symbolicoque corpore Orig. in Mat. 15. p. 17. Col. 1. B.
It is not the matter of bread, but the word spoken which profits him that
does not unworthily eat thereof, and these things I speak of the Typical and
Symbolical Body. To the Fathers of the first three hundred years we will add
the Testimonies of those that flourished in the 4th, the first whereof shall be
Eusebius. l. 8. c. 1.
Eusebius, who says, 'That our Savior delivered to his Disciples the Symbols
of his Divine Dispensation, commanding them to make the Image of his own Body,
and appointing them to use bread for the Symbol of his body. And that Eusebius.
Demonst. l. 1. c. 10 p. 27.
we still celebrate upon the Lords Table the memory of his Sacrifice, by the
Symbols of his Body and Blood, according to the Ordinances of the New
Testament. And lastly, Demo^ist l. 5. c. 3. p. 141.
Our Savior and Lord first, and then all the Priests that have followed in all
Nations, celebrating the Spiritual Divine Service according to the Ordinances
of the Church, signify unto us by the bread and wine, the Mysteries of his
body and blood. Sermon. in illud quiounque dixerit verbum. p. 979.
Athanasius faith, 'That Christ distinguished the Spirit from the Flesh, that
we might learn that the things he spoke were not Carnal but Spiritual: For how
many men might his body have sufficed, that it might be the food of the whole
world? it is as if he should have said, that which is given for the world,
shall be given for meat, that it may be Spiritually given to all. In the
Church, says (...) Macar. Egypt, Hom, 27, p. 164.
Marcarius, is offered bread and wine, the Type of his Flesh and Blood; and
they which are partakers of the visible bread, do Spiritually eat the Flesh of
our Lord. Now we shall be partakers of the Passover, says Orat. 2 de Pasch.
To. 1. p. 692.
Gregory Nazianzen, but as yet in a Figure, though more clear then in the Old
Law: For the Passover of the Law, (I will be bold to say it) was but a more
obscure figure of a figure. Elsewhere he calls the Symbols the In Epita.
Gorgon. p. 187.
Antitypes of the precious body or blood of the Lord: under the Type of bread
the body is given to thee, and under the Type of wine the blood. So St. Catech.
Mist. 4. p. 237.
Cyril Hieros. Constit. l. 5. c. 16.
Pseudo Clemens says, That Christ having given us the Mysteries figurative of
his precious body and blood, etc. went up into the Mount of Olives: and that
Constit. l. 6. c. 23.
the Mystical and unbloody Sacrifice, is celebrated by the Symbols of his body
and blood. And he adds, That in the Participation of this Sacrament they used
this thanksgiving, L. 5. c. 16
We give thee thanks our Father, for the precious blood of Jesus Christ, which
was shed for us, and for the precious body, of which we celebrate these Signs
by his command to announce his Death. Of the same Judgment were the Latin
Fathers, for Dicit Sacerdos: fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam rationabilem,
acceptabilem, quod est figura Domini nostri Jesu Christi.
Ambrose in the fourth Book of the Sacraments, Chap. 5. affirms, that in his
time this clause was in the public Service, make this Oblation to be set to
our account acceptable and reasonable, which is the figure of the body and
blood of the Lord. And again, Hic in imagine quidem Christus offertur, in caelo
vero in veritate L. 1. Officiorum. cap. 48. T. 1. p. 37.
Christ here says, he is offered in the Image, in Heaven in the Truth. Hilary
the Deacon says, Nam and M^ses ^ece p^o sanguine vituli in patera aspersit
filios Israel, dicens hoc est Testamentum -- hoc figura fuit Testamenti --
Testamentum ergo sanguine constitutum est: Quia beneficii divini sanguis testis
est, in cujus typum nos calicem Mysticum Sanguinis ad tuitionem corporis nostri
and animae percipimus. In 1 Cor 11.
The blood is a witness of divine benefit, for the Figure of which we receive
the mystical Cup of Blood for the preservation of the Body and the Soul.
Gelasius says, Certe Imago and Similitudo corporis and sanguinis Christi in
action mysteriorum celebrantur. Contra Eutych.
indeed the Image and the similitude of the body and blood of Christ are
celebrated in the action of the Mysteries.

In the Fifth Century, St. Chrysostom speaks thus, (...). Hom. 82. in Matthaeum
T. 2. p. 510.
if really Christ dyed not, Hom. 47. in T. 2. p. 750.
of what is this Celebration Symbola; Hom. 47. in T. 2. p. 750.
see how he studies to make us always mindful of his death, hence by the
Sacraments he calls to mind his passion. Again, it is a carnal thing to doubt
how Christ could give his flesh to eat, we ought to understand it Mystically
and spiritually: his words were spiritual, and had nothing carnal in them.

Theodoret speaks thus, (...) Theodoret Dial. 1. T. 4. p. 17, 18. G. 12.
Our Savior changed the names, and gave unto the body that which is the name
of the Symbol, and to the Symbol the name of the body. So when he had named
himself the Vine, he called that which was the Symbol the blood. And when the
Heretic desired to know the reason of this change of names, he gives it thus,
Christ would have those who are partakers of the Divine Mysteries, not to
attend unto the nature of the things they see, but by reason of the change of
names to believe that change which is made by Grace: For he that called that
which was Wheat and Bread, his natural body, and again calls himself a Vine; he
honored the Symbols which are seen with the appellation of his body and his
blood, not changing the nature, but adding Grace unto it. And ween the Heretic
had granted that the Sacrament contained the Symbols of a real body; (...). Id.
Dial. 2. T. 4. p. 84.
This is well answered says the Orthodox: For every Image ought to have his
Architype, and Painters imitate the nature, and paint the Images of things
visible.

Gaudentius says, that Tract. 2. in Exodus v. Supr.
in the Bread the figure of Christ's body is reasonably understood. St. Hierom,
that the Lord did not offer Water, but Wine for a Type of his blood. St. Austin
says, In Typo sangui nis sui non obtulit aquam sed vinum. l. 2. adv. Jovinian.
p. 27. F.
the Lord did not doubt to say this is my body, when he gave the sign of his
body. And most emphatically in these words, Dominus non dubitavit dicere hoc
est corpus meum, quum figuum daret corporis sui. Contr. Adimantum. c. 12. T. 6.
p. 128.
a preceptive speech for bidding a crime, or commanding something good or
profitable is not figurative, but if it seems to command a crime, or forbid a
good, then it is figurative. Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, Si
preceptiva locutio est aut flagitium, aut facinus vetans; aut utllitatem aut
beneficentiam jubens, non est figurata. Si autem flagitium aut facinus videatur
jubere, aut utilitatem, aut beneficentiam vetare, sigurata est. Nisi
manducaveritis, inquit Christus, Joh. 6.53. Carnem, etc. Facinus vel flagitium
videtur jubere. Figura est ergo precipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum,
and suaviter atque utiliter recondendum in memoria. quod pro nobis caro ejus
crucifixa and vulnerata sit. L. 3. de Doctr. Christian. c. 16.
etc. Seems to command a wickedness, it is therefore a figure commanding us to
Communicate with the Passion of our Lord, and sweetly and profitably to lay it
up in our memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Again
Sacramenta sunt signa rerum aliud existentia, aliud significantia, Idem contra
Maxim. S. 3. cap. 22. T. 6. p. 522.
the Sacraments are signs of things, being one thing, and signifying another.
Again (the Israelites) did Bibebant de spirituali sequente petra: petra autem
erat Christus. Videte ergo petra manente signa variata ibi perra Christus,
nobis Christus, quod in altari Dei ponitur, Id. Tract. 45 in Joh. I. 9. p. 333.
drink of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ: see
therefore, faith remaining, how the signs are varied, there the Rock was
Christ, to us that which is placed upon the Altar is Christ. Lastly, Habes
Christum in praesenti per sidem, in presenti per signum, in presenti per
Baptismatis Sacramentum, in presenti per altaris cibum and potum. -- Secundum
presentiam carnis recte dictum est discipulis me autem no semper habebitis --
Quomodo absentem tenebo? Quo modo in coelum manum mittam, ut ibi sedentem
teneam? Fidem mitte and tenuisti, Idem Tract. 50. in Joh. T. eod. p. 358, 371.
thou have Christ present by faith, and in the sign, by the Sacrament of
Baptism, and the meat and drink of the Altar. According to his carnal presence
it is truly said to his Disciples, me you shall not have always, how shall I
send my hand to Heaven that I may hold him sitting there? send thy faith and
thou do hold him.

To conclude, the Fathers po expressly say, that Christ pronounced of the Bread,
this is my body, and of the Wine, this is my Blood, which, say the R. Doctors,
had our Lord affirmed, we must have understood him figuratively and
metaphorically. For proof hereof, B. Morton of the Mass l. 2. chap. 6., 6,
behold a Torrent of ancient Fathers pressing upon you Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Origin, Hierom, Ambrose, Agustine, Cyril of Jerusalem, Cyril of Alexandria,
Theodoret, Gaudentius Cyprian, Clemens of Alexandria, and Isidore, thirteen to
the dozen, whose sayings we may best know by their own Idiom and Tenure of
speech. 1. Accipiens panem corpus suum esse confitebatur. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 57,
The first noting Christ to have confessed Bread to have been his body. The
second Christ to have called Bread his body. Third, that Christ's speech was
spoken of Bread. The fourth, that that which he brake, was Bread. The fifth, 2.
Christus panem corpu^ suum appellat Tertullianus. adv Judeos,
that it was Bread which he brake. The sixth, that it was Bread of the Lord,
and not Bread the Lord. The seventh, that the words (my Body) were spoken of
the Bread. The eighth, that Christ says, of the Bread this is my Body, And the
same Father, as if he had studied to take away all scales of doubtfulness from
the eyes of our minds, 3 Nec matteria panis est. sed super illum d^ctus sermo
qui prodest non indigne comedent i. Orig in mat. 15.
illustrates the matter thus: So (says he) did Christ call his Body Bread, as
elsewhere he calls his Flesh a grain of Wheat; (except the grain of Wheat
die, it brings forth no fruit.) The ninth, that Christ gave to the Bread the
name of his Body. The tenth, that Christ said of the consecrated Bread, this is
my 4 Nos audiamus panem quem fregit Dominus esse corpus servatoris. Hieron. Ep.
ad Helvid. Qu. 2.
5. Panem fractum tradidit dis^lpulis suis dicens Accipite hoc, etc. Ambrose l.
4. de Sacrament. cap. 5.
6. Judas manducavit panem Domini, etc. Augustinus Tract. 59. in Joh. Cyril.
Hieros.
7. (...), Catech, Mist, 4, p, 528.
8. Cum ipse Christus sic affirmat, ac dicat de pane Hoc est corput meum, etc.
Cyril, Alez Catech. 4
9. (...), Theod. Dial. 1. c. 8.
10. Gaudent tract. de rat. sacra.
Body. The eleventh, 11. Vinum fuisse quod sanguinem suum dixit Christus
Cyprian. Ep. 63.
that it was Wine which he called his Blood The twelfth, that he blessed Wine,
when he said drink, and the last; the Bread strengthening man's Body, was
therefore called the Body of Christ. To these citations add that of Cyprian and
Theophilus, the Lord calls Bread his Body, which is made up of many grains,
12. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 3.
and that of Tatian, or Ammonius having taken the Bread, then afterward the cup
of Wine, and testified it to be his Body and Blood, 13. Panis, quia confirmat
corpus, ideo corpus Christi nuncupatur. Is It: dor. l. 1. de officiis. cap. 8.
be commanded them to eat and drink thereof; Forasmuch as it was the memorial
of his future Passion and Death: That also of (...), Dial. 1, T. 4, p, 17,
Theodoret, that in the institution of the mysteries Christ called Bread his
Body, and that which was mixed his blood; And as if this was beyond all dispute,
he puts this question to the Heretic, OPTH (...); EPAN (...), EPAN Id. ibid.
know thou that God called Bread his proper Body, and makes him answer; yea
I know it. By all which passages, Dominus corpus suum punem vocat. Ep. 76.
and many more that might be cited it appears, that in those elder times the
words of the institution were no otherwise conceived, than as if Christ had
plainly said, this Bread is my Body, and this Wine is my Blood: In Evan, l, 1,
p, 152, L. 2.
and therefore that they did as certainly conceive the sense and meaning of
these words, Mox accepto pane deinde vini calice corpus esse suum ac sanguinem
restatus manducare illos jussit, etc. Ammon. Harmon. Evang. T. 3. Biblioth
Patr. p. 28.
this is my Body, to be Metaphorical and figurative, as any Protestant now
does: note also by the way, that this sufficiently checks the clamors of T. G.
against the Doctor, for saying, they believe Bread to be God, for let him put
what sense he can upon the Fathers words, the same will justify the words of
Dr. Stilling fleet, which being Written to a Protestant Lady were very proper
and liable to no exception, since they import this only, that the Romanist
believes that to be a God, which we believe is Bread, and to one of that
persuasion, the Doctors argument is a most powerful disuasive from the
embracing of the Roman faith, but to proceed.

To all these Fathers we will adjoyn three Councils. The first, is that of
Carthage (held An. Dom. 397. by above Two hundred Bishops: (whereof St. Austin,
and Aurelius were two) which thus decrees, that (...), Cod. Can. Eccles. Afr.
c. 37.
in the Holy mysteries nothing be offered but only the body and blood of the
Lord. (as also the Lord commanded it,) that is the Bread and the Wine mingled
with water. The second is that of Trull, whose judgment Balsamon relates in
these words. (...), Bals. in Can. 40. Syn. Carthag. p. 653.
The 32 Canon of the Synod of Trull gives an ordinance at large, that the
unbloody Sacrifice be made with Bread and Wine mingled with water, because
Bread is the figure of the Lords body, and the Wine a figure of his blood. In
Can. 40. Council. Carthag. p. 426, 427.
Zonaras says the same. In the Seventh Council of Constantinople held An. Dom.
754. by Three hundred thirty eight Bishops the Bread is called (...).
the holy Image of Christ, and the true Image of his natural body, and the
Image of his flesh given by God. And this was certainly the Doctrine of the
Church of England about 650 years ago, witness the Homily appointed publicly
to be read to the People upon Easter Day, before they did receive the
Sacrament, where we have these words, viz. Aeifrick Saxon Homily. v. Usher.
Answ. to the Jesuits challenge. p. 79.
Much is betwixt the body Christ suffered in, and the body that is hallowed to
housel, the body truly that Christ suffered in, was born of the flesh of Mary,
with blood and with bone, with skin and with sinews, in humane limbs, with a
reasonable soul living, and his spiritual body, which we call the housel, is
gathered of many Corns, without blood and bone, without limb, without Soul; and
therefore nothing is to be understood therein bodily, but spiritually. This
mystery is a pledge and a figure, Christ's body is truth it self. And again,
Christ hallowed Bread and Wine to housel before his suffering, and said, this
is my body and my blood. Yet he had not then suffered: but so notwithstanding
he turned through invisible virtue, the Bread to his own body, and that Wine to
his blood, as he before did in the Wilderness, before that he was born to men,
when he turned that heavenly meat to his flesh, and the flowing water from that
stone to be his own blood. The like matter also was delivered to the Clergy by
the Bishops at their Synods; out of two or three writings of the same Aefrick:
in the one one whereof directed to Impress Land. cum Homil. Paschali and Ms. in
Bibl. Bodl.
Wulfsine Bishop of Shirburn, we read thus. That housel is Christ's body, not
bodily but spiritually. Not the body which he suffered in, but the body of
which he spoke, when he blessed Bread and Wine to housel the night before his
suffering; and said by the blessed Bread, this is my body: and again by the
holy Wine, this is my blood which is shed for many in forgiveness of sins. In
the other written to Wulfstane Archbishop of York, thus, The Lord which
hallowed housel before his suffering, and says that the Bread was his own
body, and that the Wine was truly his blood, halloweth daily by the hands of
the Priest, Bread to his body, and Wine to his blood in spiritual mystery, as
we read in books. And yet notwithstanding that lively Bread is not bodily so,
nor the self-same body that Christ suffered in: nor that holy Wine is that
Saviors blood which was shed for us, in bodily thing, but in spiritual
understanding.

But now if T. G. should deny all this that is the testimony of almost all the
Fathers of the Church, and the confessions of so many Cardinals and Schoolmen,
and of the Fathers of the Society aforesaid, to prove that Transubstantiation
is a late upstart Doctrine and that the Scripture is to be interpreted
according to the mind of Protestants, to show the unreasonableness of this
denial, I would propose this case to his consideration and the Readers, viz. in
supposition that a controversy arise in this present age about the sense of a
Law which was made 500 years past, and that a considerable number of those who
framed the novel exposition should confess, that for the last Two hundred years
the contrary, to what they maintained was generally received in the Kingdom as
the sense of the Law, and should farther confess that the most eminent Lawyers
of the former ages from the first enacting of the Law, held the same with the
latter; Nor had there ever been any disagreement, or opposition among them in
that point; whether it be not a sufficient proof, that what they taught to be
the sense of the Law, was generally received as the sense and meaning of it
from the beginning? The Testimonies themselves of those ancient Lawyers would
be conviction enough: how much more when strengthened by the confession of the
adverse party it self? Now if this be so in the delivery of the sense of a
human Law, where it happens very often that great Lawyers may be, and often are
of different judgments; how much more in the delivery of a Divine Doctrine
where the Pastors of the Church are bound to deliver what they received, and
the succeeding age is still bound to receive what they delivered? surely, if we
add to this the confession of the very Adversaries themselves, the proof (as
St. Ireneus says) must be true and without contradiction: for if the Testimony
of Ten Fathers; and a few false impertinent confessions of our meanest Writers,
was by T.G. esteemed sufficient cause of this Triumphant flourish, the
Testimony of so many hundred Fathers of the Church, and the confession of so
many Cardinals and Schoolmen Jesuits and Fathers of the Roman party must be a
demonstration of the truth of our assertion and exposition of the words of
Christ, sufficient to convince the obstinacy of this vain Apostate; wherefore I
shall conclude with that most pertinent exhortation of the learned Origin. Haec
qui audire nesci^ detorqueat ortasse and averta^ auditum, secundum illos qui
^^icebant (...) bis carnem suam manducare sed vos Si fi^^^ estis Ecclesiae si
Evangelicis imbuti mysteriis si verbum caro fastum habitat in vobis, agnoscite
quia figurae sunt quae in divinis voluminibus scripta sunt. and ideo tanquam
spirituales and non tanquam carnales examinate and intelligite quae dicuntur.
Si ^nim tanquam carnales ista suscipitis laedunt v^s and non alunt-Est and in
N. Testamento litera quae occidit etc. ut supra. Orig. in Levit. c. 10. Hom, 7.
p. 87.
If you be Sons of the Church, if you are imbued with Gospel Mysteries, and if
the word made flesh does dwell within you, acknowledge these are figures which
are written in the Sacred Volumns, and therefore understand ye what is written
as spiritual, and not as carnal men, for if as carnal you receive them, they
will hurt, but will not nourish you. There is in the New Testament a letter
which kills him that does not spiritually understand it, for if according to
the letter you do follow that which is said, except you eat the flesh, etc. the
letter kills.

Hence we may see the vanity of this assertion of T. G. That the definition of
the present Church of Rome (for that is most absurdly called the
Church-Catholick. p. 252.) is ground sufficient to believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Whereas it is confessed by their most learned Writers, that
in primitiva Ecclesia non erat de fide, i. e. this was not any Article of Faith
delivered to her by the ancient Church, and that the De Transubstantiatione
panis in corpus Christi rara est in antiquis scriptoribusmentio Alphonsus a
castro de Haer, l, 8. v, indulgentia.
thing as well as name of transubstantiation is very rarely mentioned by the
ancient Fathers, Nay, they spoke nothing of it: And it is evident from the
clear pregnant Testimonies, and the concurrent judgment of many Hundred Fathers
that the Church of Christ did generally hold the contrary to what the Church
does now define, and held that exposition of our Saviors words was true and
Genuine, which they have now condemned as Heretical. 2. How can we know what is
the present judgment of the Church of Rome, but by our eyes and ears, since
therefore one of her determinations is, that all our senses in the Eucharist do
actually deceive us, how can we be infallibly assured of her judgment by what
she has declared to be fallacious?

CHAP. V.
The CONTENTS.
The Host was not worshipped with Latria in in the primitive Church. 1. Because
we have no command in Scripture for this worship,. 1. 2ly. Because the Holy
Scripture and the Fathers have spoken things extremely contradictory to this
worship.. 2. Thirdly, Because the Ancient Fathers have not informed us of this
Worship.. 3. Fourthly, Because they have both said and practiced many things
which are very inconsistent with this Opinion, that it ought thus to be
Worshipped.. 4. An Objection Answered.. 5. The Instances produced by T. G. to
prove this practice are considered.. 6.

THe Doctrine of Transubstantiation being overthrown, Sect, 1.
the Adoration of the Host must fall together with it. p, 222.
But since T. G. affirms, That it was Universally practiced and recommended by
the Fathers of the primitive Church, both Greek and Latin, whereas it was not
practiced or commended by any single person for Eight hundred years after the
coming of our Savior; We shall proceed to evidence the vanity and the
absurdness of this practice, and the unconscionable falsehood of this bold
assertion. And, 1. The commandment to Worship God alone is so express (says
Bishop Tailor) the distance betwixt God and what our senses represent as bread,
of Transubst. p. 338.
so vast, the danger of Worshipping that which is not God, or of not
Worshipping that which is God, is so formidable, that it is infinitely to be
presumed, that if it had been intended that we should have Worshipped the Holy
Sacrament, the Holy Scripture would have called it God, or Jesus Christ, or
have bidden us in express terms to have Adored it, that either by the first, as
by a reason indicative, or by the second, as by a reason imperative we might
have had sufficient warrant, direct, or consequent, to have paid Divine Worship
to it. To strengthen and confirm this Argument it may deserve to be considered,
1. That the Evangelists and the Apostle Paul are very punctual in the Relation
of what our Savior did, or enjoined in this Institution; they all inform us
that Christ commanded them to eat the Bread and drink the Cup which he had
given to them; and had he given them to be adored, would they, who mention
things so obvious, forget to tell us that either Christ intended they should be
Adored, or that they were Adored by them? that which induced St. Paul to
mention this Institution, and to assert that he received it from our Lord, was
the irreverence of those that did participate, 1 Cor. 11, 18, 28.
and their want of preparation to receive those Holy Mysteries. To cure this
disease he tells them, that the Holy Sacrament was Christ's own Institution, the
charge he left behind him that very night in which he was beirayed, and that
the Institution was intended for the Commemoration of our Saviors death; all
which is proper to beget within us a greater Reverence and care in celebration
of these holy mysteries; but yet it cannot be denied that this consideration,
viz. That what they thus irreverently treated, was that very Son of God which
suffered for them, and that it was that Host which they and all good people did
Worship for their God. I say, this one consideration would have been infinitely
more proper and effectual to aggravate the sin of those who slighted it, and
irreverently behaved themselves at the participation of this Sacrament. This
therefore was omitted by St. Paul upon no other score but the absurdity and
falsehood of the thing.

Secondly, consider with what expreseness the Scripture does inform us that
Christ is God, true God, God blessed for evermore, and yet because his
conversation in the World was in the habit and likeness of a Man, and his
Divinity was hid under the veil of humane flesh, and because this Jesus was
made subject to an ignominious and accursed death, the Scripture thinks it not
sufficient to ascribe unto him in 100 places the nature and proprieties of God,
and to leave us upon Record, Mat. 2.11, 8, 2, 9, 18, 15, 25, 20, 20, 28, 9, 17.
examples of his Adoration by the wise Men of the East, and by his own
Disciples, and by diverse others. I say the Scriptures think it not sufficient
to have done all this, and therefore they inform us that this is the decree of
Heaven, that to the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Phil, 2, 10, Joh,
5.23.1 Heb. 6.
and that all should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, and that
when this first born came into the World Gods Angels were commanded to Adore
him: now it is evident the humane nature did not so much conceal the Deity, as
do the accidents of Bread, for God sometimes did appear unto his Prophets in a
human shape, but never in the shape of Bread and Wine. Christ while encompassed
with our flesh, gave signal demonstrations of his Divine perfections by
Miracles, and by declaring that he knew the thoughts of those with whom he did
converse, but in the Sacrament Christ gives not the least appearance or
demonstration of his presence; He does not rescue his most Sacred body from the
Mouse or Rat, or from the Sacriligious hands of Theives, and Sorcerers. Here
then was greater reason to have told us as often, that the Sacrament was God,
and was to be adored, as they have told us Christ was God, and was to be adored
Since therefore we have no precept or example in the Holy Scripture for
adoration of the Sacrament, nor any information that the nature and properties
of God do belong unto it; seeing it is asserted of the Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4, 6,
15.1 Pet. 2.4,
and of the Church that they are Christ, and of the Saints, that they are made
Partakers of the Divine nature; but it is not once asserted of the Sacrament
that it is Christ, or that it partakes of his Divinity, but only that it his
body; we have just reason to conclude that it neither was adored by Christ's
Disciples, nor was intended so to be.

If that which Romanists adore were truly Christ, Arg. 2. 2. Brevint, p. 72,
one might safely aver (what even to think were Blasphemy) That neither
Prophets nor Holy Fathers in their Speeches against Heathenish Gods, either
considered well what they said, or ever thought well of their Savior. And
First, to begin with their Original, when the Prophet Isaiah inveighs against
them who worship Gods made by a Carpenter, of a Tree which the worshipers had
Planted, and after hewn into pieces, whereof one was to heat an Oven, and the
other to make a God. Can any rational Man think that the Holy Ghost did
foresee, That all true Worshippers in the time of the Messiah, were to adore a
God every morning made of, and every morning enclosed within, somewhat of that
Wheat that first Country Men had sown, and Bakers baked into Wafers, of which
afterward an Apothecary was to take some to wrap Pills in, and the Priest all
the rest to Consecrate into a God? And if the taking that for a God, which
before the Consecration was but a Stock, is a Pagan blindness, fit for a
Prophet to wonder at, v. 18. Is the adoring that for a Savior, which
immediately before the uttering of some few words, was a thin wafer, such clear
understanding as may become a Catholic? C 14. v. 20.
The Author of the book of Wisdom makes the Pagan folly chiefly to consist in
this, That they took him now for a God which a little before was not honored
as a Man. Pagans melt Brass, they cast it, they set it up, they fasten it,
says Minucius, it is yet no God: they polish it, they adorn it, neither is it
yet a God: But see now, they Consecrate it, and Pray to it, then as soon as Men
will have it to be a God, it is a God. p. 26. What! were these wise men blind
not to perceive, that Pagans might return the same Raillery? Christians, they
sow Wheat, they cut, gather, and thresh it, it is no Christ yet: they grind it,
they sift it, they bake it, it is but a wafer: they set it upon an Altar, they
elevate it, they cross it several times; no wonder yet: at last they speak five
words upon it; presently ten Miracles break forth, and among an hundred Wafers,
which are all like to one another, that which they are pleased to think upon,
is their Savior. And though a little before it was not honored as a Man, it
is now taken to be God. Besides, all the Reproaches and Ironies which Holy
Prophets or Christian Fathers throw on Idols, fall twenty times more heavy on
what is adored at Mass. For example, if you laugh at Laban for serving Gods
which a man or woman can steal away, and say with them that comment on that
place, Synopsis.
Summa caecitas Deos vocat quos furtim auferri posse agnovit, T. 1. in Genesis p.
447.
or with St. Chrysostom, O Hyperboly of madness, are thy Gods such as can be
Stolen, art thou not ashamed to say, why have thou stolen away my Gods? Or if
you laugh at Micah for crying out so miserably, Jud. 18.24:
you have taken away the Gods that I have made, as others do; if you deride the
Babylonians for carrying their Gods upon their Shoulders, who otherwise could
not help themselves, nor move out of the place where they were seated, as the
Prophet Esaias does. Isa. 46.7:
Or if you rally upon the Priests of Bell and Nebo, Isa. 46.1.
because their Gods fall to the ground, and are carried away Captive. If with
the Royal Psalmist you endeavor to expose them by saying, Psalm: 115.5, 6, 7.
that they have mouths and cannot speak, Eyes but cannot see; Feet, but cannot
walk: If with the Prophet Jeremy, you give these demonstrations, that they are
no Gods. First, Baruch. 6.12.
because they cannot save themselves from rust and moth, though they be
covered. Secondly, That they are not able to escape from War, and Thieves and
Robbers. v: 15.57.
And Thirdly, That the Priests make fast their Temples with Locks and Bars, v.
18, 19.20.
least their Gods be spoiled with Robbers. They light them Candles, yea more
then for themselves, of which they cannot see one; and their hearts are gnawed
upon by things creeping out of the Earth; and when they eat them and their
Clothes, they feel it not. And Fourthly, That they are born upon Shoulders, v.
26, and 27
having no Feet, whereby they declare unto Men they are nothing worth. Fifthly,
That if they fall, they cannot rise up again of themselves, neither if one set
them upright, can they move themselves. Sixthly, That their Gold and Silver, v.
58.
and Garments wherewith they are Clothed, they that are strong do take and go
away with all. v. 72.
And lastly, if you add, That you know them to be no Gods, because afterward
they shall be Eaten. All these considerations do sufficiently expose the
vanity, both of these Idols, and of those that worship them. But then what R.
Catholics esteem their God, is capable of all these Ironies, and by all these
considerations you may know assuredly that it is no God.

For First, it falls oftener to the ground then ever Nebo did, witness De
desect. cir^a Miss. p. 3. Si hostia, etc. locus! ubi cecidit mundetur! and
aliqu^ntum abradatur.
the injunction of scraping the ground where it falls, and cleansing it. And
being fallen to the ground, it cannot rise again, witness the same command to
Reverenter accipiatur.
take it up. It is sometimes stolen away, as the poor Gods of Laban were, and
it does nothing to defend and help it self, witness Decretal. l. 3. Tit. 44 c.
1.
Pope Innocents Decree that it be so well kept that no rash hand approach it;
and Aler. G^^ald in Ep ad Carol. V. ^gid. in Itin. IPSUM DEI CORPUS.
Geraldinus, his complaint to Charles the 5th, That the very Body of his God
was not safe from Thieves and Magicians, and from the fire of the Wicked. It is
sometimes carried away captive box and all, as were the Heathenish Gods whom
Pagan Rome had conquered, witness St. Lewis the 9th. who being beaten, and in
great distress, rendered it for a Pawn into the hands of the Egyptian Sultan,
insomuch that to this day the Egyptian Escutcheons by way of Triumph, bear
upon it a Pix with a Wafer in it. In their processions it is carried upon their
Shoulders, as was Bell and Nebo, or if the Journey be long, it is hung about
the Neck. Ritual. Romans p, 72.
To it agrees the whole description, which the Psalmist gives us of a Pagan
Idol, for it has Eyes and cannot see, it has hands and handles not, being
deprived of the actual use of all its faculties and senses, and so of all the
Lampades coram eo plures, vel saltem una, die noctuque perpetuo collucea^.
Ritual. Romans p. 64. Si ho stia consecrata amure, etc. p. 34.
lights that burn before it, it beholds not one.

This God is also worshipped, and afterward his heart is gnawed upon by things
creeping out of the Earth, and when they eat or drink him he feels it not.
Witness that Injuction of the Roman Missal, That if the Host be taken by a
Mouse, or any other Creature, and cannot be found, they do endeavor to take,
kill and burn that Creature, and cast the Ashes under the Altar. And that when
either Flies or Spiders chance to fall into the Chalice, Si musca vel ar^nea
etc. p. 35.
because these little Beasts cannot drink so little, but they drink him whole,
and have him in their little Guts, the Priest must by all means swallow down
these Flies and Spiders, if he can do it without the endangering of his Life,
or fear of Vomiting. Once was the time that Egypt was made ashamed of their
chief God, Theod. Hist. Eccles. l: 5. c. 22.
when they saw Mice creeping out of his Belly; what would they have said, if
they had seen their God creeping down, as the Mass God does, into the Belly of
those Mice or Flies? God does in Scripture often threaten a wicked Church or
Nation, that he would spue them out of his Mouth: And were this Doctrine true,
the Wicked of the Church of Rome might do the like to him; nay, they might not
only vomit up their God, but cause him to be burnt, witness the constitution of
the Mass, De desect. circa Miss. Occurrent. p. 38.
That if the Priest do vomit up the Eucharist, and find the Species whole, he
should then reverently eat the Vomit; but if the Species appear not, he should
burn it.

Thirdly, If T. G. rightly had asserted, that this was the continual practice
of the ancient Church, the ancient Fathers of the three first Centuries would
not have quite neglected to inform us of it: some time or other, it is like,
they would have styled it God, or Jesus Christ, or have declared that it was,
or ought to have been Worshipped by them. For the absurdness of the thing to
sense and reason, is so great and obvious, that it seems plainly to require
more Apologyes than they bestowed to vindicate, and to wipe of the scandal of
the Cross. At least it would have been remembered by Justin Martyr, or
Tertullian, who undertake to give us an account of what the Christians
practiced in this case; and yet neither the Romanists themselves, nor their new
Champion T. G. do cite one passage from them to confirm this practice. In the
Fourth Century, it was the chief concern of all the Fathers to oppose the
Arians, and all their under-Sects, and their chief Argument was this, that
communis est illa S. Patrum argumentatio qua verum and a qualem Patridcum esse
probant filium quod, summo illo genere adorationis quam (...) vocant,
afficiatur Petavius. Theol. Degrees. l. 2. c. 12.55.
Christ according to the precept of the Holy Scriptures and the practice of all
Christians was adored, and therefore could not be a Creature. Now had the
Adoration of the Host been the continual practice of that Age they lived in,
how could they all forget and wave an Argument so plain and obvious, and so
convincing as this practice does afford; it being natural thus to conclude,
Christ in the Sacrament is Worshipped with Latria, and this Adoration is there
tendered upon presumption of his Deity, and therefore he is God. Since then the
Fathers of those times did newer use this Argument, certain it is the practice
of the Church did give them no occasion so to do.

Thirdly, the Marcionites and Valentinians denied that Christ did take upon him
real flesh, and the great objection which forced them thus to slight the senses
of all those that saw him, and P. 97. 98. Apol. c. 39.
all the evidence of reason in this case, was this, that they conceived it
Turpe hoc deo, and indignum hoc dei filio, and stultum. Tertul. de carne
Christi c. 4. D.
improper for the Son of God to be conceived in the Womb, or come forth of it;
The Manichees were also startled with the same objection, it is an unworthy
thing says August. contra Faustum Man. l. 3. cap. 6.
Faustus ex utero credere Deum, and Deum Christianorum, to think that God, and
especially the God of Christians should issue from a Womb. The Synod held at
Ephesus amongst the impious speeches of Nestorius. takes special notice of this
one, that he could not (...) Council. Ephesians. Acts 3. Extr in Ep. Syn, ad Cler,
CP, p. 335. (...), ib, Acts 1, p, 265,
endure to Worship one that was two months old, or nourished by Milk. And yet
amongst all these and many other Heretics, who were so highly scandalized at
the humiliation of our Savior, and at his sufferings on the Cross, we find not
one that ever did except against this Adoration of him in the Sacrament,
against the cating of their God, the mixing of him with their spittle, or with
the ferment of the most depraved Stomach. During Eight hundred years we have
not one complaint or scruple that the Christians God was pitiful immured and
shut up in the shape of Bread and Wine, deprived of the use of all his
faculties, and exposed to the Teeth of Vermin, which gives just reason to
believe that what the Christians of those times did practice, gave no occasion
to them to discourse these things, or to be scandalized with them. Besides in
answer unto these exceptions, we do not find that any of the Fathers urged this
practice, or undertook by saying that Christians did Adore him in the shape of
Bread, did lodge him in their Stomachs, and the like, to show that he might
properly be God, and regularly Worshipped, although he lay concealed in the
Womb, and was subjected unto the like infirmities with other children. Since
then no other instance had been more proper to oppose to these objections then
this Adoration of the Host, and yet the Fathers constantly declined it, we may
be certain that they had no such practice, and that they did not hold that
Doctrine from whence this practice took its rise.

Fourthly, If this had been the judgment of the Ancient Church, why did they
Hoc quod reliquum est de carnibus and panibus in igne incendi praecepit quod
nunc videmus in Ecclesia sensibiliter fieri ignique tradi quacunque remanere
contigerit inconsumpta Hesyck l. 2. in Lev. c. 8.
burn the Host? For can we possibly imagine any thing more heinous, then is the
burning of that God we Worship? To prove that Calvinists do offer the most vile
affronts to holy Saints and Martyrs, the Bellarm. de Reliq. storum. l. 2. c. 1.
To. 1. controv. 7.
Roman Doctors hold it sufficient to affirm they burn their bodies and
relics, and cast their ashes into Rivers: And is it not a greater evidence of
the abominable contempt these Fathers offered to our blessed Lord, that they
did burn and bury that most sacred body which was united to the Divinity. To
show the great stupidity of Heathens in thinking that which they had made was
God, the Prophet Esaias tells them, that part of the same Wood which makes the
Image is burned in the Fire; and the Prophet Baruch. c. 6. v. 55.
Jeremiah lays down this strong conviction, that the Heathen Idols ought not
to be esteemed Gods, because when Fire fell upon their Temples they could not
escape, but were consumed by it. And can we then imagine that all Christians,
during this custom were such sots as to imagine that to be God, which was not
only subject to be consumed by, but was by them committed to the flames for
this intent and purpose? was it not easy to retort upon the Christian that of
the Prophet Esaiah that part of the same Corn which was converted into the
Host, and of the Wine which was converted into the blood of Christ, served only
to be meat and drink, and to descend into the Stomach and the draught.

Fifthly, v. Daille de Cultu Lat. l. 7. c. 30.
If this had been the judgment of the ancient Church, why did they put the Host
into the (...), Balfamon, p. 460.
Sepulchers of dying friends, or bury what they could not eat, since humane
nature does abhor to offer such affronts unto that God we Worship? The Prophet
Esaias to express what great contempt the Heathens in the time of Christ should
show unto their Idols, says that they shall cast them to the Moles and to the
Batts, and could a Christian cast his God unto the Worms, or lodge him with a
stinking Carcass, and not be deemed to contemn him in a viler manner?

Sixthly, We read that Vituli pulverem quem adoraverat Israel, in contemptum
superstitionis, in potum accepit populus, ut discat contemnere quod in secessum
projici viderat, Hieron ad Fab. p. 20.
Moses took the Calf and burnt it with fire, and ground it to powder, and
strewed it upon the Water, and made the Children of Israel drink of it. Isa.
1.2. v. 20. Exodus 32. v. 20.
The ancient Fathers tell us, this was done to teach them to contemn what they
saw consumed and go down into the draught; whereas this Romish Doctrine
confutes both Moses and the Fathers, and lets us know that what we devour may
be God, and that that which Si quicquid ingreditur in os, in ventrem abit and
in secessum ejicitur and ille cibus qui Sanctificatur per verbum Dei perque
observationem juxta id quod habet materiale, in ventrem abit and in secessum
ejicitur Orig. in Mat. 15. p 17.
Origin assures us goes down into the draught, is that which also rules in the
Heavens.

Seventhly, Let it be considered, that if the primitive Church had ever
practiced this Adoration of the Host, the Heathens would sure have retorted all
those Arguments upon their heads, by which they did reprove the Heathens for
their Idol-worship, for the Christians upbraided them with Worshipping the
works of their own hands, to which themselves gave what figure they pleased,
and then by certain forms did Consecrate them, and made by invocation, as they
supposed, a Divinity to dwell there. They objected to them, that they
Worshipped that which could neither hear, nor see, Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
nor smell, nor taste nor move, and in particular (...) things having not the
shape of God, they upbraided them with Worshipping what they had baked in the
Furnace, and that which could grow old and perish, that could be broken and
burned, that was subject to the injuries of Ratts and Mice, and Worms and
creeping things, that can be taken by Enemies and carried away, that is not
able either to revenge or help it self. Is it not the extremity of madness
says St. Tom. 5. p. 51. 7.
Chrysostom to think men do not say or do what is filthy, when they go about to
bring their Gods into the Images of Stone or Wood, and there to shut them up as
in a Prison. Do thou not see says Recognit. l. 5. f. 30.
Clement, That that which thou Adorest cannot see, do thou not hear that it
cannot understand? Your Gods are baked in the Potters Furnace says Arnob. l.
6. p. 200. Fornacibus incocta f gulinis.
Arnobius, and wrought into those forms in which you see them. As for your Gods
they may be burnt, or broken, or perish says Lactantius, for they are often
broken by the fall of Houses, and often are consumed by fire; what madness
therefore is it to fear that whose Ruin, Theft, or Incension may be rather
feared? what vanity to hope for help from them, who are not able to defend
themselves? what perverseness is it to fly unto their aid, who being injured
are umevenged, unless revenged by their Worshippers.

How great stupidity is it not to see it is a wickedness to think or say that
men are keepers of the Gods. Ap^l. p. 4^
So l. 2. c. 4.
Justin M It Is a shame to to Worship those whom thou defendest, and to hope for
succor from them, whom thou thy self preservest, says St. Ad Len^etr p. 239.
Cyprian. These arguments are frequent in the mouths of Ancient Father; and had
the Church then thought and practiced, as they have done at Rome in these last
Ages, might not the Heathens have replied, why may not we as well as you? do
not you Worship that with Divine Honors; and call it your God, which can be
barnt and broken, which your selves form into a round or square figure, which
the Oven first hardens, and then your Priests consecrate, and by invocation
make to be your God, which can see no more, then the Silver and Gold upon our
Images? Do not you adore that which Rats and Mice eat, which can grow Moldy
and Sour, which you keep under Locks and Bars, for fear your God should be
frollen? True it is, that if we are beaten from our Cities, we carry our Gods
with us, But does not your, Roman Ritual command the Priest that undertakes a
long and dangerous journey, p. 72.
to put his God up into a bag, and hang that bag about his Neck, that so he may
be carried with him? Let me then answer. you in the words of your Arnobius,
Contra Gentes l, 2
how impudent and shameless is it to reprehend that in another which you do
your selves?

And whereas some reply, Sect. 5.
that Christians hid this practice from the Heathens, the vanity of this
exception will be evident from this consideration, That many who embraced the
Christian Doctrine, were by the heat of persecution driven back to Paganism, who
therefore were concerned to save their credit by divulging what they thought
liable to most exception in the Christian practice: But this exception is so
abundantly confuted by Monsieur Daille, De culius objecto l. 2 c. 25. p 31
that it is needless any further to consider it. To conclude therefore, the
Synod of Constantinople held, A. D. 754. and consisting of the flower of the
Eastern Church, determins thus, Syn, ^. Act 6.7.^. p. 756. Council. T. 5.
That Christ commanded an Image, ex ellent matter, or the substance of Bread to
be offered, not having humane shape, least Idolatry should be introduced. Now
who knows not that the substance of Bread is not a proper object of Latria, and
it that Christ God-man was properly contained in the Sacrament, there could be
no suspicion of Idolatry in the adoration of it. What I have thus discoursed, I
judge sufficient to convince the Reader; that this was not the practice of the
Ancient Church.

What T. G. offers to the contrary is,. 6.
that St. Basil says, the words of invocation, when the Eucharistical Bread
was showed, T G. p. 222, 223.
are Apostoli^al Tradition. Ergo the Host was worshipped with Latria. St.
Austins Mother assisted at the Altar, from whence she knew the Holy Victim was
disp aced. Ergo the Host was Worshipped with Latria. Optatus calls the Altar the
Seat of the Body of our Lord. Ergo the Host was Worshipped with ^atria. He might
have added that Protestant: do call the Sacrament the Blood and Body of our
Lord, they do uncover and show it to the people, they therefore do adore it
with Latria. These are the wretched Sophisms by which this universal practice
is confirmed; and they prove only this, That the abettors of them do not
renounce their sense and reason only, when they do believe this Doctrine, but
also when they discourse on this unhappy Subject.

Thus when T. G. proceeds to tell us, p. 224.
That the practice of the Church was so notorious in this point of the
Adoration of the Eucharist, that the Heathens, because they knew that the
Christians made use of Bread and Wine in the Mysteries, objected to them, that
they Worshipped Ceres and Bacchus: Nothing is so notorious, as is the weakness
of this Inference. For if this argument be valid, the Heathens thought that
Christians Worshipped Ceres and Bacchus, because they used Bread and Wine in
their Mysteries, therefore all Christians Worshipped what seemed to be Bread and
Wine, this must be also valid; the Heathens thought that the Jews did Worship
Saturn, because they met on Saturday, August. con^a Faust Mamich. l. 20. c. 13.
(as the same Austin in the same place informs us) therefore all Jews Worshipped
Saturday. 2. St. Austin says, and he himself confesses, that the Heathens
thus conceived, not because they Worshipped the likeness of Bread and Wine but
because they used Bread and Wine in their Mysteries, the bare use therefore,
not the Worship of these things, was that which gave the rise to this absurd
imagination, as St. Austin deems it.

Like to this stuff is that of Chrysestom, viz. That the whole order of
heavenly Powers lift up their voice, T G. p. 224.
and the place round about the Altar, is filled in honor of him that lies
upon it. And that of Nazianzen, p. 222.
affirming, That Gorgonia went with Faith to the Altar, and with a loud voice
besought, (...), him that was honored upon it. For who knows not that Christ
is honored at the Holy Table, when by the invocation of his Holy name, the
Sacrament of his true Body and Blood is Consecrated, and to his Glory is
distributed to all the Faithful, who knows not, that the honor done to that
which represents, and is the true memorial of our Blessed Lord, is Honor done
to him? And therefore these expressions only signify that Holy Angels and Good
Christians do honor the memorials of Christ's Body; and this we Protestants do
as truly, but more safely then the Church of Rome, witness the preparations
made before we do receive them, and the Reverence we use when we receive them;
and witness lastly our confession, Eucharistiam, ut signum utile, divinitus
institutum, venerandam confitemur, says Albertinus. And that Nazianzen could
intend no more, is clear from what he does immediately subjoyn, viz. In Epitaph
Gorgon. p. 187
That if his Sister could lay hold of any of the Antitypes of our Lords Blood
and Body, she presently bedewed them with her Tears. What therefore lay upon
the Altar, was only the Antitype of Christ's true Body. This also was the mind
of Chrysostom, for he declares, Epistol. ad Caefar. Monach.
That before the Bread is Sanctified, we name it Bread, but the Divine Grace
Sanctifying it by the means of the Priest, it is s^e^d from the name of Bread,
and is esteemed worthy to be called the Lords Body, although the nature of
Bread remains in it.

To the words of Chrysostom, p. 224.
cited from Hom. 24. in Epist. ad Corinth I answer, That Chrysostom does here
exhort us to Worship Christ's Body, which we do, he also says, we see this Body
on the Altar. Nay, elsewhere he adds, (...). A^ Pop. Ant^oc Hom. 15 (...) ib.
Hom. 24 Vide Albert. l. 2. at Sacr. Euch. p. 535, 536.
we see it slain and jugulated. In Mat. Hom. 82.
And when the Heretics do ask whence it is evident that Christ was Crucified,
we stop their mouths says he, by the consideration of these Mysteries; for if
Christ be not ^ead (...), what do these Symbols mean. Christ's Body therefore is
seen upon the Altar, not as to its substance (for there according to the Roman
Doctors, its being is invisible) but as to that Sacrament which represents his
Body; this then must be the mind of Chrysostom, that Body which is really in
Heaven, and in the Altar, is seen, slain, and jugulated in effigy, do you
adore.

Hitherto we have complained only of the want of reason, in the citations
following, we have just reason to suspect his want of Conscience For with what
Conscience could he offer this passage of f Theodoret in confirmation of this
practice, (...) Dial. 2 p. 84.85.
viz. The mystical symbols ( Those words T. G. leaves out.
do not receed from their nature, for they abide in their proper substance,
figure and from, and may be seen and touched as they were before, but they) are
understood to be what they are made, and are believed and adored as being the
things. they are believed; for can that be a Demonstration of this practice,
which is a most convincing demonstration, that the supposition upon which the
Romanist does build this practice is absurd and false? And that the Adoration
of the Host, would be the Adoration of what continues B^ead, as certainly, as
the humanity of Christ continues to retain its nature and its proper substance?
had not T. G. sufficient reason to leave our these words, which are so clear a
Condemnation of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and consequently of the
Adoration of the Host, that their, great Doctors are even forced to say, that
by (...) substance, Theodoret does understand no substance, out only accidents,
which are the opposite to substance. And that by substance and nature he
means form and figure; though in this very place, he makes a clear
distinction of substance both from form and figure, and consequently that he
grants unto the Heretic, that Christ's humanity, is as to the substance and the
nature of it, changed into the Deity, and that the accidents, form and figure
of it only remain unchanged, that is, he grants. all that the Heretic asserts,
and he endeavored to refure.

For thus the Heretic dispu^es, As the Symbols of the body and blood of Christ
are other things before the invocation of the Priest; but after the invocation
they are changed, and made other, so the body of Christ after the assumption is
changed into the divine substance: and thus the Orthodox does answer, thou art
caught in thy own Net, for the mystical signs after Sanctification do not
recede from their own natures.

Again, the Orthodox puts this question, are not the mysteries. Ibid. vid. p.
57.
the signs of the body which truly is, this being granted by the Heretic he
makes this inference, If the divine mysteries do truly represent the body, then
the body of our Lord now is, and is not changed into the Deity, but only filled
with his Glory. When therefore is it affirmed by Theodoret, that this Sacrament
is (...), a venerable Type. And that the Symbols are (...), or Symbols which
are Worshipped. This phrase can signify no more then this, That they are
venerable Types and Symbols, such as deserve a reverence or honorary Worship
from all Christians, which is a very common acceptance of the word; for thus
Christian Temples are styled by the Ancients. Concal. sub Menna act. 5.
(...), or Venerable Temples, the Apostles Throat; Epist. Leonis 2.
(...), a Venerable Throne, and Baptism; Justinian Novil. 6.
(...), or Venerable Baptism.

The same uncenscionable dealing we meet with in that passage of St. Austin:
for no Man eats Christ's flesh, (...) be have si^s^ adored;for in that very
place he tells us, That In ^^s^l, 98. p, 241. ^, G.H,
the Jews interpreted the eating of Christ's Flesh, like Fools for they
interpreted it carnally, whereas Christ did instr^^ his own Disciples, and say
unto them, understand Spiritually what I say unto you, you shall not eat the
Body which you see: and drink the Blood which they will shed that Crucify me;
I have commended unto you a Sacrament, that Spiritually being understood, will
quicken you So that St. Austin in this very place asserts the contradictory to
what the Church of Rome believes touching the presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, and calls them Fools that think Christ did intend what they imagine
he has said. Therefore it is manifest, that St. Austin in this place, speaks
nothing of the adoration of Christ's Flesh under the accidents of Bread, but
only of the adoration of hs Flesh considered, as united to the Godhead. and
placed at the Right Hand of God

I astly, to that of Ambrose. De spir, Sa^cto l, 3. c. 12.
By the Footstool, is understood the Earth, and by the Earth the flesh of
Christ. which we Adore in the mysteries at this day, and which the Apostles
adored in our Lord Jesus. I answer, that he says no more than this, that in
these mysteries we Worship Christ, and c^n^^quently the flesh of Christ as
being not divided from, him ^u, he does not say that in adoring the mysteries
we adore Christ, or that we do adore the mysteries which are Christ.

1. Therefore let it be observed, that St. Ambrose does not say that we adore
Christ only in this mysteries: but in mysteriis, or in the Celebration of the
Sacraments; which it was the custom of Antiquity to do because they held these
mysteri^s to be instituted by him, to convey unto us those blessings he had
purchased by his blood, and did conceive he in Job, 9, 6.7.
Cyril words it, does invisibly swim in the waters of Baptism. And therefore in
the Celebration of that rite, they eall upon us as Paulinus Epist. 4. Chrysostom
To. 6. in illud simile est regnum czlorum.
Captives to fall down before our King, and with hands lifted up to Heaven, to
adore him, and mutually to exhort our selves, and say, come let us Worship
before the Lord who made us. And yet I hope T. G. will not infer that Element
of Water to be transmuted into Christ's Body, and therefore Worshipped by the
Christians of those times. Secondly, observe that Christ's Sacred Flesh being
united to his Godhead, and adored with it, the Worship which at the celebration
of those Mysteries was directed to him, as sitting in the Heavens, must be the
Worship of his Flesh; and this assuredly must be the meaning of St. Ambrose,
who in his exposition of these words, seek those things which are above, sermon.
58.
etc. speaks thus, we ought not now to seek our Savior upon the Earth, or
according to the Flesh, it we would find and touch him, but according to the
Glory of his Divine Majesty that we may say with the Apostle Paul, but now we
know not Christ according to the Flesh. And therefore Blessed Stephen by his
Faith did not seek Christ upon the Earth, but did acknowledge him standing at
the Right Hand of God, where, with the devotion of the mind he sought him. Now
this no Protestant denies, that Christ, even in the celebration of the
Eucharist, is to be Worshipped where he is, and where he is to be sought after
by such as do desire to sind him, (i.e.) at the right hand of God.

CHAP. VI.
The Contents.
Prop. 1. When we ascribe unto the Creature the Homage due to the Creator, we
become guilty of Idolatry. Prop. 2. To know the secrets of the hearts of
persons, praying at all times and in all places of the World, is a divine and
incommunicated excellency. Prop. 3. That to ascribe this knowledge to any
Creature, to whom God does not thus discover the secrets of the heart, and to
pay that honor to it which does suppose that knowledge, is Idolatry. Prop. 4.
Those outward Acts of Worship, which by consent of Nations, or by common Use,
do signify the honor due to the Creator, are Idolatrical, when given to a
Creature. Corol. 1. That to offer Sacrifice, is to perform that Worship which
is proper only to God. 2. That to vow to Angels or to Saints departed, is to
ascribe unto them the honor due to the Creator. 3. Prayer offered and put up
in any time and place to an invisible and not corporeally present Being, is the
oblation of that Worship to it which is due to God alone. Objections Answered..
1.


HAving thus endeavored to confirm and justify the Judgment of the Church of
England, touching the Worshipping of the Host: I now proceed to show the Equity
and Justice of her Censure of the Roman practice, in reference unto the
Invocation and Adoration of Holy Angels, and of Saints departed. And what we
have to say in this particular, as the foundation of this Charge, shall be
contained in these ensuing Propositions.

Prop. 1. When we ascribe unto the Creature that honor and respect, or pay
unto it that Love, Praise, Confidence and Homage, which is due only to the
Great Creator, we become guilty of Idolatry: as is apparent, 1. From the
evidence of Scripture; When Saul had knowingly transgressed the Command of God,
Samuel thus represents the greatness of his sin. Rebellion is (...) the sin of
Magic; 1 Samuel 15.23.
and to resist is (...) double Idolatry, for both those words do signify
Idola; and Teraphim is often used for Idolatry. Ponitur pro ipso cultu
Idololatrico, sen ipsa Idololatria. Kircher. conc^^d. p. 2307.
This then is the clear import of the words, He that does contumaciously
resist, and wilfully refuse to do what God particularly enjoins, is virtually
guilty of the sin of Magic and Idolatry: for as by consulting the Magician, or
using of that wicked Art, we do ascribe that knowledge of things had and
future, to the Creature, which agrees to God alone; And as by worshipping of
Idols, we put the Creature in the place of the Creator, and do impart his
honor to the Idol; even so by this rebellion, and obstinate resistance of the
will of Heaven, and by preferring of our wills before it, we virtually say, our
wisdom ought to be preferred before his counsel, our pleasure ought to be
esteemed above his will: and so we do advance our selves into the place of God,
and give unto our selves that honor which is due to him alone, and do ascribe
unto our selves the highest wisdom. And this we have acknowledge by the learned
Estius: They sin, says he, In Sentent. l 3 distinct. 33.. 5. p. 129
against his precept Thou shall have no other Gods but me, who will not yield
subjection to God, but contemn his precept or Authority; of which sin Samuel
pronounces thus: To Rebel is as the sin of witchcraft, and not to acquiess is
as the wickedness of Idolatry.

2. St. Paul expressly says, Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5.
That covetousness is Idolatry; and that (...), (i.e.) the covetous man is an
Idolater: and of the glutton he pronounces, That his belly is his God, Phil.
3.19.
not that they properly esteem it so, but that they chiefly are solicitous to
make provisions for it, and direct all their care and study to that end. Id
enim pro Deo habemus, cujus causa omnia facimus (says Grotius.) In locum.
And this is manifest from what the Romanists do comment on the first
Commandment: For seeing by this precept (says the learned Estius) we are
commanded to acknowledge God is our hope and confidence, Loco citato.
they must by necessary consequence offend against it is precept, who do not
place their (utmost) confidence in God, but in the flesh, (i. e.) in health or
riches, strength or friends, or any temporal concern And since this precept
does enjoin us to love God with the highest love, he that by any act proceeding
directly from the will, demonstrates an equal or a greater love unto himself,
or any other creature, them he shows unto God, whom he standt bound to love and
to prefer before all other things, he must offend against this precept and so
be guilty of Idolatry, by having other Gods besides him

3. The Prophet Habakkuk c^mplains of some who sacrificed to their net, Hab.
1.16.
and burned incense to their drags, (i. e.) they ascribed all their victories
to their own strength, says Grotius: They attributed that to their own virtue,
strength and industry, which should have been ascribed to God. So Vatablus,
They attributed to themselves what properly belongs to God, viz. the good
success of their affaris. This is the Comment of the Hebrews, says the learned
Drusius. And now by ascribing to themselves that properly belonged to God, they
must be guilty of Idolatry, because they do ascribe that honor to the Creature
which is due to the Creator only. And hence this sin is represented as the
oblation of sacrifice and incense to a Creature, which is confessed to be
Idolatry.

And that these actions do partake of the true nature of Idolatry, we have
confirmed both from the evidence of Scripture, the judgment of the learned
Fathers, the voice of reason, and the confession of our Adversaries. For when
our Savior says, Mat. 6.24.
that God and Mammon cannot both be served, because we cannot serve two Lords,
he clearly intimates, that by solicitude for worldly things, they become Gods
and Lords unto us, and so we violate the precept of not having other Gods
besides him. The Fathers do expressly say the like: Let us not think, says Hom.
2. in Judic.
Origin, because we do not worship Images, that those things do not appertain
to us, for that is God to any person which he prefers, admires, and loves
beyond all other things. One makes his mammon, says St. In Romans c. 3. He. 6.
p. 43.
Chrysostom, a second his lust, a third his belly, to be his God: I know thou
do not sacrifice thy Oxen to them, as the Gentiles do, but what is far more
pestilent, thou offerest up thy soul unto them; thou do not bend thy knee,
nor worship them, but thou art more obedient to what thy belly and thy gold
commands, than to the will of Heaven. Now even reason shows that love, hope,
trust, obedience, are parts of that internal worship which we own to God in the
most excellent degrees; and which he more regards than building Temples, and
erecting Altars, than bending of the knee or body, or any other act of outward
worship; and therefore in these acts does more especially consist Gods
worship: And therefore he that does confer them upon any Creature, must do
what is more distastful to him, than if those outward Ceremonies should be
imparted to that Creature. The Scripture therefore does esteem the covetous
person to be a worshipper of Idols, because as Heathens place their confidence
in Idols, even so the avaritious man does place his confidence in gold and
silver, which are the matter of the Idols; he chiefly does pursue them, and
for their sakes only does other matters. And therefore what the Pagan does
unto his Idol, that does the avaritious person to his glod, says (...): in
Romans c. 3. To. 6. p 43.
Chrysostom; and this we have confessed by Forcasse rectius cum S. Thoma
dixe^imus, id^irco avaritium vocari cultum Idolorum; quia sicut Paganus in
Idolo, sic avarus in Idol materia, quae est au^um, and argentum, suam fiduciam
collocat, ejusque gratia omme facit. Est. in loc.
Estius, Aquinas, and others of the Roman Church.

Secondly, This Proposition may also be confirmed, (1.) From the definition of
Idolatry; for if Idolatry consists in giving of that worship which is due to
God, to that which is not God, by giving it to any Creature we must be guilty
of idolatry, it being the most clear and most unquestionable truth that the
most excellent Creature is not God. 2. Whatever does import and signify the
honor due to the Ceator, does also signify that excellency which is only due
unto him: We cannot then perform that act of honor which imports this
excellency to the best of Creatures, but we must honor it as our Creator; nor
can we honor it as our Creator, but we must worship it as God, and by so ding
we must be guilty of what the Romanists confess to by paying honor to a
Creature: But we can pay no greater honor to the most excellent of Creatures,
than by ascribing to it that honor which is due to God alone: and therefore by
ascribing of that honor to it, we must be guilty of idolatry: 4. By giving of
that honor to God which does import that excellence and perfection which agrees
to God alone, we exercise that act of Worship which we call Latria; for since
Dulia does import only the worship proper to the Creature, it cannot signify
that worship which is due to him whose dignity is infinitely greater than what
the best of Creatures does enjoy; if then we exercise that act of worship to
the Creature we give Latria to it, and, in the judgment of our most rigid
Adversaries, to give Latria to a Creature is to be guilty of Idolatry

To know the secrets of the hearts of persons praying, Prop. 2.. 2.
is a divine and uncommunicated excellency. This is apparent 1. from express
Scripture testimony, 1 Kings 8.39. 2 Chronicles. 6.29, 30. What prayer or what
supplication soever shall be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, when
every one shall know his own sore, and his own grief, and shall spread forth
his hands in this house: hear thou from heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive,
and render unto every man according to all his ways, whose heart thou know;
for thou, even thou only, know the hearts of the children of men: where
first observe, That there it is asserted as a thing proper to God, not only
that he knows the hearts of all men collectively taken, but distributively: (i.
e.) that he alone does know the heart of any man: for this is given as a reason
why, when supplications are made by any man, God should render to him according
to his ways, because he only knows his heart; (i. e.) he only knows the heart
of any single person. 2. Observe this knowledge of the heart is thus
appropriated to God in reference to whatsoever prayer and supplication shall be
made by any man: Whence we infer, that whatsoever prayer and supplication shall
be made by any man, God only knows the heart and the conceptions of the
Supplicant; and therefore that this knowledge is not communicated to Saints or
Angels. 3. Observe, that to affirm this knowledge is ascribed to God alone,
because he only has this knowledge from the perfection of his nature; whereas
it is communicated to the Saints and Angels only by way of revelation, or by
the vision of that God, who knows all things: Is 1. without all ground to
limit what is universally pronounced in the case of prayer. 2. It we admit this
limitation, to say God only knows the secret of the heart of him that prays,
has no more of truth, than if I should assert God only has a being he only
acts, he only knows that Christ is come into the world, because he only acts,
and has his being from himself; our beings and our power of action is derived
from him, and by his revelation only we do know that Christ is come into the
world. 3. We may on like accounts assert. That even when the general has paid
his Soldiers, he alone has money, because what money and of his Soldiers
have, was given by him; and that the Master only of the School of Westminster
knows Greek and Latin, because his Scholars have derived that knowledge from
him. 4. If we admit of such a limitation, then the exclusive term will not
refer to what is spoken, but to that which is not mentioned; not to the
predicate, viz. the knowledge of the hearts of men, which is expressed, but
only to the manner of that knowledge of which the Text is wholly silent: Now
this inter pretation gives such a forced and strained sense, as in a matter of
this nature ought not to be admitted without the greatest evidence. Whereas the
sense we plead for is the most plain and natural import of the words: For it is
natural to conceive the sense of this expression should be this, thou, and no
other, know the hearts of men, whereas if we do paraphrase it thus, that
many myriads of Saints and A^gels have this knowledge of the heart, but thou
alone do naturally know, what they receive from revelation; this Proposition,
taken as it is expresed, viz. God only knows the hearts of men, will be both
absolutely false and uncouth, and what is contradictory to it, viz. God only
does not know the hearts of them that pray, will be absolutely true.

2. Saints and Angels, then could it be no proof of the divinity of Christ and
of the holy Spirit, for what is answered to the Protestant by those who do
ascribe this knowledge to the Saints in glory, might be with equal probability
alleged to baffle and evade this evidence of Christ's divinity, which is so
often and so triumphantly suggested by the holy Fathers: And hence it is
confessed by the great Quod argumentum nullum esset omnino, si non Dei proprium
id foret cogitationes intimas and corda cognoscere. Theol. dogm. Tom. 3. l. 1.
c. 7. p. 39.. 3.
Petavius, that if this knowledge were not proper to God, their argument would
certainly be weak and groundless. And yet the Fathers in his Argument are so
exceeding full and copious, that it were endless to collect what they deliver.
Our Lord, says in Lucam. l. 5. c. 3.
Ambrose, demonstrateth himself to be God, by knowing of the secrets of the
heart. Take (says Sermon. 50.
Chrysologus) these indications of our Lords divinity, hear how he penetrates
the secret of thy heart, see how he dives into thy hidden thoughts. See, says
St. p. 2. Com. in Joh. p. 144.
Cyril, how he is that God who is the (...). Cyril Alex. Com. in Joh. l. 2. p.
133. E.

(...). ib. p. 144.


searcher of all hearts: For to none other is it given to know the mind of man,
as is apparent from that passage of the Psalmist, God is the searcher of the
heart and reins: for there the Psalmist mentions it as a peculiar thing which
only does agree to the Divine nature, and to nothing else: if it be proper unto
God alone to know the secrets of the heart; then Christ, who was acquainted with
them, does very well deserve to be accounted God. So Novatian De Trin. c. 13.
p. 715.
. In the like manner they are wont to argue and conclude the holy Spirit to be
God, for if to know the secrets of men be a propriety of God, to search the
hidden things of God, as does the holy Ghost, must be a greater demonstration
of his Majesty; so Paschasius. If we especially conceive him to be God who sees
the secret thoughts of man, much more is he to be esteemed God, who searches
what is hidden in the Fathers breast: So Hom. de Trin.
Eusebius Emissenus. Quia nemo inferior superioris scrutatur interna, divinae
enim solius est potestatis ecculta novisse, similiter ergo scrutatur Spiritus
Sanctus ut Pater. Ambros. de Sp. Sancto, l. 2. c. 12. f. 108. B. Col. 2. L.
It is recorded of God that he does search the heart and reins, whence it is
evident that in like manner this is performed by the holy Spirit, for no
inferior does search the hidden things of his superior: So Ambrose v. Petav.
Theol. dogm. de Angelis, l. 1. c. 7. and de Trin. l. 2. c. 14. It would be
endless to recite all that the Fathers have delivered to this effect; if then
they taught as does the present Church of Rome, and practiced that invocation
both of Saints and Angels, which does apparently suppose them conscious to the
requests and inward motions of the heart; is it not matter of the highest
admiration, and a just reason to suspect the ingenuity or common prudence of
such men, who did so often urge that as an instance of Divinity which they
acknowledged to agree, and by their daily practice did ascribe unto the
Creature: Wherefore we are constrained, in reverence to their great names and
memories, to judge they never held this knowledge was communicated to Saints
and Angels, nor practiced that which does suppose it: Which will be further
evident if 3ly. we consider that they affirm without distinction or exception,
that to perceive the secrets of the heart is a thing proper unto God alone:
this by the concurrent judgment of the ^ather, being no more communicated to
the Creature than was the knowledge of what was future and contingent. The
Almighty Father only knows the hidden things (says Lib. 5. in Ezech. cap. 16.
page 191. E. Mat. 6.4. Psalm. 7.9. 1 Kings 8.29.
Jerome) alleging for the proof of this these Texts; Thy Father that sees in
secret, etc God searches the hearts and reins. And Thou only know the
hearts of all the children of men. It is the property of God alone (says In
Matt. Hom. 29. p. 201, 202. Ed. Savil. Jer. 17.9. 1 Samuel 16.7.
Chrysostom) to know the secrets of the heart. For the proof of this, besides
the passages now mentioned, he add that of Jeremiah, The heart is deceitful
above all things, who can know it. And that of Samuel, Man looks on the out
ward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. And of this, says he, we
have many evidences. This he again repeats Hom. 24. in Joban. and proves it
from those words of Solomon, Thou only know the heart of man. (...) In Matt.
Hom. 19. p. 134.
If thou do thy good works in secret, wilst thou have no spectactor of what
is done? (says the same Author) yes, thou wilst have, not indeed Angels or
Archangels (much less Saints and Martyrs) but God over all Hence was it held a
signal honor done to God, and a great act of faith to pray in silence: Qui in
silentio orat, fidem defert, and confitetur quod Deus serutator card^ and renis
sit, and erationem tua^an. e lile audiat, quam tuo ore fundatu^. Ambros. de.
Sucram. l. 6. c. 4.
He that does pray in silence, says St. Ambrose, brings faith with him, and
confesses that God is the searcher of the heart and reins, and that he can
hear his prayer before that it is uttered by his mouth. Consideremus bened ct^^
^eleslem Christi Sephia^, imprimis de praecepto secret adorandi, quo and fidem
hominis exigebat, ut Dei omnipotentis and conspectum and auditum sub t^ctis and
in abdus etiam adess confideret, and m destum fidei desidera^ it, ut quem
u^ique audire and videre fideret ci soli religionem, saam off^^^^. Tert. de
Orat. c. 1.. 8.
Let consider, says Tertullian, the heavenly wisdom of our Lord in his
injunction to pra^y in secret, whereby he both requires the faith of man
confiding that God omnipotent both hears and sees under our roofs, and in our
secret places, and also that our faith be modest, so that we offer our Religion
unto him alone, whom we are confident does see and hear us every where.

That to ascribe this knowledge to any Creature to whom God does not thus
discover the secrets of the heart: Prop. 3.. 3.
and to pay that honor to it which does suppose such knowledge, is Idolatry.
This I make good, 1. From the confessions of our Adversaries, and from the
Argument they use on like occasions. It is truly acknowledged by the Church of
Rome. Catechism. Romans part. 3. c. 1. 7.
That Magic, Augury, and such like wicked Arts are sins forbidden by the first
Commandment, and such as cannot be committed without gross Idolatry. Because,
whoever does expect or seek from evil Spirits, or any other Creature, what the
Magician promises, by seeking, hoping, or expecting that from them which only
ought to be expected from God, they act toward that Creature as if they
thought it to be God: For instance; he that attempteth to foretell what is
future and contingent, without a revelation from God, he does unduly do it, 2a
2a q. 95. Art. 1.
says the learned Sylvius, for since the causes of such thing are
undetermined, it is not possible we should attain to this knowledge of them
from themselves, or from their causes, and whether we do speak of things
contingent, or of the knowledge of the conceptions of the heart, it is certain
God alone can know them, it being said, Isa. 41.23.
Thou only know the hearts of men; and again, Declare the things that are to
come, that we may know that you are gods: he therefore that attempteth to
foretell such things, we therefore say that he divineth, because after a sort
he acts the God, usurping that which only does belong to him. 2. From the two
passages of Scripture cited by him, it is evident, That albeit God sometimes
did reveal unto his Prophets the knowledge of things future, and of the secrets
of the heart; yet is that knowledge to be esteemed the property of God, and a
sure indication of divinity, and therefore to ascribe this knowledge to a
Creature, God having not revealed it to him, is to ascribe divinity unto that
Creature, and to be guilty of Idolatry.

If it be said, the practice of the Church of Rome, however they by way of
worship ascribe that knowledge to the Saints and Angels, which only does agree
to God, seems yet unduely to be charged with this crime, because they do
profess this knowledge not to be inherent in them, but to be derived from God.
I Answer, If this excuse may be admitted in this case, then must we free the
Heathens, and many others from this crime, who always have been branded with it
by the Church of God. For 1. The prayers and supplications which the Heathens
made to their inferior Demons, and the first fruits and offerings which they
presented, to them, were only made upon this false presumption, (...) Celsus
apud Orig. l. 8. p. 399. Ed Spenc.
That God by them dispensed earthly things, and that he had appointed them to
rule over a City or a Country, and (...), Orig. adv. Celsuns, l. 8. p. 381.
that it was his pleasure that we should thus pray and offer to them; and yet
both these first fruits and prayers were looked upon as pieces of Idolatry by
Jews and Christians. The Nestorians held the Lord Christ to be a man, (...), by
grace invested with Divinity; and if any Arians did ever say that Christ was to
be worshipped with divine worship, they must esteem this honor to be given to
him, not from the dignity of his nature, but from the pleasure of the Father,
but notwithstanding they allowed him to be Deus factus; they were most
constantly condemned by the Church of Christ, as worshippers of men, and
persons guilty of Idolatry. Thus also the Magicians pretended to derive their
knowledge of what was hidden and contingent from God, and yet they also stand
condemned by the Church of Christ, and by the Roman Doctors, as persons guilty
of Idolatry. And 4. This excuse will say the imputation of falsehood and unjust
impeachment on the holy Scriptures; for nothing is more frequent in those
sacred Records, than to impute to persons what their action did import, however
they performed that action upon such presumptions and vain imaginations, which
if they had been true, must have excused them from the imputation. The Heathen
constantly professed they did not worship stocks or stones, but that spiritual
Being, which by their (...), ditit Olympius Sophista Sozom. H. Ecc. l. 7. c.
15. v. Dion. Chrysust. S^rm. 12.
consecration they conceived to be present in their Images, or which those
Images resembled and represented; and that prefession we have recorded by the
Hermes Aegyptius quem Trismegisium vocant -- visibilia and contrectabilia
simulachra velut corpora Decrum esse asserit. Inesse autem his quosdam spiritus
invitatos, qui valequid, sive ad nocendum, sive ad desideria little nonulla
complenda, a quibus cis divint honores, and culius obsequia deferuntur. Hos
ergo siritus invisibliles per a^^^n qua^da^ vi^^^^bis re^^s corporalis materiae
copulere, ut sin quasi animata illis spiritibus d^^ ta and subdita simulachr^;
hoc esse d^ci De^s facere. Augustimde Crivi^. P. lib. 6. cap. 23. v. cap 24.
(...) Eusebius praepar. l. 4. v. Arnch. l. 6. p. 195. Lactan l. 2. c 2. August. in
Psalm. 113. Conc 2.
Fathers: and yet both the holy Scripture and the ancient Fathers do represent
them as worshippers of wood and stone, because they vainly did conceive a
Spirit to be present, when only wood and stone were there. Moreover they
conceived the objects of their worship to be the great Creator, or some good
Spirit, which he had appointed to act as his Vicegerent in the world; and yet
because those Spirits which they conceived to be the Minsters of God, were only
Satan's instruments, and most pernicious Creatures, the Scripture represents
them as worshippers of Devils. The Israelites did not conceive the very Image
they had made to be the true Jehovah, (i. e.) they did not think, that gold
thus formed into the Image of a Calf, had really its seat in Heaven, and did
from thence behold the dwellers upon earth; they did not really believe it was
the great Creator of the World, and consequently that it made that very matter
of which it was compounded, and that it performed all the wonders which their
eyes had seen, before it had a being; they did not all conceive that man could
at his pleasure make his Maker, or give a being to that God to whom he owes,
and from whom he receives his being; and that they who were not able to
preserve themselves, could make a being able to preserve the World, and to
confer upon it whatever blessing could be wanting to future Ages. Nor did the
Heathens, who are accused of the like crime in Scripture, entertain such
foolish toughts. This is a truth self-evident, and writ upon the hearts and
consciences of all considering men: and had I no conviction of the Idolatry
committed in the Church of Rome, but only this, that they are forced to excuse
their practice from Idolatry, by laying such prodigious imputations not only on
the Perspicuum igitur ex Scripturis est (quicquid somniet insanum Calvini
caput) Judaeos simulachra pro Diis habuisse. Greg. de Valentia.
Jews, but the whole Mendacium est quod Gentiles ea Deos esse non put^rint.
Bellarm. de Eccl. Triumph. l. 2. c. 13. s. 10. and rursus causarum quibus
movebantur Ethnici ad credendum Idola esse Deos, prima est quia id eis
dicebatur a Pontificibus suis, secunda, quia videbant totum fere mundum is
credere. Ihid.
Heathen World, and to assert, they did continue such incredible portentous
Sots for very many Ages; this were abundantly sufficient to justify the
Charge. For to impute to the whole World for many Ages, the belief of many
things, the least of which no single person can imagine to be true, without a
miracle of folly, is a triumphant demonstration that their case is desperate.
For should any man be forced in defense of any Tenet to assert, that all the
World did for some Ages past believe that twice two was six, or that every Ass
they fed was the Creator of the World; I humbly conceive we should have reason
to believe, he was some mad distempered person, and that only the badness of
his cause, and his own obstinacy, and not the evidence of truth, constrained
him to espouse a Tenet so reproachful to mankind. And yet this Tenet has
nothing more apparently repugnant to the sense and apprehensions of mankind,
than that which is maintained by the Doctors of the Roman Church, viz. That all
mankind did for two thousand years conceive, that was their Maker which they
had newly made, and that at pleasure they could give a being to him, who has
his being from himself, and cannot possibly receive it from another. This
therefore could not be the apprehension of the Jews and Heathens touching their
Images and Calves; and yet I say, the Scripture does expressly say, the Jews
asked counsel of their stocks, Hos. 4.12. Jer. 2.27. Acts 7.41.
and said unto the stock, thou art my Father, and to a stone, thou have brought
me forth; and that they sacrificed unto the very Idolor Image of a Calf which
they had made: and of the Heathens it affirms without distinction, Esa. 44.15,
17.
That they fell down and prayed to the very Image they had made; because the
homage they performed to these Images, upon presumption of a Deity, presiding
in them, (that being an absurd and false imagination) was really performed to
stocks and stones: an therefore on the same account this knowledge of the heart
of all, that in all places pray unto them, being ascribed to Saints and Angels,
upon as vain presumptions of such a revelation which God vouchsafes not to
them, must be deemed to be the same, as if they did conceive this knowledge to
arise form the perfection of their natures, and upon that account did put up
their petitions to them.

Those outward acts of worship, Prop. 4. 4.
which by consent of nations, or by common use and custom of mankind, do
signify that honor they ascribe to God alone, and by the exercise of which
they always did intend to give him the glory due unto his name, are to be
reckoned acts of worship proper to God, and he that does perform those acts of
worship to a Creature, which by consent of nations have obtained to signify
the worship due to the Creator, and which in such a place or country are only
used to that intent, is by so doing an Idolater. For by doing of the same,
which they conceive an act of worship proper to the Deity, he must be vertually
conceived to will the same, and consequently to will the giving of that worship
to the Creature, which alone is due to the Creator. For seeing all such actions
have their import form custom and institution by whom soever they are
exercised, and whatsover private apprehensions he may have that worshippeth,
they must be thought to signify according to that import which institution and
custom gives them. If any man should use those words which naturally import,
according to the common use and acceptance of the words, that hope and
confidence, that love and duty which we owe to God alone, whatever private
sense or meaning he may put upon them in his inward thoughts, he must be deemed
to ascribe unto that object, to which he uses such expressions, the honor due
to God. For this being the immediate use of words to signify the thoughts and
apprehensions of our hearts, he must be judged to use them in that sense which
custom has imposed upon them, because, they will not otherwise declare the
apprehensions of the mind. Since therefore outward rites and ceremonies have
their signification from the same original from which our words derive it, or
else do naturally import as much, what reason can be given why the use of
words, which do import Gods Worship, should be thought to signify it; and yet
the use of Rites should not be thought to do the same: And hence S. Augustine
(says Aquinas) gives this reason why we must nor sacrifice unto inferior
Demons ( quia exterior a sacrificia it a signa sunt interiorum, 2a 2a q. 96.
Art. 2.
sicut verba sonantia signa sunt rerum) because exterior sacrifices are signs
of the interior, even as words are signs and indications of the things they
signify: now since all outward acts of Worship are also signs of the interior
respect and veneration of the soul, and are performed to express the same, it
follows that no act of outward Worship which does by nature, custom, or
institution, signify the honor due to God, can be assigned to any other,
without ascribing to it that inward veneration which alone is due unto him: and
if this were not so, those vviser heathens of whom St. De. Civ. Dei, l. 6. c.
10.
Austin speaks, who understood that what the vulgar people worshipped were
no Gods, and yet complied with the common practice, could not be guilty of
Idolatry; and they who understood them to be cheats and devils, and yet for
fear of punishment did offer sacrifice or incense to them, must be excused from
that crime; because they did perform indeed the outward action, but not with
an intent to pay the inward homage which was due to God; but only to comply
with the opinion of the Vulgar, or to preserve themselves from the unhappy
fate of Socrates; and yet St. Augustine does pronounce those wise men guilty
in an Colebat quod reprehendebat, quod culpabat adorabat -- ^o damnabilius quo
illa quae mendaciter ogebat, sic ageret ut eum populus veraciter agere
existimaret. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 6. c. 10.
higher nature than they were, who thought them to be Gods; and 2a 2a qu. 96.
Art. 2.
Thomas gives this clear and pregnant reason why such a sentence should be
passed upon them; viz. Because this outvvard Worship was a sign of the
interior: As therefore he that does affirm by words the contrary to what his
heart conceives, must be esteemed guilty of a pernicious lie: So also he that
does exterior Worship to that which he conceives in his mind is no due object
of that Worship, is guilty of the like pernicious falsity; which sure he could
not be, if that exterior action did not import that inward Worship of which
it is by institution and by common custom made the sign: and hence in
Scripture, those actions which in their nature do not at all import religious
Worship, yet being tendered to that object which by those actions was used to
be worshipped as God; I say such actions are in Scripture mentioned as
indications of Idolatry: ( viz. to kiss the hand unto the Sun, to eat of what
is sacrificed to false Gods, to feast and play before them, to bow the knee to
Baal.) Moreover, to bow the body, or to use prostration to the wicked Haman,
was that which Mordecai refused, and of this action he gives this account,
Esth. 13.14.
Thou know Lord, that it was neither in contempt, nor pride, (...), that I
refused to worship Haman; but I did this that I might not prefer the glory of
man above the glory of God, nor will I worship any besides thee, O God. Since
then we find this outward worship was refused, as being due to God alone; we
must confess that it was due unto him, either because God has enjoined it
should be given unto him alone, and then the Papists must confess they have
Gods precept and injunction against their prostrations made to Saints, or to
the Images of Saints; or else because this practice was in those Persian
Countries used as a testification of Divinity, which they ascribed to their
Governors, and upon that account refused not only by the Jews but Greeks, as
you may see at large in Barnaby Brissonius: De Regno Persico, l. 1. p. 8, 15.
and if this reason be allowed, it clearly follows, that all religious Rites
which are in any Place or Nation used customarily, as testimonies of Divinity,
cannot be used in that Place or Nation, to that which is not God, without
Idolatry: hence those who sat at meat in Idols Temples, however they conceived
the Idol to be nothing, and so intended no such thing, are said to drink the
cup of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.
to be partakers of the Devils table, and to have fellowship with Devils,
because those actions were in those places used to signify the worship of
those Heathen Gods which mostly were not Gods, but Devils. Lastly, should any
person put the Crown upon a Subjects head, and the Sword into his hand, should
he proclaim him King, and do whatever else was wont to signify, and to confer
the Royal dignity; would not that person justly be esteemed guilty of
Rebellion; and of ascribing to the Subject what was due only to the King?
though he should frequently protest that by so doing he intended no such thing,
but only to do honor to the King, by giving it unto his Subject; and that all
this honor which he gave unto the Subject, was only Relative, and transient,
and propter principem, or for the greater honor of that Prince whose Minister
he was, whereas the honor conferred upon the King by the like actions, was
absolute and terminated on himself. If all these subtilties and quirks of wit
would not excuse this person from Rebellion, I fear they will as little
justify the Papists in using of those Rites to Images, and Crucifixes, and
paying their devotions to Saints and Angels in those expressions, which in the
common acceptance of them, ascribe unto those Creatures the power of
conferring what God alone can give. Now from this proposition do arise these
Corollaries.

That to offer Sacrifice, Corol 1. 5. p. 389.
is to perform that Worship which is proper only to God: For T. G. truly does
aver, That Sacrifice is not only by the custom of the Church, but all mankind,
appropriated to signify the absolute Worship due only to God, and this St.
Austin did conceive to be the common apprehension of mankind. Hence he expressly
says, That no man certainly dares Sacrifificium certe nullus est qui audeat
dicere deberi nisi Domino soli -- quis vero sacrificandum censuit nisi ei quem
Deum, aut scivit, aut putavit, aut finxit. Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 10. c. 4.
say that Sacrifice belongs to any but to God alone, and puts this Question,
Who ever thought that he should sacrifice to any person whom he did not know,
or feign, or think to be God. And this is evident from Scripture, Ex. 22.20.
which does expressly say, He that sacrifices to the Gods, shall utterly be
destroyed, except unto Jehovah, even unto him only. And therefore when Manoah
would have detained the Angel with him, that he might prepare for him a Kid,
Jud. 13.16
the Angel answered, If thou intendest to prepare a Sacrifice, it must be
offered unto God. When the men of Lystra assayed to sacrifice to Paul and
Barnabas, they rent their clothes, and presently ran in among the people,
crying out, that they were men; this being in the judgment of St. Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 14.14
as well as of St. Austin, to perform the Worship proper to a Deity. But here
T. G. assures us, P. 392.
That it is far from the hearts of Roman Catholics, when they speak of
Sacrifice, as proper to God, to think that this is meant of external Sacrifice,
as distinguished from prayer. Now here I cannot but admire at the gross
ignorance of this Assertion, which does abundantly discover, that T. G. neither
knows what is the import of a Sacrifice, nor what the Church of Rome asserts
concerning it. For Sacrifice does neither in the nature of the thing, nor in
the judgment of the Romish Church, include a prayer, that is by them asserted
to be In oblatione Sacrificii cujuscunque sacerdotis duo possut censiderari,
sc. ipsum Sacrificium oblatum, and devotio offerentis. Aquinas 3. part. q. 22.
Art. 4.
another kind of Worship, but Sacrifice as it denotes the outward action, is
Sacrificium est oblatio rei sensibilis -- soli Deo facta per realem mutationem
ad testandum supre mum illius Dominium and nostram subjectionem. Becan. Theol.
Scholast. part. 3. c. 25. q. 2.
the oblation of something sensible, and this is that, say they, which is the
D^citur rei sensibilis, ut excludatur in^erna oblatio, qua quis seipsum and sua
omnia Deo subjicit (...) offert, quod non est proprie Sacrificium. Ib. Dicitur
quarto soli Deo facta, quia Sacrif^cium proprie pertinet ad cultum Latriae qui
soli Deo exhiberi potest. Ib.
proper Sacrifice. But seeing this oblation does also signify the inward
consecration, or the oblation of our selves to God, it therefore is to be
esteemed, say they, a Worship due to God alone. And whereas T. G. tells us, p.
391. Ad oratione n^s^cundo ^^quiritur petitio.
That this oblation contains the highest act of prayer, it is apparent that it
is no prayer, for it is no petition which yet is made the Genus, and put into
the definition of a prayer, both by he Aqui. 2a 2ae. qu. 84 Art. 17
Schoolmen and the Fathers: And I would gladly know what that man prays for,
who only says, Oh Lord, I offer up my soul and body to thy service. Since
therefore nothing more is requisite to the internal Sacifice, it is extremely
evident that prayer is no necessary part or adjunct of it. Prayer may indeed be
used with Sacrifice internal and external, and Sacrifice with prayer; but if
that be sufficient to demonstrate that prayer is a part of Sacrifice, our
Hoods, and Surplices must be a part of Common prayer, because we use them with
it. Moreover it is evident, that when the Romanists assert that Sacrifice is
proper to God, they mean as well the I nagini non convenit cultus imernus verus
Latriae, nec externus proprius, qualis est Sacrificium Bellar. l. 2. de
Imaginibus, c. 24. Corporale Sacrificium ad Latriam pertinet. Alex. Halensis
part. 4. de Orat. qu. 26. Art. 5. p. 704.
outward as the inward Sacrifice; for that Sacrifice which they confess to be
Latria, is the oblation of somewhat sensible, of Significat autem Sacrificium
quod offertur exterius, interius spirituale Sacrificium, quo anima scipsam
offert Deo -- and ideo sicut soli Deo su^nmo debemus Sacrificium spirituale
offerre, ita etiam soli Deo debemus offerre exteriora Sacrificia. Aquin. 2a
2ae. qu. 89. Act. 2.
something that does signify the inward Sacrifice, and suffers a real
change. Now all these things can only be asserted of the outward Sacrifice;
that therefore in the judgment of the Roman Catholic is properly Latria, or
that Worship which is due to God alone: Which I will further prove 1. Aug. de
Civ. Dei, l. 10. c. 19.
From Aquinas and St. Austin, who do argue thus; the outward Sacrifice does
signify the inward and spiritual Sacrifice, and therefore seeing the inward
and spiritual Sacrifice must be presented only to the highest God, the outward
also must be offered only to him. 2. I ask if this external Sacrifice be not
the worship proper to God, whether or no it be Idolatry to offer it to Saints
and Angels, or to Heathen Emperors and Demons: if it be not, why did the
ancient Christians refuse to do it upon this account. Why was it always deemed
Idolatry even to cast a little Non est tan^um in eo servitus Idoli, si quis
dumbus d^gieulis thura in bustum arae jaciat. Hieron. ep. ad Heliodorum.
Incense upon the Altar of an Heathen Deity? but if it be Idolatry to give this
outward worship to a Creature; it must be only due to the Creator, as is
apparent from what we have discoursed touching the nature and definition of
Idolatry.

To vow to Angels or to Saints departed, Corol. 2.. 6.
is to ascribe unto them the honor due to the Creator. For before this
Superstition of the Church of Rome obtained, whoever offered up a vow to an
invisible Being, but he conceived or feigned it to be God? Wherefore this
worship, when it began to be thus used by the Roman party, was by the common
practice and consent of Nations made to signify the worship only due to God,
and so their practice, who do ascribe this worship to the Saints departed, must
be deemed Idolatry, because it is the giving of that worship to them which is
due to God: and this in Thesi is confessed by the Roman Catholic: to Vovere
est proprie actus Latriae. Aquin. 2a 2a q 88. Art. 5.
vow is to perform the worship of Latria, say the Schoolmen. They put God into
the Est igitur votum promissio deliberata boni cujuspiam melioris Deo facta;
per hoc quod additum est Deo facta, distinguitur votum ^ promissione quae fit
homini. Estius in sent. l. 4. did. 38.. 1. p. 206.207.
definition of a Vow, and tell us that it is a Votum est quaedam promissio Deo
facta. ibid.
promise made to God; and that it Votum soli Deo fit, sed promissio etiam
potest fieri homini. id.
only differs from a promise made to man in this respect, that it is made to
God. It is confessed by Bellarmine, that in the holy Scriptures we have no
instance of a Vow that was not made to God alone. Aquinas ibid.
proves a Vow to be the worship of Latria, because the Prophet chapter 19.21.
Esa says of the Egyptians, they shall do sacrifice and oblation, yea, they
shall vow a Vow unto the Lord, and perform it; for to worship God, says he (to
wit, with Sacrifice and Oblation) is Latria, therefore to vow unto him must be
so: and this concession of our Adversaries, may farther be confirmed by Reason
and Authority. For we do virtually ascribe unto those persons to whom our Vows
are made, the knowledge of those Vows, and of the disposition of the heart
whence they proceed; for otherwise we must suppose them equally inclined to
assist the hypocritical and the sincerest Votary; and if we do suppose them
ignorant of what we vow, our worship must be vain and fruitless: now hence it
follows that we must pay this worship to him only who understands what we
vow, and is acquainted with the inward motions of the soul, which only God, who
is the searcher of the heart, does know. Besides, the Romanist does often vow
that his I humbly beg of thee, oh Mother of all Clemency, that thou would
vouchsafe to admit me into the number of those who have devoted themselves to
thee, to be thy perpetual servants. Reflect. on the Devotion of the Romish
Church, p. 420.
whole life shall be devoted to the blessed Virgin, or some other Saint. Now in
the judgment of St. Austin, thus to Vt sacra faciemus and sacrificemus vel
aliqua nostra, sive nos ipsos religionis ritubus consecremus, hic est
Divinitati, vel si expressuis dicendum est Deitati debitus cultus. Aug. de Civ.
Dei. l. 10. c. 1.
consecrate our selves by a religious rite to any thing, is to perform unto it
the worship proper to a Deity.

Prayer offered and put up in any time and place to an invisible, Cor. 3.. 7.
and not corporeally present being, is the oblation of that worship to it which
is due to God. For this, before the Superstition of the Romish Church
prevailed, was always used as an indication of Divinity, and a thing proper to
the Deity. Thus Dio tells us that Caligula was worshipped as a God, because
they offered to him (...), prayers and supplications. The consecration of an
Image was deemed by some Heathens, to fix within it some invisible and powerful
being, and then by supplication to the consecrated Image it was made a God,
according unto that of Martial: Qui fingit sacros auro, vel marmore vultus
Non facit ille Deos, L. 8. Ep. 24
qui Rogat ille facit.
It Is not the carved Gold, or Marble stone
That makes the God, but Supplication.


It is adorned. says Ecce ornatur consecratur oratur tum postremo Deus est. p.
26. Luke 11.2.
Minutius, and consecrated, and lastly it is prayed unto, and then it is a God:
This may be farther proved from Scripture, Reason, and Authority: From
Scripture thus; He only ought to be the object of our Prayer who is our
Heavenly Father; for thus the Precept runs, (...), when, or as often as you
pray, say, Our Father, etc. which Precept must not be supposed to enjoin all
Christians to use these words whenever they do pray, for we do never find in
any of the prayers which the Apostles made, that they did so; it therefore does
enjoin us when we pray for any thing which in this Prayer is mentioned or
contained, to pray unto our heavenly Father for it. 2. Obs. This form of Prayer
must be supposed to contain all things which are the matter of a true and
grateful Prayer, according unto that of Austin Dicendum quod oration Dominica
perfectissima est, quia sicut Angustinus dicit ad Probum, si recte and
congruenenter oramus nihil aliud dicere possumus quam quod in ista oratione
Dominica positum est. Aquinas 2a 2a q. 83. Art. 8. Ep. 121. c. 12.
, Run through all the words of holy Prayers, and you will be able to find
nothing which is not included in the Lords Prayer: in this both Protestants and
Roman Catholics agree. Hence therefore I assume, if when we pray for any thing
contained in this Prayer, we are enjoined to pray to God, then all our
acceptable Prayers must be directed to him, and whenever we do pray for any
blessing, we must call upon him: besides, Our Father does belong to every
Petition, no other person being mentioned in this Prayer; so that the sense
runs thus, Our Father, etc. let thy Kingdom come. Our Father, let thy will be
done, etc. And then the import of this injunction will be this, when you pray
for the advancement of Gods Glory, or the promotion of his Kingdom, or the
performance of his Will; when you solicit for any Temporal blessing, or for
the pardon of your Sin; or lastly, for the prevention of any Evil, or
Temptation of what kind soever; when you desire any of these mercies for your
selves or others, pray to your Heavenly Father for them. 3. None of these
blessings must be asked of him to whom the Kingdom, Power, and Glory does not
of right belong. For this is added as the cause or motive of making these
addresses to God, and where the motive or cause is wanting, the effect must
cease: Now to God only the Kingdom, Power, and Glory does agree, Jude 25. We
therefore must address our Prayers to him only for the obtaining of these
blessings: And least you should object that this Argument excludes the third
and second persons of the Sacred Trinity; let it be noted that all the
Schoolmen do affirm, That the word Father in this Prayer must not be taken
personally, but essentially, and so excludes not the other Persons of the
Trinity, but those things only which have not the same nature with them. 2.
Prayer offered up in any time or place to an invisible, and for any thing we
know, a Being absent from us as far as Earth from Heaven, does ascribe unto
that Being the knowledge of the secrets of the heart: now to worship any Being,
whether Saint or Angel, with such a kind of worship which does ascribe unto it
the knowledge of the desires and secrets of the heart, both where and
whenever they are conceived or uttered, is to ascribe unto them by way, of
worship what is not due to Saints or Angels, but alone to God, as has been
proved already, and may be further thus confirmed. (1.) If Saints departed were
acquainted with the desires of our hearts, why did Elijah speak unto Elisha
thus, 2 Kings 2.9.
Ask what thou wilst before I am taken from thee? The Scripture does affirm
that he was taken up into the Heavens, and therefore did behold the face of
God. And Roman Catholics themselves deny that he was held in Limbo, as they
imagine other Prophets were: being in Heaven, his love unto Elisha and the
Church of God was not diminished, but enlarged, and therefore upon that account
he had a stronger reason to ask what he desired then before. Besides, the
Prophet being now with God in Heaven, his Prayers would more effectually
prevail for any Blessing for his Friend: and therefore he had greater reason to
have said, had he believed this Doctrine of the Church of Rome, Ask what thou
wilst when I am taken from thee. And therefore we have reason to presume, that
he did not believe this Doctrine, but rather thought that his departure would
render all Elijah's future wishes and add resses to him vain and ineffectual.
(2.) From that known passage of Isaiah, Abraham nescivit nos, and Israel
ignoravit nos. St. Augustine thus concludes Si tanti Patriarchae quid erga
populum ex his procreatum ageretur ignoraverunt, quibus Deo credentibus populus
ipse ex little stirpe promissus est, quomodo mortui suorum rebus atque actubus
cognoscendis adjuvandisque miscentur? -- ibi ergo sunt spiritus defunctorum,
ubi non vident quaecunque aguntur aut eveniunt in ista vita hominibus. De cura
pro mortuis. c. 13.
, If such great Patriarchs were ignorant of what was done toward the people
that proceeded from their Loins, how should the dead be conversant in knowing
or helping of their friends in what they do? There therefore are the Spirits of
dead persons where they do not see what things are done or happen to men in
this life.

2. I reason thus, this practice does ascribe unto the objects of our Prayer
such knowledge of the heart, and such a cognizance of all petitions presented
to them at all times, and in all places of the world, which we have proved to
agree to God alone, or such a presence in all places which is proper to him,
and therefore it ascribes to them the honor due to God alone. 2. If Saints
departed do know the minds and inward thoughts of those who put up their
petitions to them, they have this knowledge either from Revelation, or from the
beatifick Vision; but they have no such knowledge either from Revelation, or
from the Beatifick Vision. Ergo. And

1. God does not ordinarily reveal unto them the knowledge of the hearts of
their petitioners: For if they do not want this Revelation, God, who does
nothing vainly, must not be supposed to impart it. But these blessed Spirits do
not want it; for did they need this Revelation to perceive our minds (says
Bellarmine) the Church would not so confidently say to all the Saints, Votis
precamur, cordium audite preces supplicum, Brev. in Com. Apost. p. 2.
pray for me, (much less we offer to you the desires of our hearts) but
sometimes would desire God, thus to reveal our prayers, and to acquaint them
with the desires of our hearts.

2. If God thus reveal the Prayers of the Petitioner to the deceased Saints,
what reason can be given (says the forementioned Author) why all the holy
Patriarchs and Prophets were not invoked by the Church of Israel before our
Saviors advent? and he had reason to make this enquiry. For (1.) It is as
easy to Almighty God to make this Revelation to the souls in Limbo (that Papal
prison of the Ancient Patriarchs and holy Prophets) as to the souls in Heaven,
nor have we one example or declaration, that what God is supposed now to do, he
was not willing to do then. (2.) Certain it is, the charity of those departed
Patriarchs and Prophets toward their relatives and friends, and the whole
Church of God, must be exceedingly advanced by their change, they must be more
the friends of God, and their petitions must be more prevailing, then whilst
they did continue in the flesh: Wherefore the Jews had as good reason to invoke
these Patriarchs and Prophets, as has the Romanist to call upon the Christian
Martyrs. And God had equal reason to declare this was the duty of the Jew, and
to reveal their Supplications to the Patriarchs, as to declare this was the
duty of the Christian, and to reveal their Supplications to departed
Christians. (3.) What a ridiculous office do they impose upon the God of Heaven
by this fond opinion? for when they pray to Apollonia for the toothache. God
must not only tell her that such a person supplicates, but also that his teeth
do ache, and therefore he particularly imploreth her assistance, when they
address themselves to any Saint in this odd language, Cum ad Imaginem Sancti
alicujus quis Dominicam orationem pronuntiat, ita tum sentiat se ab illo
petere, ut secum oret sibique postulet ea quae Dominicae orationis formula
continentur. Catech. Romans part 4 c. 6. s. 4. p. 586.
Our Father which art in heaven, etc. which they familiarly do, as is
acknowledged by the Roman Catechism. God must inform this Saint both of the
person praying, and his prayer, and his intention by so doing, to oblige him to
use those words in his behalf. O praeco accelera piae matri^ praecare viscera.
Propr. Fest. F. 2.
When they desire any Saint or Angel to go unto the Blessed Virgin, this Saint
must be informed first of the matter of the Prayer, then must he post unto the
blessed Virgin, and she must go unto her Son, and he unto his Father to present
that request which he revealed. And are not these men very bold with God, to
put such offices upon him, and make him Nuntio to all his Creatures?

2. The Saints departed do not know the hearts and the petitions of their
Supplicants, by virtue of the beatifick Vision. This vain presumption depends
on this, that seeing God, they must in him behold those things which in Idea
are contained in him, or which his knowledge does perceive, and so the
refutation of this dream will be sufficient confutation of it. And (1.) That
which the holy Spirit only knows, these blessed Spirits do not know; but the
things of God (i.e. his purposes and counsels, etc.) knows no man but the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. Ergo. If then the blessed Spirits, notwithstanding
the beatifick Vision, do not see the mind and counsel of God without his
revelation, why should we think that by beholding of God, they also do behold
the supplications we put up unto them? De vita Contemp. l. 5. c. 4.
Those words of Prosper, That nothing is so secret, as that the knowledge of it
should be denied to the perfectly blessed: And that of Gregory, L. 12. Moral.
c. 13.
That they who see that God who sees all things, must themselves see all
things. I say, those words do as much prove that blessed Spirits do know the
secrets of Gods counsel, as that they see the supplications we put up unto
them. To strengthen and confirm this Argument, let us consider, (1.) That the
Fathers do from this place conclude the holy Spirit to be God, because he is
the searcher of the things of God; which Argument would be invalid, if this
could truly be asserted of the blessed Spirits. 2. 1 Cor. 2.12
Observe that the Apostle argues thus, That as no man knows the secrets of the
heart of man, besides the Spirit of man within him, so none can know the
secrets of the God of Heaven, but the Spirit of God. Now if the blessed Spirits
do know the secrets of the heart of man, the Argument would be invalid; for the
Romanist might give the baffle to St. Paul, and tell him, That as the secrets
of the heart of man are known not only to the Spirit of man, but also to
myriads of blessed Saints and Angels, so may the secrets of God be known not
only to the holy Spirit, but to many others. 2. The Scripture does assure us,
That those blessed Angels which always did behold the face of God, had not the
knowledge of those things which are revealed to us by the Gospel; and that the
curious Wisdom which contrived that dispensation, was made known unto them by
the Church: Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12
and therefore Peter represents them, as stooping down to view this new
discovery; which is a signal indication of the falsehood of this fond conceit.
That blessed Spirits seeing him who knows all things, must have the knowledge
of those things he sees, and therefore of the prayers that are put up unto him,
they being seen and known to God. (3.) That we may pray in faith, we must be
certain that the blessed Spirits are acquainted with the desires of our hearts;
for he that does command us to pray in faith, and without doubting, cannot be
wanting to give us certain motives of this faith: and therefore God, who never
is deficient in what is necessary, would certainly have given both to Jews and
Christians sufficient revelation of his will in this particular, had he
intended that they should pay this homage to the Saints departed; whereas we
have no certain evidence, that they enjoy this knowledge, either from
Revelation, or from Vision. And (1.) We are not certain that they behold our
supplications in the beatifick Vision; for many of the Church of Rome do hold
the contrary, and it is free for all her members so to do, and so this matter
cannot be held as any Article of faith, or certain definition of the Church. 2.
It is not certain that these blessed Spirits by virtue of this Vision do behold
what is contingent, for this is generally denied by the Romish Doctors, and yet
these things are seen of God as clearly as are the secrets of the heart. (2.)
We cannot possibly be certain that God does reveal them; for we cannot
certainly conclude it from his Attributes, nor have we any certain revelation
that he does reveal our minds and thoughts unto them: for if we can certainly
conclude it from his Attributes, then God would not be God, did he not thus
reveal our supplications to the Saints departed. And Secondly, Then to deny
this Revelation, would be to sin against the light of nature; and then not only
Protestants, but the prevailing part of Roman Catholics, must sin against the
light of nature, by holding they obtain this knowledge, not by Revelation, but
from the Vision of that God who knows all things: but if by virtue of some
Revelation, we are assured that our petitions are revealed to the Saints, why
do they not produce it? Why does T. G. confess, that Austin and others of the
ancient Fathers, were uncertain what to determine in this case? Why do the
greater part of Roman Catholics deny what they have certain Revelation for? 3.
Where is this Revelation to be found? In Scripture? No, they confess that this
is wholly silent in this matter, and give us many Reasons why it was not
mentioned in holy Writ. Have we this Revelation from Tradition? Why then do the
prevailing part of Roman Catholics reject it? Since then we have no certainty
of what this practice does suppose, either from Revelation, or from the
beatifick Vision, we must be guilty of Idolatry, by our compliance with this
practice.

3. That this is the concurrent judgment of the Fathers, and that they judged
all supplications to invisible and absent Beings to attribute Gods Worship to
them, may be evinced from two Considerations: 1. That they looked upon it not
only as a Sacrifice, but as the best and greatest Sacrifice. By prayer we
honor God, says Clemens, Strom. l. 7. p. 717. A. Apol. c. 30. p. 27. B.
and send up to him,(...) the best and the most holy Sacrifice: I offer to him
a fatter and a better Sacrifice than he himself enjoined, viz. Prayer issuing
from a chaste body. an unspotted soul, and inspired by the Holy Ghost, so
Tertullian. And this is verily St. Austin's judgment, in that place which Dr.
Stillingfleet had cited to this effect, and all the tragedies and outeries of
T. G. against him upon this occasion, are the most false and impudent that ever
dropped from Pen: To make this clear, it will be needful only to lay before the
Reader Austin's words, viz. D^ C. D. l. 10. c. 19.
Qui autem putant haec visibilia Sacrificia Diis aliis congruere, illi vero
tanquam invisibili invisibilia, and majori majora, meliorique meliora, qualia
sunt p^ra mentis and bona voluntatis officia, profecto nesciunt haec ita esse
signa illorum, sicut verba signantia vel sonantia sunt rerum, quocirca sicut
orantes atque landantes ad cum dirigimus significantes voces cun res ipsas in
cord quas significamus offerimus, it a sacrificantes non alteri visibile
Sacrificium offerendum esse noverimus, quam illi, cujus invisibile Sacrificium
nos ipsi esse debemus: i.e. They that conceive these visible Sacrifices may
agree to lesser Gods, but that to him who is invisible, the greater and the
better God, invisible, greater and better Sacrifices do agree, viz. the duties
of a pure mind, and a good will; these persons know not that these (outward
Sacrifices) are the signs of them, ( viz. of the invisible, the greater and the
better Sacrifices) as our words spoken are the signs of things; as therefore
when we pray or we give thanks, we direct our speech to him, N. B. to whom we
offer the conceptions of the heart they signify; so when we sacrifice, we know
the outward Sacrifice ought to be offered unto him alone, to whom we ought to
yield our selves a Sacrifice in visible. Where 1. Does not St. Austin say, That
the invisible Sacrifices are greater and better than the outward Sacrifice; for
what is it illorum can refer to, besides majorum and meliorum? Does not he say,
The duties of a pure mind and a good will are to be deemed invisible and better
Sacrifices? And is not Prayer the duty of a pure mind and a good will? And must
he not then say, that Prayer is a greater and a better offering than any
outward Sacrifice? And 2. To put the matter beyond all dispute, Qui ergo
Divinitatem sibi arrogant Spiritus, non cujuslibet corporis fumo, sed
supplicantis animo delectantu^.
does not St. Austin add, That these inferior Spirits who usurp Divinity
require Sacrifices, not that they are delighted with the smoke and vapor, but
with the mind of him that prays? clearly concluding that to be the better and
the higher service. Does not he intimate that they usurp Divinity more by
requiring Prayer than Sacrifice? And lastly, Does not he affirm, That they who
offer outward Sacrifice to him alone, to whom their inward ought to be
appropriated, do also when (i.e. as often as) they pray or render thanks,
direct their words (not to a Saint or Angel but) to him to whom they offer the
things conceived in the heart? Which does not only prove, That Prayer was by
him likened to Sacrifice; and that mental Prayer which the Trent Council will
not permit us to deny to Saints, is an invisible and higher Worship than the
outward Sacrifice, but also that the Christians of his time did pray and render
thanks to God alone, for else it had been obvious to reply to the similitude
St. Austin gives us, That as we sometimes offer up our prayers and our
thanksgivings to the Saints departed, so might we offer up the outward
Sacrifice. And this will be sufficient to demonstrace, That T. G. in his whole
Answer to this place, has not one word of truth. For 1. p. 391.
It is a false suggestion, that Auctin's Argument runs thus, That external
Sacrifice being the highest expression of the highest part of Prayer. ought of
all others to be reserved, as most proper to God. For his Argument is clearly
this, To him only do belong the signs to whom belongs what is represented by
them, and therefore seeing we must offer up our selves to God alone, that
outward Sacrifice which is the sign of this oblation, must be appropriated to
him. That outward Sacrifice is the highest expression of the highest part of
Prayer, St. Austin does not say. 2. It is a false insinuation, that when St.
Austin does deny, that Sacrifice is due to any other but the highest God, he
does not speak of Sacrifice distinguished from Prayer, for he styles it
Sacrificium visibile; he does oppose it to the duties of a pure mind, as the
less unto the greater; he represents it as the sign of the invisible; and
therefore it is plain stupidity to think, he did not speak of the external
Sacrifice, as different from the internal, or distinguished from it. 3. It is
prodigiously false that Dr. St sides with the Dr. St. is forced to maintain an
Argument of the Heathens against Austin. T. G. p. 390. Do you not think the Dr.
^sed the utmost of his confidence to maintain for very good an Argument of the
Heathens confuted by St. Austin in this very place. The Heathen, says Dr. St.
argued very well, I deny it, says St. Austin. T. G. p. 390.
Heathens against Austin for what the Dr. pleads for; viz. That Prayer was to
be deemed an higher act of worship, than the outward Sacrifice, St. Austin does
expressly grant. 4 It is as false that Austin does confute what Dr. St.
approved, for Austin only does confute this Tenet, That outward Sacrifice might
be imparted to inferior Spirits. That which the Doctor does approve, is this,
That in all reason the duty of Prayer ought to be reserved as more proper to
God than any external Sacrifice. And lastly, it is false that Austin does deny
what Dr. St. asserted, for he abundantly confirms it; but it is no wonder that
persons given up by Gods just judgment to believe a lie, should be so prone to
tell them.

2. The Fathers, when they lay down the definition or description of Prayer,
they always do it with express reference to God, whence we may rationally
conclude, that they conceived this act of Worship did properly belong to him:
Prayer, says St. Clemens, is a conversing with God: (...). Bosil. Tom. 1.
Orat. in Jusiti. Martyr. p. 318.
Prayer is a request of some good thing which is made by pious men to God,
says Basil. whence elsewhere he asserts, that Prayer is not directed unto man,
but God. (...) Greg. Nyss. de Orat. Dom. or. 2. p. 724. D. Chrysostom. in Genesis
Hom. 30.
Prayer is a conference with God, says Nyssen, and a request of good things
which is offered with supplication unto God. Prayer is a Colloquy with God, and
every one that prays, discourses with God; so St. (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 4. p.
139.
Chrysostom: Hence on that expression of St. Paul, with all that call upon the
name of the Lord, he notes, (...), that St. Paul does not say, that call on
this or that, i.e. of any thing but Christ; and on these words, Do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, he comments thus; i.e. do all things, praying unto him
for help; and before all thy business, making thy supplication to him: or he
says thus; say and do all things (...). to. or according to God, and introduce
not Angels. But T. G. has some Arguments to prove that Saints and Angels have
the knowledge of our hearts and actions; viz.

It is said Luke 15.7. Object. T. G. p. 419.
There shall be joy in Heaven; and v. 10. There shall be joy before the Angels
of God, upon one sinner that does penance. And the Saints in Heaven no doubt
rejoice as much at the conversion of a sinner, as the Angels do.

Not only the Angels of God, Answ. White against Fisher. p. 315.
but holy men on earth rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, Luke 15.24. 2
Cor. 7.9. Likewise Parents, Ministers, and Friends rejoice, etc. And yet it
follows not from hence, that holy men on earth, which rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner, see the secrets of the heart, 1 Cor. 2.11. So likewise
Angels, which are ministering Spirits, Hebr. 1 14. may understand by the signs
and fruits of true repentance, the conversion of diverse sinners, and
consequently, they may rejoice, without intuitive knowledge of the heart.

2. Our Saviors words, Luke 15.10. are (...), the conclusion of a parable,
which must not be strained beyond the true scope. But according to the
exposition of sundry Anbr^s. l. 7. in Lucam. Hilar. in Matthew. 18 Isid^r. lib.
Alleg. Chrysol. Sermon. 168.
Fathers, and some learned Cojet. and Titus Bostrensis in locum.
Papists: The hundred sheep, v. 4. represent the whole body of the Elect,
consisting of Men and Angels: the ninety and nine sheep, not lost, were the
Angels, persisting in their prime integrity: The stray sheep, all mankind
sinning in Adam. To recover this lost sheep, the Son of God (that good
Shepherd, Jo. 10.11.) was incarnate, and by the gracious work of Redemption,
he laid the same on his shoulder. Now there is great joy in Heaven before the
celestial Angels, for this recovery and salvation of mankind. So that no more
can be inferred from this parable, but that the Court of Heaven, and in the
same the holy Angels rejoice, because of man's Redemption.

3. When it is said that there is joy in Heaven, we may expound it, as Dr.
Hammond does, not of the joy of Angels, but of God: and had we no reason to
confirm this sense, it is sufficient to destroy the force of what T. G. does
hence conclude from this citation, that it may fairly be expounded in that
sense which rendereth it impertinent to his design: but since it is not said to
be the joy of Angels, but that joy which is expressed (...) (i.e.) before the
holy Angels; this does sufficiently demonstrate that it is the joy of him,
before whose face they stand continually. Moreover, it is confessedly God, who
is compared to the Shepherd, and to the Woman seeking the lost Groat; And
therefore the similitude requires that the joy conceived, when the lost Sheep
and Groat is found, should be ascribed to him.

Whereas our Savor himself says, Object. T. G. ib.
That the just in the Resurrection shall be as the Angels in Heaven, Matthew.
22.30. (the equality as to knowledge, not depending upon the body) it follows
by the Analogy of Faith that our prayers and concerns are known also to the
Saints, now enjoying the same blissful Vision with the Angels.

Christ does not only say, Answ.
That the Spirits of just persons shall be like the Angels, but he expresses
wherein they shall be so, to wit, 1. In freedom from secular actions and
passions. 2. Inglorious Adoption, or real Possession of all the privileges of
the Sons of God We cannot therefore hence infer a parity of qualities and
operations betwixt the Angels and the Spirits of just men, but only a
similitude of state and privileges, as Verum haec authoritas (ut ingemie
fatear) solum aequat homines Angelis in hoc. quod nullum mutrimonti usum
ha^ebunt, si^^t nec Angeli; non tamen ibidem facit pare^ quantum ad facialem
visionem Det. Alph. de Castr. l. 3. c. Haer. v. Beat. v. Jansen. Harm. Evang.
c. 117.
Papists do themselves consess. 2. Christ does not In illa requie positus,
ceite securus expectas judicii diem, quando reeipias and co. ^us, quande
immuteris ut angelo aequaeris. Aust. in Ps 36. f 61.
say, The Spirits of just men are as the Angels now, but that at the
Resurrection they shall be so. White, p. 380.
Now I admire, what Papists can extort from hence for invocation of Saints; for
there is no connection between this Antecedent and Consequent, to wit, just men
at the Resurrection shall live as Angels, remote from all the necessities of a
worldly life, and they shall be as the Angels of God, free from material and
corporeal passions, and equal to the Angels in fruition of blessedness: Ergo,
The knowledge of our prayers which we make in this life, is not to be denied
unto glorious Saints, the fellows of Angels.

The smoke of the Incenses of the Prayers of the Saints ascended from the hand
of the Angel before God, Apoc 8.4. Ergo, Object. ibid.
Our prayers and actions are not unknown to the Angels.

1. This place of St. John proves not, Answ. White, p. 314.
either clearly or obscurely, That holy Angels hear the Prayers, or see the
actions and affections of men. For the Angel mentioned, is expounded by the
ancient Expositors, and by the Romanists themselves, not of an Angel by Nature,
but of an Angel by Office; and by some of them, of an Angel by Type. In locum.
Albertus in his Commentary. St. John, says, Another Angel, that is Christ,
who is the Angel of the Covenant, Esaias 9. Dionysius Carthusianus, Doctores
Cae^belici -- per Angelum isium intelligunt Christum, qui magni consilii
Angelus, and per incarnationis mysterium venit in mundum stetitqae ante Altar,
id est, in conspectu Ecclesia. Dionys. Carthus. in Apoc. 8.
Catholic Doctors, etc. by this Angel understand Christ, who is the Angel of
the great Counsel, and which by the mystery of his incarnation, came into the
world, and stood upon the Altar of the Cross. Blasius Nec vero recte. quidam e
recentioribus argumentantur Angelum istum Christum esse non posse, quod
Christus nunquam Angelus absolute dicitur: satis enim est ut ex consequentibus
facile intelligi potest Christum esse, quae nifi Christ alteri apt
accommodari non possunt, Cujus enim alterius est universae Ecclesiae incensa,
hoc est orationes in Thuribulo aurto tanta Majestatis specie patri offerre?
Cujus praeterquam Christi fuit de igne quo Thuribulum aureum eaat impletum,
partem in terras misisse, easque divini amoris igne inflammasse, etc. Apuaret
autem Christus sacerdotis personam gerens ut ejus pro nobis apud patrem
intercessio atque interpellatio monstretur. Vieg. in Apoc. 8. Sec. 2.
Viegas, a Jesuit, We may easily perceive, that this Angel is Christ, because
the thing here spoken of him, can agree to no other but Christ: for who but he,
can with so great Majesty offer up to God the incense, that is, the Prayers of
the Universal Church? who besides him, is able out of the perfuming pann, to
send down into the Earth the fiery Coals of Divine Charity, and to inflame
People with the burning Graces of the holy Spirit? With these agree Ambros.
super Apoc. Vis. 3. Cap. 8.
Ambrose, Primas. in Apoc. 8. Biblioth. Sanct. Colon. to. 9. p. 2.
Primasius, Ansbert. in Apoc. 8. Bibl. Sanct. Col. to. 9. p. 393.
Authertus, Bed. 5. super Apoc. lib. 2.
Beda, Haimo, in Apoc. 8.
Haimo, Hugo Card.
Hugo Cardinalis, and the Glosses Glossae totum legunt hoc de Christ.
. But if it were granted, that this Angel were a created, or ministering Spirit,
it cannot be proved that Angels understand the secret cogitations of man's heart
any farther then the same are manifested by signs, neither is it consequent,
that people ought to pray unto them, for Priests offer up the Prayers of the
Church to God, and yet no man does therefore invocate Priests.

It is recorded of the Saints enjoying the same blissfull vision with the
Angels, Object. ibid.
that they had golden Vials full of odours, which are the Prayers of Saints,
that is, of the faithful upon earth.

1. Answ.
The Reverend Dr. Hammond, and many other Expositors, Ancient and Modern, tell
us that the four and twenty Elders are not the Members of the Church
triumphant. as T. G. without proof asserts; but the Bishops and the Elders of
the Church militant. whose office it is to present the Prayers and Praises of
the Church to God. Here it is more plainly declared, says Beda, that the
Beasts and the Elders are the Church, redeemed by the blood of Christ, and
gathered from the Nations; also he shows in what Heaven they are, saying,
they shall reign upon earth. So Ambrose on the Apcalyps, and Haimo.

2. Vossius will tell you, That here is nothing intended, but Eucharistal
Prayers not Petitory; and that the four and twenty Elders only intimate, that
the whole Family of Christians in Earth and Heaven, did render continual
Doxologies to God for the Redemption of the world by his Son.

The Psalmist says, I will sing unto thee in the sight or presence of the
Angels, Psalm. 137.2. Object. p. 418.
The Angel of the Lord said, O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy
on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou have had
Indignation these threescore and ten years. And Michael is a great Prince which
stands for the Children of Gods people: Ergo, The Angels know the secrets of
the heart, and are acquainted with the Prayers that men in any place put up
unto them.

To these Objections I answer Ha, Ha, He: Answ. Valentianus.
Fieri ne potest ut homo qui sic ratiocinatur homo sit. The Psalmist also
says, I will pay my vows in the presence of thy people: Ergo, All Gods people
knew the secrets of the heart, etc. The Phanatick says, How long Lord will thou not remember, and have mercy upon the Godly Party, who have been under
persecution fourteen years: Ergo, The Phanaticks know the secrets of the heart,
etc. And blessed be God, King Charles the Second is a great Prince, who
stands for his People against the Whore of Babylon. He therefore knows the
Prayers and necessities of all his People, he is acquainted with the secrets of
the heart, and we may put up mental Prayers unto him. If T. G. have an estate
worth begging, he may well fear that his performance here, and P. 222, 223.
will rob him of it.

CHAP. VII.
The Contents.
The Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome, touching the invocation of
the Saints departed, delivered from their own Catechism and Liturgies, and the
decree of the Trent Council. Sect. 1. the Question stated in seven Particulars.
Sect. 2. The Idolatry of this practice proved; 1. Because it does ascribe unto
them the knowledge of the heart and of our confessions. 2. Because Prayer to an
absent Being is the oblation of that Worship to it, which is proper to God. And
so are Vows and Hymns. Sect. 3.3. Because the Apostles gave us no Precept or
Example so to do. Sect. 4. The sequel of this Argument is confirmed, and the
Objections answered. Sect. 5. And the Argument from Miracles confuted. Sect. 6.

HAving laid down these Propositions; let us now view the Doctrine and Practice
of the Church of Rome, which the Trent Council has delivered in these words:
viz. Mandat Sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis and clerieis docendi munuscuramque
sustinentibus, ut -- fideles diligenter instruant docentes eos -- Bonum atque
utile esse suppliciter eos invocare, -- ad eorum orationes opem auxiliumque
confugere. Illos vero qui negant Sanctos, aeterna felicitate in calo fruentes,
invocandos esse; aut qui asserunt -- eorum, ut pro nobis singulis orent,
invocationem esse Idololatricam; vel pugnare cum verbo Dei, adversi ique honori
unius Mediatoris Dei and Hominis Jesu Christi, vel stultum esse in coele
regantibus voce vel mente suppli^are, impie sentire -- St quis autem his
Decretis contraria docuerit aut senserit Anath ma sit. Sess. 25. c. 1.
That it is good and profitable, humbly to invoke the Saints, and fly unto
their prayers and help? and that whosoever does deny, that Saints, who do enjoy
eternal happiness in heaven, ought to be invoked, or do assert that to entreat
them to pray for any single person is Idolatry, or is repugnant to the word of
God, or opposite to the honor of Jesus Christ our only Mediator; or that it is
a foolish thing to pray unto them either with vocal, or with mental prayer,
does impiously think. This they command, all Pastors to teach to all their
faitful people; and they pronounce Anathema on any person that shall teach or
think the contrary. The Roman Catechism informs us, That Jure autem Sancts Dei
Ecclesia huic Gratiarum actioni, preces etiam and implorationem Sanct ssimas
Dei Matris adjurixit, qud pie atque suppliciter, ad eam confugeremus, ut nobis
peccatoribus sud Intermissione conciliaret Deum, bonaque tum ad hanc, tum ad
aeternam vitam necessaria impetraret. Ergo nos exules filii Evae, qui hanc
lachrymarum vallem incolimus. assidne misericordiae matrem, ac fidelis populi
advocatam invocare debemus, ut oret pro nobis peccatoribus, ab edque hac prece
opem and auxilium implerare; cujus and praestantissimu merita apud Deum esse,
and summam voluntatem juvandi humanum Genus, nemo, nisi impid and nefarie,
dubitare potest. Catech. Romans Part. 4. c. 5. Sect. 8. p. 584.
the Holy Church of God does teach us piously and humbly to fly unto the Mother
of God, and to entreat her by her intercession to reconcile God to us sinners,
and to obtain those good things for us which are necessary both for this
present life, and that which is eternal. Wherefore we exiled sons of Eve, who
live in this vale of tears, continually ought to entreat this Mother of Mercy,
and Advocate of faithful People, that she would pray for us sinners, and by
this prayer to implore her help. Agreeable to this Doctrine are many Forms of
Prayer recorded in the Ancient Missals and Breviaries of the Church of Rome,
and in those likewise which have been published, and corrected by the Decree
and order of the Council held at Trent. For to St. Peter they pray thus:

Beat Pastor Petre, Erov. Rom
clemens accipe
Voces precantum, criminumque vinoula
Verbo resolve, cui potestas tradita
Aperire terris Coelum, apertum claudore.
Peter, blessed Shepherd, graciously
Receive our Prayers, our bands of sin unty
By thy sole word, to whom the power is given
To open wide, and shut the Gate of Heaven.
To all the Apostles thus: Communt Apost. p. ^.


Vos sacli justi judices
Et vera mundi lumina,
Votis precamur cordium
Audite preces supplicum.
Qui Coelum VERBO clauditis,
Serasque ejus Solvitis,
Nos a peccatis omnibus
Solvite JVSSV quesumus.
Quorum praecepto subditur
Salus and languor omnium,
Sanate aegros moribus,
Nos reddentes Virtutibus.
You that are Judges of the World,
And its true lights that brightly shine,
With heartiest wishes we entreat
Out humble supplications hear.
Ye that do shut Heavens Temple Gates,
And by your word unlock the same,
Our guilty souls from punishment
Release, we pray, by your command.
For in an instant your commands
Sickness and health do both perceive.
Heal therefore our diseased minds;
And every Grace in us increase.
-- Virgo dulcedine plena
In te sperantes audi, Miss. de Sanct^ Genouefa f. 12.
miserando precantes.
Dele Peccamen: Vexatis praebe juvamen:
Omnibus and moestis solamen porrige semper.
To Genouefa thus:
Hear us that pray, blessed Genouefe,
And pity those who hope in thee.
Blot out our sins. and send relief
And comfort in sad misery.
Cerne tua n familiam, Miss. de Sancto Sebast. f. 13.
quae orat flexis genibus,
Serva a peste patrian istam, and a malis omnibus
Audi famulos rogantes, o Martyr Sebastiane;
Serva corpus, sana mentes hujus plebis Christianae:
Ne incurramus immane Baratrum confusionis,
Dona vespere and mane genitum compunctionis.
To Saint Sebastian.
Behold thy family which prays with bended knee.
Preserve this Country from the plague, let it no evil see.
Hear the desires of thy folk, Martyr Sebastian
Preserve the bodies, heal the minds of people Christian,
That we the horrid Gulf may fly of sad confusion,
At night and morning let us sigh with deep ^ compunction.
Ista per te gens sit tuta
Et ne noceat acuta
Febris hac in patria; Miss. Rom, Antiq.

Ex quo nostra spes est tota
In te Martyr, nunc remota
Sit pestis mortifera.
May we from this sharp fevers rage
Safe and unhurt hereafter be.
Its deadly influence assuage,
Since all our hopes are placed in thee.
Tu nostrum columen, tu decus inclytum, Brev. Romans Jan. 30.

Nostrarum obsequium respice mentium;
Romae libens vota excipe, quae pio
Te ritu canit and colit.
To St. Martina.
O thou our stay and chiefest ornament,
Regard the ready service of our minds,
Rome's vows receive; which in devotest sort
Does praise and worship thee.
Promove nostras Domino querelas
Cast aque vota. Prev. Rom Antiq. Mart. 20.

Scis quot hic saevis agitemur undis,
Triste quos mundi mare defatigat,
Scis quot adnectat Satanas caroque
Praelia nobis.
To Joachim.
See our chaste vows we make to God, be paid.
And all our Prayers promote, when we complain
Tossed in this Sea with many a cruel wave,
Thou know we weak and weather beaten are.
Thou know what combats we'are like to have
Which flesh and Satan, our sworn foes, prepare.
Sis pro nobis advocata, Proprium Fest. Ordinis Minorum, f. 12.
causam nostrae
Paupertatis coram Deo sustine,
Et veniam de peccatis servis tuis obtine.
To the Blessed Virgin.
Be thou our Advocate with God, and plead
Our cause with him in thy poor peoples stead,
Obtain that pardon of our sins we need.
Quicunque in alta syderum
Regnatis Aula Principes, Brev. R.

Favete votis supplicum
Qui dona Coeli flagitant.
To all Saints.
All ye that with the eternal King
As Princes reign above the Stars,
Favor the Prayers of Suppliants.
2. They do not only pray unto them, but they give laud and honor to them: And
also do entreat them to hear and to receive their Praises.

Jacobe vindex Hostium
Huc, Brev. R. in Festo S. Jacobi.
Coeli ab altis sedibus,
Converte dexter lumina,
Audiqu^ laete debitas
Grates tibi quas solvimus.
To St. James they speak thus:
The praises due that we do pay
To thee, hear joyfully this day.
Ave salus hominum. Miss Prop rtum Fest. p. 35. B. Ed. A^tutep. 1577.
Virgo decus virginum,
Te decet, post Dominum, laus and honor.
To the blessed Virgin.
Hail, oh thou happiness of Man
And Virgin, Flower of Virgin race.
All laud and honor be to God,
And to thee in the second place.
But of this no man can be ignorant, there being nothing more common in their
Books and mouths, than Laus Deo and Beatae Virgini.

3. They also do confess their sins unto them. In the Reformed Roman Missal we
have these words:

Confiteer D^^ omnipotenti, Beatae Mariae s^mper Virgini, Beato Michaeli
Archangelo, Beato Joanni Baptistae, Sanctis Apostolis Petro and Paulo, ominibus
Sanctis and v^bis F^atres, qu^^^ peccavi nimis cogicatione v rbo and opere. --
Ideo precor Beatam Mariam semper Virginem, Beatum Michaelem Archangelum, Beatum
Joannem Baptistam, Sanctos Apostelos Petrum and Paulum, omnes Sanctes and vos
Fratres crareprome ad Dominum Deum n sirum. Ordinarium Missae. p. 217. Ed.
Antuerp. F. 1605.
I confess to God Almighty, and to the ever Blessed Virgin, to Blessed Michael
Archangel, to Blessed John Baptist, to the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, to all
the Saints, and to you Brethren, that I have sinned in thought, word and deed:
And therefore I entreat the Blessed Virgin, the Archangel Michael, St. John the
Baptist, St. Peter and St. Paul, and all the Saints, and you my Brethren, to
pray for me to our Lord God.

This is the doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome, and it contains these
seven particulars.

1. That it is good and profitable for every faithful man, and exiled Son of
Eve, to pray unto the Blessed Virgin, and the Saints departed.

2. That it is good and profitable thus to intercede not only for the good and
welfare of the Church in general, but for every single person.

3. August. Ser. 37. de Sanctis. Ser. 3. de pluribus Mart. In Com. plurium
Mart. extra tempus Pasch. Lect. 4.
Whereas the ancient Church spoke thus, As often as we celebrate the
solemnities of holy Martyrs, let us so expect by their intercession to obtain
from the Lord temporal benefits, that by imitating the Martyrs themselves, we
may deserve to receive eternal, (which words are still retained in the Roman
Breviary) we are now taught to pray unto them, for all the blessings necessary
to eternal life; nay we are told that Gunde matter miserorum quia pater
saeculorum dabit te colentibus Congruentem h^c mercedem, and faelicem
polisedem, Regnis in caelestibus. Prosa de Beata Maria f. 30. apud Missale Romans
Ed.A^tuerp. 1577.
God will give eternal life to those that do adore the Blessed Virgin.

4. It is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that Saints departed may, and
should be invocated, as well by mental, as by vocal Prayer. This was decreed at
Trent; this Pastors are enjoined to teach their People; and lastly, this we
have confirmed by their practice in these words, With the desires of our hearts
we pray unto you, regard the ready service of our minds.

5. These Practices and these Petitions are many of them built upon this
supposition, that the Blessed Saints do hear our prayers, and are acquainted
with our hopes, and with the praises which we offer to them; and consequently
the Church of Rome, in whose solemnities these prayers are used, must be deemed
to ascribe this knowledge to them. For what more foolish and absurd than
constantly to call upon them to bear, behold, and to receive, to regard,
favor, and promote our prayers; when we complain, to pity, and consider them
that pray, to be their Advocates, and plead their causes, if these addresses be
not understood by those Blessed Spirits to whom they are particularly directed?
Who knows not that to be our Advocate, is to commend our cause to God, and to
entreat that our desires may be granted? And who knows not that our cause
cannot be thus commended, or our disires represented, till they first be
understood? Moreover, seeing they do request these Blessed Spirits to receive
their vows, and to take care that they be paid to God, to hear and to receive
their praises; seeing they do consess their sins unto them, and therefore do
entreat them to intercede with God in their behalf; seeing they do endeavor to
move them to commiserate their state, by saying, that they place their hopes
and only confidence upon their intercession, they mast acknowledge that these
Blessed Spirits are acquainted with their confessions and their vows, their
hopes and praises: and therefore albeit this consequence should be denied. T.
G. p.
We pray unto the Saints departed, therefore they do hear us, yet this can
never be denied, We pray unto them to hear, and to receive our prayers and
praises, vows and confessions, and therefore we believe they do.

6. Hence it is manifest, that Papists do not only pray unto them, to intercede
with God for blessings, but do desire that the Blessed Spirits would themselves
confer them. Thus they entreat St. Peter by the power given to him, to unty the
bonds of their iniquity; and the Apostles to absolve them from their sins by
their command; and to their Guardian Angel they speak thus, Take hold of sword
and buckler, and rise up to help me, say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. And
therefore that they only do entreat them to pray for and with us, is a great
untruth.

7. Seeing the Church of Rome allows of mental Prayers addressed to the Saints;
seeing their Lyturgy speak thus, With the desires of our hearts we pray unto
you, receive the ready service of our minds; seeing they do instruct us in all
places, and upon all occasions, to fly unto their help and succor; seeing they
do ascribe unto them the knowledge not only of their vows and praises, but of
their inward hopes, they consequently do ascribe unto them the knowledge of the
heart, and the internal motions of every supplicant, as far as these petitions
and other actions do require it. This is that Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
which we think justly charged with Idolatry.

For 1. To ascribe unto the Saints departed by way of worship, that excellency
which is proper to God, is Idolatry; but to ascribe unto them by an act of
worship, the knowledge of the hearts of them that pray unto them, is to ascribe
unto them that excellency which is proper to God, by Propos. 2. Ergo.

2. Prayer offered and put up in any time, or place, to an invisible and
incorporeal Being, is the oblation of that worship to it which is due to God,
by Prop. 4. Corol. 3. but this devotion of the Roman Church, is prayer offered
up in any time, or place, to an invisible and incorporeal Being, and therefore
must be the oblation of that worship which is due to God; and being offered to
those Blessed Spirits which are confessedly Creatures, it must be the oblation
of that worship which is due to God unto the Creature, which we have proved to
be Idolatry.

3. To vow to Saints departed, is to ascribe unto them the honor due to the
Creator, by Prop 4. Corol. 2. but Papist vow unto the Saints departed,
therefore they do ascribe unto them the honor due to the Creator. The Answer
Bellarmine returns unto the Major of this Argument, is this, That to vow, in
sign of gratitude to the first and chiefest Good, and in recognition of a
benefit received from him as the first Author of it, is the worship due to God;
but we may vow to Saints, in sign of gratitude to them, considered as Mediators
and Intercessors, by whom we do receive Gods blessings. But this distinction
has no foundation to depend upon; and with like reason we may distinguish thus
of Sacrifice, (and of whatever else is proper to God) and say, That to offer
Sacrifice to any thing, under the notion of the first and chiefest Good, is to
ascribe unto it the worship due to God alone; but notwithstanding we may offer
Sacrifice to Saints, in sign of gratitude to them, considered as Mediators and
Intercessors, by whom we do obtain Gods blessings. Dicendu n^quod vetum s^lt
^e^s^, sed promiss^^ p^^si etiam f^cri homini -- and per hunc medum
intelli^^^dum est ^v^^^n, qu^ quis v ^ t aliquid Sanctis vel Prael^r^is, ut
ips^ promissio facta Sanctis vel Praelatis cadat sub vo^^ (...) ria^^er, in
quintum scilicit home v^vet Peo^ se impleturum quid Sanctis vel Praelatis
promi^tit. Aquin. 2a 2ae. qu. 88. Art. 5.
Aquinas does distinguish thus, That in a vow we have two things, 1. The matter
of it, and that is the promise. 2. The form or essence, viz. the direction of
that promise to God: the matter of the vow, says he, i.e. the promise we
indeed make to Saints, and only vow to God, we will be faithful to this promise
which we make to them. This Answer Bellarmine rejects as being false, and
contradictory to what they practice: For, says he, Vota quae faunc Sanctis,
termin^niu, etiam ad ips^^ Sanct^s, ita^ w^revera ipsis v^ta fiant. L. 3. de
cultu Sanctorum, c. 9.
The Vows we make to Saints, are terminated on the Saints, so that we really do
vow unto them. And again, Vo inomen est general, quad convent^ D^^. and Sancta,
alia^^ name di core audent, v^e^ Deo and B^^^a^ Maria, and ^iam si^ (...) v^
Beata Mariae. Ibid.
The name of Vow is general, and agrees both to God and Saints, for otherwise
men would not dare to say, I vow to God and to the Blessed Virgin, and simply I
vow unto the Blessed Virgin. And certainly no reason can be given, why I vow to
God should be a formal Vow, and I Vow unto the Blessed Virgin should not be so.
3. They by this promise do ascribe unto the Saints the knowledge of our hearts,
and of our promises, whence they desire them to hear, and to receive their
vows, and so they do ascribe unto them Gods uncommunicated excellency.

4. To put up Hymns unto the blessed Angels, and the Saints deceased, is to be
guilty of Idolatry. But Papists put up Hymns unto the Blessed Angels and the
Saints departed, Ergo, The minor is apparent both from the Roman Missal and the
Breviary, where we find many Hymns directed to those Blessed Spirits; the major
may be thus confirmed. To pay that honor to these Blessed Spirits, which is due
to God alone, is to be guilty of Idolatry. To offer Hymns unto them, is to pay
that honor to these Blessed Spirits, which is due to God alone: Ergo. The major
is apparent from Chap. 6. Prop. 1. The minor I prove thus: To pay that honor to
these Blessed Spirits, which Christians paid to God alone, is to pay that honor
to them, which alone is due to God (for why should the whole Church of Christ,
which, if we may believe the Romanist, received so great advantage by their
addresses to these Blessed Spirits, refuse to pay unto them those Hymns and
Praises which were due unto them, and which on this account are offered to them
by the Church of Rome?) but to offer Hymns unto them, is to give that honor to
them which Christians paid to God alone. For Origin does in the name of all his
fellow Christians say, (...). Ita Origcontr. Cells. l 8. p. 422.
We offer up our Hymns only to God and his Son Jesus Christ.

5. To ascribe to all the Saints departed, and the holy Angels, the knowledge
of the confession of our sins, and upon that account to beg that they would
intercede for pardon of them, is to be guilty of Idolatry. Ord. Missae p. 217.
But the Romanist does in the Service of the Missal, ascribe to all the Blessed
Spirits the knowledge of the sins they do confess, and upon that account do beg
that they would intercede for pardon of them: Ergo. The major may be thus
confirmed; To ascribe to all these Blessed Spirits, now in Heaven, the
knowledge of those confessions which we make on Earth, and those petitions we
put up unto them, is to be guilty of Idolatry by Prop 2. Chap. 6. and Prop. 4.
Corol. 3. of the same Chapter: But to ascribe unto them the knowledge of the
confession of our sins, and upon that account to beg that they would intercede
for pardon of them, is to ascribe unto them the knowledge of those petitions
and confessions which we make on Earth: For this is to suppose, that albeit
these Blessed Spirits are as distant from us, as is Earth from Heaven, yet are
they as assuredly acquainted with our confessions and petitions, as if they had
been present with us, for who would move another to intercede in his behalf, by
reason of that confession he has made unto him, who did not think he knew both
his confessions and petitions?

6 This may be strongly argued from two considerations: (1.) That the Apostles
did not invoke the Saints departed, or give us any Precept or Example so to do.
(2.) That they abstained from this pra lise, because they did not think this
honor to be due to Saints departed, but to God alone. And first* Th^^ the
postles did not invoke the Saints departed, that they did put up no petitions
to the Patriarchs and Prophets, or to the B. Virgin, or to the Proto-Martyr
Stephen, or to James, the brother of our Lord, is evident from an impartial
view or all their Writings and Epistles; for those Epistles, Acts, and Gospels,
were written to promote the cause of Piety, and to instruct us in the means and
helps which they conceived most proper to preserve us from the assaults and
temptations of Sin, Satan, and the World, Joh. 20.31.
they do assure us, That these things were written that we might believe, and
believing might have life eternal:and so to give us those directions which were
chiefly instrumental to obtain that end; whence it does follow, that if they
had conceived this practice to be so highly instrumental to the promotion of
our eternal happiness, as does the Church of Rome, and the enjoyment of all
those spiritual favors which they expect and beg from those blessed Spirits,
they would not wholly have omitted what so highly did conduce to the obtaining
of those blessings. The Church of Rome commands her Bishops, Syn. Trid. Sess.
25.
Priests, and Curates, diligently to instruct the Flock committed to their
charge in this important duty; and to inform them, that it is very good and
profitable to fly unto their prayers for help and refuge; that we must daily
invocate the Blessed Virgin and that it is a wicked and most heinous crime to
doubt either her readiness to help, Cate^^. ^om. p. 584.
or that her merits are most prevailing for this end. Their practice does
inform us that there is not any blessing which our Souls can wish for, but
Christians should implore it from them: And if their Doctrine were according
unto Piety their practice must assuredly he so. For what more proper then to
implore their aid, who are so highly instrumental to preserve us from our most
fatal Enemies, and to procure all those blessings, which are needful both to
the Piety of this present life, and to the felicity of that which is to come.
St. Paul is in like manner large and copious in these instructions which he
gives unto the Pastors of the Church, and to the people committed to their
charge: He informs us that we must all pray, and for all men; that we must pray
with pure hands, and with hearts free from wrath and doubting: He tells us in
what language we should frame our prayers, viz. in such a language that all
that hear may understand. 1 Cor. 14.
and say Amen to our Petitions: in what posture both men and women ought to
pray: and that this duty ought to be performed in all places. And yet this
person who descends to these minute particulars, speaks not one word of this
important duty, so pious and profitable in it self, so necessary to preserve us
from the worst of Enemies, and to procure the greatest blessings: Nay, in all
the Scripture which was written to make us wise, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.
and thoroughly instructed unto all good works, we have not the least mention of
it: In those Epistles they frequently enjoin us to be instant in prayer, to
pray always, with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18.
and to watch thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints:
To continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving: To pray without
ceasing: Col. 4.2.1 These. 5.17. 1 Timothy 2.1. Phil. 4 6.
To put up supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for all
men To be careful for nothing, but in every thing with prayer and thanksgiving
to let our requests be made known unto God. And to go unto that God for wisdom,
who gives unto all men liberally, James 1.5.
and upbraideth not. They also do exhort us to pray for others that they may be
saved particularly, 5.16. 1 John 5.16.
for every brother, that has not sinned unto death. Now surely they, who do so
frequently discourse upon this subject, and upon the lesser circumstances of
this duty, would not have omitted to mention something of this so profitable
practice, if they had really believed it so to be, For wherefore do they give
us these directions, but to preserve us against the power of temptation, and
the assaults of Sin and Satan? Why do they frequently enjoin us to be instant
in the performance of this duty but that we may obtain those spiritual
blessings which without great danger to our souls we cannot want? If then the
Invocation of the Saints departed, and especially of the Virgin Mary, be so
highly profitable to these ends, why should these men, I say, be silent in this
matter, who being guided by the Holy Spirit, could not forget to do it, and
being as concerned for the Churches welfare, as the Trent Fathers, could not
for want of zeal unto Gods glory, or the good of Souls, neglect to charge all
Pastors diligently to instruct the people in this most profitable and pious
practice? Why should these men, who both by precept and example do instruct us
to request the prayers of living friends, be wanting both in precept and
example to move us to request the more prevailing prayers of Blessed Spirits?
they who command us when we are infirm to have recourse unto the prayers of
surviving Pastors, and to pray for one another, because the fervent
supplication of a righteous man avails much, why should they never send us to
the B. Virgin, to the Patriarchs and Prophets, to St. Stephen and St. James,
and other early Martyrs of the Church; whose Prayers, if we believe the Roman
Church, are highly meritorious, and far more prevailing. Nay, they had the
greater reason to inculcate this, because it was a novel practice, and never
used by the Jewish Church; and therefore they had need of an Express to move
and to encourage them to such devotions: Whereas it was the daily custom of all
Jews to put up their petitions to the God of Heaven. Since therefore neither
Paul, or Peter, or James, or John, Apostles, or Evangelists, have left us any
precept or example for this practice, we may be certain they did not approve it.

Moreover, to move us more effectually to the performance of this duty, they
tell us, That the eyes of God are still intent upon the just, 1 Pet. 3.12.
and his ear open to their prayer; that he is well acquainted with those inward
groans and wishes, Romans 8.26
which we do, or cannot utter; and is also able to perform exceedingly above
what we can ask or think; Ephesians. 3.20. Marth. 7.7.11. James 1.5.
that he is good and gracious to all that call upon him faithfully, that he
will fulfill the desires of them that fear him: Thus also do the Latins teach
concerning the Saints departed; they tell us in the words of Basil. (...), they
confidently ascribe unto them Summan juvandi voluntatem, the greatest readiness
to help, and the most prevailing merits: Catech. Romans p. 585.
and this they do most sutably to that presumption they have taken up; for all
these things are the more needful to be taught, because both Scripture seems to
say the contrary, affirming that Saints departed are ignorant of us, and our
concernments here on Earth: and denying that any besides God can know the
secrets of the heart. And secondly, the things themselves seem difficult to be
believed; viz. That Creatures at so infinite a distance can be acquainted with
what is done on carth; much more that they should at such a distance understand
the secret motions of the heart. Why is it then that the Apostles, who do so
often mind us of what we have less reason to suspect, viz. That God is able,
and very ready to perform what we desire, and that he hears the secret
groanings of our heart, should not inform us of what is so exceeding hard, and
yet so necessary to be believed of these Blessed Spirits? Whosoever diligently
reads their Writings, will find them praying earnestly to God for all those
blessings to be conferred upon the Christians, which Papists do request from
Saints and Angels, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ would give to the
Ephesians the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him, Ephesians.
1.17, 18.
the eyes of their Understanding being enlightened: That he would grant that
Christ might dwell in their hearts by faith, -- 3.17.18.19,
that they might be strengthened by his Spirit in the inner man, that they being
rooted and grounded in love, might be able to comprehend with all Saints what
is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; And to know the love of God
which passes knowledge, and be filled with all fullness of God. That the
Philippians love might abound more in knowledge, Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
and in all judgment, that they might approve things that are excellent, and be
sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ; Being filled with the
fruits of righteoussness, to the praise and glory of God. That the Colossians
might be filled with the knowledge of the will of God in all wisdom, Col. 1.9,
10, 11.
and spiritual understanding, that they might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
well pleasing, being fruitful in every good work and increasing in the knowledge
of God: Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power unto all
patience and long-suffering with joyfulness: 1 Thessalonians. 3.12, 13:
That the Thessalonians might increase in love, and have their hearts
established unblamable in holiness before God. -- 2.1.11.12.
That God would count them worthy of his calling, and fulfill all the good
pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power: That the God of
Peace would make the Hebrews perfect in every good work, to do his will, Heb.
13.20, 21. 1 Pet. 5.10.
working in them that which is well pleasing in his sight: That the God of
Grace would make them perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle them. These
Supplications were their daily exercise, and had they thought the Invocation of
the blessed Virgin, the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Proto-Martyr, and the
brother of our Lord, would have been needful and effectual to the attainment of
these things, for which they prayed so earnestly, why do they never once
address themselves unto them; why do they never pray as does the Church of
Rome, Brevarium and Missal.
that through the deprecation, intervention, patrocination, and intercession of
these persons, they may be worthy to obtain these blessings, why do they never
pray by the merits of these persons to be delivered from Deus qui beatum
Nicolaum P. -- tribue q^ae^un us ut ejus moritis and pracibus (...) Ochenna
incend is liberemus. Miss. in sest. san^. Nich. Dec. xi. Deus q. ^ beatu^.
Lodovicum -- ju, quaesamus meritis and intercessione Regis Regan. ^^su Christ^^
f^l ^ui facias nos esse can o^tes. in Fest. beat. Lud. Aug 25.
Hell, and made partakers of the joys of Heaven, as does the Roman Blashemy?
Why do they no declare with them, that they do In Fest.fa^ct. Agapiti Aug. 28.
place their confidence in the petitions of these prevailing Saints and blessed
Spirits? Why do they not ascribe their mercys and deliverances to the Accepta
tib^ si^, ^^mine, sacrat^e pleb^s oblatio pro inorum H^nors Sanct^um qu^r^m^^e
^^ritis per^^^^, de tribulatione cognoseit (...). Miss Dee ^^^p. (...) Ed.
Antwerp. 1605.
merits of these Saints, as they most insolently do? Assuredly on this account,
because they did not in their hearts approve the practice. Were blessed Paul
alive to see his Prophesy so punctually fulfilled: That in these later times
men should depart from the Faith, attending to erroneous Spirits, (...), and to
the Doctrine of worshipping departed Souls, how would he passionately cry out O
foolish Romanists who has bewitched you, etc. Lastly, St. Paul had such an
ardent zeal to the promotion of the Gospel, that he omits no help which he
conceives might give a blessing to his labors: He therefore passionately
entreats the Christians to whom his writings are directed, Romans 15.30, 31.-
That they would strive together with him in their prayers to God, that he
might be delivered from them, who did not believe in Judea, and that his
Service which he had for Jerusalem might be accepted of the Saints: and that he
might come unto them with joy -- and with them be refreshed: That they would
always, Ephesians. 6.18, 19.
and with all perseverance pray for him, that utterance might be given unto him
hat he might open his mouth boldly to make known the Mystery of the Gospel:
Col. 4.1, 2, 3.
That they would continue in prayer, that God would open unto him a door of
utterance to speak the mystery of Christ: for which he was in hands that he
might make it manifest, as he ought to speak. 1 These. 5.25.2-3.1.2.
Finally Brethren, says he, pray for us that the word of the Lord may have
free course, and be glorified even as it is with you: And that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for all men have not Faith. So
blessed Paul; and had he thought that his addresses to the Patriarchs, and
Prophets, the blessed Virgin, the Quire of Angels, or the Saints made perfect,
would have been more effectual to this end, would not his zeal have prompted
him to have put up one request unto them? or one Petition to his Guardian-Angel
to be defended from these unreasonable men? If all these circumstances be
considered it will amount to an invincible conviction of the falsehood of that
determination of the Church of Rome, Juxta Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae
usum a primaevis Christianae Religionis temporibus receptum. Council. Trid.
Sess. 25.
that this is the practice which was derived from the Apostles, and has been
still continued in the Church of Christ.

2. No other reason can be given why they did not practice, or commend the
Invocation of the blessed Spirits besides this, that they conceived this
worship to be that honor God had reserved for himself, and that they looked
upon it as a vain and fruitless practice, The knowledge of the heart, and of the
Prayers that are put up by All men, at all times, and in all places of the
Earth, being the knowledge proper to the God of Heaven, and not communicated to
the Saints deceased. This will appear more evident if we consider and refute
those shifts whereby they do endeavor to evade the force of this triumphant
Evidence. And

1. They tell us that Si Apostoli and Evangelistae docuissent sanctos
venerandos, arrogantiae iis datum fuisset, ac si post mortem gloriam illam
quaesivissent; noluit ergo Spiritus Sanctus expressis Scipturis docere
invocationem Sanctorum. Eckius in Enchirid. loc. Com. ex edit. Alex.
Weissenhorn. Alanus Copus Dial. 3. fol. 239.
had the Blessed Apostles taught this doctrine it might have been objected to
them, that they sought their own advancement, and honor by the propagation of
their Gospel, and proudly did endeavor to be worshipped by their Christian
followers.

Repl. 1. This answer gives us some show of reason why this Invocation was not
enjoined in Scripture; but it affords not the least shadow of a reason why it
was not practiced.

2. Either this Invocation was practiced by the Church in the Apostles time or
not; if not, Quem seu^per Ecclesia Catholica adhibuit. C^t. Romans p. 3 c. 2.
Sect. 8.
then the Trent Council, and the Roman Catechism, falsely do assert, that this
was the perpetual and Apostolic practice of the Church of Christ; if it was
practiced, then that practice must give rise unto the same Objection, viz. that
the Disciples of Christ had brought into the world this custom on purpose to
advance their honor, and to procure worship to themselves.

3. This doctrine had it been consistent with the Christian Faith ought more
especially to have been often preached to the Jews to reconcile them to that
Faith, by giving them assurance, that they might have recourse unto the prayers
of Father Abraham, and their beloved Moses, and that Noah, Job and Daniel,
Elijah, Samuel and all the blessed Patriarchs and Prophets, who were so
powerful with God on Earth, would upon their request be ready to procure for
them the greatest Temporal and Spiritual blessings, since therefore we have no
such Revelation in any of these Writings or Epistles, which are especially
directed to them, and were designed for their conversion and satisfaction; it
may be well concluded this was no doctrine of the Christian faith.

2. Some others do assert, That the Apostles did abstain from giving any
precept, or example of this Invocation, lest Heathens should conceive, that for
the multitude of Heathen Nondum erat tempus in ipsius fidei exordiis eam mundo
doctrinam divulgandi ne Gentiles arbitrarentur plures nos Deos colere. Alanus
Copus Dial. 3. f. 239. and Eckius ubi supra.
Deities they worshipped, the Christians only introduced a multitude of
Christian Gods. Repl.

1. This evasion is a mere conjecture, of which we have not the least hint in
any of the Ancient Fathers, or the Church Historians, which is sufficient to
crack the credit of it; for that such a change should happen in the worship of
the whole Church of Christ, without the notice or observation of any single
person, is incredible. Besides, this figment thwarts that declaration of St.
Paul, that he was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; and that profession,
that he withheld not from them any useful Doctrine: Act. 20.20
it thwarts that Doctrine, and Assertion of the Church of Rome, that this has
been the constant custom of the Church of God, including the Apostles time.
Besides, the reasons of abstaining from this practice, must continue as long as
there were Heathen^ to be converted to the Christian Faith, and so beyond the
time of Constantine. Now albeit it be a certain truth, that Christians till
after the days of Constantine abstained from this practice, yet cannot that
Assertion consist with the pretenses of the Church of Rome for Apostolical
Tradition, and derivation of these Doctrines, which they obtrude upon us from
the Apostles of our Lord. 4. Either these Primitive Professors were not well
advised, to let this fear of Scandal deter them from the publication of a
truth, so pious and profitable to the Church of Christ, or else the Roman
Doctors are not so cautious in their attempts to propagate the Gospel as they
ought to be, as not concealing from the 8. Dali. de cultu Latin. To. 1. l. 3.
cap. 25. p. 493.
Pagans, whom they endeavor to convert, this so suspicious practice of their
Church. In a word, if the Apostles and the Church of Christ which was converted
by, and flourished under them, had no such practice, certain it is we have no
reason now to do what they did never practice or command, for all instructions
we embrace as from them, must be what they did teach or practice; but if they
did admit this practice, then could not Jews and Heathens want the knowledge of
it, seeing the number of Apostates and hypocritical Professors was so great,
and there were many who took upon them the profession of the Christian Faith,
Call 2 4. Phil. 1.16
only to spy out what they practiced.

3. If it be said, they might abstain by reason of some precept, which forbad
this Invocation. I reply, that which Gods wisdom does forbid us to give unto
the noblest of his Creatures, he by so doing does declare that he reserves unto
himself, and when we act against his precept, we may be certain that he will
not reveal or manifest that supplication which he has forbidden; and therefore
they that tender to these Blessed Spirits this forbidden worship, must ascribe
unto them that knowledge which agrees to God alone, and that honor which he
will not give unto another, and so be guilty of Idolatry. To conclude, If this
Invocation were so beneficial to mankind, and was not derogatory to Gods
honor, it might be well presumed, that Christ and his Apostles would have been
careful to instruct us in it, for they neither wanted knowledge to perceive the
benefit, or love sufficient to engage them to acquaint us with it.

Lastly, P. 420.
Whereas T. G. objects, That it is certain by many and great Miracles wrought
by God, upon addresses made to the Saints, that those who call upon them are
heard, and obtain what they desire; and that therefore it cannot be unlawful or
Idololatrical to desire their intercession. Answ. This is an Argument in which
the Romanists much triumph; but it is only what their Brother Donatists had
urged long before, L. de unitate Ecc. contra Pet^liani Donatistae Epistolam.
and what St. Austin has admirably answered. And first, I say, It is but a
Translation of that Argument, which formerly was used by the Donatists, in
confirmation of their Schism; for thus St. Austin propounds their Objection:
Non dicat verum est qu^a hoc (...) dico, aut quia hoc dixit ille Collega meus
aut illi Collegae mei, aut illi Episcepi vel Clerici vel Laici nosiri, aut ideo
verum est quia illa and illa Mirabilia fecit Donatus, vel Pontius, velquilibet
alius, aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum orant and exaudiuntur,
aut quia illa and illa ibi contingunt, aut quia ille Frater noster, aut illa
Seror nostra tale visum vigilans vidit vel tale visun dormiens somniavit;
removeantur is^a vel figmenta mendacium hominum vel portenta fall icium
Spirituum; aut enim non sunt vera quae dicuntur, aut si Haereticorum aliqua
mira sunt facta, magis cavere debemus quod cum dixisset Dominus quesdum futuros
esse falleces qui nonnu^la signa faciendo etiam Electos si fieri posset
fallerent, adjecit vehementer commendans and dit, ecce praedixi vebis, unde and
Aposiclus admenens Spiritus autem manifes^e decet quia in novissimis temporibus
recedent quidam a fi^e intendentes Spiritubus seducteribus and Doctrinis
Daemen^^^um. Ibid. c. 16. p. 116. I. K.
Let him not say that therefore they are in the right, because that Pontius, or
Donatus, or any other, did such and such Miracles, or because men pray at the
memorials of our Martyrs, ( i e. the Martyrs of the Donatists) and they are
heard; and because such and such things do happen there; or because such a
Brother or a Sister watching there saw such a sight, or dreamed such a dream.
This is the Argument of T.G. and his Brother Donatists, and we Protestants
crave only leave to answer what St. Austin does, viz. (1.) That either the
things are not true which are spoken, or if some Miracles be wrought by
Heretics, we ought to be more careful; because our Lord Christ having said,
that there should come Deceivers, who should work such Miracles, Mat. 24.
as to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect; He adds, by way of
vehement commendation, this, Behold I have foretold you; whence the Apostle
admonishing us, says, 1 Timothy 4.
Now the Spirit manifestly teaches, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrinis Daemoniorum, i.
e. the Doctrine of worshipping the Spirits of dead men. Which Answer does
contain three things, (1.) That the truth of these relations may be well
suspected; and so also may the truth of what T. G. delivers, as from St. Basil,
Austin, and Theodoret: for, as I shall show hereafter, we have just reason to
suspect the falsehood and depravation of these passages which he has cited from
Austin and Theodoret, and that St. Basil does not say that any man was cured by
the Invocation of those XL. Martyrs, but only by praying with them, or by the
intercession which they make of their own accord, for those who frequent their
shrines. (2.) St. Austin has but two instances of any benefit received by
Prayers put up unto the Martyr, and before he mentions them, he does
ingenuously confess, Quando alibi aliisque narrantur non tanta ea commendat
autoritas, ut sine difficultate aut dubitatione credantur quamvis Christianis
fidelibus a fidelibus indicentur Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 22. c. 8. p. 209. C. 1.
That they are not backed with so good Authority, as that we should believe
them without doubt or difficulty. (3.) We have just reason to suspect the truth
of these relations, if we consider (1.) That St. Tom. 5. Hom. 88. p. 601. 602.
Chrysostom declares that Miracles were ceased in his time, and has a set
discourse on purpose to inform us (...), i.e. why Miracles then ceased: which
had they been so common in the Christian world, had been an idle Question, and
no small prejudice unto the Christian cause. Especially, these being the chief
Heads of what he answers, (1.) That though (...), p. 606.
or such miracles as were the objects of our Senses ceased, yet God did still
vouchsafe (...) his efficacious workings on the souls of Christians. p. 607.
And (2.) That Signs were not intended for Believers, but for Unbelievers, and
then immediately concludes (...), this therefore is the cause why Miracles are
now ceased. (2.) Because it was more ordinary in these times to pretend Dreams
and Visions, then to speak of any cures performed by prayers put up to Martyrs,
as you may see in Gregory Nyssens Homily upon the XL Martyrs; and in this
Chapter of St. Austin: And yet the Fathers do ingenuously confess, and were at
last convinced that they were delusions. Many, both Priests and Idiots, says
Synesius, have been found among us (...), Ep. 5.4. p. 190.
feigning some Dreams, which they call Revelations: Ei(...). Tom. 5. p. 256. l.
29. Ed. Savil.
The Dreams or Visions which have appeared in the shape of them that have
departed this life at this time, have deceived and corrupted many, there being
no such thing, says Chrysostom. And that of Aug. Consess. l. 10 c. 42.
Austin is very pertinent to this purpose; Whom should I find, that might
reconcile me to thee? Should I have gone unto the Angels with what Prayer? with
what Sacraments? many endeavoring to return unto thee, and being not able to
do it by themselves, as I hear, have tried these things, and have fallen into
the desire of curious Visions, and were accounted worthy of Illusions. The
second Answer is contained in the words of Austin, that God may permit some
wonders to be done by Heretics, and by Impostors, and has declared that he
will do so Quaecunque talia in Catholica fiunt ideo sunt ^^pr^banda quia in
Catholica fiunt, non ideo ipsi mani^estatur Cub ^^ca quia haec in ea fiunt --
utrum ipsi Eccsesium ten^an^, Non nisi Divinarum Scriptur^^um canonic^s libris
ostendant. Ibid. p. 117. A.
; this therefore, says he, is no confirmation of the truth, nor do these
Wonders manifest the Church is Catholic, wherein they are performed, but the
Holy Scriptures: Show us your Scriptures: Haec sunt causae nostrae documenta,
haec fundamenta, haec firmamenta. This answer will be sufficiently confirmed by
these words of Dr. Orig. Sacrae. lib. 2. cap. 10. ^. 6.
Stilling fleet: That after the true Doctrine is confirmed by Divine Miracles,
God may give the Devil power to work, if not real Miracles, yet such as men
cannot judge by the things themselves, whether they be so or no; and this for
trial whether we will forsake the true Doctrine confirmed by greater Miracles,
for the sake of such Doctrines as are concontrary thereto, and are confirmed by
false Prophets, by Signs and lying Wonders: Now in this case our Rule of trial
must not so much be the Miracles considered in themselves, whether real or no,
as the comparing them with the Miracles wrought in confirmation of that
Doctrine which is contrary to this, which these words tend to the proving of.
Therefore Gods people under the Law were to examine the drift and scope of the
Miracles; and if they were intended to bring them to Idolatry; whatever they
were, they are forbidden to hearken to them, as you may see most evidently
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. So now under the Gospel, the worship of the true God through
Jesus Christ, and by the Doctrine revealed by him is the Standard, whereby we
ought to judge of all pretenders unto Miracles: So that let the Miracles be
what they will, if they contradict that Doctrine, which Christ revealed to the
World, we are to look upon them only as trials of our Faith in Christ, to see
whether we love him with our whole hearts or no. And accordingly we look upon
these Miracles as trials whether we will forsake the Head Christ Jesus, and
give this worship of the Creator to the Creature, and the like; and are
sufficiently warded against the force of this assault by being told that
Antichrist must be ushered in with Signs and lying Wonders. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.


Secondly, What Austin says unto the Donatists, we also say unto the Church of
Rome, Show us your Scriptures for this Invocation; haec sunt causae nostrae
firmamenta -- The third Particular contained in this Answer is. That the Holy
Spirit has forewarned us that in the latter times this Doctrine of Damons
should prevail: which Doctrine both the ingenious Mr. Mede, and (...). adv.
Antidico marionitas. Haer. 78.. 23. A.
Epiphanius do well interpret to be the Doctrine of worshipping the Spirits of
dead Men, and by the pertinency of this Sense unto St. Austins present subject,
we have good reason to conjecture that he approved their Opinion.

St. Austins second Answer to this Objection is as follows; Porro si aliquis
in Hereticorum memoriis orans exauditur, non pro merito loci sed pro merito
desiderii sui recipit sive matum sive bonum -- nonne legimus ab ipso domino Deo
nonnullos exauditos in excelsis montium Judaeae: quae tamen excelsa ita
displicebant Deo, ut Reges qui ea non everterent cr^lparentur, and qui
everterent laudarentur; unde intelligitur magis valere pe^enti^ assectium ^u ^m
petitio^is locum. ib. p. 116. Col. 2. K. L
Moreover if any person praying in the memorials of Heretics be heard, it is
not for the merit of the place, but of his own desire that he receives any
good. Do we not read that God himself hearkened to many of those Jews who prayed
in the high places, although those places so displeased him, that he rebuked
those Kings that suffered them. Whence we may understand that the affection of
the Supplicant is more prevailing, then the place of Prayer. And accordingly we
say, That if any person praying to these Saints was heard, it was not for the
merit of this prayer considered as directed to the Saints, but for the
affection of his heart, and as it will not follow that it was lawful for the
Jew to pray in those high places, or for the Christian to pray in the memorials
of Heretics, because that they who prayed there were sometimes heard: So
neither does it follow that it is lawful to pray unto the Saints departed,
because of some few instances that they who have thus prayed, have received the
desired Blessing.

Thirdly, says St. Austin, De visis autem fallacibus legunt quae scri^ta sunt,
and quia ipse Satanas se transfigurat tanquam Angelum lucis, and quia multos
seduxerunt somnia sua. Audiant etiam quae narrant pagani de Templis, and Diis
suis mirabili^er vel facta, vel visa, and tamen dii Gentium Baemonia --
Exaudiuntur ergo multi and multis modis, non solum Christ^^ani Catholici, sed
and Pagant, and Judaei, and Haeretici variis error^lus, and supersti^ionibus
dediti, exaudiuntur autem vel ab spiritibus seductoribus, qui tamen nihil
faciunt nisi permit^antur Deo subli^iter a^que ineffabiliter judieante quid
cuique tribuendum sit, sive ab ipso Deo, vel ad poenam malitiae, vel ad
solatium miseriae, vel ad monitionem quaerendae salutis aeternae. ib f. B. Col.
2. L.M.
Let them hear what the Pagans tell of the Wonders done by their Gods, and at
their Temples; and yet the Gods of the Heathens are but Demons: and therefore
many, not only Catholics, but Pagans, Jews, and Heretics, may many ways be
heard, either by those seducing Spirits, which yet do nothing but with Gods
permission, or else by God himself, either for castigation of their wickedness,
or comfort of their misery, or in admonition of them to pursue eternal safety.
Which Answer also does suggest these things.

1. That the Argument is vain, because it will serve the Paegan, as well as it
well serve the Donatist or Roman Catholic; and proves as much their Invocation
of Demons to be lawful, as the invocation of the Saints departed, which is now
practiced in the Church of Rome. For, as Quibusdam signis and miraculis, and
oraculis fidem divinitatis operatur. Apol. c. 21.. 8.
Tertullian says, by Signs, and Miracles, and Oracles, they obtained to be
reputed Gods. (...). ^om. 6. p 375 l. 20.
They often by their skill have cured diseases, and restored to health those
that were sick; what should we partake therefore with them in their iniquity,
God forbid? So Chrysostom. (...). Eusebius. Praepar. Evang. l. 5. c. 2.
The wicked Demons, says Eusebius, counterfeited by working many Miracles,
the Souls of them that were deceased and thence they were thought worthy to be
celebrated with greater service. Frustra tantum arrogas Christo cum saepe alios
sciamus and scierimus Deos, and laborantibus plurimis dedisse medicinas, and
multorum hominum morbos valetudi^esque curasse. Arnobius l. 1. p. 28.
In vain, say they, you arrogate so much to Christ, for we have often known
that other Gods have given Medicines to, and healed the infirmities of many.
Moreover, these benefits they still pretended to receive by virtue of those
Supplications which they offered to them. (...). Apud Orig. l, 8. p. 407.
(...), p. 416.
How many, says Celsus, being troubled, that they had no children, have by
them enjoyed their wishes? How many, being maimed in their body's, have been
healed by them? Hence says Daut cautelam periculi, m^rb^s medelam, spem
afflictis, ope^^ m^seris, s^latium calamitatibus, laboribus levame^um. Minur.
p. 7.
Cecilius, they give us caution in dangers, and medicine in diseases, hope to
the afflicted, help to the miserable, comfort in calamities, ease from labors.

2. This Argument is vain, because it serves the Heretic as well as Catholic.
For what can be more glorious then what Philostorgius records of (...).
Philost. Hist. Eccl. l 2.. 8. p. 14.
Agapetus one of his fellow Heretics, That he wrought many miracles, he raised
the dead, and healed many that were sick, and converted many to the Christian
Faith. And of Theophilus, another of his brother Arrians, (...). Idem. l. 3. 4.
p. 27.
That his wonders were so great, and such convincing demonstrations of the
Christian Faith, as to constrain the obstinacy of the Jews, and Silence all
their contradictions. --

Lastly, Hence we may learn, that although Austin should have related some few
instances of persons healed by Supplications tendered to the Saints, we cannot
thence infer, as T. G. does, that by so doing he commends them, or does relate
them as patterns for our imitation.

CHAP. VIII.
The Contents. The Judgment of the Fathers proved to be the same with that of
Protestants, because they do assert that Prayer must be offered unto none but
God, and by no other Intercessor but our Savior Christ. Sect. 1. And this
Assertion they prove, 1. Because God only can be called good. 2. Because he
only can answer our Petitions, ibid. 2. They do affirm, That by addressing a
Petition to a Saint or Angel, we become guilty of distraction from God, and of
deserting our Lord Jesus Christ. Sect. 2. 3. That to pray unto a Creature, or
to that which is no God, is to worship it as God, or give that honor to it
which is due to God alone. Sect. 3. 4. They hence infer that Christ is God, and
that the Holy Ghost is God, because we put up our Petitions to them. Sect. 4.
5. Because the invocation of the inferior Heathen Demons was by the Fathers
censured as Idolatry. And there is no desparity betwixt the invocation of those
Demons, and that invocation of the blessed Martyrs which is now practiced in
the Church of Rome, sufficient to acquit the Papist from that Guilt, if it be
duly charged on the Heathens by reason of their Supplications tendered to
inferior Demons. Sect. 5. 6. The Fathers dispute against the Heathens with
such Arguments as perfectly destroy this practice, and confute this Doctrine.
Sect. 6. 7. Because the ancient Fathers prayed for all the Saints, without
exception of Martyrs or Apostles, or the blessed Virgin. 8. Because the Fathers
gave no Rules touching the Canonizing of the Saints departed. ibid.

TO what we have discoursed from the holy Scriptures, and from the Principles
of Reason, we shall now add the suffrage of those ancient Fathers who
flourished in the first and purest Ages of the Church. Who do not only say
expressly, that our Prayers should only be directed to God (asserting this
without those limitations and distinctions which are now used by the Church of
Rome) but also do it upon the very same enducements and motives which
Protestants are wont to use for confirmation of this truth. Moreover, in their
conflicts with the Arrians, and other Adversaries of the Church of Christ, they
use those very weapons wherewith we fight against the Church of Rome, and do
pronounce that Doctrine and Practice which that Church contends for, to be the
giving to the Creature what is due to God.

And first, the Fathers do assert that prayer must be offered unto none but
God, and by no other Intercessor but our Savior Christ. When Celsus had
pronounced that (...). l. 8. p. 394.
Heathen Demons did belong to God, and thence inferred, we should entreat
their favor. Origin replys two things. 1. That those Demons being wicked
Spirits could not belong to God. 2. That this advice of (...). Origin. contra
Cells. lib. 8. p. 395.
Celsus, to put up our Petitions to them, was to be utterly rejected, and by no
means allowed by Christians: Because, God only was to be made the object of our
prayer, nor were we to solicit any other than our great High Priest, to offer
and present them to the Father. And hence in two Catena's, both published by
the Doctors of the Church of Nicet. Caten. in Psalm. 5.
Rome, we have this free confession of an ancient Father (...), We Christians
pray to God alone. And upon this account, they tell us the Psalmist uttered
this expression, Attend unto the voice of my petition my King and my God: For
unto thee will I pray; because Ora^io enim so^ Deo ^ff^rtur. Aurea Catena in
50. Psalm. edit. Ven^t. Anno 1569. Page 53.
Petitions were to be offered unto God alone, according to that Question of St.
Austin Cui alteri praeter te clamabo? Aug. Confess. lib. 1. cap 5.
to whom else shall I cry but unto thee? and that expression of L. de Creatione.
Dracontius esse nihil prorsus se praeter ubique rogandum: that nothing besides
God should be invoked. And this assert on they do not barely offer, but also
they confirm it by many pregnant Arguments; as first, He only must be prayed
unto, because, he only can be called Good: (...). Clem. Alexand. Strom. l. 7.
p. 721.
since God alone is good (says Clemens) it is reasonable we should solicit
him alone: for the Donation and Continuance of good things. (2.) because God
only is present in all places, and so at hand to hear, and help us wherever we
address our prayers to him. It is an absurdity (says (...). Orig. contra
Celsum lib. 5. page 239.
Origin) having that God with us, and nigh at hand, who fills Heaven and
Earth, to go about to pray to that which is not omnipresent. This I confess is
spoken to demonstrate, that intercessions were not to be made unto the Sun and
Moon and Stars: but then it must be noted that this Father held both Sun and
Moon and Stars to be intelligible Creatures, and in this very place asserts,
that (...). Id page 238.
they do offer up their Prayer to God, and from this very Argument concludes,
we must not pray to them, because they pray to him. Whence it will follow that
he conceived them as fit and able to be our Intercessors as the Saints
departed, and that it was absurd to pray to any, who themselves properly did
pray for us. And (2.) he adds, (...), etc. Id ib.
if any Christian be not sufficient immediately to direct his Prayers to God,
let him address them to the Word of God; making no mention of an address to be
preferred either to Saint, or Angel, or to the B. Virgin in this Case. (3.) He
adds that put the (...). Id. p. 239.
Case that Sun, Moon, and Stars were heavenly Angels, and Messengers of God,
yet were they not to be adored for this, but he whose Messengers and Angels
they were. Where by the way observe, that he insensibly slides from (...) to
pray, to (...) which is to adore. Whence we may certainly conclude, that in the
Judgment of this Father, it was the same to pray to any person, and to adore
that person, and that nothing may be invocated, which may not be adored.
(Lastly) it is evident his reason will hold good as well against addresses made
to Saints, as to the Sun and Moon, they being neither of them omnipresent. (3.)
They say he only must be prayed unto, who sees and hears every where? Let us
consider (says De Orat. c. 1. Sect. 8.
Tertullian) the Heavenly Wisdom of our Lord in his Injunction to pray in
secret, whereby he both requires the Faith of Man, confiding that God
omnipotent both hears and sees under our Roofs, and in our secret Places, and
also that our Faith be modest, so that we offer our Religion unto him alone,
whom we are confident does see and hear us every where. And Chrysostom, upon
the same Expression, finds fault with those that pray aloud, and bids us
Imitate the Hymns and Melodies of holy Angels, who pray with us, although we
do not hear them: for, says he, (...). Chrysostom. Tom. 2. Homil. in Matt. 19.
page 137.
thou do not pray to Man, but to God omnipresent, to him that hears before
thou speak, to him that understands, what the Mind does not utter.

(4.) Because he only can Answer our Petitions, and from him only can we obtain
what we desire. Precantes sumus proomnibus Imperatoribus vitam illis prolixam,
imperium securum, domun tutam, populum probum, orbem quietum, quaecunque
hominis and Caesaris vota sunt. Haec ab alio orare non possum, quam a quo me
scio consequnturum, quoniam and ipse est, qui SOLVS praestat, and ego sum cui
impetrare debetur, famulus ejus qui eum Solum observo. Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
Sect. 2, 3.
We beg for all our Emperors long life, safe Empire, valiant Armies, a faithful
Senate, an honest People, and a quiet World, and whatsoever any man or Emperor
could wish. So Tertullian: And then he adds, These things I may not pray for
from any other but from him of whom I know I shall obtain them: because, both
it is he who alone is able to give, and I am be to whom it appertains to
obtain that which is requested, being his servant who observe him alone. From
all which sayings it is evident these ancient Fathers did not only think as we
now do, that all our Intercessions should be made to God, but also that they
did it for these very Reasons we alledg viz. that he alone is omnipresent, that
he alone discerns the secrets of the Heart, that he alone is able to confer the
Blessings which we want, and pray for.

(2) The Fathers do affirm, that by addressing a petition to a Martyr, Saint,
or Angel, we become guilty of distraction from God, and of deserting our Lord
Jesus Christ. (...). Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 15. page 135.
We cannot be induced, says the Church of Smyrna, to forsake Christ, or
worship any other Person; where first it well deserves to be noted, that what
is in the Greek (...) is in the ancient Interpreter of the Acts of Polycarp,
Alteri cuiquam Orationis precem impendere (we cannot pray to any other. Act.
Polyc. in Append. Ignat. Usser. p. 27.
) And what the Jews objected; ( that if the Christians could obtain the Martyrs
body (...), deserting Christ they would begin to worship him) is by the
Metaphrast thus rendered, huic fundenda esset oration singulorum, they would all
pray unto him. Now seeing this Translation was of such credit in the Western
Church, that it was read in their assemblies; it is most certain that Church
did anciently conceive (1.) that the Church of Smyrna did deny that any genuine
Christian would pray to any Saint departed. (2.) That to put up a petition to a
Martyr was to renounce their Savior. And (3.) that to pray to and afford
religious worship to a Martyr was the same. And (4.) that we must only put up
our petitions to the Son of God; because, he only must be worshipped. Secondly,
observe the reason of this assertion of the Church of Smyrna; We cannot worship
any other, delivered in these words; For him being the Son of God we worship,
but the Martyrs, as the Disciples and followers of the Lord, we highly love for
their exceeding great affection to their own King and Master. The Church of
Rome could have informed them of a better Reason why they should affect them,
(viz.) as being Intercessors, and Mediators for, and Patrons of the Christian
Church, and the Procurers of all spiritual Blessings for them. She could have
told them it was ignorantly done to comprehend that Service which was due to
the deceased Martyrs in this one expression, We love them worthily: For if the
Veneration and Worship of the Saints departed, nay, the Worship of their very
Ashes, has been the constant Custom of the whole Church of God; and if the
Invocation of them be that, which Holy Scripture teaches, and the Apostles
have delivered, and which the Church of God has always practiced, as is
delivered in the * Catechism of the Church of Rome, Part. 3. c. 2. Sect. 8.
it may be well admired that the Church of Smyrna which daily practiced (say
they) this veneration and invocation of the holy Martyrs, should, without
distinction, appropriate all worship and adoration to the Son of God, in
opposition to the Martyrs, and comprehend the Service they performed to the
blessed Martyrs in a word which does not in the least import the Veneration
which they daily practiced.

(2.) Observe the Reason which is given by the Church of Smyrna why they could
not worship any other, viz. Because they worshipped the Son of God: if any
worship had been then paid to Martyrs, or any other Saints departed, by the
Church of Christ, what could have been more stupid than this Way of reasoning?
Now that this Doctrine is introduced into the Church of Rome we hear them
speaking thus; Tantum abest ut Sanctis invocandis Dei gloria minuacur, ut eo
maxim augeatur. Cat. Romans part 3. c. 2. Sect. 11.
We worship Saints and Martyrs in honor of the Son of God: So far do they
esteem that honor which they pay to him from being any prejudice unto the
Worship of those blessed Spirits.

(3.) Observe the Argument which the Jews urged to move the Proconsul to retain
the body, viz. That if the Christians could obtain it, it might be feared they
would leave Christ, and worship Polycarp. The Jews could not be ignorant of
what the Christians practiced in this case, by reason of those numerous
Apostates who daily left the Church, and of that liberty they had to come to
their Assemblies. Had then the Christians worshipped other Martyrs with Christ,
and had they professed to do it for his sake and honor, could this have been
objected by the Jews with any sense and reason, that they would quit Jesus
Christ, that they might worship Polycarp? Must they not rather have objected,
that with Christ they would worship Polycarp? which since they did not, we may
well suspect the practice of the Church gave them no reason so to do.

Athanasius discoursing upon these words of Jacob; The Angel that delivered me
from all evil, defend the Lads, (which by the Arians were urged to the same
purpose as they are used by Roman Catholics, viz. to prove that Invocation was
not so proper to God, but that it might be used to Creatures, and therefore
that it was no evidence that Christ was God) declares, that Jacob did not speak
of a created Angel: (1.) Because he joins the Angel with God, and says, (...)
Athanas. Orat. 4. contra Arianos. p. 260.
The God that fed me; the Angel that delivered me, which, though it be familiar
with the Roman Catholics, he looked upon as an absurd, illegal practice. (2.)
Because no man, deserting of that God that fed him, would ask a blessing for
his kindred of the holy Angels: whence it is evident, that in the judgment of
this Father, to pray to holy Angels was to desert the God of Heaven, even when
we made our first addresses to him, as here Jacob did.

(...) l. 4 c. 4. M.
St. Hilary the Deacon says, That the Idolaters made use of this Solent tamen
pudorem passi neglecti Dei misera uti excusatione, dicentes per istos posse ire
ad Deum, sicut per comites pervenitur ad Regem. Age nunquid tam demens est
aliquis, aut salutis suae immemor, ut honorificentiam Regis vindicet comiti;
cum de bdc re siqui etiam tractare fuerint inventi, jure ut rei damnantur
Majestatis? and isti se non putant reos, qui benorem nominis Dei deferunt Cr
aturae, and relicto Domino conservos adorant; quasi sit aliquid plus, quod
servetur Deo, nam and ideo ed Regem per Tribunos aut comites i^tur, quia homa
utique est Rex, and nescit quibus debeat rempublicam credere. Ad Deum autem
(quem utique nihil latet, omnium enim merita novit) promerendum suffrugatore
non opus est, sed mente devota. Vbicunque eniae talis l^cu^us fuerit ej,
respondebit illi.
miserable excuse for themselves, that by those inferior Deities they
worshipped, they went to God himself, as we go to the King by his Courtiers.
But, says he, is any man so mad, or regardless of himself, to give the Honor
due to the King to any of his Courtiers, which if a man does he is condemned
for Treason? And yet they think themselves not guilty, who give the Honor due
to Gods Name to a Creature, and forsaking God adore his fellow servants, as
though any thing greater than that were reserved for God himself. But therefore
we go to a King by his Officers and Servants, because the King is but a man,
who knows not of himself whom to employ in his public affairs. But to procure
the favor of God, from whom nothing is hid, (for he knows the merits, or
works, of all men)we need no spokesman, but a devout mind; for wheresoever such
a one shall speak unto him, he will answer him. Where we have these three
things considerable: 1. That to go unto God by a Creature, as we go to earthly
Princes by their Ministers, is to be guilty of Rebellion against God, by giving
of his Honor to a Creature, and by worshipping the Minister as if he were the
King 2. That this is to desert the God of Heaven. And (3.) That by doing thus,
we do ascribe unto our fellow servants as great Honor as we can give to God
himself. To this T. G. replies; p. 370 First, That this Author speaks of those
who gave the Honor due to God, to a Creature, and forsaking God adored their
fellow servants; very true: But then he adds, That he is guilty of all this,
who goes to God by a Creature, as a man would recommend himself to the King by
his Minister, which is the daily practice of the Romanist. This plaster
therefore does not heal the wound, but make it wider.

2. As he who only makes use of a Courtier to recommend him to the King, does
not give the Honor due to the King to any of his Courtiers, so neither do
Catholics give the Honor due to God, to the Saints, who only require the
favor of their prayers to God, P. 371.
so T. G. Repl. This is as if he should have said, St. Hilary thou lie: For
he expressly says, That to recommend our selves to God by a Creature, as we do
to the King by his Courtiers, is honorificentiam Regis vindicare Comiti. For as
he who sets up a Viceroy or subordinate King in any Commonwealth, and gives
the Honor of a Viceroy to him without the Kings Commission, does give that
Honor to him which is due only to the King, and ought to be esteemed as a
violater of his Kingly Power; so must he also be esteemed, who having no
Commission from God and Christ, sets up subordinate Mediators, and Masters of
Request to God. Ibid.
3. T. G. does charge the Doctor with a terrible blunder; because he renders,
Suffragatore non opus est, We need not any to recommend us to his favor. Repl.
1. This is a Calumny, for what he renders thus, is Suffragatore non opus est
ad promerendum Deum, which cannot otherwise be rendered. T. G.'s Translation is
confuted by the Reason following, which (as the Doctor does translate the
words) is this, The devout person needs no spokesman to obtain Gods favor, for
if he speak himself, God will be sure to answer him. But according to T. G.'s
it will run thus, We need not any to inform God, that so we may procure his
favor, but a devout mind; which is sufficiently ridiculous. 3. To this
Interpretation of Peroon Du Moulin answers thus, Novelty of Pop. p. 420
To this word the Cardinal gives an absurd Interpretation, saying, that it
signifies a Counselor. Every one that has some taste of the Latin Tongue
will smile at this, knowing that this word was never taken in that sense. The
votes of every Roman Citizen in the Comitia or City Meetings were called
Suffragia, and he who helped or favored any with his vote, was called his
Suffragator. Now it is clear, that the Author of this Book speaks of Colonels
and Governors, or Comites, which are used as Intercessors, not as Counselors.

But T. G. does object against St. Hilary; If a devout mind be enough to
recommend us to the favor of God, what need we the prayers of others, or the
intercession of Christ? What Hilary would answer I am not able to divine; but
if he were alive, he might well wonder, that speaking against them, Qui honorem
nominis Dei deferunt Creaturae, he should be thought to exclude Christ Jesus,
whom he so often denies to be a Creature. 2. As to the prayers of others, St.
Chrysostom says the same with Hilary in very many places. Chrysest. in Matthew.
T. 7. p. 768
When we have suit unto men, says he, it falls out oft-times, that we cannot
go straight unto the Lords themselves, and present our gift unto them, and
speak with them, but it is necessary for us first to procure the favor of
their Ministers, and Stewards, and Officers, both with praying, and using all
other means unto them, and then by their mediation to obtain our request. But
with God it is not thus: For there is no need of Intercessors for the
Petitioners; neither is he so ready to give a gracious answer being entreated
by others, as by our own selves praying unto him. And again, Sermon. 7. de
paenit. T. 6. Ed. Savil. p. 802.
With God there is no such matter, without an Intercessor he is entreated, it
suffices only that thou cry in thine heart. Lastly, Sermon. de profectu Evang.
To. 5. p. 416.
With God (says he) thou have need of no Intercessors; but although thou be
alone, and have no patron, thou by thy self praying unto God shall certainly
obtain thy request. He uses not to yield so soon, being prayed unto by others
for us, as when we our selves do pray unto him, although we be replenished with
a thousand evils. Sermon. in Psalm. 4. p. 524.
Thus did he deal with the Woman of Canaan: When Peter and James came for her,
he did not yield, but when she her self did remain, he presently gave that
which was desired. All this, and much more to the same effect, we find in
Chrysostom; and yet in his fifth Homily upon the first of Matthew, exhorting us
to pray (...). To. 2. p. 34.
by our selves, rather than by others, and giving us examples of many, for whom
the prayers of their good friends that lived with them, prevailed not; and the
example of this Woman, who by her self prevailed, when James and Peter could
not: He adds, (...), (i. e.) I speak not this that we should not request the
prayers of holy men, (i. e.) of those we do converse with here on earth, as the
examples mentioned do interpret it, but to prevent our sloth. The like might
Hilary have answered to T. G.'s. objection. Lastly, that he might give some
color to his exposition of the words of Hilary, he very disingenuously and
lamely represents his Argument, for he makes it to be only this, that because
nothing is hid from God, there is no need of a suffragator. Whereas his
Argument runs thus, to make him favorable who is acquainted with the merits
(or the works) of all men, there is no need of any Suffragator: now I conceive
it is as well the business of an Intercessor, as of a Counselor, to plead the
merits, or good works, of him for whom he intercedes.

4. When (...), l. 8. p. 381.
Celsus had affirmed, that by giving worship to those Demons which were
subject to the highest God, he would not be offended whose Subjects they were:
Origin replies, (...), etc. (...) -- Orig. contra Celsum. l. 8. p. 382.
That he who does not any work that is grateful to the Demons, (...), does
ascend above the worship of them. And that be ascends above the portion of
them, who by St. Paul are called Gods, (i. e.) the Angels, who, as they do, or
any other way does look, not at the things which are seen, but which are not
seen; and who beholding that the creature waits for the revelation of the
Sons of God, etc. does (...), (i. e.) does speak well of, or wish well to them,
and understanding that the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the liberty of the Sons of God, is not himself distracted, or
withdrawn from God, to worship any other with him, nor does endure to serve two
Lords. Wherefore, says he, it is not a seditious speech of those, who being
well content with one Lord Jesus Christ, do think and say, (...), they will not
give Dulia to more Lords. Now that the strength and pertinency of this
Discourse may be conspicuous to the Reader, let it be observed that Eam vero
Origenis doctrinam fuisse, quod omnes Angeli sublimesque virtutes in delore,
and gemitibus sint antequam nos penitus liberemur, non dubium est legenti
commentarium ejus hoc loco, and ca quae scribir libr. 1. de principiis, c. 7,
8. Esth. in locom. Vide Not. Spenceri. in l. 5. contr. Celsum. p. 63.
Origin conceived this passage of St. Paul, which speaks of that corruption and
vanity to which * the Creature was unwillingly subjected, was to be understood
as well of Angels, as of inferior Creatures, as is apparent both from his
Comment on the place: And from his first Book de Principiis, Chap. 7, 8. so
that his meaning in these words must undeniably be this, the Christian in his
Devotions does ascend above the Angels, and is not so distracted and withdrawn
from God, as to worship Angels with him; but makes God and his Son Jesus
Christ the only objects of his Worship. 2. -- (...). Orig. contra Celsum l. 8.
p. 383.
We Christians, says he, do not decline the worship of any other with God, and
by his word, because we think, God can be hurt, as a man may, by serving of
another with him, but that we may not hurt our selves, by separating of our
selves from the Portion of God. (3.) He adds, that -- (...). Id. p. 384.
we have better reason to serve God only by his Son, by whose conduction we are
brought to God; than to serve two Lords, or perform what Celsus had affirmed to
be grateful to God: (viz.) the worshipping of those who were his Subjects, and
belonged to him (4.) He affirms, that when St. -- (...). Id ib. p. 382.
Paul asserted that to us there is but one God the Father, from whom are all
things, he speaks there of himself, and of all them who do ascend unto the
highest God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, which persons he describes by these
three Notes, 1. That they were such as did (...). etc. Id. ibid.
inseparably and undividedly worship this God of Gods by Jesus Christ. 2. That
they were such as came unto him by Christ alone. 3. That they were such as so
ascended to him, as to (...). Id. (...).
transcend even these blessed Spirits which are in Scripture called Gods. 5. He
comprehends the Honor which the Christians gave unto the Angels, in the words
(...), been precatur creaturae, says the Latin. Whereas St. Aug. Sermon. 17 de
verbes Apost.
Austin tells us, It is an injury to pray for them, unto whose prayers we
ought to be commended. To these citations T.G. returns this Answer, viz p. 357.
That the worship which Origin here contends, is not to be given to Angels is
Divine Worship, proper to God alone. But 1. this Reply makes Origin dispute
impertinently, and to say nothing to the purpose. For Celsus only did contend
for this, (...). Orig. l. 8 p. 381
That together with the highest God, inferior Beings might be worshipped as his
Subjects. No, says St. Origin, the Christian goes immediately to God by
Christ, he comes unto him by no other, he ascends above the service of Demons
and of Angels, and does not suffer himself to be distracted from God, so as to
worship any other with him. If he intended to assert the Christians did not
worship Angels or Demons with him, as his Subjects, the Discourse is
pertinent, if he intended only to affirm that Christians did not worship Angels
or Demons with him, as his Peers, this does not hinder the worship of them, as
his Subjects, according to the plea of Celsus. 2. When he affirms that
Christians did ascend, or go to God, only by Jesus Christ, having no other
(...) Conciliator, or Intercessor to give access unto him, when he affirms all
this, in opposition unto that of Celsus, that it would be grateful to God to
worship them who did belong unto him, when he asserts that Christians did
ascend, or go to God, (...), without dividing of their service betwixt him and
any other, and more particularly, that in ascending to God they overlooked the
blessed Angels, which are in Scripture called Gods, and that both Reason and
St. Paul had taught them so to do. What greater evidence can be desired to
prove that the Christians of his time did never call upon the Saints and Angels
to be their Advocates with God? or tender any part of their Religious Worship
to them, or think it reasonable to worship them, because they did belong unto
God? 3. If this had been the mind of Origin, is it not to be wondered that he
makes no distinction of the kinds of Worship, or of the parts and actions of
it: but absolutely and indefinitely pronounces, that to worship any other with
God, is to be distracted from him, and that Christians undevidedly did worship
God by Jesus Christ? For if the Christians of his time did also worship Saints
and Angels, and go to God not only by Christ Jesus, but by them, these sayings,
without limitation, are both absolutely false, and perfect condemnations of the
Churches practice. But yet T. G. p. 358.
assures us, It is plain, Origin speaks only of divine worship, and not of such
an inferior worship of which Creatures are capable upon account of their
holiness or relation to God, 1. From the Reply which Origin gave to that
evasion of Celsus, viz. that none were to be honored For Gods, but those to
whom the Supreme God does communicate it. Repl. Since then, the plea of Celsus
was that we ought to worship (...), the Relations of God, what an Impertinent
was Origin to speak only of an other matter? 2. The strength of this citation
entirely depends upon the words, For Gods, which T. G. disingenuously adds unto
the words of Celsus l. 8. p. 384
, which are only these, (...), it is not lawful to worship any but those to
whom he grants to be honored: But (3.) he expressly adds, that he speaks of
the worship of the Gods, or the Demons, or the Heroes, (...). l. 8. p. 384.
Let us ask Celsus, says he, concerning those that are worshipped either as
Gods, or Demons, or Hero's, whence he is able to demonstrate that God has
granted to them to be honored. And then having produced Alcinous as an
instance of the first kind, he asks how it can be demonstrated that it was
given to him to be worshipped as a God; and then he adds, this Question I would
ask (...), i. e. of the Demons and the Heroes. Then he proceeds to prove that
(...), to be honored, was a thing granted to Christ, which he confirms from
that passage of St. John, that all should honor the Son as they honor the
Father: i. e. as truly, but not equally, that being inconsistent with Origens
opinion, as you will presently perceive. Obj. When Celsus objects, T. G. p. 358.
that by the same rule that Christians gave honor to Christ, he thought they
might give it to inferior Deities, the account which Origin gives of the
worship which Christians attribute to the Son, ( viz. because it is said, I and
my Father are one) makes it yet more evident that he speaks of Divine Worship.
Answ. In the close of this Argument we have the same cheat repeated which I
observed before, for he expressly says, that Celsus objected that they
worshipped Christ for God. Which is not only false, but flatly contradictory
unto the very words of the Objection, viz. (...). Celsus apud Orig. l. 8. p.
385.
that if the Christians worshipped nothing else besides God, they might seem
reasonable in their contempt of others, but when they do excessively extol
with honor him who was of late original, and yet believe that they do not
offend against God by reverencing of his Minister, they are unreasonable:
Whence evident it is, that Celsus did not think they worshipped him as God, but
as the Minister of God, and one besides God. 2. Hence it is also evident, that
Celsus did not contend for Divine Worship to be given to his Heroes, but only
that they might be worshipped as the Ministers of God. And lastly, it is
evident that (...). l. 8. p. 386.
Origin by that expression, I and my Father are one, did not intend to argue
the Unity of Essence, but of affection only betwixt God and Christ, as in this
very place he does distinguish, nor yet to say our Savior was that God who was
the Lord of all, for this (...) ib. p. 387.
expressly he denies. And so this Answer can be no evidence that he speaks of
Worship properly Divine: But if we do at last admit it, what Argument is more
ridiculous than this, Origin denies that there is the same reason to give
honor to Christ and to inferior Demons, Because, Christ is God, therefore he
only does deny the attributing of Divine Worship to them: For should a Roman
Catholic object against us in the words of Celsus, by the same Rule that we
Protestants give honor to Christ, we may give it unto Saints departed, and
should the Protestant answer, No; Because Christ is God, could it be thence
inferred that Protestants denied to Saints departed that honor only which is
called Latria, but did allow that kind of worship which is called Dulia.

To pray unto a Creature, Arg. 3.
or that which is not God, is in the Language of the the ancient Fathers to
worship it as God, or give that honor to it, which is due to him alone; is it
not the extremest ignorance, says (...) Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. p. 721. D.
Clemens, to ask of them who are no Gods, as if they were Gods; and of this
imputation he gives two accounts. 1. That seeing God alone is good, he only
should be called upon. 2. That prayer is a discourse with God. We find in
Scripture (says (...). Orig. contra Cells. l. 5. p 233.

(...). Id. ib.


Origin) That Angels are sometimes styled God, but notwithstanding that these
Gods do also minister, and bring the gifts of God unto us, we must not worship
them (...) in place of God, for all our prayers and supplications (by
whatsoever name we call them, for he mentions all the Kinds of Prayer,) they
must be all sent up to God by that high Priest, who is above all Angels, and is
God. Why so I pray you, but that all prayer is worship which alone belongs to
God, and Jesus Christ? And therefore to offer it to any Creature, or by any
other Mediator, is to ascribe that to him which is due to God alone: had he
been of the Church of Rome he must have said with them, that notwithstanding
you have that High Priest, yet may you send up your Petitions to the Saints and
Angels, this is an honor to him not an Encroachment upon the office of this
great High Priest; it is confessed you must not worship them instead of God,
but notwithstanding you may put up to them Supplications, Prayers,
Thanksgiving. Intercessions, you may say unto them Pater noster, and ask all
temporal and eternal blessings of them, provided you do not pray unto them with
absolute, terminative, and sacrificial Prayer, distinctions which in reference
to this matter, the Fathers knew but little off.

The Fathers hence conclude that Christ is God, Arg. 4.
and that the Holy Spirit is God, because, we put up our Petitions to them, and
because that they are present to relieve us, being called upon. Si homo
tantummodo Christus quomodo adest ubique invocatus, cum haec hominis natura non
sit, sed Dei, ut udesse omni loco possit? No vat. de Trinitate c. 14. p. 707.

Si homo tantummodo Christus, cur homo in Orationibus Mediator invocetur, cum
Invocatio hominis ad praestandam Salutem inessecax judicetur. Novatian. ibid.


If Christ were only man how comes he to be every where present when he is
invoked, since to be omnipresent is the property of God, and is not competent
to humane nature? If Christ was only man, why is a man invoked in our Prayers,
as if he were a Mediator? for the Invocation of a man is (by Christians) judged
inefficacious to the obtaining of Salvation, so Novatian: It was so by the
ancient Christians, but is it so esteemed by the Church of Rome? Is not the
blessed Virgin by them styled Ave salus hominum. Prosa. Miss. f. 35. B.
Salus hominum, or the Salvation of mankind? Do they not say that Ibid. fol. 30.
God will certainly confer eternal Life on them that worship her? Do they not
bid the Missa in Honorem proprii Angeli. f. 16.
Guardian Angel say unto their Souls, I am thy Salvation? It is written, says
Athanasius, be thou to me a God, Protector, and as house of refuge that thou
may save me: which words if Arians conceive to have been spoken of the Son,
-- (...) Contr. Ar. Orat. p. 369.
let them know that (Christians or) Holy Persons do not Petition any thing that
was begotten to be an helper to them or a house of Refuge. What are they then
who do declare that it is good and profitable Council. Trid. Sess. 25.
ad little opem auxiliumque confugere to fly for refuge to their help and aid,
whose daily practice is to fly unto the blessed Virgin, Catech. Romans Par. 4. c.
5. Sect. 8.
ab eaque opem and auxilium implorare, i. e. and to petition her to be our
helper? who do advise us Sub Matris refugio fuge causa veniae. Prosa. Miss. f.
33. B. 34. A.
to fly under her refuge for the pardon of our sin? Lastly, who say unto their
Guardian Angel, Exurge Angele in adjutorium meum. Miss. in Hon. Pr. Angel. f.
16.
Arise O Angel to my help. Origin lay's down this as a most certain Rule, Sed
in Principio Epistolae quam ad Corinthios scribit, ubi dicit cum omnibus qui
invocant nomen domini Jesus Christi in omni loco ipsorum and nostro cum cujus
nomen invocatur Deum Iesum Christum esse pronunciat: Si ergo and Enos, and
Moses, and Samuel invocabant Dominum, and ipse exaudiebat eos sine dubio
Christum Iesum Dominum invocabant, and si invocare Domini nomen, and adorare
Deum unum atque idem est, sicut invocatur Christus, and adorandus est Christus.
Orig. l. 8. in Epist. ad Romans c. 10.
That to invoke the name of God, and to adore him is the same: Whence he infers
that as Christ may be invocated, so also must he be acknowledged to be God: and
he adds, that when Saint Paul does mention those that in all places call upon
the name of Christ, he proves the same.

Having thus manifested from the judgment of the ancient Fathers that
invocation is a part of worship proper to God, and that it cannot be ascribed
to Saints departed without Idolatry, much less to the inferior Heathen
Demons: Page 1.5.
We shall subjoyn what Dr. St. affirms, viz. That there being other
intermediate beings between the supreme God, and men whose office, as the
Heathens did conceive, was this, to carry the prayers of men to God, and to
bring down help from him to them, they thought it very fitting to address their
solemn supplications unto them, this (I say) being so, there was the very same
cause in debate betwixt the ancient Fathers and the Heathens, which is between
us and the Church of Rome. Here T.G. swells and cries out (...): this is a most
injurious Calumny and such as scarcely ever dropped from the pen of the greatest
enemies of Christianity: So he, this being his continual Custom to begin with
false and disingenuous accusations, and to confirm them by most impertinent and
weak discourses. We therefore will a little draw the parallel, and then proceed
to answer his impertinencies.

First then Oration porrigitur alicui dupliciter. Vno modo quasi per ipsum
implenda. Alio modo sicut per ipsum impetranda. Primo quidem modo soli Dec
Orationem porrigimus: quid omnes crationes nostrae ordinari debent ad gratiam
and gloriam consequendam, quae solus Deus dat. Secundum illud Psalm. 83. Gratiam
and Glorian dabit Dominue. Sed Secundario modo orationem porrigimus Angelis and
hominibus -- Aq. 2 2ae. q. 83. Art. 4.
Aquinas thus propounds the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, touching the
Invocation of departed Spirits; a prayer may be directed to a person so as that
we do request him to fulfill, and by himself accomplish our desires, and thus we
pray to God alone, or so as that we do solicit him to beg or to obtain them
for us, and thus we pray to Saints and Angels; now this is that very Office
which the Platonists ascribed to their Demons; They says August. de C. D. l.
8. c. 18.
St. Austin, bring the prayers of men unto the Gods, and what they beg and do
obtain, quae poscunt impetrata they bring back to men. And again, They think
them so to intermediate betwixt God and men, as that they carry out desires
hence, illinc referunt impetrata, and from thence bring back what they have
obtained. Hence are they often styled by them Advocates and Mediators,
Intercessors, and Pararii i. e. the obrainers of our Suits.

2. On this account they thought it reasonable to honor them with
supplications. Ficinus tradit Platonem universan. Deorum Synagogam unico Regi
subdere prout vult sengulis imperanti, Jubere primum Deum adori propter
seipsum, sequentes vero, qui participes ejus Dii queque dicuntur amari tanquam
illi similiores, honorari etiam ut Vicarios, imo and advocari lanquam
Conciliatores.
Plato, says Ficinus, subjected the whole number of Gods unto one King, who as
he pleased did command them all, and he commanded that the chief God should be
worshipped for himself, the other who are also called Gods by participation to
be loved as likest to him, and to be honored as his Vicars, and to be
addressed to as to reconcilers. And Plato has himself determined, -- (...).
Epinom. page 1010.
That they ought to be honored with our Prayers, by reason of their laudable
Province: which he says is double. 1. (...). Symposium p. 1194.
To be our Interpreters to God. 2. To carry up the Prayers and Sacrifices of
men to God, and to bring back the commands and answers of God to them. --
(...). Celsus apud Origin. lib. 8. p. 394.
We ought to pray unto them to be propitious to us, so Celsus. 3. They did not
think them to be Gods properly so called, but only the ministers and servants
of God, as I have proved above. C^^cta coelestum voluntate, numine, and
autoritate fiunt, sed Paer. number obsequi^, op^^a, and ministerio. Apulesus de
Daemo^^ Soc^ate p. 45.
All things are done, says Apuleius, by the will, majesty, and authority of
the heavenly beings, but by the ministry, work, and obsequiqusness of the
Demons. Hence do they style them, virtutes and ministeria Dei magni (...) i.
e. Gods Ministers and Messengers. Hence do they rank them in the second and
third place from God, and put this Office on them quia nullus Deus miscetur
homini, because no God, that is, properly so called, does immediately converse
with man; this is so plain that Austin does acknowledge that the difference
betwixt Hos si Platonici malunt Deos, quam Daemones dicere, eisque annumerare,
quos a summo Deo conditos Deos scribit eorum author and magister Plato, dicant
quod volunt non enim cum eis de verborum controversia laborandum est. -- and
rursus, Quamvis nominis controversia videatur. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 9. cap. 23.
Plato's good Demons, which he acknowledged to be made by the highest God, and
the good Angels was only in the name. Having thus drawn the Parallel, we are
prepared to attend T. G's. pretenses of a great disparity betwixt this
Invocation of the Heathen Demons, which by the ancient Fathers was charged
with Idolatry, and that Invocation of the Saints departed, which is now
practiced by the Church of Rome, which will be quickly done, since all his
great disparities are only great impertinencies: for what is this unto the
Doctors Argument concerning Invocation, that they do not offer Sacrifice unto
the Saints departed; which is his fourth disparity: Or, that the God they
worship is the true immortal God, who sees the secrets of the hearts, which is
his first disparity. What is it to the purpose to say, the persons they address
their prayers unto are not Devils, or wicked wretches, but the blessed Spirits;
for if the same kind of Invocation be used to both, it must be deemed Idolatry
in both, because in both it is the giving of the worship due to God unto the
Creature; when this is done unto the best of Creatures, then is Idolatry
committed; when this is not done, we may be guilty of Superstition or ((...))
in giving of inferior worship, or Dulia, to the worst of Creatures, but cannot
be guilty of Idolatry: And this cuts of his third disparity.

4. page 351.
Their Office is not to inform the supreme God of what he knows not, says T.
G. but to be joint Petitioners with us: and what is this unto the purpose?
seeing the Fathers neither did, or could condemn them of Idolatry for thinking
God did not know our Prayers without Interpreters. But for what was consequent
upon it, viz. the making their addresses to them to present their requests to
God, and by their prayers to obtain his blessings: the first opinion made them
sacrilegious in robbing God of what did properly belong unto him, and with this
we do not charge the Papists in this case. The second is Idolatrical in giving
of his honor to a Creature, of which they are but too much guilty. This T. G.
saw, as well as I: and therefore for the same good reason that some unskilful
Painters write under their work this is a Dog, a Cat, Page 352.
etc. T.G. at the foot of his performance writes thus, I have spoken home to
the Case, and then he states it thus, whether the practice of Catholics in
honoring and invocating the Saints, be the same with that of the Heathens, in
the worship of their inferior Deities? T.G. page 440.
Thus expiring Candle gathers up its Spirits, and forces it self into a blaze
before it dies. Alas! that we should all this while have been mistaken in the
question. The question hitherto controverted betwixt Dr. St. and him, in this
particular, was concerning the Invocation of Saints, as T. G. does himself
confess, p. 350. but now like a mischievous Card that will spoil the hand, this
is dropped under the Table, and all the show above board is, whether their
Invocation of Saints does differ, not from the Invocation, but the whole
worship of inferior Demons. The business of solemn supplication to them is the
Case in debate between us and the Church of Rome (says Dr. St.) If ever you
would speak home to the case do it upon this point. Page 145.
I beg your pardon, says T. G. I am not free to speak upon that point; I know
my foot must slip if I should touch upon it, and therefore though you press me,
and call upon me to speak home unto it, I am resolved to be reserved; nay, I am
conscious to my self, that all that I have spoken is impertinent to that Case,
I have not, nor I cannot show the least disparity betwixt their Invocation of
inferior Demons: and that Invocation of the Saints, which Roman Catholics do
practice: but if instead of speaking to this one case of supplication, you will
let me wander, through the whole worship of those Demons, then I have three
disparities to offer; this is the twig the poor man catches hold of, to save
both him and his whole Church from sinking, but in vain; for the disparities
which he has represented betwixt that honor which they give to Saints, and
what the Heathen do ascribe to their inferior Demons is not only horribly
impertinent, but also vain and frivolous, as will appear by reassuming of his
heads of difference, as 1. The persons to whom we address our selves for their
prayers, T. G. page 351.
are not Devils or wicked Wretches, but the Friends and Servants of God. Answ.
1. St. Austin manifestly does assert, Dec. D. l. 9. c. 23.
That either all, or at the least, the better sort of Platonists, Hoc ipsum
dicunt quod dicimus, did assert the same of their good Demons, which we do of
the blessed Angels; that there was also no dissension betwixt them and
Christians touching these blessed Spirits; and that the controversy was but
this, whether they should be called Demons, as they were wont to style them,
or Angels, as the Christians called them: and therefore it is manifest he did
not think the Platonists good Demons to be Devils, or wicked Wretches, as T.
G. suggests. 2. It is apparent from their Writings, that other Heathens had the
same apprehensions of them, which the Papists have of Saints and Angels, for
they distinguished them into such Spirits, as Verum haec omnis distributio
little Daemonum fait, qui quondam in corpore bumano fuere. Sunt autem non
posteriore numero praestantiori long dignitate superius aliud angustiusque
genus Daemonum, qui semper a corporis compedibus and nexibus liberi. Apuleius
l. de Deo Socratis. p. 50.
were by death delivered from the body, and such as never were united to the
body. And hence that Law of the old Romanists, Divos and eos, qui coelostes
semper habiti, colunto: and ollos quos in coelum merita vocaverunt. Cic. de
legibus. l. 2.
Let them be worshipped who have always lived in Heaven, and those whose merits
have advanced them to that place; where we have both the same objects of our
worship, and the same reason of that worship given, viz. their merits, or as
Trismegistus has it, the virtues of their life. And though I grant they were
mistaken in their apprehensions, yet he that does so confidently assert, That
Roman Catholics would not be guilty of Idolatry, provided the material object
of their worship should be bread, because they apprehend what is bread not to
be there, but Christ; cannot have any reason to quarrel with the Heathens,
because, when they performed their worship to an Image in whom these Spirits
were conceived to be present, they apprehended no evil Spirit to be there, but
only pure and holy Souls, and blessed Demons.

2. Their office, says he, is not to inform the supreme God of what he knows,
but to be joint Petitioners with us. Answ. Admit all this, the Fathers do
expressly hold they ought not to be worshipped upon that account. But 2. Let me
crave leave of good St. Augustine to assert, That the Platonists did not
conceive that God was ignorant of what was done on Earth, or that he needed
Demons or any other Spirits to inform him of our words, thoughts, or actions.
St. Augustine (I confess) infers this Doctrine from what they did assert, but
that they constantly professed and taught the contrary, is clearer than the
Sun. Theolog. Dogm. Tom 1. l. 8. c. 4.
Petavius tells us, That the tenth Book of Plato is spent in proving that God
wants neither power, will, nor knowledge, to make his providence concerned
about the least things which are done on Earth, and that expressly he declares,
that the Gods discern, know, and hear all things, and that nothing which our
sense or reason can perceive, can be concealed from them. This, says (...). l.
10. de leg. p. 955.

(...), Ammonius Comment. ad librum Aristotelis de interpretatione.


Plotinus and Ammonius, must be certain, that if the Gods are the first causes
of all things, they cannot possibly be ignorant of any thing which is in any
manner done by them Moreover the -- (...). Plotinus Enn. 5. l. 9. c. 5 Vid.
Petavium T. 1. l. 4. c. 2.
Platonists affirmed, That God had this knowledge from and by himself, and from
no other, and that nothing was required but his nature to make him understand
all things. Particularly, both Platonists and others held that God was the
searcher of the heart, and was himself acquainted with the thoughts of men.
Hence (...). Laertius in vit. Thaletis p. 24 Nihil Deo clausum est, interest
animis nostris and cogitationibus intervenit; Senec. Ep. 83.
Thales being asked, whether the actions of men could be concealed from God; he
answers, No, nor yet our thoughts. Nothing is hid from God, faith Seneca, he is
both present to our minds and thoughts, Whence he exhorts us so to live as in
his sight, and so to think, as having one who looks into our breasts. (...).
Xenophon memorab l. 1.
The Gods, says Socrates, know all things which are spoken, done, and which in
silence we consult. (...). M. Antonini l. 12. Sect. 2. (...). Id. l. 11. Sect.
13.
God sees all minds, says Antoninus, divested of those Barks and material
Vessels that contain them, for with his mind alone he reaches all those minds
which are derived from him, and are lodged in them. Whence he exhorts us so to
be (...). Epict dissert l. 2. c. 14.
affected in our minds, as that the Gods may see that nothing does trouble or
disgust us. (...). Plutarch. de tarditate divin. vindict.
This we are first to learn, says Epictetus, that there is a God, whose
Providence does reach to all things, and that not only what we do but what we
think cannot be hid from him. It is more agreeable to God, says Plutarch, to
perceive the actions of the soul than of the body; he therefore knows the
dispositions of all men. This is but little of that which might be easily
produced to confirm this truth; but yet it is sufficient to inform the Reader,
that T. G. was scandalously ignorant if he did not know it, or scandalously
wicked, if knowing this, he ventured to declare the contrary.

3. We, says T. G. do not procure or buy this favor of them by offering
Sacrifice to them. Answ. True; but then you offer up your prayers unto them,
which in the judgment of the ancient Fathers is the best and highest Sacrifice,
as I have proved already, Prop. 4. Corol. 1. 2. As Roman Catholics do pray to
Saints departed, and do ascribe unto them the knowledge of the heart, because
they vainly do conceive these things are not so proper to God, but that they
may be attributed to the Creature; so Heathens offered their first fruits and
Sacrifices to inferior Demons, because they vainly did conceive they were not
properly that worship which was due unto the highest God, but such as might be
given to those Demons, which they acknowledged to be Creatures. This is
apparent from what St. Austin does assert concerning them, viz. De C. D. l. 10.
c. 19.
That they conceived these visible Sacrifices might agree to lesser Gods, but
that to him who is invisible, the greater and the better God, invisible,
greater, and better Sacrifices do agree, viz. the duties of a pure mind, and a
good will. I grant they were deceived in this apprehension: But if the
Romanists cannot be justly charged with Idolatry, although the object of their
worship should be Bread, because they do conceive it not to be so, why should
the Heathens be deemed guilty of Idolatry in this particular, although the act
of worship which they confer upon the Creature, be proper to God, seeing they
also do conceive it not to be so? For as Dr. Tailor argues in behalf of them;
if these Heathens thought this act of worship proper to God, they who command
us not to exceed in paying honor to them, would be far from doing of it; which
is a demonstration that their soul has nothing in it that is Idololatrical.

Lastly, The Doctor says, P. 145.
The wiser Heathens acknowledged one God, not Jupiter of Creet, but the Father
of Gods and Men. P. 350.
To this T. G. replies, That Origin says that Jupiter was a Devil. But if
Origin spoke this of Jupiter of Creet, or if he did not speak it of the
Philosophers supreme God, which T. G. never offers to assert he did, De Theol.
Gent. l. 1. c. 2. p. 7.
what can be more impertinent? The Learned Vossius had met with some as
ignorant as T. G. who thought that the Philosophers God was not the true
Jehovah, and that the Heathens had not the knowledge of him; and thus he puts
the Question to them: What will these persons say to Blessed Paul, who calls
Jupiter God? What, does he understand that Jupiter who was so infamous for his
Adulteries? Sure it is no such matter; he with the Philosophers did understand
that infinite mind that runs through all things; why else does he approve that
saying of Aratus, For we are all his offspring? Why does he manifestly apply
that to the true God which Aratus spoke of Jupiter, for he begun his Verses
with him. This therefore is the mind of the Apostle, that we are his
offspring, whom the wiser Heathens understood by Jupiter, which he would not
have said, had not some of the Heathens had the knowledge of the true Jehovah.
When St. Paul says, Him whom you ignorantly worship, Acts 17.
I declare unto you, how manifestly does he affirm, that the Athenians
worshipped that very Deity of which he was about to speak, viz. God that made
the world, etc. And how can any man deny this thing, says he, when the same
Apostle does affirm that they knew God, Romans 1.20
and that he had manifested to them that which may be known of God; for what is
more absurd than to imagine, that the true and only God should manifest unto
them any other God besides himself? Veteres cum adversus Deorum cultores
Christianam causam agunt, insignium Poetarum, ac philosophorum, necnon
Sibyllarum testimonia quamplurima referunt, quae unicum Deum esse, Deos autem
illos, quos vulgus ascivit, mentitos and inanes esse praedicant. Petav. T. 1.
l. 1. c. 3. p. 17.
Petavius could have informed him, That it was the business of the Fathers, in
their Apologies and Exhortations to the Gentiles, to show, that both the wisest
and the most eminent Poets and Philosophers acknowledged the one true God, and
laughed at those vain fictitious Deities the vulgar worshipped. But 2. The God
whom we adore, says T. G. is not that wise Father of Gods and Men, who was so
high as not to know what was done here below, but the true and immortal God,
who sees the secrets of our hearts, and knows our necessities before we utter
them. Answ. This also did the God of the Philosopher, as we have largely
proved. Quisquis est Deus, totus est sensus, totus visus, totus auditus, totus
animae, totus animi, totus sui.
Let God be what he will, says Pliny, he must be all sense, all eye, all
hearing. (...). Apud Lipsii Physiol. Stoicorum l. 1. dissert. 6. p. 30.
He must be deemed, says Hippocrates, to be immortal, and to hear, and see,
and know all things, both present, and to come. Of this we have innumerable
evidences in Lipsius Physiol. Stoic. l. 1. Dissert. 6. xi. Petav. de Deo. To.
1. l. 4. cap. 1.2, 3, 4. and l. 8. c. 4. sec. 6. and Gataker in Antoninum. l.
1. sec. 3. l. 6. sec. 13. l. 12. sec. 2.

To this convincing evidence of Dr. St. That invocation of the Saints deceased
was not the Doctrine of the ancient Church: we add these four Considerations:
1. That Lactantius and others dispute against the Heathens with such Arguments
as perfectly destroy this practice, and confute this Doctrine, and which could
never, without the highest folly, be alleged by those who did approve either
the Doctrine or practice of the Church of Rome. Quid -- sibi -- volunt denique
ipsa simulachra, quae aut mortuorum aut absentium monimenta sunt? Deos igitur
in quorum numero reponemus? Si in absentium: colendi ergo non sunt: si nec
vident quae facimus; nec audiunt quae precamur. Si antem Di^ absentes esse non
possunt ^qus quoniam divini sunt, in quacunque mundi part fuerint, vident and
audiunt universa: Supervacua ergo sunt simulachra, illis ubique praesentibus;
cum satis sit audientum nomina precibus advocare. Lactant. de Origin Erroris,
l. 2. c. 2.
Quid sibi volunt simulacra, what mean their Images, says he, which either are
the Monuments of the Dead or absent Persons? for upon this account were these
similitudes invented, that the memory of them might be retained, who are either
dead, or absent from us: in which of these two orders will you place your Gods?
If in the number of the dead men, is any man so foolish as to worship them? If
in the number of the absent, they are not to be worshipped, if they can neither
see what we do, nor hear our Prayers: Where note, that it is here supposed, as
an unquestionable thing, that persons absent can neither hear our Prayers, nor
see our Actions. Let me then ask T. G. what mean the Images of the Church of
Rome, which are either the monuments of the dead, or absent persons; in what
order will you place your Saints and Angels? If in the number of dead men; Why
then are you so foolish as to worship them; If in the number of the absent,
they are not to be worshipped, since they can neither see our actions, nor hear
our prayers. What I have thus retorted on the Church of Rome, if the like
practice had then obtained in the Church of Christ, might have been with like
evidence returned upon Lactantius.

Tertullian tells the Heathens, that by allowing many Gods Cum alii alios Deos
colitis, eos quos non colitis, utique contemnitis: praelatio alterius sine
alterius contumelia esse non potest, nec ulla electio non reprobatione
componitur. Qui de pluribus suscipit aliquem eum quem non suscipit despexit.
Sed tot ac tanti ab omnibus coli non possunt! Jam ergo tunc primo
contempsistis, non veriti scilicet ita instituere, ut omnes coli non possent.
Tertul. ad Nationes, L. 1. c. 10.
they do affront as many of them as they do not worship, for the prelation of
any one, is a reproach to all the rest: which Argument does equally impugn the
worship of the Church of Rome: For who knows not, that many of their Saints,
who in some Countries are worshipped more than Christ himself, are scarcely
known in others.

2. The Ancients prayed for all the Saints departed, excepting neither
Apostles, Martyrs, or the blessed Virgin: The Liturgy of the Church of
Constantinople, ascribed to St. Chrysostom, says; Chrysostom. Tom. 6. p. 998,
999.
We offer unto thee this reasonable Service, for those who are at rest in the
faith, our Forefathers, Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Religious Persons, and every
Spirit perfected in the Faith: But especially for our most holy, immaculate,
most blessed Lady the Mother of God, and ever Virgin Mary. -- Remember all them
who are fallen asleep in the hope of the Resurrection to eternal life, give
them to rest where the Light of thy Countenance presideth. The Liturgy ascribed
to St. Mark, having made mention of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
etc. speaks thus, Biblioth. Patrum Gr. Lat. Tom. 2. p. 35. A.
Lord make the Souls of all these to rest in the Tabernacles of thy Saints, in
thy Kingdom, conferring on them all the good things promised. Which is a
pregnant evidence, that the first Authors of those Liturgies did not invoke the
Blessed Virgin, or the Evangelists, Apostles, Martyrs, or any other Saints
departed, this being a known Rule (and as Cum sacrae Scripturae dicat
auctoritas, quod injuriam facit Martyri qui orat pro Martyr. Innocent. III. P.
R. Decret. l. 3. de celeb. Miss. tit. 41.
Pope Innocent declares the voice of Scripture) that he who prays for any
Martyr does offer an affront unto that Martyr. Nay, even common sense and
reason shows, that it is very foolish and absurd to pray for them, and to
commend them to Gods favor, to whom we therefore pray, because, we think their
merits and their interest with God is such as that they can prevail by virtue
of them for all the blessings they can ask for others.

3. The Heathens did object against the Christians, that they put up
Supplications to the Man Christ Jesus, whose birth and ignominious death they
owned. Inique non scis quem invocas hominem quendam factum, sub custed a Pontii
Pilati punitum? In Act. Andr. apud Bar. A. D. 290.. 26.
Do thou not know, says Maximus unto Andronicus the Martyr, that him whom
thou invokest was a man who suffered under Pontius Pilate? And in Arnobius, the
Heathen thus disputes, Sed non, inquit, idcirco Dii vobis infesti sunt, quod
omnip^lentem colatis Deum: sed quod hominem natum, and, quod personis infane
est vilibus, crucis supplicio interemptum, and Deum fuisse contenditis, and
superesse adhuc creditis, and quotidianis supplicationibus ad^^atis. Arnobii
adversus Gentes l. 1. p. 20.
You Christians do adore with daily Supplications, and look upon him as a God,
who was both born a man, and suffered an ignominious Death on the Cross. And
had the Christians of that time put up their Supplications to the Apostles,
Evangelists, and Martyrs, and the Blessed Virgin, had not the Heathens greater
reason to object, that they offered up their Supplications unto such as were
but ordinary men, and who continued in the state of death?

When in the days of Julian this custom did insinuate it self into the Church
of Christ, and they began in Panegyrical Orations to speak unto the Martyrs, as
to men present with them; Eunapius presently cries out, Eunap. in Aedesso. p.
65.
(...): that they call their Martyrs Ministers, and Legates of their Prayers to
God. That therefore this was not objected by Porphyry or Celsus, or taken
notice of, as their objection, by any of the ancient Fathers, is an assurance
that they had no such practice in the purest Ages of the Church.

4. This will be farther evident, if we consider, that in the writings of the
Apostles and Evangelists, and of the ancient Fathers, we have no rules
prescribed for the Canonizing of any Saints departed, or any mention of this
custom till the seventh Century: for since it is so great a Crime to worship
damned Spirits next to God, seeing to celebrate their praises, and to give God
thanks for their Examples, and for the Graces of his Spirit, is so absurd a
thing: And yet it is a thing, says Nisi judicio Ecclesiae certi Sancti
proponerentur colendi, facil: fieri posse^, ut populus saepe ^rraret, and
damnatos pro Bea^is coleret. Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat. c. 7.. Sed.
Bellarmine, that easily might happen from the neglect of this Canonization; we
may conclude that they who never took the care to practice it, did not allow
that worship which made its observation necessary.

CHAP. IX.
The Contents.
General Heads of Answer to the Testimonies produced by T. G. from Ancient
Fathers, 1. That the Fathers of that time did more unquestionably practice and
approve what has been since condemned by the Church of Rome, V.G. They
practiced the communicating of Infants, they approved the necessity of it to
Salvation. Sect. 1. They approved the Doctrine, that the Righteous did not
enjoy the sight of God before the Resurrection. Sect. 3. Secondly, That the
Fathers cited by him, do many of them in words more clear, and writings more
authentic, deny, or disapprove this practice. Sect. 2. Thirdly, Many of the
Fathers of those times beld Doctrines inconsistent with that practice, Sect. 3.
viz. that Saints did not enjoy the Beatifick Vision, ibid. Secondly, That they
did not hear or understand our words directed to them, and that it was doubtful
whether they had the knowledge of our condition, yea, or not. Sect. 4.
Fourthly, That the forementioned Fathers did often speak to their departed
Friends as present, although they did not think them so to be Sect. 5. Fifthly,
That the very same Authors do make the like addresses to insensate Creatures,
which makes it reasonable to look upon them as Rhetorical Apostrophe's. ibid.
Sixthly, That there is great difference betwixt the practice which then began
to be approved in some parts of the Christian World, and the practice of the
Church of Rome, as V.G. 1. That no instance can be given of any Christian that
put up mental Prayers unto them, or dia ascribe unto them the knowledge of the
heart. 2. That they prayed unto them only upon supposition of their presence at
their Tombs, and Oratories. Sect. 6. The Authors cited by T. G. are partly
spurious or doubtful. Sect. 7. Partly impertinent, and such as use either
Rhetorical Apostrophe's or only wishes. Sect. 8. or such as only do ascribe
unto them the worship of honor and affection, but say not any thing which
necessarily includes Prayer. Sect. 9. Or only do assert that they did pray
with us, and so did help us with their Prayers. Sect. 10. Or that they did
commend themselves unto their Prayers by desi^ing God, that for their
intercession he would be gracious. Sect. 11.

. 1. AND thus we have confirmed the truth of our assertion from the most
pregnant Testimonies of the ancient Fathers of the four first Centuries: We
come now to consider what T.G. offers from the Fathers, to prove the invocation
of the Saints departed, to have been the practice of the Primitive Church: Unto
which purpose he alleges some passages of Gregory Nazianzen, and Nyssen, St.
Cyril, and St. Ambrose, Ruffinus, St. Basil, Chrysostom, St. Austin: to which
we Answer.

1. That all these Fathers lived in the declining times of the fourth Century,
or after the conclusion of it. Bas. M. A. 370. Nazian. 379. Nissenus 380.
Ambrose 374. Chrysostom. An. 398. Hierom. ob. 420. Ruffinus 418. August 396.
Cyril Alex. 412. Theodoret 423. Nor can one Item of such a practice be produced
from any of the former Writers; so that if all these Fathers did expressly say
what T. G. does contend they do, it would be only this, That the most ancient
Fathers of the three first Centuries, and to the middle of the fourth, were in
this matter perfect Protestants, whereas some of the middle Fathers, who lived
in the declining Ages of the Church, do seem to speak in favor of the Church
of Rome: Now in this case we say with Cyprian, Si in aliquo nutaverit, and
vacillaverit veritas, ad originem Dominicam, and Evangdicam, and Apostolicam
traditionem revertamur, and inde surgat actus nestri rati^, unde and ordo and
origo surrexit. Ep. 74. Sect. 14.
If verity does warp or lean aside, we must look back, and return to Divine,
Evangelical, and Apostolic Tradition; and derive the order of our action, from
the original ground where it first began. And with Tertullian, Ostendam -- hoc
exigere veritatem cui nemo praescribere potesi non sputium temporum, non
patrocinia personarum, non privilegium regionum, ex his enim fere consuetudo ab
aliqua ignorantia vel simplieitate initium sortita in usam per successionem
corroboratur, and ita adversus veritatem vindicatur, sed Dominus noster
Christus veritatem senon consuetudinem cognominavit, siquidem semper Christus,
and prior omnibus, aeque veritas sempiterna, and antiqua res. De Veland. Virg.
c. 1.
If a custom proceeding from ignorance or simplicity, be confirmed by use of
succession, and opposed against verity, we must observe that neither space of
time, nor privilege of persons may prescribe against truth; for Christ is
eternal, and before all, and in like sort, verity is most ancient: For who
knows not, that above 100 years before this time, the practice of
communicating Infants had obtained in the Church: St. De Lapsis Sect 7. and 20.
Cyprian makes mention of it twice; the l. 8. c. 13.
Apostolic Constitutions declare, that first the Priests communicated, then
Virgins, after them, Widows, and then (...), or their little Infants. In the
same Century (...), etc. Apud Phot. in Bibl. 177
Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia in Sicily, concludes against his Adversaries,
that Infants must be acknowledged to be guilty of sin, because, it was the
custom to administer Christ's Body to them for the Remission of Sin. They also
held, that it was necessary to eternal life for Infants to receive this
Sacrament. When Christ says, If you eat not my flesh, you shall not have life
in you; should I say that an Infant should have life, who ends his life without
that Sacrament: So Austin. Again, Dominum audiamus, inquam, non quidam hoc de
Sacramento Iavacri dicentem, sed de Sacramento San^^ monsae suae, quo nemo
rite, nisi Baptizatus, accedit, nisi manduca^^^ it is carnem meam and biberitis
sanguinem meum non habebitis vitan (...) vobis -- an vero quisquam etiam hoc
dicere audebit quod ad par^^^ los haec sententia non pertineat, possinique sine
participatione corp^^^ hujus and sanguin is in se habere vitam? Tom. 7. l. 1.
de peccat. (...) ritis and remiss. c. 20.
Let us hear our Lord, says he, speaking of the Sacrament of the holy Table,
whether none rightly comes, but he that is baptized: and then citing this
place; Unless you eat my flesh, etc. he adds, Dare any say that this sentence
belongs not to Children, but that they may without the participation o^ the
body and blood of Christ, have life in themselves. For this he also urges the
Testimony of the See of Rome; (for then this Doctrine, (...) well as Practice,
was received there.) Ecce B. memoriae Innocentius Papa sine Baptismo Christi,
and sine participatione Corporis and Sanguinis Christi, vitam non habere
parvulos dicit. To. 7. contra duas Ep. Pelag. l. 2. c. 4. p. 190. L. Si autem
cedunt (Pelagiani) Apostolicae sedi, vel potius ipsi Magistro, and Domino
Apostolorum qui dicit non habitures vitam in seipsis, nisi manducaverint carnem
filii hominis, etc. (quod nisi Baptizati non ut^que possunt) nempe aliquando
fatebuntur parvulos non Baptizatos vitam habere non posse. Epist. ad Paulinum,
Ep. 106. p. 101.
Behold, says he, Pope Innocent of blessed memory, declares that little ones
cannot have life without Baptism, and the participation of the Body and Blood
of Christ: And in his Epistle to Paulinus, if the Pelagians, says he, will
yield to the Apostles Seat, or rather to their Lord and Master, saying that
except we eat his flesh, and drink his blood (which the unbaptized cannot do)
we shall not have life, they will at last confess that unbaptized Infants
cannot have it. The Words of Innocentius are these; Haec enim ejus verba sunt,
Illud vero quod eos vestra fraternitas asserit praedicare parvulos aeternae
vitae praemiis etiam sine Baptismatis Gratia posse donari perfatuum est, risi
enim manducaverint carnem filii hominis. August. contr. duas Epist. Pelag. l.
2. c 4.
Whereas your Brotherhood asserts, that the Pelagians say that Infants may be
saved without Baptism; this is a very fond opinion, for unless they eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, they have no life in them. Hinc
constat Inncoentii primi sentententia (quae 600 circiter annos in Ecclesia
viguit, quamque Augusitnus sectatus est) Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus
nece^sarium fuisse. Council. Tom. 1. part. 4. p. 624.
Whence it is evident (says Binius) that this was Pope Innocents opinion,
which also was maintained in the Church 600 years, viz. that the participation
of the Eucharist was necessary to Infants: and what he thus confesses is made
good by * Dalle from the fourth inclusive, to the eleventh Century, by the
plain pregnant Testimonies of them that lived in those Times; Who also does
abundantly consute that vain imagination of Mr. Cressy and Vasquezius, that
they conceived it necessary that Infants should partake Christ's Body and his
Blood not Sacramentally, but Spiritually, by such a participation as may be had
in Baptism. Lastly, they also do affirm this Doctrine to be derived from Optime
Funici Christiani Baptismum ipsum nihil a liud quam salutem, and Sacramentum
Corporis Christi, nihil aliud quam vi^um vocant, unde nisi ex Aatiqua, ut
existimo, et Apostolica traditione; qua Ecclesiae Christi insitum tenent
praeter Baptismum and participationem dominicae mensae, non solum ad regnum
Dei, sed we ad salutem, and vitam aeternam posse quenquam hominum pervenire,
hoc enim and scriptura testatur (viz. Tit. 3.5. 1 Petr. 3.21. John 6.51, 53.)
si ergo, ut tot and tanta Divina testimonia concinunt, nec salus, nec vita
ae^crna, sine Bapt^^m^ and Corpore and Sanguine Domini cuiquam speranda est,
frustra ^^ne his promittitur parvulis. Tom. 7. lib. 1. de peccat. meritis, etc.
c. 24. p. 144 D. E.
Apostolical Tradition, and deeply settled in the Churches of Christ, as does
most evidently appear from that of Austin: From an ancient, and (as I suppose)
Apostolical Tradition, the Churches of Christ have this deeply settled in them,
that without Baptism and the participation of the Lords Supper, no man can
attain to the Kingdom of God, nor yet to life eternal: If therefore so many
Testimonies Divine convince us, that everlasting Life is not to be expected
without Baptism and the Body and Blood of Christ, it is in vain to promise it to
children without them. And yet the Church of Rome has laid aside this
practice, and determined against this Doctrine thus: Council. Trid. Sesi. 21.
Can. 4.
Si quis dixerit Parvulis antequam ad annos discretionis pervenerint
necessariam esse Eucharistiae communionem anathema sit: Which must be thus
interpreted; If any Person now does say, what the whole Church of Christ did
for 600 years together; viz. That it is necessary for Infants to be partakers
of the Eucharist, let him be accursed. I will not quarrel with them, as Mr.
Dalle does for their intolerable irreverence to the ancient Fathers, or for the
Curse they have pronounced on the whole Church of Christ, for many Ages; but I
will take the Boldness to infer, that if they may condemn a practice far more
ancient than was the Invocation of departed Saints, a practice not opposed, as
that was, by many Fathers of the Church, upon its first encroachment, when
about A. D. 360. it began to creep into the Church, a practice so deeply settled
in all Christian Churches in St. Austins time, when that of Invocation of
Saints departed, was but in the Embryo; Lastly, a practice proved from clear,
unanimous, and numerous assertions of the learned Fathers; (Whereas what is
produced for the other practice is obscure and contradictory to what in other
places they deliver, and fairly may admit another sense, as you shall see
hereafter;) I say, if they may wholly lay aside this practice, and may
pronounce Anathema's against it: I hope we also may refuse to practice this
Invocation of the Saints departed, provided that it were as ancient as the
Times of Nazianzen, Basil, and St. Austin.

2 Observe, 2.
That though these Fathers cited by T. G. seem in some places to assert or use
this invocation of the Saints departed, in others they deny the Doctrine, and
disapprove the practice of it; and this they do in Writings more assuredly
Authentic, and in words more clear and pregnant, than are, or can be brought
to justify it. This I might easily make good, by an induction of the places
cited pro and con, from all these Father; but since T. G. has singled out St.
Austin, p 431.
as a man so clear and pregnant in this Point, that whosoever shall deny St.
Austin, to have held such formal invocation to be the Worship due to Saints,
must shut his eyes, and fight against the light of a noonday truth: Let any
man peruse the places which are cited from that Father, and say, whether I have
not reason to affirm this bold Assertion to be a manifest untruth.

The passages produced out of the genuine Works of Austin for Invocation, are,

1. Let Blessed Cyprian help us with his prayers. T. G. p. 430.

2. We Christian People do with religious solemnity celebrate the memory of
Martyrs, both to excite us unto the imitation of them, and that we may become
partakers of their merits, and may be helped by their prayers. T. G. p. 433.

3. It is an injury to pray for a Martyr, to whose prayers we ought to be
commended. T. G. p. 434.

Against it we produce these Testimonies.

Ipse Sacerdos est, qui nunc ingressus in interiora Veli, solus ibi ex his qui
carnem gestaverunt interpellat pro nobis. In Psalm. 64. p 144. M.
(1.) Christ is the Priest, who being now entered within the Vail, only of all
that have been made partakers of flesh, makes intercession for us there.

Si vero ita diceret, hoc scripsi vobis ut non peccetis, and si quis
peccaverit, Mediatorem me habetis apud Patrem, ego exoro pro peccatis vestris,
sicut Parmenianus quodam loco Mediatorem posuit Episcopum inter Populum and
Doum, quis cum ferret bonorum atque fidelium Christianorum? quis sicut
Apostolum Christi, and non sicut Antichristum intueretur. Contr. Epistol.
Parmen. l. 2. c. 8. p. 7. L. Tom. septimo.
(2.) If he (i. e.) St. John, had said thus, If any man sin, you have me a
Mediator with the Father, I make intercession for your sins, ( as Parmenian in
one place does make the Bishop a Mediator betwixt the People and God) what good
and faithful Christian would endure him, who would look upon him as the Apostle
of Christ, and not as Antichrist?

Non est quo cas nisi ad me, non est qua eas nisi per me. Tract. 22. in Joh.
(3.) Thou have not whither thou can go but to me, nor have thou any other
way to go but by me.

Thirdly,. 3.
Observe, that many of these Fathers held those Doctrines and opinions which
are inconsistent with this practice, according to the Judgment of the Romanist.
As 1. It is the Judgment of the Doctors of the Church of Rome, Illi qui sunt in
Purgatorio, nondum fruuntur visione verbi, ut possint cognoscere ea quae nos
cogitumus vel dicimus, and ideo eorum suffragia non imploramus orando. Aquin.
2a 2ae. qu. 83. Art. 4.
That our petitions should be directed only to such Saints as do enjoy the
beatifick vision, or a clear sight of God, and are admitted into those glorious
Mansions which are emphatically styled Heaven. And this they do imagine to be
necessary upon three accounts: 1. That they may give a reason why this practice
was never used by the Notandum est quia ante Christi adventum sancti qui
moriebantur non intrabant in coelum, nec Deum videbant, nec cognoscere poterant
ordinary preces supplicantium, ideo non fuisse consuetum in Testamento veteri
ut diceretur sancte Abraham, Ora pro me. Bellar. de Sanctorum Beatitud. l. 1.
cap. 19. S. item Exodi.
Prophets, or the Jewish Church, and why it is not said in Scripture, or in the
Jewish Records, Sancte Abraham, Ora pro me, Holy Abraham, Pray for me. And 2.
Why neither they, nor any other persons, did ever put up a petition to the
Dicendum est ideo non fuisse morem in veteri Testamento adeundi Sanctos
Intercessores, quia nondum erant beati and glorificati ut modo sunt. Alphons.
Salmer. in 1 Timothy 2. disp. 8.
Saints in Purgatory. 3. Because this Quod autem aliquis diricte oraverit
Sanctos defunctos ut se adjuvarent, vel pro se orarent nusquam legimus, hic
enim modus orandi est proprius legis Gratiae, in quo Sancti videntes Deum
possunt etiam in co videro orationes quae ad ipsos fundantur. Fr. Suarez. in
part. 3. Th. To. 2. disp. 42. Sect. 1. V. Albert. Pigh. Controv. 13.
beatifick vision is conceived to be that glass, in which the blessed do behold
the prayers that are made unto them, or at the least it is required as a
preparatory to this Revelation. Now Thomas Stapleton informs us, That Tot illi
and tam celebres antiqui Patres, Tertullianus, Irenaeus, Origenes, Chry
sostomus, Theodoretus, Oecumenius, Theophy lactus, Ambrosius. Clemens Romanus,
D. Bernardus, huic sententiae (quae nunc in Concilio Florentino magnd demum
corquisitione facta ut dogma fidei definita est) quod justorum animae ante diem
Judicti Dei visione fruuntur non sant assensi s^d sententiam contrariam
tradiderunt. Defens. Eccles. Authorit. contr. Whitak. l. 1. cap. 2.
many famous ancient Fathers, Tertullian, Irenaeus, Origin, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, Ambrose, Clemens Romanus, and Bernard, did
not assent unto this sentence, That the Souls of the righteous enjoy the sight
of God before the day of Judgment; but did deliver the contrary sentence
thereunto. To these Franciscus Pegna adds, In part. 2. direct. Inquisitor.
comment. 2^.
Justin Martyr, Austin, Lactantius, Victorinus, Prudentius, Aretas, and
Euthymius. The truth of which Confessions of these Roman Doctors, you may see
largely proved in De poenis and satisfact^. 5. c. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Dalle: And that this Doctrine was almost generally received, about that time
when all those Fathers flourished which T. G. cites, to confirm the invocation
of Saints, is evident from that of Post vitam istam parvum nondum eris, ubi
erunt Sancti quibus dicetur, Venite benedicti Fatris, percipite regnum quod
vobis paratum est ab initio mundi. Nondum ibi eris, quis nescit? Sed jam
poteris ibi esse, ubi illum quondam ulcerosum pauperem, dives ille superbus and
sterilis in medits suis tormentis vidit a long qutescentem. Tom. 8 in Psalm.
36. fol. 61. G.H.
Austin, Nondum ibi eris: qu^s nescit? Thou shall not as yet be there: who
knows it not?

2. It is confessed by many Doctors of the Church of Rome, that if the Saints
deceased do not hear and understand our Prayers, it is a vain and idle thing to
pray unto them: if this, says DeBeatitud. disp. 25.
Lorca, was not supposed by the Church of Christ, she would first pray unto God
to reveal our Prayers, and then would put up her Petitions to them: Now almost
all the Fathers cited by T.G. held that the Dead did neither know nor were
acquainted with our Petitions or our wants, or at the least, they were of
S^etiam ex^ra corpus positi, vel sancti qui cum Christo sunt, agunt aliquid and
laboran^ pro nohis ad similitudinem Angelorum, qui salu^is nost^ae ministeria
procurant, -- habeatur hoc queque inter occulia Dei, ^ee char^ulae committenda
mysteria. Orig. in Romans l. 2. p. 472.
Origens Opinion, that it was doubtful whether they did or no. Thus Ambrose
speaking of his dead brother, says did thou now know how Si nunc urgeri
Italiam tam propinquo bosie cognosceres, quantum ingemisceres. Ambros. de obitu
sr. Satyri.
Italy was pressed with so near an Enemy, how would thou groan within thy
self? St. Hierom in Nepotians Epitaph professes he believes him Quicquid dixero
quia ille non audit m^tum vide^ur. f. 8. B. Scimus quidem Nepotianum nostrum
esse cum Christo and Sanctorum mixtum ch^ris. ib. 1. F^lix Nepotianus qui haec
non videt, felix qui haec non audit. p. 10. B.
mingled amongst the Quire of Saints: And yet he adds, whatsoever I shall say
will be but speaking to the Deaf, because, he hears not: and again, happy is
Nepotian, who neither hears nor sees these things: Ibi ergo sunt Spiritus
defunctoru^ ubi non vident quaecunque aguntur, aut eveniunt in isra vita
hominibus. De cura pro mortuis. c. 13.
The Spirits of dead men are there where whatsoever things are done or happen
in this life to men, they do not see them. So St. Augustine; and therefore
Anselm in his interlineal Gloss upon that Text, Abraham is ignorant of us,
notes thus, Austin says that the dead do not know what the living do. Else
where he is less positive, and only says, Respondeo magnam quidem esse
quaestionem, vtrum, vel quatenus, vel quomodo ea quae circa nos aguntur (...)
ver^nt Spiritus mor^norum. August. in Psalm 108. Enar. 1. p. 276, A.
whether at all, or how far, or after what manner the Spirits of the dead could
know the things that are done here, is a great question. And the like doubt we
find in Nazianzen in his Rhetorical Apostrophe's: for in his invective against
Julian he speaks thus; (...). p. 2. Ed. Eton.
Hear O thou soul of great Constantius (if thou have any understanding of these
things) and as many souls of the Kings before him as loved Christ. Where the
Greek Scholiast upon that Parenthesis nutteth this Note; (...) He speaks
according to the manner of Isocrates, meaning, if thou have any power to hear
the things that are here And therein he says rightly, for Isocrates uses the
same form of speech, both in his Evagoras, and in his Aegineticus; (...). If
they which be dead have sense of the things which are done here. The like
limitation is used by the same Nazianzen toward the end of the funeral Oration,
which he made upon his Sister Gorgonia where he speaks thus unto her; (...)
Greg. Nazian. Orat. 2. in Gorgon.
If thou have any care of the things done by us, and holy souls receive this
honor from God, that they have any feeling of such things as these; receive
this Oration of ours, instead of many, and before many funeral obsequies.
Whence it is evident, that the Foundation of this Doctrine was doubted by them;
And then it follows, that the thing it self was in those times only a doubtful,
or a disputable point, and therefore that it was not delivered to them by
tradition, or confirmed by Scripture, and cannot be required as the Condition
of Communion without Schism: 2. Hence we have just reason to suspect that in
those other passages, we meet with of like Nature, these words, If thou have
any sense, or apprehension of these things, when they are not expressed, may
very well be understood: and that this is the genuine import of their
Rhetorical Petitions.

. 4. Observe that the before mentioned Fathers did often speak to their deceased
Friends in such a manner, as if they did suppose them present, although they
did not think them so to be: thus Tom. 1. p. 314. B.
Nazianzen, when ready to conclude his Funeral Oration upon his Father,
speaks thus, What say thou Father, is this sufficient? And l. 1. contra
Julian. c. 6.
Austin speaks to Chrysostom, who had been dead some years before; Enter, St.
John, enter, and sit together with thy brethren. And Tom. 1. in Psalm. 50. p.
703. l. 27.
Chrysostom to David thus, What is it thou desire, David, thy sins are
pardoned, what would thou more? Oh David, go, give God thanks, and ever
glorify him. And again, why art thou troubled, David, let me know. This (...).
p. 19. ed. Eton.
Nazianzen does acknowledge to be the meaning of his addresses to Constantius
when he believed he did enjoy the vision of God: for thus he speaks, What was
the matter, oh divinest King, and greatest lover of our Lord, for I am moved to
find fault, as if thou wast here present, and did hear me, though I do know
thee to be now with God, and in possession of his Glory. And this way of
speaking they borrowed from the Heathen Orators and Poets, whom we find
speaking thus; O M. Drusius I appeal to thee; O Audisne haec Am^ ^hiarie sub
terram abdite? Tuscul. Qu. l. 2 p. 147.
Amphiarius, who art now buried in the Earth, hear thou this? Quid dicem^^
C^eanthe? number in illa re -- mali nihil fuisse. Tusc. Quaest. l. 3. p. 163. Ed.
Paris. 1555.
What shall we say Cleanthes, is this a wicked thing.

. 5. The very same Authors do many of them make the like Apostrophe's to
insensate Creatures, and use Expressions which contain as formal and direct
petitions, as any which are used in the places cited by the Roman Doctors. St.
Nazianz. Orat. Decima. quarta. p. 214.
Nazianzen invokes peace thus, Oh friendly Peace, who art that good which all
men praise, but few observe, where have thou so long left us, and when wilst
thou return unto us? And unto Easter he speaks thus; (...) Nazianz. (...) O at.
42. p. 696.
Oh great and holy Passover, who art the reconciliation of both the Worlds: For
I will speak to thee, as unto one endued with life. In his invective against
Julian he speaks thus: Hear O Heavens, and perceive O Earth: Hear all ye
Nations, perceive all you that dwell upon the Earth: For to you all I speak.
(...). p. 1.
Hear you who live at present, and hereafter shall be born. St. Ambrose speaks
unto the Water thus; Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. c. 22.
Oh Water which have obtained to be the Sacrament of Christ, which washest all
things, and art not washed thy self, thou do begin the first, and do
complete the perfect Mysteries. In the like manner we find De Vir. Constantim
l. 5
Eusebius calling upon Piety, and Optat. l. 6. p 98.
Optatus upon Water: and this they did agreeably to the Example of the Vos vos
Albani ^umuli atque luci, vos inquam i^ploro a^qu: obtestor, vosque A ^banorum
obru^ae arae, etc. Orat. pro Milone, p. 558. Ed. P^ris.
Orator, who does implore, and does beseech the broken Altars of the Albans;
and puts up his Petition to their Tombs and G^ove^: and to the frequent custom
of the sacred Writers, who cry out, Isa. 1.2.
Hear O Heaven, and perceive oh Earth! Hear ye, O Mountains, the Lords
controversy, and ye strong Foundations of the Earth. Micah. 6.2.
Praise the Lord from the Earth, ye Dragons and all Deeps. Psalm. 148.7, 8, 9.
Fire, and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind, fulfilling his word. Mountains
and all Hills, fruitful Trees and all Cedars. Which form of Compellation is
still retained in our Liturgy. And yet I hope T. G. will not infer that the
Jews of old did, and English Protestants do at present properly invoke and
intercede to those insensate Creatures. Lastly, we find in Lipoman one speaking
to the girdle of the Blessed Virgin in this manner; O venerable girdle, make us
Heirs of eternal and blessed Life, and preserve us in this our present life,
from perdition: O undefiled Girdle, preserve thy people from pollution. If this
and such like speeches of the Church of Rome must be acknowledged to be
figurative, why may we not assert the same of such Expressions of the Fathers
as are used to those Saints departed, of whom they do assert that what is
spoken to them, because they do not hear it, is as if it had been spoken to
insensate Creatures.

6. Observe, Sect. 6.
there is great difference betwixt the practice that in these times began to be
approved by some men, and what is now the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. For,

1. That which we chiefly do object against that Church, is, that she does
enjoin us to believe, That even mental prayers are well addressed to them, and
consequently that they have the knowledge of the conceptions of the heart, and
the sincerity of its intentions. Whereas the Fathers of that age, without
distinction or exception, held that it was proper to God to perceive the
secrets of the heart; this, by the concurrent judgment of the Fathers, being no
more communicated to the Creatures, than was the Knowledge of what was future
and contingent, as I have proved already chap 6. Prop. 2.4.

2. Whereas the Doctrine and practice of the Roman Church, does make it good
and profitable for all people, to call upon them in all places, though as far
distant from them as is Earth from Heaven, or as one corner of the Earth is
from the other; some of these Fathers did conceive the Saints were present at
their Tombs and Shrines, and being so, they might attend unto the prayers of
them that did resort unto them. Thus when it was objected by Vigilantius to St.
Jerome, If it be so, then the souls of Martyrs love their ashes, and hover still
about them, and are always there, lest if any Petitioner should come, they
being absent, should not hear him; I say, when this was urged by Vigilantius,
agreeably to that opinion which then began to gather strength, and to be owned
in the Christian Church: St. Jerome does not, as T. G. deny the sequel, but lays
down this absurd and monstrous Tenet to defend it, That Si agnus ubique, ergo
and hi qui cum agno sunc ubique esse credend^ sunt.
if the Lamb be every where, they also that be with the Lamb, must be believed
to be every where. Moreover, he represents it as a wicked speech of
Vigilantius, Ais enim vel in sinu Abrahae, vel in loco refrigerii, vel subter
aram Dei animas Apostolorum and Martyrum consedisse, nec posse de suis tumulis,
and ubi vol^erunt, adesse praesentes. Hier. adversus Vigilant.
That the souls of the Apostles and Martyrs could not be present at their
Tombs, never suggesting in the least that such a presence was needless to this
end. De cura pro mortuis c. 16.
St. Austin does affirm, That either the Martyrs themselves must be at one time
in such diverse places, so far distant from one another, ( viz. as they were
distant with whom they were conceived to pray at their memorials) or if they
were not present, they must be removed from all commerce with the affairs of
men here, and only prayed in general for the necessities of supplicants.
Sulpitius upon the death of St. Martin comforts himself with this
consideration, Non deerit nobis ille, mibi creed, non deerit, intererit de se
sermocinantibus, adsiabit orantibus. Epist. 2. de obitu and appar. S. Martini
p. 533 ed. Lugd. Batav.
That he would not be wanting to them; and of this assertion he immediately
subjoyns this reason, viz he will be present with us speaking of him, and will
stand by us when we pray; upon which passage the Scholiast observes, that it
was vulgarly believed, that holy Martyrs were present at their Sepulchers. That
this was also the Opinion of Nazianzen, Basil, and all the Fathers cited by
T.G. is largely proved by Bochartus. If then these Fathers did in this
particular maintain what is confessedly erroneous, why might they not be
subject to the same mistake, touching the doctrine of invocation of the Saints
departed, and then that error in their judgment must necessarily give rise to
that unwarrantable practice, which in those times began to be approved.

Having in general laid down these propositions, Traitee second de^l'invoc. des
Saints c. 4.
I might decline all farther Answer to what T.G. produces from the testimonies
of the fore mentioned Fathers, in favor of that practice we dispute against;
but, that he may not think we study to decline what he has offered, we proceed
to a particular reflection on them; and shall endeavor to demonstrate that
they are either cited out of spurious and doubtful books, or are impertinently
alleged. And, Sect. 7. Hom. 26. in 2 Cor.


1. Amongst the spurious, or doubtful Authors, we reckon that passage cited
from St. Chrysostom; this was the Judgment of Erasmus, who in his preface
before his Latin Translation of Basil de Spiritu sancto, says, that there are
somethings in that book which must own him for their Parent, who mixed his weak
and wordy trifles with the sweet works of Athanasius on the same subject, and
who, in this Epistle, and in the Acts of the Apostles, endeavored to be
esteemed Chrysostom. And therefore when Erasmus came to the 7th. Homily of this
Epistle, he would translate no farther: 2. this passage in some editions is not
extant though these editions have proceeded from the hands of Romanists.
Novelty of Popery. p. 422, p. 423.
3 Peter Du Moulin makes evident the falsehood of this passage and the words
preceding, not only from the diversity of the style, and want of a connection
with the precedent words, but chiefly from the doctrine, so full of ignorance
and absurdity, as shows it to be inconsistent with the Judgment and Learning of
that Holy Father. Lastly this place is cited by Garesius under the name of
Theodorus Daphnopatus, De Sanct. i^ v^c. p. (...).
who therefore is most like to be the Father of this spurious passage.

Secondly, amongst spurious and doubtful writings, We may reckon the Oration
upon Cyprian fasly ascribed to Gregory Nazianzen, where S. Justina is brought
in (...) (i e) Entreating that the Virgin Mary would defend her against C^^^an,
who being then a Pagan endeavored by M^gical enchantments to attempt her
chastity, but finding his attempts all frustrate, was by that means converted
to the Christian Faith, and was that famous Bishop of Carthage, whose memory
was precious through the Christian World. Whereas (1.) It is certain, St.
Cyprian was never in his life a Sorcerer, Page 1.
for Pontius his Deacon, who has writ his life assures us, that whilst he was
a Heathen he was addicted to good arts, and such as tended to the benefit of
the World, which sure no Christian would affirm of a 'Magician. (2.) Whereas
this fable ascribes his conversion to Justina, or the experience of his vain
attempts upon her; This Pontius wholly omits that Fable, and does assure us,
that he was converted by Erat sane illi etam de nebis contubern um viri justi
and laud ibilis Memoriae Cecilii, and aetatetune, and honor Presbyteri, qui
eum ad agnition^m verae divinita^is a saeculari errore correxerat. P. 2.
Cecilius a Carthaginian Presbyter: (3.) Explosa fabula illa de Cypriani Macica
art. Baroni^s A.D. 250. Sect. 5.
Baronius himself confesses this story of the Magic of St. Cyprian to be
explodendam fabulam: now hence it follows that this Oration is not the genuine
work of Nazianzen, or else that Nazianzen was a man of very easy Faith, one
prone to tell the most absurd and foolish sables for truth, and therefore one
who can deserve no credit in this relation of Justina's prayer unto the blessed
Virgin.

Such thirdly is the passage cited from Theodoret, for, as Disp. Hist. de
Invoc. Sanct. Th. 8. p. 198.
Vossius well argues, had that Book been his; Nicephorus, who gives us the
Catalogue of his books, would have made mention of it. And Photius when he
makes mention of the writings of this Author which he had perused, would not
have lest out this. Besides, what is here cited from him, directly contradicts
what he delivers in his undoubted Comment on the second and third Chapters of
the Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians. Lastly, the same we have just reason
to suspect of the two instances related by St. Austin De Civit. Dei l. 22. c.
2. for Ludovicus Vives does ingenuously declare, In hoc capite non dubium quin
multa sint addita, that many things have, without doubt, been added to this
Chapter. The 33. Homily de diversis is one of those, which have been lately
added to St. Austins Works, by the Divines of Lovain, and so deserves but
little credit.

2. Sect. 8.
Those places which are cited from the true writings of the Fathers, are made
to speak what they did not intend, and pressed to testify what they do not
assert. Thus when T.G. objects that passage of St. Austin, let B. Cyprian help
us with his Prayers. I answer, May T.G. rep^nt of his accursed Apostasy from
the Church of England. This I entirely wish and yet, I hope I pray not to T.G.
but says T.G. whoever considers the motive alleged by him why he add ressed
himself to St. Cyprian, which was for that in Heaven, he saw more clearly the
truth of that Question, of which himself had formerly doubted, and E. B.
Cyprianus ^wd^m ^a^n c^^^pore quid corrum^itur n^n aggravante animam nec
deprimen^e terr^na i^^ab^^a^ione sensun mul^^ ^^git^nte^, ^e^enius perspiei^
veritat^m quam m^^u^t adi^^s^^ (...) Ch^i (...) in istius c^rnis m^^talitate,
tanqu^m in caligin^sa nu^e lib (...), at donante Domino quantum possu ^us bona
^ju, ^mi^emur. To. 7. de Bap^. l. 7. c. 1. B.
St. Austin was then treating of, and the necessity he had of his prayers, as
being yet in the mortal Flesh, and laboring as in a dark cloud, will easily
see that it was not a counterfeit, but a true and serious address to him for
the assistance of his prayers. Answ. and why not rather an address to God for
his assistance, by virtue of the prayers of Cyprian. 2. Had Austin said, let
Cyprian help us, that we may be enlightened or instructed in this question,
this Answer might have had some show of strength, but when he only E. B.
Cyprianus ^wd^m ^a^n c^^^pore quid corrum^itur n^n aggravante animam nec
deprimen^e terr^na i^^ab^^a^ione sensun mul^^ ^^git^nte^, ^e^enius perspiei^
veritat^m quam m^^u^t adi^^s^^ (...) Ch^i (...) in istius c^rnis m^^talitate,
tanqu^m in caligin^sa nu^e lib (...), at donante Domino quantum possu ^us bona
^ju, ^mi^emur. To. 7. de Bap^. l. 7. c. 1. B.
wi^^^ to be assisted by his prayers, that he might imitate his goodness,
certain it is that not St. Cyprians Knowledge, but his charity, and his
enjoyment of God, of which that Knowledge was a consequent, was the true motive
of St. Austins wish, since he desires not to be instructed in the truth, but to
be confirmed in Goodness, it was not the want of Knowledge but of Goodness,
which he desired might be advantaged by the Prayers of Cyprian. Moreover, had
he desired to receive these things from Cyprian, either by converse with him,
or by some secret influence upon his clouded understanding, the circumstances
mentioned might be conceived a proper motive to that wish; but since he only
wishes to receive them donante Domino, or from the Gift of God, and by the
Intercession of St. Cyprian, certain it is that the consideration of St.
Cyprians Knowledge could be no motive unto that address, but only the
consideration of his enjoyment of God, and his power with him, and of his
charity by which he had obtained that enjoyment. To that of Jerome, Vale O
Paula, and Cultoris tui extremam sen^ctutem oration^bus juva, fides and
cperatua te Christo consociant, praesens facilius qu^d p^stulas, imp^trabis.
Epitaph. Pa^lae.
Farewell, O Paula, help the old Age of thine honourer with thy prayers; We
have sufficiently replied by showing, that it was frequent with the Fathers by
an Apostrophe to speak to their deceased Friends, as if they did suppose them
present, although they did not think them so to be: and this must necessarily
be the sense of Jerome: For he declares that his dear friend Nepotian, being
once joined to the Quire of Saints, whatever he should say unto him would be
but speaking to the deaf because he would not hear it: he therefore must
conceive the same of Paula, of whom he here affirms this she was present with
Christ.

The better to reply unto some other passage objected by T.G. observe first,. 8.
that the antie^^ Fathers did yield a threefold Service to the Sa^r^ departed,
as first, the honor of love and Society. Secondly, The Recognition and praises
of their excellencies. Thirdly, The Imitation of their virtues, and their godly
Examples: this service the writers of the fourth and fifth Century, sometimes
call worship, and Veneration, but the more ancient Fathers styled it honor,
accounting all religious worship to be due to God alone, as is most excellently
proved by Dalle. Advers. Lat. Cult. l. 1. c. 5, 1.
And when the Heretics and Heathens did object against these latter Fathers
the worship of the holy Martyrs, they reply two things.

1. That they did not worship them as Gods. Thus when it was objected by the
Apostate Julian, that (...) apud Cyril. l. 6 contr. Jul. p. 203.
instead of many Gods the Christians worshipped many miserable men; St. Cyril
answers, (...). ibid.
We do not make them Gods, nor do we worship that which by nature is not God.
And when Faustus had objected against the Christians, that they had Vertistis
Idola in mart yres quos votis, inquit, similibus colitis. Apud August. contra
Faustum Man. lib. 20. chap. 21.
changed their Martyrs into the Heathen Idols, and in like manner paid their
Homage to them; St. Austin answers, that At illo cultu, quae Latria dicitur,
nec colimus, nec colendam docemus, nisi unum Deum. August. ibid.
they gave not divine worship to them.

2. That Reverence and honor, which they oppose to this Latria, or divine
worship, and which they acknowledge to be due, and given by them to Saints
departed, they comprize in the forementioned particulars, or in such other
matters as are, and do include no formal prayers, and no elicite actions of
Religion; whence we may rationally conceive that neither Prayers, nor Vows, nor
any actions, which were properly religious, were then tendered to them, and that
they did not think them parts of that Dulia which was due to Saints, Contra
Faustum lib. 20. c. 21.
but rather parts of that Latria, which was due to God alone. This is apparent
from St. Austin's Answer unto Faustus, viz. the worship therefore, which we
give the Martyrs, is that worship of Society and Love which we afford unto
those holy men whom in this life we worship, but with that worship which is
called Latria, we worship God alone. Where (1.) observe that he ascribes unto
the Martyrs only that worship which in this life we give unto our fellow
Saints. Now is it any part of that affection or society we bear unto the
living, to put up our petitions to them, when at great distance from us and
invisible? (2.) Unto this worship of Society and love (which does not
comprehend addresses made by way of Prayer to persons absent and invisible) St.
Austin does oppose Latria, the worship proper to God: Whence we infer that
worship which could not be included in these expressions of Society and Love,
viz. all mental prayers, and supplications made by Speech to persons at great
distance and invisible, must in St. Austins judgment be Latria, or the worship
proper unto God alone. The like we may observe in Cyril, for having said, We
neither do affirm the Martyrs to be Gods nor do we worship them (...) with
Latria, but with the worship of honor and affection, He gives three instances
of their honor: (...) Cyril adv. Jul. l. 6. p. 204.
We give them all Veneration, we honor their Sepulchers, and we remember their
resplendent Virtues. Moreover the honor given to them seems therefore to be
called (...) or relative, Because as Basil notes, the honor given to the best
of our fellow Servants is the sign and demonstration of our good will and
respect toward our common Lord. Whence that of St. Gregory Nyssen speaking to
the Martyr Theodorus, Orat. de Theod. Martyr.
We hold this assembly for thee, to adore our common Lord, and make full
commemorations of thy Victories. So then these Answers and Objections which T.
G. reckons a confirmation of this practice of invocation of the Saints
departed, are rather a just prejudice against it, it being never mentioned by
them upon these occasions, as any portion of that honor they bestowed upon
these blessed Spirits, nor yet contained in what they mention.

Secondly,. 10.
Observe it was the custom of those times to put up their Petitions at the
Martyrs Tombs, and this they did for these considerations, viz. (1.) From a
presumption, that when the Christians came unto these Tombs, the blessed
Martyrs joined their Supplications with them, and by so doing helped to speed
them, Whence Basil in his Oration on the 40 Martyrs, says, Together with these
Martyrs let us pour forth our Prayers, for here are 40 sending up one Prayer,
and if where two or three be gathered together, God is present, who doubts his
presence where forty are? (2.) That their Devotions might be enlivened, and
their affections raised by the place. Thus Austin tells us, that Quod offertur,
offertur Deo, qui Martyrs coronavit, apud memoriam little quos coronavit: ut ex
ipsorum locorum admonitione major affectus exurgat, ^d acuendam Charitatem and
in illos quos imtrari p^ssumus, and in illum quo ad^^^nte p^ssu^us. Contra
Faustum Man. l. 20. c. 21.
What was offered to God was offered at the memories of the Martyrs, that by
the admonition or remembrance which the very places give us, a stronger
affection may arise to inflame our charity both toward those whom we imitate,
and him by whose assistance we may be enabled to do it.

Another custom of these Ancients was to (...). Cyril. Catech. Mystag 5. p.
241.

Ideo ad ipsam mensammon sic cos commemoramus quemadmodum alios qui in pace
requi^scunt, ut etiam pro iis o emus, sed magis ut ipsi pro nobis orent.
August. Tract. 84. in Joh.


pray unto God,. 11.
that for the intercession of those Saints and Martyrs, he would grant them
their requests, just as the Israelites did desire kindness for the sake of
Abraham and David. And this, says Austin, happily may be conceived that De cura
pro Mortuis, cap. 16.
they in general making addresses unto God (as we do for the Dead, although we
know not where they are, or what they do) for all the wants of such as come to
these assemblies, God may be moved by their Prayers to grant what he sees
needful for them; as happily he is moved by the fervent Prayers of some Relations
distant from us, to vouchsafe us blessings, and by the addresses of some
Churches, to grant deliverance from Persecution unto others.

This observation is a sufficient Answer to many of those passages which T.G.
cites to prove it was the custom of the ancient Church to invocate the Saints
departed; as V. G. Ruffinus does relate of Theodosius, Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c.
33.
That he went to all the places of Prayer, and lying prostrate before the
Martyrs and Apostles Tombs, he asked succors by intercession of the Saints
(which upon supposition that they prayed with him, and did continually
intercede for all that put up their petitions there, or for the whole Church
militant, he might well do) but then it is not intimated that he begged these
succors by invocation of the Saints. We also hope for benefit and succor from
the intercessions of our pious friends, and of the whole Church militant, and
may entreat God to help us for the sake of their petitions, yet is not this a
warrant to put up supplications to our pious Relatives, or to the universal
Church.

St. Basil in his Oration on the forty Martyrs says, (...). Bas. Hom. 20 in
XL. Mart. p. 459.
He that is pressed with affliction flies to them, and he that is glad runs
to them; the one that he may be freed from his affliction, the other that he
may continue in that joyful state. But then to fly, and run unto them, is only
to fly and run unto the Tombs and Churches where they were interred, as is
apparent from the following words; Here it is that a woman praying for her Son
is heard: And from the Exhortation following; Wherefore together with these
Martyrs let us pour forth our Prayers: Here therefore is a demonstration, that
this blessed Chorus were judged (...), (...).
co-helpers of our Prayers by interceding with us (as are our fellow Christians
here on earth, 2 Cor. 1.11. Romans 15.30.) but here is not one tittle to
demonstrate that they did, or that we ought to pray to them.

4. When Austin says that Christian People do with religious solemnity
celebrate the memory of Martyrs, both to excite them to the Imitation of them,
and that they may become partakers of their merits (or Good works) and may be
helped by their Prayers: This passage only proves that Austin held, what was
then commonly asserted, that when the Christians came to Church, the blessed
Martyrs joined their Supplications with them, and by so doing helped to speed
them: But it is no evidence that either Christians prayed unto the Martyrs, or
that the solemnity was styled Religious upon that account: For Protestants do
bring their Children to the Church to be baptized, not only that they may be
excited by that rite to the performance of the Christian Covenant, but that
they may obtain advantage by the Churches Prayers, but yet they do not pray
unto the Church. And T.G. may perhaps expect advantage from the Prayers of
Christ's Church Militant, and yet I hope he is not so express for Invocation of
the members of it, as for the invocation of the Church Triumphant. De cura pro
Mort. c. 16.
Besides, Austin himself expounds how we are helped by their Prayers: viz.
because that God may be induced by their intercessions made in general for all
that pray, to grant what he sees needful for them.

Moreover, that this passage is no evidence that Christians held Religious
Solemnities to the Martyrs, or did religiously worship Martyrs, is extremely
evident: For Protestants do also celebrate the memories of their deceased
Friends with a Religious Solemnity performed in those places where they were
interred, and yet they give unto from no Religious Worship: It therefore may be
^^^ed a Religious Solemnity because of the Devotion paid to God, and not unto
the Martyrs: But this Exposition, says T. G. is opposite both to the words
themselves, p. 432.
and is refuted by St. Austin, for he declares himself not to speak of that
Religious Worship which is due only to God, but such a kind of Worship with
which even holy men in this life are worshipped; we worship therefore, says
he, the Martyrs with the Worship of love and society: thus T. G. And yet in the
same page he adds, It is evident that St. Austin speaks of such Religious
honor as is due to God himself: If then within the space of ten lines St.
Austin speaks both of Religious Worship, and of that Worship which is not in
the strictest sense Religious, I hope the Dr. may be allowed to Answer with T.
G. that when St. Austin says, We worship Martyrs with the worship of love, he
did not speak of Religions Worship, though in this sentence he expressly does
so. For does not St. Austin say, That to speak Ipsa Religio quamvis distinctius
non quemlibet sed Dei cultum significare videatur, etc. de C. D. l. 10. c. 1
properly, Religion signifies that Worship which is due to God alone: Does not
he thus advise all Christians, Non sit nobis Religio cultus hominum mortuorum,
quia si pie vixerunt, non sic habentur ut tales quaerant honores, sed illum a
nobis coli volunt, quo iltuminante laetantur meriti sui nos esse consertes.
Let not the worship of the Dead be any part of your Religion, for if they have
lived well, they will not seek these honors. Does not he say, Henorandi ergo
sunt prepter imitationem Non adorandi prepter Religionem. August. de vera Rel.
Tom. 1. cap. 55. page 166. B.
They should be honored with our imitation, but not be worshipped with
Religion? and is not this sufficient reason to conceave, that when he says we
honor the memory of Martyrs with religious Solemnity, the Religion of that
Solemnity belongs to God, and not unto the Dead? Secondly, St. Austin says
Populus autem Christianus memorias Martyrum religioso solennitate concelebrat,
and ad exitandam imitationem, and ut meritis little consoctitur atque
orationibus adjuvetur; ita tamen ut nulti Martyrum, sed ipsi D^o Martyrum
quamvis in memorias Martyrum constituamus. Altaria. l. 20. contr. Faustum
Manich. c. 21.
We Christian People do celebrate the memory of Martyrs with Religious
Solemnity -- but albeit we erect Altars in memory of the Martyrs, we do not do
it to them, but to the God of Martyrs. If then constituere Altaria in memorias
Martyrum, be to erect Altars to God in memory of the Martyrs, to celebrate
Religious Solemnities in memory of the Martyrs, ought in all reason to admit of
a like sense, viz. we celebrate Religious Solemnities to God, in memory of Holy
Martyrs.

Whereas S. Austin says, It is an injury to pray to Martyrs, unto whose
Prayers we ought to be commended; This also may refer to the forementioned
presumptions; viz. That we ought to commend our selves to their Prayers, by
going to the places where the Martyrs pray together with us, or by entreating
God to hear us by virtue of their intercession, as does the Church of Rome.
Elsewhere he teaches, that we commend our Friends unto their Prayers by
burying of them where the Martyrs lie interred; so that we see this
commendation of our selves and others to the Martyrs Prayers, does not imply
the Invocation of those Blessed Spirits.

The same St. Austin in his Book de Cura pro mortuis, speaking of such as did
forecast to bury their departed friends, about the memories of the Saints,
passes his judgment of that action thus, Cum talia vivorum solatia
requiruntur, quibus eorum pius in suos animus appareat, non video quae sunt
adjumenta mortuorum, nisi ad hoc ut dum recolunt ubi sint posita eorum quos
diligunt corpora iisdem sanctis illos tanquam patronis susceptos apud dominum
adjuvandos orando commendent. Cap. 4. f. 214. E.
When the survivors seek such comforts, wherein their well disposed mind
toward their friends may be conspicuous, I see not what advantage these things
may be unto the dead, except that whilst they cast about where the bodies of
them that are dear to them should (or may) be laid, they may commend them so
received, to the Saints as to Patrons, to be helped by their prayers to God.
Which passage only does import, that by depositing their bodies by the Martyrs
shrines, they engage the Martyrs to pray to God for them. And to the like
effect is that which follows, viz. Cum itaque recolit animus nbi sepultum sit
chari ssimi corpus, and locus nomine occurrit Martyris venerabilis, eidem
Martyri animam dilectam commendat recordantis and precantis affectus. Ibid. F.
That when the mind does cast about where the body of a dear friend may be
buried, and straight a place occurreth to his mind, renowned for the name of
some Martyr, the affection of him who thus remembers and prays, forthwith
commends the beloved soul to the same Martyr, viz. that affection which induced
the surviving person to think of placing his beloved friend by the memorial of
that Martyr, and made him choose that as the place where he would commend the
soul of his beloved friend to God. For that the prayer was directed to God,
though put up at the Martyrs Tomb, is evident from the following words,
Plurimum intersit ubi ponat corpus mortui sui, qui pro Spiritu ejus Deo (N. B)
supplicat, quia and precedens affectus locum elegit sanctum and illic corpore
posito recordatus locus sanctus eum qui praecesserat renovat and auget
offectum. Cap. 5. H.
It may very much concern any, where he should place the body of his deceased,
who prays for his Spirit unto God, because both the preceding affection has
chosen an holy place, and the body being placed there, the remembrance of that
holy place renews and augments the affection. That this is the true import of
the place, and that the benefit St. Austin speaks of, was to be expected not
from any prayers put up unto the Saints, but partly from the desire of burying
the deceased by the Martyrs shrine, upon presumption of some advantage he might
receive by being there interred, and partly from the increase of the affection
of him that prays in that place to God, is admirably evident from that which
follows, viz. Cum ergo fide lis matter fidelis filii defuncti corpus desideravit
in Basilicam Martyris poni, siquidem credidu ejus animam meritis Martyrts
adjuvari, hoc quod ita credidit supplicatio quaed im fuit, and haec profuit
siquid profuit, and quod ad idem sepnichrum recurrit anime, and filium precibus
magis magisque commendat, adjuvat defuncti Spirtum, non mortui corporis locus,
sed ex loci memoria, vivus martyris affectus. Ibid G.
When therefore a believing Mother desires that the body of her Son may be
buried in the Martyrs Temple, as believing that his soul may be advantaged by
the merits of the Martyr, this very thing that she believes thus, is a kind of
prayer, and if any thing profits it is this. Since therefore nothing else
does, in St. Austin's judgment, profit, certain it is he does not speak of
prayer directed to the Martyrs, for if so, he could not have confessed, that
the forementioned faith did only profit, much less could he affirm it to be
that supplication (to the Martyr) which alone did profit.

Lastly, It is confessed, that Basil, Nazianzen, and Nyssen, do in their
Panegyrical Orations seem to invocate the Holy Martyrs. But then it is
apparent, 1. That they doubted, whether these Martyrs had any sense or
apprehension of the Requests put up unto them, and therefore prefaced their
addresses with an (...), If you have any sense. 2. They do ingeniously confess,
that though they knew them to be absent, yet they were moved to speak unto them
as if they had been present, and could hear them. 3. They make the like
addresses to insensate Creatures, of whom they were assured that they could not
hear them, which makes it reasonable to interpret their Addresses, rather as
Wishes and Rhetorical Apostrophes, than direct Invocations and Petitions
tendered to them; especially if we consider, that all those Fathers when they
discourse of Prayer, define it to be a Colloquy with God, and therefore did not
think that those addresses made unto the blessed Martyrs, had the true nature
of a Prayer. Moreover, it is certain that they never offered any mental Prayer
to Saint or Angel. And 2. That they conceived the Martyrs present in those
places where they offered these devotions, and therefore were not guilty of
those Doctrines and unwarrantable practices, for which especially we do condemn
the Roman Church.

CHAP. X.
The CONTENTS. The Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome, touching the
Invocation of the Blessed Angels, delivered from their own Catechism and
Rituals. Sect. 1. The Question stated. Sect. 2. The Idolatry of this Practice
proved. 1. This practice does ascribe unto them by way of Worship, what is
proper to God: viz. The Knowledge of the Secrets of the Heart. Sect. 3. 2.
Because, it is the Worship of the Mind. Sect. 4. 3. From the silence of the Old
Testament. Sect. 5. An objection answered. Sect. 6. The Reasons of this silence
which are alleged by the Romanist, Refuted. Sect. 7. And from the silence of
the New Testament. Sect. 8. 4. From the Consideration of those principles
whereby the Romanists condemn White Magic, as a practice guilty of Idolatry.
Sect. 9.

THe Catechism of the Church of Rome,. 1.
Published by the Decree of the Trent Council, gives us the Doctrine of that
Church, touching the Invocation of the Holy Angels in these words; Extant
divinae scriptuae testimonia hujus invocationis. Jacob enim ab Angelo quicum
luctatus fuerat petit ut sibi benedicat immo cogit, se enim non dimissurum
illum profitetur nisi benedictione accepta, neque solum sibi ab eo tribui quem
intuebatur, sed ab eo etiam quem minime videbat tum cum dixit Angelus qui eruit
me de cunctis malis benedicat pueris istis. Catechis. Romans Part 3. cap. 2. See.
10.
concerning this Invocation we have the Testimonies of the Scripture extant;
For Jacob requested of the Angel with whom he wrestled that he would bless him,
and he compels him so to do, for he professes that he would not let him go
without his Blessing; nor does he only put up his Petition unto the Angel whom
he saw, but also unto him whom he saw not, when he thus said, the Angel who
delivered me from all evil bless the Lads. Agreeable unto this Doctrine, is the
continual practice of that Church in her Authentic Lyturgies: For to St
Michael they pray thus.

Sancte Michael Archangele defend nos in praelio ut non percamus in tremendo
judicio. Miss. festo Appar. Sancti Mich. Maii. 8.
Defend us in our Warfare we thee pray, Least we should perish in the dreadful
day.

In the Roman Ritual, a Dying person is taught to pray with his Heart, when he
cannot do it with his Mouth thus; Hortetur praeterea ut co modo quo potest,
saltem, ex Cord, ita per intervalla precetur. Maria Matter Gratiae, Matter
Mifericordiae tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe.

Omnes Sancti Angeli and omnes Sancti intercedite prome, and mihi succurrite.
Rituale Ed. Antuerp 1617.


All ye Holy Angels intercede for me, and succor me. To the Guardian Angel
they pray thus;

Huc eustos igitur pervigil advola
Avertens patria de tibi credita
Tam morbos animi quam requiescere,
Quicquid non sinit incolas, Brev.
R. Reform. Off. Angeli Cust.

"Thou watchful Guardian hither therefore fly, "And from that Country where thy
charge does lie, "Divert what ere may prove their Minds Disease, "And what
disturbs the peoples quiet peace.
And again, Tu es spes mea Gloriose Angele, altissimus te posuit and mihi dedit
refugium tuum. Non accedat igitur ad me malum, and flagellum non appropinquet
tabernaculo meo. Mi custos Gloriose me consigna, and servis Dei aggrega
Gloriosis. Apprehende arma and scutum and exurge Angele in adjutorium mihi, dic
animae meae salus tua ego sum. Missa in honorem proprii Angeli.
Thou art my Hope, most glorious Angel, the most High has given and appointed
thee to be my Refuge, Let then no Evil come unto me, Let not the Scourge come
nigh my Tabernacle. Mark me and gather me unto Gods glorious Servants; take
hold of Shield and Buckler, and stand up to help me, say unto my Soul, I am thy
Salvation. The old Roman Missal f. 52. had a Prayer to this Effect.

Omnis homo omni die
Gabrielis and Mariae
Poscat beneficia
Ex his manet fons virtutis
Dulcor vitae spes salutis
Et diffusa Gratia.

"Let every Man on every day, "To Gabriel and to Mary pray "These are the
spring whence virtue flows apace, "Heavens hope, life's sweetness, and diffused
grace.
Whence we observe,. 2.
that according to the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of Rome, Angels when
absent and invisible, should be invocated: for this they daily practice, and
endeavor to confirm from the Example, and by the words of Jacob.

2. Observe that we must pray unto them, not only to obtain deliverance and
protection for us, by their Prayer, Intercedite pro me and mihi succurrite.
but to perform it by their power; for what they do conceive to be the Office
of those Angels, viz. to keep us, to avert those dangers that are imminent, and
to remove a present evil, must they not think it proper to request? If God has
placed a Guardian Angel for their refuge, may they not ask him to do the office
of a Guardian, as well as any other thing, and to preserve them in their ways,
that so no Evil may befall them? this, upon supposition, that they do always
hear our Prayers, is very Rational.

When therefore T. G. does insinuate, that they only do desire these Blessed
Spirits to offer up our Prayers, P. 361.
or to pray for us, as we desire the Prayers of just Men upon Earth, he does
insinuate a most apparent falsehood: for besides that signal difference betwixt
requesting of our Brother to pray for us; and their Petitions directed to the
holy Angels, to preserve them from the assaults of Satan, and to Tu Gloriose
Angele qui stas ante Dominum preces meas offer Altissimo and veni tribue mihi
desideriorum meorum abundantiam. Missa in hono^em proprii Angeli in Missali
Romans Ed. Antuerp. 1577.
confer upon them the greatest Blessings we can ask. I say besides all this; 1.
We never do by word of Mouth, request an absent Person, nor do put up any
Mental Prayers to our surviving Brethren, both which are tendered to the Holy
Angels, by the Roman Catholics.

3. It is apparent from what we we have discoursed, that it is in vain to put
up these Petitions to the Blessed Angels, unless we do ascribe unto them the
knowledge of the Hearts of those that supplicate, and unless we do suppose them
either present with us, or able to help us, being absent, and that they do
accept this service when we pay it to them, that so as they are deemed to be
able, they may assuredly be willing to relieve and help us. Now to ascribe this
Knowledge to them, and upon this account to Worship and invoke them, is to be
guilty of Idolatry. This we endeavor to demonstrate. 1. From the Reason of
those Addresses which we make to God, viz. that we believe him to be the
searcher of all Hearts, one that does see the inward Motions of the Soul, and
is acquainted with our most secret thoughts and actions: Now this we have
already proved, to be an excellency so proper to the God of Heaven, that it is
not ordinarily communicated unto Saints and Angels; and therefore to ascribe
this Knowledge to them, is to ascribe unto them, what is Gods propriety, and
consequently to be guilty of Idolatry by Prop. 1. And as a farther evidence,
that no such Knowledge is Communicated to the Blessed Angels, either by
Revelation, or by the beatifick Vision, consider that from this supposed
Communication it would follow, (as it is well suggested by the Learned Addamus
Angelos ne quidem supernaturaliter de facto cognoscere quaslibet cordium
cogitationes quasi hoc eis competat communi lege Beatudinis, nam si ita esset,
nondum absolutam haberent veritatem generales sententiae soli Deo tribuentes
notitiam occultarum cogitationum, quandoquidem beneficio beatudinis id esset
multis communicatum; sed intelligendae essent cum limitatione hac aut simili
solus Deus naturaliter novit etc. quam utique limitationem nusquam insiauant
addendam esset ut sicut absolute verum maneat solum Deum de facto nosse
(quaelibet) futura contingentia non obstante eo quod quaedam seis amicis
revela, ita etiam absolute verum maneat solum de facto nosse passim (quaelibet)
occulta Cordium, quoniam ut dictum est Authoritates de ^troque loquuntur eodem
modo. in senten. l. 2. distinc. 7. 12. p. 80
Esthius that all those sentences of Scripture, and the Holy Fathers, which
attribute this Knowledge of our secret thoughts, and of the inward Motions of
the Heart to God alone, would not be absolutely true, but without this
limitation, viz. God only naturally knows them, or some like exception, they
would be absolutely false: And yet this Limitation the Scriptures and the holy
Fathers never do insinuate; so that as it is absolutely true, that unto God
alone belongs the knowledge of contingent Beings, although he sometimes did
reveal some matters of that nature, to his Priests and Prophets: nor do we
notwithstanding think, that such a Knowledge does belong to Saints and Angels;
so is it absolutely true, that unto God alone belongs the Knowledge of the
inward Thoughts and Secrets of the Hearts, nor have we any reason to conceive,
that such a Knowledge ordinarily belongs to Saints and Angels.

4.
2. To worship any Creature with the Mind, is to be guilty of Idolatry: This was
the Ancient and undoubted Doctrine of the whole Church of Christ; for this St.
Austin witnesses, that Divine and singulariter in Ecclesla Catholica traditur
nullam creaturam colendam esse animae (libentius enim l^quor his verbis quibus
mihi haec insinu^ta sunt) sed ipsum tantummodo rerum quae sunt omnium
Creatorem. August. l. de quant animae. p. 34.
in the Catholic Church, it is divinely and singularly delivered, that us
Creature is to be Worshipped by the Soul, but he only, who is the Creator of
all things. But Roman Catholics do, and (upon supposition that they have the
Knowledge of the Hearts, and do by seeing God, p. 418.
perceive the Secrets of it; And as T. G. asserts, do know both our Necessities
and Prayers, Concerns, and Actions; I say, upon this supposition) they ought to
worship Saints and Angels, not only with the Body but the Soul; for seeing
mental Prayers, Vows, and Thanksgivings, are by all confessed to be parts of
that Religious Worship which our Souls perform to God, to make such Vows, and
put up such Petitions and Thanksgivings to the Saints and Angels, must be to
Worship Saints and Angels with the Soul: Besides all inward Fear and Reverence,
must be the Worship of the Soul. And yet if we may Vow, and Pray, and tender
our Thanksgivings to them upon presumption, that they know the inward Motions
of our Hearts; we may well be afraid to do these actions Hypocritically, and
remisly, upon the same account. We may well dread to think, or vow, or pray
amiss; and fear their Anger, and their just Displeasure if we do so: thus to
deter us from our secret Sins, the Stoics tell us, not only God, but our good
Doemon is in secret with us. And when St. (...) To. 1. p. 741. A.
Basil had asserted that these Angels did (...) behold us every where; he adds,
that upon this account, the Virgin that was devoted to God ought to reverence
those blessed Spirits. And surely then by parity of Reason, if their Knowledge
reach unto the Heart and inward Motions of the Soul, we ought to have that Fear
and Reverence of them upon us, in reference to all those motions.

3. This may be strongly argued from two Considerations. 5.
1. That the Jewish Church had no such practice. 2. That they abstained from
this practice, because they did not think this honor to be due to Angels, but
to God alone. And

1. I say, the Jewish Church had no such practice; for, run over all their
Sacred Records, the Law, the Prophets and the Psalms: Look into their most
ancient Writers, Philo Judaeus, and Josephus; into their Litanies, or forms of
Prayer, their Misnah, or Traditions, and in all these Records you shall not
find one Precept or Example of any Invocation directed to the Saints departed:
consider all the Motives which have induced the Church of Rome to use this
practice, and you will find that they are chiefly taken from the Jewish
Records, and from those sayings of the Psalms of David, which tell us, that the
Angels of the Lord do pitch their tehts about them that fear him, to deliver
them; 34 Psalm. 7.
And that he gives his Angels charge concerning them, that they dash not their
foot against a stone: 91 Psalm. 11.
Or from those Doctrines which were received by that Church. Besides, they had
great evidence, and manifold Examples, that God did Minister his Blessings to
them by the holy Angels: an Angel lead them out of Egypt, through the
Wilderness, into the Land of Canaan, the Law was given to them by the hand of
Angels, they often did appear unto them in an humane shape, and God himself,
when he appeared, was still attended with an Host of Angels, and by them they
were often preserved from their Enemies. Since therefore notwithstanding all these
Motives, they never put up one Petition to an absent Angel; We have just Reason
to believe, that in the judgment of the Jews, they had no knowledge of the
Heart, or the desires of the Soul, especially when absent from us, and that
this honor was not to be given to them, but was entirely to be reserved for
the God of Heaven. Add to this, that they do frequently entreat of God, that he
would cause those Angels to preserve them, and annoy their Enemies; Psalm. 35,
5, 6, 7.
Let them be as Chaff before the wind, says David, and let the Angel of the
Lord chase them; Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the Angel of the
Lord persecute them. Why therefore do they never use the Language of the Church
of Rome? Horae Sec. Us. Romans Manual of Godly prayers 1610. with license. Horae
Sec. Us. Sarum.
Why do they never pray to Michael the Captain of Gods Host, the vanquisher of
evil Spirits, to be their refuge and defense against the Power of the Enemy, to
drive away their foes, and overthrow their Machinations; Why do they never call
upon their Guardian Angel, to take hold of Sword and Buckler, and rise up to
help them? Or to their valiant Champion Gabriel, to rise up to help them
against the Malignants, and to be with them against all their Adversaries?

3. According to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, when they appeared, the
Jews did sometimes put up their Petitions to them: Why therefore did they not
invoke them when absent and invisible, if they had held as does the Chuch of
Rome, that being absent they were as able to perceive their supplications, and
obtain the Blessings they did want, and that their aid was such an excellent
and present help against the violent assaults of a Temptation, and all those
Floods of Evils we are continually exposed to? With us consent the Ancient
Fathers in this matter, (...) etc. l. 5. p. 234. (...) p. 235.
none that observes the Law of Moses does worship Angels: For so to do is not a
Jewish Custom, but a transgression of their Customs, says the Learned Origin;
(...). Orat. 4. cont. Arrian.
Jacob and David did request deliverance of none but God, says Athanasius.

And whereas T. G. and the Roman Catechism, Object. 6.
produce those words of Jacob, the Angel that redeemed me from all evil, bless
the Lads, as an example of this Invocation, and a proof that it was practiced
by the Ancient Jews. If we consider what the Fathers have delivered upon this
Text, and how expressly they assert, these words must certainly be understood of
Christ: We may admire that any Roman Doctor, who stands obliged by his Oath,
Nec eam unquam nisi juxta unanimen consensum patrum accipiam and Interpretabor.
Bulla pii 4. super forma juramenti professionis fidei.
not to Interpret Scripture, but according to the unanimous consent of the Holy
Fathers, should make so little Conscience of that Oath, as to Interpret this,
and many other Scriptures, in opposition to the prevailing Judgment of those
Fathers.

2. It is admirable to consider, with what incredible advantage to our cause,
the Fathers speak upon this Text: if we had nothing more to say, but what they
have delivered on these words, yet should we have what is abundantly sufficient
to confirm our Faith, and justify that Imputation which we lay upon the Cburch
of Rome; for, first they do expressly say, that this Exposition of T. G. and his
Infallible Mother, is not only false, but an heretical exposition. Ac si
aliquis Haereticus pertinaciter obluctans adversus veritatem voluerit in his
omnibus exemplis proprie Angelum aut intelligere aut intelligendum esse
contenderit in hoc quoque viribus veritatis frangatur necesse est. de Trin. c.
15.
If any heretic, says Novatian, who pertinaciously strives against the truth,
would have us in all these Examples properly to understand the Angel, or would
contend for such a sense of that expression, in this he must assuredly be
broken by the force of truth. This Exposition of the Papists, says St. Cyril,
Thesaur. p. 115.116.
is (...) (i.e.) the sottish exposition of the Arians. The Exposition of the
Protestants must therefore be both true and Orthodox. 2. They add, that (...).
Cyril. Alexandr. Thesaur. p. 116.
if the Enemies of Christ did think that Jacob was a Holy Man, and one endned
with the Prophetic spirit, when he spoke these words, they might be well
ashamed to charge him with so gross an error, as was the Invocation of an Angel
with God.

This Custom therefore of putting up the same Petition in the same sentence to
God and to the Blessed Angel, or to God and to the Saints or Angels, must be
acknowledged to be a thing (...). Orat. 4 contr. Arr.
exceedingly repugnant to the Doctrine which then obtained in the Church of
Christ, and that which they esteemed the (...). B. Cyrill. Alexandr. Thesau. p.
115.
grossest error 3. They give us this as a sufficient Evidence, that Jacob spoke
not to a Creature, because he says, Orat. 4. contra Arian. p. 260.
the Angel that delivered me from all evils. Hence it is manifest says
Athanasius and St. Cyril, that he did not speak of a created Angel, but of the
Angel of the Covenant: and therefore it is manifest, that these petitions
prescribed in the Church of Rome, and often tendered both to Saints and Angels,
are in the Judgment of these Fathers, such as ought not to be tendered to a
Creature, and so are guilty of Idolatry: As therefore Athanasius to the Arians,
so say I to the Church of Rome, Contr. Arian. Ora 2. p. 369.
Let them know, that never any good Man put up such a Prayer to any thing that
was begotten. They being taught by Christ to pray to God the Father, to be
delivered from all Evil. c. 16. v. 8.
And by the Son of Syrach to confess that it is he who delivers from all
evil. And this Interpretation of the Ancient Fathers, will manifestly appear to
be the truth, if we consider who this Angel was, for the Angel who delivered
him from all Evil, must be that very Angel which delivered him from Labans
wrath, and from the fury of his Brother Esau; now the Angel which said unto him
I have seen all that Laban does unto thee; 31 Genesis 13.20. 28 Genesis 13.
return thou therefore into the Land of thy Kindred, was the God of Bethel, the
God to whom he vowed a vow, that God who did appear in Haran to him, it was the
God of his Father Abraham, and the fear of Isaac that rebuked Laban, and
charged him not to do him hurt. v. 29.42.32 Genesis 23. 12 Hos. 4.
The Angel that he wrestled with, and with whom he prevailed, was the God of
Heaven. Lastly it was his Prayer to this God that made his Brother Esau melt
into expressions of the greatest love.

2. I answer, this is no Prayer but a Wish thus when St. Paul concludes in his
Epistle to the Church of Corinth, the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, 2 Cor. 13.14.
and the Communion of the holy Ghost be with you all. I hope he does not pray
unto the Grace of Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communication of the
holy Ghost: so then, this passage may be thus Expounded, I wish to God, that
he, and that good Angel who under him, preserved me from all evils, may
preserve the Lads.

Some Roman Catholics confess that which we now contend for, and tell us, Vide
Vossium de invoc. Sanct. disp. 2 Th. 18.
that although this practice in its self was good and profitable, God would not
suffer his own people to invoke these blessed spirits, least they should
worship them as Gods: Idolatry being a Vice they were so prone, upon the least
occasion to commit. Answer, we find, that notwithstanding the proneness of this
people to that sin, God often did appear in the similitude of Angels to them,
he used the Ministry of Angels in the delivery of that Law, they did so highly
reverence: he used their Ministry both in conferring of the choicest Blessings
on his people, and the inflicting of the most remarkable Judgments, both on
them, and on their Enemies: And he delivered those things touching the Ministry
and custody of holy Angels, which Romanists conceive to be sufficient ground
and motive for their Invocation. Whence we may very well conclude, it was not
out of fear of any proneness of that people to this Idolatry, that he did not
enjoin this practice, but only because he is a jealous god, and will not give
his honor to another. Against the Worship of an Image, or of the Host of
Heaven, or any other Gods, which by the Heathens were still worshipped under
some visible representation, we have frequent Cautions, and very dreadful
threatenings in Moses and the Prophets; but against this Idolatry of Worshipping
those spirits, which in their nature are invisible, those writings give us not
one Caution or Prohibition, though they do often call them Gods, of which
affair I am not able to conceive a better Reason then this is, that it was just
matter of suspicion, that this rude heavy people might be prone to worship what
they saw: but it was not to be feared that they should worship what was
invisible and seldom did appear; and hence we find this people continually
revolting from the invisible Jehovah, to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and to the
Heathen Deities: but never do we find them in the least inclined to the worship
of these blessed spirits.

Moreover if we do consider that in the whole New Testament, 8.
we have not any precept to enjoin; Example to commend, or promise to encourage
us unto this Invocation, we have a further reason to believe, that Christ and
his Apostles disapproved of it, for can we think that Christ himself, and all
his Servants and Apostles, would have neglected to commend unto us some way or
other, that Invocation which they themselves approved, and if the Church of
Rome does not deceive us, did know to be exceeding profitable for the Church of
Christ. For, 1. We cannot without Blasphemy conceive, that Christ or his
Apostles wanted the knowledge of that great advantage which Christians might
receive, by virtue of this supplication; it is no derogation I conceive from T.
G. or his Partisans, to say, that Christ and his Apostles knew, as well as
they, what were the proper motives to this practice, and what were the benefits
it could bring to the Christian supplicant: nor yet to say that they as
heartily desired the Welfare of the Church as does T. G. or the Compiler of the
Roman Catechism; if then they had conceived as they do, they would undoubtedly
have been as exact and punctual in this injunction; it being in it self so
highly prositable and the more necessary to be mentioned, because omitted in
the Law of Moses, and never practiced by the Jews, especially if we consider
that nothing could have been more properly suggested for the consolation of all
Christians under those fiery trials they endured, then this consideration, that
they might pray in Faith as does the Roman Missal; Oh most glorious Angel, the
most high has given thee to be my Refuge, let then no evil come unto me.

Moreover, the Church of Rome does offer this as a present help in trouble;
unto this refuge she exhorts us all to fly; Quoties gravissima cernitaer urgere
tentatio and tribulatio veheme ns imminere invoca custodem tuum, ductorem tuum,
adjutorem tuum in opportunitatibus, in tribulatione; inclama eum, and dic
domine salva nos perimus. Brev. in Festo Ang. Cust. lec. 6. ex Bern. in ps. 90.
P. 190.
when any violent temptation does assault and press thee, when any vehement
tribulation threatens thee, call thou upon thy Guardian Angel, thy Leader and
thy helper in due season, in tribulation call upon him, and say, Lord save us
we perish. So the Roman Breviary; and this is their continual practice. Whereas
our Heavenly Father does instruct us thus, call upon me in the day of trouble,
50 Psalm. 15.
and I will deliver thee, etc. The Apostles and Evangelists are very copious
and frequent, in suggesting consolations and encouragements, to bear with joy
and patience those cruel persecutions, with which the Primitive professors of
Christianity were still infested and perplexed; they have delivered many
excellent discourses touching the Comforter, the presence of their Savior with
them, the Example of his Sufferings, and of that Cloud of Witnesses which
labored under the same fiery trials; and lastly that exceeding weight of
Glory, which they should purchase by those Sufferings, but not one hint have
they vouchsafed us of this Comfort, which is administered by the Church of Rome.
They frequently inform us, that God is able and willing to preserve us from,
sustain us under, and give an happy issue to our trouble; they bid us arm our
selves against Temptations by Faith and Patience, and assiduity of Prayer, but
never tell us that we should pray to any Angel for this end. St. Paul, when
buffeted by Satan's Messenger, has thrice recourse unto our Savior, but never
unto Raphael or Michael, who by the Church of Rome are styled tentatorum firma
propugnacula, the sure Defenders of the tempted. 2 Cor 1.9, 10 11.
Elsewhere he tells us, that being pressed above pleasure, and above strength,
insomuch, that he despaired even of Life, he was delivered by that God who
raises the Dead, in whom, says he, we trust that he will yet deliver us, you
also helping together by Prayer for us, this he expressly tells us were his
hopes from the petition of Surviving Saints. But then he never gives us the
least hint of the like expectation from the Prayers of Holy Angels, nor does he
once direct a Prayer to them. Is any sick, says the Church of Rome; Rituale
Romans p. 117. Ed. Antue. 1617.
let him say to his Guardian Angel, O Holy Angel of God assist me as my Keeper.
To all the Saints and Holy Angels let him say, O all ye Holy Angels, and all ye
Saints intercede for me, and succor me. Is any sick, 5 Jam. 14.15.
says the Apostle James, let him send for the Elders of the Church, and let
them pray over him, and the prayer of Faith shall save the sick. Had he
believed that practice of the Church of Rome, had been the more prevailing
means for their recovery; had he conceived it proper and beneficial to the
dying person, should we have had no mention of it? no Rubric to direct those
Elders to mind those dying Christians of this thing? The same Apostle does
command all Christians to confess their faults to one another, v. 15.16.
and pray for one another, that they may be healed, and gives this reason of
that precept, that the effectual fervent prayer of any righteous Man, avails
much; why does he not exhort them to confess their Sins to all the Holy Angels,
as does the Church of Rome? why does he never send them to the Medicinal Angel
Raphael, who, as they do inform us, Animarum corporisque optimas Medicator.
Her. Sec. us. Sarum f. 92. 1. Pet. 1.21. 10. Romans 14. 1 Jam. 5.
is the best Physician both of Soul and Body? add to this, that these Apostles
have not been only silent in this matter, but they have delivered many things
which seem to be repugnant to it, they do expressly teach us, that our Faith
should be in God, and ask, how we can call upon him in whom we have not
believed. They say, if any Man want wisdom (to direct him how to bear the
Cross) let him ask of God, that gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth
not: and it shall be given him. What therefore we are taught by them to seek
from our Petitions made to holy Angels, St. James directs us immediately to ask
of God: as being most able, and most kind, and therefore prone to help us.
Whence it is easy to collect, that it seems very vain and idle to go to them,
who are less able, and less willing so to do. St. Jude concludes his General
Epistle with these words, to him that is able to keep you from falling, v. 24,
25.
and to present you faultless: to the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and
Majesty, Dominion and Power. To him alone he does ascribe this Power: to him
alone he gives the Glory of all our preservations; nay they assure us that
Christ has not subjected the Christian state unto the Angels, 2 Heb. 5.
as the Jewish was; that they are now our Fellow Servants, and therefore must
not be adored: And that we must be cautious lest any do obtrude upon us the
worship of those blessed Spirits: 22 Rev. 9. 2 Coloss. 18.
this they deliver without the least suggestion of any of those limitations and
distinctions which are so frequent in those Writers of the Church of Rome which
comment on the places mentioned. These blessed Apostles were not so careful to
prevent the Errors and Mistakes of Heretics in this particular, as are the
Doctors of the Roman Church: they do not seem so tender of the Invotion and
Worship of those blessed Spirits, or so sollicitous we may not loose so great a
benefit, as are those Roman Doctors; which gives us reason to conjecture, not
that their Knowledge or their Piety was less, but that they did not very much
aprove that Doctrine which gave the rise unto this Superstition of the Romish
Church, and so much for the first particular.

2. That both the Jews and Christians abstained from this practice; because
they did not think this honor to be due to Angels, but to God alone is evident
from what we have discoursed already to confirm this inference: the Apostles
and Evangelists left us no precept or example to put up our petitions to
departed Saints, and therefore they conceived it the Worship due to God alone.
2 Having removed and taken off those reasons which the Romanist assigns of
this neglect, it follows that that reason must stand good which we assign, at
least till they can find a better. With us consent the learned Jews; Joseph.
Albus, l. 3. in Icarim. c. 18. Idololatriam primam little fulsse existimans qui
Angelos and similes creaturas ut sequestres inter se at Deum colluissent ait
Deum in Decalogo quando ait Non cru^t tibi Dit a^ieni ante faciem meam: id
voluisse ne homines ullos ponerent sequestres aut deprecatores inter se and
ipsos. Vossiu. in Maim. de Idolol. c. 2. Sect. 1.
Josephus Albus supposes this Worship of the Angels as Mediators betwixt God
and us, to be the most antique Idolatry; and Fundamentum Mandati de Idololatria
est nequis Serviat Creaturae, non Angelo, non Sphae^ae, non Stellae -- quanquam
autem is qui ca colit sciat illa non esse Deum, ac colat Creaturam hanc quomodo
coluit Euos and illius coaetanei nihilomi^us est Idololatria. Maim. ibid.
Maimonides sue definitione non tantum se complecti ait Eos qui creaturis cultum
exhibent, us Deo, verum qui iis supplicant, ut ministris Dei. Dionys. Vossius
in locum.
Maimon adds that the foundation of the precept of Idolatry is this, that no
man serve or Worship any Angel or created being.

As the Foundation of our last evidence of that Idolatry which is in this
particular committed by the Church of Rome,. 9.
we do premise.

1. That Magic is that art of Divination which in conversant about the
Revelation of things co^tingent and concealed; as v. g. touching the victory of
contending parties, the future condition of the Church, etc. The declaration of
our future State, Fortune, Marriage, Death, Prosperity, Adversity, and many
other things which it is very useful for Mankind to know. Alii dicunt hos esse
effectus bonorum Angelorum, Delrio disq. Mag. l. 2. qu. 2. p. 96. B.


2 I premise that there was amongst the ancients an oppinion that by the help
of Souls departed, or good Angels, they might obtain the knowledge of things
contingent and concealed: and hence that Divination which they exercised who
did pretend to know things secret or contingent, by their means, was called
(...), or white Magic, in opposition to Divination by evil Spirits, which they
styled (...) or black Magic: it was a very old opinion especially of the
Platonists of Jamblick, Porphyry, Plotinus, Proclus, and Julian the Apostate,
that Divination was the effect of holy Angels. So Disquis. Mag. l. 2. qu. 2. p.
96. B.
Delrio, Strom. 3.
Magicians who observe Angels and Demons are careful to abstain from Wine and
Venery, and living creatures: So St. Clemens. And,

3. I premise that this white Magic is by the Church of Rome condemned as
Idolatry: For such is all unlawful Magic, says Tacita Idololatria est omnis
Magia prohibita Belrio, l. 1. disqu. Mag. cap. 1. p. 3. Col. 3.
Delrio. Whosoever exercises the art of Divination, or consults them that do
it, are guilty of having other Gods, says Estius in Sent. 3. did. 4. Sect. 6.
p. 130.
Estius, because they attribute unto the Creature what is Gods propriety, viz.
The knowledge of things future, and which in nature have no certain Causes, but
which depend upon the will of man, or other things which are mutable.
Valentianus adds, That they affront his Majesty by a vain expectation of those
things from Creatures which are to be expected only from God: for God having
said, declare to us things future that we may know that ye are Gods. the
knowledge of things future and contingent must be the knowledge proper unto God
alone. And again the procuration of the knowledge of things hid, or secret,
belongs to Divine Worship, for these are to be expected only from God by
prayer and other lawful means: when therefore we expect them vainly from the
Creature, we do ascribe unto the Creature that Worship which is properly
Divine. These things premised,

4. I add, that either this white Magic must be lawful, or else the Invocation
of Saints and Angels, as it is practiced in the Church of Rome, must be
unlawful, and guilty of Idolatry; either we vainly do expect that they should
hear and understand our mental Prayers, and know the secrets of our Hearts, or
the Magicians who do expect the knowledge of things secret, or contingent by
those blessed Spirits, cannot be justly charged with Idolatry: For whatsoever
the Romanist pretends in vindication of the first, does equally excuse and
vindicate the second: for if you do conjecture with the Church of Rome, that
the affection of those blessed Spirits to mankind is so exceeding great, that,
it will prompt them most assuredly to intercede in our behalf for other
temporal concerns, to be our refuge, and Protectors, and to Minister to the
concernements both of this, and of the future life, why may we not conceive
that the same love should move them to declare those future things which it
does Equally concern us to know, both that we may obtain the greatest
blessings, and may be able to fly and to prevent the greatest perils, or may
prepare to bear those evils, with a Christian courage which we cannot escape?
When Florentius having lost his Cloak, T. G. p. 424.
and had not where withal to buy another, by praying to the twenty Martyrs
caught a Fish with a Gold Ring in t, sufficient (I suppose) to buy another.
Caniw e doubt but when we lose a Cloak, that praying to all Saints and Angels,
some kind hearted Saint, that perhaps in his life time lost his own (and so
must be supposed according to Part. 3. cap. 2. Sect. 4.
T. G. to be more ready than the rest to pity any body that sustains that
loss) will tell us where this lost Cloak is? If God does either from the Law of
Friendship, or for our profit reveal the secrets of men's hearts unto them, and
inform both Saints and Angels of our Prayers, and our Necessities, why should
we not conceive that he is as ready to inform them of those hidden and
contingent things, which, it as much concerns us to be informed of, as to
receive an Answer to our Prayers, v. g. if he informed the twenty Martyrs of
Florentius his Petition that his Cloak might be given to him, T. G. p. 423, 424.
why should he not inform them where it was; or if those blessed Spirits do by
virtue of the beatifick Vision see our Prayers and Wants, why should they not
be thought to view our Losses, and our future state in the same beatifick
Vision? If that could represent unto the twenty Martyrs Florentius's Prayer,
why not his Cloak, and where it was? They who see God see all things in him
which belong unto him, say the Roman Doctors, therefore they see the Prayers
directed to him, for they objectively must be in God, they that see God says
the Magitian, see all things in him, and therefore they must see things future
and concealed, for they objectively must be in God; and with what show of
reason can any man reject the latter inference who does allow the former, for
to be the Searcher of the Heart, is not less proper to God then is the
Knowledge of what is future and contingent? Nay Holy Scripture seems more
clearly to appropriate to God the Knowledge of the Heart, then of things future
and contingent; for it expressly says thou only know the Hearts of men, but
does not so expressly say, thou only know what is to come. Moreover the
secret motions of our Heart do equally depend upon our will, which is
uncertain, and very subject unto change, if therefore it be truly said that
what is future and contingent cannot be known by any creature, because it does
depend on what is mutable and therefore to expect this knowledge from a
Creature, or to ascribe it to him is to be Guilty of Idolatry; the like must be
affirmed of the thoughts and inward motions of the Heart, which equally
depending on the free motions of the will, must be obnoxious to the same
uncertaintyes.

CHAP. XI.
The CONTENTS. The Canon of the Council of Laodicea, de iis qui Angelos Colunt,
is laid down, and the Judgment of Theodoret and Photius upon it. Sect. 1. And
it is proved. 1. That it contains the Sentence and belief of the whole Church
of Christ. Sect. 2. That it forbids the Invocation and Worship of Angels. Sect.
3. That the Angels whose Invocation and Worship it forbids were blessed Spirits
and not evil Angels. Sect. 4. That it forbids what is the Practice of the
Church of Rome. Sect. 5. That it pronounces the Worship and Invocation of the
holy Angels to be Idolatry. Sect. 6. That in the Judgment of the Fathers, this
was the Worship which St. Paul condemned. 2 Coloss. Sect. 7. The evasions of T.
G. confuted. ibid. And all the other Answers of the Romanists. Sect. 8.

THat what we have thus confirmed from Scripture and the voice of Reason, 1.
has also the consent, and the concurrent suffrage of Antiquity we shall
demonstrate, not from the words of any single Father, but from the clear
decision of the whole Church of God, which is delivered to us in these words,
viz. (...). Codex Canonum Eccles. Univers. Can. 139.
That Christians ought not to forsake the Church of God, and depart a side, and
invocate Angels, and make meetings which are things forbidden. If any man
therefore be found to give himself to this privy Idolatry, let him be accursed.
Because he has forsaken our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and betaken
himself to Idolatry. In the Epitomy of Canons collected by Dionisius Exiguus,
and which Pope Adrian delivered to Charles the great, this Decree is thus
entitled, Jus^el. Cod. Can Eccles. p. 106.
Canon de his qui Angelos colunt, a Decree concerning those that worship Angels
Brev. Canon. 90.
Crisconius has the like. Theodoret, who lived in the next Century upon those
words of the Apostle, Let no man defraud you of your reward in a voluntary
humility and worshipping of Angels, writes that (...). Theodoret. in Coloss. c.
2.
They who were zealous for the Law, persuaded men to worship Angels, because
say they, the Law was given by them. This did they council to be done,
pretending himility, and saying, that the God of all things was invisible, and
inaccessible, and incomprehensible, and that it was fit we should procure Gods
favor by the means of Angels. And again (...). Id. in Col. 2.
Because they commanded men to worship Angels (says Theoderet) he enjoyneth
the contrary, that they should adorn their words and deeds with the
Commemoration of our Lord Christ: and send up thanksgiving to God and the
Father by him and not by the Angels. The Synod of Laodicea also following this
Rule, and desiring to heal that old disease made a Law that they should not
pray to Angels, nor forsake our Lord Jesus Christ. And lastly, (...). Id. in
Col. 2.
This vice (says he) continued in Phrygia and Pisidia for a long time. For
which cause also the Synod assembled in Laodicea, the chief City of Phrygia
forbad them by a Law to pray to Angels, and even to this day among them and
their Borderers, there are Oratories of St. Michael to be Seen. The like has
Oecumenius upon the same place, saying, that Oecumen MS. in Coloss. 2. apud
Hoechelium in Origenem contra Celfum. In libris editis desideratur.
this Custom continued in Phrygia, insomuch that the Council of Laodicea did by
a Law forbid to come to Angels and to pray unto them. From whence it is also,
that there be many Churches of Michael the Chief Captain of Gods Host among
them. This Canon of the Laodicean Fathers, Photius does note to have been made
against the (...) Phot. Nomocanon tit. 12. c. 9.
Angelites, or the Angelicks rather. For so St. Angelici, in Angelorum cultum
inclinati Aug. de haeres. c. 39.
Augustine names those Heretics, that were inclined to the worship of Angles,
being from thence called Angelici vocati quia Angelos colunt. Isidor. Orig. l.
8. c. 5.
Angelici, as Isidorus notes, because they did worship Angels. Now that the
strength of what we argue from this Canon.

And that the vanity of what the Romanists except against it, may appear,

1. Let it be noted, that the forementioned Canon contains the Sentence and
Belief of the whole Church of Christ, 5 2.
for it is a Canon of that Code, which the whole Christian World did use both
in their Councils and Ecclesiastical Judicatures, until the Seventh Century;
and which is cited both by the Council of Calcedon and of Ephesus, as (...). ex
Council. Ephesians. act. 1. p. 2. p. 327. To. 1. Council. General. Edit. Romans
the order of Canons, the series of Ecclesiastical Laws, the Ecclesastical
constitutions, and (...) act. 2. p. 400. (...) p. 426. v. p. 425. p. 491. (...)
ex Council. Calced. act. 3. p. 241. Tom. 2. Council.
the Code; It is a Canon of that Code to which the Council of Calcedon gave the
force, and the Authority of an universal Law in these Expressions, (...). act.
4. p. 297. vic. Justel. Cod. Canon. p. 6. -- 12.
we think it equal that the Canons made by Holy Fathers in every Synod until
now, should be observed. Can. 1.


2. Observe that what the Canon thus expresses, 3.
viz. that Christians should not name the Angels; is an Anathema directed
against those which pray to Angels, so Theodoret and Photius, who call upon
them for help or introduction to God. So Zonaras and Aristenus, who worshipped
them. In locum
So Theodoret, Dionysius, Christonius, and the Epitome of Canons presented by
Pope Adrian to Charles the great; who said, we must be brought to God by
Angels; so Aristenus and the Amerbachian Scholiast; In locum.
and that to cure that Disease, the Council did command all Christians not to
pray unto them, so Theodoret and Oecumenius. (...).
And therefore evident it is, that Zonaras does truly say, that to name Angels,
in this Canon, was as much as to invoke them: whence it will follow, that the
whole Church of Christ for two whole Centuries and upwards, did forbid all
Christians to Invoke Angels, to worship or to call upon them, and did pronounce
Anathema's on them that did so.

3. Observe that what this Canon does forbid, 4.
was not the Invocation of wicked Demons, or of Damned Spirits, but of the
Blessed Angels. For, 1. According to Theodoret and Photius, they did condemn
the worshipers of Michael, the Archangel, and those that went unto the
Oratories or Churches of St. Michael. 2. The Canon does relate to Christians,
who surely would not meet to worship Devils, nor does it recall them to good
Angels, but to Jesus Christ. 3. The persons reprehended are said to have took
up this Custom of going thus to good Demons, from a pretense of their
unworthiness, to go to God or Christ immediately, and from an appearance of
humility: So Chrysostom, Theodoret, and others; but to expect the help of
Devils to introduce them to God, and to pretend humility in doing such an
horrid act, is to be guilty of the highest madness. 4. Theodoret and Photius
inform us, that they who brought up that forbidden practice, were zealous for
the Law; now that most strictly did forbid the worship of all evil spirits, it
was delivered not by them, but by the Blessed Angels.

4. That which is here forbidden, 4.
is what the Church of Rome does daily practice, for they do worship Angels,
says the Roman Catechism; Part 3. p. 434.
this is, and has been their perpetual Custom to call upon them, and to expect
their help and patronage, by virtue of those supplications: Hence that
Expression of the Roman Missal Hos fidenter deprecemur ut ab ipsis adjuvemur
apud deum jugiter. Prosa ad S. Angelos. f. 32. B.
To them with confidence let us pray, for Gods assistance every day. They do
expect Salvation from their intercession, in that very sense in which
Theophylact asserts the Heretics expected to be saved by Angels, viz, (...) as
persons ministering unto our Introduction to God and Christ: Hence their
petitions, that Hostias tibi Domine laudis offerimus suppliciter deprecantes ut
easdem Angelico interveniente suffragio and placatus accipta, and ad salutem
nostram provenire concedas. Missa votiva de Angelis. p. 5.36. Ed. Aut. fol.
Gaudium erit tibi Angele dei super me peccatore -- tuis intercessionibus deum
obtinente. Missa in honorem proprii Angelif. 16. B. Ed. Antuerp. So. 1577.

Angelorum concio sacra, and Archangelorum turma inclyta, nostra diluant jam
peccata, praestando superacaeli Gaudia. Prosa de omnibus sanctis ibid. f. 33. B.


by the intercessions of the blessed Angels, they may obtain Gods favor, and
may be brought to Life Eternal. If then that Invocation which is here forbidden
be Idolatry, the practice of the Church of Rome must be so too.

5. This Invocation of the Blessed Angels,. 6.
is expressly said to be Idolatry: and therefore, if it be not truly so, this
Synod and the Church of Christ must be pronounced false accusers; now of this
enormity, they could not justly be accused for deserting Christ; for,
notwithstanding this, they did not look upon those Angels they invoked as Gods,
but as inferior Creatures; and (...), or presons instrumental and subservient
unto our Introduction to God; and therefore thought we should procure Gods
favor by the means of Angels, because that God himself was not to be
approached or apprehended, and because Christ was so exalted, that they durst
not make their immediate addresses to him, now to think Christ greater than
that we sinful Creatures should make addresses to him, makes some show of our
humility, but cannot possibly be charged with Idolatry. For should any Man
conceive himself unworthy to appear before God, or look upon him as
unaccessable by one of so defiled a spirit, and therefore should entreat the
Prayers of his pious Neighbors, we might conclude that he was very ignorant and
vain in his imaginations, but could not thence conclude, that he was guilty of
Idolatry. And so the Reader sees, that notwithstanding these mistakes of the
Angelicks, the Church of Rome has no wrong done them, when we charge their
Invocation of the blessed Angels with Idolatry; for if the Invocation of them
when absent were not guilty of this Crime, these by-mistakes could never make
it guilty of that imputation. Besides the Synod and Theodoret do put a clear
distinction betwixt these two particulars, which by the Exposition of the Roman
Doctors are confounded, and made to signify the same, viz. desertion of Christ,
and being guilty of Idolatry, by praying to the blessed Angels, as is apparent
from this expression of Theodoret: the Synod of Laodicea made a Law that
Christians should not pray to Angels, nor forsake the Lord Christ; whosoever
does such things, say they, accursed let him be; because he has deserted
Christ, and given up himself unto Idolatry. Lastly, we do not find that they
did so reject or desert Christ, as to deny his intercession in the Heavens, but
only, upon this account, because they did not make immediate addresses to him.
For as St. Paul asserts, 1 Gal. 6.
that the Galatians had deserted him that called them, because, they joined the
observation of the Law to the profession of the Gospel of Christ, so does St.
Paul, and the Laodicean Fathers declare, that those Angelicks had deserted
Christ, because, they joined the Mediation of the blessed Angels, to Christ,
the only Mediator of his Church.

6. Let it be noted,. 7.
that those Fathers and Interpreters do with one mouth affirm, was what this
Canon thus condemned, was what St. Paul had long before condemned in his
Epistle to the Colossians; and therefore that St. Paul did in the judgment of
those Fathers, condemn the worship and invocation of the belssed Angels as
Idolatry. Theodoret expressly says, that because they commanded men to worship
Angels, he enjoyneth the contrary; that they should adorn their words and their
deeds with commemoration of our Lord Christ: p. 378.
and send up thanksgiving to God and the Father by him, and not by the Angels:
(...)
to this T. G. replies, That these words of Paul, viz. in a voluntary humility,
and not holding the bead, sufficiently intimate a particularity in the worship
which St. Paul condemned, and this was says St. Crysostome that some among the
Colossians said that we ought to be rceonciled, and have access to the Father
not by Christ, but by the Angels; and this says he, is that which is said ( id
est, condemned) by the Apostle, that they so admitted and worshipped the Angels
for Mediators, as to exclude Christ. Ans. In this Reply according to T. G. his
constant custom we have two horrid falsifications of the words of Chrysostom:
For, 1. These words we ought to be reconciled, are disingenuously added to the
words or Chrysostom, that he might seem to say that they whom Paul condemned
did attribute unto the Angels our reconcilement unto God. 2. What he asserts to
to be assigned as a reason why St. Paul condemned their Worship, is in St.
Chrysostom a reason why they were (...). Chrysostom. in locum.
pufft up, and did pretend humility, but is not assigned as a reason why St.
Paul condemns this worship.

3. He does expressly say that because these men introduced Angels, St. Paul in
opposition to them did exhort us to do all by Invocation of the name of Christ,
and not to introduce the Angels; now he that does exhort us, whether we eat or
drink or whatsoever else we do, before we set upon it, to put up our Petitions
to him: and then adds (...) must in all reason be supposed to forbid us to put
up our petitions to them, in reference to any thing we do.

T. G. p. 378.
proceeds to tell us that the reason why they excluded Christ from
reconciliation is given by Theophilact, (...)
because they esteemed it a thing unworthy of the Majesty of the only begotten
Son on the one side to make the Reconciliation, and far transcending Man's
poverty and lowness on the other. Reply, It Is an old saying, and a true, that
one Ly begets an other. Thus T. G. having falsely cited Chrysostom, he gives as
false a Reason of what he never said. For does Theophylact say, they esteemed
it unworthy of Christ, on the other side to make the Reconciliation? no T. G.
confesses, that he does not, by putting this in a different Character from the
words of Theophylact: does he say that something was esteemed unworthy, but
does not tell us what that was, that so T. G. might have some color for saying
it was reconciliation? No, he expressly says, they deemed it beneath Christ, to
bring us unto God, or to procure our access unto him; and that it was beyond
our meannes immediately to go unto him. Do any of the latter Scholiasts, since
that this practice was used in the Church of Christ, suggest this sense? No,
they expressly say, that which these Heretics asserted was (...), (...).
Balsamon Zonaras Aristenus
that we ought not to pray to Christ for his assistance, or introduction to the
Father. Must that expression (...) be thus expounded, To make this
reconciliation, is a thing far transcending Man's lowness? No, St. Chrysostom
and all the Scholiasts do manifestly say the contrary, and they all expound it
thus, that Christ was greater then that we should go unto him, and that to be
introduced by Christ, was a thing greater then we could expect. Or lastly, does
the Word (...) import this Reconciliation? no, the proper import of (...) is to
procure access, and they were called (...) who obtained admission or favor for
the supplicant.

Thirdly, p. 379.
he answers, that St. Paul, and the Council of Laodicea (in the Judgment of
Theodoret, forbad the worshipping or praying to Angels, upon account that the
Law was delivered by them, (and therefore, as Theophylact says, they brought
us Salvation) Answer, As if Theophylacis assertion, who lived above 400 years
after this Council met, were to be valued, when both Theodoret and Photius and
Chrysostom, who lived almost 400 years before him, gave not one item of it, but
do assign such reasons of that Prohibition, as nothing do relate unto it. (2.)
It is false, that Theophylact affirms, that they who prayed to Angels, because
the Law was delivered by them, did therefore say they brought us Salvation; for
he asserts not that this Law was made aginst Judaizing Christians, as does
Theodoret and Photius, but against those who from pretenses of humility,
excluded Christ. (3.) To be so far our Saviors only, as to bring or to
discover the tidings of Salvation to us, is no otherwise to be our Saviors,
then were the Blessed Apostles and Evangelists; and so to worship them as such,
is but to worship them as Papists do St. Paul and Peter. (4.) This will be more
apparent from his words. (...)
They said it was unworthy of the Majesty of Christ, to bring us to the Father,
and that it was beyond them to desire it, and therefore did conceive it more
agreeable to reason to think that Angels ministered to our Introduction, and
hence they introduced the worship of Angels, and persuaded the more ignorant to
go unto them, (...) i. e. (...) to those that saved us by ministering unto our
Introduction to God, from whom we do obtain Salvation, and thus the Papists
also do persuade the ruder people to look upon them as their Saviors, for by
the suffrage of the Holy Angels they hope to obtain Salvation, and by the
intercession of their Guardian Angel, they hope to enjoy God, and therefore in
this language call upon him, Say unto my Soul, thou art my Salvation -- We meet
with many other answers to this Canon, and to that passage of St. Paul in
Perroon, Bellarmine, Petavius, amounting to this only, That they forbid only
that supplication, which was tendered to them as to Gods, or as to primary and
only Mediators. But (1.) the Canon speaks of Christians, now to suppose that
they, whose Fundamental Principle it is to own one only God, should also
worship Angels as God, is the extremity of folly (2.) Theodoret and Jerome
declare, Epist. ad Algasiam quest. 10.
that they who did abet this Doctrine were Jews, or persons zealous of the Law,
Now these Men knew that Angels were but the Instruments and Creatures of God,
and therefore could not worship them as Gods. (3.) They chose these Angels as
fit persons to introduce them to God, and used their Meditation upon this
pretense, that such mean persons should not go directly to him, and therefore
could not look upon them as partakers of the nature to God.

In a word, 8.
what can be more incredible then that St. Paul being assisted by the Holy
Spirit, and the whole Church of Christ, should daily practice this worship, and
Invocation of the Holy Angels, and teach all Christians so to do, and yet
affirm these things without any limitation or distinction, which if we may
interpret them according to the plain and obvious meaning of the words, do
manifestly condemn that which they did daily practice, and lay upon Saint Paul,
and the whole Church of Christ, on supposition of this practice, the imputation
of Idolatry, and of deserting our Blessed Lord, and should deliver and approve
these things, as the Doctrines of the Christian Faith, which all Men stood
obliged to believe. Nothing can be more contrary unto the worship and
Invocation of these blessed Spirits, then an express command, that we should
neither worship nor Invoke them can it then enter into the heart of any sober
person to believe, that the whole Church of Christ, even when they taught and
practiced both, should make, receive, and in their Universal Synods should
solemnly confirm a Law, without distinction or exception, forbidding both the
worship and Invocation of them, and requiring all good Christians to avoid this
practice, as being the deserting of their Savior, and the giving of Gods
worship to those Spirits? Since this Devotion has obtained in the Church of
Rome, who ever heard of any Romanist, who roundly and without distinction,
would assert, that to invoke an Angel was Idolatry or that this Invocation was
forbidden by the Church of Christ, as does Theodoret and Photius, and the
Laodicean Council? who of them ever cautioned all Christian people, as St. Paul
has done, that no Man should seduce them to the worship of those Blessed
Spirits? What Council ever did decree, that they should not be worshipped or
invoked, or own such Doctrine as any part of Christian Faith? And yet we find
this done both by Saint Paul, and by the Laodicean Council, by Origin,
Theodoret, and Photius, and the whole Church of Christ; viz. what they
confirmed by their daily practice, they not only did forbid, but they
pronounced it to be Idolatry and the deserting of their Savior, what they had
thus decreed in opposition to their own daily practice, that they obtruded as a
dictate of the Holy Ghost, and as the matter of their Faith; but against the
worshipping of Angels with Divine Worship, or as sole or primary Mediators,
which (if we may believe the Church of Rome) was the only thing in which they
did offend, we have no mention in the least. That there were in the world such
Heretics, as said it was beyond us, or was too great an arrogance to go
directly to the Son of God, and that God was Inaccessible, and therefore we
must go to Angels, this Synod I suppose must know as well as Chrysostom and
Theodoret, why therefore do they never mention as do the latter Comments on
this Canon, what they alone designed to prevent? Why do they not recall these
Heretics unto that invocation of these Blessed Angels, which had obtained in
the Church of Christ, and tell them that they need not to desert the Church, or
gather private conventicles in order to the Invocation of these Angels? Why do
not they or or any other person, that flourished in the fourth or fifth Ages of
the Church, when this injunction was in force, distinguish between the
Invocation of the Holy Angels, which the Church did practice, and that which
was forbidden by this Canon? Why does S. (...). l. 5. contra Celsum. p. 236.
Origin conclude that Celsus had not read that passage of St. Paul to the
Colossians, because he said the Worship of the Holy Angels was no transgression
of their Law? For what is this but to suggest that this text of Scripture is so
plain against the worship of them, that he that reads it cannot think that they
who own it can admit that Worship? Why does Theodoret affirm that because
Heretics commanded men to worship Angels, S. Paul enjoined the contrary; for
what is contrary to a command to worship Angels but an injunction not to
Worship Angels? Why does he say that the Apostle does command us to send up our
Thanksgivings by Christ, and not by the Angels, for by whom we may send up our
Petitions why may we not send up Thanksgiving too? Why does both he and Photius
inform us that the Laodicean Synod being desirous to heal this old disease
enjoined Christians (...), not to pray to Angels? For is not this a shrewd
suspicion that this Idololatrical disease, was only that of praying to Angels;
or else that both Theodoret and Photius were such intolerable dolts as to
represent the very practice of the Christians as the disease of the Idolaters,
and the desertors of our Blessed Lord? Why is it lastly that St. Chrysostom
informs us that for a cure of this disease St. Paul enjoined all Christians to
invoke the name of Christ, and not to bring in Angels, suggesting this unto us,
that the Invocation of Angels was not consistent with that of Christ, and that
by saying do all things in the name of Christ, he has commanded us to pray
unto him, and call upon him as our helper, and not upon the holy Angels? Who
knows not that a sentence against any person ought in some words or other to
specify the crime that it condemns, and that an act so framed as to condemn a
person as guilty of the highest crimes and worthy of the severest punishments
for doing what in the plain and literal meaning of the words all they that
framed the act and they that owned it as a Law did daily practice, is an
absurdity that Humane Nature cannot possibly be guilty of? When therefore I can
find an Act of Parliament, intending only to condemn Incestuous conversation,
framed thus, whosoever shall marry any Woman let him be severely punished; or a
decree of any Council, intending only to forbid us to go to the Assembly of
Heretics, thus worded, Whosoever shall go to Church let him be Anathema; then
shall I think this Synod and the whole Church of Christ, intending only to
forbid such invocation of the Blessed Angels as made them Gods, or sole and
primary Mediators, would make a Law M (...) not to pray to Angels, and thus
decree, whosoever shall go and invocate the Angels let him be Anathema. When I
can find that such determinations and decrees shall pass for current in a
Church or Nation without all limitation, or restriction for some hundred years,
though contradictory to what they practice and believe, then shall I be induced
to believe this Canon could be thus admitted and confirmed as a Law of the
whole Church of Christ in contradiction to their Faith and practice.

CHAP. XII.
The CONTENTS. The Invocation of Angels confuted from the Testimony of Irenaeus
and st. Augustine, etc. Sect. 1. From the Testimonies of Origin. Sect. 2. The
exceptions of T. G. against them largely confuted. Sect. 3. The Testimony cited
from Origin. Hom. in Ezech. considered. Sect. 4.

TO this so pregnant Testimony of the whole Church of Christ, we shall adjoyn
such sayings of the ancient fathers as do directly overthrow this doctrine, or
manifestly affirm that no such practice was allowed by the Church of Christ.
Non est numerum dicere Gratiarum quas per universum Mundum Ecclesia a Deo
accipiens in nomine Christi Jesu crucifixi sub Pontio Pilato per singulos dies
in opitulationem Gentium perficit -- neque seducens, aliquem nec pecuniam ei
auferens, nec invocationibus Angelicis, faciat (i. facit) aliquid nec
incantationibus, nec aliqua prava curiositate, sed munde, pure, and manifest
orationes dirigens ad Dominum qui omnia fecit, and nomen Domini nostri Jesu
Christi invocans, virtutes secundum utilitates hominum, sed non ad seductionem
perfecit. Iren. l. 2. c. 57.
Thus in the second Century it is declared by Irenaeus, that the Church of
Christ did nothing by the Invocation of Angels but purely, simply, and openly
addressed her prayers to God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, To this T. G. Replies
that Irenaeus speaks only of such superstitious Invocating of Angels, as was
used by the Martionites, and Carpocratians in their Magical operations, and
working of false Miracles. p. 388. Repl. 1. The words of Irenaeus do absolutely
say that Christians did nothing by the Invocation of angels; which if T. G.
will limit thus, he stands obliged in equity, and and by the Laws of
Disputation to give some reason of that limitation, which since he has not
done, it is apparent that he has answered nothing to the Doctors argument.
But, 2. what he replies, as it is absolutely groundless, so is it false and
inconsistent with the words of Irenaeus: For he does manifestly distinguish
betwixt those magical operations and the invocation of holy Angels, and affirms
that the Church does nothing by incantations, or by Angelick invocations. 3. He
does oppose unto this Angelick invocation, the invocation and directing of our
Prayers purely to God and Christ. What therefore he ascribes thus purely unto
God and Christ, he must be deemed to deny to Angels, and consequently must deny
that they directed their petitions to them. Besides why does he tell us, that
the Church addresseth her petitions to that God who made all things, if not to
show that this was the true reason of our praying to him alone, seeing he only
is the maker of all things? 4. He manifestly speaks of the miraculous gifts of
Christians in curing diseases and casting out of Devils, which things not only
Irenaeus, but (...). lib. 3. contra Celsum. p. 124. l. 1. p. 7.
Origin affirms to be performed only by the invocation of the name of God and
Christ. Lactantius tells us that Ille autem preses Mundi and rector Universi qui
scit omnia, cujus divinis oculis nihil septum est, solus habet rerum omnium cum
Filio suo potestatem nec in Angelis quicquam nisi parendi nicessitas it que
nullum sibi honorem tribui volunt quorum omnis honor in Dao est. l. 2. c. 16.
the holy Angels will not have any honor bestowed on them, because their honor
is in God and they have nothing else to do but to obey. S. Chrysostom is very
copious on this subject; For (1.) he tells us the Devil brought in (...) ( i. e.
The Calling upon Angels as is apparent from its opposition to calling upon God)
and that, says he, he does endeavoring to rob us of this honor (of going unto
God by Christ alone) as is apparent from the words preceding (...)
do all things by God, and introduce not Angels. And lastly, he concludes in
these expressions, Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Coloss. Tom. 4. p. 139.
be he Angel, or Archangel, or Cherubim, do not suffer it; for neither will
these powers receive this honor but reject it, when they see their Lord
dishonored. I have honored thee, says God and have said call upon me, and do
thou dishonor him? Again, Hom. 3. ad Heb. p. 443.
Why gape ye (says he) after Angels they are our fellow servants? Now from
that very name the Fathers argue that they are not to be adored. Hence (...).
etc. Orat. 3. p. 394.
Athanasius concludes no Creature ought to adore his fellow Creature though he
be an Angel, because the Angel said to John, see thou do it not, I am thy
fellow servant. And, Gregory Nazianzen says (...). Nazianz. Orat. Qudragessim.
p. 668, 669.
If I adore the Creature what shall I say to the Idolatrous Heathen, since I my
self adore my fellow servants: For Creatures are all servants, though some more
excellent than others. Of the same judgment was St. Angustin who speaks thus;
Quem invenirem qui me reconciliatet tibi, an eundum mihi suit ad Angelos? qua
prece? Quibus Aacramentis? multi conantes ad te redire neque per seipsos
valentes, sicut audio, tentave^unt haec, and inciderunt in desiderium
curiosarum visionum and digni habiti sunt illusionibus. Consell. l. 10. c. 42.
Whom should I find that might reconcile me unto thee? should I have gone unto
the Angels? With what Prayer? With what Sacraments? many endeavoring to return
unto thee, and not being not able to do it by themselves, as I here have tried
those things, and have fallen into the desire of curious visions, and were
accounted worthy of illusions. de C. D. l. 9. c. 23.
Elsewhere he tells us, those blessed Spirits, however they are called, are no
Mediators to bring miserable mortals to blessedness and immortality, where,
says the Doctor, p. 154.
It would be ridiculous to distinguish between Mediators of Redemption and
Intercession: for all that they attributed to their good Spirits was only
Intercession: to this T. G. Replies, p. 375, 376.
that this is manifestly false, and that Doctor Stillingfleet not only
contradicis the Truth, but himself too, to wit because he had before affirmed
that the Egyptian Demons, says Celsus, healed the diseases of the parts
proper to themselves: and therefore might justly be Invocated. And 2. because
he had told us from S. Augustine, that it was their Office to inform the
superior Gods of what they could not know otherwise; this is the only ground of
this rude imputation of falsehood and contradiction to the Doctor: and yet this
ground is as ridiculously vain as if I should affirm this Proposition to be
false; that all the Heathens attributed to their good Spirits was only
Intercession, because they attributed to them Wings, and an Aetherial body: who
is so blind as not to see, that when the Doctor says they made them Mediators
of Intercession only, not Mediators of Redemption? by that exclusive only he
could not intend to say that they asserted nothing else concerning them, as he
most grossly does mistake, or most unconscionably does interpret him: but only
that they ascribed nothing to them which made them Mediators of Redemption.
Moreover, is it fair dealing when he thus rails against Dr. Stillingfleet to do
himself what he imputes unto the Doctor and quote him falsely in that very
place, which yet he manifestly does in setting down this passage as the Doctors
words, viz. that the giving them Divine Worship proceeds upon that
superstition, etc. For both to this citation and to many passages pretendedly
translated from the Fathers, or cited as the sense and meaning of their words,
he adds this word Divine where it is not expressed; or in the least intended,
only that he may seem to answer when he does nothing less; which is a fraud so
horrible and disingenious that no man can sufficiently detest it, or judge that
man can make a conscience of his actions, who makes a common practice of it. 2.
Let any man peruse S. Augustin's whole discourse upon this matter, and he will
find that to overthrow this Tenet of Sed quia eosdem Daemones inter homines and
Deos ita medios constitutos putant, tanquam nullus deus homini misceatur, ut
hine perferant desiderata, inde referant impetrata: atque hoc Platonici
precipui Philosophorum ac nobilissimi sentiant, cum quibus, velut cum
excellentioribus placuit istam examinare quaestionem, utrum cultus plurimorum
Deorum prosit ad consequendam vitam beatam, quae post mortem futura est. De
Civitat. Dei. l. 9. c. 1. p. 268. D.
Apuleius, and all Philosophers that were of the same judgment with him, and
held that their good Doemons did so mediate betwixt the Gods and men, as that
they carried our petitions up to them, and did return the Aids and Blessings of
the God to us. He undertakes the Refutation of this Platonic Doctrine, and the
examination of this Question, whether the worship of those many Gods or Demons
was profitable to the obtaining of our future Bliss; and to confute this
Doctrine of the Platonists, and to prove this Mediation not to be profitable to
this end, he argues thus; Proinde mediatorem inter nos and Deum and
mortalitatem habere oportuit transeuntem, and beatudinem permanentem: ut per id
quod transit, congrueret morituris, and ad id quod permanet transferret ex
mortuis. Boniigitur Angeli inter miseros mortales and beatos immortales medii
esse non possunt quia ipsi quoque and beati and immortales sunt. Id. ib. c. 15.
vid. etiam c. 13. -- Multi sunt medii Separatores -- ne possit ad illud unum
beatificum perveniri, ad quod* ut perduceremur, non multis, sed uno Mediatore
opus erat, and hoc eo ipso cujus participatione sumus beati, hoc est Verbo Dei
non facto, sed per quod facta sunt omnia. Ib. c. 15. A.
This Mediation cannot be performed but by a middle person, who partakes of
some what that makes him like unto hoth parties: and therefore cannot be
performed by good Angels, such as the Platonist asserts these Demons are,
because Good Angels have happiness and immortality with God, but neither misery
nor mortality by which they may agree with Man. This is his argument even in
that place, whence Dr. Stillingfleet does cite these words, that those who are
Christians do believe, that we need not many, but one Mediator, and that such a
one, by whose participation we are made happy, i. e. the word of God not made,
but by whom all things were made.

Now here the Doctor is with great confidence, p. 373.
and with as little reason accused of false translation, and addition to St.
Austins words; of addition, because he says, those that are Christians do
believe: Of false Translation in those words, we need not many but one
Mediator: but it is easy to vindicate the Doctor from these false aspersions;
for, that Christians only could be brought to the Enjoyment of God, was
certainly St. Austins Faith, so then ut perduceremur (sc. nos ad Deum) non
multis, sed uno Mediatore opus erat, (sc. nobis) must import thus much, That we
Christians may be brought to God, we have no need of many Mediators. To cavil
at this Translation is to expose his ignorance to every School Boy: But to the
Testimony of St. Austin, he returns this Answer, that it is plain he speaks of
such a Mediator, p. 374.
by whose participation we are made happy, that is, a Mediator of Redemption,
and not a Mediator of Intercession, Rep. it is as plain that St. Austin speaks
of such a Mediator, who is the word of God, not made but making all things, and
that the Platonist acknowledged his Mediating Demons, to be made by God; the
Platonist may therefore with T. G. infer, that it is plain he speaks not
against them, though he designed nothing else, because he speaks of such a
Mediator by whose participation we are made happy; that is, (says he) the word
of God not made, etc. 2. Does not St. Austin tell us in the beginning of this
Book, that seeing some Philosophers affirmed, that their Good Demons were
Ministers to intercede with God, or carry up our Prayers to him, and to bring
back his Blessings unto us, therefore he would enter upon this dispute, whether
the worship of those many Gods was profitable to Salvation. And therefore it is
evident he stood obliged to show they did not contribute to our Salvation, by
being Mediators of Intercession for us, as well as to exclude them from from
being Mediators of Redemption.

The Works of Origin against Celsus,. 2.
are so express and clear against this practice of the Church of Rome, that if
he had designed to confute the Doctrine of that Church, he could not have
devised expressions more repugnant to it: for having confessed that (...). p.
233.
holy Angels did carry up our Prayers to God, and bring down blessings from God
to us, (as he had learned in the School of Plato) least any should be tempted
to infer from this, that we should pray unto these Angels, or that it was
useful or needful so to do, that so these Blessed spirits might be more
propicious or helpful to us; he does expressly say, that (...). p. 233.
to invoke them is no reasonable thing, and this assertion he confirms by many
arguments. 1. It is absurd (says he) to call upon them, because we want the
knowledge of their nature, nd because it is above the reach of Man. And 2. That
if we could attain unto this Knowledge, that very Knowledge which declares
their Nature and their Offce to us, would not permit us to pray to any other,
but unto God the Lord of all, who is abundantly sufficient for all, by the Son
of God. 3. He reckons up in the Apostles language, all the kinds and sorts of
Prayer, (...) Orig. contra Celsum l. 5. p 233.
Petition, Deprecation, Intercession, and Thanksgiving: And then he adds, all
these we must put up to God by that high Priest, who does Transcend all Angels;
and that this worship in any of the kinds forementioned, was therefore not to
be conferred upon the Angels, because they were not to receive Ibid.
the worship due to God. 4. He adds, that it was sufficient to obtain the
favor of the holy Angels, and the assistance of their Prayers, to labor to
have God propitious, and to procure his good will by godliness and virtue, and
by imitation of the Angels Piety. And therefore not only in his answer to this
objection, Lib. 5. p. 233.
but elsewhere he tells us, me must endeavor to approve our selves to him, who
is one God over all, and we must pray to him for mercy, and that if Celsus will
yet have us to procure the good will of others after him, who is God over all,
he must consider, that as when the body is moved, the motion of the shadow
thereof does follow: so in like manner, having God favorable unto us who is
over all, it follows, that we shall have all his Friends, both Angels, and
Souls, and Spirits loving unto us: For they have a fellow feeling with them
that are thought worthy to find favor from God. To whom they are not only
favorable, but they pray with them. So as we may be bold to say, that when Men
which with resolution propose unto themselves the best things, do pray unto
God: many thousand of the sacred powers pray together with them unspoken to.
Moreover when Celsus affirmed, Id. l. 8. p. 420.
that thanks were to be given to Demons, and that our Prayers and first Fruits
were to be offered to them; (...). l. 8. p. 396.
that so we might obtain their presence with us, and their favor to us, who
have obtained of God to be Dispensers of inferior things: to this it is
replied by Origin. 1. That God had given no such Government to Demons. (...)
Id. ib. p. 400.
2. That first Fruits must be offered to God alone, who said, let the Earth
bring forth Fruit, and to him to whom the Christians offered their first
Fruits, they offered also their petitions. 3. He does acknowledge that office
which Celsus had ascribed to wicked Demons did agree to Angels, who upon that
account in Scripture were styled ministering spirits, and do encamp about Gods
servants for their protection and deliverance. But least we should infer with
Celsus, that we must therefore pray unto them, to be thus propicious; he adds,
we shall sufficiently obtain their favor, by imitation of their Piety, and
Invocation of that God to whom they pray. For thus he speaks; If we have a
desire to a multitude, whom we would willingly have to be favorable unto us,
l. 8. p. 400.
we learn that thousand thousands stand by him, and Millions of Millions
minister unto him, who beholding them that imitate their Piety toward God, as
if they were their Kinsfolks and Friends, help forward their Salvation and
call upon God, and pray sincerely, appearing also, and thinking that they ought
to do service to them; and as it were upon one watchword to set forth for the
benefit and salvation of them that pray to God, unto whom they themselves also
pray.

Now to all these and all the Arguments that any man can bring, T. G. returns
this Answer,. 3. p. 360.
Viz. That Prayer implies either a total dependence upon God as the Author of
all good, and so we ought to pray to God alone, or an address unto the Members
of the Church triumphant, for the assistance of their Prayers to him, who only
can give what we ask, and in this sense it is still used by Roman Catholics,
when it is applied to Saints and Angels; when therefore Origin denies that our
Prayers are to be offered to any but to Christ alone, he speaks of Prayer in
the first sense. This is that Catholic answer, which upon all occasion he
produces. This Origin and all the Fathers mean, verily it is this, and nothing
else; Not that the Fathers of the four first Centuries, when they so roundly
and frequently assert, that Prayer is to be offered unto God alone, did ever
thus distinguish or speak one title of this nature, no, simple Creatures as
they were: they absolutely, and without all distinction condemned what they
daily practiced, and practiced what they had condemned; they all spoke what was
absolutely false, and meant only what was true; so that no Man could have
imagined this to have been their meaning, had not T. G. been their Interpreter.
Thus when Origne expressly says, (...) l. 8. p. 402.
It is no reasonable thing to pray unto the Angels, l. 5. p. 258.
we must only pray to God and to his Son Christ Jesus. He nust affirm, what was
a plain and absolute contradiction to the Churches Doctrine, but then his
meaning must be Orthodox, and contradictory to what he does assert. When he
adds almost by way of Syllogism, to whom we Christians offer our first Fruits:
to him we offer up our Prayers: But to God alone we offer up our first Fruits,
Ergo to him alone we offer up our Prayers. When he informs us, that the
Christians were such as did not pray to Angels, but undividedly and inseparably
did worship God by Jesus Christ, l. 8. p. 382.
and came to God by Christ alone, and so, as to transcend even those blessed
spirits, which are called Gods, He must apparently belly the Christian World,
according to the plain Interpretation of his words, but his intentions must be
Orthodox. And yet 3. he does not only deny the Doctrine, and the practice of
the Church of Rome to be the Doctrine and practice of the time wherein he
lived, but he destroys the very ground and reason of that practice, viz. the
benefit we may receive by putting up requests unto them; and the concernments
which ly upon us so to do in order to our preservation from all evil, and the
obtainment of the greatest blessings, for he expressly tells us our care must be
to get his favor who alone is God: and that if Celsus (or the Church of Rome)
would have us to procure the favor of the inferior beings he must know that all
good Spirits, Souls and Angels, (if we do obtain Gods favor, when we pray to
him) they need not be called upon for the assistance of their prayers for they
will pray together with us, ((...)) not being called upon so to do. This he
does frequently repeat, and indeed it is the common language of those times he
lived in, witness the like expression of Arnobius, In hoe omne, quod colendum
est colimus: quod adorari convenit adoramus: quod obsequium Venerationis
exposcit Venerationibus promeremur. Cum enim divinitatis ipsius tencamus caput,
a quo ipsa Divinitas divorum omnium, quicunque sunt, ducitur, supervacuum
putamus personas ire per singulas: cum and ipsi qui sint, and quae habeant
nomina nesciamus: and cujus sint praeterea numeri, neque liquidum neque
comprehensum, neque exploratum habere possimus. Atque ut in terrestribus Regnis
necessitate nulla compellimur, regalibus in familiis constitutos nominatim cum
Principibus adorare, sed in Regum ipsorum cultu, quicquid illis annexum est,
tacita and se sentit honorificentia comprehendi: Non alia ratione quicunque hi
Dii sunt, quos esse nobis proponitis: fi sint progenies Regia, and principali
oriuntur e capite, etiam si nullos accipiant nominatim a nobis cultus,
intelligunt se tamen honorari communiter cum suo Rege, atque in illius
venerationibus contineri. Arnobius contra Gentes, lib. 3 p. 101.
In worshipping the Father and the Lord of all things we worship all things that
are to be worshipped, we adore all things that may conveniently be adored, we
venerate all that calls for veneration. For holding to the head from whence
these Divi borrow their Divinity, we think it needless to go to every Person;
seeing we know not what they are, what names they have, or of what order they
may be. And as in honoring the King we honor all that do belong unto him, so
what ever Gods you do propose unto us, if they be of this Kingly progeny, and
do belong unto this head, although they do receive no worship from us they
understand that they are worshipped together with their King, and are included
in that veneration, which we pay to him.

4. This Answer renders the discourse of Origin impertinent, and a perfect
declination of the Question betwixt him and Celsus: For Celsus thus disputes,
no God nor any Son of God can possibly descend from Heaven; but if you do
assert this of the Angels of God these are no other than our Demons. Orig. l.
7. 5. p. 23^.
To this St. Origin returns this Answer. 1. That to deny that any God descends
from Heaven, is to deny what was esteemed a thing common by the Heathen World.
2. That Christians do indeed confess this is the office of the Angels to come
down from and to ascend to Heaven, and to offer up the Prayers of men to God,
but yet, says he, we must not worship them as God, for all our Prayers must be
directed to God, and to his Son Christ Jesus who is the living Word and God.
Which argument if it have any strength at all consists in this, that which you
must not worship and adore as God you must not pray unto, but Angels you must
not worship and adore as God. Ergo, Angels you must not pray unto. This is that
Fathers plea to which T. G. may answer in behalf of Celsus as well as of the
Church of Rome, that he apparently distinguishes those Angels both from God
and from the Son of God, and therefore did not contend that we should pray unto
them as to that God, who is the Author of all good, but only as to the
Ministers and Servants of God, whom he appointed to preside over such persons,
Families, and Countries. And therefore he was contented only that it might be
lawful to say unto them as does the Church of Rome to St. Sebastian, Cerne
familiam tuam (id est) behold thy family: and to St. Gabriel, preserve thy
Country. 2. (...).
Celsus objects that if with God we do adore his Son, then may we ((...))
venerate his Ministers.

To this St. Origin replies; that if (...). Orig. Contra Celsum. lib. 8. p. 386.
Celsus by the Ministers of God had understood Gabriel and Michael and other
Angels and Archangels and had contended that they should be venerated, perpaps
by purifying of the word, and of the actions of the venerators, we might say
something of that matter (i.e.) Perhaps some actions which in some sense may
bear the name of veneration might be performed to those Angels.

This T. G. thinks a great advantage to his cause; and wonders that the Doctor
would produce this passage. But I conceive it is the clearest confutation of
it, that we could desire; For having granted this, and then restraining our
petitions unto God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, as he expressly does,
he most apparently demonstrates that prayer could be no part of the
forementioned service he allowed to Saints. 2. In that he thus distinguishes
of veneration and never does distinguish in the like manner of prayer and
supplication, or of (...) and (...), id est, of adoration and worship: it
follows that although he thought some veneration might be allowed to Angels in
some inferior kind: yet no petition was to be put up unto them, and that no
worship and adoration should be given unto them. 3. When Origin in answer to
this passage says, (...). Id. Ibid.
we (Christians) venerate with supplications only God and his Son Jesus Christ,
and put up our petitions to God by his only Son: If he does understand only
such supplications as are made to him as to the Author of all good, he is as
vain and impertinent as T. G. in his Answers to the Dr. for Celsus only does
contend for such a worship, and consequently for such addresses only as agree
unto the Ministers and Servants of God. 4. Origin plainly does inform us that
the veneration he allowed to Angels was (...) (...) Id. l. 8. p. 416.
to speak well of them and pronounce them blessed, and imitate to their
virtues; and what is this to supplication? 3. Celsus objects that Demons do
belong to God and therefore must be prayed unto: and a little after that, to
them it was given to preside over the Earth, or to be patrons or Inspectors of
such a City or of such a Country; and upon that account infers we must both
pray and offer our thandsgiving and first fruits unto them. To all this Origin
replies, that we must offer up our prayers to God alone, and we must pray to
him alone to whom we offer our first fruits: in both which places if Origin
intended only to affirm that prayer was due to God, which implies the object of
our supplication to be the highest God and the chief Author of all Good, it is
apparent he does not in the least deny what Celsus pleaded for, viz. such
supplication as he conceived due to such Demons as were commissionated from
God and belonged to him.

5. This Answer renders the discourses of this learned Father rediculously weak
and unconcluding: as v. g. 1. We cannot rationally pray to Angels, says this
learned Father; Because we do not know their natures, nor are we capable of the
knowledge of them. lib. 5. p. 233.
Which if we understand it thus We know not what their understanding is, or
whether they have any knowledge of our hearts when present, or of our prayers
when absent. And therefore do not conceive it rational to pray unto them, it is
both pertinent and conclusive: But if we understand it thus, we must not pray
unto them, as we do to the great God of Heaven; because we do not know their
Natures. Nothing is more absurd and foolish, for certainly all Christians knew
so much of their nature as to believe they were not Gods. Besides we neither
know the nature of God nor are we capable of understanding it, and yet it will
not follow that we we may not pray unto him, lib. 5. p. 239.
as to the Author of all Good. Again it is absurd, says he, having God always
present with us to pray unto the Son which is not always present: now this
absurdity does equally respect Prayer relative, and absolute; for if the Son
can hear our prayers, and can obtain Gods blessings when he is not present, it
cannot be absurd to pray unto him, because not present, but if he cannot, then
must it be absurd to put up to him such petitions as the Church of Rome does
tender to the holy Angels. Moreover we do not in the least contemn (says he)
so admirable a work of God, but yet we must not pray unto (the Creature or)
this work of God, lib. 5. p. 238.
because it prays for us: Now here can any man conceive he should intend no
more but this, you must not look on that as the supremest Deity, which I have
told you is his Creature? No sure, had he and all the Christian World prayed
daily to them, who do pray for us, he would have rather said you must not pray
unto him, as to that God who is the Author of all good, because he is a
Creature. 6. When Origin discourses of this subject he usually says that we
must put up our petitions unto God by Christ, and having once confessed that we
may pray directly to Christ whom he conceived to be inferior to the Father) he
makes that very same distinction which our Author and his party do, viz. (...)
l. 5. p. 233.
That prayer may be taken properly (...) or (...) in an improper and abusive
sense: and in this sense alone he does approve of prayer made to Christ,
whereas had he allowed of any prayers made to Saints and Angels, it is to be
presumed having so many provocations and occasions to treat upon, and to
explain the subject, he would have sometimes used this distinction, and would
not always have denied this practice and condemned that doctrine, without
distinction or exception: elsewhere, he says, If any man be not sufficient, (
viz. to go directly to God) let him go to the Son of God who is able to heal
him. Since then he never says as does the Church of Rome let him go to Saints
and Angels, certain it is that he did not approve this practice: and this is
yet more evident from his reply to Celsus, Orig. lib. 8. p. 416.
for when Celsus had objected that according to the Doctrine of the Egyptians
every part of a man has a particular Demon or Ethereal God, and every one of
these being invocated heals the diseases of the parts proper to themselves. Why
then may not the Christians justly invocate the favor both of them and others
if they had rather be in health than sickness? To this it is replied by Origin;
1. That Celsus by advising us to go to Demons, sufficiently declared his
distrust of the inseparable and undivided worship of the God of all, lib. 8. p.
417.
and did imagine that to Worship God alone and honor him, was not sufficient to
preserve those that did so from diseases and the insidiations of evil spirits;
which is an evident conviction that he did not think the invocation of the
Archangel Gabriel, Michael, Raphael, or of Sebastian, Valentinus, or any other
Roman Saint, (which they of Rome do daily invocate for their protection from
these evil spirits, and the diseases which they are subject to) was needful for
that end: or that it could be practiced without distrusting of the
all-sufficient God. 2. He adds, It is much better to commit our selves to God,
the Lord of all things by Jesus Christ, and ask of him all help, lib. 8. p. 418.
and in particular the custody of the holy Angels who may deliver us from these
terrestrial Demons. where also it is manifest that he would have us ask the
help and custody of Angels, not from them, as is the manner of the Roman
Church, but only from the God of Angels. Orig. ib.
3. He affirms that health is to be sought either by means of the Physician,
which is the ordinary way, or by extraordinary means, viz. by piety toward God
in our addresses to him, by which expression it is also manifest that he was
ignorant of that way of seeking health, which had its rise from after ages, and
is so common in the Church of Rome, for otherwise, as it is excellently
observed by the learned Doctor, p. 150.
he must have told him that Christians were not to address themselves to
Chnumen, Chnaachnumen, Cnat, Sicat, Biu, Eru, or any other Heathen Demons to
obtain these Blessings but unto Raphael and Appollonia, Sebastian and Roach.

Unto the first and second argument urged by the Doctor, and most apparently
confounding the doctrine and common practice of the Roman Church; T. G. affords
us not one word of answer; the evidence being too plain and pregnant to admit
of a reply; but over the third remark he triumphs and undertakes to render it
ridiculous to all sober Readers by showing two things. 1. The difference
between the Doctrine and Practice of the Egyptians, and that of the
Catholics. 2. The reasonableness of the practice of making addresses to one
particular Saint rather than another: But 1. were both these things as true as
Gospel, yet are they horribly impertinent to what the Doctor urged, viz. that
Origin had he conceived the invocation of any holy Angels or of Saints departed
proper to obtain deliverance from the diseases of the body he would have
mentioned their names, in opposition to the names of those Egyptian presidents
or Demons, whom Celsus did advise us to invoke on that account, Which argument
is more convincing, because he does oppose unto them the holy name of Jesus as
that which was invoked by all true Christians to that end: Now unto this
consideration nothing is more impertinent and more ridiculously opposed than
these two things: For what if the Egyptians did conceive their Gnat and Sicat
to be Gods, why should not Origin reply, that, we expect assistance rather from
our Saints and Angels, than your Gods? And if the practice of making such
addresses to particular Saints had been conceived so reasonable by this learned
Father, he had the greater reason upon so fair an opportunity to have made
mention of these Saints. T. G. saw this and knew that if the Doctors Argument
had been propounded thus he could have nothing to object against it: And
therefore that he might be able to frame some color of an Answer he makes the
Doctor speak as if he did affirm there was no difference between the Egyptian
Demons or Ethereal Gods, p. 362.
and the Saints deceased, but in the names: or between the Egyptians addresses
to these Devils, and those of the Catholics to the holy Saints and Angels, but
in the language; and that there needed no more but to correct the names as you
would do faults in Printing; viz. for Chnumen to read Raphael, for
Chnaachnumen, Apollonia, for Gnat Sebastian, etc.

Whereas this affirmation is plainly inconsistent with the Doctors words, p.
150.
who introduces one of the Church of Rome affirming that the thing was
rational which he said, only they were out in their names: For instead of
Chnumen, Chnaachumen, Cnat, Sy^at, Biu, Eru, etc. they should have chosen
Raphael for traveling, and against diseases; Apollonia against the toothache.
Now it is sure no Roman Doctor ever taught the very name of Raphael and
Appollonia would cure diseases, but that the Souls or persons called by those
names, could do it And, 2. No Romanist can be presumed to confess, according to
the principles of his profession, that it was either rational to pray to evil
Spirits, or to bare words and names: and therefore when he brings him in
asserting that the thing was rational which Celsus said, only the names were to
be changed, he cannot be conceived to mean it otherwise than thus it is
rational we should pray for health, provided that we do not do it to these evil
Spirits which are called by the names of Cnat and Sicat, but to those blessed
Spirits which in our Lyturgies are called Raphael, Apollonia, Sebastian and
Roach. 2 Of these two things the second, viz. the reasonableness of this
practice the Doctor was so far from mocking at or making it the subject of his
mirth, as does Arnobius, that it is barely mentioned by the Doctor without the
least reflection on it, that unless to mention be to expose this practice to
derision, the Doctor cannot without the greatest falsehood be accused of it; and
if it be so, this guilt falls heavy on T. G. who spends so many pages to
justify what is exposed if it be only mentioned: T. G. p. 368, 362, 363.
The difference he puts betwixt the Egyptian Demons and his Saints and Angels
is (1.) that the Egyptians believed their Demons to be Gods. p. 363.
But this is either manifestly false, or else intended only to delude the
Reader; for Celsus calls them (...) Earthly Demons: apud Orig. l. 8. p. 417.
and adds that wise men taught their power was limited, that they could only
heal men's bodies and foretell future things to private Men, and Cities, and had
the power to do such things as did concern the actions of Mortal Men; and
therefore bids us to beware, lest we be guilty of excess in paying Homage to
them, and so forget that service which we owe unto their Betters. Whence it is
evident, that Celsus did not speak of them as Gods in the most famous sense, as
it imports the great Creator of the World; but in that sense, in which St.
Austin says, whether you call them Angels, de C. D. l.9. c. ult.
Gods, or Demons, the difference is only in the name: Hence in this very
place, Celsus first calls them Demons, and then by way of Paraphrase ethereal
Gods. (2.) Says he, Ibid.
the Invocation which Celsus here contended for, was votiva illis sacrificia
reddere, to offer Sacrifice to them, (which is due to God alone) and that upon
account, that they had power to heal the Diseases of the parts proper to
themselves.

Answ. (1.) this is that disingenious art of adding to the words of Origin,
which T. G. is so unconscionable guilty of. For does Celsus say, that if we
sacrifice unto them they will heal us? No; he expressly says, invocati sanant,
they do it being called upon: does he say, that what he called Invocation was a
Sacrifice? No, Does he move us to sacrifice unto them because they heal? No,
but only does infer, p. 416.
(...), why may we not endeavor to procure their favor, does Origin reply,
that though he mentioned Invocation, he intended Sacrifice? No, but only thus,
Celsus would have us to believe the Demons (...) and pay them Reverence, if
Celsus did contend for sacrificia votiva, Origin answered not one word. to that
which he contended for. Did the Egyptian

Magi procure these blessings from them by Sacrifice? No, Origin tells us,
(...) that the Egyptian Magitians did this by Invocation of their Demons, p.
417.
did he imagine that Celsus so conceived? No, he expressly says, that he had
given us a Catalogue of Egyptian Names (...), which being called upon, Ibid.
healed the distempers of their parts. Has then T. G. no color for this
Interpretation? Answ. For saying, that by Invocation Celsus intended votiva
sacrificia, he has no pretense. For mentioning votiva sacrificia he has only
this, viz. that Celsus before he came to mention the Egyptian Demons,
speaking of other Demons, he contends (...) that Sacrifices of thanksgiving
must be due unto them; p. 415, 416.
which T. G. very fairly turns into votiva sacrificia, or petitory sacrifices,
that so he might have something to pretend by way of Answer, though it be
contradictory to Origin and Celsus, and to the practice of those Egyptians he
mentions.

Origin acknowledges, Object. p. 361. 4.
that the Angels do offer up the prayers of Men to God: and surely it can never
be Idolatry to desire them to do what they do: Answ. The minister prays for his
Parish, and yet should every Parishioner in his private Closet desire him to
pray for them, should they put up mental prayers unto him, and so ascribe unto
him the knowledge of the heart, and of the desires of Men absent from him, they
would make an Idol of him. Thus albeit the Angels are present in the assemblies
of Saints, and offer up the prayers they hear, yet to invoke them when absent,
and with mental prayer, may duly be esteemed Idolatry.

2. T. G. informs us, Ibid.
that Origin in his first Homily upon Ezekiel, invocates an Angel in these
words, Veni Angele suscipe sermon conversum ab errore pristino, a doctrina
Daemoniorum, ab iniquitate in altum loquente, and suscipiens eum quasi Medicus
bonus confove, atque institue, parvulus est, hodie nascitur senex repuerascens,
and suscipe tribuens ei baptismum secundae regenerationis. ^ 133. E.
Come holy Angel and receive him who is converted from his former Sins. Answer.

1. We have just reason to suspect this place is an addition to the works of
Origin, 1. Because it contradicts his constant plain opinion delivered so
often, and so industriously confirmed in his reply to Celsus, it also
contradicts the practice of Church then being, (as Origin himself declares.

2. He speaks thus to the Angel, Receive him, and confer upon him the Baptism
of the second regeneration. Now who ever heard of any Baptized by an Angel, who
ever heard so uncouth and absurd a Phrase as is the Baptism of second
Regeneration? these therefore cannot be the words of Learned Origin, as all
that know him must confess. Besides, this speech can be applied to none but
Origin himself, and if it has any sense, A. d. 153.^.121, 122, 123.
it seems plainly to refer to his repentance after his lapse into Idolatry,
which happily is styled the Baptism of a second Regeneration, since then that
story is confuted by Baronius, it follows, that this passage which refers unto
it, must be also false.

3. Were it granted that those are the true words of Origin, they contain only
an Apostrophe, such as is that of Austin to St. Chrysostom, enter St. John,
sit with thy Brethren and others mentioned, c.9. Or (2.) If I should grant them
to contain a formal Prayer, it is directed only to an Angel whom he conceived
to be present, and it is only a vocal prayer, (for Origin conceived not only
that every person, but also every Church had a Ego non ambigo and in caetu
nostro adesse Angelos non solum Geperaliter omni Ecclesiae sed etiam
figillatim. Hom. 23. in luc.
particular Angel that presided over it, and so was present there:) And
therefore this Example is not pertin ent to prove what we deny, viz. that it is
lawful to pray unto them, when we have no assurance of their presence, or with
mental prayer.

THE CONCLUSION
shows 1. That what T. G. alleges to prove the Dr. Guilty of false and
disingenious Citations, is most unconscionably false. 2. That T. G. is
notoriously Guilty of false and disingenious citations. 3. That he very falsty
represents the question touching the Invocation of the Saints departed. 4. That
T. G. is a Man of Wit; but in his Book, he has not in the least discovered
himself to be a Man of Learning or of Judgment, but given us just reason to
suspect his want of both.

WE are informed by the incomparable Dalle, 1. De usu Patrum Cap. 3. p. 43.
that it was a Thesis publicly proposed and defended by the College of Lovain,
that it is no mortal sin to elude a great Authority, that is detracting from,
or noxious to us with a Lie; and that the Jansenists do frequently object
against the Jesuits, the same ungodly Tenet. That this has been the constant
practice of T. G. and that he owes the glory of his Book to his exact
Conformity, to this acursed Doctrine, I have demonstrated already from many
instances so clear, that nothing can admit of greater evidence. Before I enter
into a farther demonstration of this Charge, I must assure the Christian
Reader, that from my heart I wish, that I had nothing of this nature to object
against T. G. and I do think my self unhappy that I have to deal with one, who
by so base a prostitution of his Conscience, does seek advantage to his cause.
Indeed the subject is so unpleasant and unwelcome to me, that I would certainly
have wholly waved it, had not my Duty to my Brother, and the disadvantage which
the truth might suffer from these Arts, obliged me to proceed in this
discovery, which both in pity to my self, and to my Adversary, I shall confine
to the consideration of what he has delivered Part the Third, that so my
Labor and his Guilt may be the less. This being thus premised, the Truth of
what I charge him with, shall be made good. (1.) By consideration of what he
offers to crack the credit of the Dr. and cast a Disrepute on his incomparable
Labors. And (2.) From diverse instances of his endeavors by the forementioned
Arts, to weaken the Authorities produced against him. And

First,. 2.
the Dr. is very often (but most unjustly) charged with false Citations,
Interpretations, and suggestions, touching the Authors cited by him, v. g. The
Dr. says he, makes a terrible blunder by his dextrous Translating, etc. p.
371. And again p. 373. The Dr. says he, first makes a Preface of his own, as
if it was St. Austins, and then turns opus erat, there was no need, into we
need not, etc. And p. 375. he makes the Dr. to avm^ch in the face of the World
156. what was a perfect contradiction to what he told us out of St. Austin p.
155. and out of Celsus. p. 150. These imputations I have already proved to be
false and groundless in their respective places; whither I refer the Reader. v.
Chapter 9. 3.
Again, the Dr. having given us the descant of Theodoret, upon that passage of
St. Paul, and upon that Canon of Laodicea, which forbids Christians to Worship
Angels, he subjoyns these words, No wonder that Baronius is so much displeased
with Theodoret, for this Interpretation; p. 155.
for he very fairly tells what he condemns (and St. Paul too) was the practice
of their Church, and those Oratories were set up by Catholics, and not by
Heretics. This is foul dealing says T. G. and these are pitiful slights of
Sophistry, to delude an unwary Reader: p. 380.
And he shall wonder if the Dr. find any one that will believe him, p. 383.
so that what Dr. Stillingfleet has here delivered, must be incredible foul
dealing, or else T. G. must certainly be guilty of much disingenuity and
falsehood in this accusation, which runs thus, viz. That the Dr. says that
Baronius very fairly tells us, p. 383.
that not only what Theodoret condemned, but what St. Paul too condemned, was
the practice of the Church of Rome. Answ. These words Baronius fairly tells us
(says the Dr.) that what St. Paul condemned was the practice of the Church,
are a malicious untruth, the Dr. having taken all the care imaginable, to
prevent this mistake in all judicious Readers, for this expression (and St.
Paul too) which is the only ground of this rude charge, he did not only put in
a Parenthesis, but in a different Character, that so no Reader might have the
least appearance of color for so false an imputation. This T. G. saw, as is
apparent from the words cited by him, p. 380. And therefore when he comes to
lay his accusation (p. 383. Sect. 3.) he very craftily sets down the Doctors
words without Parenthesis, or any difference of the Character. This I am sure
is foul dealing, and these are pitiful arts of Sophistry. What therefore Dr.
Stillingfleet asserts, is only that Baronius tells us, Ex his videas (quod
necessario dicendum est) Theodoretum haud feliciter, ejus pace sit dictum,
assecutum esse Pauli verborum sensum cum in hujus ad Colossenses Epistolae
commentariis dicit haec a Paulo esse scripta quod tum grassarentur haeretici
qui Angelos colendos esse jactarent -- sic ergo errore semel lapsus in alium
Graviorem impegit, ut diceret Canonem trigessimum quintum Laodiceni concilii de
his Haereticis esse intelligendum qui Angelos colendos esse docerent quique in
eadem regione Asiae oratoria erexissent Sancto Michaeli Archangelo, incaute
nimis quae a Catholicis essent antiquitus instituta, haereticis quorum nulla
esset memoria, tribuens. Annal. An. 60. 20. caeterum Angelos venerari non
Haereticorum sed Catholicae Ecclesiae mos fuit 21.
That what Theodoret condemns, and in his judgment, St. Paul too, was the
Practice of the Roman Church, than which nothing can be more true and certain,
for having told us that Theodoret asserted, haec a Paulo esse scripta, quod tum
grassarentur haeretici, qui Angelos colendos esse jactarent, or that the
admonition, beware least any Man deceive you by worshipping of Angels, etc. was
written by St. Paul, by reason of some Heretics, who taught that Angels should
be worshipped, and that the 35 Canon of Laodicea, was directed against such
Heretics as worshipped Angels, he adds, caeterum Angelos venerari, non
haereticorum, sed Catholicae Ecclesiae mos fuit: this he erroneously taught;
but to worship Angels was not the Custom of Heretics, but of the Church
Catholic. And now let the discerning Reader judge what reason T. G. p. 381.
had to say, that these are not Baronius his words, but the Doctors; which is
another of his Demonstrations, that it is but too too evident, that the Dr.
has not dealt fairly with Baronius: But says T. Ibid.
G. these are not Baronius his words, but the Doctors, for Baronius says there
expressly, that Theodoret, as to the Doctrine of the veneration of Angels, recta
sensit, that is, held the same which the Roman Church holds at his day. To
which I answer in his own expressions, such arts as these were enough to make a
Man suspect a good cause, p. 145.
much more to desert a bad one: for Baronius does not absolutely say, that
Theodoret did rectum sentire, but makes a manifest exception as to this his
Interpretation of St. Paul and the forementioned Canon, his words are these,
His igitur de germano sensu illius Canonis Elucidatis, satis Theodoreti
perperam facta interpretatio remanet refutata; cum Alioqui N. B. in his quae
spectant ad dogmata, non sit dubium ipsum rectum sensisse de Angelis. Annal.
An. 60. 23.
These things touching the true sense of this Canon being thus cleared, the
false Interpretation of Theodoret remains sufficiently confuted, whereas
otherwise, as to his Doctrine, it is not to be doubted, but he thought right of
Angels; which passage does not only manifest the wretched fraudulency of T. G.
p. 380.
but gives him an example of what he thought incredible: for if Theodoret could
affirm the practice of the Roman Church was an heretical practice, and as such
condemned both by St. Paul, and by the Canon of the Universal Church, and yet
hold the same with the Roman Church; why might not Baronius do the like; either
Theodoret was a very great Dolt, or Baronius deals not fairly with him, which
is but too too evident.

2. T. G. concludes, that these are not Baronius his words; p. 381.
because the point in which Baronius differs from Theodoret, is not that those
were not condemned by him. And St. Paul too, who worshipped Angels upon the
Erroneous account aforesaid, viz. That access could only be made to God by
Angels: But that Theodoret judged Baronius mistaken in asserting the Authors of
that Doctrine, not to have been the Heathen Philosophers, but certain
Heretics: This is what Baronius says. Where first he cunningly (but falsely
does insinuate) that in the judgment of Theodoret, St. Paul and the
forementioned Canon, only condemns them, who worshipped Angels upon this
erroneous account, that access could only be made to God by the Angels: and if
this be the grievous error, and that false interpretation, p. 379.
with which Baronius does so smartly charge him, T. G. does very ill to espouse
it in his Interpretation of this Canon. But the truth is, Theodoret in the
Exposition of this passage of St. Paul, only affirms that this was the opinion
of the Heretics, but does not in the least insinuate, that either the Council,
or St. Paul condemned them only upon this account, but without all limitation
or exception, he affirms that they condemned praying to them. (2.) What he says
was not the point in which Baronius differs from Theodoret, is so apparently
the point, though not the only point, that nothing can be more. For his great
peak against him is, that he asserted, that both St. Paul and the forementioned
Council condemned the Heretics for teaching the Worship of Holy Angels;
whereas says he, this was the very practice of the Church of Christ, and not
of Heretics.

Another instance of the Doctors juggling tricks, The Dr. translates it
eqquivocally to perform any sacred offices. T.G. p. 386.
T. G. produces p. 386. viz. that when St. Austin had affirmed the blessed
Spirits are not willing we should Sacra eis facere, perform sacred Offices to
them, he translates Sacra facere to perform sacred Offices, as if he did
imagine, ignorant person that he was, that Sacra signified Sacred Offices, and
facere to perform: whereas T. G. informs him, that Sacra facere is to Dedicate,
and because this ridiculous interpretation would not help him out, for Papists
dedicate their service to the blessed Spirits; he adds that it is evident, St.
Austin speaks of the worship which is due to God alone; that is, of such
dedications and consecrations as were performed by the Heathens to their
Demons as Gods: And having T.G's. word for this, you ought not to expect his
proof. But (1.) The words of St. Austin do apparently distinguish betwixt
performing Sacred Offices and Consecration of our selves unto them; for says
he, the Question is Quomodo Credendi sint velle a nobis religionem pietatemque
servari: hoc est, ut apertius dicam utrum etiam sibi^^an tantum Deo suo, qui
etiam nosier est, placeat eis ut sicra faciamus, Et Sacrificemus, vel aliqua
nostra, sen nos ipsos Religionis Ritibus consecre mus.
Whether it can please those holy Spirits that we should perform Sacred offices
and Sacrifices to them, or should consecrate our selves or any thing belonging
to us by Religious Rites: The affirmative is the opinion of the Platonists and
of the Church of Rome, but that we should not consecrate our selves unto them
by any Religious Rite is the opinion of S. Austin. (2.) St. Austin had in the
immediate foregoing Chapter undertaken to evince Quos autem bonos, and ideo non
solum immortales verum etiam beatos Deorum nomine Sacris and Sacrificiis
propter vitam b^^tam post mortem adipiscendam colendos putant, qualescunque
illi sint, and quolibet vocabulo digni sint, non eos velle per tale religionis
obsequium nisi unum Deum coli, a quo cre^ti, and cujus participatione beati
sint, adjuvante ipso in se uenti libro diligentius disseremus, de Civit. Dei,
l. 9. c. 23.
that those blessed spirits would not be worshipped, Sacris and Sacrificiis (id
est,) by Sacred Offices and Sacrifices, but that God only was to be worshipped
by such rites: and though he says they would not be worshipped Deorum nomine,
which gave occasion to this Answer of T. G.

St. Austin in this very Chapter does inform us, that these Palatonists against
whom he disputed did not differ from the Christians in their apprehensions of
their Demons, and as if he had intended to exclude this exposition of T. G. he
adds that Platonists acknowledged their Demons to be good Spirits, De C D.
lib. 9. c. 23.
made by God and therefore only called them Gods, in such a sense, in which the
Scripture was wont to Style the Angels Gods: So that it is most certain (1.)
that Sacra facere was not equivocally translated to perform Sacred Offices. And
(2.) that Austin does not speak of the worship due to God alone, but of the
worship due to good Spirits, made by God.

Page 390, 391.. 5.
We have a fresh attempt to blast the Credit of the Doctor, but I have
thoroughly considered it, Chap. 6. Prop. 4. Corol. 3. and have made it clear
beyond all contradiction, that it is, only a rude heap of false suggestions,
and desingenious insinuations: be pleased Reader to consult the place, and
disbelieve me if thou can.

From p. 390, 6.
to 430. he is more sparing in his accusations; but from that Page to the
conclusion of his book, we have but little besides Prodigious outcries and
admirations of the miserable shifts, and disingenious arts of Dr. Stilling
fleet; p. 431.
and thus the Charge begins. I must desire the Reader to take the pains to
peruse attentively the words of S. Austin, as they stand cited in the Reply,
and the Doctors Considerations upon them (for himself thought not fit to call
them an Answer;) that by his performance in this point, he may see to what
miserable shifts, and disingenious arts they are put, who will shut their Eyes,
and fight against the light of a Noonday truth. And then he proceeds to charge
the Doctor with corrupting the words of Austin, li. 22.
and with an exposition not only opposite unto the sense of Austin, li. 29.
but confuted by him. And with affirming what if he had not shut his Eyes could
not have been affirmed, li. 16.
and yet all this I have demonstrated to be false, Chap. 9. Sect. 11.

But then what follows ( p, 432.) is that disingenious accusation which
deserves for ever to to be branded with a note of Infamy; viz. Whereas he says
that I conveniently left out, what St. Austin adds, p. 432.
that not only Sacrifice was refused by Saints and Angels, but any other
Religious honor, which is due to God himself; had he not conveniently put in
those words (any other Religious honor) into the Text, ( for they are not in S.
Austin) he had had nothing to blind his Reader with. Whoever looks into the
Text will judge he had done much more conveniently for his Cause had he left it
out. p. 433.
Answ. This he avoucheth here in the face of the world but as I suppose in
confidence that neither his Reader or his Adversary would be so rude as to look
into the Text, or to suspect the truth of what he does assert with so much
confidence: For thus St. Austin speaks, Cum autem ad hunc Cultum pertineat
oblatio Sacrificii unde Idololatria dicitur eorum qui hoc etiam Idolis exhibent
nullo modo tale aliquid offerimus. Now let it only be observed that Sacrifice
is on all hands confessed to be religious worship, lib. 20. contra Faust. c 21.
and then let Romanists themselves be judge, whether nullo modo tale aliquid
offerimus do not signify we do not offer any other religious honor which is due
to God himself, and which would render us Idolaters? so unhappily did he advise
us to peruse attentively the words of Austin, which do so clearly evidence that
it is not the Doctor but T. G. who is forced to fly to miserable shifts, and
disingenious Arts.

The Doctor ( p. 173. 7.
) Speaks thus, we do not say, that some superstitions did not creep in after
the Anniversary meetings at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs grew in request; for
St. Austin himself says that what they taught was one thing, and what they did
bear with was another, speaking of the Customs used at those Solemnities. Now
here T. G. is pleased to represent him as a most unconscionable Cheat, and with
great wonderment Cries out; Is it possible he could think so great a forb as
this could pass for current in the World? p. 439.
Is it possible he could have courage enough to cite the place, where these
words are to be found, and not fear a Rat, Observe I pray. What St. Austin
condemns is this, that some who brought Wine and Meat to the Sepulchers of the
Martyrs took so plentifully of them, that they made themselves drunk: His words
are these, as for those who make themselves drunk at the Sepulchers of the
Martyrs: how can they be approved by us whom sound doctrine condemns, even when
they do it in their own private houses. This was the Custom of which S. Austin
says that the Governors of the Church did not teach it but bore with it till
it could be amended. And the Doctor had the conscience by a subtle Insinuation,
to make his Reader believe, that what S. Austin condemned, was the desiring,
or, as he calls it, wishing the Martyrs to pray for them, I shall leave him to
make satisfaction to God and the World. Repl. Here I am at a stand for I am
loath to think that any Christian should with such confidence and pertness
accuse his Brother (though he be an Adversary) without the least occasion or
reason so to do. Conscience and credit are so deeply interested in so foul a
Charge, that I cannot imagine that it should be laid by any person who values
either of them, against one who is wholly innocent. I will not therefore say
the Doctor is not Guilty, but will crave leave to tell the Reader what mine
Eyes can wittness too. viz.

1. p. 174.
That what the Doctor does affirm is that St. Austin Speaking of the customs
used at the Solemnityes of Martyrs, says, that what they taught was one thing
and what they did bear with was another. Now what those Customs were St. Austin
and from him the Doctor tells us in this very Parapraph viz. Novi multos esse
Sepulchrorum and Picturarum Adoratores: novi multos esse qui luxuriosissime
super mortuos bibant, and epulas Cadaveribus exhibentes super sepultos seipsos
sep^liant. Nunc vos illud admoneo, ut aliquando Ecclesiae Catholicae maledicere
desinatis vituperando mores hominum, quos and ipsa condemnat, and quos quotidie
tanquam malos filios cotrigere studet. De moribus Eccles. Cath. lib. 1. cap. 34.
Their banquetings at the Martyrs Tombs, and their worshipping of Sepulchers and
Pictures: viz. the Pictures of those Martyrs, which Image worship being
relative, must certainly refer unto the worship of the martyrs by them; which
custom St. Austin had no sooner mentioned but he cries out, Now I advise you
(Manicheans) that you cease to speak evil of the Catholic Church by upbraiding
it with the manners of those whom she her self condemns, quam aperte
irrepenten, improbat cor s^etudinem. Th. Theol. 206. Th. 12.
and seeks every day to correct as naughty Children: when the Excellent
Vossius had alleged this place he presently cries out See with what clearness
St. Austin reprehends this growing Custom.

2. My Eyes can witness that what St. Austin does refer to, not only in the
place now cited and quoted by the learned Doctor, but in the passage he excepts
against, is not only the luxury of the intemperate, as T. G. suggests, but it
is also error infirmorum i. e. the error of the weak; as Austin testifies. To
make this farther evident let us consider that the objection of the Manicheans,
which St. Austin Answers in this place, was this: viz. Hinc nobis calumniatur
Faustus quod Martyrum memorias honoramus, in hoc dicens, nos Idola convertisse.
l. 20. c. 21.
that the Cathocicks had converted the Christian Martyrs into Idols, that they
did drink and feast at their Sepulchers, and that they worshipped them with like
addresses, Vertisse dicit Idola in Martyrs, quos votis, inquit similibus
colitis, Defunctorum umbras vino placatis and dapibus. Advers Faust. lib. 20.
ibid.
or by presenting of the like desires to them. To the second part of this
objection St. Austin largely Answers that it was true they gave to holy Martyrs
the worship of society and love, but did not give to them that worship which
was due to God. And then proceeding to the other part of the Objection,
touching those who at the feast of Martyrs did eat and drink unto excess, he
tells us that the Church condemns them, and then immediately he adds, Qui autem
se in memoriis Martyrum inebriant, quomodo a nobis approbari possunt, cum eos,
etiam si in Domibus suis id faciant, Sacra Doctrina condemnet? Sed aliud est
quod docemus* aliud quod sustinemus: aliud quod praecipere jubemur, aliud quod
emendare praecipimur; and donec emendemus, tolerare compellimur. Alia est
disciplina Christianorum, alia luxuria vinolentorum, vel error infirmorum.
Advers. Faustum lib. 20. cap. 21.
that it is one thing which we teach, another thing which we endure, it is one
thing which we are enjoined to commanded, but it is another thing which we are
commanded to amend, and till we can do so, we are constrained to suffer: the
discipline of Christians is one thing, the luxury of Wine-bibbers, or the
infirmity of the weak, another.

And now I leave it to the judgment of all sober persons, to consider, whether
the luxury of wine bibbers, was the only thing St. Austin speaks of here, and
whether he does not also speak of the infirmity of such as gave occasion to
that objection of the Manicheans, similibus votis eos colitis.

3. Whereas he adds, p. 439.
the Dr. had the Conscience by a subtle insinuation, to make his Reader
believe, that what St. Austin condemned was the desiring, or as he calls it,
wishing the Martyrs to pray for them. Ans. this is another instance of T. G's.
Excellency in the Art of Calumny. For all that can be Rationally inferred from
the Doctors words, is only this, that St. Austin did affirm, that superstitions
at that time had creeped into the Church, and therefore this as well as others
might do so. But had the Dr. used this insinuation, it would have been as true
as it is counted subtle, for St. Veruntamen and in hoc ipso distant plurimum
culpae vinolentorum and Sacrilegorum. Long quippe minotis peccati est, ebrium
redire a Martyribus, quam vel jejunium s^cuisicare Martyribus. Sacrificare
Martyribus dixi, non dixi sacrificare Deo in memoriis Martyrum, quod
frequentissime facimus, illo duntaxat ritu, quo sibi sacrificari novi
Testamenti manifestatione praecepit: quod pertinet ad illum cultum, qui latria
dicitur, and uni Deo debetur, Ibid.
Austin here affirms, it is a less Sin to return Drunk from those Solemnities,
than to sacrifice unto the Martyrs whilst we continue to be Fasting; I say,
(quoth he) to sacrifice unto the Martyrs but I do not say to sacrifice to God
at the Memorial of Martyrs, which we often do, after the manner only, according
to which God has commanded us to Sacrifice under the Gospel, which Sacrifice
does appertain unto Latria, and is due to God alone. Whence I thus argue.

That which is a Gospel Sacrifice ought not to be offered to a Creature; But
prayer is a Gospel Sacrifice; (for so St. Quas autem habere simplices and puras
orationes tanquam divinos honores and sacrificia poteritis? ubi sunt sacrificia
vestra simplices ac purae orationes vestrae? l. 20. contr. Faustum. c. 17.
Austin does often style it in this very Book) Ergo, prayer ought not to be
offered to a Creature; and now it is not easy to declare, whether the folly or
the falsehood, the confidence or the weakness of this accusation were the
geater: but I am not willing to expose him farther in this matter, I pray God
he may repent of this Iniquity, and make due satisfaction to God and the World,
and Dr. Stillingfleet, and so I pass on to some fresh discoveries of the same.

In his reply to the first Answer of the Dr. he affirms, 8.
that Austin himself held formal Invocations a part of the Worship due to
Saints. This he confirms, p. 25.
first from that passage of St. Austin, let blessed Cyprian help us with his
Prayers, and for a farther confirmation of it, p. 26.
viz. that Austin held this Invocation to be a part of Worship due to Saints.
We have, says he, the ingenious confession of Calvin himself, Instit. lib. 3.
Chapter 20. n. 22. where speaking of the Third Council of Carthage, in which St.
Austin was present, he acknowledged it was the Custom at that time to say, Holy
Mary, or Holy Peter pray for us. p. 174.
To this the Doctor answers thus, I cannot but wonder, if he saw the words in
Calvin, that he would produce them; for Calvin does there say, that the Council
of Carthage did forbid praying to Saints, least the public prayers should be
corrupted by such kind of adresses, holy Peter pray for us: To this T. G.
replies, have not I more reason to wonder at his wonder, p. 444.
for why, I pray, was such a Decree made, and why did the Fathers of that
Council fear, lest the public prayers should be corrupted by such kind of
addresses, if there were no such Custom at that time? either the Doctor
corrupts the words of his dear Master Calvin, or, it is manifest, they imply it
was the Custom at that time to say Holy Peter pray for us. Answ. The Dr. does
confess that there was such a Custom, condemned by Councils and Fathers, as was
that Custom of those times, of Banqueting at the Sepulchers of Martyrs, and
that which is condemned by the same Council in these words, It pleases us that
the Altars which are commonly erected in the Fields and Roads, as the Memorials
of the Martyrs, in which it is not evident, that the body or any relics of
the Martyrs are preserved, should be demolished by the Bishops, if that can be
done, but, if the popular tumults will not suffer it, then let the people be
admonished, that they do not frequent these places. Can. 3. so that T. G.
discourses thus, that which was condemned by the Councils and Fathers was the
Custom of those times, but direct prayer and invocation, was condemned by the
Counsel and the Fathers, Ergo it was the Custom of those times: and if this be
a good Argument, this Doctrine was condemned by the Church of Christ: Ergo this
was the Custom of the Church of Christ: Then all the Heresies that ever were
condemned by Councils and by Fathers, must be acknowledged to have been, the
Customs of the Church of Christ. But T. G. will set down the words of Calvin,
and make it thence appear that there was such a Custom. Answ. By all this what
the Dr. does confess, viz. That some people condemned by the Council used this
Custom, shall appear, but what T. G. had undertaken to make good from this
Citation, p. 445.
That St. Austin held, that formal Invocation, was a part of the worship due to
Saints. This shall disappear. But then again, who sees not says T. G. that
for fear the Reader should see this; the Dr. most. conveniently left out of his
Citation, those words of Calvin, which were most material to the present
purpose, viz. That the Decree was made, to forbid direct praying to Saints at
the Altar, and the reason, in his opinion, why those Fathers made that Decree,
was to restrain the force of an evil Custom, which they could not totally
repress? for had these words been put down, the thing had been too clear to be
denied, viz. that Calvin acknowledged there was such a Custom at that time:
where first the Dr is introduced as one denying that Calvin did acknowledge,
that there was such a Custom at that time, whereas he manifestly confesses
what T. G. does affirm, that he denies, p. 174
for he expressly says from Calvin, that the Council did condemn and forbid
those prayers, which were in use by some of the people, Secondly, whereas he
does accuse the Dr. for leaving out the words of Calvin, which were most
material to the present purpose. This also is a loud untruth, as will appear by
setting down the Doctors words, and by comparing of them with the words of
Calvin, as they are represented in T. G. and they are these; That the Council
of Carthage did forbid praying to Saints, lest the public Prayers should he
corrupted by such kind of Addresses, Holy Peter, pray for us. And again, the
Council did condemn and forbid those Prayers, which were in use by some of the
People: And now what is there is the words of Calvin Translated by T. G. which
is not contained in the words of Dr. Stillingfleet. These things I have
collected, not that I take delight in the discovery of this unchristian spirit
of Calumny. I can assure T. G. it is no small Grief to me to find a Dr. of
Divinity, so prone to wound his Conscience, and expose his credit to the
censure of discerning Men. I am afflicted that the Atheist should have such
great Temptations, to suspect that we are guilty of the like insincerity, in
managing of the Christian cause against him; or that the people should have
such reason to cry out, behold the falsehood of our Priests; see here what
little reason we can have to credit any thing they say; since what they
confidently avouch in the face of the World, is so unconscionably false and
full of Calumny: But I entreat them to consider, we have great reason to
suspect, it is the unhappy principles of the Roman party, which do betray them to
this evil practice. They think it lawful to equivocate and lie to those they
are pleased to call Heretics, and to promote the Cause of Holy Church by such
unchristian Arts. This I in charity believe, because I would not think them
guilty of what this practice must import, if it were used by Protestants.

A second Art whereby T. G. endeavors to evade this charge, 9.
and bring a disrepute upon the Doctors Person and Performance, is a false and
disingenious representation of the Question betwixt us and the Church of Rome,
and an undeavour to possess the Reader with an apprehension that the Dr. waved
it, and durst not speak unto it. Thus p. 334: That the Reader my see what a
prodigious stock of Wit is r^^^is^e to make it out, that Invocation of Saints
is Idolatry, I will, says he, set down the Doctrine of the Church, as it
stands Recorded in the Council of Trent: What that Council teaches, is, that,
it is good and profitable for Christians humbly to Invocate the Saints, and to
have recourse to their prayers, aid, assistance whereby to obtain benefits of
God, by his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our only Redeemer and Savior.
These are the very words of the Council, and any Man but of common reason,
would think it were as easy to prove Snow to be black, as so innocent a
practice to be Idolatry, even Heathen Idolatry. Answ. That the Reader may see
what disingenuity is here insinuated, it is sufficient only to advertise him
that we do not accuse the Church of Rome as guilty of Idolatry, for holding
what she delivers in the words now cited, but for holding what she insinuates
in the words which follow, and which T. G. thought most convenient to conceal,
viz. That every person may pray unto them, and that not only with vocal, but
with mental prayer; and for enjoining the sick, to pray with his heart when he
cannot do it with his mouth, O all ye Saints intercede for me, and succor me.
What we teach, says he, and do in this matter, is to desire the Saints in
Heaven to pray for us, as we desire the Prayers of one another upon Earth, and
must we for this be compared to Heathens? Do we not profess to all the World,
that we look upon the Saints, not as Gods, but as the friends and Servants of
God, that is, as just Men, whose prayers therefore are available with him?
where then lies the Heathenism? where lies the Idolatry? Answ. it lies in
praying to them with mental prayer, and in praying to their when they are as
distant as is Earth from Heaven. p. 353.
But says T. G. the Question at present between Dr. Stillingfleet and the
Church of of Rome, p. 353.
is not whether Divine Worship be to be given to the Saints, but whether an
inferior worship of the like kind, with that which is given to holy Men upon
Earth, for their holiness, and near relation to God, may not be lawfully given
to them, p. 389.
now they are in Heaven? And again, we pray no otherwise to them, than we do to
holy Men upon Earth, though more devoutly, upon the account of their
unchangeable estate of bliss. Answ. This he does frequently affirm, but till he
can produce some instance of this practice of praying, only with mental prayer
to any Man alive, or of petitions vocal directed unto living persons at so
great a distance, his affirmation can be no better than a manifest untruth; but
this is a peculiar Topic, of which, all those who vainly do endeavor to excuse
this Idol worship of the Church of Rome, are forced to make use of, viz. to
affirm her Doctrine and practice, not to be what certainly it is, and thence
conclude her not to be guilty of that crime, which could not be denied without
this Artifice.

Again, the Question between us, 10. p. 173.
(says the Dr.) is not how far such wishes, rather then prayers, were thought
allowable, being uttered occasionally, as St. Austin does this in St. Cyprian,
but whether solemn Invocation of Saints in the Duties of Religious worship, as
it is now practiced in the Roman Church, p. 44^.
were ever practiced in St. Austins time, Here T. G. represents him as a very
Shuffler, and most Rhetorically cries out, alas, that so many Learned Men
should all this while have been mistaken in the Question, that they should have
spent so much oil and sweat to no purpose! The Question hitherto controverted
between Catholics and Protestants was held to be, whether it be lawful to
invocate the Saints to pray for us? and whether this were agreeable to the
practice of the primitive times? But now like a mischievous Card that will
spoil the hand, this is dropped under the Table, and all the show aboveboard, is,
whether it may be clone in the Duties (as the calls them) of religious worship?
Thus T. G. as if all persons that ever writ before them, must have spoken
nothing to the purpose, if this had been the Question between T. G. and him, or
that this could not be the Question, if what he mentions were another; or that
it were impossible that Men disputing whether this were agreeable to the
practice of the Primitive times, should also dispute whether it were the
practice of St. Austins, time. Who knows not that one medium to prove this
practice to be lawful, is, that it was the practice of the primitive times, and
that St. Austins times are instanced in, as a sufficient Confirmation of that
grand assertion. This is the very method of T. G. and these are his formal
word, This was the Doctrine and practice of Christian people in St. Austins
time; p. 25.
this he endeavors to confirm from that of Cyprian; and unto this the Dr.
returns this Answer, and yet this must not be the Question betwixt T. G. and
him. 11.
Lastly, the Dr. says he undertakes to show out of the Primitive Fathers, that
it was the property of the Christian Religion, to give Divine Worship to none
but God, and in this strain he runs on for no less than ten leaves together and
without ever proving that Catholics do give Divine Worship to holy Angels and
Saints, he most triumphantly concludes them to be Idolaters. Answ. The falsehood
of this passage is so exceedingly notorious, that there is nothing requisite
besides the use of reason to discern it, for p. 146, 159. We have this
triumphant Argument. Upon the same account that the Heathen did give Divine
honor to their inferior Deityes, those of the Roman Church do so to Saints and
Angels. And how unhappy T. G. was in his attempts upon this Argument I have
abundantly evinced: Again the Doctor Argues thus The Fathers do expressly deny
that Invocation or Prayer is to be made to Angels; for so Origin, p. 158.
and theodoret speak expressly that men are not to pray to Angels, and any one
that reads St. Austin will find that he makes solemn Invocation to be as proper
to God as Sacrifice is. 2. On what account should it be unlawful to Sacrifice
to Saints and Angels, if it be lawful to Invocate them? May not one be relative
and transient as well as the other, can any man in his senses think that a mere
outward Sacrifice, is more acceptable to God than the Devotion of our heart is?
Thus the learned Doctor, and there needs nothing to convince us of the strength
and pertinency of this discourse, but to reflect upon the vanity and weakness
of what T. G. has ventured to oppose against it. See. Chapter 6. Prop. 4. Corol.
3. besides in vindication of the Testimonies of Irenxus, Origin, Theodoret, St.
Austin, Hilary the Deacon, and of the Council of Laodicea. I have clearly
manifested that all these Fathers cited by the learned Doctor, do very
evidently prove the Invocation of Blessed Saints and Angels to be, according to
their judgments the giving of that honor to them, which is due to God, and so
is properly divine.

I might be large upon the second head viz. 12.
in giving many pregnant demonstrations that he n^ost wretchedly corrupts those
Fathers which he cites or Answers. But reader having glutted thee with manifold
examples of thiskind already, part 2. I beg thee to accept of these few
instances which I shall represent unto thy view, noteing what he has added to
the words of those few Fathers which he has ventured to produce or Answer, in
a larger Character.

1. 1. The words of Celsus are, (...). Orig. advers. Cells. l. 8. p. 416. What
T. G. cites is no where to be found.
The invocation which Celsus contended for was Votiva illis Sacrificia reddere.
T. G. p. 363.

2. Celsus his evasion was that none are to be honored for Gods but those to
whom the supreme God does communicate it. 2. (...). Celsus apud Orig. l. 8. p.
384.
T. G. p. 357.

3. 3. The words of Celsus are, (...), ibid. p. 385.
By Celsus this was not objected, but only that they were by the same rule by
which they worshipped Christ for God, to worship in like manner the inferior
Deities. p. 358.

4. Chrysostom says that some among the Collossians said that We ought to be
reconciled and have access to the Father not by Christ but by the Angels. 4.
(...). Chrysostom. in locum.
T. G. p. 378.

5. The reason why they did so is given by Theophylact because they esteemed it
a thing unworthy of the Majesty of the Son of God on the one side to make this
reconciliation, 5. (...). Theophyl. in cap. 2. ad Coloss.
and far transcending man's poverty and lowness on the other. T. G. ibid.

This I confess is not so properly an addition (because he ownes it so to be)
as a most palpable depravation of the Fathers sense.

These are some few discoveries of the unchristian arts, and disingenious
deportment of T. G. toward the Dr. I wish I could say something better of his
learning or his judgment. But alas the whole Book clearly manifests that he
is unacquainted with the thing called Learning. Let any man produce in his 440
pages one considerable notion which is not ushered in with the great names of
Dr. Tailor or of Mr. Thorndyke, let him point but to one single instance
wherein he shows himself a Scholar, or a man of reading, let him produce one
observation or Authority which is not trivial and common in almost every Roman
Pamphlet, and I will beg his pardon for passing so severe a censure on him. In
short, the only new thing in his book is this, p. 369.
that he advises Whores to have recourse to Mary Magdalene.

Lastly, his want of judgment and dexterity in making inferences, Note, that
the word Honoring though it be printed in the Italick Character, is an addition
of his own, the Canons cited by him only do enjoin us. (...).
cannot be doubted by any who considers what he has discoursed, p. 222, 223.
and p. 418. all which I have abundantly refuted with an ha ha he, and to
consider all the examples of like nature to them, would be to frame a second
Answer to his book. One farther instance of this kind we have p. 384. where he
thus argues. The Council of Laodicea both in in the Canon 34 as also Canon 51.
allows the honoring and celebrating the Feast-dayes of the Martyrs which is a
plain indication that it intended not to condemn in this Canon the worship due
to Angels. Which Syllogistically runs thus, they who allow the honoring and
celebrating the feast days of the Martyrs cannot intend to forbid the
invocation of Angels, but the Canons of Laodicea do allow the honoring and
celebrating the feasts of the Martyrs, Ergo. Answ. And is it not notorious that
the Protestants allow the honoring and celebrating the Feast-days of many
Martyrs, why therefore does he not conclude that they cannot condemn the
invocation of the blessed Angels.

Again they who are more to be honored than men are to be invocated, according
to T. G. but Angels in the Judgment of Theodoret are more to be honored then
men, Ergo. Answ. and is not this the judgment also of the Protestans, why
therefore did he not infer that Protestants do not condemn this invocation.

And now consider whether T. G. had reason to usher in this inconsiderate and
Childish tatle, with the ensuing Preface it is manifest that the Council of
Laodicea cannot with any show of probability be understood of that worship
which the Catholic Church gives to holy Angels. And to conclude with such a
triumph, by this the Reader may see whether we had more reason to fear the
force of this Canon, etc. Whereas that which is manifested and plainly
indicated by this whole discourse, is chiefly this, that T. G. labors not only
under a great want of Learning but of judgment too. But to them who know that
he is an Apostate from the Church of England all demonstrations of this nature
must be needless. What I have written I am humbly confident must be sufficient
to convince his conscience of that horrid action if God peradventure will give
him repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth which is the hearty desire
of him who honors his Person, and his Wit, whilst he detects his want of
Learning and of Judgment, and refutes his Calumnies.

FINIS.

