A SERMON Preached at the ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE SONS of Clergymen.

A SERMON Preached at the Anniversary Meeting OF THE SONS of CLERGYMEN, IN THE
Church of St. Mary Le Bow, On Tuesday, December. 3. 1695.

Printed at the Desire of the STEWARDS of the FEAST; To whom it is humbly
Presented.

By THO. WHINCOP, D.D. Rector of the United Parishes of St. Mary Ab-Church and
St. Lawrence Pountney, London.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

St. Paul 's Epist. to Titus, iii. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these
things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in
God, might be careful to maintain good works: these things are good and
profitable unto men.


IT has been a mistaken Opinion of some, and an invidious Objection of others,
that those who are true Believers need not be solicitous about good Works, and
whatever they did they could not fall, but had a Liberty of doing what they
would without Danger or Sin.

And this has been improved by the Enemies of our Reformed Church, as if we
had laid aside all thoughts of Duty toward God, or Christian Regard and
Compassion of our Neighbor; not supposing, as they represent us, that we make
them Articles of our Christian Faith, or necessary Terms of our Salvation.

Since therefore we have hitherto, God be thanked, outlived these unjust
Reproaches, the Church whereof we profess our selves Members, strictly
requiring not only Duty toward God, but a compassionate Sense, and helping of
our Christian Brother's Indigence; and that we are now once more met together,
Brethren of the same Stock and Lineage, descended from those who contended
earnestly for the Faith, and were as zealous for good Works. Witness those many
charitable Bequests since the Reformation, and the Purpose of our Annual
Assembly this Day, is an Evidence that we do not either discountenance or
explode doing Good.

The Enemy (as in the Parable) thus scatters his Tares to choke at least, if
not destroy the Wheat; but maugre all the industrious Designs against our Holy
Faith, we do not forget the Doctrines of our Church, or our Forefathers
Precepts, but as we believe in God, are careful also to maintain good Works.

Which Direction of the Apostle's immediately follows other good Advice given
unto Titus, how he should behave himself in the Church of God, of which he was
made a Bishop; as if he should have said:

Those things which I have spoken concerning the Love of God our Blessed
Savior to wards Man, of his being saved by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost; of our being justified by his Grace, and made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life, (as in the former Verses), are not
fabulous, doubtful, or uncertain things, no Philosophical Conjectures of Jewish
Traditions, but faithful sayings, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.
as elsewhere he so phraseth it, and therefore ought to affirm constantly.

This he directs him to assert and publicly teach all Persons as undoubtedly
true, by which precious Promises they might be excited to good Works; (...),
that they should be intent and solicitous about, remarkable and eminent for
them, as Captains and Leaders to every Body else both for Doctrine and Example,
Piety toward God, and Charity toward their Neighbor, as I take the Word in
the largest Sense; And that they should be above others so remarkable, the Word
(...), as it is frequently used, may properly enough intimate.

The Sum of this Apostolic Precept is, that those who have learned, and
profess Christ's Doctrine should practice that Obedience it requires, and be
eminent for all good Actions, especially those of Mercy and Charity:

In pursuance therefore of which Design of the Apostle's, and to establish the
Truth of which Proposition, I do design to show, I. That it is not enough to
believe what God has said to be true, and to give our Assents to the Certainty
of Divine Revelation, unless our Belief does influence our Hearts and Lives.
II. That this Practice of good Works in absolutely necessary for all unto
Salvation. III. And, lastly, more especially necessary for those that are more
particularly acquainted with God's Will, and early instructed therein.


I. First, I say, It is not enough to believe what God has said to be true, or
to give our Assent to the Certainty of Divine Revelation, unless our Belief
does influence our Hearts and Lives.

We cannot suppose Believing to be a bare Notion, and a mere Speculation, a
(...), as Eusebius calls it, but an obedient Faith, believing the Truth,
performing the Commands, omitting the Prohibitions, fearing the Threatenings,
and embracing all the Promises of God's Word; a Faith working by Love, a new
Creature, a keeping the Commandments, all which are almost equivalent.

For God's method of transacting our Redemption by Christ, was not only by him
receiving a full Satisfaction for our Offenses, but by him also proposing a
more rational way to please him, by requiring us to perform, as Instances of
our Faith, all manner of Holiness and Purity, as Conditions and Terms on our
part, of our being accepted through Faith in Christ.

Christ's Laws as well as any other, run in this disjunction, either Do, or
Suffer; either live Holily, or perish Everlastingly; nothing is therein
promised but upon Condition of our Obedience: This is the Rule and Spring upon
which they all move, as Moses spoke to Israel, Deuteronomy. 5.1.
that we take heed and hearken and do the commandments and statutes which God
commanded us.

St. James tells us, that he who is a doer of the work, shall be blessed in his
deed, (...), in his working and Practice, not in his Knowledge or Believing
only; for that is but a shadow of Godliness only which has no Power, with
those in the Gospel, which cry Lord, Lord, but our Blessed Savior tells them,
Mat. 7.21.
they shall not enter into the kingdom, only they that do the will of his
Father which is in heaven. Wherein is intimated Knowledge enough having
Prophesied in his Name, but no Salvation on that Account.

Every Article of our Creed may be made use of as a proper Argument against Sin
in general, and a powerful Motive to Obedience in particular: the great Design
of our Savior's gospel, and our believing in him, being to reform the Lives of
Men, and in order thereunto by Faith in Christ, who made himself a sacrifice,
was a sufficient Atonement, and left us an unparalleled Example of well doing;
we have an admirable Pattern to do what he did, as a reason of our Faith and
Hope that we have by him.

That Gospel which we believe, and brings us the glad Tidings of Salvation,
teaches us not only to believe what he delivers, but to deny all ungodliness
and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12.
and live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world; for such as
have given up their Names to Christ, must not think that upon that account they
have liberty more than other Men to do what they will, or that they may sin the
more freely because Grace abounds; there is a Yoke to which they must submit,
and Laws, to the fulfilling of which they stand obliged; If ye love me, John
14.15.
(says our Blessed Lord) keep my commandments.

God has sufficiently declared his Will, that Faith in him intitles no one to
a Neglect of Religious Duties, or that any one's casting himself upon his
Mercy, or relying upon Christ's Merits for Salvation will be available, unless
as an Evidence of that Faith, and Sincerity of that Relyance, we examplifie and
adorn that Faith by a conscientious and unblameable Conversation.

Whatever our Faith intitles us to hope for, it is upon this Condition, that if
we have right to the precious Promises, we must cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God; 2 Pet.
1.3, 4.
and St. Peter calls the Gospel the knowledge of him who has called us to
glory; whereby (says he) are given the great and precious promises; that by
these ye might he partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption
that is in the world through lust.

and it is easy to observe, that the main thing our Savior aimed at all his
whole Life, was to restore Humane Nature to its primitive Purity and
Perfection, and to advance true Piety and Holiness in the World; to bring Men
to a good Opinion of, and a ready Compliance with God's Laws, so that it
influences all their Actions, Faith not being enough to denominate a Man a true
Christian, unless he goes on to add to his faith virtue, to his virtue
knowledge, etc.

Religion not being such an empty Name as to consist in fair Shadows only, in
thinkink well or talking gravely, in all the outward Performances imaginable,
unless our Actions are agreeable to the same, unless we practice what we
profess, and are Doers of what we read and hear.

I would not be mistaken, as if I thought Faith signified nothing; so that a
Man be an honest, good, moral Man it would be enough, and he should be happy in
the End, though he did not believe aright, and as he ought, and had little or no
regard to the Revelation of God's Will in the Old and New Testament, the
Subject of our Faith; as some have improved the seeming difference between St.
Paul and St. James, which I will not now meddle withal:

Only assert that it is most certain that Faith in Christ is the main Condition
of all our Hopes from the Gospel Covenant, the the Scripture being express,
Joh. 6.40.13.15. Act. 10.43. Joh. 12.46 1 Pet. 2.6.
as whosoever believes on him shall have everlasting life, he shall not perish, he
shall have remission of sins, he shall not abide in darkness; and that Christ
is the end of the law to every one that does believe; so that Faith is the
principal ground on which our Hopes of Salvation are founded.

But withal I further add, that this Faith to make it truly saving, must be
always accompanied with doing the Will of God, with a sincere Obedience to
God's Commands, and a Conscientious Discharge of our respective Duties; for as
he deceives himself that hopes to enter into Life, who does not believe as he
should and ought, so are they in no less Danger who believe aright, but live
not according to it: Would any one not deceive himself, he must join both
together, showing his Faith by his Works, and then with reason may he hope to
be happy.

II. The Second thing I observed from these Words was, that the Practice of
good Works, taken either for Piety toward God, or Charity toward Man, is
absolutely necessary for all unto Salvation.

When I lay down this Position I would not be thought as if we believed our
Works meritorious, or that they would commute for our Sins; yet I say the
Obligations to them is indispensible, and as requisite as any other part of our
christian Duty.

It Is acknowledged and granted to be true, that we cannot by the best we can
do, deserve Happiness, and the promised Reward for them; yet they are necessary
to be performed by all the Branches of Necessity imaginable, whether of Precept
and Duty, or as the Way and Means, that without the Practice of which none can
be admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven, and through the Omission of which many
forfeit that Interest they truly otherwise might have had in the Promises of
Everlasting Life.

In the Promise it self all that are Partakers of the Word and Sacraments, all
that acknowledge the Word Revealed, to be the way unto Everlasting Life, have a
true Interest, but of the Pledge of that Blessing promised, none are Partakers
but such as are fruitful in good Works, according to the Means or Abilities
which God has bestowed upon them, Dr. Jackson. Vol. 3. page 587.
as Dr. Jackson's Remark and Works are: They are both the Condition and Means
with respect to God and our selves, which are required in our Christian Course,
Heb. 12.14.
and without which no man shall see the Lord.

Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, Mat. 7.19.
says our Savior, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire; and the Apostle
tells us, that it is the will of God, even our sanctification; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3.
Eschew evil, and do good; cease to do evil, learn to do well, teach the
Prophets; God requiring the Beginning of our Obedience in this Life, though he
reserves the Perfection of it to a Life to come.

Nor are they the Condition injoined only, but as the Way and Means whereby we
must obtain those promised Rewards we are in hopes of, Tribulation and anguish,
Romans 2.9, 10.
indignation and wrath, the Apostle denounces against every one that does
evil, whether Jew or Gentile, but glory, honor, and peace to every one that
does good.

Hence are those Comparisons in Scripture of Men's good Works, and the Rewards
in another World, one to a Crown or Prize, the other to a Race or Course; one
to sowing of Seed, the other to Harvest, or gathering of the Fruit; those who
run in a Race, must first strive before they obtain the promised Prize; as
every one in his Christian Race must contend earnestly, and continue fighting
before he must expect that Crown of Glory which the Lord the Righteous Judge
has promised to all them who continue in well doing.

As the Husbandman commits his Seed to the Ground, and patiently waits the
appointed Time allotted by God and Nature, and then expects the Fruit; so he
that is fruitful in good Works, his Labor is not in vain, but he may
reasonably expect the fulfilling of God's Word, that from thence shall spring
up unto him a glorious Crop, and a great Reward of Bliss and Glory: So that the
Performance of these are Conditions and Terms upon which we are to build our
hopes of Happiness; and moreover, First, render our Services more acceptable
unto God; Are Means, Secondly, of bringing more Glory to his Name; And,
Thirdly, by which we shall be the greatest Gainers, and reap most Advantage.

1. They render, First, our Services more acceptable unto God's, Purity and
Holiness in the Heart before there be, or when there is no opportunity to work,
are in themselves good; but when they are demonstrated by godly and charitable
Actions, then smell they sweet, and are Sacrifices well-pleasing.

Thus Noah's Thankfulness to God for his Preservation from that universal
Deluge of all (except himself, Genesis 8.21.
and those with him in the Ark), and Abraham's Faith, Genesis 22.12
were well known unto God; but when the one publicly built an Altar, and
offered burnt-offerings unto the Lord, and the other readily went to sacrifice
his only Son, the Text tells us, that thereupon God smelled a savor of rest,
and now I know that thou fear God.

A Man being inwardly upright toward God, harmless and innocent, tender and
compassionate toward Man, may have comfort and satisfaction in himself upon
such Reflections; but it would be far better to unlock those treasures, and
disperse them abroad, by which they will gain greater Acceptance at God's
Hands, who is more especially delighted with the fruits of our Faith in the
Practice of Piety, and Exercise of a Christian Life both toward God and Man.

2. By which, Secondly, God's Name is more glorified, which reason is affign'd
by our Savior why our light should shine before men, Mat. 5.16.
that thereby we may glorify our father which is in heaven: and he is so more
particularly either in our selves, or in others. In our selves, by our
Obedience to his Commands, which were therefore given us, not that we might
know only but do them.

Both natural and spiritual Endowments are given us, 1 Cor. 12.
as St. Paul speaks, to profit withal. Gifts themselves then cease so to be,
when their Use and Benefit cease, and those are subject to a most severe
Account, who bury their Talents, as well as those that employ them ill.

A not gaining will condemn as well as a losing, and a not doing good as well
as doing evil; with the unprofitable Servant in the Parable, Men will be
severely sentenced for bringing no Glory to their Maker, in not being means of
praising him, as by their good Works they may. In others; God is glorified by
Men's good Works, and truly blasphemed by their evil Ones. Our Savior and his
Apostles, curing the Impotent, healing the Diseased, Acts 4.21.
and raising the Dead, makes the Beholders glorify God upon the sight of what
was done, and acknowledged, Luk 7.16.
That a great Prophet was risen among them, and that God had visited his people.

Our Savior there they took to be but a Man, at best, a Prophet; attribute
therefore no more to him; but to God, who, as they thought, had given such
gifts unto men; as upon St. Peter's Relation to the Apostles, Acts 11.18.
how God by his Preaching had converted the Gentiles, when they heard these
things they held their peace, and glorified God. And as good Works do win Glory
to God, so evil Ones, on the contrary, do mightily dishonor him, and cause his
Holy Name to be evil spoken of by those that do not believe.

This was St. Cyprian's Complaint long since, what the unbelieving Heathens
said in his time upon like occasion, against the Christians, Ecce quam jactant
se redemptos, etc. (says he) These are the men that boast themselves of their
Redemption and Deliverance, of their Baptism and Gospel, when their whole Life
was a Contradiction to it, and then presently fall a railing at their Religion,
and speaking evil of that God whom they worshipped.

As Nathan could tell David after his Murder and Adultery, By this deed (says
he) thou have caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; and St. Paul objects
the same thing to the Jews, Romans 2.23, 24.
Thou that gloriest in the law, by breaking the law dishonourest thou God? For
the name of God is dishonored among the Gentiles through you.

Which very Argument we find made use of, as a principal Incitement to Honesty
of Life and Manners, 1 Timothy 6.1.
That the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of; for which reason
also servants are to count their masters worthy of all honor, that the name of
God be not blasphemed, as a Doctrine of Liberty, and a Religion that allows any
thing.

And indeed there is nothing wounds our Religion more, or lays a greater
Blemish upon it, than a Form of Godliness and no Power, a 'Semblance of
Religion, and yet licentious Practices; these do more Injury to our Profession,
and bring more Dishonor to our God, than an open Infidel and Pagan that denies
both.

3. By our good Works, Thirdly, we shall be the greatest Gainers or Losers, in
that by them we make our calling and election sure, as St. Peter tells us, 2
Pet. 1.10.
Give all diligence (says he) to make your calling and election sure; and how
this was to be done he directs, by adding to their faith virtue; to their
virtue knowledge; to their knowledge temperance; to their temperance patience;
to their patience godliness; to their godliness brotherly-kindness; and to
their brotherly-kindness love.

The Apostle there lays down a full Catalogue of those Graces which beautify a
Christian's Life, and those Works by which a Man comes as it were step by step
to a full Perfection in Christ, the Foundation of all which is Faith, and the
Top, Love to our Brethren: These are the works (says he) that assure us of
election, that if we live in them, we shall certainly be saved in the end.

But it is to be remembered, that whatsoever good Wrok we do is no meritorious
Cause of our Election or Salvation, but necessary Effects which follow, and
from whence we may ground an Assurance, to ur unutterable Comfort, that if we
continue in them, our End shall be Peace, and why? Because the Promise of God
is sure and steadfast, Joh. 5.29.
That they which have done good shall come forth of their Graves to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
condemnation; and every Man shall receive his Wages according to his Labor.

And it is observable, God has often declared, that those unspeakable Joys in
Heaven, are therefore prepared by him only as Rewards of Men's well-doing in
this World, and shall be distributed to each according to the measure and
proportion of that Good which they have done in the World.

Come, Matthew. 15.34.
ye blessed of my Father, will our Savior one day say, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, and the Reason is added, I
was hungry, and ye fed me; thirsty, and ye gave me drink; a stranger, and ye
took me in; in prison, and ye visited me: Gal. 6 9.
Therefore, says St. Paul, let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due
season we shall reap if we faint not: And in the Verse before, Verse 3.
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap; He that sows to the flesh,
shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of
the spirit reap life everlasting.

This is the Ground of our Assurance, That a good Life shall be crowned with
Eternal Glory, which was St. Paul's rejoicing, having fought a good fight, and
finished his course, that thenceforth was laid up for him a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, should give him of his own
free Grace and Mercy; as a Gift, not a Debt, as a Reward, not the Purchase of
his welldoing.

And though our Judgment at the latter day be according to our Works, as the
Scripture in many places expresses, yet our Works shall be no Causes of this
Judgment; I mean our good Works; we read indeed that every man shall be
rewarded according to his works, Rev. 2.6. Rev. 20.13.
and that they were judged according to their works ( i. e.) according to the
quality of their Works, not according to the Merit of them, as their Works
were, not according as their Works deserved.

The Apostle therefore speaking of that Act of distributive Justice in God,
Romans 2.5.
whereby he dispenses Recompense according to the quality of every Man's
Person and Demeanor, calls it (...), a Revelation of the just Judgment of god;
as if he should say, Then it shall appear to all the World how just the Lord is
in his Rewards and Remunerations, when every Man shall receive according to
what he has done.

I might instance further in respect of our own present Advantage even in this
World, which a Man shall sometime or other find by living well, and doing good,
according to the Advice of Timothy, That Godliness, (...), the Practice of
Piety, living religiously and holily, as their Faith is sound, so having their
Manners incorrupt and blameless, is profitable for all things, having the
Promise of good things here and hereafter; of Blessings in this World and the
next, as the Scriptures are frequent in Instances, had I time to recount them
unto you.

There remains now, in the last place, only to show,

III. Why those are more indispensibly obliged to be exemplary in all good
Works, who have been more particularly acquainted with God's Will, and early
instructed in it.

As we may be supposed to have been, whose Parents were our Spiritual Guides,
as well as Fathers of our Flesh; and under whose Roof we were early seasoned
with their daily Instructions and good Example.

We shall therefore reflect upon their Memory and Care, we shall cause others
to uncover their Ashes with Dishonor, unless we adorn that Faith our Fathers
believed, which they taught us, and which we saw them practice.

We therefore from Children having been trained uup in the way that we should
walk, should not ever depart from it, but transmit the Honor of our Fathers
Memories to Generations to come, by walking after their early Directions, Tit.
2.7.
by showing our selves patterns, as they showed us, of good works in all
things; and as St. James more fully, Jam. 3.13.
out of a good conversation showing forth our works with meekness.

Such a Practice might possibly win others, or at least stop their Mouths whose
Religious and Charitable Conversation while they behold, might be either
allured to practice the same, or else silence their Clamours and Censures.

For the beholding our good Works is the best Argument to persuade an evil
Generation from the Wickedness of their Ways, and even an unanswerable Reason
to an Infidel for his Conversion, as they were to the Jaylour mentioned in Acts
16. who, seeing the Constancy and Cheerfulness of Paul and Silas, was thereby
turned to the Faith.

By this Method was our Religion first recommended to the World, when our
Church-Histories also tell us of Bystanders and Executioners too, that at the
Martyrdom of Godly Christians beholding their Patience and Universal Charity,
their Faith and Courage in suffering, made them become Christians also.

Thus Justin Martyr of a vain Philosopher became a Religious Christian, Justin
Martyr Apol. 1. (...).
as he himself gives an Account to the Roman Emperor in his first Apology.

And I might allege other Instances even of Enemies; Julian. Epist. 49. (...).
Julian the Apostate himself in his Epistle to Arsacius the Pontifex of
Galatia, Epist. 49. advising him, To build Hospitals, and take care of the Poor
in every City, according to the Practice of the Impious Galileans, as his usual
Style is, who by their Bounty to the Poor and Strangers, their Care in burying
their Dead, and their Holiness of Life, propagate their Religion, and
overspread all.

By these good Actions many are wrought upon, and won more, than by any
Arguments whatsoever, and therefore the Apostate directs to the Practice of the
like Bounty and Holiness of Life.

And by the same Methods still we may continue the Reputation of our Religion,
and wipe off all the Slanders and Reproaches of either that, or us that profess
it; by doing what the Apostle advises the whole Christian Church, That they
have their conversation honest among the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 2.12.
that whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good
works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.

May we all therefore endeavor to bring Glory to our Maker by our abounding in
all good Works, especially of Charity to the Necessitous, which makes us
resemble God himself, the Chief Happiness, whose Excellency consists in being,
and doing Good.

I need not offer Arguments, I am sure, to you, to persuade to that, which you
know is no Indifferent or Arbitrary thing, but as strictly required, the
contrary as severely threatened, and the Rewards of Bounty and Charity as
firmly ascertained as any other Precept in the Gospel.

And who knows the wise Ends of God's Providence in not so liberally providing
for some of the same Tribe as others; perhaps that the most Wealthy and Great
may wisely consider what even they are subject to, as well as their poor
Brother, whose Necessities implore their Aid.

Perhaps to prove them whether they will say in their Hearts, as the Israelites
of old did, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
My power, and the strength of my arm has procured me this abundance.

Or, lastly, that the World may see whether those who are Rich in this World
will be also in Good Works, whether they will be ready to do good, and
communicate, and be bountiful out of that Basket whereof they are but the
Almoners, and be liberal of that Store which was given them like Joseph's Corn,
to be laid up in Barns against a Famine and hard time to come.

That we may answer therefore the Design of God's Providence in suffering some
to want, while we are full.

And that we may make some grateful Acknowledgments for those Blessings we have
in Plenty shower'd down upon us by his Bounty, from whose Hand alone we receive
all that we possess; Put on Bowels of Mercies, and make the Hearts of the
Widows and Fatherless, of those of the same Family and Household with your
selves, rejoice with you, and praise God for you; their Numbers and Necessities
bespeak your Compassio, and command your Assistance to love them not in word,
or speech only, but in deed, and in truth; for your Compassion may perhaps
cheer them a little in their Distress, but it must be your Hands that must
raise them, and your good Works lift them up to a better Estate.

The Honor of God and our Holy Faith obliges us, our own Descent and the
Memory of them from whom we sprang, require us to do as much good as we can to
them of the same Household of Faith.

As we have therefore Opportunity, (and now once more one is put into our
Hands) dedicate to God some Portion of that Substance wherewith God has
blessed you, and why may it not be the same Portion out of our own, which our
Heavenly Father allotted our earthly Parents out of other Men's Estates, to
bring up and maintain our selves.

By his Blessing on their Care we have been brought up and disposed of into our
respective Stations in the World. The Manest of which have their Mite, and the
more Honorable and Great, by their greater Number of Talents have greater
Obligations, as well as greater Opportunities, of doing Good therewith.

Both are obliged as the Son of Syrach and the Apostle advises, To give unto
the most High according as he has enriched them, and to lay by in store as God
had prospered them, and for their so doing they have God for their Play Master,
who has promised, If they sow bountifully, they shall reap bountifully, and
greater shall be their Reward in Heaven.

By making thus Friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, whenever they fail,
as sometime or other, how soon we know not, they will; they may receive us into
everlasting habitations: and we shall lay a Foundation in the highest Heavens,
which no Disturbance on Earth shall ever remove or take away from us, but our
Blessedness shall remain for ever, and we be rewarded with all the abundant
Riches of God's Kingdom for evermore.

Which God in his infinite Mercy grant unto us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord
and only Savior; To whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, Three Persons, and
One God, be ascribed by us and all the World, All Honor and Glory, Praise and
Power, Might, Majesty and Dominion, now, henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

