THE REDEMPTION OF TIME OR, A SERMON containing very good Remedies for them
that have misspent their time: showing how they should redeem it comfortably.

By WILLIAM WHATELY, Preacher and Minister of Banbury in Oxfordshire. Now
published for general good by RICHARD BAXTER.

Psalm 90.12. Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street. 1673.

THE PREFACE.
THE usual vice of humane nature, to be weary of good things, when they grow
old and common, and to call for novelties, is especially discernable in men's
esteem and use of Books. Abundance of old ones are left neglected to the worm^
and dust, whilst new ones of far less worth are most of the Booksellers trade
and gain. It is not easy to give a reason of it, but it is not to be denied,
that this age has few such Writers as the last, either controversal or
Practical. Even among the Papists, there are now few such as Suarez, Vasquez,
Valen^^^, Victoria, Penottus, Ruiz, Alvarez, Bellarmine, etc. And among us, too
few such as Jewel, Whittaker, Reignolds, Field, Usher, White, Challoner,
Chillingworth, etc. which the Papists understanding, would fain have the
monuments of these worthies forgotten; and are calling for new answers to the
schism that have been so long ago confuted; to keep those old unanswerable
writings, from the peoples hands. And thus does the envious enemy of holiness,
by the Practical writings of those holy men who are now with God. The solid,
grave, and pious labors of Rich. Rogers, Perkins, Greenham, Deering, Dent,
Smith, Dod, Hildersham, Downame, Sam. Ward, Hall, Bolton, Dike, Sto^ke, Elton,
Tailor, Harris, Preston, Sibs, Ball and many more such, are by the most
neglected, as if we were quite above their parts; But it were well if more
injudicious or undigested writings possessed not their room. Though I may
hereby censure my self as much as others, I must needs say, that the reprinting
of many of our Fathers writings, might have saved the labor of writing many
later Books, to the greater commodity of the Church.

Among the rest, I well remember that even in my youth (and since much more)
the writings of Mr. Whateley were very savoury to me: especially his New Birth,
his Carecloth, and his Sermon of Redeeming Time. And finding this last now
hardly to be got, when yet the necessity of it is increased, and knowing of no
other, that has done that work so well, I have desired the Printer to
vindicate it from oblivion, and benefit the world with the reviving of so
profitable (though small) a Treatise.

I must so far venture on the displeasure of the guilty, as to say, that the
doleful condition of two sorts of persons, the SENSUAL GENTRY, and the idle
Beggars, is it that has compelled me to this service: but especially of the
former sort, who though slothful, may possibly be drawn to read so small a
Book: What man that believes a life hereafter, and considers the importance
of our busin^ss upon earth, and observes how most persons, but especially our
sensual Gentry, live, can choose but wonder that ever Reason can be so far lost,
and even self-love and the care of their own everlasting state, so laid asleep,
as men's great contempt of Time declares! Ladies and Gentlewomen, it is you
whom I most deeply pity and lament: Think not that I am too bold with you: God,
who employeth us on such service, will be bolder with you than this comes to.
And Christ was bold wi^h such as you, when he spoke the Histories or Parables
of the two Rich men in Luke 12. and Luke 16. And when he told men how hardly
the Rich should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And James was b^ld with such
when he wrote, Chap. 5. Go too now, ye Rich m^n, weep and ^owl for your
miseries that shall come upon you: Your Riches are corrupted, and your garments
Mo^heaten: Your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, etc. -- Ye have
lived in pleasure on earth, and been wanton: Ye have nourished your hearts as
in a day of slaughter. -- And he was neither ignoble nor unlearned, but of
Honorable birth, and the Orator of an University, who was so bold with the
English Gentry (when they say, they were much wiser and better than they are*
now) as to be speak them thus -- ( Herbert's Church Porch.)

" Fly Idleness; which yet thou can not fly.
" By dressing, mistressing, and complement:
" If those take up the day, the Sun will cry
" Against thee; for his light was only lent:
" God gave thy soul brave wings; put not those feathers
" Into a bed to sleep out all ill weathers.
" O England! full of sin, but most of slo^h!
" Spit out thy phlegm, and fill thy breast with glory!
" Thy Gentry bleats, as if thy native cloth,
" Transfused a sh^epishness into thy story.
" Not that they all are so, but that the most,
" Are gone to grass, and in the pasture lost.
" This loss springs chiefly from our education,
" Some till their ground, but let weeds choke their son:
" Some mark a Partridge; never their child's fashion:
" Some ship them ^ver, and the thing is done.
" Study this art: make it thy great design:
" And if Gods Image move thee not, let thine.
" Some great estates provide; but do not breed
" A mast'ring mind; so both are lost thereby.
" Or else they breed them tender; make them need
" All that they leave: this is flat poverty.
" For he that needs five hundred pounds to live,
" Is full as poor as he that needs but five.
When I peruse the map of Sodom in Ezekiel. 16 49, 50. methinks I am in an
infected City, where instead of [LORD HAVE MERCY ON US] is written on the
GENTRY's doors [PRIDE, FULLNESS OF BREAD, ABUNDANCE OF IDLENESS, UNMERCI^U^NESS
AND ABOMINATION.] B^hold this was the iniquity of thy s^st^^ ^od me, pride,
fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her, and in he^ daughters,
neither did she strengthen the ^a^d of the poor and needy: and they were
haughty and committed abomination before me] The title over the leaves of these
verses might be [THE CHARACTER OF THE SENSUAL GENTRY.]

Mistake me not, I am so far from accusing all the Rich and Honorable, that I
must say it is as a testimony against the rest, that I know many such who spend
their Time as fruitfully and diligently as the poor (though in another sort of
service:) And such might the rest have been if their Bodies had not got the
mastery of their Souls. It is not your PRIDE or FULLNESS of BREAD that I am now
to speak of, but your IDLENESS. Many of the old Philosophers thought that when
sickness or age had made one unserviceable to the Commonwealth, it was a shame
to live, and a duty to make away themselves; as being but un^rofi^able burdens
to the world. Christians are not of their mind, because it is a mercy even
under pain to have time of preparation for another world, and because we may
serve God in Patience and Heavenly desires and Hope, when we cannot serve him
by an active life: But Christians and Heathens will proclaim those persons, to
be the shame of Nature, who wilfully make themselves unprofitable, and live in
their hea^^h a^ if they were d^s^bled by sickness; and are condemned by their
se^suality to a prison, or a grave: so that their Epitaph may be written on
their door, HERE LIES SUCH A ONE, rather than it can be said that Here he
lives. O what a rock is a ha^dened heart! How can you choose but tremble when
you think how you spend your dai^s? and how all this time must be accounted
for? That those that have a death and judgment to prepare for, a Heaven to
get, a Hell to escape, and souls to save, can waste the day in careless
idleness, as if they had no business in the world, and yet their consciences
never tell them what they do, and how all this must be reviewed?

Compare together the life of a Christian, and of a fleshly bruit, and you will
see the difference. Suppose then both Ladies and Gentlewomen of the same rank:
The one rises as early as is consistent with her health; with thoughts of
thankfulness and love, her heart also awaketh, and rise^h up to him that night
and day preserves her: she quickly dispatcheth the dressing of her body, as
intending no more but serviceable warm^h, and modest decency: and then she
betaketh her self to her closet, where she pours out her soul in confession,
supplication, thanksgiving and praise to God, her Creator, Redeemer and
Sanctifier: And as one that delights in the Law of the Lord, she reverently
opens the sacred Scriptures, and reads over some part of it, with some
approved Commenta^y at hand, in which she may see the sense of that, which of
her self she could not understand: What is plain, she takes in, digesteth* and
lays up for practice: And that which is too hard for her, as a humble learner
she waits in patience, till by her Teachers help in time she can come to
understand it. As she has leisure, she reads such holy Books, as interpret
and apply the Scriptures, to inlighten her mind, and resolve her will, and
quicken her affections, and direct her practice. And as she lives in an
outward Calling or course of Labor, in which her Body, as well as her Mind,
may have employment, she next addresseth her ^elf to that; she looks with
prudence and carefulness to her family! she takes care of her servants
labors, and their manners: Neither suffering any to live in idleness, nor yet
so over-labouring them, as to deny them some time to read the Scriptures, and
call upon God, and mind their souls: She endures no profane despisers of
Piety, or vicious persons in her house: She takes fit seasons to speak to her
servants such sober words of holy counsel, as tend to instruct and save their
souls: She causes them to learn the principles of Religion in some Catechism,
and to read such good Books as are most suitable to their capacity. In her
affairs, she avoideth both so^bid parsimony, and wastful prod^gality; and is
thrifty and sparing, not in covetousness, but that she may do the more good to
them that want: She indulgeth no excess or riotousness in her house, though the
vices of the times should make it seem need^ul to her honor. If she want
recreation, or have leisure for more work, she steps out to her poor Tenants
and neighbors houses, and sees how they live, and what they want, and
speaks to them some sober words of counsel about the state of their immortal
souls, and stirs them up to a holy ^ife: She caus^th the sou^s of the poor
to bless her, and is an example of piety to all about her. But her special care
and labor is in the education of her children (if she have any:) She watches
over them, lest the company, and example, and language of ungod^y persons
should infect them. She causes them to read the Scriptures, and other holy
Books, and to learn the princip^es of Religion, and tea^heth them how to call
upon God, and give him thanks for all his mercies: She acquainteth them with
the sins of their depraved natures, and labors to humble them in the sense
th^reof: She opene^h to them the Doctrine of man's salvation by Christ, and the
necessity of a new birth, and of a heavenly nature: She disgraceth all sin to
them, especially the radical mastersins, even ignorance, unbelief, selfishness,
pride, sensuality and voluptuousness, the love of this world, and unholiness of
heart and life: She sweetly and seriously insinuateeth into them the love and
liking of faith and holiness; and frequently enlarges her speech to them of
the Greatness, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, and what he is to man, and how
absolute^y we owe him a^l the service, obedience and love, that our faculties
can possibly perform: She sweetneth their thoughts of God and Godliness, by
telling them what God has done for man, and what he will be to his own for
ever: and by acquainting them with the reasons of a holy life, and the folly of
ungodly men, and what a beastly thing it is to be sensual, and to pamper and
please this flesh, which must shortly turn to dust, and to neglect a soul which
must live for ever. She remembers them often that they must die, and tells
them how great a change death makes, and how the charge of Regeneration must
prepare us for it: She op^^^eth to them the blessedness of holy souls, that
shall be for ever with the Lord, and the misery of the damned, who cast away
themselves, by the wilful neglect of the tim^ of their visitation. In a word,
it is her dai^y care and calli^g, to prepare her children for the service of
God, and to be blessings to the world in their generation, and to be happy
themselves for evermore: and to destroy and prevent that sin and wickedness,
which would make them a plague and curse in their generation. Her meals are not
lxurious nor long, nor her feastings unnecessary, to the wasting of estate, or
precious time; but seasonable, frugal, charitable and pious, intended to
promote some greater good. She keeps up the constant performance of religious
duties in her family; not m^^king God with formal complement; but wo^sh^pping
him in reverence and serious devotion, reading the holy Scriptures, and
seriously calling upon God, and singing to him Psalms of praise. If her mind
need recreation, she has some profitab^e history, or other fruitful books to
read, and variety of good works, and a seasonable diversion to the affairs of
her family, instead of Cards and D^ce, and the abused fooleries of the sensual
world: When she is alone, her thoughts are f^uit^ul to her self; either
examining her heart and life, or looking seriously into eternity, or rejoicing
her soul in the remembrance of Gods mercies, or in the foresight of endless
blessedness with him, or in stirring up some of his graces in her soul. When
she is with others, her words are savoury, sober, seasonable; as the oracles of
God for piety and truth, tending to edification; and to administer instruction
and grace to the hearers, and rebuking the idle ta^k, or filthy scurrility? ^r
backbiting of any that would corrupt the company and discourse. At evening she
again returns to the more solemn worshipping of God, and goes to rest, as
one that still waits when she is called to rest with Christ, and is never
totally unready for that call. Thus does she spend her days, and accordingly
does she end them, being conveyed by Angels into the presence of her Lord, and
leaving a precious memorial to the living, the poor lamenting the loss of her
charity, and all about lamenting the removal of a pattern of piety and
righteousness, and loving holiness the b^tter, ^or the perfume of such a
heavenly and amiable an example.

On the other side, how d^fferent is the life of the sensual Ladies and
Gentlewomen to whom I am now writing. When they have indulged their sloth in
unnecessary sleep, till the precious morning hours are past, they arise with
thoughts as fruitless as their dreams: Their talk and time, till almost half
the day is gone, is taken up only about their childish trifling ornaments: so
long are they dressing themselves, that by that time they can but say over, or
join in a few formal words, which go for prayer, it is dinner time (for an
Image of Religion some of them must have, lest conscience should torment them
before the time.) And when they (...) sat out an hour or two at dinner, in
gratifying their appetites, and in id^e talk, they must spend the next hour in
talk, which is as idle: A savoury word of the life to come, must not trouble
them, nor interrupt their fleshly converse: Perhaps they must next go to Cards
or Dice, and it may be to a Play house, or at least, on some uprofitable
visitation, or some worthless visitors that come to them, must take up the rest
of the afternoon, in frothy talk, which all set together comes to nothing, but
vanishes as smoke: And they choose such company, and such a course of life, as
shall make all this seem unavoidable and unnnecessary, and that it would run
them into contempt and great inconveniences if they did otherwise. If they look
after their affa^^s, it is merely through covetousness: But more usually they
leave that care to others, that they may do nothing that is good for soul or
body: They use their servants, as they do their beast^, for their service only;
and converse with them as if they had no souls to save or lose: They teach them
by their example to speak vainly, and live sensually, and to forget the life to
come: Their children they love but as the bruits do their young: They teach
them how to bow and dance, and carry themselves decently in the sight of men;
but never labor to heal their souls of ignorance, unbelief and pride; nor open
to them the matters of everlasting consequence: But rather persuade them that
serious holiness is but hypocrisy, and the obedience of Gods Laws is a
needless thing. They teach them by their example to curse, and swear, and lie,
and rail, and to deride Religion, or at least, to neglect God, and life
eternal, and mind only the transitory vanities of this life: They leave them to
Satan, to wicked company and counsel, and to their fleshly lusts and pride, and
when they have done, take care only to get them suffi^ient maintenance, to feed
this sensual fire while they live: They train them up for the service of sin
and Satan, that at age they; may have Igno^ance and Vi^e s^fficient to make
them the plagues and misery of their Country, and to engage them in enmity
against that Gospel and Ministry which is against their lusts; that rebelling
against Christ, they may have at last the reward of Rebels, instead of
salvation. In a word, they do more against their poor childrens souls, than all
their enemies i^ the world; if not more than the Devil himself could do, at
least* they most eff^ctually serve him, for their childrens damnation. Thus do
they spend their days, and at night conclud^ them as carelessly as they begun
them: And at death (without a true conversion) shall end them as miserably as
they spent them sinfully: And while they are pampering their flesh, and saying,
I have enough, I will eat, d^ink and be merry, they suddenly hear, Thou fool,
this night shall thy soul be required, and then whose shall all this be which
thou possessest, Luke 12.19, 20. And when they have a while been clothed in
Purple and Silks, and fared s^mptuosly every day, they must hear at last,
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and Lazarus
evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And when the Time
which they now despise is g^ne, O what would they give for one other year or
hour of such time, to do the work which they now neglected, Luke 16.24, 25, 26.
Matthew. 25.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Is there not a great difference now between these two sorts of persons, in the
expense of Time. And is it any wonder if there be a difference in their
rewards. In Matthew. 25.30. It is not on^y [ cast the whoremonger, the drunkard,
the perjured, the persecutor] but [ cast the unprofitable servant into outer
^arkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of t^eth.]

Compare, I beseech you, the Time which you spend, 1. In idleness. 2. In
excessive sleep. 3. In adorning you. 4. In feasting and long meals. 5. In
curiosity and pomp, employing most of your servants time in impertinences, as
well as your^ own. 6 In excessive wordly cares. 7. In vain company and idle
talk. 8. In vain thoughts. 9. In sensual recreations, in cards, dice, huntings,
hawkings, plays, Romances, fruitless books, etc. I say compare this Time, with
the Time which you spend in examining your hearts and lives, and trying your
title to eternal life, in bewailing sin, and begging mercy of God, and
returning thanks and praise to your great Benefactor, in instructing your
children and servants, in visiting the sick, relieving the poor, exhorting one
another, in meditating on Eternity and the way thereto, in learning the word
and will of God, and in the sanctified labors of your outward calling; and let
your consciences tell you, which of these has the larger share? And whether
those things which should have none, and those which should have little, have
not almost all? And whether God have not only the leavings of your flesh?

Gentlemen and Ladies, I envy not your pleasures: I have my self a body with
its proper appetites, which would be gratified, as well as you? And I have not
wanted opportunity to grat^fie it. If I thought that this were the most manly
life, and agreeable to reason, and that we had no greater things to mind, I
could thus play away my Time as you do. But it amazeth me to see the worlds
stupidity that people who are posting away unto Eternity, and have so much to
do in a little time, and of such unconceivable importance, can yet waste their
days in sleeping, and dressing, and feasting, and complementing; in pastime
and plays, and idle talk, as if they were all but a dream, and their wits were
not so far awakened as to know what it is to be a MAN. And to increase our
pity, when they have done they ask, [What harm is there in cards and dice, in
stage plays and Romances? Is it not lawful to use such and such recreations?]
suppose they were all unquestionably lawful, Have you no greater matter that
while to do? Have you no more useful Recreations? that will exercise your
bodies and minds more profitably, or at least with less expense of Time? To a
sedentary person, Recreation must be such as stirs the Body: To a Laboring
person, variety of good books and pious exercises is a fitter recreation than
cards and dice. Is your Recreation but as the Mowers whe^ting of his sithe? no
oftener, nor no longer than is necessary to fit you for those Labors and
duties, which must be the great and daily business of your lives? If this be
so, I am not reprehending you; But I beseech you consider, Have you ^o^ souls
to regard as well as others? Have you not a God to serve? and his word and will
to learn and do? Have you not servants and children to instruct and educate
(And O what a deal of labor does their ignorance and obstinacy require? Have
you not death and judgment to prepare for? Have you not an outward calling to
follow? (Though I say not that you must do the same labors as the poor, I say
that you mast labor and be profitable to the Commonwealth) Have you not many
good works of Charity to do? And will you leave the most of this undone, and
waste your time in plays, and cards, and feasts, and idleness, and then say [
what harm is in all this? and are they not lawful?] O that the Lord would open
your eyes, and show you where you must be ere long, and tell you what wo^k you
have here to do, that must be done, or you are lost for ever; and then you
would easily tell your selves, whether playing and fooling away precious Time
be lawful for one in your condition? If your servan^s leave most of their work
undone, and spend the day in cards, and stage plays, and feasting, an^ in
merry chat, and then say, Mada^, are not cards, and plays, and jesting
lawf^l?] Will you take it for a satisfactory answer? And is it not worse that
you deal with God?

It is a most irrational and ungrateful error, to think that you may spend one
hours time the more in Idleness, because that you are Rich. The reason were
good, if labor were for nothing but to supply your own bod^ly necessities: But
do you not believe that God is your Lord and Master? and that he gives you not
an hours time in vain, but appoints you work for every hour? (except your
necessary rest;) And that your time and wealth are but his talen^s? And bethink
your selves whether a servant may say, I will do less work than my fellow
servants, because I have more wages? And whether you may do less for God,
because he gives you more than others? But of this I have said so much in my
Preface to my Book called [ The Crucifying of the world] that I shall now
dismiss it.

And what I have said especially to the Rich, (who think their loss of Time no
sin,) I must say also to all others, O value Time before it is gone! Use it
before it is taken from you! Dispatch the work that you were made for: Repent
and turn to God unfeignedly: Prepare for death without delay: Time will not
stay; nor will it ever be recovered: Were it not lest I should write a Treatise
instead of a Preface, I would especially press this on all these following
sorts of people. 1. Those that are young, who have yet the flower of their Time
to use, that they cast it not away on child^sh vanity or lust^. 2. Those that
have lost much Time already, that they show the sincerity of their Repentance,
by Redeeming the rest, and lose no more. 3. Those that are yet ignorant,
ungodly and unprepared for death, and the world to come; O what need have these
to make haste, and quickly get into a safer state, before their Time be at an
end. 4. Those that in sickness resolved and promised, if God would recover
them, to redeem their Time. 5. The weak and aged, who nature and sickness do
call upon to make haste. 6. The poor and servants, whose opportunities for
spiritual means are scant, and therefore have need to take them when they may;
especially on the Lords day. Those that live under excellent helps, and
advantages for their souls; which if they neglect, they may never have again.
8. And those that by Office or Power have special opportunity to do good. All
these have a double obligation to value and redeem their Time.

But because in my Book called NOW or NEVER, I have already urged these to
diligence, I shall only add this one request, to sportful Youth, to sensual
B^uites, to the idle sort of the Gentry, to impenitent loyterers, to Gamesters,
and to all that have Time to spare, that they will soberly use their reason in
the answer of these following Questions, before they proceed to waste the
little Time that is remaining, as vainly as they have done the rest. And I
earnestly beseech them, and require them, as in the sight and hearing of their
Judge, that they deny me not so friendly and reasonable a suit.

Quest. 1. Do you consider well the shortness and uncertainty of your Time? You
came but lately into the world, and it is but a very little while till you must
leave it. The glass is turned upon you: and it is uncessantly ^unning. A
certain number of motions your Pulse must beat, and beyond that number it shall
not be permitted to strike another stroke. Whatever you are thinking or saying,
or doing, you are posting on to your final state: And O how quickly will you be
there! suppose you had seventy years to live, how soon will they be gone? But
you are not sure of another hour. Look back on all your Time that is past, and
tell me whether it made not haste? And that which is to come, will be as hasty.
Will not the tolling of the Bell instruct you? Will not graves and bones, and
dust instruct you? While many are hourly crouding into another world, will
conscience permit you to be idle? Does it not tell you what you have to do, and
call upon you to dispatch it? Can you play away your time, and idle it away,
whilst the bell is tolling, whilst the sick are groaning, whilst every pulse
and breath is telling you, that you are hasting to your end? Do you consider
what a wonder of providence it is, that all your humors, parts and organs,
that so many arteries, nerves and vains, should be kept in order one year to an
end? If you have no pains or sickness to admonish you, do you not know what a
fragile thing is flesh? which as the flower fa^leth, does hasten to corruption
and to dust? How short is your abode in your present dwelling like to be, in
comparison of your abode in dust and darkness? And can you have while now to
waste so many hours, in the adorning, the easing and the pampering of such a
lump of rottenness, and forget the part that lives for ever? Must you stay on
earth so short a time, and have you any of this little time to spare? Yea so
much of it as you daily waste, in idleness, play and vain curiosity?

Quest. 2. Do you sober^y consider, what work you have for all your time? and
on how important a business you come into the world? Believe it, O man and
Woman, it is to do all that ever must be done, to prepare for an everlasting
life? Endless Joy or misery is the certain reward, and consequent of the
spending of your present Time! And O that God would open your eyes, to see how
much you have to do, in order to this eternal end! You have ignorant minds
which must be instructed, and knowledge is not easily and quickly got! Poor
Ministers of Christ can tell you that, who with many years labor can scarce
bring one half a Parish to understand the very Principles of the Christian
Religion. You have souls depraved by original sin, and turned from God, and
enslaved to the world and flesh; and these must be renewed and Regenerate: You
must have a new and holy nature, that you may have a new and holy life. How
many false opinions have you to be untaught? How many weighty lessons to learn?
How many pernicious customs to be changed? How many powerful corruptions to be
mortified? How many temptations to be overcome? How many graces to be obtained?
and then to be exercised, and strengthened, and preserved? Is it easy to get a
solid faith? a tender heart? a faithful conscience? a fervent desire and love
to God? a quieting confidence and trust? a well guided zeal? and preserving
fear? an absolute resignation, self-denial and obedience? a hatred of all sin?
a love to holiness? a fitness and ability for every duty? a love to our
neighbor as our selves? a true love to our enemies? a contentedness with our
condition? a readiness and joyful willingness to die? a certainty of the pardon
of all our sins, and of our title to e^ernal happiness? a longing after the
coming of Christ? a public spirit, wholly devoted to the common good? Is it
nothing to do all that which y^u ^ave to do, in meditation, in
self-examinati^n, ^^ prayer, in educating children, in teaching and governing
your families; in all duties of your other relations? to superiors? to
inferiors? to equals? to neighbors? to enemies? to all? Is it nothing to
order and govern your hearts? your thoughts? your passions? your tongues? Alas,
sirs, have you all this to do? and yet can you have while to sl^g, and game,
and play and fool away your Time? If a poor man had but six pence in his purse,
to buy bread for himself and for his family, and would give a groat of it to
see a Poppet-play, and then dispute that Poppet-playes are lawful, how would
you judge of his understanding and his practice? O how much worse is it in you
(as the case is more weighty,) when you have but a little uncertain Time, to do
so much, so great, so necessary works in, to leave it almost all undone, and
throw away that Time, on cards and plays and sensuality and idleness? I tell
you, Time is a most precious thing: more precious than gold, or jewels, or fine
clothes; and he is incomparably more foolish, that throws away his Time, than
he that throws away his gold, or trampleth his clothes or ornaments in the
dirt. This, this is the foolish pernicious prodigality.

Quest. 3. Have you deeply considered that everlasting condition is, which all
your Time is given you to prepare for? Does it not awaken and amaze thy soul,
to think what it is to be for ever; I say, for ever, in Joy or Misery? in
Heaven or Hell? one of these will certainly and shortly be thy portion,
whatever unbelief may say against it? O what a heart has that stupefied
sinner, that can ^idle away that little Time, which is allotted him to prepare
for his everlasting state? That knows he shall have but this hastly life to
win or lose eternal Glory in, and can play it away as if he had nothing to do
with it? and Heaven and Hell were indifferent to him? or were but insignificant
words?

Quest. 4. What makes you so loath to dye, if Time be no more worth than to
cast away unprofitably? The worth of Time, is for the work that is to be done
in Time? To a man in a palsy, an Apoplexy, a madness, that cannot make use of
it, it is little worth; If you were sick and like to die this night, would you
not pray that you might live a little longer? I beseech you cheat not your
souls by willful self-deceit. Tell me, or tell your consciences, How would you
form such a prayer to God for your recovery if you were now sick? Would you
say, Lord give me a little more Time to play at cards and dice in? Let me see a
few more Maskes and plays! Let me have a little Time more to please my flesh,
in idleness, feastings and the pleasures of worldliness and pride! Did you ever
find such a prayer in any Prayer book? Would you not rather say, Lord vouchsafe
me a little more time to repent of all my loss of time, and to redeem it in
preparation for eternal life, and to make my calling and election sure? And
will you yet live so contrary to your prayers, to your consciences, and to
reason it self?

Quest. 5. Is the work that you were made for hitherto well done? Are you
regenerate and renewed to the Heavenly nature? Are you strong and stablished in
grace? Have you made sure of pardon and salvation? Are your hearts in Heaven?
and is your daily coversation there? And are you ready with well grounded hope
and peace, to welcome death, and appear in judgment? If all this were done,
you had yet no excuse for idling away one day or hour, because there is still
more work to do, as long as you have time to do it. (and if this were done, you
would have that within you, which would not suffer you to cast away your time.)
But for these men or women to be passing away Time in ^loth or vanity, who are
utterly behind hand, and have lost the most of their lives already, and are yet
unregenerate, and strangers to a new and heavenly life, and are unpardoned and
in the power and guilt of sin, and unready to die, and shall certainly be for
ever lost, if they die before that grace renew them, I say again, for such as
these to be sporting away their Time, is a practice which fully justifies the
holy Scriptures, when they call such persons, Fools, and such as have no
understanding, unless it be to do evil, and succesfully destroy themselves.

Quest. 6. Do you think if you neglect and lose your Time, that ever you should
come again into this world, to spend it better? If you idle away this life,
will God ever give you another here? If you do not your work well, shall you
ever come again to mend it? O no sirs, there is no hope of this. Act this part
well, for as you do it, you must speed for ever; There is no coming back to
correct your errors. I have elsewhere told you, that it must be Now or Never.
And yet have you Time to spare on Vanity?

Quest. 7. Do you mark what dying men say of Time, and how they value it?
(unless they be blocks that are past feeling.) How ordinarily do good and bad
then wish, that they had spent Time better, and cry out, O that it were to
spend again? Then they are promising, O if it were to do again, we would spend
that time in heavenly lives, and fruitful obedience, which we spent in
curiosity, idleness and superfluous sensual delights Then they cry, O that God
would ^enew our Time, and once more try us how we will spend it. Alas sirs, why
should w^se men so much differ in health and sickness! Why should that time be
vi^ified now, which will seem so precious then?

Quest. 8. How think you the miserable souls in Hell would value Time, if they
were again sent hither, and tried with it again on the terms as we are? Would
they feast it away, and play it away as you do now; and then say, Are not
plays and cards and feasting lawful? Every fool will be wise too late, Matthew.
25.3^ 8, 11. Bethink you what their experience teaches them, and let warning
make you wise more seasonably, and at a cheaper rate.

Quest. 9. Do you believe that you must give an account of your Time? and that
you must look back from Eternity on the Time which you now spend? If you do,
what account will then be most comfortab^y to you? Had you not rather then find
upon your accounts that all your hours have been spent to the best advantage of
your souls, than that abundance of them have been cast away on fruitless toys?
Will you have more comfort then in the hours which you spent in
Heart-searching, and H^art-reforming and learning and practicing the word of
God, or in those which you spent upon needless sports, curiosity or idleness?
Do now as you would desire you had done.

Quest. 10. How do you now wish that you had spent the Time which is already
past? Had you not rather that it had been spent in fruitful holiness and good
works, than in idleness and fleshly pleasures? If not, you have not so much as
a shadow of Repentance; and therefore can have no just conceit that you are
forgiven? If yea, then why will you do that for the Time to come, which you
wish for the time past that you had never done? And hereby show that your
Repentance is hypocritical, and will not prove the pardon of your sin? For so
far as any man truly Repents, he is resolved not to do the like, if it were
to do again, under the like temptations.

Quest. 11. Do you know who attends you while you are loitering away your
Time? I have elsewhere told you, that the patience and mercy of God is waiting
on you: that Christ is offering you his grace, and the holy spirit moving you
to a wiser and a better course; that Sun and Moon and all the Creatures here on
earth, are offering you their service: Besides Ministers and all other helpers
of your salvation: And must all these wait upon you while you serve the flesh,
and vilify your Time, and live as for nothing?

Quest. 12. Do you consider what you lose in the loss of Time; That time which
you are gaming or idling away, you might have spent in entertaining grace, in
heavenly converse, in holy pleasures, in making your salvation sure. And all
this you lose in your lose of Time: which all your sports will never compensate.

Quest. 13. Is the Devil idle while you are idle? Night and day he is seeking
to devour you: And will you, like the silly bird, sit chirping and singing in
your wanton pleasures, when the Devils gun is ready to give fire at you? If you
saw but how busy he is about you, and for what, you would be busier your
selves for your own preservation, and less bu^ie in doing nothing than you are.

Qu^st. 14. Do you really take Christ, and his Apostles and Saints, to be the
fittest pattern for the spending of your time? If you do not, why do you usurp
the name of Christians: Is he a Christian who would not live like Christians?
or that takes not Christ for his Master and Example? But if you say, Yea; I
pray you then tell us how much Time Christ or any of his Apostles, did spend at
cards, or dice, or stage plays? how much ^n curiosity about dressing and
superfluous ornaments, about unnecessary pomp and courtship; how much in
sluggishness, idleness and vain discourse? or how much in furnishing their
bodies, their attendants, their habitations with matter of splendor and vain
glory? Did they waste so much of the day, in nothings, and need-nots as our
slothful sensual Gentry do? Or did they not rather spend their time in holy
living and fervent praying, and in doing all the good they could to the souls
and bodies of all about them? and in the labors of a lawful bodily employment?
Write after this copy; rather than after that which is set by the sensual fools
of the world, if you make any account of Gods acceptance! Do as the Saints did,
if you will speed as they; or else for shame never honor their names and
memorials to your own condemnation! If you will spend your Time as the flesh
and the world teach you, rather than as Christ has taught you, you must look
for your payment from the flesh and the world. And why then in Baptism did you
renounce them and vow to follow Christ? Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall be also reap; For he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8. Bethink you what the
reason was that the ancient Fathers and Churches, so much condemned the going
to the spectacles of Theaters; and why the Canons made it such a crime for a
Minister to play at dice (Read Dr. Io. Reignolds his cloud of witnesses of all
sorts against stage plays.)

Reader, if thou think this counsel or reprehension too precise or strict,
grant me but this reasonable request, and I have my end [Live in the World but
with a soul that is awake, that soberly considers what haste Time makes, and
how quickly thy glass will be run out; how fast death is coming, and how soon
it will be with thee? What a work it is to get a carnal unprepared soul to be
renewed and made holy, and fitted for another world; What a terrible thing it
will be to lie on a deathbed with a guilty Conscience, unready to die, and
utterly uncertain whither thou must next go, and where thou must abide for
ever! Foresee but, what use of thy present times will be most pleasing or
displeasing to thy thoughts at last, and spend it now but as thou will wish
thou had spent it; and value it, but as it is valued by all when it is gone;
Use it but as true Reason tells thee will make most to thy endless happiness,
and as is most agreeable to the ends of thy Creation and Redemption; and as
beseems that man who soberly and often thinks what it is to be either in
Heaven or Hell for ever, and to have no more but this present short uncertain
life, to decide that question, [ which must be thy lot?] and to make all the
preparation that ever must be made for an endless life] I say, do but thus lay
out thy Ti^e as Reason should command a Reasonable creature, and I desire no
more. I have warned thee in the words of truth and faithfulness; The Lord give
thee a heart to take this warning!

Thy compassionate Monitor, Rich. Baxter.
Sept. 23. 1667.
THE REDEMPTION OF TIME.
Ephesians. 5.16. Redeem the Time, because the days are evil.


Whilst I bethought my self of a portion of holy Writ to treat upon, that
might hold some agreement with the present season; this short sentence offered
it self unto my mind. At the first I rejected it as impertinent, but after a
second and more serious view, methought it was the most fit Scripture that I
could make choice of, on this occasion: for howbeit it has pleased the common
sort of men, to style these festival days with the name of good times; yet by
reason of the gross abusage, to which the corruption of men has made them
subject, they may very well receive an alteration of their title, and in a
quite contrary phrase, be termed evil days; yea, and that in the highest
degree of all, the worst of days. Now in this time wherein time is so lavishly
misspent, I hope it cannot seem unconvenient, or untimely, to give a brief
exhortation concerning the right use of Time.

These words which I have read, lead us into that path: being part of an
exhortation begun in the former verse. There in general he had exhorted them to
be most strictly careful of their ways, and to direct their course of life in
such respective sort, as they might deserve the name of wise, not unwise men:
commending herein unto them and us, that very strictness and preciseness,
wherewith the world has now long since picked a quarrel and fallen out. And
because this was but a general rule, he seconds it with some particulars, by
which we may be led on to the like instances in other matters. The first of
these specials is placed in the well disposing o^ Time, in this verse: Where
having set down the duty of Christians in this behalf, he backs it with a
reason; which in it self and to a spiritual understanding, is most sound and
firm; but to the carnal judgment of a carnal man, is void of all soundness and
reason. The duty is, to buy out the Time, to traffic with it, as men do with
wares; and when it is in other men's hands (as I may say) to give something
(yea, any thing) that we may get it into our own hands for good uses. He means,
that we should use our greatest care and diligence (even that which we would
employ in matters most nearly concerning us) to win all the time we possibly
can, for the duties of Religion and Godliness. His argument to confirm this
exhortation, is taken from the contrary, (if we look on it with a carnal eye,
it will seem inconsequent, halting, and not able to bear up the Conclusion) it
is, because the days are evil: that is, the customs and manners of the greatest
part of men that live, are wicked and lewd. Now because the number and rout of
the world is so strongly bent to all manner of ungodliness, as that they have
even tainted the time itself, and corrupted the very days; the Apostle would
therefore have the Ephesians, and all other Christians so much the more
industrious, to take all seasons and occasions for the bettering of themselves.
Because other men are naught, and stark naught, therefore ought faithful
Christians to be good, and very good, and to turn all opportunities to this end
and use, that they may be furtherances to make them good.

The world would have framed a more crooked conclusion from this ground, and
have said, Because men are so generally and extremely bad, (for that is noted
in saying, the days are evil) we must therefore needs strain courtesy a
little, and not be too strict, lest we should be over much different from other
men, and incur the by-name of Singularists. But the Apostle tells us, that
because the waves of men are excessively disordered, and full of naughtiness,
we should bestow so much the more pains, that we might not be carried down the
violent stream and deluge o^ unsanctified living; and unto this intent should
earnestly watch, and diligently take all good occasions of getting and doing
good. You see in part the meaning of this short sentence, which contains a
few words indeed, but is stuffed full of worthy matter, which (according as my
weakness can attain) I shall strive to spread before your eyes, unfolding it in
such manner, as that you may perceive the things, that lay therein closely
wrapped up before.

Doct. The point which the words offer to our consideration at the first sight,
is this, That all Christians ought to be very good husbands for their time.
Good hours and opportunities are merchandise of the highest rate and price: and
whosoever will have his soul thrive, must not suffer any of these bargains of
Time to pass him, but must buy up, and buy out all the minutes thereof. No man
of trade can be more careful to chaffer, and deal in the most gainful things
that pertain to his occupation, than we should be to deal in this ware of Time,
wherein every Christian is, or should be a well taught and practiced dealer. As
such kind of men (if they can either make money themselves, or borrow it of
their friends, yea; or else (such is the greediness of men) (take it up of the
Usurer) will not let slip any commodity wherein they have skill, and are
persuaded that it will bring in large profit within a short time of return: so
should every good man use all diligence (for diligence is in stead of money
here, and care in stead of coin) to gain every day, every hour, and every
minute, (so much as may be possible) from all unprofitable actions, and
overworldly affairs, to bestow the same on the duties of Religion and
godliness. This being such a parcel of ware, as if it be wisely bestowed, when
it is heedfully gotten, will come i^ again with both hands full of profit for
recompense of ones pains taken i^ that behalf. This self-same exhorta^tion,
this same Apostle delivers in s^ many words unto the Colossians, when he says,
Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem the time* Col. 2, 5. See
how Paul, an old beaten and experienced dealer in these matters for the soul,
does neither forget nor neglect to teach his apprentices (as I may call them)
the very secrets and mysteries of the trade of good living, whereof this is
one, even the thrifty laying out and getting in of time: which being repeated
to the Colossians, (as well as delivered to these Ephesians) comes with a
double charge upon our minds, to make us heedful in these bargains. And that
excellent petition of Moses (the man of God) does mean nothing else but this,
when in other words he says, Teach me so to number my days, that I ^ay apply
my heart to wisdom, Ps. 90.^2. For he means, that God would enable him with
grace, so seriously to consider of the shortness of this life, and the
transitoriness of this present world; as that he might take all occasions, and
use all means to bend his heart to the seeking and obtaining of the true
knowledge of God and himself, and so the true fear of God, which is the
beginning of wisdom.

And the want of this husbandry Christ does mournfully lament in the City of
Jerusalem, setting out unto us also the grievous and dismal effects and
consequents of this heedlesness, in regard of taking time, and using the fit
opportunity: O (says he) if thou had even known, at the least in this thy
day, those things that pertain unto thy peace! but now are they hid from thine
eyes, etc. Luke 9.42. as if he had said, Hitherto thou have had the means to
learn what made for thy good, and what might have prevented thy ruin; and if
thou had but even at this last hour marked and considered them, thou might
have escaped these fearful judgments: but now that thou have been all this
while wanting to God, he will hereafter be wanting to thee; thou shall never
have any true knowledge of these things, nor ever avoid these miserable
calamities. Because they did not use time, whilst time did serve, to repent and
turn to God, therefore after, it was too late, God would not hear them nor help
them. They that refuse the good offer of a good bargain from God, shall not
have this bargain offered again at their pleasure: yea God will not deal with
them at their leisure, that would not deal with him at his leisure. And Wisdom
(in Solomon's wise book of Proverbs) speaks to this effect of ungodly men,
Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27. That when their misery comes, she will laugh at them,
because when she gave her good instructions to prevent this misery, they
laughed at her.

The neglect of taking the fit time and occasion to follow Wisdom's wholesome
counsel, and to come when she calls, plungeth scornful men into such a depth of
misery, as that there is no means of recovery. For when wisdom laughes a man to
scorn, whither shall he repair for succor? And to this intent (of husbanding
our time well) notable is the saying of the same Apostle in another place,
bidding us, whilst we have time, do good to all, Gal. 6.10. as much as if he
had told us, that time must so much the rather be bestowed in doing good, (and
then it is redeemed) because we have no such great store of it, as we do
foolishly imagine. The vessel of time is not so full, (as most men dream) nay,
it will soon come to the bottom: it is then wisdom to spare betime, and not in
the very dregs and lees. All these places do in most plain manner confirm the
point, viz. that every Christian must be very saving and thrifty of his time,
that is, must convert all occasions to the good of his soul, and furthering of
his reckoning, not suffering by his will any hour or minute (more than needs
must) to be laid out in any thing, but matters that may fit him for a better
life. This is in truth to have ones conversation in Heaven, when one upon the
least occasion is ready to make one step further thitherwards: when one gives
all his time to God, but so much as may be more especially to religious
exercises, and such things as do after a peculiar sort make for a better life;
not letting slip any means of furtherance, that is offered him this way. Now
for your better direction in this saving thrift, and for the more full
understanding of this point, and more ^^sie practicing of this needful duty, ^^
purpose to stand some while in shew^^g these two things. First, from that time
is to be redeemed. Secondly, what the time is which must be redeemed.

For the first, we must understand, that there be five Hucksters of time, very
Cormorants and Ingrossers of this precious ware, which betwixt them (for the
most part) get up all the hours of men's lives, not suffering the soul to enjoy
so much as an hour for its own use, upon the best occasion to benefit it self.
These thieves, when I have told you their names, I will discribe more at large.
They be, 1. Vain sports. 2. Vain speeches. 3. Immoderate sleeping or
sluggishness. 4. Vain thoughts. Lastly, Immoderate following of worldly
businesses and affairs. Play, ^watling, sleeping, foolish thinking, excessive
rooting in the earth. Now for these fond sports (amongst which I comprehend
riotous feasting and belly-chear, a companion (...) gaming, for the most part,
and als^ that trifling and womanish diseas^ of curiousness in putting on
apparel for these (I say) it is easy to prov^ that they do eat up these good
hours which otherwise would much enrich the soul of man. Solomon (the wisest of
mere men that lived sin^^ Adam) has set it down as a su^^^ rule (that never
fails, scarce ever admits exception) That he which love^ pastime shall be poor,
and he that love^ wine and oil shall not be rich, Prove. 21.17. If this saying
be understoo^ only of the body, it is most true for these things will make a
man extremely reedy in the midst of larg^ possessions, and plenteous revenues*
But if we apply it to the soul, (as see no cause why it may not be applied to
both) it is most universally true. He that is so wedded to his pleasures, and
besotted upon vai^ ^elights, as that the current of his ^^fe is carried that
way, or else too ^reat a part of the stream is turned ^hither; shall be
destitute of under^tanding, shall have a naked, ragged, ^^atter'd soul: and
that comes, because he has not used his time well, by the right employment
whereof he might have got wealth for his better part; I mean, unto his mind and
heart. A threed-bare heart, needy of knowledge, comes from a voluptuous life
stuffed with pleasures. And the Prophet Isaiah cries out, Chap. 5.12. with a
woeful and a better cry against those which had the Timbrel, the Pipe, and the
Harp in their feast, but would not regard the work of the Lord: all their days
were taken up in eating and drinking, in banqueting and feasting, in good cheer
and merry-making; so that there was no time to meditate and think on those
afflictions, whereby God did warn them to repentance and amendment; which is
most contrary to this duty of redeeming the time for all this time is even lost
and cast away. And had we no other proo^ than our own experience in this
behalf, would it not manifestly convince, that he which desires to redeem the
time, must fly these vain delights and sports? For do we not plainly see, what
a canker it is in a number of men's lives? when (many days) they bestow three or
four hours together, yea, half the day, if not the whole, in Dicing, Carding,
Bowling, Shovel-board, of the like idle (if not wicked) exercises? does not
this waste and pour forth time over-lavishly? Or can that man have so much rest
and quiet, or so much fitness and opportunity to do good to his soul, as his
wise care in cutting off these needless recreations, or vexations rather, would
have afforded him? For these vain pleasures are not alone mischievous hinderers
of this thrift, in that they consume the very hours themselves, but as much, or
more also, in that they dissettle the heart; and pull the affections out of
joint: so that a man is driven to take as much pains to set his heart to a good
exercise, as would well have dispatched the duty, had he not been thus
unfitted. Now what a miserable loss is it when a man is robbed of his time, and
of his heart both at once? and by both kept from reading, praying, medi^ating,
examining his heart; or any such good exercise for his souls advantage.
Wherefore if any man would so prevent these vain and foolish sports, that they
should not spoil him of his heart and hours: let him observe these two rules in
his sports, and then he shall do well in these respects.

First, (this being presupposed, that he do not use any recreations, but those
which he can prove to be in themselves lawful:) First, I say, for the beginning
of recreation; let every man know, that recreation must follow labor, for the
most part: or (...) at any time it go before it, it must be very little, only
to fit one for labor. The Lord allows a man no sport^ (though never so lawful
in it self) until such time as his body or mind do stand in need of it; chiefly
when they have been busied in some such honest affairs, as by wearying them,
have made them unfit to further labor, so that they must again be fitted
there^o by recreation. Until pains-taking have made the body or mind not so
well able to take pains, there is no allowance ordinarily for r^creation. All
our sports and recreations, if we will use them well (I speak of those which
are lawful) must be to our body or mind; as the Mowers whetstone or rifle is to
his Sithe, to sharpen it when it grows dull. He that when his Sithe is dulled,
will not (upon a desire to do more work) take time to whet it, shall cut less,
and with more pain, and more unhandsomely than he need ^o do; so he, that when
his body or mind is tired or heavy, will not use some honest refreshing, shall
do less, and with less dexterity than he might. But on the other side, if the
Mower should do nothing from morning to noon, or from noon to night, but whet,
whet, whet, rubbing his Sithe, he would both mar the Sithe, and be counted an
idle workman also, for losing his days work; so he that will run after the
most honest delights, when neither the weariness of his body, nor heaviness of
mind requires the same (but only upon a fond lust or longing after them) shall
in time destroy his wit and strength, and in the mean seas^n mavelous
unthriftily misspend his time. Therefore let not a man begin the day with play,
though never so lawful, unless his body (...) mind require some necessary
exercis^ to make it more apt for his calling He that sets into the day
sportingly shall be sure to go through it, eith^^ ^umpishly or sinfully, much
more (...) he spend all the day from morning to night in playing; let it be
never so much holy day, or have he what other excuse he will. This rule is for
beginning of sports.

The second is for the measure and continuance of them, where this is a general
and a firm direction; that it is not lawful for a man in an ord^nary course, to
spend more time in any pastime, upon any day, than in religious exercises. I
mean chiefly private religious exercises; I say, it is utterly unlawful to
bestow a larger time any day upon the most lawful delight, than in private
religious exercises, or at least in a customable course so to do. This is
plainly proved by that which Christ speaks to (...), saying, Mat. 6.33. First
seek ^he Kingdom of God, and the righteousn^ss thereof. You see here commanded
to prefer the seeking of Heaven, before any other thing whatsoever; ^o let that
have the chief place in our souls, and in our lives. Now he that first seeks
the Kingdom of Heaven, cannot bestow more time in sports of any sort, than in
those things which do directly make for the obtaining, of eternal life, and
that righteousness which will bring one thereunto; such as are, hearing and
reading the Word, praying, meditating, examining the heart, conferring, and the
like. And surely this is a most equal thing, that the most needful duty should
have the most time bestowed upon it. Yea, and it is a most easy rule to all
sorts of men, that have seasoned their hearts with the true fear of God. For if
a man's calling lie in bodily works, then the very ^^^rcises of Religion are a
refreshing to his body, in that he does for the space while they continue,
desist from his bodily labor, (and his calling affords sufficient stirring of
the body for health;) so that if he be religiously minded, and have indeed set
his delight on God, he may well give as much time to these actions, as to any
carnal sports. But if any man's calling lie in study, or such like labor of the
mind; first, the change is a great refreshing, and variety a delight; and then
there be religious exercises, which will refresh the mind as well as any
sports; and for so much exercise as health requires, it is not long in using,
because nature is here, as in other matters, content with a little, howsoever
men seek excuses by belying her: so that at the least, an equal portion of time
must be allotted to God and Religion: as to sports and delights, even of
Students, if they will first seek the Kingdom of God. Therefore let a man
measure out the time of sporting and recreating himself, by the time he takes
to pray, to read, to meditate, to sing Psalms, to con^^rr of good things, or
the like; and ^how that he has not liberty from God to employ ordinarily so
much ^ime, never to employ one minute ^ore, in the most unoffensive sports,
^^an in these services of God. Now ^et a man conform himself to these two
^ules: Begin not to play, till need of ^ody or mind crave it: Con^inue not
^ports longer than a man has, or shall Continue some godly private ^xercise of
Religion, and he shall save ^is time well from his first Thief.

Now comes to be considered the ^ext spender, or rather robber of ^ime, that
is, idle twatling or bab^ing; and concerning this, our Savior Christ deals
plainly with us, saying That of every idle word which men shall speak, they
shall give account at the day of judgment: think well of this sentence, and
lay up every wordpunc; Thou must not alone give account of thy works, but also
of thy words: thou must not alone be called to a reckoning for moving of thy
hand, foot, or whole body, but of thy tongue also: and that not alone for
wicked words, sinful words, harmful words, speeches in themselves infectious
and rotten; but for idle and waste words, and not only for a number of idle
words, for a whole throng or fleet of them, but for every idle word.

Now then if there be an account to be given, and a reckoning to be made for
these rubbish speeches, judge, if it be not a want of redeeming the time, to
lay it out in such a thing as will bring a sore and heavy burden afterward
without repentance to cast it off; and judge if he which makes much of time had
not need take much heed of this ill-spent breath. Not alone then wicked
speaking (when one bel^heth forth lewd and filthy words, not slanderous and
backbiting talk, (when one whispers of his neighbors faults behind his back,
utt^ring (perhaps) also lying reports, and fathering that upon him which he
never d^d or meant;) but even vain, needless, and ^^profi^able words, (...) to
no good or wh^^^som^ (...) on body) are a mis-s^^^ding of (...), and contrary
to th^s ^r^c^pt; and therefore also to be (...) of him that is this way (...)
dispos^d.

N^ (...) can talk idly, but he casts himself (...) a double damage, even the
loss of a word, and the loss of time; two great losses, what ever m^n imagine
of them: And therefore the Apostle Paul also finds fault with a certain sort of
women that were pratlers, which would go from house to house, twa^ling and
babbling out fro^hy speech that was good for nothing, which fault he condemns as
a ma^ter something worse than idleness, or doing nothing, when one talks toys
or trifles, and speaks shadows or gawds that yield no profit. Such twatling
cuts out the heart of good time, for it has seldom any measure, it creeps by
little and little over a great part of the day, and sometimes of the night. How
many winter nights do men suffer themselves to be robbed of, by this childish
babbling? And in the fourth verse of this Chapter the Apostle forbids foolish
speaking and jesting: The one is a roving discourse, gathering together a great
deal of chaffie geer, that will feed no man: a busy, but absurd prosecuting of
a headless and footless tale (as we may call it in our phrase.) The other is a
setting of ones self, and sharpning of his wit, to coin pretty and witty scoffs
and conceits that may move laughter, and for this end only: both these are
condemned, as unlawful, and unbeseeming Christians.

There must be a difference made betwixt a smooth and pleasant uttering of ones
mind in seemly phrases, and good and delightful terms and manner; and this
whetting of the wit, to bandy and toss sharp and brinish taunts and quirks.

Now this pleasantness of the most honest sort is not to b^ used as a custom,
but in the nature of a refreshing, when men are dulled for better matter. For
laughter being a power of Gods creating, and wholesome to the body, and
therefore lawful, it cannot be unlawful in a seemly sort, harmlesly to move
laughter by words; but it must not be jesting: one must not give himself to it,
and make it his occupation for an hour or two together. Now none can be
ignorant, how great an hinderance this vain speech is to the well employing of
time. For do we not see, that in many places, whole days are cast away in the
deep gulf of roving, and unprofitable runnagate-babling to no purpose? And that
whole meals are devoured in gibing and jesting, if without taking the sacred
name of God in vain, and hurting ones brothers name, (which is very seldom, yet
excessively, and not without thrusting out better ma^^er, which is a grievous
faul^. Wherefore that we may be well armed against this robber, let us observe
diligently these two rules:

First, Let us make conscience of our words, and of the moving of our tongue,
knowing it to be a necessary duty that God has imposed upon us, to have our
words always gracious, and seasoned with salt; always good for the matter, and
tempered with wisdom for the manner. Which precept the Apostle adds presently
after this, of redeeming the time (to the Collossia^s) Col* 4.5. as an t^ble
part of it. The Law of Grace then must be the bridle of our tongue, and Wisdom
must reign in our mouths, so that we speak nothing but that which may be for
some profit to our own or others soul or body, being f^ly temp^red to the
present circumstances of time, place, etc. where and when we speak. For the
words are gracious, not alone when they tend to the further edification of the
soul in some matter of Religion; but also when they be busied about ones honest
outward affairs, and lawful calling, this being a great furtherance to
godliness, that a man may know how (and accordingly practice it) to follow his
calling with dexterity and wisdom.

Now he that would not have unnecessary trifling words steal into his heart,
and out of his mouth, and so spoil him of good seasons, must set it down, as a
thing to which his conscience is bound, (as well as not to lie, swear, or
slander) not to speak one word, whereof he cannot give some reason from the
good that he does aim at in speaking of it. And every man must know, that
having let slip such a word, he has committed such a sin, as makes him liable
to Gods judgment, and the sentence of condemnation.

The want of resolving the heart thus, causes many to take liberty to their
tongues, (and harmful liberty it is) and yet to think they have done no harm to
themselves in so doing. And therefore the common excuse of such twatlers is
this: I hope that it is no harm: yea, but what good was it? If it were not
directed to some good, it has done harm, for it has broken Gods Commandment,
and set thy self deeper in debt than thou wast before, thou have one trespass
more to answer for, before Gods Tribunal: no man shall ever avoid this puddle,
that will not be persuaded it is a damnable sin to step into it. First then,
labor to convince thine heart, and frame thy practice to this rule in all
speaking.

Secondly, for honest comely mirth in speech, (besides that it must not relish
of lust, nor savor of malice and profaneness, for then it is worse than idle
words) it ought to be bounded with this rule; namely, that it be used as a
means to quicken our selves or others against some natural heaviness or
deadness, by which the heart is made unapt for better conference, and other
exercises of more profitable use; and when this effect is brought to pass, that
laughter has scattered the mist of dullness from off the heart and mind (or if
no such occasion be offered) then let mirth and natural laughter give place to
his betters: otherwise coming into a continued custom, and shouldering out more
needful communication, it takes the name and nature of jesting, and is a thing
much unbeseeming the stayedness of a Christian. Thus the tongue may be bound
from dealing falsely with the heart, and cousening the soul of good hours and
occasions.

Now follows the third devourer of time, and that is immodera^e sleeping or
sluggishness. The wi^e King Solomon have a great hatred to this Thief, and
gives many warnings and caveats; whereby men might learn to take heed of it.
The bed is a very cunning and sly cousener, that uses a pleasing trick to
deceive a man, and robs him, under show of friendship. Now Solomon has made* a
most fit description of a sluggard caught by the whiles of sleep and sloth;
setting him out to the light, Prove. 6.9, 10, 11. where he brings him in roaming
himself, and rubbing his eyes with an unwilling hand, uttering broken and
sl^epy sentences, as one not half awake. First, he calls him up (as it were)
saying; How long will thou sleep, when will thou rise out of thy sleep? As if
he had said Ho, Sir, it is time to get up; what not out of your b^d yet, at
this time of the day? Then mark the drowsy, slumbring, and senseless answer: A
little sleeps, a little slumbers, (for the Original has the words in the
plural nember, well befitting a sluggard) a little folding of the hands to
sleep. See how speaking of sleep all is in the littles; and though he names
sleeps, yet it is but a little in his conceit. He tells not when he will rise,
but he cannot rise yet; and when he ha^h had enough, and too much already, then
he must have a little more, begging for sleep as one would beg for bread. He
asks a little, because he would not be denied. First, He must have sleeps; and
having slept, he must have slumbers, and having slumbred, he must fold his
hands, and roam and tumble himself. Behold a sleeper in his colors; and mark
what answer Solomon gives, he spends no more time to call him up, but tells him
his doom as he lies in his bed; Therefore thy poverty comes as a traveller, and
thy necessity as an armed man. As if he had said, Well, be it so, if you will
needs, sleep on, take your belly-ful of sleep, but know, that since you show
such skill in begging sleep, you shall even become a beggar for it; since you
will have you fill of sleep, you shall have little enough of any wealth;
poverty will pursue you, and overtake you; it will follow you, and surprise
you; it will make haste and strike home, you cannot run from it, nor resist it,
it comes with speed and with force; it will take you in bed, where you cannot
fly away from it, nor drive it from you: and what he says of outward poverty,
is most certain of inward penury; a sluggard has so much the less grace; by
how much he has the more sleeps and slumbers. So the same wise King has set
out a sluggard in another place, saying, that a sluggard tumbles himself on his
bed, as the door on the hinges, Prove. 16.14. that is, he is still there, and
there must be such a do before he can be removed from off his couch, as if one
were to lift a door off the hooks, a man must come with leavers to heave him
off: call him, waken him, bid him rise, etc. all is little enough to rear him.
This sluggish humor (you see) is condemned long ago, for a misspender of time.
And surely it is not alone very dangerous, in regard of the quantity and
muchness of the time which it filcheth; but also in regard of the quality and
goodness: for it ordinarily feeds gluttonously on the very fat of time, it eats
the very flower of the day, and consumes the first fruits of our hours, even
the morning season. After sleep has made strong what labor has weakened;
after that nature has been well refreshed, and the revived spirits come with a
fresh supply of strength and nimbleness to serve the body and the mind: then
for want of exercise all grows dull again, as a band of Soldiers, that grow
effeminate by lying in garrison without labor all the Summer. Thus it robs one
of the principal and most seasonable time, when the mind and body were both in
the greatest fitness to read, pray, meditate, or to dispatch and cast any
matter of ones calling: it is a thief that robs one, not of his baggage stuff,
but even of his gold and jewels, (for some time is better than other, as much
as some metal is better than others; and this always for the most part takes
away the most precious) yea, it has one trick as much, and more dangerous than
the former: If a man give himself to sluggishness, it will often follow him to
the Church, and close up his eyes and ears, both of body and mind, from hearing
and marking those most wholesome exhortations, which like so many Pearls, God's
messenger with a liberal hand, according to the pleasure of his Lord, does
sca^ter amongst men, that who so will may take them up. The time of Preaching
and Expounding the Word, with applying it, is the time of harvest, it is God's
market day; nay, it is his dole or prin^ely congie, when he gives gifts freely,
and those of great worth too, unto those that will take them. How can it choose
but be a great hinderance to a man's estate to sleep in harvest, and to be in
bed at such a time, when so much wealth is bestowing? Therefore this sleep, you
see, is a most crafty and pernicious deceiv^r, and does with much cunning
overreach a man, taking from him, for the most part, the morning time, and the
time of hearing, two the most profitable seasons, and the most worthy to be
rede^med of all others. Now against the deceit of this false companion, a man
may defend himself by following these two rules.

First, it is not lawful for any man, upon pretense of leisure from business,
to take more sleep than is required for the strengthening and refreshing of his
nature. The measure of ones sleep, or lying in bed, must not be according to
ones business, bu^ so much as his nature requires, for the better enabling of
it to perform the duties of his calling, and of religion. Indeed a man may, and
ought to break his sleep, and stin^ himself in this regard, when important
business, either for the soul or body, do press upon him; but no man must take
more sleep than is requisite for the sufficient refreshing of nature, upon
vacation of necessary affairs. The reason of this is plain: It is a sin to
strain and stretch natural things for the serving of lust, beyond that end for
which they were created and ordained. Now sleep, and lying in bed, was ordained
for the strengthening of nature, and for the repairing of the spirits
diminished by labor; wherefore it must not be drawn beyond this end, to the
satisfying of a sluggish humor. So that, as it were a fault for a man to sit
and cram himself with meat, till his stomach would turn back the morsels,
because no business did call him from the table: so it is a sin to give ones
self to immoderate sleeping or slugging in bed, (as our-word is, to sleep
compass) because no urgent matter does call him up. This is to be on the bed,
as a door on the hinges, that one cannot rise till a leaver come; that is,
something even almost of necessity. It is wicked to ^urfeit on sleep, as well
as on meat. So then, it shall be a great help against sluggishness, to know
that God allows not any man to be sluggish, and therefore to accustom ones
self to timely rising: for in this one thing, custom has as much power almost
as in any thing, so that look what is ones use, that he shall hardly refrain.
He that does customably forsake his bed, so soon as he fe^ls his nature fresh,
and his spirits quickened, shall with ease keep on in so doing. But he that
takes liberty to laze himself, and dull his spirits for lack of use, shall find
the more he sleeps, the more he shall be drowsy, till he become a very slave
to his bed, and make sleep his master. So a healthful body, by confessing it to
be his duty, (and through custom, though hard at first) drawing unto it a
nature, may have the morning at command. And this is the first rule.

Secondly, For time of hearing the Word, he that would not be troubled* with
such sluggishness then, must look that he do use meat, and drink, and sleep
moderately, in the first season of it; and then strive to quicken himself
against carnal heaviness and sorrow, by prayer and meditation beforehand:
which two things will keep a heathful body in such good temper, that s^ee,
shall not ordinarily oppress it in this most sacred exercise.

Now follows the fourth Thief to be arraigned, and that is, Idle thoughts. Man's
imaginations will be working, and tossing conceits up and down almost
continually. Now all men by nature are so tainted with the sickness of vanity,
that their minds will run willingly after nothing else, but that which vanity
begets. And for this cause men have taken up a Proverb, to dazzle their eyes,
(if it might be) that this might not seem a ^^u^^. They say, tha^ Thought is
free; a^ though one should never answer for idle though^s. And it is the common
excuse of men to say, They think no harm; as though it were enough, to hatch no
mischievous and harmfull conceits, notwithstanding they do exceed in idle and
unprofitable imaginations. Whereby it may be seen, that men are so far from
reforming this fault, and avoiding this thief, that they will not take it for a
fault, nor esteem it as a thief of time. But this swallows up most of our
solitary hours, when men are in bed, or alone in the night season, and cannot
sleep; or when they be journeying and walking without company, they cannot then
possibly talk with others, when no man is present: yet their mind does busy it
self in idle talking with it self, casting a thousand fond things before ones
eyes; as, wha^ if this should be? or, what if that should come to pass? and
much ado to little purpose. This roving and frisking of the fantasy (like a
wanton calf let loose from the st^ll) is a f^^ting worm, that eats out a great
deal of most men's time, so that they cannot redeem it for the profit of their
hearts. This puts by good meditations, and suggests featherly and light stuff,
that has no good substance in it; froth and some, which is not nourishment to
the mind, but rather poison, in that it fills it full of wind; and a windy
heart is no less burdensome that a windy stomach. This casts out the cogitation
of God's benefits, that one may not be thankful for them; it shoulders away the
thought of ones own sins, that he may not renew his godly sorrow and repentance
for them; it justles out the consideration of God's graces, that we cannot set
our affections on fire, to long and labor after them. And in all th^se
respects, it takes away the benefit of much good opportunity. For every time a
man is alone, separated from all company and outward business, there is an
excellent occasion of furthering his own soul, offered unto him. If any thing
grieve him, he may freely disburden his heart into God's bosom; if he faulted
any way, he may have full and free scope to confess and bewail it; if he want
any good thing, there is l^isure and place in as effectual manner, and with as
many words as one can, to beg it of the Lord. Thus great riches might come to
the soul by a well spent solitariness: but vain cogitations do deprive a man of
all this, and do so blow up the mind with that which is nothing, as it grows
swollen, like the flesh of him which has the dropsy, so that it may well be
called the dropsy of the mind. Now for a help against this vanity of the mind,
breaking forth in idle thoughts and phancies; first, we must take the counsel
of Solomon, to keep the heart with all diligence. The heart is that which must
be narrowly looked unto, that evil and unprofitable thoughts rise not up in it.
Here must be the special care to prevent, first breeding and ingendring of sin
in the most inward parts.

This Thief will be still filching and stealing time continually, do what one
can. Wherefore a watchful and wary eye must be had thereunto, and a diligent
guard must be set before the heart, to keep out such imaginations from entering,
as be like Rogues and Vagrants, worth nothing, and always come to steal
something. When a man makes conscience of his thoughts, and observes them to
what end they tend, this will be an excellent help to keep them from wandering;
whereas if one will follow the Proverb, and esteem them as free, they will
never be kept from a busy fondness, like Ants in a Molehill, that run up and
down, hither and thither, and do nothing.

Then in the second place, we must labor to be provided beforehand, of some
profitable matter or subject, whereunto to bend the thoughts in solitariness;
something that tends to the glory of God, and our own good, either in the
matters of the Soul, or the lawful affairs of the body, must be let into the
Soul, to take up the room, that the busy Fancies may be the better stopped out.
And indeed the Lord has provided a Christian of good store of such matter, if
he be not wanting to himself. For there is nothing that offers it self to any
of our senses, which does not also offer to our mind (if it were not stark
blind) some glorious attribute of God to be seen and considered of. So that to
want occasion of good thoughts in this variety of matter, as to want light at
noontide, that proceeds from nothing but from want of eyes. But this is a
great help to him, that can see to set his Soul a work first on the good
things. For if one have let his heart loose at first, he shall not (without
much pains and toil) catch it again, and have it within command. Thus doing, a
great part of vain cogitations shall be cut off.

Now comes to be handled the fifth and worst of all the five consumers of time;
which is so much the more dangerous, because it is in some honest reckoning
among most men; and is esteemed as the right Lord and true owner of that time,
which for the most part it holds by usurpation and injury. This is the
immoderate care of the world, and of things of this life, though in themselves
honest and lawful, when a man does wind himself into such a labyrinth and maze
of affairs, as he cannot get out at fit times to spiritual and religious
duties, at least not to those which are private: when the heart is so
surcharged with bargains and purchases, and buying and selling, and building,
and such like; that God and goodness, Christ and salvation, Heaven and Hell,
come not into a man's mind once in a day, scarce once in a week; or at least,
(...) they come, they be quickly shut o^t, and have no long nor quiet
entertainment there: when the Soul is overwhelmed with caring, thinking,
devising, and striving how to grow great h^re, and is so tossed in the gulf of
earthly matters, that it cannot come to land (as it were) to settle it self in
any proportion, to think how it may grow great in Heaven, and how it may get
possession of ^he true treasure. This is a wondrous consumer of good hours,
digging them all into the dunghill of this World. Christ finds fault with this
in the Parable; the men bidden to the Feast, had Farms, and Oxen, and Wives,
and such matters in hand, (business forsooth of more importance than so) and
therefore could not come, Matthew. 22. And the thorny ground had so much carking
and caring how to live, that it does even choke the Word, the good seed could
not grow thereby, Matthew. 13. And the Lord complains of them of the captivity of
Judah, Hag. 1.13. that they could find time to build their own houses, yea and
to ciele them too; but they sa^d, it was no time to build the house of God: so
this sin does ingross all the time to it self, and will not give elbow-room to
any good exercise, especially to any private exercises, without which the
public are but as meat without digestion; and yet it comes like an honest and
approveable thing, painted wi^h the name of thriftiness and pains in ones
lawful calling. To fence our selves against this ravenous and lurking fault, we
must bind our selves to these three rules, which all depend upon the rule of
Christ, that bids us first seek the Kingdom of God, first in time, and first in
affection, Matthew. 6.33. And again, lay up your treasure in Heaven. v. 20. Hence
(I say) three rules may be collected, to which he that would not be spoiled of
good occasions to the Soul by worldliness, must more and more frame himself and
his life.

That first is, that no man suffer himself to enter upon so many businesses, or
any so eagerly, as that his ordinary affairs should hinder himself, or his
Family from the performance of ordinary Religious exercises.

The common and daily matters of this world, in any man's Calling whatsoever,
should not draw him, or his Family, from common and daily duties of Religion;
such are reading, praying, meditating, and religious observing of the Sabbath:
for here a man must take care for his household, as well as for himself, that he
do not hinder them from taking convenient time to pray, and read, etc. by
forcing upon them an overgreat burden of ordinary businesses. For if the Soul
be to be preferred before the Body, and Heaven before Earth; then those
customable matters that pertain to the saving of the Soul, must be set before,
much more stand equal with the things that pertain to the Body. Secondly, the
extraordinary works of our calling (if any fall out) must not bar us from the
extraordinary works of Religion. As for example, Harvest, and Hay-^ime, or the
like, are extraordinary times for the business for the Body: so preparation to
the Sacrament, fasting (if need so require) and such like, are extraordinary
works for the Soul; now as the care of inning ones Corn or Grass, must not keep
him from taking time to prepare himself to the Sacrament, or to fast at his
need: so the receiving of the Lords Supper is matter of more than ordinary use
for the Soul; and some needful journey stands in the like manner for the Body,
but a man must rather def^r his journey (if it may be put off without overmuch
hinderance to him) than omit the receiving of the Lords Supper. The same rule
must be kept in all other particulars. For if the Soul be more worth, and must
be more carefully attended on than the body (as it is no reason the Handmaid
should take place of the Mistress,) then those things which do after a peculiar
manner concern the good and profit thereof, must not be neglected for such as
do more specially help the state of the body outwardly. Lastly, if some outward
duty of Religion have been put off from the time, wherein it should be
performed, by some sudden and unexpected business, that required such haste (as
in such case ordinary duties of Religion may be deferred) then some ordinary
business of less weight must (in recompense) give place to that exercise
afterward, and a man must find time for that, whether it be reading, praying,
or meditating, by leaving undone (for that space) something that may be better
spared. And thus you have heard what be those special evils which lie in wait
to cosen us of our good time, and how they may be prevented. And so the first
part is handled; namely, from what Time is to be redeem^d.

Now follows to show, what it is that is to be redeemed, and so you shall fully
know wherein this duty consists. Now by Time, the Apostle means two things:
First, the very passing away of hours and minutes, the space and leisure of any
thing; and Secondly, the good occasions or opportunities that fall out in this
space. For the word in the Original, signifies not alone the very sliding of
minutes, but the space considered also with some special fitness, that it has
for some good, which we call the season of it. Now for the first, it shall not
be needful to say any more, being that every one knows, that every thing must
have some space wherein to be done. And he that will avoid the five forenamed
evils, shall never want time, or the space wherein to do or get good. But for
the occasions and fit opportunities that fall out, now for this, now for that,
in this space, it is some more skill to find them out, and make use of them.

Now these seasons are all of two sorts: First, such whereby a man may more
easily get some good to himself: Secondly, such, whereby a man may with more
fitness and ease do some good. Of the first sort, namely, seasonable
opportunities to get good, I will name three particulars which are most needful
to be considered, and by proportion of which, any man may come to the knowledge
of other like. The first, when God continues the Gospel, offering daily the
Word and Sacrament, and calling to repentance and amendment of life; this is
the season of repenting; this is the harvest wherein we may reap Christ, if we
be not negligent; this is the acceptable year of the Lord, in which one shall
be received, if he return. Whilst Wisdom lifts up her voice; whilst her
messengers come daily to invite us; whilst her gates stand open, and her
dinner stands ready dressed, whilst her message is done unto us: all this time
if a man will strive and endeavor to turn from his sin, to leave his folly,
and forsake his scorning, he shall be a welcome guest, she will accept him,
help him, and give him an increase of grace, till he become strong with her
mea^s.

Whosoever lives under the preaching of the Gospel, has this privilege
annex^d to the outward teaching, that if he will but strive and pray to God, to
give him strength to repen^ and (...) his ways and turn to him, God will (upon
his promise) hear his prayers and assist him: but when the Gospel is gone, then
the da^^ is past, a man may call and not be heard, and cry and not be regarded.
So then every man rede^ms th^s season of the Gospel, when he gi^es himself to
consider seriously of those ^^ults which he finds in himself, and hears sharply
reproved in the Word, and hereupon resolves to forsake them, and does not only
his own b^st endeavor, but earnestly call upon God for his hel^, with^u^ which
his power is bu^ weakness ^^d ineffectual* when he does also duly ponder upon
the holy Commandments that he hears preached, and those exhortations that are
daily sounded in his ears to move him to do such duties as God requires, and
hereupon concludes with himself to set about this work, and craves the strength
of God to bear him through in the same. And when he does advisedly think of the
promises that are generally proclaimed, and labors to get some assurance that
he is such a one to whom the right of these promises appertain: thus doing, I
say, one redeems the time wisely, and makes his advantage of the Gospel while
it continues, which is a thing that all men should do: but so rare in the
world, as that it is wonder the Lord has so patiently continued his loving
voice, when men scoff at it and will not hear. The Lord has and does send his
Prophets amongst us, as he did among the Jews, rising up early, and sending
them, which with all earnestness do proclaim the dangerous event that shall
follow upon profaneness, neglect, and contempt of Gods word, breaking of his
Sabbath, railing, wrathfulness, whoredom, wantonness, covetousness, thieving,
oppressing, slandring, lying, and such like: yet how many run on in these evils
presumptuously, rushing like the horse into the battle, with an unreasonable
boldness, Not fearing any danger, and shutting their ears against these
reproofs, as the deaf-Adder does, that they may not be moved by them to
amendment: ah, how contrary is this to redeeming the time? If any man have
hitherto lost the season, let him now grow wise, and even at this time turn to
God, and beg power to forsake these sins. How often and how earnestly are men
exhorted to all good works by the continual voice of God, speaking unto them by
his servants? to read the word of God daily; to pray privately; to meditate
upon the Word, to watch over their days; and to call themselves to a reckoning
every day for the faults committed in the day; yet who regards this voice? who
marks these exhortations? where is one, that has enjoined himself to some
constancy in praying, reading, and the forenamed duties? This is to sleep in
harvest, a most foolish practice and unwise; wherefore whilst there is yet a
little time left, whilst we have the light, let us walk in it, that we be not
overtaken with darkness. He that has not yet begun, let him be sorry that he
has put it off so late, and now set foot into these ways of God, whilst God
sets out his Word as a candle to direct him, and as his hand to lead him by.
The promises of God are in like sort published amongst us. Happiness is held up
as a reward of all true hearted Christians, and the crown of life is proposed
to those, which are sound and faithful members of Jesus Christ. And yet as
^^^ugh all w^r^ sure to get it, or it were not worth ^eeking^y any, the most
men slatter themselves in their sins, and will n^^ds promise these good things
to themselves, when they have no assurance or proof out of Gods word, whereby
to lay claim or title to them. This is a grievous and a dangerous neglecting of
time. And if any have not yet made sure work this way, let him even now set
about it, whilst the Word as a touchstone is before him, by which he may try
himself, and which will make him such a one as he should be, if he will strive
to follow it, and pray for ability to be ruled by it. So then whilst God holds
out his benefits, and stands with his arms open to accept us, let us take his
benefits, and be persuaded to come unto him in good earnest; let it be too late
to travel when midnight shall come, instead of noon day^* This is the first and
chiefest opportunity of getting good: namely, to join with the Gospel, and
follow it with our endeavors and prayers, by which it shall be made effectual
unto us.

The second opportunity of getting good, is in time of youth and health, whilst
the vigor and strength of the body and mind is fit for labor, and capable of
instruction. And Solom^n in his book of Penance, viz. Ecclesiastes, bids,
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come. These
days of youth and health are good days, when he which will use them, has his
memory steadfast to call to mind his evil ways that he may bewail them, and to
treasure up good instructions and promis^s that may guide and comfort him, when
the limbs will join with the mind, and the mind has the body as a fi^
instrument to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, if a man will address himself unto
it: but the days of old age and sickness fail much of the commodious fitness
for good; the memory is cracked, the head and understanding is weak, and
especially the time of sickness is so filled with pain, so shaken with
distractions, and encumbered with griefs and sorrows, that one is nothing fit to
repent, or pray, or hear, or to do any such thing.

Now when a man in the prime of his days, and in the fullness of his health,
will give himself to seek heaven, will hear the Word, and meditate upon it, and
apply it to himself, will confess his sins, and force himself to bewail them;
will pray to God for good things, and set the whole course of his life in a
right frame; he has well taken opportunity, and he shall have rest in his
latter days, much quiet and contentment, at least much strength and assistance
in his sickness, because he has something in store against the time of want.

But alas, how do the common sort of men bewray their monstrous folly in this
behalf? What more common than that sottish and brutish speech, at least such
ignorant and profane thoughts, men will repent when they be old, and cry God
mercy when they feel themselves sick, and amend all when they be ready to go
out of the world? and foolish man, thou know not whether thou shall die
suddenly, whether thou shall have thy wits and senses, or whether thou shall
have power of heart to make the least color of repentance in those
extremities. How many have died suddenly? how many sottishly? and yet how do
men, for all these warnings, defer the best business, namely, the work of
repentance and turning to God, (which will require the whole strength of the
soul) to the worst and most crasie time of sickness or old age? As if a
prisoner, at what time a man was offering him a pardon, and calling upon him to
take it, some good space before the Assizes, should say, Nay, let me alone, I
will not look after my pardon, till immediately before I am to come before the
Judge: this were a most fond part, especially if it were so, that the thief
knew not whether the next day should be the day of his arraignment or no: so
the case stands betwixt the Lord and us. If any man therefore has been so
little careful of his own eternal good, as to put off repentance and conversion
till that dead time, or does foster any such harmful conceit in his heart, let
him now cast it out, and now that he has his health and strength, upon better
deliberation take in hand this work.

Be not so extremely mad, as to give more time to the devil than to God,
especially to give the principal time. He were a foolish traveller, that would
willingly gallop all the day quite contrary to his way, and being told of it,
would answer, When it draws toward Sunset, I will turn into the right way.
Why be men thus blockish for their souls, that knowing themselves to be out of
the way of life, will yet of purpose defer to set their feet into the right
path, till sickness of age, when the Sun of their life is at the point of
setting? Ah, let our Proverb teach us more wit, Make hay while the Sun shines.
Turn, turn, whilst thou have health and strength, use all to get repentance and
salvation.

The last chief opportunity of getting good, is, when a man has company, and
is in the society of some godly wise man, able to give sound counsel and
direction, able to answer all doubts, objections, and scruples of ones mind,
now there is a fit opportunity to grow in wisdom, to be resolved of all doubts,
and to seek direction.

So then, a man ought not to suffer bashfulness, or other foolish matters to
put by that good communication, whereby he might enrich his soul. It is a
special favor of God, that any man can come where his servants are that have
excellent gifts; and he does deprive himself of much good, that will not seek
to benefit himself by them. When the Woman of Samaria perceived Christ to be a
Prophet, she proposed her doubt unto him, albeit he was a stranger. When John
Baptist might be come to, the publicans and sinners came and asked what they
should do. Whilst the Jayler had Paul in his keeping* he came to ask that
needful ^uestion, What shall I do to be saved? So if there be any man whose
heart is perplexed with some doubt, or over-burdened with some temptation, or
over-master'd by some sin, it is a part of ^^od discretion for such a one to go
and se^k the advice of some able Christian or wise man, before that either
himself be too far gone, or he want the opp^rtunity of such a counselor or
helper. These be three special occasions of obtaining good to a man's own soul
from things without him: In all which, to take the time is a most commendable
point of wisdom, but to be negligent, is such folly as Solomon reproves, when
he says, That a fool has a price in his hand to get wisdom, but he wants a
heart. Oh that men would beware of this heartlesness, and take heed of losing
their price, by which they might get wisdom. Now come to speak of the occasions
of doing good, and these are either in others, or in themselves. First, in
others, and that for their soul and body. Sometimes a man shall find a kind of
tractableness in those with whom he has to deal, that their ears stand open,
and they are ready to drink in an exhortation or reproof, by reason of some
affliction that is upon them, or some need they have of our help, or such like
occasion. Here is time for a kind and sound admonition, then a man ought in all
love, and yet with all plainness, to follow the occasion; striking (as our
proverb is) whilst the iron is hot, speaking when he sees him in the melting
vein, ready to take all well, and in good part. And so Elihu notes, that when a
man is brought to his dea^h-b^d, and to abhor all worldly delights, then his
ears are bored, and then there is w^rk for an interpreter: before the bones
clattered, and the mourners looked for the funeral, an interpreter was
despised, but now his words are observed. Thus a man may do much good to his
neighbors or servants soul, if he wait for a time when he is fit to receive
admonition, and then gives him it; as the husbandman in dry weather waits for a
shower of rain, and then sets in his plow. Again, for the body, sometimes one
shall meet with one that has true need, that is in distress for his bodily
estate, and does indeed want relief; this is an occasion and fit time to show
liberality, now a man must open his purse, and be ready to give freely; I mean
not, that every time a man meets a beggar, he should be giving, (for to those a
man should not give, but in the very extremity of necessity) but if our brother
has been afflicted by any loss through fire, or such like, (that he do not
make himself needy by idleness, but it comes upon him by some hand of God) here
is an object fit for mercy, and here one may be seasonably liberal; here is an
Altar, offer the sacrifice of alms upon it, which is a thing wherewith God is
well pleased. Some other time sparing may be more fit, but now is a season to
be more free of gift, and openhanded.

There is an occasion of doing good offered in others, wherein I have named
these two particulars, that every man might accordingly take notice of other
like. Then, there is also occasion of doing offered in ones self, whether by
some outward thing that befalls him, or by some inward stirring of the mind and
affections: as outwardly when a time comes in, wherein we have received some
more special benefit; this should provoke us to more thankfulness by
remembrance of the benefit.

Thus this time of Christ's Nativity should (if any way) be celebrated, that it
might turn to an occasion of of more hearty thanksgiving, and more true
obedience unto Christ, that gave himself for our sins, and took our nature upon
him, that in it he might bear our iniquities. So when we be in the enjoying of
Gods Creatures, whilst we be eating and drinking, or such like, here is a
special season to lift up the heart to God, and to kindle a flame of praise by
this fuel, that our thanks might be so much the more earnest, by how much we
have a more present feeling of Gods mercy, and do even taste how good he is.

On the other side, a man is sometimes pressed with a sore cross and affliction
that pincheth his Soul, here is a very fit occasion of humbling ones self, and
examining ones heart: for in these afflictions God calls to humiliation for the
most part, which duty being performed, after, a man may rejoice in his
afflictions, but whilst the burden of the cross is heavy, here is a notable
means to ^urther one in the work of humiliation; and if one can take the time
when God smites, he may (at least he ought) cause his heart to stoop before him
with more ease, than when he was at more ease for his body. Again, sometimes a
man has a more inward stirring of his affections, which he cannot have at
another time; this must be followed, greedily taken, sometimes at the Sermon,
or upon some other occasion, a man hearing or thinking of his sin, and the
punishment due thereunto, having a kind of pricking in his heart, and some
touch of remorse within him, his conscience begins to tell him that all is not
well, and he grows to some orderly conclusion; sure I will now be sorry for
this fault, and amend it: now if one will follow this motion, and go after God
when he calls (for this is one of his inward callings) and not shoulder it out
with fond mirth, but nourish it by a plain confession of his sin to God, and an
hearty begging of grace and strength from him, to do that which he now sees he
should do; this will come to godly sorrow, and so t^ repentance: but else if he
choke it and quench it, it will vanish, and the heart will be more hard frozen
in the dregs of sin. So that if there be any, whose heart at this time at the
speaking of these words, whose Soul smites him for his swearing, lying,
Sabbath-breaking, whoredom, drunkenness, gaming, covetousness, railing, or the
like sin; let him when he is gone out of the Church, cast himself down in the
presence of God confess this is his sin or sins freely, without dissembling;
labor to be more sorrowful for them than ever he was, and pray to God to pull
him out of this mire. This if he do, he shall take the time, he shall be a
Convert, the Lord will receive him, as the unthrifty Prodigal Son was received,
and by redeeming the time he shall find redemption to his soul. But if he
despise this admonition of God, his soul shall be more seared than before, his
heart shall be delivered to a greater hardness and senselesness than ever
before, and so be further off from repentance and life.

But alas, the frantic dealing of men in this case is too palpable, and to be
wondered at, when Gods word strikes upon them, when they feel the keenness of
it, when the threatenings have cut, so that they smar^ for it; then they run to
dicing, carding, drinking, dancing, etc. as it were of set purpose to drive
away the Spirit of God, that was coming toward them to heal their Soul. None
is so mad to take such courses for his body, that when he feels the sore to
smart, then to run from the Physician, and cover it over with a clout, or
strive to forget it: yet for their Souls a number deal so senselesly in this
thing as much as in any other, verifying that name which the Holy Ghost has
given unto them, when he terms them mad (...) it is a property (...) mad man,
that fe^ling (...) hate the Physician (...) him that would (...) of us which
have (...) so mad, would return now to their minds, and to God to be healed!
Again, sometimes a man's hear^ is stirred up with an inward and secret rejoicing
or gladness. Then says Saint James, If any man be merry, let him sing Psalms,
Jam. 5.13. now he shall do it with a cheerful courage indeed; and therefore
David would in such a case rise at midnight to sing a Psalm, rather than he
would lose the season, when it would relish with him so well.

Sometimes also a man or woman shall feel a secret pensiveness growing over his
heart, so that it even melts, as the ground that thaws after a frost, and he
could even weep abundantly, tears offer themselves in a full measure. Here is
an excellent occasion of renewing ones repentance. Now whatever be ones
company, whatever be the matter in hand, except it be of absolute necessity,
let him leave it off, and betake him to his Chamber or some secret place, let
him fall on his knees; now let him open his mouth, and acknowledge his sins
against himself, giving vent to his grief, and turning all to godly sorrow,
whatsoever the occasion was at first. Thus if any body do, his repentance shall
receive a notable increase: but if he pass it over, his heart will not answer
his desire another time. Further more, sometimes a man's heart is earnestly
moved with some hungry desire to enjoy some grace of God, and great longing
after some Christian virtue: Now let him in the heat and flame of his desire
address himself to prayer; then one shall send up such piercing cries, and give
such a loud knock against the gates of Christ's mercy, that he cannot choose but
hear, and send one back wi^h an Alms, as it were; thus he redeems the time: But
else his desires will be so cold and chill at another time, that he shall
scarce thrust a Petition out of his lips, and then these drop down at his feet,
and do him little good. And thus in every other (through the turning of our
affections) we must follow Gods Spirit, yea, or nature when it leads us, wisely
turning all to spiritual uses. And thus you may perceive what it is to redeem
the time, and how it may be attained. Now let us come to some brief Application
of the Point.

Use. First, this Point thus explained, meets with a number of imperfections
even in the best, and him that is most careful of his ways; of which we are now
to take notice, and purpose amendment, if we have not hitherto considered of
them. For this is a fault to which a man (even in a good measure spiritual) is
subject, for want of redeeming the time, that he comes to that lazy pass now
and then, as he has nothing to do, nothing whereabout to settle himself. It is
a carnal unsettledness in a Christian to be so negligent of his time, as that
he should have any minute of time, which he knows not how to bestow upon some
good and profitable use. The Lord offers such a multitude of occasions to do
and receive good, that if we could with wisdom take them, there is no hour
passes us, in which we might not do or get some good. And if there be nothing
else, yet this is something whereabout he has good occasion to be busied, even
to fall out with himself, because he has nothing (I mean, he sees nothing that
he has to do.) Sometimes, if men see their servants standing idle and
unbusied, they can ask them with a kind of indignation, What, can you find
nothing to do? And sure the Lord might come with this question diverse times to
us, and say, as it is in this Parable. Why stand you all the day idle? asking
whether the World were so empty of occasions, and our selves so perfectly well,
as that we can find nothing to do? But there is no hour passes us, which we
should not find fit for some good thing, if we could catch the opportunity
before it be turned, and did not harm our selves for want of diligent redeeming
the time.

Yet there are other faults, of which Christians are to be warned: as to begin
with the last first. How many be there that are so stuffed with worldly
businesses, and yet are greedy of more, as that they cannot find leisure one
hour in a day, nay, scarce in a week, to bestow upon rea^ing, praying,
meditating or conferring? Yea, as though time were made for nothing but to seek
wealth and transitory things, so it is the chiefest of their care. It appears
that such labor not for conscience, but for gain, because they cannot break
off ordinary labors so long, as well to perform ordinary duties of Religion.
Many may say (with grief enough if they did well) that their hands are so full
of the world, as that they can scarce through the week, take the Bible into
their hands to read any thing therein, unless perhaps it be in the Church at
some public meeting. Thus, men which are born to a better inheritance, are
content to w^ar out themselves in the earth, as if they were to perish in the
earth with other baser creatures. Here is one fault to be amended then: let no
Christian bestow so much time in the world, as that he cannot find sufficient
to seek Heaven and the things thereof. Then for the matter of sports, methings
some Christians should even shrink, before the word of reproof comes to them,
when they may think of so many hours spent such a day at bowls; so many (it may
be) the next day in shooting; so many the third day in shovel-boord, or the
like exercises: happily in themselves not unlawful, and when they come to
reckoning for religious exercises, the count comes in very slowly, but the
minutes or quarte^s, some half quarter of an hour, or thereabouts bestowed such
a day in praying alone, and some three or four days after, about a quarter of
an hour in reading; and (it may be) the next week, some half quarter more in
meditation: and thus if the expenses of time were written in our debt-books, as
they be in Gods; we might even blush to read so many Items for pleasure and
sport, and scarce one or two in a side for private religious exercises. Then
for our words: may we not hang down our heads with shame, to think that God
made our tongues, and we speak scarce one word in an hundred to his glory? Idle
words, even many of those whom we are to regard as Christians, count them no
faults, neither come to rep^n^ for them; it was but a word out of the way, say
they. But this power to speak (being a gift peculiar to men above all beasts)
ought to be more preciously regarded, than that it should be abused for base
trifles. Then for idle thoughts; who makes question of them almost? Alas we do
not remember that God has searching eyes and fierce, which pierce into the
depth of ones soul. We dream that thoughts are not so much, and spare our
selves in our unthriftiness, when we should deal more religiously with our
selves. Lastly, some might be reproved for too long lying in bed, and spending
more hours in slugging or sleeping, ^han health and strength does require: many
perhaps will think that it is left to their own pleasure, and that the Preacher
is too busy, if he take upon him to teach them when to rise, as though it were
no fault to over-sleep themselves. Indeed some old and sickly men's bodies must
take it when they may; but for the greatest part of men, if they knew what good
the first half hour of the early morning spent in religious exercises would
bring them, they would not love sleep so well, as for it to neglect them. It is
well said, He that seeks me early, shall find me, and it well may be literally
understood. Therefore (brethren) there is none but may see a fault in himself
in these respects some or all of them, and happy is he that resolves to mend
it. Therefore if you will take good counsel, do thus when you come home. Think,
alas, if time must be reckoned for, and should be redeemed, how far am I behind
hand with God, that (what for sleep, what for play, what for idle babbling, what
for vain thoughts, and excessive worldliness) I cannot make a good account of
the fortieth, yea, of the hundredth part of my time? And then grieve because
thou have been such an unthrift of time, and now begin carefully to spare
before all be gone. But now here is a reproof more sharp for some others, that
are not willing to hear of that ear. Tell them they must not spend a whole day,
or a whole night in playing and sporting. What not at Christmas? (say they)
why, you are too precise: well, but yet vouchsafe to consider a little what God
speaks. Thou say this is too much preciseness, and so says the world; but
the Apostle bids to walk precisely or warily, redeeming the time: and he that
will take time to card or dice, and to use lawful recreations immoderately (I
mean so, as to be at his play the greater part of the day, and it may be some,
if not the most of the night too) shall pay full dearly for it: either he must
repent, and undo this with much grief and sorrow of heart, or else he must
smart for it hereafter worse in Hell. I would not deal over sharply with thee:
but take Gods loving admonition, and let him have one tenth part of the four
and twenty hours: yea, more a good deal than so, now that thou have more
leisure than ordinary. And here is yet a kind of people that are to be
rigorously handled, such as are all gamesters, that spend no one hour waking,
but upon pleasure: the world calls them scatter-goods, and the Lord will call
them scatter-hours, that do mispend both goods and hours. Such (let them think
of themselves how the^ will) as do make gaming the greatest part (if not all)
of their occupation, must be content to hear that they have no portion in
Heaven, as they can keep no portion in earth. How can one have treasure in
Heaven, that never laid up any there? If God hate a gamester* so that he will
not give him good clothes to his back, (now he had ^reamed tha^ he shall be
clothed with ^^g^) he will much less afford him a seat in Heaven. And howsoever
for a time they ruffle it out, and be clad better than their more laborious
neighbors, yet this trade will surely undo them, for they have brought this
peril upon themselves, that either God must not be true, or they must not be
rich, he must forfeit his truth, or they their goods, besides their name and
soul: wherefore let such as have hitherto given their days to such an
unsanctified and inordinate course, surcease from the practice of their
lewdness; and both in conscience for their souls sake, and in discretion for
their goods sake, resolve to become better husbands of time, lest their gaming
on earth, bring beggary to their latter days, and damnation to their souls for
ever. Lastly, Let all good Christians be admonished to make precious account of
their time, and with much carefulness to take the seasons and opportunities of
God, according as they have heard it is their duty. Christians either indeed
purpose to learn, or make a show of such a purpose when they come to Church.
Ah, that we might all learn this thrift, and practice it as we have heard:
begin to day, and hold on still. Now is a time of remembering the most admirable
work of Christ's incarnation, when he was made flesh of the Virgin to purge us
from sin, and save us from wrath by the shedding of his blood, and sufferings
which he endured in his flesh. Give not all (ah, why should we give any of it?)
this time to play, chiefly to bezeling, surfeiting or wantonness, but take some
space to consider of the greatness of this benefit, and to be thankful
proportionably thereunto. I would I might hope to prevail with any by this
exhortation: but howsoever, it is needful to be spoken, that none may have
occasion to pretend ignorance. You see or might see your duties in this behalf;
and in practicing the same shall find the benefit of it. But fools will scorn
admonition, and those that have accustomed themselves to lust, will not be
entreated to pull their necks from out their hard yoke, and to serve a better
Master; nay, so foolish are a number, that they think to do Christ great honor
in spending the day whereon they imagine that he was born, and some few that
follow it, in more than ordinary riot and sinful excess; as though he were a
God that loved iniquity, and were delighted with drinking, and swilling, and
gaming, and swearing, and surfeiting, and all disorder: but those that know
Christ, know full well that he is not pleased with such pranks. Wherefore if we
will spend a day to Christ, spend it more religiously and soberly than all
other days, not more profanely and luxuriously. We should neither forget his
birth; but when we observe some special time of remembering it, show that we
remember his goodness by doing good, more honor to his name, not by committing
more rebellion against him. And to conclude, as at this time so at all times,
let all men that would have their souls well furnished with inward substance,
play the good husbands in taking time and opportunity. Whenever we find any
fit occasion of getting or doing good in our selves or others, let it not slip,
but lay hold upon it, and use it. It is joyful to th^nk (if we could think of
it seriously) what commodity this thrift would bring; how much knowledge and
godliness might he get, that would keep his tongue and heart carefully to good
matters? What a large treasure of good works might he have, that would be ready
whenever his neighbors necessity called for help, to stretch our his hand
for his relief? And when he saw him fit for an admonition, would wisely bestow
it upon him? How full of grace should his old age and sickness be, that would
give his health to God, and his first years to the service of his soul? How
great acquaintance might he get in the palace of Wisdom, that would come to her
at her first call, and enter so soon as the doors were set open? How many sins
might a man leave, and how much power should he get over all sin, that (when
his heart smites him) would turn to God by prayer and confession? What great
grace would affliction bring, if a man would settle himself to humiliation, and
gage his heart in time of affliction? How much thankfulness might he have, that
would lift up his heart to God in the fruition of blessing? How many fervent
prayers might he store up in heaven that would not fore-slow time, when he
feels his desires earnest? how comfortably might he weep over Christ, and how
plenti^ully, that would take the tide of tears, and turn all pensiveness to
this use? and how many sweet and cheerful Psalms might a Christian sing, if he
would turn all his mirth into a Psalm; and offer it up to God? O what a large
increase of grace would this care bring? how should his souls thrive, that
would be thus husbandly? Surely as the common speech has commended a little
land well tilled, before much more ground that is carelessly dressed: so the
weaker means with this care, would be more available to enrich the heart, than
are the strongest without it. It is not the greatness of ones living that makes
one rich; but the good employing and wary husbanding of it: so it is not the
greatness of the means, but the diligent redeeming of time, to make use of the
means, that makes the soul wealthy. But if great means join with great care,
the increase will be so much the more large, as a large living with good
husbandry. But alas, hence comes it, that some in the store of all good means
of salvation, are very beggars and bankrups, because of their negligence to
take the time and fit season. They let pass all good opportunities, and care
not for any occasion for the soul, and how can their soul thrive? Wherefore let
every true-hearted Christian learn this wisdom, and practice it, as ever he
desires to store his soul with that wealth, which will make him glorious in the
eyes of God, and much set by even in heaven among the Angels. And thus much for
this time, and this duty of redeeming the time.

FINIS.

