CONSIDERATIONS Humbly Offered for Taking the Oath of Allegiance TO KING
WILLIAM AND Queen Mary.

Optima Regula, qua nullae est verior, aut firmior in Jure, Neminem oportet
esse sapientiorem legibus. LONDON,

Printed by J. Leake, for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black Swan at Amen-Corner,
MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
ALthough I have insisted chiefly on the following Argument, because it seems
most fully to take off that scandal from the Genuine Members of the Church of
England, which others seem not so to have regarded as the importance of the
matter does require; yet do I by no means condemn those Writings which plead
for taking the imposed Oath upon such Grounds as do more fully justify the
Title of our present Governors; which as I never will dispute, so I conceive my
self unable, by reason of my want of Knowledge in the Law, to pass an exact
judgment in that matter.

But yet in matters which chiefly do relate to History, it may not be improper
for one of my Profession to produce what He by reading of our Historians has
observed.

When by the Greatest Councils of our Nation an Original compact or
establishment betwixt the King and People was asserted, few can be ignorant
with what disdain the Notion was received, and how 'twas represented as an
imaginary notion without foundation either in History or Law, or with what
earnestness an evidence or prospect of such a contract was demanded: Now in
order to the satisfaction of such Enquirers, be it observed,

1. That Florence of Worcester, Simeon of Durham, and R. Hoveden, do with one
voice assert, That Ubi Aldredus Archiepiscopus, Walffunus Wigornensis
Episcopus, Clito, Eadgarus, comites Eadwinus and Morcarus, and de Lundonia
quique Nobiliores, cum multis aliis ad eum venerunt, and datis obsidibus illi
deditionem fecerunt, fidelitatemque juraverunt, cum quibus and ipse soedus
pepigit, etc. Flor, Wigorn. p. 635. Dunelm. p. 195. R. Hoved. Par. Pr. p. 258.
William, called the Conqueror, made a League, or Compact with the Archbishop,
Bishops, Earls and Nobles of the Land who met him at Beorcham. To this it is
indeed replied by Dr. Brady, That there was no Election, no Consent of the
People, no Bargain stricken, or Covenant made to observe and keep the Laws,
which were, bonae and approbatae leges Regni, the good and approved Laws of the
Kingdom: but, on the contrary, here is the Submission of the People, the
Behavior of a Conqueror, Hostages taken, Towns burnt, Rapine committed, Answ.
to Arg. Antinorm. p. 251.
and He himself made King by the influence of an Army. To which I Answer;

1. That Gulielmus Gemiticensis, and Walsingham expressly say, That William the
Conqueror was Ab omnibus tam Normannorum quam Anglorum proceribus Rex est
Electus. Gul. Gemit. de ducibus Norm. l. 6. c. 37. Walsingh. Hypod. Neuslriae,
p. 436.
Elected King by all the Nobles of England and Normandy.

2. Florence of Worcester, Simeon of Durham, R. Hoveden, Daniel. p. 36.
and John Brompton declare, That as the Bishops and Barons of the Realm swore
Fealty to him, so He reciprocally Cum quibus ipse foedus pepigit, and
nihilominus exercitui suo villas cremare, and rapinas agere permisit --
Appropinquante igitur Nativitatis festivitate, cum omni exercitu Lundoniam, ut
ibi in Regem sublimaretur, adiit -- ipsa Nativitatis die ab Aldredo
Eboracensium Archiepiscopo in Westmonasterio consecratus est, honorifice prius,
ut idem Archipraesul ab eo exigebat, ante Altar Sancti Petri Apoftoli, coram
clero and populo, jurejurando promittens, se velle Dei Sanctas Ecclesias ac
Rectores illarum defendere, hec non and cunctum populum sibi subjectum just
and Regali providential regere, rectam legem statuere and tenere, rapinas,
injustaque judicia penitus interdicere. Flor. Wigorn. p. 634, 635. Dunelm. p.
195. Hov p. 258. Ipsum Regem W. ad jura Ecclesiae Anglicanae tuenda and
conservanda, populumque suum recte regendum, and leges rectas statuendum,
facramento solenniter adstrinxit. Chron. Job. Brompt. p. 962.
being required thereto by the Archbishop of York, made his Personal Oath
before the Altar of St. Peter to defend the Holy Church of God, and the Rectors
of the same; to govern the Universal People subject to him justly; to establish
equal Law, or Laws, and to see them duly executed. And when new Commotions were
made by the Nobility and Clergy, upon their Submission, and Oath of Allegiance
re-taken, Ibid. p. 37.
He himself takes again his Personal Oath Occurrerunt igitur Angli memorati --
ubi post multas deceptationes, praesente Archiepiscopo Lanfranco, Rex pro bono
pacis juravit, tactis Sacrosanctis Evangeliis, bonas and approbatas antiquas
Regni leges, quas Sancti ac pii Angliae Reges ejus Antecessores, and maxim Rex
Edvardus statuit, inviolabiliter obhservare; and sic pacificati ad propria
laeti recesserunt. M. Paris in Vit. 23. Mon. p. 30.
before Archbishop Lanfranc and the Lords, for the Good of Peace, NB. to
observe the Ancient Laws of the Realm established by his Noble Predecessors the
Kings of England, and especially of Edward the Confessor.

3. R. Hagulstadensis, S. Dunelmensis, R. Hoveden, M. Paris, Henry of Knyghton,
and W. of Malmsbury inform us, That Legem R. Edvardi vobis reddo cum illis
emendationibus quibus Pater meus eas emendavit consilio Baronum suorum. R.
Hagustald. p. 311. Dunelm. p. 225, 226. Fioveden. part 1. p. 268. Mat. Paris,
p. 38. Henr. de Knight. p. 2374. W. Malmsbur. l. 5. p 88.
Henry the First granted to all the People the Laws of Edward, with the
Emendations which his Father had made of them, strengthening them with his own
Oath, and the Oath of all his Nobles, that they might not be eluded: And W.
Lambara, in his Book of the Ancient Laws of England, cites this as one of the
Laws of William the Conqueror, Hoc quoque praecipimus, ut omnes habeant and
teneant legem Edwardi Regis in omnibus rebus adauctis hiis quas constituimus ad
utilitatem Anglorum. Apud Seld. Annot, ad Eadmer. p. 192.
This also we Command, That All men have and keep the Law of King Edward, with
the Additions we have made to them for the benefit of the Englishmen. All
which things plainly show, in opposition to the Assertion of Dr. Brady, That
there was an Election of William the Conqueror, a bargain stricken between him
and his Subjects, and that He did consent, covenant, and swear to observe the
good and approved Laws of the Realm, and in particular those of King Edward.

And whereas the same Dr. Brady says, P. 25.
These Laws of King Edward were mostly penal, or else of small moment; our
Forefathers were far from having such a slight opinion of them: For,

1. The Sed postea ad preces communitatis Anglorum Rex adquievit, qui deprecati
sunt quatenus permitteret sibi leges proprias and consuetudines Antiquas habere
in quibus vixerant Patres eorum, and ipsi in eis nati and nutriti sunt;
scilicet leges Sancti Edwardi. Et ex illo die magna Authoritate veneratae, and
per universum Regnum corroboratae and conservatae sunt prae caeteris Regni
legibus leges R. Edwardi. Chron. Eccl. Lichsield apud Seld. ibid. p. 171.
Chronicle of Lichfield does informus, That the whole Community of England sued
to the Conqueror that he would permit them to have the proper Laws and ancient
Customs in which their Fathers had lived, and under which they were born and
educated, viz. the Laws of St. Edward, and that the King consented to their
Petition.

2dly, When they had fought for the Empress Maud against King Stephen, and
placed her upon the Throne, they Interpellata est a civibus Londinensibus ut
liceret eis uti legibus Sancti Edwardi and non legibus Patris sui H. quia
graves erant, sed illa non adquievit; inde populus commotus illam capere
Statuit. Chron. Job. Brompton. p. 1031. Chron. Gervas. p. 1355. Henr. de
Knight. p. 2387.
requested her to Grant to them the Laws of King Edward; and upon her denial of
that request, they again thrust her from the Throne, and forced her out of the
Kingdom.

3dly, Cum autem haec Charta perlecta and Baronibus audientibus intellecta
fuisset, gavisi sunt gaudio magno valde, and juraverunt omnes in praesentia
Archiepiscopi saepe dicti quod viso tempore congruo, pro his libertatibus, si
necesse fuerit, decertarent usque ad mortem. M. Paris, p. 167.
When the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the days of King John, produced the
Charter of Henry the First, by which He granted the ancient Liberties of the
Kingdom of England according to the Laws of King Edward, with those Emendations
which his Father by the Counsel of the Barons did ratify; this Charter being
read before the Barons, they much rejoiced, and swore, in the presence of the
Archbishop, That for those Liberties they would, if need required, spend their
blood. And,

4thly, They made this one part of the Sequitur forma juramenti soliti and
consueti praeftari per leges Angliae in eorum Coronatione, quod Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis ab iisdem Regibus Exigere and recipere consuevit.

Concedis justas leges and consuetudines esse tenendas, and promittis per te
esse protegendas, and ad Honorem Dei corroborandas quas vulgus elegerit. Resp.
Concedo and promitto. Vid. Book of Oaths. H. de Knight. p. 2746.


Coronation Oath of the Kings of England, That they should consent to the
observation of the just Laws and Customs which the Community of the Realm had
chosen, and especially of the Laws of King Edward. And in the time of Richard
the 2d, it is declared, That the usual and customary Oath which the Kings of
England took at their Coronation, and which the Archbishop of Canterbury was
wont to exact of them, and receive from them, was, That they should grant that
the just Laws and Customs which the Community had chosen, should be observed
and confirmed by them. All which things put together, seem to conclude an
Original compact or establishment of Laws by which the Kings of England were to
Govern, and the Kingdom to be Governed, and the Continuance and the Renewal of
that Original Establishment by our succeeding Kings. Add to this that Rule of
Grotius, That Successio non est titulus imperii qui imperio formam assignet,
sed veteris continuatio; jus enim ab Electione coeptum familiae succedendo
continuatur; quare quantum prima Electio tribuit tantum defert successio. De
jure Bell. l. 1. c. 3.. 10.
Succession is not a Title of Empire, which gives the form to it, but is only a
continuation of the old Title; the Right begun by the Election of the Family,
being continued by Succession; and thence with him we reasonably may infer,
That Succession only brings down to Kings what the first Election gave, and
makes them only Kings according to the Compact, and with the Conditions agreed
on at the first admission of their Progenitors to the exercise of the Royal
Authority.

To this Historical Account of the present subject, I add these words in the
preamble of the Statute made 25. of H. 8. to forbid Impositions paid to the Sea
of Rome. Cap. 21.
Your Grace's Realm recognizing no Superior under God, but only your Grace has
been and is free from Subjection to any Man's Laws, but only to such as have
been devised, made, and obtained within the Realm for the Wealth of the same;
or to such other as by sufferance of your Grace and your Progenitors the People
of this your Realm have taken at their free liberty by their own consent to be
used among them, and have bound themselves by long use and custom to the
observance of the same; not as to the Laws of any Foreign Prince, Potentate or
Prelate, but as to the customed and ancient Laws of this Realm Originally
Established, as the Laws of the same by the said Sufferance, Consent and
Cisstom, and none otherwise. In which words,

1. There seems to be a plain distinction between ancient and accustomed Laws
of this Realm, which the People enjoy by Susferance of our Kings, or were
induced into it by the said Sufferance, Consent and Custom, and Laws made,
devised, and obtained within this Realm for the wealth of the same; these
latter being Statute-Laws, Leges istae vocatae sunt leges Sancti Edvardi, non
quia ipsas primo invenerat, sed quia quasi sub modio positae and in oblivione
derelictae a tempore R. Edgari avi sui, qui primo manum suam misit ad ipsas
inveniendas and statuendas. Henr. de Knight. de Event. Ang'l. l. 1. c. 15.
Chron. Lichfield ubi supra. Sir Robert Atkyns Enq. into the Disp. Power, p. 9.
the other being Laws Originally Established, and Ancient Customs of the Realm,
which the People of this Realm have taken at their free liberty, by their own
consent to be used among them; and our Kings finding thus established, suffered
them to enjoy. And these the Histories and Records I have cited tell us were
the Laws of St. Edward, or rather of King Edgar, renewed and confirmed by St.
Edward, which the Community of England desired of King William, and his
Successors, that they might enjoy by his, and their sufferance, or permission,
and which accordingly He and they consented that they should enjoy as their
proper Laws and ancient Customs; swearing also, at their Coronation, to
maintain, protect, and to corroborate them; and which the Archbishop of Canter
bury, at his Coronation of them, always exacted to be granted to the People. To
which may be added the Laws contained in Magna Charta; which though they run in
the style of a Grant from the King in the word Concessimus, for the honor of
the King; yet were they, says Sir Edward Coke, the Common Laws and Rights of
the People before. 3dly, It plainly is asserted, That the whole Realm is
subject to these Laws, and to be Governed by them, and no otherwise. And
agreeable to this Statute is that excellent Resolution of King James, when his
Subjects desired to know of him, Whether he would Rule according to the Ancient
form of this State, and the Laws of this Kingdom; or if he had an intention not
to limit himself within these bounds, but to alter the same when He thought
convenient by the absolute Power of a King. Fourth Speech at White Hall, A.
1609. p. 530, 531.
He Answers, That the King was Lex loquens after a sort, binding himself by a
double Oath to the observation of the fundamental Laws of his Kingdom, tacitly
as by being a King, and so bound to protect as well the People, as the Laws of
his Kingdom, and expressly by his Oath at his Coronation. So as every just King,
in a settled Kingdom, is bound to observe that paction made to his People by his
Laws, in framing his Government agreeable thereunto -- And therefore a King
governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a
Tyrant as soon as He leaves off to Rule according to his Laws -- therefore all
Kings that are not Tyrants, or perjured, will be glad to bound themselves
within the limits of their Laws; and they that persuade them to the contrary,
are Vipers and Pests both against them and the Commonwealth.

CONSIDERATIONS Humbly offered for Taking the Dath of Allegiance TO King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY.
SECT. I.
BEFORE I produce the particular Arguments which may be urged for taking of
this Oath, it may be useful to lay down some general Considerations relating to
this matter, viz.

1st. That through the whole Series of our Kings it has often happened, that
Ground sufficient has been given to question the Right of their Succession;
and in the Cases of Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, the lawfulness
of their Deposition; and yet no scruple ever has been made till now of taking
an Oath of Allegiance to the King who had Possession of the Government. That
ever the Bishop of Carlisle refused the Oath of Allegiance, I do not remember.

2dly, That all the Interests of the Protestant Religion plead for the taking
of the Oath, if lawfully it can be done, it being reasonable to conceive, that
from the present King we may expect the Preservation of that Religion, and the
Defense of it to the utmost of his Power, not only here, but in the
Neighboring Nations, against the Malice of the French, King against it, He
being chosen the Head of the Protestant League for that effect; whereas we
cannot reasonably expect King James should, by French Interests, return to sway
the Scepter, without the outmost hazard of the Interest of Protestants in this,
and all the Neighboring Nations.

3dly, If we comply with those who take this Oath, we shall prevent that
Division of the Church of England, which may, if it be not prevented, give
great Advantage to her Enemies; we shall strengthen the Hands of King William,
and of the Kingdom, against the Adversaries of Church and State; we shall
contribute to the Peace of the Nation, which all good Men are bound to pray
for, and seek by all means lawful. If we refuse compliance, we shall
accidentally, at least, give Advantage to Dissenters (who generally comply)
against the Church; we, by our Example, shall cause others to refuse
compliance, and so shall strengthen the Hands of the Papal Party, and Minister
to those Divisions which may cause our Ruin.

4thly, By refusing to take this Oath we shall deprive our selves of our
Subsistence, and of the ordinary means of providing for our Family, which
without absolute necessity we cannot do; 1 Timothy v. 8.
for, says the Apostle, If any provide not for his own, and especially for
those of his own house, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.
We shall deprive our selves of the capacity of exercising our ministerial
Function, which without like necessity we cannot justify.

5thly, We seem not well able to Answer the Question, What it is we would have,
or what we would be at? for if we be asked whether we would have King James
return a Conqueror, or whether we would have him put in statu quo, we must in
Conscience Answer, No, unless we would have Popery and Slavery entailed upon
us. And that he should return any otherwise, as matters now stand, is next to
impossible. Since then we cannot be willing that we should be reduced to a
capacity of yielding him ctual Allegiance upon those sad terms, we seem upon
the matter to have renounced the Allegiance we swore to him; which was, 1st,
That we were then willing and inclined to yield him true Allegiance; and, 2dly,
That we hereafter would act suitably to that Inclination.

6thly, We all conceive it reasonable that we should live peaceably and quietly
under the Government of King William; that we should never be active to
introduce King James, or to disturb the Possession of King William; and that
whilst we enjoy his Protection, we should pay him the Taxes imposed on us. Now
this is all that many of those who write for taking of the Oath, and many of
those who take it, for taking of the oath, and many of those who take it, think
is meant by swearing Faith, and true Allegiance to King William; and therefore,
according to the ordinary Sense imposed upon the Oath by many Wise, Judicious
Persons, we our selves think it reasonable to take it; and surely then, there
concerns of the Protestant Religion at Home and Abroad; our love to the Church
of England, to the Peace of the Nation, to our selves, to those Souls to whom
we minister, must weigh much with us to engage us to do that, which, in the
ordinary import put upon the words by many Wise and Judicious Persons, we own
we cannot rationally refuse to do.

SECT. II.
HAving premised these general Considerations, I now proceed to those Arguments
which seem to prove it lawful, in our Circumstances, to take the Oath imposed
by the said Act. And,

First, This seems to be self-evident, That a legal Oath, n. 1.
or an Oath imposed by Law, ought to be understood in a sense reconcilable to
the Law, and consequently no Man, by virtue of a legal Oath, can be obliged
first to transgress the Laws, and then to suffer for so doing.

It is also evident from the nature of the thing, Cowel verbo ligeance.
and the determination of our ablest Lawyers, that Ligeance, or Allegiance is
such a kind of duty as no Man may owe to more than one Lord. It is that duty
which no man owes, or by the Law should pay, but to his Sovereign, who, in one
Imperial Kingdom, can be but one; and it is agreeable unto our Savior's Axion,
That no man can serve, (...), two Supreme Lords. Matthew. vi. 24.


Now by the Laws of this Land I owe and am bound to yield Allegiance to him who
is in Possession of the Kingdom, n. 2.
whether he have rightful Possession or not, and am excusable and free from
punishment by the Law, if I afford it; for so the Law runs.

The King our Sovereign Lord, 11 H. 7. c. 1.
calling to his remembrance the Duty of Allegiance of his Subjects of this his
Realm, and that they, by reason of the same, are bound to serve their Prince
and Sovereign Lord, for the time being, in his Wars, for the defense of him and
the Land, against Every Rebellion, Power and Might reared against HIm, and with
Him to enter and abide in service in Battle, if case so require; and that for
the same Service, what Fortune ever fall by chance in the same Battle against
the Mind and Will of the Prince (as in this Land sometime past has been seen)
it is not reasonable, but against all Laws, Reason and good Conscience, that
the said Subjects, going with their Sovereign Lord in Wars, attending upon Him
in Person, or being in other places within this Land or without by His
Commandment, any thing should lose or forfeit for doing their true Duty, and
Service of Allegiance. It be therefore ordained, enacted, and established by
the King our Sovereign Lord, by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by
Authority of the same, that from henceforth no manner of person or persons,
whatsoever he or they be, that attend upon the King and Sovereign Lord of this
Land, for the time being, in his Person, and do Him true and faithful Service
of Allegiance, he or they be in no wise convice or attaint of High Treason, ne
of other Offenses for that cause by Act of Parliament, or otherwise by any
Process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall lose, or forfeit Life, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Possessions, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or any other
things, but to be for that Deed and Service utterly discharged of any Vexation,
Trouble or Loss. Where Note,

1st. That this Service and Allegiance mentioned in this Statute, is faithful
Service, and true Allegiance once and again, and it is declared to be the duty
of all Subjects.

2dly, That it is to be yielded to the King for the time being, without enquiry
whether he be the rightful King or no; for it was agreeable to reason fo
Estate, says the Lord Bacon, History of the Reign of H. 7. p. 144.
That the Subject should not enquire of the justness of the King's Title, or
Quarrel; and it was agreeable to good Conscience, That whatsoever the fortune
of the War were, the Subject should not suffer for his Obedience.

3dly, That this Service and Allegiance is to be yielded to the King for the
time being against every Power and Might reared against Him.

4thly, That through the whole Body of the Act he is called the Sovereign Lord
of the Land, their Sovereign Lord; and so it seems we need not scruple the use
of the said Title in our Prayers, it being only that which the Law of the Land
gives to every one that is King for the time being.

5thly, That this Statute has continued unrepealed about Two hundred years,
and therefore has been so long approved by the whole Nation, and judged well
consistent with the duty of Allegiance owing to their lawful Sovereign; they
therefore judged it not repugnant to their Oaths of Allegiance to their
rightful Sovereign to bear true Allegiance, and to do true and faithful Service
of Allegiance to any other King for the time being, who had got quiet
possession of the Throne, which is all that this Oath requires of us.

Moreover, all High Treason committed by a Native of the Land, is an offense
against his natural Allegiance, n. 3. Cook's Reports, Par. 7. Calvin's Case, p.
435.
which appears from the Indictments of Treason, ( which, says the Lord Cook,
are of all other things most curiously and certainly indicted and penned) for
they run for committing this Crime contra debitum fidei and ligeantiae suae,
quod praefato Domino Regi naturaliter, and de jure impendere debuit, Against
the duty of Faith and Allegiance which he naturally and of right ought to yield
to his Lord the King; or for committing this fact, contra Dominum Regem
supremum, and naturalem Dominum suum, Against our Lord the King, his supreme
and natural Lord; or, contra naturalem ligeantiam Domino Regi debitam, Against
the natural Allegiance due to our Lord the King.

Now the same Lord Chief Justice Cook in his descant on these words of the
25th. of Edward the Third, Instit. Par. 3. chapter 1. p. 7.
Seignior le Roy, used in that Statute concerning High Treason, says, That
this Act is to be understood of a King in possession of the Crown and Kingdom;
for if there be a King Regnant in possession, althopugh he be Rex de facto, and
non de jure, yet he is Seignior le Roy, within the purvien of this Statute; and
the other that has right, and is out of possession, is not within this Act.
Nay, if Treason be committed against a King, de facto, and non de jure, and
afterward the King, de jure, comes to the Crown, he shall punish the Treason
done to the King, de facto; and a Pardon by a King, de jure, that is not also
King, Pleas of the Crown, p. 11.
de facto, is void. The Lord Chief Justice Hales does also say, That a King de
facto, and not de jure, is a King within this Act, and a Treason against Him is
punishable, though the right Heir get the Crown.

And sitably to these declarations of these great Men, I find in Bagot's Case,
Pasc. 9. Ed. 4.
argued in the Ninth year of Edward the Fourth, that it is said, That the King
shall have the advantage of any Forfeiture made to Henry the Sixth, etc. and of
Trespasses made in his time, the Brief shall be, contra pacem H. 6. nuper de
facto, and non de jure, against the peace of Henry the Sixth, late King in
Possession, though not of Right, etc. and a Man shall be arraigned of Treason
done to the said King Henry in compassing his Death; and it is there added, Qu'
si cesty qu' est ore Roy in temps le Roy Henry ust fait Charter de Pardon c'
sera void a ore car chescun qu' ferra Charter de Pardon covient estre Roy en
fait, That if he who is now King had given a Charter of Pardon in the time of
King Henry, that Charter shall be void at present, because it is necessary that
every one who makes a Charter of Pardon should be actually King. Now hence,

1. I infer, that we cannot reasonably except against the using of those
terms, Our most Gracious Sovereign, our Sovereign Lord and Lady King William
and Queen Mary, they being only the terms which our Law gives to every one that
is in Possession of the Government; yea, say our great Lawyers, terms which
belong to the King in Possession alone, though he be King de facto, and not de
jure.

2ly, If Treason committed against a King in Possession, though de facto only,
by any of his native Subjects, be an offense against his natural Allegiance due
to him, and against that duty of Faith and Allegiance which he naturally, and
of right ought to yield to him, then is Faith and Allegiance both his Right to
challenge, and our Duty to yield to him; and then he, by requiring us to swear
it, requires us only to give him his Right, and we by so doing shall only
engage our selves to the performance of our Duty. If it be his Right, because
he is a King Regnant in Possession, then it is his Right no longer than he is
in Possession, and then the Oath can require it no longer then he is in
Possession; and then we have no just Ground to fear that the Oath of Allegiance
to King James does bind us now he is not in Possession; or that the Oaths we
take unto King William and Queen Mary can bind us any longer than they are in
Possession; this Oath can therefore do no real Injury to King James; for if he
be not in Possession, he has not, by these Expositions of Seignior le Roy, a
Right to actual Allegiance. If he become again the King Regnant in Possession,
the duty of bearing Faith and Allegiance to him immediately returns without
taking any new Oath.

Again, if the King that has Right, and is out of Possession, is not within
this Act, and therefore cannot be the Seignior le Roy within the purvieu of
this Statute, and therefore not the King against whom Treason may be committed,
against this Act, then can I not offend against my natural Allegiance, or
against any Duty of Faith and Allegiance, which of right I ought to yield to
him, and then I do not so offend by taking of the Oath of Faith and true
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary; and therefore I may take that Oath
notwithstanding my former Promise upon Oath to bear Faith and true Allegiance
to King James, because by doing so I offend not against any Faith and
Allegiance due to him.

Moreover, if the King in Possession be the Seignior le Roy within the purvieu
of this Act, it must be Treason against him to compass or imagine his Death, or
to prepare by any Over-Act to depose him; This being, says the Lord Coke,
Ibid. p. 12.
a sufficient Over-Act to prove the compassing and imagination of the Death of
the King; for this, upon the matter, is to make the King a Subject, and to
dispose of his Kingly Office of Royal Government: Then must it be High Treason
against Him to Levy War against him in this Realm, to be adherent to his
Enemies within this Realm, giving to them aid and comfort in this Realm, or
elsewhere; for all these things are by that Act made Treason against the
Seignior le Roy within the purvieu of this Statute. This Statute therefore as
it is expounded by the Lord Chief Justices, Coke and Hales, must oblige the
Subjects of King William and Queen Mary not to assist King James against them,
that being Treason against the 25th. of Edward the Third, which they cannot be
obliged to commit. If King James, should he come again to the Possession of the
Crown, might punish me for any of these treasonable Acts committed against King
William and Queen Mary, but could not punish me by the Eleventh of Henry the
Seventh for any Duty of Allegiance, or faithful Service paid to them as my
Sovereign Lord and Lady, then sure Allegiance and Faith will be due to them
whilst in Possession, and to them only; for were it due to King James, I might
be punished for not performing it to him. If, lastly, no Pardon now given by
King James can save me from the guilt of Treason against King William and Queen
Mary, and that guilt only be contracted by offending against that Duty of Faith
and Allegiance, which of right I owe to them; sure I cannot offend by want of
Faith and Allegiance against him who cannot pardon me, but against them only
against whom I commit that Treason; and therefore unto them alone Faith and
Allegiance must of Right be due, and so to them by Oath and Promise may be
given.

As an Addition to, n. 4.
or a Consideration strengthening the former Argument, let it be observed,

1. Sand. de juram. prael. 7.. 7.
That it is agreed on all hands, that a promisory Oath cease to bind, when
the matter of the Oath cease. Thus, if a Man swears to appear at such an
Assizes, if there be no Assizes kept there, he cannot be bound to appear,
because impossibilium nulla est obligatio, there is no obligation to
impossibilities; and of the matrimonal Vow, St. Paul declares, That the Woman
is bound by the Law whilst her Husband lives; 1 Cor. vii. 39.
but if her Husband die, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will;
because then the matter or objectof her Vow is removed.

Others deliver the Rule thus, Ames.
Quum aufertur Ratio formalis juramenti juramentum cossat; When the formal
Reason of an Oath cease, the Obligation of the Oath must cease. Thus, if a
Man swears Residence on a Living, his Oath only binds him whilst he is
Incumbent, because he only took, and only was obliged to take it for that very
reason, because he was Incumbent. Now the formal Reason of the Fidelity and
Allegiance promised to King James, was this, That he was our Sovereign Lord
King James, says the Oath of Allegiance; the Supreme Governor of this Realm,
says that of Supremacy; and therefore when he cease, in the sense and
meaning of the Law, to be our Sovereign Lord, and the Supreme Governor of this
Realm, my Oath to yield Faith and Allegiance to him must cease to be obliging
to me. If when another is King Regnant in possession, he is legally dead for
that time, his politic capacity being then separated from the natural Person
of the King, then must the Subjects of England be free from their Allegiance to
him for that time; for though Ligeance is due, as was resolved in Calvin's
Case, Cook's Reports, p. 438.
to the natural Person of the King, and not to the politic Capacity only; yet
is it only due to the natural Person of the King, when it is accompanied with
his politic Capacity; for otherwise he could not possibly divest himself of it
by any the most formal or voluntary resignation of the Government whatsoever,
nor by any other Act whatsoever, viz. the entrance into a Monastery out of his
Dominions, and the continuance there during life; for he cannot cease, while he
lives, to be descended of the Blood Royal of the Realm, which immediately
constitutes him in his natural Capacity, nor to be King by Birthright
inherent; he therefore only in such cases cease to be King, and our
Allegiance to him only cease to be due, because he has separated from
himself that politic Capacity which was before apropriated to his natural
Person by the Law, Ibid.
by virtue of the Lineal descent of that Person from the Blood Royal, whereupon
Succession does attend.

2dly, Ibid.
It is agreed on all hands that we cannot have two Kings at once, and therefore
either the King Regnant in possession only, or the King, de jure, out of
possession only, can be our legal King; or he who is in the eye of our Law, our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the only Supreme Governor of this Realm.

3dly, It appears by what has been already said, and by the determination of
the Judges in Calvin's Case, P. 438. P. 439.
That Ligeance is due only to the King; that the Ligeance or Faith of the
Subject is proprium quarto modo tot the King; omni, soli and semper; it is due
therefore to every one who is Seignior le Roy; and so to a King Regnant in
possession, though he be only King, de facto, if the Law make him Seignior le
Roy. It is due soli to him alone, if he alone for the time being be our
Sovereign Lord the King. It is due unto him semper, as long as he continues the
King Regnant in possession, upon the same account.

4thly, A. 9. Edw. 4. Term. Pasch.
Observe that in Bagot's Case it is determined that le Roy Hen. fuist Roy en
possession, and il covient qu' le Royalme eit un Roy South qu' les leges seront
tenus and maintein doque per c' qu' il ne fuist eins forsque per usurpation,
unc' chescun act judicial fait per luy qu' touch jurisdiction Royal sera bon,
and licra le Roy de droit quand il fait regress; King Henry the Sixth was King
in possession, and it is necessary that the Kingdom should have a King, under
whom the Laws should be held and maintained; therefore be it that he was only
in by usurpation, yet every judicial Act done by him which touches the Royal
jurisdiction shall be good, and shall bind the rightful King when he returns.
And it is there added, that le dit Roy H. ne fuit merement comme usurper, car
le corone fuist tail a luy per. Parliament; The said King Henry was not merely
as an Usurper, because the Crown was entailed upon him by Act of Parliament, as
now it is upon King William. If then il covient qu' le Royalme eit un Roy, The
Realm must always have a King, under whom the Laws shall be held and
maintained, the King Regnant in possession being he alone under whom, for the
time being, they can be held and maintained, he only can be our Sovereign Lord
the King for the time being. If every Judicial act done by him which concerns
the Royal Jurisdiction shall be good, though it be always done under the Title
and Authority of our Sovereign Lord the King, then must he be our Sovereign
Lord the King, to all intents and purposes of Law, for the time being; then
must the Laws made by him be good also, though they run in the style of our
Sovereign Lord the King, or our Lord the King. And if all this be true of a
King Regnant, or in possession though it should be granted that he held the
Kingdom merely by usurpation, it must more certainly be true of one on whom the
Kingdom is entailed by Act of Parliament, as in our case it is, and who is
therefore not to be looked on as a mere Usurper.

5thly, P. 434.
Observe that in Calvin's Case it is determined, that, Protectio trahit
subjectionem and subjectio protectionem, Protection requires Subjection, and
Subjection Protection. Quia sicut subditus Regi tenetur ad Obedientiam, ita Rex
subdiot tenetur ad Protectionem; P. 436, 437.
For as the Subject owes to the King his true and faithful Ligeance and
Obedience; so the Sovereign is to govern and protect his Subjects; that Power
and Protection draws Ligeance, and that the Ligeance of the Subject is of as
great extent and latitude as the Royal Power and Protection of the King; that
though the King in his natural Person is subject to Death, P. 438.
Infirmity, etc. yet in his politic Capacity he is esteemed to be Immortal,
not subject to Death, Infirmity, etc.

Now I would not hence infer with others, that I owe a King no Subjection or
Allegiance any longer than he does actually protect me; or that, if he neglect
his duty in protecting me in my Goods or Body, or of protecting the Laws,
(according to these wordds of Foretescue, Rex ad tutelam legis, Cap. 13.
corporum and bonorum erectus est,) I may neglect my duty of Allegiance to him.

But yet I think it reasonable hence to infer affirmatively, From the King
Regnant in possession, I, for the time being, do receive Protection; therefore
to him for the time being I do not owe Subjection. Protection draws Allegiance,
therefore Protection from him draws Allegiance to him. The Ligeanceof the
Subject is of as great extent and latitude as is the Royal Power and Protection
of the King; therefore it must extend it self unto all times and places in
which, and where this Royal Power is exerted, and this Protection is afforded
to me. Romans xiij. 1, 4.
St. Paul does found the reason of our Subjection, (...), to the present
Powers, on this ground, That they are unto us the Ministers of God for good; or
in the words of Christ, that they are (...), Benefactors; Luke xxij 25.
to whom we therefore own Subjection on the score of gratitude, as far as we
with justice can afford it. Since therefore, says the Reverend Bishop
Sanderson, De legum Oblig. lec. 5.. 18.
we owe it to the Supreme Powers, even when they are usurped, that we enjoy
what is our own, that we live safe from slaughter, and from rapine; yea that we
live at all since without them we neither could have remedy or safeguard
against the Lusts, the Furies, or the Injuries of wicked Men; it is the most
equitable thing, and that which the Old Law of giving and receiving mutually
does require, that for so many and great benefits we should make some return
unto that Power which affords them: And what is that Return, he does
sufficiently explain in the ensuing words, Profecto perfecto perversissimae
mentis est, It Is certainly an indication of a most perverse mind to desire to
live under the Patronage of his Government whom you will not obey, and to
refuse to be governed by him whose Protection you enjoy.

Moreover, if the King in his politic Capacity does never die, and yet the
King out of possession is no King, as to that politic Capacity, or as to all
intents and purposes of Law; then the King Regnant in possession must be King
for all the same intents and purposes, or there must be an Interregnum, which
yet our Law will not admit of.

The Lord Bacon Tells us, n. 5. History of the Reign of H. 7. p. 144. 1 Chr.
xxj. 17.
That the Spirit of this Law was wonderfully pious and noble, being like in
matter of War to the Spirit of David in matter of Plague, who says, Is it not
I that commanded the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned, and
done evil indeed; but these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray
thee, O Lord my God, be upon me, and on my Fathers house, but not on thy people
that they should be plagued. The equity of which Prayer is built on this
foundation, That they who had no hand in the sin, should bear no share in the
punishment, and should not be dealt with, ut oves quae ducuntur ad mortem,
neque evadere possunt, As sheep led to the slaughter, which they cannot avoid.
This, applied unto the present Law, runs thus: They who have had no share in he
Sin, if any he committed in that Revolution which has dispossessed the King of
Right, and given possession to the King de facto, should have no share in the
Punishment, and should not be brought into an unavoidable necessity of being
ruined, and undone by it. But now, without the benefit of this Law of Henry the
Seventh, and on the supposition of a necessity still laid upon them to retain
Faith and Allegiance to the rightful King, though out of possession, and to
deny it, whatever they may suffer by so doing, to the King Regnant, or in
possession as aforesaid, they must be under an unavoidable necessity of being
ruined, and undone; for they cannot reasonably expect Protection from the King
Regnant, if they deny him their Allegiance; and not only so, but declare they
hold themselves in Conscience bound to give it to his Enemies; nor can they
hope to escape those Penalties which are at present, or may hereafter be
imposed on all who shall refuse to promise they will bear. Faith and true
Allegiance to him; and so the more honest, and the better Subject any Man is,
the greater miseries and hardships will he lie exposed to; for the Sense of his
Allegiance will induce him to preserve his rightful King upon the Throne, as
far as lawfully he can, and hazard Life and Fortunes in so doing, and when he
has done this, he must, if he be still obliged to retain Faith and true
Allegiance to him, when out of Possession, in opposition to the King Regnant,
expose his Life and Fortunes still to a greater and more certain hazard.
Whereas, as the Seasonable Discourse well observes, Let Men argue as much as
they please, P. 2.
yet it is certain, that no Man is of such a captivated Allegiance, as by
reason of it to engage himself, or think himself engaged to his own certain
Ruin and Destruction. The most valiant and strictly obliged Troops stick not
to ask Quarter when they cannot defend themselves any longer, and are justified
for it by those to whom they swore to bear Faith of Life and Member, as the old
Oath of Ligeance did oblige all Subjects. Excellent to this purpose is that
Observation of the same Author, A Man cannot by Oath, or by any other way, viz.
P. 41.
by natural Allegiance, be obliged further to any Power, than to do his utmost
in behalf thereof; and though the Oath for the right Magistrate be taken in the
strictest terms of bearing Faith or Life, or his natural Allegiance be
construed to extend to the venturing the last drop of his Blood in his Service;
yet it is to be understood always with this condition, if the Action or Passion
may be for that Prince's Advantage. For Instance, In an Army each man is, or
may be obliged by Oath to lose his Life to the Prince whose Army it is, rather
than turn back, or avoid any danger. This Army, after it has done its utmost,
is beaten, and now the Soldiers can do no more for their Prince than die,
which indeed is to do nothing at all, but to cease from doing any thing either
for him or themselves: In these streights therefore, it is not repugnant to
their Oaths to ask Quarter, or a new Life, nor to take it with an Obligation of
Fidelity to those who give it only upon that condition, or with an Oath never
more to fight against him who gives it, whilst his Power continues. In like
manner, they who live under the full Power of the King Regnant for the time
being, may be said to take Quarter for he has their Lives and their Substance
at his Mercy; and so they may as lawfully oblige themselves to that which the
Prince in Possession requires from them; viz. that they will live in
Allegiance, or obedience to him, and will not attempt any thing against him.

Secondly, n. 6. Ibid.
The same Lord Bacon adds, That this Law wanted not prudence, and deep
foresight; for it did the better take away occasion for the People to busy
themselves to pry into the King's Title; for that, howsoever it fell, their
safety was already provided for. And truly, if, as the Author of the
Seasonable Discourse Asserts, we may assure our selves of a justifiable
Obedience by this, That he who requires it is King in Possession, and has us,
and the means of our Subsistence in his Power; then Subjects may easily know
the Rule of their Obedience, and the meanest capacity will not be wanting for a
Rule of that Subjection to the Higher Powers which the Apostle requires, for
Conscience sake, from Every Soul. But if all persons whatsoever must be put to
the perplexity of examining the Title of every King that reigns over them, and
is in Possession of the Government, it will, I fear, prove a very difficult
task, if not impossible for every Soul to yield this Subjection, (...), to the
present Powers, for Conscience sake, or to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake; there being often very intricate perplexities both as to matter of
Right, and as to matter of Fact touching these things: For, not to insist upon
the long Contest betwixt the House of York and Lancaster, the meanest capacity,
to satisfy himself of the Justice of the present Cause, besides his general
knowledge of the Nature and Obligation of an Oath, must be able to pass an
exact Judgment first concerning the Desertion of King James, Whether it do not
amount to an Abdication. Secondly, Whether there were not some Original
Contract, by the Violation of which he may have lost his Right to govern.
Thirdly, whether by his Endeavors to subvert the Fundamentals of this
Government he may not have forfeited it. And Fourthly, Whether he may not have
done it by actually subjecting part of it to a foreign Power; and both it, and
himself, to Papal and French Power. Again on the part of King William, he must
know Whether he had not a just cause of War; and if he had, Whether that do not
create a right to the thing gained by it; Whether King James, by disbanding his
Army, and withdrawing his Person, did not virtually yield him the Throne: And
must not the Decision of these things, if it be necessary to be made by every
Soul in order to the paying that Obedience to the Higher Powers, he stands
obliged to yield them for Conscience sake, cast many honest Souls into great
Mazes, and under insuperable difficulties? And must it not then be very
reasonable to conceive, that God has given them some way more easy? And
fitted to their mean capacities for satisfaction in this case; and what can
that more likely be, than this of yielding actual Obedience to him whom they
find in actual Possession of the Government, whilst they enjoy the benefit of
his Protection, and of his Government?

Thirdly, God, says the Apostle, has called us to Peace, n. 7. 1 Cor. vii. 15.
i. e. to peace even with Pagans, and to a peaceful Deportment in our conjugal
and oeconomical Relations; for unto that, he in that Paragraph seems more
immediately to referr: 1 Pet. ij. 12.
And the Apostle requires the Christian to yield Subjection to the present
Powers; that by this good Behavior their Adversaries might be convinced of the
peaceable Deportment of Christians, and how free their Religion was from
causing any disturbance to the Government. Now if Christianity did indeed
enjoin them to yield this peaceable Subjection to the Powers then reigning, and
having full Possession of the Government, without a scrupulous enquiry into the
justness of their Titles, they must be then obliged to live peaceably under all
Governments, and give disturbance unto none; but if it did enjoin them first
exactly to enquire, and satisfy themselves of the validity of every Princes
Title, and refuse Subjection as ost as they found reason to dispute the Justice
of it, it might then often happen, that all of them might be obliged to disturb
the Government; and the Jewish Converts at that very time, who scrupled the
Title of any Heathen Ruler over them, might lie under continual Temptations to
Disobedience and Tumults. Again, even in our present Case, if we can bring our
selves to this persuasion, That Allegiance is due to a King in Possession for
the time being, we may not only pray for all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy ij.
2.
that under them we may live peaceable and quiet Lives in all holy Conversation
and Godliness, but we shall actually do so. But if, after the Wisdom of the
Nation, in the most solemn Assembly, has conferred the Government on such a
Person, and given him the Title of our Sovereign Lord the King, and put him in
full Possession of the Crown, every private person may still not only Question
whether they ought to own him as such, but even deny him their Allegiance, and
maintain that by an immutable Law of Nature they stand bound to give it to
another, it is in vain to pray we may live peaceable and quiet lives under his
Government, to hope for any Settlement of such a Government, or any peaceable
subsistence of it, since we conceive our selves indispensably obliged to
promote, and to abett all struglings to disturb and overturn it.

But against this Discourse it may be urged, n. 8. Obj.
That Allegiance is a Duty we owe unto a lawful Sovereign, not only by virtue
of our Oath, which is styled legal Obedience, but by virtue of the Law of
Nature. Now though our legal Obedience may cease, as being that which only is
imposed on us by Law, and so may be removed by such a Law as rendereth it
impracticable, or transferrs it to another, yet our natural Allegiance must be
immutable, because the Obligations of the Law of Nature are so. To strengthen
this Objection let it be considered out of the famous Judgment given in
Calvin's Case: First, P. 440.
That our Ligeance is due to our natural Liege Sovereign, descended of the
blood Royal of the Kings of this Realm.

Secondly, Ibid.
That by the Law of Nature is the Faith, Ligeance and Obedience of the Subject
due to his Sovereign or Superior, because Magistracy is of Nature; for
whatsoever is necessary and profitable for the preservation of the Society of
Man, is due by the Law of Nature, but so is Magistracy. Seeing, as Tully says,
Sine imperio nec domus ulla, nec civitas, nec gens, nec hominum universum genus
stare, nec ipse denique mundus potest, Without Government no House, City,
Nation, nor the whole Race of Mankind could stand.

Thirdly, Ibid.
That seeing Faith, Obedience and Ligeance are due by the Law of Nature, it
follows that the same cannot be changed or taken away.

Fourthly, P. 441.
That when a Man is out of the Kings legal Protection, as a Man Out-lawed, a
Man attainted with a Praemunire, he is not out of his natural Protection; but,
notwithstanding any Statute, the King may protect and pardon him. And so, in
like manner it seems reasonable to distinguish betwixt legal and natural
Obedience or Allegiance, and to affirm, That by these Statutes and Judgments we
seem to be absolved indeed from our legal, but cannot by them be absolved from
our natural Allegiance. I think I have made the Objection as strong as the most
scrupulous person would propound it; and if I can really tender a clear and
satisfactory Answer to it, I hope my foregoing Argument will hold good even in
the judgment of the most impartial.

I therefore Answer, n. 9. Repl.
1. That what is granted seems to yield Advantage enough to us, viz. That legal
Allegiance may cease to be due to a King de jure, and may be due to a King de
facto; though natural Allegiance cannot, this last is due Antecedently to all
Laws, Promises and Oaths, whereas legal Allegiance is that which we by Law do
swear and promise. Natural Allegiance is due to our natural Liege Lord
descended of the Royal Blood of the Kings of this Realm. Legal is that which
the Laws exact to the King for the time being, though he should not be thus our
natural Lord. Natural Allegiance is due because he to whom I owe it is rightful
King. Legal, because he is King Regnant, and actually affords me that
protection which calls for Subjection. This is undoubtedly mutable, the other
is esteemed immutable. Well then, supposing, but not granting what this
Objection does suppose, That King William were King only de facto, no natural
Allegiance can be due to him, but only legal and mutable; that therefore only
is required by the Law imposing this Oath, and that according to Law is due to
him for his legal Protection; Why therefore can we not swear to yield him this
legal Allegiance, whilst this Protection does continue.

We cannot, say some, do it, rightful King his Right: For instance, if a
struggle happen betwixt the King de jure and de facto, it obliges us not to
assist the first, as natural Allegiance, which never cease, does require
against the latter. Now that is an unlawful Oath which does oblige us not to
perform our Duty.

But to this I Answer, Conquered Army to ask Quarter, or to receive it upon the
Terms forementioned, or for a Conquered Nation to submit unto the Conqueror
until the lineal Succession be extinct; and yet it is generally granted, That
in these Cases we may take Quarter, and submit upon condition never to sight
against the Conqueror, but to bear Faith and true Allegiance to him. 2. This
obstruction of our natural Allegiance is only such as we may reasonably take
for the presumptive Will of the rightful King, or that which he should
rationally grant to his oppressed Subjects; for in extreme necessity it is to
be presumed, that he would recede from the Rigor of his Right for Preservation
of his Subjects, rather than by holding them to it, to subject them to certain
Misery and Ruin, without receiving any benefit thereby. We think that the Will
of the displeased Prince is, That he would not have us hopelesly begin the
Miseries of a new Confusion for him, we therefore must believe his Will, that
we should not exert our Natural Allegiance in such Cases. Why therefore should
it not be as much supposed his Presumptive Will, that when we cannot refuse the
Promise of bearing Faith and true Allegiance to the King in possession for the
time being, without our present Misery and Ruin, we should submit unto it? And
therefore it is said, That King Charles the First gave way to the taking the
Engagement, Case of Engag. P. 113.
rather than that his Good Subjects should loso their Estates for refusing the
same. P. 123, 124.
And Bishop Sanderson would not condemn the taking of it in this Sense; I N. N.
promise, That so long as I live under this Power and Protection, I will not
contrive or attempt any Act of Hostility against them, but living quietly and
peaceably under them, will endeavor my self saithfully in my Place and Calling
to do what every good Member of a Commonwealth ought to do for the safety of my
Country. Only he adds this, He who understands the words of the Engagement,
P. 131.
so as if they did oblige him to any thing contrary to his Allegiance, or
render him unable to act according thereunto upon any seasonable emergent
occasion, cannot with a good Conseience take it, but only he who understands it
to be no way contrary to his hounden Allegiance so long as he is under such a
force, and cannot exercise it; and that whenever that force is removed from
him so, or he from it, as that he has Power to act according to his
Allegiance, the Obligation of the Engagement of it self determines and expires.
Now if this be understood to be a promise to live quietly and peaceably under
the Government, without contriving or attempting any act of Hostility against
it, till by the Providence of God it does expire, or cease to be the
Government under which I am for the time being; then is it the same with that
Allegiance which the Statute of Henry the Seventh requires, and these Cases
plead for: But if it only be a Promise to live quietly under their Government,
till they can get an opportunity to destroy, and cut their Throats; or an
occasion offers it self to side with them that are struggling so to do; It is
one of the most vain, illusory, senseless Engagements in the World, for who
knows not that, without any Engagements, all men will be quiet till they can
get an opportunity to be otherwise? Who can have the face to go to any Prince
with this Petition, Sir, I desire the benefit of your Protection, and your
Government, assuring you I will give your Government no Disturbance till I can
get an opportunity to do it, or till I can find some Body struggling to
Dethrone you? Who can judge it fit that any Government should permit such
persons to live in it, who declare themselves bound, when any opportunity, or
seasonable occasion happens, to endeavor its destruction; and when they see
any body struggling to do so, to side with them? What are such persons under
the present Government, Subjects or Enemies? If the First, then Bishop
Sanderson informs them, Ibid. p. 109.
That Allegiance is so intrinsecal, proper, and essential a Duty, and as it
were fundamental to the Relation of a Subject, qua talis, as that the very name
of a Subject does after a sort import it. If they be Enemies and not Subjects,
how can they reasonably expect that Protection which is due only unto Subjects,
for that very cause that they are Subjects, and not that Treatment which all
Governments think sit to use to their avowed Enemies.

Secondly, I Answer, That the Reply removes not the whole strength of the
Argument, part of it being this, n. 10. Answ. 2.
That Treason may be committed against a King de facto in Possession, and
cannot be committed against a King de jure out of Possession, and yet it always
is committed against the natural Allegiance which is due to our Soevereign Lord
the King. And therefore even this natural Allegiance seems due to the King in
Possession, and the exercise of it for the time being is Suspended as to the
King out of Possession. Calv. Case. p. 441.
Moreover our Law Books, as they tell us, That the Allegiance of the Subject is
due by the Law of Nature; so do they also tell us, That Protection and
Government is due by the Law of Nature. What Incongruity therefore is it, that
for the time that he cannot perform what is due to the Subject by the Law of
Nature, De jure belli 1. 3. c. 18. 2.
the Subject should suspend the exercise of what was due to him by the same
Law. Grotius affirms, That Reges qui Regnis exuti sunt, cum aliis Regni bonis,
eriam jus leg andi perdiderunt, That Kings out of Possession of their Kingdoms,
have lost the Right of sending Ambassadors; and yet that is a natural Right of
Kings: And if that, for that time may be lost to him, and gained to the King in
Possession, Why may it not be so as to Natural Allegiance? 3. Though our
Lawyers distinguish between Natural and Legal Allegiance, yet they do truly
tell us, Calv. Case. p. 435.
That they differ not in Substance; but only as the Duty of Allegiance promised
and sworn does: differ from it before those Engagements. The Substance and
Effect thereof is due by the Law of Nature, the Form and Addition of the Oath
is of humane Provision. So that legal Allegiance contains the Natural, and adds
the confirmation of an Oath unto it. Where then the legal Obedience is
suspended, and cease for a time, the natural Obedience must much more cease
to be exerted.

Again, the Allegiance which all Subjects owe unto their Sovereign is natural,
or that which is required of them by the Law of Nature, whether they live under
an absolute or mixed Monarchy, under a Government which in no case allows them
to resist, to take up Arms against the Sovereign; or under such Governments as
that of Poland, that of the King of the Romans, See Bodin 1.2. de Republ c. 5.
Grot. de jure belli annot. ad l. 1. c. 4. Sect. 14. Sleid. Comment, l. 8. p.
195. See Sect. 3. Numb. 4.
and of Arragon, and that of the Emperor over the Princes of the Empire; where,
if they violated their Oaths, if they did not preserve their Laws and
Liberties, their very Contract was, Their Promise of Allegiance should go sor
nothing, the Inhabitants of the Kingdom should not be bound to show them any
Obedience, but they should be empowered to resist them, sine Rebellionis aut
infidelitatis crimine, without the guilt of Rebellion, or breach of Faith.
Whence it is plainly evident, that all natural Allegiance is not immutable and
indispensable.

Thirdly, To this Objection I answer by Explanation, n. 11.
and Distinction of a natural Right, or a Right grounded on the Law of Nature;
and by Application of these things to the present Subject.

1. The Law of Nature is that which the Dictate of Reason, from Principles
known, and approved from their own evidence, obliges me to judge sit to be
done, or lest undone by reason of that Moral honesty or turpitude which is
apparent in the Action.

2. Nature may be esteemed to dictate any thing either directively, as a thing
consentaneous to the Laws of Reason, sit and agreeable to natural Principles;
as perhaps Kingly Government in opposition to Aristocracy, or Democracy; or
else Preceptively, as necessary to be done, or be omitted by virtue of some
evidence, which clearly shows the Equity or Turpitude of the performance or
omission of it.

3. Of these Laws of Nature some are Principles, and those either general; as
that what is good is to be chosen; what evil is to be avoided, that I am to do;
or avoid any thing out of respect unto some good or evil to my Soul or Body.
That which I judge to be fit, due, and meet by the Laws of Humanity and Justice
to be done to me, in the like cases I must do to others; that the public Good
is to be preferred before my private Good of the same kind.

Or, secondly, relating to Particulars, viz. That I ought to do good to all, as
far as I can do it without Spiritual, or great Temporal damage to my self.
2dly, That I am to do no hurt or damage to any innocent person, if I can avoid
it. 3dly, That I am to be true to my Word, and faithful to my Promise,
especially when I have, for the more assurance of another, confirmed it with an
Oath. 4thly, That I ought to do my best endeavor, that he who has deserved
well of me, should receive well from me. And against these Laws of Nature God
himself cannot dispense, i. e. he cannot grant liberty to any one to act
against the Tenor of these Laws, even in those circumstances in which they
would have otherwise been obliging; and therefore they are truly called
immutable, and are the same in all who are endowed with the exercise of Common,
Reason.

Some are Conclusions resulting from these Principles, and they do only bind,
as we may clearly see the natural connection of them with these Principles, and
when no Laws of a more strict connection with them intervene to hinder their
obliging force.

4. Some Laws of Nature continually do oblige under all circumstances, and so
their Obligation never cease; as the Laws forbidding the hatred of God and
Idolatry: Others oblige only under such circumstances; as, Thou shall not kill,
viz. except when it is necessary for thy own preservation and desence; Thou
shall not take away what is thy Brothers, viz. unless extreme necessity compel
thee to it. In these latter there must be a comparison of Duties, and of
Circumstances, that we may know the better when they are to us Laws of Nature,
and when not. Now to apply these things.

It seems hard to say, n. 12.
that by any dictate of Common Reason, clear by its own native Light, or any
first Principle of Nature, we, in these circumstances, are still obliged to
yield natural Allegiance to King James, and cannot, without violating these
Common Principles of clearest Reason, afford it to King William and Queen Mary;
for then that great Assembly of the Nation, those Reverend Bishops, and that
numerous Clergy, which believe they may, and therefore actually have done the
contrary, and either have obliged, or exhorted others so to do, must sin
against the clearest light of Common Reason, which sure we cannot charitably
think or say; then must this Law of Henry the Seventh, which has so long
obtained, and all those Judgments which have been made so solemnly by the great
Sages of the Law, have been Laws made, and Judgments given, and Sentences
pronounced against the clearest light of Nature. Then, thirdly, all persons of
other Nations, who in like cases have done the like in Swedeland, Portugal, and
Germany, and other places; and all those learned Persons, who in their Writings
have expressly, or by just consequence allowed the transferring of our
Allegiance in these circumstances, must both have acted themselves, and
authorized others to act in contradiction to the plain light of humane Reason;
which yet seems a plain contradiction to that property of a true Law of Nature,
that it is the same in all who are endowed with the exercise of Common Reason.

2dly, n. 13.
When it is said that Allegiance from the Subject is due by the Law of Nature
to his Soverign, this is none of those Laws of Nature which oblige under all
Circumstances: For when I am subdued by the Power of another who has conquered
me, and has my life at his mercy, no Man doubts but that I may engage, for
preservation of my life, that I will not be active against him that gives it;
That is, that I will no further bear Allegiance to my former Sovereign. When a
Nation, or part of it, is subdued by a Conqueror, without visible hopes of
recovering Freedom, they may swear Allegiance to the Conqueror. Upon Frontiers,
says the Seasonable Discourse, P. 47.
all Men are most strictly obliged to the destruction one of another, according
to their several Allegiances; yet it happens daily, that by Sieges, and other
Extremities, Towns are reduced to the Jurisdiction of those to whom they were
sworn not to submit, but to destroy; and upon their Surrender, the must swear
Allegiance to another Master, and to destroy those whom before they were bound
to preserve; if they afterward be re-taken by their former Prince, he cannot
look upon them as Traitors or Revolters; for he could neither expect Allegiance
from them, when it was impossible for them to give it; or the refusal of
Allegiance to the Conqueror, when it was impossible they should refuse it
without being put to the Sword. The Reasons which justify such particular
places, justify a more universal; such as are whole Kingdoms, which are made
out of such particular places, and are subject to the same Fate, and necessity
of War, to the same Confusions and Revolutions of Government, and so to the
same opposite Allegiance. This therefore can be only such a Law of Nature as
binds under such circumstances, and cease when those circumstances cease,
viz. When Power of Protecting, Governing and Preserving cease without my fault,
and I can have them only from another upon condition of Allegiance.

3dly, Let us considerately peruse the Grounds of natural Allegiance, n. 14.
or the Foundations upon which, according to the learned, it relies; and they,
perhaps, may somewhat contribute unto our satisfaction in this case. The
foundation of legal Allegiance is the natural Law of Fidelity, which obliges
us to be true unto our Promises and Oaths; and this the Objection grants may
cease. The grounds of natural Allegiance are by our Judges in that famous Case
of Calvin declared to be two:

1. Protection and Government; and from this Ground it is demonstratively
evident, that my natural Allegiance must cease to be actually due to him who
cannot govern and protect me, and must be due to him who actually does so.

2dly, The Necessity of Government, and the Profit of it for the preserving the
Society of Man; it is necessary, because the Prince cannot attain the ends of
Government, unless his Subjects yield him due Obedience; it is profitable,
because Peace is preserved, and Justice has its due uninterrupted Current,
whilst the King, who protects and governs, finds Obedience from his Subjects.
Now both these Grounds, as has been shown in Bagot's Case, and from the
Reverend Bishop Sanderson, require Obedience to the King in Possession for the
time being; for if there be a necessity, when we have lost our Governor de
jure, and he is out of Possession, that we should still have Government, and we
cannot have it but from the King de facto; there must be a necessity that we
should yield Obedience or Allegiance to him; for they are words of the same
import, and used indifferently for the same thing in the Old Statute of
Allegiance; the Old Oath being commonly called, says the Act for the
abrogation of it, P. 188.
The Oath of Allegiance or Obedience. Peace also is preserved, and Justice has
its Course under the King in Possession, and cannot have its Course under him
who is out of Possession.

3dly, Case of Engag. P. 109.
Bishop Sanderson says, That Allegiance is a Duty that every Subject by the
Law of Nature owes to his Country, and consequently to the Supreme Power
thereof; for the same Law which we may call the Law of Nature (at least in a
large acceptance) which inclines particular Men to grow into one Civil Body
of a Commonwealth, must necessarily withal imprint a Sense and tacit
acknowledgment of such a Duty of Allegiance in every inferior Member of the
Body to the Sovereign Power by which the Commonwealth is governed, as is
necessary for the preservation of the whole Body: It therefore, say I, must
imprint an acknowledgment of such a Duty of Allegiance in every inferior Member
of the Body to the King, de facto, in full Possession of the Government,
because he is Caput communicatis; and is, for the time being, that Sovereign
Power by which the Commonwealth is governed. And this he elsewhere proves in
our very case by this cogent Argument: Whatsoever is to be done for any end,
Lect. 5. de leg.. 19.
is so far to be done, as it seems necessary and profitable for the obtaining
of that end; but the end of Civil Government, and of the Obedience due to it,
is the safety and tranquillity of humane Society; and therefore every Subject
is bound to obey the Commands of him who, de facto, is Supreme Governor, as far
as the safety and tranquillity of that Society requires that Obedience. Now
three things are necessary for preserving of humane Society: 1. Defense of our
Country against Foreign force, and the attempts of her Enemies. [ Add, And by
parity of Reason, against those who would create Seditions in her bowels; for,
surely, they are opposite to the safety and tranquillity of the Society.] 2dly,
The administration of Justice, by which Rewards and Punishments may duly be
administered as by Law established. 3dly, The care of Trade and Merchandice; for
in these three things the welfare of Manking does so much consist, that without
them all things must run to ruin; all places will be filled with Rapines,
Murders, Frauds and Injuries, The Lives and Fortunes of the most innocent
Subjects will become a prey, to the Lust of the more powerful; the only, remedy
against which Evils is, That good Subjects remember that it is their duty to
obey their Commands and Laws in all things which relate unto the public
safety, by whose Sword and Authority they are defended from the injuries of
wicked Men. I know he concludes with this exception, That we must so yield
Obedience to the Invasor,. 20.
as not to violate the Right of the Lawful Heir, or do any thing to his
prejudice; Which exception shall be considered in the following Head.

4thly, Allegiance may be grounded on that Law of Justice which enjoins us to
give every one his right. But then according to our Laws, according to that Old
Rule, Protection does require Allegiance, according to those known Principles,
That there must be always a Government under which the Laws may be preserved,
and Justice executed; and where there is a Government, there must be Obedience:
I say, according to these Rules, Allegiance for the time being must be the
Right of the King in possession for the time being. Moreover, in many things
which are in general enjoined by the Law of Nature, humane Laws determine both
of the exercise and measures of them; for instance, Thou shall not steal; Thou
shall not defraud another of his Right, are Laws of Nature; but yet the Law of
Man determines what shall be esteemed stealing, and what defrauding others of
their Right. Thou shall not kill, is another Law of Nature; but yet the Law of
Man determines when I may kill without committing Murder, and when not; so in
like manner the Law of Nature requires Allegiance to my Sovereign; but for any
thing I can see to the contrary, the Law of Man may determine who shall be
esteemed that Sovereign, and what is that Allegiance I stand bound to yield
him; and were this otherwise, all those Laws forementioned of Poland, n. 10
Arragon, and the Imperial Princes, must be contrary to the Law of Nature, and
to the natural Allegiance due to their Soverigns. 3dly. There can be no
prejudice to the Right of the King, de jure, in these matters in which he does
or ought to be presumed willing to recede from that Right. Ibid. Sect. 21.
Now, says the Bishop, it is to be presumed that Allegiance should be so far
paid to the Invader, as it serves for the good of the Community; the safety of
which is far more the interest of the right Heir, than of him who has the
Possession without Right; and so this Father of the Country cannot but have
that affection for it; that rather than it should be destroyed, and his
Subjects ruined, they should modestly accommodate themselves to the present
affairs, than by their unseasonable resistance ( add, or refusal of Allegiance)
they should bring upon themselves certain destruction.

5thly. The true foundation of Allegiance is that of the Law of Gratitude,
which says, That from whom I receive Protection, and all the other benefits of
Government, to him in gratitude I owe Subjection and Obedience; and upon this
Subjection is founded by St. Paul, declaring, That we must needs be subject,
because he is the Minister of God for good. Now this makes plainly for
Subjection to that King from whom, for the time being, we receive Protection,
and all the benefits of Government. This is the ground of that Obedience which
Children owe unto their Parents and Servants to their Masters; and therefore
where these cease, we may much more suppose that the Allegiance of Subjects to
their Prince should cease. Now,

Though no Man can have the same relation to me as my Father has, or do that
Action which gave him that Relation; yet do the Roman Laws conclude, That even
Fathers may forfeit this right; so far, as that their Childrens obligation to
Obedience to them may cease. Vide Sharock de officiis secundum naturae jus, c.
5. n. 7. p. 352.
The Law of the Twelve Tables says, That if the Father sell his Son thrice, or
his Daughter once, they shall be freed from obligation of Obedience to him; the
Roman and Imperial Laws, That if the Parents will not nourish, but expose their
Children, they shall have no power to recover them to their Obedience, though
by that Action they cannot cease to be their natural Parents; That if Parents
seek to poison, or otherwise to attempt the life of their Children, or neglect
to take care of them, then shall they have no benefit of their Obedience. And
as for Servants, their Law provided thus; Ibid. p. 353.
That if sick Servants were neglected by their Masters, if, in that state, they
cast them out of their Houses, neither providing for them themselves, nor
committing them to the care of others, they were to enjoy their liberty. Now if
our Case should be determined by the equity of these Rules, and I can see no
reason why it may not be so; I mean if we do only take our measures of it from
the Law of Nature, abstracting from our Oaths, and the decision of the Holy
Scriptures; that Father of the Country who has deserted us, cast off all care
of us, exposed us to the pleasure of another; that Master who has left us when
sick and distempered, neither taking care of us himself, nor committing the
care of us to any other, must have lost his Title to our Subjection and
Obedience.

Lastly, I answer, n. 15.
That in matters of this nature there must be place for a comparison of natural
Obligations; and when they seem to clash, those which are more immediate, and
nearest to first Principles; those which are most obliging under all
circumstances; those which are most immutable, and indispensable, must prevail
against all others which have less of these great Characters of the Law of
Nature instamped upon them. Let us then bring this matter to these Rules, as
Men supposed to be left purely to the Law of Nature for the decision of this
case, as the Objection does suppose, and then it seems to be fairly argued,

1. That the first and most immediate Law of Nature is Self-love and
Preservation, as that imports the love and preservation of my Soul and Body; of
my Soul absolutely, and of my Body by all lawful means, or by such means as are
not prejudicial to the higher interests of my Soul. This is so certainly the
fundamental Ground of Action, that I can have no Motive to do any thing, and so
no Motive to yield Obedience to any Sovereign, which may not be resolved into
these Principles; and when these Principles combine, and equally affect the
whole Society, it is their most strong and most immediate bond of Action;
according to that known Rule, salus populi est suprema Lex. When then the
safety and preservation of the Community depends upon their promise of
Allegiance to the Supreme Governor for the time being, as it must do when they
are in his Power, and cannot have the benefit of his Protection, and his
Government without it; it must prevail above all Obligations of Allegiance to
him, who, being out of Possession, can no more Protect or Govern them.

If it be said that the acting, King Regnant can be to their Bodies; and so it
must be acting contrary to the true Principle of Preservation and Self-love.

I answer by Concession, That if thus acting were indeed acting contrary to the
true intent and meaning of the Oath of Allegiance; and it were lawful thus to
bind our selves by Oath and Promise; we by thus acting should act against
Self-love, and the true import of Self-preservation; but if Men will examine
either their own Actions, or the general Conditions of an Oath, they will find
reason to believe, that, in so doing, they do not indeed act against the true
intent and meaning of their Oath or Promise. For,

1. This Oath of Allegiance, say these Objectors does oblige us to spend the
last drop of our Blood, and to hazard our Lives and Fortunes in the King's
Service against all Men whatsoever; and yet did any of this Nation, besides
Roman Catholics, conceive themselves obliged thus to act for King James
against the Prince of Orange, when they saw they could not do it without being
active toward the Ruin of themselves, their Liberties and their Religion?
It Is therefore evident, That, by their Actions, they declared they judged
themselves exempted so far from that Oath, as it did lay upon them a necessity
of being instrumental to promote the Ruin of themselves, the Laws and the
Religion of the Nation. Or does any Man call a Conquered Nation, or a City
taken Storm, or a Routed Army, perjured, because they accept of their Lives
upon condition of promising, upon Oath, allegiance to their Conqueror?

2dly. The General condition of all Oaths, is, That I will perform them so
long, and so far as it is lawful so to do. Now can any Man think it lawful to
be active to the apparent Ruin of himself, the Laws, Religion, and Community
of which he is a Member. If not, he cannot think himself obliged by his Oath or
Promise to those things which will, in humane probability, have these sad
Effects.

3dly. The Oath of Allegiance is a legal Oath imposed by the Representatives
and Guardians of the Community. Now can it reasonably be thought that they
intended to bind the whole Community, and, in them, themselves to ruin both
their Laws, Religion, and their private Interests? If not, no Man can
rationally think himself obliged by such an Oath to do that which apparently
does tend to such an End.

Again, the immediate Law of all Societies is the public Good. Now Allegiance,
says Bishop Sanderson, Case of the Engag. p. 109.
is a Duty that every Subject owes to his Country, that is, the Public, and
consequently to the Supreme. And hence it seems demonstratively to follow, that
he cannot owe it to the Supreme Power, when the performance of it tends
plainly, and directly to the ruin of the public Good, and therefore cannot
owe it to him, when it tends to the destruction of that Community of which he
is a Member. The Allegiance which is confirmed by Oath is stronger than is
natural Allegiance; and yet the Casuists do generally teach, that when the
Observation of a promissory Oath is plainly destructive of the public Good, it
is not Obligatory, because the matter of it then becomes unlawful: For,

1. That which we cannot lawfully promise, we cannot swear to do; but we cannot
lawfully Promise to be actively Obedient to the Commands of our Superior to the
ruin of the Public; we cannot therefore swear to be so.

2. An Oath can only bind us to do that which we can be obliged to do; but no
Member of a Community can be obliged to do what is destructive of the Good of
the Community, he being, Jer. xxix. 7.
by virtue of his Relation to it, to seek the Peace and Welfare of it, and to
pray unto the Lord for it; and therefore cannot be obliged to act in
contradiction to his Duty, and his Prayers.

3dly. To this Effect may be urged that saying of our Lord, The Sabbath was
made for Man; Mar. ij. 27.
that is, for his behoof, not Man for the Sabbath; whence he concludes, That
the Rest commanded on that Day, and in which the Observation of it did consist,
may be violated for the preservation of Man. Accordingly Kings were made for
the public Good, the Welfare and Safety of the Government; and Allegiance,
says St. Paul, is therefore due to them, because they are the Ministers of God
to us for good: The Community or Public was not made for them, and
consequently the humane Laws concerning them, and the Allegiance we owe to them
may be violated, when it is necessary to do so for the preservation of the
Public. When therefore Subjects are under a necessity either to Hazard or
Ruin the Public, or to transferr their Allegiance, for the time being, to the
King Regnant, they may do the latter.

Moreover, it may very probably be argued, That when a King, being wrongfully
outed, repairs to a foreign Power by which to conquer his own Kingdom, I am not
bound by my Allegiance tamely to give up my self, without resistance, to be
enslaved to that power, as I must be, if, in such cases, I may not resist; it
being not in the King's Power, how much soever it may be in his Will, to Rule
or to Command these Conquerors, and therefore not to hinder our enslavement to
them.

Yea, when he visibly attempteth to dissolve those Laws on the Preservation of
which the Good of the Community consists, or by such evil Methods to subject it
to Popery and Slavery, i. e. to Temporal and Eternal Ruin, my Duty of
Allegiance cannot oblige me to be obedient to him in prosecution of those ends.
Had I sworn to stay a Prisoner in such a House, that Oath would bind me to stay
in it, though I found it smoaky, and wanting Accommodations for my Health; but
not when it is on Fire, or ready to fall down upon my Head, because the
Observation of it to my own immediate Destruction, is against the Law of
Nature. Much less can may Oath of Allegiance bind me to the Subversion of the
Public, that being more against the same Law, and the very End of Societies.
When therefore a King has put his Conscience under such Guides as render it
morally impossible for him to desist from the Subversion of the Established
Religion, and his Power, and Person under such Hands, that it is morally
impossible he should return to his Government without enslaving the Community,
and subverting her Laws and Liberties, I know not what natural Allegiance, or
Principles of mere natural Reason can tie me to hazard my own safety, by
refusing to promise Allegiance for the time being to another who will preserve
both.

In cases of such unhappy Contests between the good of the Governor and the
Governed, it seems most natural to think it better, ut pereat unus, potius quam
unitas. For the present Governor, in such a struggle, may suffer much, and yet
the Government may not suffer, but be as well preserved in another Person. But
when a Kingdom and a Church is thus subverted and enslaved, the Government then
suffers without prospect of Recovery, and the Effects of these things reach
unto Posterity. Witness the woeful Spectacle of France.

According to the supposition of the Statute of Henry the Seventh, and the
Cases cited, de jure King, and so we must be his Subjects de jure; these being
essential Relatives which mutually infer one of the other. If we be of right
his Subjects, we must owe him Allegiance of right; and then, How can we promise
and swear to give away his right to another?

To this Objection I have given a sufficient Answer in what I have Discoursed
on the Fourth Foundation of Allegiance, n. 16.
the Law of Justice. To which things I add,

1st. That as a King de jure has right to the Allegiance of his Subjects, so
have they also the same right to Government, and Protection by him, and he is
by his Coronation Oath obliged to afford it. If then, whilst he is out of
Possession, the exercise of his Government and Protection cease, though I
have a right to it, and he is not to be esteemed a violater of his Oath because
he does not then protect us, or execute Justice for us; Why may not the
Exercise of that Allegiance which I have promised by Oath to him cease, though
he has the same right to it?

2dly. When we say a King out of Possession has righ tto the Allegiance of his
Subjects, we mean not an immediate right, but mediate; i. e. our meaning is,
That first he has right to Possession and actual Government, and by that to
Allegiance; he therefore must be first in Possession, before we can exert the
Allegiance due to him. Accordingly, though Edward the Fourth is by Act of
Parliament in the First Year of his eign declared to have been in Right, See
Bagot's Case, 9 H. 4. Term Trin.
from the Death of the Right Noble Prince Richard Duke of York, very just King
of the Realm of England; yet because he only took upon him to use his Right and
Title to the said Realm of England on the Fourth of March, A. D. 1460. and
entered only then into the Exercise of the Royal Estate, Dignity, Pre-eminence
and Power of the same Crown, and to the Governance of the said Realm of
England, by the amotion of Henry the Sixth (till then King in Deed, though not
of Right;) therefore is he said by the Act of Parliament to have been only on
the Fourth day of March in the lawful Possession of the same Realm, with the
Royal Power, Pre-eminence, Estate and Dignity belonging to the Crown thereof;
and then only to be lawfully seized and possessed of the Crown of England in
his said Right and Title, and of all Prerogatives belonging to it.

Now what is only thus of Right, may be both promised and performed to another,
whilst this other is in Possession, though he be not de jure so, provided he be
so according to the Course of Law, or the accustomed Rights of giving and
receiving Possession, as is apparent in the Case of a Lord of a Manor, who is
thus in Possession of what is the Right of another, who is by Fraud, or corrupt
Verdict, or Judgment, outed of his Right; for the Homage due of Right to the
true owner is here, by Law, as occasion offers it self, to be sworn to the
unjust Possessor. Nay we read of diverse Acts of Parliament continuing the Name
and Honor of a King to him, who, by their own Confession, had not the just
Title, and only proclaiming him who had the right Title, Heir apparent to the
Crown, as in the very Case of In ipsa autem vigilia capta fuit conclusio
differentiae hujusmodi, viz. Quod Dux, and Filii sui, Edvardus Comes Marchiae,
ac Edmundus Comes Rutlandiae, qui ambo discretionis annos attigerant, jurarent
ipsi Regi fidelitatem, quodque ipsum recognoscerent eorum Regem quamdiu ageret
in humanis; id enim Parliamentum ipsum jam decreverat, addendo, de ipsius Regis
consensu, quod quamprimum Rex ille in fata discesserit, licebit dicto Duci,
suisque Haeredibus, coronam Angliae vendicare, and possidere. Hist. Croyl. Ed.
Oxon. p. 550.
Richard Duke of York and Henry the Sixth; and in the Case of Theobaldus
Cantuariensis -- Utrosque demum ad concordiam emollivit, in tantum quod Rex
Juvenem Ducem in filium susceperit adoptivum, and juramenti attestatione Regni
sui constituit Haeredem, Regi tamen honorem debitum. fidemque, dum viveret, Dux
ipse promiserat se conservaturum. Ibid, p. 451. Vide Dunelm. continuat. p. 282.
King Stephen and Henry Duke of Normandy: Not to mention the Treaty of Peace
made afterward for the avoiding the shedding of Christian Blood, Daniel 's
Hist. page 91.
That Henry the First being invested with the Crown, by the Act of the Kingdom,
should enjoy the same during his Life, though the just Title was in Robert.

This Assertion, n. 17. Obj. 3.
That actual Possession makes a Sovereign Lord the King for the time being,
destroys all Hereditary Successions, in which the Heir is the power in being
without farther Act done by him, or passed by the People, or others, and
without actual Possession.

Since it is certain that no person can now claim by a Paternal Authority
uninterrupted from the beginning, Hereditary by virtue of their own Consent and
Compact, or by their own Establishment, that the Crown shall be continued in
such a Line; it therefore is Hereditary, because they have consented and agreed
it should be so. If then all Parties concerned have consented also to a Law
that a King, in quiet Possession of this Government, shall be looked upon, for
th etime being as the Heir; that is, shall be to all intents and purposes, as
much our Sovereign Lord the King, as if he were so: Cook's Instit. par. 3. c.
1. p. 7.
This Law can bear no Contradiction to such an Hereditary Succession, but only
be a wise Provision, that in the interruptions of the Regular Succession,
Justice should never fail, there being by the Law always a King in whose name
the Laws are to be maintained and executed; and therefore they who have the
least acquaintance with our History, must know that though our Kings de facto
were more numerous, before the Union of the two Houses, than those de jure; yet
are they equally placed in the Catalogue of the Hereditary Kings of England,
and Allegiance was sworn to them by their subjects without any Scruple, as well
as to the Kings de jure.

2dly. That the Heir is of Right the Power without farther Act done by him,
than claiming of the Crown, may be granted; but that he is actually the Power
in Being, whilst he is incapable, by being out of Possession, to exercise any
Act belonging to the Supreme Power, is denied. For we find throughout the whole
History of the Kings of England, Vide Knighton Chron. l. 2 c. 5, 8.
That they who had the Right by Proximity of Blood, but wanted Possession, See
the whole Pedigree of them in Bagot's Case 9 Ed. 4. Term. Trin.
were never owned as Kings and Queens of England, as is visible in the Case of
Robert the Eldest Son of the Conqueror, of Maud the Empress of Germany, Prince
Arthur and Elenor his Sister, and of all the Issue of Lionel Duke of Clarence;
who, by the Judgment of the High Court of Parliament, in the Eighth of Richard
the Second, were declared Heirs Apparent to the Crown, in case King Richard
should die without Issue, as he did. On the other hand, they who were Kings de
facto, and not of Right, as unquestionably were King Stephen and King John, Ed
4. 1o c. 1.
and as Henry IV, V and VI. by Act of Parliament were declared to be, were
always reckoned as true Kings of England, and Allegiance was sworn, and paid to
them as such.

An Inferior Magistrate is not to be obeyed or owned as our Superior in
opposition to a Superior Magistrate's Command, n. 18. Obj. 4.
because in such things he has no lawful Call, Warrant or Commission; and for
the same reason a King de facto is not to be owned, or obeyed as our Superior
in opposition to a King de jure, because he cannot be supposed to have a lawful
Call or Warrant to Exercise the Kingly Government.

If an Inferior Magistrate has a Law to warrant his Commands, Superior without
law. Now a King de facto, in quiet Possession, has a Law to warrant his Acting
as our Sovereign Lord the King, and requiring our Faith and true Allegiance ot
him for the time being; he therefore is to be owned and obeyed, as having a
legal Call to the Government for the time being.

Secondly, To give a satisfactory Answer to this, and many Objections of the
like nature, it will be proper to consider what a Call, or a Commission to be
the Governor of any Nation does import; and for the Resolution of this Enquiry
let it be noted,

1. That God does not now, as in the Case of Saul and David, by himself appoint
and nominate the Person who shall sway the Scepter in any Nation of the World.
We see by plain Experience God does not interpose in this extraordinary manner
in the Election or Constitution of Superiors. The Roman Emperors had no such
Appointment, but were Elected by the roman Armies, or chosen and confirmed by
the Senate; whence it must follow, That an immediate Appointment or Designation
of the Person by God, cannot be necessary to render any Prince God's Ordinance.

2. By virtue of God's general Appointment or Ordinance, that all Nations shall
have some Government placed over them, no Individual Person can claim a Right
to be the Higher Power in any Nation more than Others; nor are the People tied
to yield Subjection by it to this Man, rather than to that: As then the former
Designation was more, so this is less than reasonably can be required to make a
Man the Individual Person who is God's Civil Ordinance, in reference to such a
Nation.

3. It cannot be said of any Person or Family at present in the World, That he,
or it claims, or holds the Throne in any Nation by a Right of Fatherhood or
Primogeniture derived from Adam. I know no Prince on Earth who thus pretends
to derive his Pedigree, and am persuaded, that, if any has the Vanity to make
such an Extravagant pretense, he cannot thus make out his Title. It remains
therefore,

4. That Government be conveyed to this or that Individual Person or Family, by
Compact, or Consent, and Choice of the Persons governed, that such a Person or
Family shall Exercise the Government over such a Nation, it therefore must be
that Choice, Consent, or Contract of the Persons to be governed which renders
any person the Ordinance of God to such a Nation; that is, it must be granted
that all the present Governors of any Nation become God's Ordinance to them by
the Consent of the Community. Where therefore any person is invested with the
Supemacy by them to whom God has committed the Choice of a Superior, or by
their consent to have such Persons for their Superiors, there is the Ordinance
of God. And if they do admit that person to the Government, who by
Constitutions and antecedent Compacts has a right to be so, he is to them the
Ordinance of God de jure. If, in this Choice, they deviate substantially from
these Constitutions, he only is the Ordinance of God de facto; but yet he truly
is the Ordinance of God, because he is so by the only means which God has left
for the Investing any Individual Person with that Office. Hence do we find
throughout the History of our Kings, that the Election of, or else a Compact
with the People, has generally been looked upon as a thing proper either to
satisfy the People, or to strengthen their Title to the Crown, thus, v. g.

Of the Conqueror, Dunelm. p. 195. Hoved. par. 1. p. 258.
Simeon Dunelmensis and Hoveden inform us, That Foedus pepigit, he made a
Covenant with his People, and at his Coronation took an Oath to defend the Holy
Church f God, and the Rectors of the same, to govern the Universal People
Subject to him justly, to establish equal Laws, and see them duly executed.
Daniel, p. 36.


William the Second held the Possession of the Crown of England by the Will of
the Kingdom, Ibid. p. 52.
the Succession in Right of Primogeniture being none of his.

Dan. p. 61. Rich. Hugust. p. 310.
Henry the First was invested in the Crown by the Act of the Kingdom. concilio
Communi Baronum Regni Angliae, says the King.

King Stephen declares himself to be chosen King Assensu populi and Cleri in
Regem electum. Malmesb. Hist. Nov. l. 1. f. 101. b. Rich. Hugust. p. 314.
by the consent of the People and the clergy, as he had good reason to do,
having no title at all, says Daniel, but as one of the Blood, by mere Election
advanced to the Crown, p. 69.

King John received the Crown by way of Election, as being chosen by the
States, says Daniel.

The Succession of Edward the Second, says Page 127. Non tam jure haereditario
quam unanimi assensu procerum and Magnatum, Ed. Franc. 1602. P 95.
Walsingham, was not so much by Right of Inheritance, as by the unanimous
Assent of the peers and Great Men.

Edward the Third was Elected Dan. p. 217. Cui electioni consensit populus
universus, id. p. 126.
with the Universal consent of the People, upon his Fathers Resignation.

Edward the Fourth, on his entrance on the Government, makes a solemn
declaration TRussel, p. 179.
of his Right to the Crown of England, challenging it to belong to him by a
double Right; The first as Son and Heir to Richard Duke of York, the Rightful
Heir of the same; The second, as Elected by Authority of Parliament upon King
Henry 's forfeit thereof.

And Henry the Seventh to all his other Titles by Lord Bac. Hist. of H. 7. p.
12.
Marriage, Conquest, and from the House of Lancaster, adds that of the
Authority of Parliament.

This Principle makes Authority and Supreme Power inseparable from Actual
Regency, n. 19. Obj. 5.
or Command, investing him with the Supreme Power, who has it for the time
being; and making him incapable of being the Higher Power, who is out of
Possession, whilst he so continues; which seems clear contrary to the decision
of the Holy Scriptures; for though all Israel chose Absalom to be their King, 2 Samuel xix. 10.
and anointed him over them, though he had, for the time, the Kingdom in
possession; and David fled out of the Land, leaving no Governor behind him; yet
the Power was in David, he was, even then, the Supreme Governor and Higher
Power, to whom Subjection was due: 2 Samuel xx. 2. 2 Chr. xxij. 12.
So he was also when all Israel followed Sheba; And though Athaliah possessed
the Kingdom of Judah six years, Joash was the true King; and so, the Power
ordained of God.

1. This Assertion meddles not with the Right to, Exercise of the Supreme
Authority. Now it is plain to Common sense and experience, that a King out of
Possession, whilst he so continues, cannot do any thing belonging to the Higher
Power to do; nor is he such an Higher Power as St. Paul represents; for he does
not actually bear the Sword of Justice; he does not watch continually for that
very thing; he makes no Judges or Justices of Peace; there are none
Commissionated by him for the punishment of evildoers, or for the praise of
them that do well: He cannot be a terror unto evil works, or a Rewarder of the
good done in that Kingdom in which he has lost all Power. So that if it be
necessary that we should always have a King under whom Justice should be
executed, and the Laws be maintained; and he that is out of Possession, for the
time being, cannot be that King; it plainly seems to follow, that for the said
time he cannto be the Minister of God to us for Good, intended by St. Paul.

Again, it is as plain that the King in quiet possession, for the time being,
actually does or may perform all these particulars, and so, in reference to
them all, may be the Minister of God to us for Good: And why then may he not be
deemed the Ordinance of God for the time being? Or why may not those Laws which
make him the Supreme Power, and the Executor of these Offices for the time
being, be also said to render him the Ordinance of God for the time being?

The Instances produced from the Old Testament have nothing in them parallel to
our case, Hypothesis; as will be evident, if we consider, that the Possession
pleaded for, as being that which creates a Right to our Allegiance for the time
being, and renders any Prince the Ordinance of God for the said time, is,

1. Full and quiet Possession of Kingly Government, without the Contest of any
opposite prince in the said Nation; for he who is not King, can never be our
Sovereign Lord the King.

2dly, Possession given and received by the usual method, viz. The Consent of
all the Representatives of the People Governed, and the Coronation of the
Person Governing, with the usual engagements to the Governed. Which Coronation,
how unnecessary soever it may be to a Prince who has an Hereditary Title to
the Crown, must necessarily be needful to make a King, who is not so by
Birthright, our Sovereign Lord the King for the time being.

For want of these two things, though Oliver had engrossed the whole
Government, yet was he still a mere Usurper, and no legal Governor; and
therefore no Allegiance could, by our Laws, be due unto him, he being no King,
much less a King chosen by the House of Lords, and Crowned in the usual manner.
And by the enjoyment of these things it was that King Stephen, John, and the
three Henrys, though deficient in Title by Birthright, were notwithstanding,
in their respective times, our Kings, and so the Odinance of God for the said
time. This being premised, the impertinency of all the instances produced, will
easily appear. For,

1. As for Absalom, he never had any qiet possession of the Kingdom, nor did
ever David flee out of the Land; for when the Battle was fought, he was in
Mahanaim, a City of Refuge, and a Sacerdotal City; He had with him an Army of
his own Subjects able to cope with Absalom, besides those who in reality were
for David, though they pretended to follow Absalom.

2dly, Sheba was never Anointed, or placed on the Throne; he never had
Possession, or any deliberate Consent of the ten Tribes; for he was presently
pursued, 2 Samuel xx. 14.
not only by the Men of Judah, but of Israel also.

3dly, That Athaliah ever ruled by the consent and approbation of the People of
Judah, is not evident from the Sacred Records; perhaps she did it only by mere
force and violence, 2 Chr. xxij 9. xxiij. 3.
because the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the Kingdom; or
because they knew of noen of the Seed-Royal that survived.

Moreover, in all these instances there was an express Law or Declaration of
the Will of God against all these pretenders: For Absalom and Sheba rebelled
against that David whom the Lord had expressly chosen to seed Jacob his Chosen,
Ps. lxxviij. 71.
and Israel his Inheritance: Athaliah was excluded by that Declaration,
Promise, Oath of God, whereby he had engaged that David's Kingdom should be
established for ever, Ps. lxxxix. 33, 34, 35. 2 Samuel vij. 16.
and that there should not want a man to sit upon his Throne. Whence having
found a Son of Ahaziah, the Priests and People with one voice cry out, The
King's Son shall Reign, 2 Chr. xxiij. 3
as the Lord has said of the Sons of David. Now though it is granted that no
man can be God's Ordinance against his own immediate and express Appointment of
another individual person so to be; this hinders not, but where there is a Law
to make it so, where the same ways are used which convey a good Title, and
where the exercise of the Government is conveyed by them whom God has
entrusted with the designation of the Individual Governor; that Governor may
exercise the Supreme Power for the time being, even when the Right is in
another, or may at least be deemed God's Ordinance in so doing.

For whereas it is said that Civil Magistracy is by the Law of Nature; de
facto, and so is King in prejudice to, and violation of another Right, cannot
be a Magistrate by the Law of Nature, but against it; and so his exercise of
that Authority is contrary to the Law of Nature.

I Answer, Magistracy is only by the Law of Nature, because some government is
so; not because this Individual Governor is so. If therefore Government may
equally proceed under a King de facto, as de jure; they may be equally by the
Law of Nature, because those Acts of Government, viz. the punishing Offenders,
the protecting of the Innocent, and whatsoever else is of the Law of Nature;
because essential to Government which is so, may equally be performed by both.

For a Conclusion of this Answer, and this Section with it, it may deserve to
be considered, That in these and all other cases of such Popular Elections, and
Revolts left on Record in the Old Testament, we find not any person punished
afterward as Rebels for siding with the opposite Party against their Rightful
King; None that followed Adonijah, and proclaimed him King; none of the ten
Tribes who Anointed Absalom, or followed after Sheba; none who submitted to
Athaliah. To which add a like Observation out of Daniel's History, In the Life
of Hen. 3. p. 181.
viz. It is worthy the Note, that we find no execution of blood, except in open
battle, in all these combustions; nor any Nobleman to die on a Scaffold, either
in this King's Reign, or any other, since William the First, which is now
almost Three hundred years.

SECT. III.
NOW as the strength of this Argument seems to me greater than is that of many
others which are produced in this Cause, so are there many singular advantages
which it has above them. For instance:

First, Whereas, it is said, n. 1.
That we cannot take this Oath upon the Grounds which commonly are offered to
move us so to do, without condemning the Doctrine of Non-resistance, allowing
Subjects, in some cases, a Power to Depose their Prince; asserting, that our
Allegiance to him may cease even whilst he does continue to Govern, or to sway
the Scepter; and so we cannot, upon those Motives, comply with the Act
enjoining us to take it, without condemning our ancient and avowed Doctrines,
our Subscriptions to our Homilies and Canons, if not the Doctrine of the
Ancient Church, and that which once was counted the Glory of the Church of
England; and consequently we cannot do it on those Principles, without the
scandal of Hypocrisy and Mutability; and so of being Ecclesiastical
Weathercocks, that turn with every wind that blows; and Men of such flexible
Consciences, as will permit us to swear backwards and forwards, or any ways for
our interest; which scandal would cause ur Persons to be despised, and our
Doctrine not to be regarded. Whereas, I say, some of the other Grounds of
taking the Oath of Fealty and Allegiance to King William seem to subject us to
these and many other inconveniences, this way entirely avoids them all. For,

1. We may still honestly declare, as do our Statutes, n. 2. 3. Jam. 1. c. 1.
Can. 36.60. Can. 1. 1640.
our Canons, and our Convocations, That the King's Highness is the only Supreme
Governor of this Realm, and of all other his Dominions and Countries; That the
Kingly Authority within his Dominions and Countries is immediately, and after
God, Chief and Supreme; and that all Subjects by divine Law stand bound to
yield all Faith and Obedience to it above all Earthly Power whatsoever. For
this Doctrine does not in the least diminish any Privileges, or meddle with any
Prerogatives of our Sovereign Lord the King, but only tells us who, for the
time being, is that Sovereign Lord to whom these Prerogatives belong.

2. n. 3.
We may still honestly declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever to take up Arms against the King; Stat. Car. 2 A. 14. cap. 2.12.
Car. 2. cap. 10.
And that by the undoubted fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers
of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor the People
collectively or representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever had, have,
has, or ought to have any coercive Power over the Kings of this Realm. And
with our Convocation still assert, A. D. 1640. Can. 1.
That for Subjects to bear Arms against their King, offensive or defensive,
upon any pretense whatsoever, is at the least to resist the Powers which are
ordained of God. We may still subscribe these Doctrines of our Homilies as
wholesome and godly Doctrines, and Doctrines to be embraced by all men; 2d Par.
of the Sermon. of Obed. p. 72.
That it is not lawful for Subjects and Inferiors in any case to resist and
stand against Superior Powers; that Christ has taught us plainly, that even
the wicked Rulers have their Power and Authority from God; and therefore it is
not lawful for their Subjects to withstand them, Although they do abuse their
Power; That if they would command us to do any thing contrary to God's
Commandments, in that case we may not in any wise withstand them violently, P.
74, 75.
or rebel against Rulers, or make any Insurrection, Sedition or Tumults, either
by force of Arms or otherwise, Against the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his
Officers, but we must in such case patiently suffer all wrongs and injuries,
referring the Judgment of our Cause only to God. Hem. of Rebel. Par. 2. p. 301.
And that though Multitudes, not only of the Rude and Rascal Commons, but
sometimes also Men of great Wit, Nobility, and Authority, have moved Rebellions
against their lawful Princes (whereas true Nobility should most abhor such
villainies,) though they should pretend sundry Causes; as the Redress of the
Commonwealth (which Rebellion, of all other mischiefs, does most destroy,) or
Reformation of Religion (whereas Rebellion is most of all against true
Religion,) yet were the multitude of the Rebels never so great, the Captains
never so noble, politic, and witty, the pretenses feigned to be never so good
and holy; yet the speedy overthrow of all Rebels, of what number, state, or
condition soever they were, or what color and cause soever they pretend, is,
and ever has been such, that God thereby does show, that He allows neither
the dignity of any person, nor the multitude of any people, nor the weight of
any cause as sufficient, for the which Subjects may move Rebellion against
their Prince. For this Doctrine only adds to these Particulars this, That the
King Regnant in possession is the King whom we may not resist in any case.

3. We are not obliged for the justification of our selves, n. 4.
and of our Doctrine, to appeal from the Homilies themselves, to those who
composed or subscribed them, to prove their Actions toward others, and the
Sayings of one or two of them elsewhere, were inconsistent with the plain
import of the words which they subscribed and taught as good and wholesome
Doctrine, when it served to defend the Protestants against the Insurrections of
the Romanists, the chief Adversaries of that Doctrine which England knew of in
those times; or to insinuate, to their disparagement, that they held this to be
good Doctrine, when it was useful to secure them against the Romanists; but
that the Doctrine of the Lawfulness of Resistance was as good when it was
useful to preserve the Protestants in England, or beyond the Seas, against the
Romanists: But can fairly account for that assistance which they gave to their
oppressed Brethren from the difference betwixt the constitution of their
Government, and ours; this being one of the chief Laws by which the liberty of
the Netherlands was long maintained and justified.

If any Prince has disturbed the State of the Republic either by violence,
wrong dealing, or treachery, Oration of the Lawfulness of the Netherlandish
War, p. 14.
then all the States and Burghers may deny him Obedience, and shall be free,
and discharged of their Oaths; they shall appoint a Chief in his place, until
he be reduced to a better Mind, and more easy Government. From the Observation
of Dr. Hammond out of Bodinus, L. 2. de Rep. c. 5.
That in France, Spain, England and Scotland, Reges sine controversia jura
Majestatis habent per se: singulis civibus, nec universis fas est summi
principis vitam, famam aut fortunas in discrimen vocare, sive vi, sive judicio
constituto id fiat; Their Kings have all the Rights of Majesty within
themselves; and it is not lawful for any of, or all their Subjects to bring
their Lives, Fame, or Fortunes into jeopardy, either by force, or way of
justice. But as for the Emperor of Germany, Charles the Fifth, Tyrannide cives
ad Rempublicam oppressit, cum jura Majestatis non haberet; Divin. Dial. par. 2.
p. 81.
He, by his Tyranny over his Subjects, when he had not the Rights of Majesty,
forced them to resolve themselves into a Commonwealth. And from that of Dr.
More, That Lutherus semper docuerat, Magistratui non esse resi stendum, and
extabat ejus de hac re libellus; cum autem in hac deliberatione periti juris
docerent legibus esse permissum resistere nonnunquam, and nunc in eum (asum de
quo leges inter alia mentionem faciant, rem esse deductam ostenderent, Lutherus
ingenue profitetur se nescivisse hoc licere. Sleid. Comment. l. 8. p. 195.
Luther would never assent to the Consederacy of defensive Wars at Smalcald,
till he was thoroughly instructed by the learned in the Law touching the
Constitution of the Empire of Germany, that by the Magna Charta of that Empire
the Princes of the Empire are invested with such Rights, as if they be violated
by the Emperor; it is lawful for them to take Arms and resist, Sine
Rebellionis, and insidelitatis crimine, Without the Crime of Rebellion and
Unfaithfulness; and that the Emperor had viovated those Rights: Much less are
we constrained to fly to such Assertions as these, viz. The Homilies of
Obedience do no where teach Submission to lawless Violence, Mr. J. p. 73.
but only to lawful Authority; and the Homilies against Rebellin speak not one
word of submitting to mauthoritative or lawless Violence. Sermon. of Obed. Par.
2. p. 72. of Reb. p. 277.
Whence it must follow, that Princes have lawful Authority to be sharp and
rigorous, and wrong doers; to abuse their power; Page 74, 75. Hom. of Rebel. p.
287, 288.
to do all wrongs and injuries to them who will not obey them against God's
Commandments; to be mortal Enemies, seeking the Lives of their Subjects; to be
naughty, cruel Princes; Princes that be to their good Subjects mortal Enemies;
Princes that are hurtful, or like to be hurtful to the Commonwealth: For
whosoever reads those Homilies honestly and carefully, will find in them almost
as many Passages as Pages requiring Obedience to such Princes.

4. n. 5.
We may still with our Forefathers condemn those Romish Doctrines which ascribe
unto the Pope a power of crubing the deposing Princes, Bish. Morton's discovery
of the Romans Doctrine in the Case of Conspiracy and Rebellion, p 9, 15, 19, 37.
in case of Heresy, perverting of Faith, and persecution of their Catholic
Subjects, which pronounce it lawful for Catholioks to break Faith with
Heretics; to do evil that good may come; to use fraud, falsehood, and
injustice, treachery, and dissimulation, for the benefit of holy Church; we
may, as they have done before us, condemn those Principles as Rebellious, which
set up a Democratical or Monarchical Power of People, or of Pope over Princes;
which dissolve the Oath of Obedience to Princes; which countenance the
violating Faith with men of diverse Religions; which allow the Doctrine of
forcible Deposing of Princes from their Thrones. I say, We may still do all
this without fear of having that of the Apostle retorted on us; Thou art
inexcusable, O Man, Romans ij. 1, 3.
whosoever thou art that judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that judge, do the same things. And think
thou this, O Man, that judge them who do such things, and do the same, that
thou shall escape the judgment of God. For we by taking of the Oath of Fidelity
and Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary upon this Principle, approve of
no Democratical Power over our Sovereign Lord the King: No forcible deposing of
Princes from their Thrones; but, without farther enquiry after their Right, if
we find them settled by the Naitons Representatives in quiet Possession of the
Throne, give them Faith, and that Allegiance which our Laws have made due to
every King in the Possession of the Realm. And lastly, we allow of no other
Absolution from our former Oaths than that which Casuists of all Persuasions do
admit of; viz. By the Cessation of the matter of our Oath, King James now
ceasing to be King in Possession, and so in the Law Sense, to be our King.

5thly. n. 6.
We may also retain our old Sense and Exposition of St. Paul and Peter, viz.
That the present Powers which by the Law are such, be they such as duly use, or
do abuse the Power committed to them; such as, according to their Duty, are the
Ministers of God for good: Or, such as prove eventually the Encouragers of evil
Doers, are still the Ordinance of God; and therefore he that does resist them
shall receive to himself Damnation, and are not by our Principles obliged to
restrain their words unto such Princes as are in Fact as well as Duty, the
Ministers of God for good; but only to such Princes, as, by the Tenor of our
Law, become our Sovereign Lords, however they demean themselves in the Exercise
of the Government; and so we are not concerned in these Objections against the
other Interpretation.

1. That it rather seems to make the Discourse of these Apostles an Exemption
from Subjection and Obedience to the then present Powers, and an allowance to
them, than any Obligation to be subject and obedient to them, they being not in
Fact as well as Duty the Ministers of God for good; but most unnaturally and
barbarously Cruel, of a most savage, bloody Temper, as is recorded in the Roman
Histories touching Tiberius, Claudius, Caligula and Nero; or if such persons
were to be obeyed without Resistance, as being the Ministers of God for good,
who then may be resisted for not being so?

2. It plainly seems to lay upon the Blessed Apostles the imputation of
Dissimulation, and acting not according to that Simplicity and Plainness as
might have reasonably been expected from the Discpensers of the Gospel; for
without any limitation or exception, they require every Christian Soul to be
subject to the Higher Powers for Conscience sake, and, upon pain of Damnation,
never to resist them: They declared to the Heathen World, That Christianity
required all its Professors, how ill soever they were treated, how cruelly
soever they were persecuted, how wrongfully soever they did suffer from them,
to suffer with the greatest patience, and never to take up the Sword for their
Defense against them, but after the Example of their Lord, when they thus
suffer, not to revile and threaten, and much less to resist their Persecutors,
but only to commit their Cause to him that judges Righteously. Now if, after
all these Declarations, they indeed allowed all Christians to resist and take
up Arms against their Governors, when they conceived them guilty of Tyrannical
abuse of Power; when they became a terror to good Works, and not to Evil only;
when they did not act according to Justice, or established Laws, or for the
Good and Welfare of the Kingdom, but the contrary; surely they cannot be
excused from a semblance of Deceit, and of imposing on the Heathen World.

3. It plainly seems to make them guilty of the Murder of those many
Christians, who, when they declared themselves Vide Tertull. Ap. c. 37. ad
Scap. c. 5. Cypr. Ep. ad Deem. r. Buseb. l. 8. c. 1, 4. Aust. de Civ. Dei l.
22. c. 6.
sufficient both for strength and number to resist and overcome their
Persecutors, at the same time declared, they durst not do it, because it was
forbidden by the Christian Laws.

And whereas against our Interpretation of the words it may be objected, n. 7.


First, Usurpers, if they can once obtain quiet Possession, and the consent of
the Nobility and of the Commons, must also be the Ordinance of God for the time
being.

This I confess is true; Scripture, which Antiquity, which Reason, and the Law
of this our Nation does allow and justify. For of those wicked Enperors
forementioned, it is that St. Paul says, They are the Ministers of God to thee
for good; to them it is St. Peter does require Subjection, 1 Pet. ij. 14.
as to men sent for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well. And even of the Power of Pilate to condemn our Savior, Christ
does himself confess, That it was given him from above. Joh. xix. 11.
And Reason says the same; for, even under wicked Magistrates Justice is
executed, Offenders against the Lives and Lively-hoods of others punished, and
Peace preserved; and from their Government it is that we are kept from the
Insolences of Thieves and Robbers, from barbarous Assassinations, and all the
miseries of Anarchy. For, take away the Higher Powers, says St. Chrysostom,
and all goes to wreck, Chrysostom. in Romans Hom 23. Tom. 3. p. 191.
neither will City, nor Country, nor Family, nor Assembly, nor ought else
stand, the stronger will devour the weaker, and all things will be turned
upside down. So that we do in some measure receive that good from the most
wicked and depraved Governors, which without Government we could not have.
Accordingly the ancient Christians say in General of those Kings who were not
very good, at least many of them, in their times, That they are the Ordinance
of God, That by his command Kings are Ordained, Theoph. ad Autol. l. 1. p. 76.
That they were appointed by God, That they received their Government from
above; That the Emperor derives his Government from him from whom he does
receive his breath; Iren. l. 5. c. 24. Tertull. Apol. c. 30, 33. ad Scap. c. 2.
That he is the Man whom God chooses, and therefore must be loved by
Christians, who know he is appointed by God, and that he makes them Governors
over the Nations. Legate. pro Christianis. Apud Eus. H. Eccl. l. 7. c. 11. Apud
Athanas. Ep. ad Solit. Vit. agentes.
Athenagoras says of Aurelius and Commodus, You have received the Kingdom from
above. Dionysius of Alexandria, of Valerianus and Gallienus, God has committed
the Kingdom to you. Hosius of Constantius, who labored might and main to
introduce the Arian Heresy into the Church, against those Imperial Laws which
had established the Nicence Faith, That God had given to him the Empire.
Paulinus of Trier, Lucifer of Calaris, Eusebius of Vercelli, and Dionysius of
Millain, That God gave to him the Kingdom. Athanasius, Apol. ad Constant. De
Civ. Dei l. 5. c. 21.
That God by his Word had given the Kingdom to his Servant Constantius. He that
gave the Government to Marius, says St. Austin, gave it to Caesar; he who gave
it to Augustus, gave it also to Nero; he who gave it to the Vespasians most
sweet Emperors, gave it also to the most cruel Domitian; and he who gave it to
that most Christian Prince Cnstantine, gave it to Julian the Apostate. Tho he
be wicked, abominably wicked; though he commit Ten thousand Evils, and do the
worst of mischiefs to us, says St. Chrysostom, yet he is a King, a Governor,
one to whom the Government is committed, and therefore to be reverenced, and
not to be despised for his wickedness, but revered for his Dignity.

But yet it may be said, n. 8.
How true soever this may be of an evil King, who has a lawful Title to his
Government, it seems strange and incongruous to assert, That he who is only
King de facto, and so can only Exercise that Government which does of Right
belong unto another, should be the Ordinance of God; and it is liable to these
great Objections and Absurdities.

1st. That which renders a man an Usurper of another Man's Right, without due
Title or Admission to the Exercise of that Right, can never render him the
Ordinance of God to which I owe Subjection and Allegiance; but that which makes
him only King de facto, in opposition to a King de jure, makes him an Usurper
of another Man's Right, without due Title or Admission to the Exercise of that
Right.

2dly. The Precept: Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers cannot agree
to him who is only King de facto in opposition to him that is King de jure; for
this Subjection does not only signify a Passive Obedience, or Non-Resistance,
but an active Execution and Observation of all his lawful Commands, the
Contribution of Taxes, to his Support and Maintenance, our Assistance and
Endeavors to keep him in his Station by our Arms, Purse; our Counsel and our
Prayers; our Love, Reverence and Honor of him: In a word, our Fidelity and
Allegiance to him against all others. Now can all this be due to a King de
facto in opposition to him whose Right it is.

3dly. It is Damnation to resist the Power ordained of God in favor of any
other person; but can it be Damnation to resist him who is only King de facto,
in Favor of a King de jure, to whom assistance must be due de jure? If so,
then what just War can he made for the Recovery of his Right? or, why did
Jehoiada not only Depose, but cause Athaliah to be Murdered for the sake of
Joash?

4thly. The Power is the Minister of God, or one Commissionated and Deputed by
him, for the same Dependence that a Subordinate Magistrate has upon his
Sovereign for becoming his Minister, the same has a Soreign Magistrate upon
God for being his Minister; but can any one be Deputed or Commissionated by God
to take away another Man's Right, or wrongfully to detain it?

5thly. By this Assertion no King de facto, or in quiet possession can be an
unjust Possessor, or an unlawful occupant of the Throne; for he that is so in,
as to be God's Ordinance; i. e. Commissionated and Deputed by him to be the
Higher Power, must needs be rightly in, and Authorized to execute the
Government.

These, n. 9.
I confess, seem to be great Absurdities at the first view, our Argument; but
yet, I hope, their force may be sufficiently abated by these Considerations
following.

1. That some of these Arguments seem with an equal strength to prove, that
wicked Kings are not, and cannot be the Higher Powers, or, the Ordinance of
God, as that Kings in possession without Right, can never be so.

2. That it is plain to common Sense, and the Experience of Men, that a King
out of Possession, whilst he is so, exercises none of the Characters and
Offices ascribed by St. Paul to the Higher Powers, and that the King de facto
does, or may exercise them all.

3. That he who in our Case is King Regnant in Poessession is not to be deemed
an Usurper in the Law Sense and Acceptance of the Word.

4. That by the difference which must be put betwixt him and a mere Usurper,
all the forementioned Objections may be solved. And,

First, Some of these Arguments seem with an equal strength to prove what most
undoubtedly is false, viz. That Princes acting wrongfully and injuriously
toward their Subjects cannot be the Higher Powers; for it is certain they can
derive no power from God, but for the good of Man. They can have no Commission,
Title or Authority from him to hurt the Innocent, to pervert Judgment, or to do
Evil to his People; they therefore do exert this Power without due Title or
Commission from God, they usurp upon the Rights of other Men; for every Subject
has a right to Justice, every innocent person to Protection from suffering hurt
or violence. They cannot be Commissionated or Deputed by God to do these
things; for then they must have Authority from God to do them, and so they must
be rightly done: And yet even in these Cases we must suffer patiently, and be
thus subject for Conscience toward God, and cannot forcibly resist them
without the peril of Damnation, which we only can incurr, because we do resist
the Higher Powers. They therefore in these Actions are at once the Power, and
the Abusers of the Power, yea the Usurpers of a Power which belongs not to
them; and therefore even of the Power of Pilate to condemn the blessed Jesus
our Lord speaks thus: Thou could have no Power over me, Joh. xix. 11.
unless it were given thee from above. And when Peter drew his Sword in the
defense of his Innocence against men Commissionated by an Illegal High Priest,
he says unto him, Mat. xxvi. 52.
Put up thy Sword into its place, for all that take the Sword shall perish by
it. Moreover, if Subjection signifies active Subjection to their Administration
of the Government, if it require our Arms, Purse, Counsels, Prayers, it is
certain this cannot lawfully be afforded to strengthen and assist them in these
Evil Actions; but that, in all these Cases, we may both Counsel, and pray
against their Wickedness, and though we may not even then lift up our hands
against them, we may hold them down.

Secondly, n. 17.
In Answer to the Fifth Objection in the Second Section I have proved, that it
is plain to common Sense, that a King out of Possession, whilst he is so,
cannot do any thing belonging to the Higher Powers to do, and that a King de
facto in Possession may perform all things of that Nature.

Thirdly, I add, That King William and Queen Mary being King and Queen by the
consent of the Nobility and Commons, the Representatives of the Kingdom, cannot
be looked upon as mere Usurpers for the Reason given in Bagot's Case concerning
Henry the Sixth, That he was not to be deemed an Usurper, because the Crown had
been entailed on him by Act of Parliament. Which may be proved,

Secondly, From the nature of a mere Usurper or Possessor, Gre. p. 295.
viz. That he is one who is in the place of Power without any Call, Consent, or
Constitution of the People; or, that he is one that is in merely by his own
Act: Whereas King William and Queen Mary are not in the place of Power merely
by their own Acts, but by the Call, Consent, and Constitution of the Nobility
and People.

Thirdly, From the Nature and the Essentials of Government. For what does
constitute it but the Subjection of the governed Party, or the Resignation of
themselves, their wills, abilities or powers to the Rule and Arbitration of
some other? What Title has any Conqueror to another Man's Subjects without
this? Or what King now in Being can claim a Right unto his Kingdom upon any
other Title? What are the motives to Government but the preservation of Peace
and Order, and the prevention of Injuries and Wrongs? When then there is, after
mature deliberation had, such an actual Designation of the whole Community,
there is Government conveyed in that very way in which it always was, since
paternal Government ceased, communicated; and in which alone it can be properly
conveyed: And so, there is no Usurpation of it in respect of him who thus
receives it, whatever irregularities may be in their Actions who do thus
conferr it.

Lastly, I add, That by due observation of the difference which must be put
betwixt Usurpers, and our present King and Queen; and the two Observations
made, all the forementioned Objections may be solved. For,

First, As we compared them before with the Case of a King injurious to his
Subjects, and found them almost as strong against his being the Higher Power,
so let us again compare them with the Case of a King injurious to his fellow
King, injustly Invading, and so entirely Conquering his Dominions, and seizing
on them for himself. Did not the beginning of this Action constitute him an
injurious Person, when he takes upon him the Government thus got? does he not
take away another Man's Right? and must he not then wrongfully detain it? is
not the person, thus wrongfully Excluded, King de jure? may he not justly wage
War for the Recovery of his Right? but yet do not all Persons own that it is not
only lawful, but even necessary for the People, after such Conquest, to consent
to take the Conqueror for their Governor, to yield Allegiance to him; and that
by doing so, they render him the Higher Power, and the Ordinance of God? And
yet all the forementioned Objections are as strong against him, as any other
unjust Possessor of the Throne.

Moreover, by a particular consideration of them, it will be evident, that they
partly have received a sufficient Answer, and that it is easy from the
Premises, to give a full Solution to them. To reassume them therefore in their
order, it is Objected,

That which renders a Man an Usurper of another Man's Right, n. 10. Obj. 1.
without due Title or Admission to the Exercise of that Right, can never render
him the Ordinance of God, to which I owe Subjection and Allegiance; but that
which makes any person King de facto only, in opposition to a King de jure,
makes himan Usurper of another Man's right without due Title or Admission to
the exercise of that Right, Ergo.

To this I Answer, That a due Title may be either such, de facto, or an unjust
Conqueror can have no due Title against a King de jure: Or, 2dly, that may be
styled a due Title which is legal, or allowed of by the Law, and which is
conferred with those Formalities of Law, and with those usual Ceremonies and
Rites which customarily are observed in the most Regular Collations of those
Titles. A Title just, in the first sense, cannot be necessary to render a
Prince the Ordinance of God, or any other Secular and Ecclesiastical person
capable of being owned as such; for then none of the jewish High Priests, in
the times of our Savior, could have been owned as God's Ordinance, they having
seldom obtained that Office by due means; nor having it conferred upon them
without the injury of him, to whom by God's direction it belonged for life,
viz. The eldest Son of the house of Aaron; for the Procurator of Judea made
that Office Annual; it was usually bought and sold: Vide Ham. in Luc. 3. not c.
Josephus reckons no less than twenty eight of these irregular Advancements to
that Dignity; and yet St. Paul owns one of these very persons as the Ruler of
the People: Act. xxiij. 5.
Our Lord owns those who were sent by their Authority as men who could not be
resisted lawfully. Matt. xxvj. 52. Joh. xi. 49, 51.
The Holy Ghost does own them as High Priests, and even assisted one of the
worst of them to prophecy whilst he held the Office: Nor does our Lord himself
deny his Right unto that Title. Moreover, those Bishops which received their
Power and Investiture from those Popes who wrested it from Kings, and others
who had right to nominate, and to elect them, could not, upon this supposition,
be God's Ordinance, nor as such obeyed in prejudice to the Rights of kings, and
these Electors. 3dly, No Conqueror of a Rightful king could be God's Ordinance,
notwithstanding any consent afterward obtained from the People. 4thly, The
four great Monarohies could not be the Ordinance of God with respect to the
greatest part of their Dominions, which they obtained only by the Sword. 5thly,
Most of the Roman Emperors in the Primitive Times could not be truly styled
God's Ordinance, as being advanced to the Imperial Throne, rather by the
Arbitrary choice of the Army, than the free Antecedent choice of the Senate.
Then, lastly, had we of this Nation no Ordinance of God in being, during the
Reigns of Henry the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth, that is, for the space of sixty
years, they being accounted, and in one of our Acts of Parliament often styled
Kings in Deed, 1. Edw. 4.
and not of Right.

And if a due Title, in the Second sense, be sufficient to render a person the
Ordinance of God; then, be it supposed, though not granted, that King William
and Queen Mary are only King and Queen de facto, yet may they have a due Title,
because they have a legal Title from those Laws which declare the King and
Queen, for the time being, to be our Sovereigns within the parvien of the
Statute. The Government also being conferred upon them by consent of the
Nobility and Commons, representing all the Coverned, they being Crowned King
and Queen after the usual manner; and so having the Government conferred upon
them with those Formalities of Law, and with those usual Ceremonies and Rites
which customarily are observed in Collating of it.

The Precept; n. 11. Obj. 2.
Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, cannot agree to him who is
only King de facto, in opposition to him who is King de jure; for this
Subjection does not only signify a passive Obedience, or Non-resistance, but
an active Execution and Observation of all his lawful Commands; the
Contribution of Taxes to his support and maintenance; our Assistance and
Endeavors to keep him in his Station by our Arms, Purse; our Counsel and our
Prayers; our Love, Reverence, and Honor of Flim: In a word, our Fidelity and
Allegiance to Him against all others. Now can all this be due to a King de
facto, in opposition to him whose Right it is?

1. Our Law seems very plainly to require most of this to a King de facto, for
the time being; as making it our duty, true and faithful Service and
Allegiance, and that because, for the time being, he is our Sovereign Lord the
King, and so the Higher Power, to which we are to be subject for the time
being; and if he may be the Ordinance of God, as I have showed he is, most of
the things here said to be included in Subjection, must be due unto him by St.
Paul's Injunction.

2hly, I have showed already, that a King out of Possession, while he continues
so to be, cannot do any thing required by the Office of the Higher Power; he
cannot bear the Sword of Justice; he can Commission none to punish evil doers,
or reward the Good; he cannot be the Minister of God to us for good: And yet it
is on these accounts that St. Paul lays a necessity of Subjection on us, Not
only for Wrath, but Conscience sake; and that he tells us we are to pay
tribute, because he is continually attending on these things.

I have also showed, that from a King, de facto, in full and peaceable
Possession of the Government, we do or may enjoy all these benefits, and in all
these particulars; He may be unto us the Minister of God for good, and that
from Him alone it is we can receive actual Protection, and all the benefits of
Government, (if therefore it be necessary that we should always have a King
under whom Justice should be executed, and the Laws have their course, it seems
as necessary that the King, for the time being, should be received as our King;
if Protection does require Allegiance, and we, for the time being, do receive
it only from him, it seems as evident, that for the time being, we should yield
it only to Him.) If then the King, de jure, out of Possession, can be to no
intents and purposes the Minister of God to us for good, and the King, de
facto, may be so to all the said intents and purposes; then may he also be the
Higher Power, and the Ordinance of God for the time being. In a word, the Lord
Chief Justice Coke expressly says, Instit. par. 3. p. 7.
That by the Law there is always a King in whose name the Laws are to be
maintained and executed, otherwise Justice should fail; and if so, then by the
Law the King Regnant must be our King, there being no other in whose name the
Laws can be maintained and executed, and the failure of Justice be prevented:
And if he be the Higher Power, he must also be that Ordinance of God, for the
time being, to which we owe the Duties mentioned in the Objection.

3dly, As for the first of these Duties, An active execution and observation of
all the lawful Commands of the King Regnant for the time being, it admits no
real Ground of Scruple; for lawful Commands may lawfully be obeyed.

The Contribution of Taxes to his support and maintenance, is by St. Paul
declared to be due, (...), for this very cause; that he attends continually
upon the Government, and therefore due to him that does so.

Our Assistance to promote the welfare of the Government we are under, by our
Prayers and Counsels, seems plainly to be our duty by virtue of that Command
which God gave to his own People, and the continuance of the Reason of it; Seek
the peace of the City, Jer. xxix. 7.
whither I have caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord
for it; for in the peace thereof you shall have peace; and of that Apostolical
Injunction, That prayers, 1 Timothy ij. 1, 2.
and supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all that
are in Authority, or eminent Place.

As for our endeavors to keep them in their Station by our Arms, it only can
be so far our duty as it is lawful so to do: Nor do I find St. Paul inculcating
it as any part of our Subjection to the Higher Powers; nor does our Law, since
the Cessation of the Tenure of Knights. Service require it personally of all
Subjects. At least we of the Clergy cannot be concerned in it, because we by so
many Statutes are exempted from bearing Arms.

And, lastly, as for bearing Faith and true Allegiance, you see our Law does
plainly and expressly make it due unto a King de facto. And so I cannot fee why
all these Duties may not, as far as we can be concerned in them, be paid to
such a King for the time being.

It is damnation to resist the Power ordained of God in favor of any other
person; n. 12. Obj. 3.
but can it be damnation to resist him who is only King de facto, in favor of
a King de jure? if 2o, then what just War can be made for the Recovery of his
Right? or why did Jehoiada not only depose, but even cause Athaliah to be
murdered for the sake of Joash.

1. The word which we translate Damnation, Judgment. Now, by our Law, Treason
may be committed against a King de facto, and that is punishable by the
Judgment of Death; and if this Treason be an offense against the natural
Allegiance due to the King de facto, as all Treasons are, and I do thus offend
by levying War against the King for the time being, in this Realm, by being
adherent to his Enemies, or giving Aid unto them, I must be guilty of it by
doing this in favor of a King de jure. It therefore may be judgment to resist
the King de facto, in favor of the King de jure, i. e. it may be an Offense
which, by the Law, will render me obnoxious to judgment. If the King de jure,
at his return to exercise the Government, may punish me for any Treasonable
action done against the King de facto, and consequently for resisting such a
King in favor of himself, it must be an Offense deserving Judgment, according
to our Law, thus to resist the King de facto, in favor of the King de jure.

Nor does it follow hence, that the King de jure, can make no just War for the
Recovery of his Right; for this he may do by the Assistance of his Allies, by
Foreign Aids, or by those Subjects who have still adhered to him, or will
repair unto him; only they cannot do it who have received Protection, and lived
for a time in quiet subjection to another Government. If therefore Men will act
up to their principle, That their Allegiance is still due to King James, they
must immediately go out of the Realm, and repair thither where they alone can
pay it to him. If they think it unlawful to own any Allegiance due to King
William, they must expect no Protection, seek for no Justice from him, pay no
Taxes to him; for if they repair to him, as the Avenger of any evil done to
them, or as the Minister of Justice; if they pay him any Taxes, they thereby
virtually own him as the Higher Power, seeing these things are only due unto
him, and can be expected from him, because he is the Higher Power, and you are
his Subjects.

To the Case of Athaliah I have Answered before;. 2. n. 17.
and shall now only add, That if she obtained any consent from the People, it
was by reason of their ignorance that she had any Competitor, or that any of
the Sons of Ahaziah were alive; and that she could not have the Throne of Judah
whilst any of the Seed-Royal lived, by reason of God's manifest declaration to
the contrary; and therefore when the King's Son was discovered, the Priests,
the Levites, and the Chief of Israel do presently cry out, 2 Chr. xxiij. 3.
Behold the King's Son shall Reign, as the Lord has said of the house of
David: Here therefore was the immediate Declaration, the Promise, and the Oath
of God against her; which whosoever in our case can show, will make this
instance pertinent. Moreover, she who gained consent only on supposition, that
there was none of that Seed of David left, of whom God had expressly said, That
they should sit upon the Throne, could only be supposed to have their consent
so long as no such Seed appeared.

The Power is the Minister of God, n. 13. Obj. 4.
or one commissionated and Deputed by him, for the same dependence that a
Subordinate Magistrate has upon his Sovereign for becoming his Minister; the
same has a Sovereign Prince upon God for being his Minister: But can any one
be Deputed or Commissionated by God to take away another Man's right, or
wrongfully to detain it?

That the Supreme Magistrate is Commissionated by God to be his Minister,
Prince's Minister, is true; but there is a signal difference as to the manner
of conveying this Commission; for the Inferior Officer is personally named by
some of his Superiors, and acts by virtue of a particular Grant or Instrument
of his Superior conveying that Office to him, or imposing it upon him by name;
whereas since the times of the Jewish Kings, no man can pretend any such Title
to be the Supreme Power in any Kingdom; God never personally naming now, or
immediately declaring the Person who is to preside in any Kingdom, but leaving
this to be done by the governed, according to Prudential Rules, or according to
the Constitutions they have made among themselves; here therefore may be great
fault committed by the Governed, in varying from the form of Government
prescribed by their Constitutions, or from the Person they by those
Constitutions were obliged to admit unto the Government; and yet the Person
they do pitch upon to Govern after such a form may be the Ordinance of God, as
being pitched upon by them to whom his Providence thought fit to leave the
management of this affair; and though their irregular Proceedings can justify
no man in taking or detaining what is another Man's right, especially if he in
conscience be convinced that it is so; yet may it render him the Ordinance of
God who exercises the Government thus devolved upon him, because he is the
Minister of God by the same way and method by which the justest Title is
conferred.

By this Assertion no King, de facto, n. 14. Obj. 5.
thus put in quiet possession of the Government, can be an unjust Possessor, or
an unlawful Occupant of the Throne; for he that is so in as to be God's
Ordinance, that is Commissionated and Deputed by him to be the Higher Power,
must needs be rightly in, and Authorized to exercise the Government.

He that is so God's Ordinance as to be immediately Deputed by him, as Saul,
David, Solomon,

Again, He may be styled an unlawful Occupant of the Throne, with reference to
them, who, against the Tenor of their Laws and Constitutions, did conferr it on
him; but cannot be styled an unlawful Occupant, as that imports one, who by
Law cannot exercise the Government conferred on him; because the Law does make
him for the time being our Sovereign, and one to whom true Duty and Service of
Allegiance is to be tendered by his Subjects. Thus he, who by an unjust Decree
of a corrupt Judge, or the false Testimony of a Witness, not then discerned so
to be, gets the Possession of, and becomes Lord of a Manor, is an unjust
Possessor, but not an unlawful Occupant, because he has obtained it by form of
Law; and the Tenants are obliged, whilst he continues in Possession, to swear
Homage to him, as there is occasion, as much as they did formerly to him who
justly was possessed of it.

6thly. Moreover, we are not by our Principles obliged to condemn the ancient
Christians, not only as Fools and self-Murtherers, but introducers of a
mischievous Turkish Doctrine, even the slavish Doctrine of the Bow-string; but
may, with Origin, (...). Contr. Cells. l. 3. p. 115.
continue to assert, That the mild Laws of Christianity are such by which they
are obliged to suffer themselves to be slain, rather than to avenge themselves
upon their Persecutors, of what kind soever; and may believe the Persian
Martyrs, to be never the worse Christians, because they said, Nos enim nos
ipsos tanquam oves tradidimus ad occisionem, ut qui didicerimus esse subjecti
omnibus potestatibus. Apud usher, Power of the Prince, p. 223.
We have given up our selves as Sheep to the slaughter, having learn to be
subject to every Ordinance of Man. We may still judge it was for the Praise,
and not the Condemnation of Christians, that Origin declared, That, after all
the barbarous and unjust Severities the Emperors inflicted on them, (...). Ibid.
they could give no example of any Sedition of the Christians. Circa Majestatem
Imperatoris defamamur, sed nunquam Albiniani, vel Nigriani vel Cassiani
inveniri potuerunt Christiani. Ad Scap. c. 2. Erant de Romany non Christianis,
Apol. c. 30.
That Tertullian's Apology for them runs thus, No Christian was ever found a
Rebel: As for Pescenninus Niger, and Clodius Albinus who rebelled against
Severus; and Cassius, who conspired against Verus; they were Romans, but none
of them Christians. Though the Historian tells us, Ael. Spartian. in Vita
Severi p. 347, 349, 353.
That the Emperor Severus was a Man truly answering his Name, and of infinite
Cruelty, not only to the meaner sort, but to the Senators. That Saint Austin
said, Neque tunc Civitas Chrlsti -- quamvis haberet magnorum agmina populorum
adversus impios persecutores suos pro temporali salute pugnavit, sed potius, ut
obtineret aeternam, non repugnavit. De Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 6.
That the City of Christ, though it had Armies of great People appertaining to
it, did not fight for their temporal safety against their cruel Persecutors,
but rather, that it might obtain eternal happiness, made no resistance at all.
And we may still think it no disparagement to the Christians, that they
accounted the Thebaean Legion true Martyrs, and composed Hymns to be sung in
praise of them Day and Night. Nor need we have a worse Opinion of that which
anciently was styled, (...), Orig. Contr. Cells. l. 8. p. 426, 427.
The Divine Aid, the whole Armor of God, the Host of Piety. And by Saint
Bernard is called, Pugnabimus usque ad mortem, si ita oportuerit, pro matre
nostra ARMIS QVIBVS LICET, non scutis and gladiis, sed precibus, fletibusque ad
Deum. Ep. 221. ad Ludovic. Regem.
The Weapons with which alone it is lawful for us to fight against our Prince;
because this has been lately rendered the mischievous Cant of Prayers and
Tears; for our Principles oblige us to resist none, to be patient under, and
submissive to all Higher Powers for the Lord's sake.

7thly. Again, our Principles give no encouragement to any to rebel against, or
call their Princes to an account for Arbitrary Government, or violation of
their Coronation Oaths; but, whatsoever they may be to us, require our
Subjection and Allegiance to them, and our sincere endeavors, by all lawful
means (though not by being active to the Ruin of the Church and State) whilst
they are in possession of the Government to keep them there. For as the Statute
of Henry the Seventh says, That no person or persons shall take any benefit or
advantage by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his, or their said
Allegiance: So can they, from our Doctrine, have no advantage so to do.

Lastly, Our Principles do not concern themselves either with the supposed
Title of the Prince of Wales, or the supposed defect of Title in King William;
for do but grant what is plain matter of Fact, that neither King James, nor the
Prince of Wales are in Possession of the Crown of England, and that King
William and Queen Mary are in Possession of it by the consent and approbation
of the Parliament, and Faith and true Allegiance for the time being, must, by
our Principles, be due unto the latter, whatsoever Right or Title may being
unto the former.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 18. line 16. for displeased read displaced: p. 31. l. 32. dele of: p. 46.
l. 5. add resist.

Books lately Printed for Awnsham Churchill at the Black Swan at Amen-Corner.
THE Late Lord Russel's Case, with Observations upon it. Written by the Right
Honorable Henry Lord De la Mere. fol.

An Historical Account of Making the Penal Laws by the Papists against the
Protestants, and by the Protestants against the Papists. Wherein the true
Ground and Reason of Making the Laws is given, the Papists most barbarous Usage
of the Protestants here in England, under a Color of Law, set forth; and the
Reformation Vindicated from the Imputation of being Cruel and Bloody, unjustly
cast upon it by those of the Romish Communion. By Samuel Blackerby, Barrister
of Gray's Inn. fol.

Obedience Due to the Present King, notwithstanding our Oaths to the Former.
Written by a Divine of the Church of England. 4o

A modest Enquiry, Whether St. Peter were ever at Rome, and Bishop of that
Church? wherein, I. The Arguments of Cardinal Bellarmine and others, for the
Affirmative, are considered. II. Some Considerations taken Notice of, that
render the Negative higstly Probable. 4o

The Spirit of France, and the Politic Maxims of Lewis XIV. laid open to the
World. 4o

Memorials of the Method and Manner of Proceedings in Parliament in Passing
Bills. Together with several Rules and Customs, which by long and constant
Practice have obtained the Name of Orders of the House. Gathered by
Observation, and out of the Journal Books, from the time of Edward VI. 8o

Dr. Burnet's Tracts in Two Volumes. Vol. I. Containing, 1. His Travels into
Switzerland, Italy and Germany; with an Appendix. 2. Animadversions on the
Reflections upon the Travels. 3. Three Letters of the Quietists, Inquisuion,
and State of Italy. Vol. II. 4. His Translations of Lactantius of the Death of
Persecutors. 5. His Answers to Mr. Varillas: In Three Parts. 12o

A Collection of Texts of Scripture, with short Notes upon them. And some other
Observations against the Principal Popish Errors. 12o

The Fallibility of the Roman Church, Demonstrated from the manifest Error of
the Second Nicene and Trent Councils, which Assert, That the Veneration and
Honorary Worship of Images, is a Tradition Primitive and Apostolical. 4o

A Demonstration that the Church of Rome, and her Councils have Erred; by
showing, That the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Trent, have, in all their
Decrees touching Communion in one Kind, contradicted the Received Doctrine of
the Church of Christ: with an Appendix, in Answer to the XXI. Chapter of the
Author of A Papist Misrepresented, and Represented. 4o

A Treatise of Traditions, Part I. Wherein it is proved, That we have Evidence
sufficient from Tradition; 1. That the Scriptures are the Word of God. 2. That
the Church of England owns the true Canon of the Books of the Old Testament. 3.
That the Copies of the Scripture have not been corrupted. 4. That the Romanists
have no such Evidence for their Traditions. 5. That the Testimony of the
present Church of Rome can be no sure Evidence of Apostolical Tradition. 6.
What Traditions may securely be relied upon, and what not. 4o

A Treatise of Traditions, Part II. Showing the Novelty of the pretended
traditions of the Church of Rome; as being, 1. Not mentioned by the Ancients of
their Discourses of Traditions Apostolical, truly so called, or so esteemed by
them. Nor, 2. In their Avowed Rule, or Symbol of Faith. Nor, 3. In the
Instructions given to the Clergy, concerning all those things they were to
teach the People. Nor, 4. In the Examination of a Bishop at his Ordination.
Nor, 5. In the Ancient Treatises designed to instruct Christians in all the
Articles of their Faith. 6. From the Confessions of Romish Doctor with an
Answer to the Arguments of Mr. Mumford for Traditions; and a Demonstration,
That the Heathens made the same Plea from Tradition as the Romanists do; and
that the Answer of the Fathers to it does fully justify the Protestants. 4o

All these four Books Written by the Reverend D. Whitby, D.D.

An Exhortation to Charity, (and a Word of Comfort) to the Irish Protestants:
Being a Sermon Preached at Steeple in Dorsetshire, upon occasion of the
Collection for Relief of the Poor Protestants in this Kingdom, lately fled from
Ireland: By Samuel Bold, Rector of Steeple. 4o

THE END.

