THE Bishops Courts DISSOLVED: OR, THE LAW OF ENGLAND TOUCHING Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction STATED.

Wherein it appears that the Spiritual Courts want both Power and Might to
execute their Wills upon his Majesty's good Subjects at this day.

BEING A short and brief Account of the several Statutes made concerning the
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

By E. W.

LONDON, Printed for T. Reyner, to be sold by Rich. Janeway in
Queens-head-alley in Paternoster Row. 1681.

THE Bishops Courts DISSOLVED: OR, THE Law of England Touching Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction Stated.
THe design of this Narrative, whatever Censurers it may meet with, has no
other end than to bring truth to light, and that truth more especially which
has been so long masqued and hid under Church-mens Gowns; and which has been
most industriously concealed with great Artifice from the ignorant vulgar, as
they are generally pleased to term Laymen; though some of those Lay men, nay,
the most of them, I think, are both for Parts and Piety not in the least
inferior to the best of them, though they call themselves the only Clergymen,
as if every member of Christ's Church were not the Clergy or Gods heritage as
well as they.

But my present business is only to meddle with the coercive power they pretend
to in Courts Christian, or Spiritual Jurisdiction, which for them to claim such
a power in England distinct from the legal power known in this Kingdom, and
contrary to the Supremacy of the King, in direct opposition to his Authority,
as he is by Law supreme head of the Church of England, is a very great wonder
to me, and I believe to the Ingenuous Reader, if he consider the matter of fact
as it lies.

In the first place, the Reader must know that all manner of Spiritual
Jurisdiction used in this Nation had its original and foundation from the
un-holy Mother Church, the Sea of Rome, and her Canon Law: and was born or
rather brought into this Northern Island of England by Austin the Monk: for
before his time we do not find any tract of Church Government (that is) by way
of Excommunication in Court Christian.

When he came here it was with the same specious pretense that Rome and her
Adherents and Devotaries to this day use, that is, decency and regular
government of the Church of Christ: But no sooner had this Monk set foot into
this Kingdom but he began to show his cloven foot^ as it evidently appeared in
a very short time after, for when he found that the Christians in this Island
were more holy than himself; and that they liked not his Pride and Arrogance,
he fell upon the Monks of Bangor, and began to Curse them with Bell, Book, and
Candle, till they should submit to him and the unholy See of Rome. And from
that time, and not before, all manner of Ecclesiastical Courts and Censures of
the Church both grew and continued in this Kingdom (until the time of Henry the
Eighth) under the Popes Authority: and how they used the people in these
Courts, and how many were murdered and destroyed for Religion sake in all that
time, is too great a number now to be reckoned.

But not withstanding they had this vast power, and held Courts Canonical (as
they term them) by Authority from the Sea of Rome, even from Austin the Monk,
to William the First (commonly called the Conqueror) and from thence to the
time of Henry the Eighth, yet the Bishops and Clergy of England sometimes by
the Statute Law of the Land met with many rubs in their Canon Law: for their
oppressions being become very great, even so great that in those dark times and
fogs of Popery the Laymen began to discover their cheats, and therefore the
wings of the Clergy began sometimes to be a little clipped by the Statute Law
of the Land, as you will find by several Statutes made since Henry the Third:
Vide Rot. An. 1257. 3 Ed. primi Cap. 2.
particularly in the Statute made in Edward the First's time, which ordains,
That a Clerk being indicted of Felony by solemn Inquest of lawful men in the
Kings Court, in no manner shall be delivered without due Purgation.

Now before this Statute the Churchmen pleaded exemption from the Temporal
Law; and offenders, it should seem, which were Churchmen claimed a privilege
to be only liable to the power of the Church.

In the next place you will find by the Statute of Edward the First in the
thirteenth year of his Reign the Spiritual Courts were prescribed what it was
they should be suffered to take Cognizance of and no more, see the Statute, Viz.

The King to his Judges sends greeting, Called Stat. de circumspect. agatis
made 13 E. 1. Anno Dom. 1285.
Use your selves circumspectly in all matters concerning the Bishop of Norwich
and his Clergy, not punishing them if they hold plea in Court Christian of such
things as be mere Spiritual, that is, to wit, of Penances enjoined by Prelates
for deadly sins, as Fornication, Adultery, and such like, for the which
sometimes corporal Penance, and sometimes pecuniary is enjoined, especially if
a Freeman be convicted of such things. Now after this Kings time those
spiritual men finding themselves by his Laws kept within some moderate bounds,
Vid. Rot. de Artic. Cleri An. 9 Ed. 2. and A. D. 1315.
grew very uneasy; and therefore in Edward the Second's time they began to
stir for the enlarging their power: For you will find in his Reign that the
Clergy got Laws to pass then, that the Clergy might correct in their Spiritual
Courts for defamation, and corporal penance was to be enjoined, as you may see
by the Rolls of those times.

In these Statutes made at Lincoln they had diverse Privileges given them,
Idem Cap. 3.
as in the third Chapter they had power allowed them to lay Corporal punishment.

And in the fourth Chapter, Cap, 4.
Prelates might correct for Defamation by that Statute.

In the eighth Chapter it appears that the Clergy did use to meddle with the
Kings servants, Idem Cap. 8.
and censure them at their pleasure, till they were limited and bounded by this
Ordinance: which Ordinance, viz.

It pleased our Lord the King that such Clerks that attend in his service, if
they ostend they shall be corrected by their Ordinary, like as other, but so
long as they are occupied about the Exchequer, they shall not be bound to keep
Residence in their Churches. And in the same year among the Articles made for
to give power, Idem Cap. 14.
and to restrain: it is ordained, viz.

Also if any dignity be vacant, where Election is to be made, it is moved that
the Electors may freely make their Election without fear of any power Temporal.
The Kings Answer was, They shall be made free according to the form of Statutes
and Ordinances.

This power continued to the Clergy till King Henry the Eighth, only sometimes
there was some small abridgements by several Statutes and Ordinances, as in 31
Ed. 3. Cap. 4. where their Extortion about Fees was by the Statute regulated.
Vide Rot. 31 Ed. 3. Cap. 4.


The next thing wherein the wings of the Clergy were clipped, was by the
Statute of 16 Rich. 2. Cap. 5. which declares purchasing Bulls from the Sea of
Rome unlawful, and a Praemunire so to do: Vide 16 Rich. 2. Cap. 5.
and ordains among diverse other things, viz.

Whereupon our Lord the King by the assent aforesaid, and at the request of the
said Commons has ordained and established that if any purchase or pursue or
cause to be purchased or pursued in the Court of Rome or elsewhere, by any such
Translations, Processes or Sentences of Excommunications, Bulls, Instruments,
or any other things whatsoever, which touch the King, against him, his Crown,
or his Regality, or his Realm, as is aforesaid, and they which bring within the
Realm, or them receive, or make thereof Notification, or any other Execution
whatsoever, within the same Realm or without, that they, their Notaries,
Procurators, Maintainers, Abettors, Factors, and Counselors, shall be put out
of the Kings protection, etc. and shall forfeit all their Lands and Tenements,
Goods and Chattels, and make Ransom to the King, etc. and that process be made
against them by praemunire facias, in manner as it is ordained in other
Statures of Provisoes and others, which do sue in any other Court, in
derogation of the Regality of our Lord the King. In Henry the Seventh's time we
find the Clergy prayed Aid of the Common Law, Vide H. 7. cap. 4.
to help them to punish their Priests and Clerks for Incontinency.

Which Statute gives the Bishops power to punish such offender by their
Episcopal Jurisdiction, as was to them thought most meet, and to be freed from
any action to be brought against them for the same at Law.

Thus they continued without any Interruption until the fatal time of Henry the
Eighth, and even in his time till the twenty first we do not find any great
adding or diminishing from them or the power they pretended to by their Canon
Law, for it must be observed, and it will not be denied by any person, but that
still the power the Clergy of England ever had, except what was given them by
Statute Law, was only the Canon Law brought with them from their unholy Mother,
the Church of Rome.

In 21 H. 8. cap. 13. Stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 13.
Spiritual persons are abridged from having pluralities of Livings, and from
taking of Farms, or to deal in Merchandise, and that all Dispensations contrary
to this Statute shall be void, by which it seems the Clergy were Merchants for
Temporals as well as Spiritual before that time.

In 23 H. 8. cap. 9. 23 H. 8. cap. 9.
another Act was made which reaches their Court more especially than any before
that time, called, viz. (the Bill of Citetias) in which Law the Archbishops
and Bishops are enjoined not to cite any person out of their own Diocese where
they live under a severe penalty, except it be for Heresy and Probates of
Wills, in which Law is provided 10 l. damages, besides cost to be recovered by
the party grieved by action or otherwise.

Sect. 6. this very clause also is contained, viz.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Archbishop or Bishop,
Ordinary, Official, Commissary, or any other Substitute or Minister of the said
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, or others having Spiritual Jurisdiction,
at any time from the Feast of Easter next coming, shall ask, demand, take or
receive of any of the Kings Subjects any sum or sums of money for the Seal o^
any Citation afer the said Feast, to be awarded or obtained, then only 3 d.
Sterling, upon the pains and penalties before limited, contained and expressed
in this present Act to be in like form recovered, as is aforesaid. But now
though this Law is so plain as nothing can be made more plain, yet to this day
their Spiritual Courts Conscience are large enough to take instead of 3 d. for
every Sealed Citation not less than 6 s. 8 d. or such like sum, to the shame
and reproach not only to themselves, but even to the whole Nation that suffers
such abuses to be put upon the people contrary to all Law, and when remedy may
easily be had.

In 24 H. 8. cap. 12. 24 H. 8. c. 12.
Another Act was made, which takes away all Appeals to the Sea of Rome: and
because it may most evidently appear that the Spiritual and Temporal
Jurisdiction was ever a Flower to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, I shall
here insert in haec verba part of the second Section of that Statute, viz.

And whereas the King and his most noble Progenitors, and the Nobility and
Commons of this Realm, at diverse and sundry Parliaments, as well in the time
of King Edward the First, Edward the Third, Richard the Second, Henry the
Fourth, and other Noble Kings of this Realm, made sundry Ordinances, Laws,
Statutes and Provisions, for the entire and sure conservation of the
prerogatives, liberties and preheminencies of the said Imperial Crown of this
Realm, and of the Jurisdictions Spiritual and Temporal of the same, to keep it
from the Annoyance as well of the Sea of Rome, as from the Authority of other
foreign Potentates attempting the diminution or violation thereof, as often and
from time to time, as any such annoyance or attempt might be known or espied,
and notwithstanding the said good Statutes and Ordinances made in the time of
the Kings most noble Progenitors, in preservation of the Authority and
Prerogative of the said Imperial Crown as is aforesaid, etc. By which recital
in this Statute it is most plain, that all Spiritual Jurisdiction is and ought
to be derived from and under the Prerogative of the King and the Imperial Crown
of England, as will more fully appear by the remaining part of the Statute, too
long here to be inserted.

But now in 25 H. 8. cap. ^9. 25 H. 8. c. 19.
the whole power of the Clergy, and all their Authority is acknowledged to be
in the King, and all Canons to cease, and they never to make more but by
Commissions from and under him, by virtue of that Act entitled, viz. The
Submission of the Clergy, and restraint of Appeals: Which begins thus, viz.

Whereas the Kings humble and obedient Subjects the Clergy of the Realm of
England have not only acknowledged according to truth, that the Convocations of
the same Clergy is, always has been, and ought to be assembled only by the
Kings Writ, but also submitting themselves to the Kings Majesty, have promised
(In verb Sacerdotii) that they will never from henceforth presume to attempt,
allege, claim, or put in ure, enact, promulge, or execute any new Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinances, Provincial or others, or by whatsoever name they
shall be called in the Convocation, unless the Kings most Royal assent and
licente may to them be had, to make, promulge, or execute the same. And that
his Majesty do give his most Royal assent and authority in that behalf. And
whereas diverse Constitutions, Ordinances and Canons, Provincial or Synodal,
which heretofore have been enacted and be thought not only to be much
prejudicial to the Kings Prerogative Royal, and repugnant to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, but also overmuch onerous to his Higness and his
Subjects. The said Clergy have most humbly besought his Highness that the said
Constitutions and Canons may be committed to the Examination and Judgment of
his Highness, and of thirty two persons of the Kings Subjects, whereof sixteen
to be of the upper and nether house of Parliament of the Temporality, and the
other sixteen to be of the Clergy of this Realm, and all of the said thirty two
persons to be chosen and appointed by his Majesty, etc. And then Enacts, viz.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, according
to the said submission and petition of the said Clergy that they nor either of
them from henceforth shall presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in urd
any Constitutions or Ordinances, Provincial or Synodal, or any other Canons;
nor shall enact, promulge, or execute any such Canons, Constitutions or
Ordinances Provincial, by whatsoever name or names they may be called in their
convocations in time coming, which always shall be assembled by authority of
the Kings Writ, etc. And the Penalty for doing other than this Act directs was
imprisonment, and Fine at the Kings will, as by the Statute more at large
appears.

So that by this Statute their whole power was now invested in the King, and
till new Canons were made, or the old ones confirmed, as the Statute directs,
the Clergy of England could in no sort act: and from that time of the making of
this Statute until this present, I cannot find that ever any liberty was given,
or that any Canons were made or confirmed by Law, other than what were judged
unlawful in King Charles the First's time, and damned by Act of Parliament in
1640. Which you will hear more of by and by.

If it be thus, then from 25 H. 8. I must date their downfall, a most happy day
to England from that time; and it may be said, all their Canons are now out of
doors, or at seast very lame: and if so, then let the Reader judge where is
their Authority for their Courts, for they must and do own that it was the
Canon Law they acted by; and if so, then sure if they have no Canons to act by,
or at best but doubtful Canons, then I conceive they can have no power except
they can find it by the Statute Law, which I would be glad to see.

In the next place another Law is made against them in 25 H. 8. which takes
away all First Fruits to the Bishop of Rome, 25 H. 8. c. 20.
and ordains that Elections of all Bishops shall be by the Kings Writ under a
severe pain.

In the same year an Act is made to take away Peter Pence and Dispensations,
Idem cap. 21.
in which Statute it is expressly declared that this Land ought not to be
subject or bound to any humane Laws but such as are of their own making within
this Realm.

The King being declared head of the Church, 26 H. 8. cap. 1.
it is expressly there enacted (viz.) Shall have full power and authority from
time to time to visit, repress, redress, reform, order, correct, restrain all
such errors, heresies, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities, whatsoever
they be, which by any manner of Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction ought or
may lawfully be reformed, repressed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained
or amended, most to the pleasure of Almighty God, etc.

This being the Case, what color can here be for any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power to any person whatever, but what must be derived from and
under the King, and by his Authority and Commission, and in his name and not in
their own, nor in the Bishop of Rome.

But because the Reader may be more fully satisfied, I have here inserted the
Statute made 37 H. 8. cap. 17. 37. H. 8. c. 17.
Entitled, viz. A Bill that the Doctors of Civil Law being married may
exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

In most humble wise show and declare unto your Highness your most faithful,
humble and obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons
of this present Parliament assembled, That whereas your Royal Majesty is, and
has always been, justly by the word of God, Supreme head in the Earth in the
Church of England, and has full power and authority to correct, punish, and
repress all manner of Heresies, Errors, Vires, Sins, Abuses, Idolatries,
Hypocrisies and Superstitions, sprung and growing within the same, and to
exercise all other manner of Jurisdictions, commonly called Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction: Nevertheless the Bishop of Rome and his adherents, minding
utterly as much as in him lay, to abolish, obscure and delete such power given
by God to the Princes of the Earth, whereby they might gether and get to
themselves the Government and rule of the world, have in their Councils and
Synods Provincial, made, ordained, established and decreed diverse Ordinances
and Constitutions, that no Lay or married man should or might exercise or
occupy any Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, nor should be any Judge or Register in
any Court, commonly called Ecclestatical Court, lest their false and usurped
power, which they pretend, and went about to have in Christ's Church should
decay, wax vile, and be of no reputation, as by the said Councils and
Constitutions Provincial appears: Which standing and remaining in their
Effect, not abolished by your Graces Laws, did sound to appear to make greatly
for the said usurped power of the said Bishop of Rome, and to be directly
replignant to your Majesty as supreme head of the Church, and Prerogative
Royal, your Grate being a Lay man.

And albeit the said Decrees, Ordinances and Constitutions, by a Statute made
in the five and twentieth year of your most noble reign, be utterly abolished,
frustrate, and of none effect: yet because the contrary thereunto is not used,
nor put in practice by the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, who have no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but
by, under, and from your Royal Majesty, it adds, or at the least may give
occasion to some evil disposed persons, to think, and little to regard the
proceedings and censures Ecclesiastical made by your Highness and your
Vicegerent, Officials, Commissaries, Judges and Visitators, being also Lay and
Married men, to be of little or none effect or force, whereby the people
gathers heart and presumption to do evil, and not to have such reverence to
your most Godly injunctions and proceedings as becomes them.

But forasmuch as your Majesty is the only and undoubted supreme head of the
Church of England, and also of Ireland, to whom by Holy Scripture all authority
and power is wholly given to hear and determine all manner of causes
Ecclesiastical, and to correct all vice and sin whatsoever; and to all such
persons as your Majesty shall appoint thereunto: That in consideration thereof,
as well for the Instruction of ignorant persons, as also to avoid the occasion
of the opinion aforesaid, and the setting forth of your prerogative Royal and
Supremacy.

It may therefore please your Highness, that it may be ordained and enacted by
the authority of this present Parliament, That all and singular persons, as
well Lay, as those that be now married, or hereafter shall be married, being
Doctors of the Civil Law, lawfully create, and made in any University which
shall be made, ordained, constituted and deputed to be any Chancellor,
Vicar General, Commissary, Official, Scribe or Register, by your Majesty or any
of your Heirs or Successors, or by any Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon, or
other person whatsoever, having authority under your Majesty, your Heirs and
Successors to make any Chancellor, Vicar General, Commissary. Offical or
Register, may lawfully execute and exercise all manner of Jurisdiction,
commonly called Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Coercions
appertaining or in any wise belonging unto the same, albe it such person or
persons be Lay, married or unmarried, so that they be Doctors of the Civil Law,
as is aforesaid; any Law, Constitution, or Ordinance, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Now here it appears plain, that all Authority must be derived from the King,
and he alone as head of this Church has power to correct or amend Heresies,
and all other Misdemeanors, having the sole jurisdiction in Courts Spiritual,
called Ecclesiastical Courts, and none to be made, or Synold held, but by his
authority and permission, so that it cannot be imagined by any that the Clergy
had power to make Canons either new, or to go on with their old ones, till
another Law be made, and power given them by the King as the Law directs.

And from this time of the making of this Law none of the Canons, or pretended
Canons, are any more in force in England than if there never had been any such
thing in the world, This therefore I lay down as a sure rule that the
Ecclesiastical Courts have no power but what must be given them by the Statute
Law of the Land.

And therefore to come nearer to the matter, I shall set down what Laws have
been since made in their favor, and what against them. Which is thus:

King Edward the Sixth being a Protestant, and having a wise and honest Council
about him, foreseeing the great benefit did accrue to the Crown and whole
Nation by those good Laws made in his Fathers time, made a Law that takes away
all scruple and doubt whatsoever about the Ecclesiastical Courts, and gives
them not so much as power to hold any Courts in their own name, nor to use
their own Seal, although they were suffered to act by, from, and under the
King, according to the Laws made by his Father. And it appears by the Statute,
Entitled, viz. An Act for the Election of Bishops.

Which Act, for the better information I have inserted at large, hoping those
worthy Spiritual men will vouchsafe the reading it. Which is as follows:

Forasmuch as the Elections of Archbishops and Bishops, 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2.
by the Deans and Chapters within the Kings Majesty's Realms of England and
Ireland at this present time, be as well to the long delay, as to the great
costs and charges of such persons, as the Kings Majesty gives any
Archbishopric or Bishopric unto: And whereas the said Elections be in very
deed no Elections, but only by a Writ of Conge d'Eslire, have colors, shadows
or pretenses of Elections, serving nevertheless to no purpose, and seeming also
derogatory and prejudicial to the Prerogative Royal, to whom only appertains
the Collation and gift of all Arch-Bishopricks, and Bishoprics, and Suffragan
Bishops within his Highness said Realms of England and Ireland, Wales, and
other his Dominions and Marches: For a due reformation hereof, Be it therefore
enacted by the Kings Highness, with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
Authority of the same, That from henceforth no such Conge d'Eslire be granted,
nor Election of any Archbishop or Bishop by the Dean and Chapter made: But
that the King may by his Letters Patents at all times when any Archbishopric
or Bishopric is void, confer the same to any person to whom the King shall
think meet: The which Collations so by the Kings Letters Patents made, and
delivered to the person whom the King shall confer the same Archbishopric or
Bishopric, or to his sufficient Proctor or Attorney, shall stand to all
intents, constructions and purposes, to as much and the same effect, as though
Conge d'Eslire had been given, the Election duly made, and the same confirmed.
And thereupon the said person to whom the said Archbishopric, Bishopric, or
Suffraganship is so conferred, collated or given, may be consecrated, and sue
his Livery or Ouster le Main, and do other things as well as if the said
Ceremonies and Elections had been done and made.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every such
person, to whom any collation and gift of any Archbishopric or Suffraganship
shall be given or collated by the King, his Heirs or Sure essors, shall pay, do
and yield to all and every person all such fees, interests, and duties, as of
old time has been accustomed to be done, any thing in this Act or in any other
to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas the Archbishops and Bishops, and other Spiritual persons in this
Realm, do use to make and send out their summons, citations and other
processes, in their own names, and in such form and manner as was used in the
time of the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, contrary to the form and order
of the summons and process of the Common Law used in this Realm ( seeing that
all Authority of Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Temporal, is derived and deducted
from the Kings Majesty as supreme head of these Churches, and Realms of England
and Ireland, and so justly acknowledged by the Clergy of the said Realms, that
all Courts Ecclesiastical within the said two Realms) be kept by no other power
or authority, either foreign or within the Realm, but by the authority of his
most excellent Majesty. Be it therefore further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that all summons and citations, or other Process Ecclesiastical, in
all suits and causes of Instance betwixt party and party, and all causes of
Correction, and all causes of Bastardy or Bigamy, or enquiry de jure
patronatus, Probates of Testaments, and Commissions of Administrations of
persons deceased, and all Acquittances of, and upon account made by the
Executors, Administrators, or Collectors of goods of any dead person, be from
the first day of July next following, made in the name, and with the style of
the Ring, as it is in Writs Original or Judicial at the Common Law: And that
the Test thereof he in the name of the Archbishop or Bishop, or other, having
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, who has the Commission and grant of the Authority
Ecclesiastical immediately from the Kings Highness, and that his Commissary,
Official or Substitute, exercising Jurisdiction under him, shall put his name
in the Citation or Process after the Test.

Further be it enacted by the Authority before (...), That all manner of person
or persons, who have the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction shall have
from the first day of July before expressed in their Seals of Office, the Kings
Highness Arms decently set, with (...) Characters (...) the Arms for the
knowledge of the Diocese, and shall use no other Seal of Jurisdiction, (...)
where his Majesty's Arms be engraven, upon pain that if any person shall use
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction ( after the day before expressed) in this Realm of
England, Wales, or other his Dominions or Territories, and not send or make out
the Ciration of Process in the Kings name, or use any Seal of Jurisdiction
other thau before limited; that every such Offender shall incur, and run in the
Kings Majesty's displeasure and indignation, and suffer Imprisonment at his
Highness will and pleasure.

Provided that no more, nor other Fees be taken or paid for the Seal and
Writing of any Citations or other Process than was heretofore accustomed.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, shall use his own Seal and in his
own name, in all Faculties and Dispensations according to the Tenor of an Act
thereof made: And that the said Archbishops and Bishops shall make, admit,
order, and reform their Chancellours, Officials, Commissaries, Advocates,
Proctors, and other their Officers, Ministers and Substitutes, and Commissions
of Suffragan Bishops, in their own names, under their own Seals, in such manner
and form as they have heretofore used: And shall certify to the Court of
Tenths their Certifitates under their own names and Seals, as heretofore they
have used, and according to the Statute in that case made and provided: And
likewise shall make collations, presentations, gifts, institutions, and
inductions of Benefices, Letters of Order, or Dismissories, under their own
Names and Seals, as they have heretofore accustomed; any thing in this Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enactes by the Authority aforesaid, that all
Process hereafter to be made or awarded by any Ecclesiastical person or
persons, for the Trial of any Plea or Pleas, or matter depending, or that
horeafter shall depend in any of the Kings Courts of Records at the Common Law,
and limited by the Laws and Customs of this Realm, to the Spiritual Courts to
try the same, that the Certificate of the same, alter the Trial thereof, shall
de made in the Kings name for the time being, and with the style of the sanle
King, and under the Seal of the Bishop, graved with the Kings Arms, with the
name of the Bishop or Spiritual ^^^cer, being to the Test of the same Process
and Certificate, and to every of them.

This being then the Law that not only the power of Spiritual Courts, and all
manner of Jurisdiction must be derived from and under the King, but also if
they hold any, it must be in the Kings name with his Arms in their Seals, and
all Process must have the Kings Title and not their own, otherwise than to the
Test of the Process as in judicial proceedings in other Courts.

If this be so, as there is no man dare own the contrary, then what color have
the Bishops in their Spiritual Courts at this day to hold them in their own
names, and to send out Process under their own Seals as if they were all
paramount the King, and even as big as the Pope himself? for so runs their
Process, viz. I cite you to appear before me, etc. at such a place. Now I would
feign know what this [I] is, whether it be I Pope, or I Jesuit, or I Turk,
that dare be thus bold with the Law and their Sovereign, not only in eclipsing
his Prerogative, but indeed fetting themselves above him and the Law too:
surely should but a Fanatic dare to do but one half so much, it would be both
hell and damnation, if not the Fanatic Plot, so much talked of by these great
Loyalists.

But I must now come to show you what they pretend against this Law, for had
they no excuse at all they would not be legitimate.

Their pretense therefore is this, that Queen Mar when she came to the Crown
repealed all Laws that diminished the authority of the Sea of Rome; among
which, they say, this Act was one, but how this will help them, the Reader may
judge, if it were so, which cannot be allowed.

For thus it is, 1 and 2 P. and M. Cap. 8.
in the first and second of Philip and Mary, an Act was made, viz. An Act
repealing all Articles and Provisions made against the Sea Apostolic of Rome
since the 20th of K. H. 8. and for establishing all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical possessions and hereditaments conveyed to the Laity.

In this Statute there are diverse Acts repealed by name, but this Act of Ed.
6. is not named, but is supposed to be employed, because that was against the
Jurisdiction of Rome, but if that be a good repeal without naming, the Statute
it ought to be well considered;

However if it were so, that will stand them in but small stead, for in Queen
Elizabeth's reign all this whole Statute of Repeal is repealed; then if so,
those Acts are in force again. And so this excuse for holding Courts in their
own names, and by the Authority of their Canons cannot help them, but leaves
them in the same condition as in Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth's time,
in which they had no power at all.

This plainly appears by the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. which restores to the
Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction, and abolishes all foreign power in Causes
Ecclesiastical, and repeals the Statute of Repeal made in the first and second
of Philip and Mary. Which is as follows:

An Act to restore to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction over the Estate
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, 1 Eliz. cap. 1.
and abolishing all foreign power repugnant to the same. Which begins thus:

Most humbly beseech your most Excellent Majesty your faithful and Obedient
Subjects, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this your
present Parliament assembled: That where in the time of the reign of your most
dear Father of Worthy Memory, King Henry the 8th. diverse good Laws and Statutes
were made and Established, as well for the utter extinguishment and putting away
of all usurped and Foreign powers and Authorities out of this your Realm, and
other your Highness Dominions and Countries, as also for the restoring and
uniting to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, the Ancient Jurisdictions,
Authorities, Superiorities, and Preheminencies to the same of right belonging
and appertaining, by reason whereof, we your most humble and obedient Subjects,
from the five and twentieth year of the reign of your said dear Father, were
continually kept in good order, and were disburdened of diverse great and
intolerable charges and exactions before that time unlawfully taken, and
exacted by such Foreign power and authority as before that was usurped, until
such time as all the said good Laws and Statutes by one Act of Parliament made
in the first and second years of the Reigns of the late King Philip, and Queen
Mary your Highness Sister intituted an Act repealing all Statutes, Articles and
provisions made against the Sea Apostolic of Rome; since the twentieth year of
King Henry the eight, and also for the Establishment of all Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical possessions and Hereditaments conveyed to the Laity, were all
clearly repealed and made void, as by the same Act of Repeal more at large does
and may appear; By reason of which Act of Repeal, your said humble Subjects
were eftsoons brought under an usurped Foreign power and Authority, and yet do
remain in that bondage, to the intolerable charges of your loving Subjects, if
some redress (by Authority of this your high Court of Parliament, with the
assent of your Highness) be not had and provided.

May it therefore please your Highness, for the repressing of the said usurped
Foreign power, and the restoring of the Rites, Jurisdictions and
Preheminencies appertaining to the Imperial Crown of this your Realm, that it
may be Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament. That the said Act made
in the first and second years of the Reign of the said late King Philip and
Queen Mary, and all and every branches, Clauses and Articles therein contained
(other then such branches, Clauses and Sentences, as hereafter shall be
excepted) may from the last day of this Session of Parliament, by Authority of
this present Parliament, be repealed, and shall from thenceforth be utterly
void and of none effect.

And to the intent that all Usurped and Foreign power and Authority Spiritual
and Temporal, may for ever be clearly exting uished, and never be used or
obeyed within this Realm, or any other your Majesty's Dominions or Countries,
May it please your Highness that it may be further enacted by the Authority
aforesaid. That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
Spiritual or Temporal, shall at any time after the last day of this Session of
Parliament, use, entry or exercise any manner of power, Jurisdiction,
Superiority, Authority, Pre-eminence, or Privilege Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or within any other your Majesty's Dominions
or Countries that now be, or hereafter shall be, but from thence forth the same
shall be clearly abolished out of this Realm, and all other your Highness
Dominions for ever; any Statute, Ordinance, Custom, Constitutions, or any other
matter or cause whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that also it may please your Highness that it may be established and
enacted by the Authority aforesaid that such Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Superiorities and Preheminencies Spiritual and Ecclesiastical as by any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or Authority has heretofore been or may
fawfully be exercised or used for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State
and Persons, and for Reformation, order and correction of the same and of all
manner of Errors, Herefies, Shismes, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and
Enormities, shall for ever, by Authority of this present Parliament be united
and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Now by these Branches of this Statute it is most clear that all manner of
Jurisdiction in Causes Spiritual and Ecclesiastical is more absolutely invested
in the Crown then ever before, so that if that of Edward the sixth be repealed,
yet here it is past all doubt that Act is now by this more enforced then ever:
And that it may appear more plain, that no Court Spiritual was to Act any more
but by Authority from the Queen in the next Section of this Statute of 1. Eliz.
Power was given to the Queen in express words to grant Commissions (to hold
Courts) under the great Seal of England, or else by this Statute none could be
held at all neither in their own name, nor in the name of the Queen, which
branch of the said Statute runs thus.

And that your Highness your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this
Realm, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, by letters
patents under the great Seal of England, to assign, name and authorize, when
and as often as your Highness, your Heirs or Successors shall think meet and
Convenient, and for such and so long time as shall please your Highness, your
Heirs or Successors such person or persons being natural born Subjects to your
Highness your Heirs and Successors, as your Majesty your Heirs or Successors
shall think meet to exercise, use, occupy and execute under your Highness your
Heirs and Successors, all member of Jurisdictions, Privileges, and
Pre^en^nences in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within these your Rea^^s of England and Ireland or
any other your Highness Dou^^^ions and Countries, and to vis;it, reform,
redress, order, correct, and amend all such errors, herisies, schisms, abirses,
offenses, contempts, and enormities whatsoever which by any manner of Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical power Authority or Jurisdiction can or may lawfully be
reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended to the pleasure
of Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and the conservation of the peace and
unity of this Realm. And that such person or persons so to be named, assigned,
authorized and appointed by your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, after the
said Letters Patents to him or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, shall
have full power and authority by virtue of this Act and of the said Letters
Patents under your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, to exercise, use and
execute all the premises; according to the Tenor and effect of the said Letters
Patents; any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Here it is most evident that the Queen had the only sole power to nominate,
and appoint by her Commission under the great Seal of England, both laymen as
well as Bishops to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction when and as often as
she pleased, and it is most evident it was not to be done at all without such
Commissions.

But besides this Law it was the practice both in the times of Edward the
sixth, Queen Elizabeth and King James; That all the Bishops, and the Spiritual
Courts whatsoever were held by such Commissions and to satisfy the Reader I
have here inserted a Copy of one of them taken out of the Rolls, Verbatim, viz.

Elizabeth by the Grace of God, Rot. 9. Pars. 10. Eliz.
etc.
To the Reverend Father in God Matthew Parker nominated Bishop of Canterbury,
and Edmond Grindale nominated Bishop of London, And to our right Trusty and
well beloved Councellor Francis Knowls our Vice-chamberlain, and Ambrose Cave
Knight. And to our Trusty and well beloved Anthony Cook and Thomas Smiths
Knights, William Bill our Almoner, Walter Haddome and Thomas Sackford Masters
of our Requests, Rowland Hill and William Chester Knights, Randoll Cholmely and
John Southcote Sergeants at the Law, William May Docter of Law, Francis Cave,
Richard Goodrick and Gilbert Gerrard Esquires, Robert Weston and (...) Hunck
Doctors of Law, Greeting.
Where as our Parliament holden at Westminster the Five and Twentieth Day of
January, and there continued and kept until the (...) Day of May then next
following; Amongst other things, there was Two Acts and Statutes made and
Established; the one Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of the Common Prayer
and Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments: And the other
Entitled, An Act, Restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction of the
State-Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and Abolishing all Foreign Power repugnant
to the same. As by the same several Acts more at large does appear: And whereas
diverse Seditious and Slanderous Persons do not cease daily to invent and set
forth false Rumors, Tales, and Seditious Slanders, not only against us and the
said good Laws and Statutes, but also have set forth diverse Seditious Books
within this our Realm of England, meaning thereby to move and procure Strife,
Division, Dissension amongst our Loving and Obedient Subjects, much to the
Disquieting of us and our People. Wherefore we earnestly minding to have the
same Acts before mentioned, to be duly put in Execution; and such Persons as
shall hereafter Offend in any thing contrary to the Tenor and Effect of the
said several Statutes to be accordingly punished; and having Especial Trust
and Confidence in your Wisdoms and Discretion, have Authorized, Assigned and
Appointed you to be our Commissioners. And by these Presents, do give our full
Power and Authority to you, or Six of you; whereof you the said Matthew Parker,
Edmond Grendale, Thomas Smith, Walter Haddon, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard
Godrick, and Gilbert Gerrard, to be one from time to time hereafter, dureing
our pleasure, to Inquire as well by the Oaths of Twelve Good and Lawful Men; as
also by Witnesses, and all other Lawful ways and means you can devise, for all
Offenses, Misdoers and Misdemeanors done and committed of them, and hereafter
to be committed or done contrary to the Tenor and Effect of the said several
Acts and Statutes, and either of them; and also of all and singular Heretical
Opinions, Seditious Books, Contempts, Conspiracies, false Rumors, Tales,
Seditious-Misbehaviours, Slanderous Words, or Shewings, published, invented, or
set forth; or hereafter to be published, invented, or set forth by any Person
or Persons, against us, or contrary, or against any of the Laws or Statutes of
this our Realm, or against the quiet Governance and rule of our People and
Subjects, in any County, City, Borough, or other place or places within this
our Realm of England, and of all and every the Coad jutors, Counselors,
Comforters, Procurers and Abbettors of any such Offender: And further, We do
give Power and Authority to you or six of you, Whereof the said Mathow Parker,
Edmond Grindale, Thomas Smith, Walter Haddon, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard
Godrick, or Gilbert Gerrard, to be one from time to time hereafter during our
pleasure, as well to hear and determine all the premises, as also to inquire,
hear, and determine all and singular enormities, disturbance, and misbehaviors
done and committed or hereafter to be done and committed in any Church or
Chapel or against any Divine service, or the Minister or Ministers of the
same, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and also to enquire often
search out and to order correct and reform all such persons as hereafter shall
or will obstinately absent themselves from Church, and such Divine Service as
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, is appointed to be had and used. And
also we do give and grant full power, and Authority to you or six of you
whereof you the said Matthew Parker, Edmond Grindale, Thomas Smith, Walter
Haddon, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard Godrick, or Gilbert Gerrard, to be one from
time to time and at all times during our pleasure, to visit, reform, redress,
order, correct, and amend in all places within this our Realm of England, all
such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical wheresoever, which by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction can or may be lawfully
reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended to the pleasure
of Almighty God, the increase of Virtue, and the Conservation of the Peace and
Unity of this our Realm; and according to the Authority and power limited,
given and Appointed by any Laws or Statutes of this Realm. And also that you
and six of you whereof the said Matthew Parker, Edmond Grindale, Thomas Smith,
Walter Haddon, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard Godrick, or Gilbert Gerrard to be one,
shall likewise have full power and Authority from time to time to enquire often
and search out all Mercilesimen quarrels, Vagarant, and suspected persons
within our City of London, and ten Miles Compass about the same City, and of
all assaults, and affrays done and committed within the same City, and the
compass aforesaid. And also we give full power and Authority unto you and six
of you as before sumerly to hear, and finally determine according to your
discretions and by the Laws of this Realm all Causes and Complaints of all them
which in respect of Religion or for lawfully Matrimony contracted and allowed
by the same where injuriously deprived defrauded or spoiled of their Lands,
Goods, Possessions, Rights, Dignities, Livings, Offices Spiritual or Temporal;
and them so deprived as before, to restore unto their said livings, and to put
them into possession amoveing the Usurpers in convenient speed, as it shall
seem to your discretions good by your Letters, Message, or otherwise all
frustratory appellations clearly rejected. And further we do give Power and
Authority unto you, and six of you whereof you the said Matthew Parker, Edmond
Grindale, Thomas Smith, Walter Hadden, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard Godrick, or
Gilbert Gerrard to be one by virtue hereof full Power and Authority, not only
to hear and determine the same and all other Offenses and matters before
mentioned and rehearsed, but also all other Notorious and manifest advoutry and
Fornications, and Ecclesiastical crimes and offenses within this our Realm
according to your Wisdoms, Consciences and Discretions willing and commanding
you or six of you, whereof you the said Matthew Parker, Edmond Grindale, Thomas
Smith, Walter Haddon, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard Godrick, or Gilbert Gerrard to
be one from time to time hereafter to use and devise all such pollitick ways,
and means for the Trial and Searching out of all the premises as by you or six
of you as aforesaid shall be thought most expedient necessary, and upon due
proof had, and the Offense or Offenses before specified or any of them
sufficiently proved against any person or persons, as by you or six of you, by
confession of the party or by lawful Witnesses or by any other due means before
you or six of you whereof the said Matthew Parker, Edmond Grindale, Thomas
Smith, Walter Haddon, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard Godrick, or Gilbert Gerrard to
be one, that then you or six of you as aforesaid, shall have full power and
Authority to award such Punishment to every Offender by fine Imprisonment or
otherwise by all or any of the ways aforesaid, and to take such order for the
redress of the same as to your Wisdoms and Discretions or six of you, whereof
the said Matthew Parker, Edmond Grindale, Thomas Smith, Walter Haddon, Thomas
Sack-ford, Richard Godrick, or Gilbert Gerrard to be one to call before you or
six of you, as aforesaid from time to time, all and every Offender or
Offenders, and such as by you and six of you as aforesaid shall seem to be
suspected persons in any of the premises, and also, All such Witnesses as you
or six of you, as aforesaid shall think fit to be called before you or six of
you as aforesaid, and them and every of them to examine upon their Corporal
Oaths, for the better Trial and opening of the premises or any part thereof.
And if you or six of you as aforesaid shall find any person or persons
obstinate or disobedient, either in their apparel before you or six of you as
aforesaid, at your calling and Commandment or else not accomplishing or not
obeying your Orders, Decrees, and Commandments, in any thing touching the
premises or any part thereof, that then you or six of you as aforesaid shall
have full Power and Authority to commit the same person or persons so
offending, toward there to remain until he or they shall be by you or six of
you as aforesaid enlarged and delivered. And further we do give you and six of
you whereof the said Matthew Parker, Edmond Grindale, Thomas Smith, Walter
Haddon, Thomas Sack-ford, Richard Godrick, or Gilbert Gerrard to be one full
Power and Authority, by these presents to take and receive by your Discretions
of every Offender, or suspected person to be convented and brought before you a
Recognizance or Recognizances Obligation or Obligations to our use in such sum
or sums of Money as to you or six of you as aforesaid shall seem Convenient, as
well for their personal appearance, before you or six of you as aforesaid, as
also for the performance and accomplishment of your Orders and Decrees, in case
you or six of you as aforesaid shall see it so convenient. And further our will
and pleasure is, that you shall appoint Our Trusty and well beloved John
Skinner to be your Register of all your Acts, Decrees, and Preceedings by
virtue of this Commission, and in his default one other sufficient person, and
that you or six of you as aforesaid, shall give such Allowance to the said
Register for his pains, and his Clerks to be levied of the fines, and other
profits that shall arise by force of this Commission; and your devices in the
premises as to your Discretions shall be thought meet. And further our will
and pleasure is, that you or six of you as aforesaid shall name and appoint one
other sufficient person to gather up, and receive all such sums of Money as
shall be assessed, and Taxed by you or six of you as aforesaid, for any fine or
fines upon any person or persons for their Offenees. And that you or six of you
as aforesaid, by Bill or Bills signed with your hands, shall and may assign and
appoint as well as to the said person for his pains in receiving the said sums.
As also to your Messengers and Attendants upon you for their trouble pains and
charges to be sustained for us about the premises or any part thereof such sums
of Money for their rewards as by you or six of you as aforesaid shall be thought
expedient, willing and commanding you or six of you as aforesaid, after the
time of this our Commission expired to certify unto our Courts of Exchequer,
as well the name of the said Receiver as also a Note of such fines as shall be
set or taxed before you, to the intent that upon the determination of Account
of the said Receiver we shall be answered of that to us shall justly appertain,
Willing and Commanding also our Auditors, and other Officers upon the sight of
the said Bills, signed with the hands of you or six of you as aforesaid, to
make unto the said Receiver due allowances according to the said Bills upon his
account. Wherefore we will and Command you our Commissioners with Diligence to
Execute the premises with effect any of our Laws, Statutes, Proclamations or
other grants privileges or Ordinances, which be or may seem to be contrary to
the premises notwithstanding. And more, we will and command all and singular
Justices of peace, Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other our
Officers, Ministers, and faithful Subjects to be ayding helping and assisting
you, and at Commandment in the Due Execution hereof as they tender our
pleasure, and will Answer the contrary at their utmost perils. And we will and
grant these our Letters, Patents, shall be a sufficient Warrant and discharge
for you, and every of you against us our Heirs and Successors, and all and
every other person or persons whatsover they be of and for or concerning the
premises, or any parcel thereof, of or for the Execution of this our Commission
or any part thereof Witness the Queen at

Westminster the Nineteenth day of July, Anno Regni Regine Elizabethe Primo.Per
ipsam Reginam.

Thus by what has been said, you see both by Statute, Law and President, of
the very Commission themselves which the Bishops Acted by, it is clear they
ought not to Act or Hold any Courts whatsoever in their own Names, nor in the
Kings, without his Special Commission under the great Seal of England. And
although there was a Statute made in the First of Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act
for Repeal of certain Statutes made in the time of King Edward the Sixth; vid.
1 Jac. Cap. 25.
yet by the First of King James, Cap. 25. that Statute of Repeal is Repealed,
so that cannot stand our Spiritual Persons in no stead at all, though my Lord
Cook did insist upon it in his 2d. Institutions.

But to proceed, In the 8th Year of Queen Elizabeth, you will find the very
same thing asserted by the Act made, 8 Eliz. Cap. 1
8 Eliz. Cap. 1. Entitled, An Act declaring the making and Consecrating of the
Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm, to be good, Lawful and Perfect. In which
Act, Sect. 2. it is Declared thus, VIZ.

First, It is very well known to all degrees of this Realm, that the late King
of most famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth, as well by all the Clergy then of
this Realm in their several Convocations; as also by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons assembled in diverse of his Parliaments, was justly and
rightly recognized and knowledged to have the supreme Power, Jurisdiction,
Order, Rule and Authority over all the Estate Ecclesiastical of the same, and
the same Power, Jurisdiction and Authority did use accordingly: And that also
the said late King in the 25th Year of his Reign, did by Authority of
Parliament amongst other things, set forth a certain Order of the manner and
form how Archbishops and Bishops within this Realm, and other his Dominions,
should be Elected and made, as by the same more plainly appears: And that
also the late King of worthy Memory, King Edward the Sixth, did Lawfully
succeed the said late King Henry his Father in the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, and did justly possess and enjoy all the same Power, Jurisdiction and
Authority before mentioned, as a thing to him descended with the same Imperial
Crown, and so used the same during his Life. And also that the said late King
Edward the Sixth in his time, by Authority of Parliament, caused a Godly and
Virtuous Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England; to be made
and set forth, not only for one Uniform Order of Service, Common Prayer, and
the Administration of Sacraments, to be used within this Realm, and other his
Dominions; but also did add and put to the same Book a very good and Godly
Order of the manner and form how Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons and
Ministers, shauld from time to time be Consecrated, made and ordered within
this Realm and other his Dominions, as by the same more plainly will and may
appear. And although in the time of the late Queen Mary, as well the said Act
and Statute made in the 25th Year of the Reign of the said late King Henry the
Eighth, as also the several Acts and Statutes made in the Second, Third,
Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Years of the Reign of the said late King Edward, for
the Authorizing and Allowing of the said Book of Common Prayer, and other the
premises, amongst diverse other Acts and Statutes touching the said Supreme
Authority, were Repealed: yet nevertheless, at the Parliament holden at
Westminster, in the first Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty that now is by one other Act and Statute there made, all such
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities and Preheminences Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power and Authority has
heretofore been, or may Lawfully be used over the Ecclesiastical State of this
Realm, and the Order, Reformation, and Correction of the same, is fully and
absolutely by the Authority of the same Parliament, united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm: And by the same Act and Statute, there is also
given to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, Kings and Queens of
this Realm, full power and authority by Letters Patents under the great Seal of
England, from time to time to assign, name and authorize such Person or Persons
as she or they shall think meet and convenient to exercise, use, occupy and
execute under her Highness all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminencies and Authorities in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Power or Jurisdiction within this Realm, or any other Her
Highness Dominions and Countries. Here again you see that the very Commissions
are again Confirmed, and all Ecclesiastical Power absolutely in the Queen to
make and Appoint by her Commission whom She please to exercise Spiritual
Jurisdiction, and no Man ever pretended this Statute to be touched.

This being the Case to the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, we must see what was
done in King James time, and so to this Day.

In King James time the Bishops and Ecclesiastical Courts were holden as in
Queen Eliz. time, as is most apparent; for meeting with an Objection, that the
Bishops held Courts in their own names time out of mind, notwithstanding the
Statutes, and that the long custom would excuse them therein, especially when
the King did permit it. I took an occasion to inform my self from the Journals
and Records, and do find that the Ecclesiastical Power was held and used in the
time of King James, under him by Virtue of Commission, as before, and to put it
out of all doubt, I shall demonstrate it thus: Vide Journ. ho. Lords. 7 Jac.
and 10. 1610.
7 Jacobi, A Dispute arose about the Spiritual Courts of their Extortion and
going beyond their Commissions; the Commons in Parliament complained to the
King against the Ecclesiastical Courts, and pray that no more such power may be
given them by Commissions, And a Question arose in the 10th of Jacobi, whether
they had any power at all; in full Parliament it was Resolved, and the King
gave his Answer, and the Judgment of the House of Peers, That they had no
Power but by the Kings Commission, which he would take care for the time to
come that it should not be any Burden to the People. Which Answer and
Judgment in Parliament you have here in hec Verba set down, VIZ.

Die Lunae, Viz. 23 die July, 1610. Post Meridiem.
His Majesty's Answer delivered to the whole Assembly of both Houses, the 23d
of July, 1610. unto certain Grievances formerly delivered to His Majesty by the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, touching
the inconvenient and dangerous extent of the Statute of 1 Eliz. Chap. 1. Our
Approved care for the well Ordering of Ecclesiastical-Courts and Causes, ought
to banish from the conceits of our loving Subjects all needless and imaginary
fears: Nevertheless we are pleased to assure them by Our Royal Promise, That
our Ecclesiastical Commissions shall not be Directed to singular Persons, but
to such a number of Commissioners, and them so elected as the weight of such
Causes does require: And that no Definitive Sentence be given or pronounced by
such our Commissioners, under the number of Seven of them, sitting in Court, or
Five at the least, and that in only case of Necessity. And further, That we
shall not take Advantage by any power given us by that Statute, to grant forth
any forms of Commission exceeding further then to Imprisonment and Reasonable
Fine. And likewise, That We shall restrain such our General Commissions to the
number of Two, the one for this Province of Canterbury, the other for that of
York; Besides we are Resolved to Establish such an Order touching the use and
practice of Our said Commission, as that none of our Loving Subjects shall be
drawn from remote places, either to London or York, except it shall be for such
exorbitant offenses as are fit to be made exemplary; And for the enumeration of
Ecclesiastical Causes in particular, as it is a matter full of Difficulty, so
it is needful (as we suppose,) considering that they are already limited and
confined as no Ancient Canon or Spiritual Laws are in force, that are either
contrary to the Laws, Statutes, or Customs of this Realm, or tend to the
Damage or Hurt of our Prerogative Royal.

For the Grievances apprehended in the Commission, First a Sovereign King being
Mixta Persona, and having Authority as well in Causes Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, it was with great Wisdom ordained (Matters of the Church being many
ways impugned, and the Censures of it grown into contempt) That there should be
a Commission consisting as well of Temporal as Ecclesiastical Persons, who
might have power for one Offense at one time and by one sentence to inflict as
there should be cause, both Spiritual and Temporal punishment, but as to the
Inquiry by Juries, it has not for many Years been practiced. And we are
content, that hereafter it be omitted in our Commission; And concerning
Appeals, the use has always been to exclude them in Commissions of this
nature; And yet if any of our Subjects shall be justly grieved with any
Sentence given by our Commissioners, we shall be content, as we find just
cause, to grant unto them a Commission of Review: Also for the Execution of
diverse Statutes, aimed at in your Grievances, although it has been from time
to time committed in some sort unto our Commissioners. And that every such
Commission has been still penned by the Attorney General, with the Advice of
the chief Temporal Judges; yet we are well pleased, and will give commandment
accordingly, that our Temporal and Ecclesiastical Judges, assisted with our
Learned Council, shall confer together concerning the Exceptions by you taken,
to the end that hereafter our said Commissioners may have no further power to
intermeddle with the Execution of any part of the said Statutes, then it shall
be found fit for our Service, necessary for the suppressing of Popery and
Schism, and no ways repugnant to the Laws and Pollices of this our Realm: But
for making any Innovations in the forms and proceedings heretofore used by our
said Commissioners, we know no cause to depart therein from the Examples of our
Progenitors, nor from that which the Laws of this our Kingdom has Approved.
And touching Fees, since it is a Court by Statute erected and no Fees in the
Statute expressed, it was very fit, That the Commissioners should have
Authority to limit and Appoint to every Officer his Reasonable Fees: And we
will commend the further care thereof to some Principal person of our
Commissioner, to take a view of them, and as to reform what they find amiss, so
to Establish such as shall be Moderate and Reasonable, touching the Grievances
found in the Execution of the Commission. We know that there is no Commission
nor Court either of Ecclesiastical or Temporal Jurisdiction, but may be subject
more or less to Abuse in the execution of their Authority. Nevertheless, it is
Our part to have our Ear open to receive Complaints of that kind especially
from our Parliament, when we shall find them to be just: And therefore our
purpose is to see such Reformation made of all Abuses made in the execution of
the said Commission, as may best procure the ease of Our Subject, from charge
of Vexation; And such punishment to be inflicted upon any Pursivants or other
inferior Ministers which shall be Offenders, as may repress such Misdemeanors
in time to come.

Sure if this Record be considered, there is ground enough to justify that the
Spiritual Courts cannot be holden but by the Kings Commission; Therefore I need
say no more, the Case being plain the Law was so to this Year of 1610. which I
set down the rather because a use will be made of it by and by.

But in King Charles the First's time, the Bishops cast about them how to get
rid of these Shackles; And therefore in Bishop Laud's time, the point about
Holding Courts in their own Names, without the Kings Commission, was by him
stated, and in the Star Chamber where he ruled the Roast got the Judges there,
though it was but an extra Judicial Judgment to declare in their favor, which
was easy enough to be done when both the Judges and His Grace were resolved
upon the point, for those very Judges most of them were the same that gave
their Judgment about the Shipp-Money; And we know what became of that Judgment
and them: And for your Prelate he met with his due at Tower Hill after, but
before his Lordship had finished his Ministry, so prevalent he was, that I am
told he got a Proclamation to publish the Extra judicial Opinion, which made a
great noise in the World, for Noise and Decency was all along the Cheat that
was put upon the People in those Days by that Prelate and his Gang.

But I think no Man will say that that Extra Judicial Opinion is either equal
with the Statute Law, or with the Judgment of Parliament, therefore I shall
say no more, but proceed.

After that Extra Judical Opinion of the Judges, and by means of the long
Intervals of Parliament, the Spiritual Courts as well as the Star Chamber, were
Lords Paramont, and so great, that they became a most Heavy Burden to the
people of all sorts; therefore before the Troubles began, the Parliament in 16
Car. primi, made an Act to take away the Power that was given by the Statute of
1 Eliz. for the Granting any Commissions at all; by which means they well knew
that no Courts could be held at all; And therefore an Act passed to Repeal that
Branch of the Statute of 1 Eliz. which was only one Clause about the granting
Commissions, as by the Act of Car. primi, appears, and all Spiritual Courts
were utterly Abolished by that Act, The Title of the Act runs thus, VIZ.

A Repeal of the Brauch of a Statute, primo Elizabethe, concerning Commissions
for Causes Ecclesiastical.
Whereas in the Parliament holden in the first Year of the Reign of the late
Queen Elizabeth, 16 Car. c. 11.
late Queen of England, there was an Act made and Established, Entitled, An
Act Restoring to the Crown the Ancient Jurisdiction over the State
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and Abolishing all Foreign Power Repugnant to
the same. In which Act amongst other things there is contained one Clause,
Branch, Article or Sentence, whereby it was Enacted to this effect, Namely,
That the said late Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens
of this Realm, should have full Power and Authority by virtue of that Act, by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to Assign, Name and Authorize,
when and as often as her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, should think meet
and Convenient: and for such, and so long time as should please her Highness,
her Heirs or Successors, such Person or Persons being Natural Born Subjects to
her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, as her Majesty, her Heirs or Successors
should think meet to exercise, use, occupy and execute under her Highness, her
Heirs and Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies,
in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
within these her Realms of England or Ireland, or any other her Highness
Dominions and Countries, and to visit, reform, redress, order, correct and
amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and
Enormities whatsoever, which by any manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power,
Authority or Jurisdiction, can or may Lawfully be Reformed, Ordered, Redressed,
Corrected, Restrained, or Amended to the Pleasure of Almighty God, the increase
of Virtue, and the Conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm. And that
such Person or Persons so to be Named, Assigned, Authorized and appointed by
her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, after the said Letters Patents to him or
them made and delivered as aforesaid, should have full Power and Authority by
Virtue of that Act, and of the said Letters Patents under her Highness, her
Heirs or Successors, to exercise, use and Execute all the Premises, accordidg
to the Tenor and Effect of the said Letters Patents, any matter or cause to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas by culler of some Words in the aforesaid Branch of the said Act,
whereby Commissioners are Authorized to Execute their Commission, according to
the Tennor and effect of the Kings Letters Patents grounded thereupon, the said
Commissioners have to the great and in-Sufferable VVrong and Oppression of the
Kings Subjects used to Fine and Imprison them, and to exercise other Authority
not belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction restored by that Act, and diverse
other great Mischiefs and Inconveniences have also ensued to the Kings
Subjects, by reason of the said Branch and Commissions issued thereupon, and
the Executions thereof: Therefore for the Repressing and Preventing of the
aforesaid Abuses, Mischiefs, and inconveniences in time to come.

Be it Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Commons
in this present Parliament Assembled, and by Authority of the same. That the
aforesaid Branch, Clause, Article or Sentence contained in the said Act, and
every word, matter and thing Contained in that Branch, Clause, Article or
Sentence, shall from henceforth be Repealed, Annulled, Revoked, Annihilated and
utterly made void for Edect; any thing in the said Act to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Archbishop, Bishop
or Vicar General, nor any Chancellor Official, or Commissary of any
Archbishop, Bishop, a Vicar General nor any Ordinary whatsoever, nor any other
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or Minister of Justice, nor any
other Person or Persons whatsoever, exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, by any Grant, License, or Commission of the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or by any Power or Authority derived
from the King, his Heirs or Successors, or otherwise, shall from and after the
first Day of August, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God One Thousand
Six Hundred Forty and One, award, impose, or inflict any pain, penalty, fine,
amerciament, imprisonment, or other Corporal Punishment upon any of the Kings
Subjects, for any Contempt, Misdemeanour, Crime, Offense, matter or thing
whatsoever belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance or Jurisdiction,
or shall Ex Officio, or at the Instance or Promotion of any Person whatsoever
Urge, enforce, tender, give or Minister unto any Churchwarden, Sideman, or
other Person whatsoever, any corporal Oath whereby he or she shall or may be
Charged or Obliged to make any presentment of any Crime or Offense, or to
confess or accuse himself or her self of any Crime, Offense, Delinquency or
Misdemeanour, or any neglect, matter or thing whereby or by reason whereof he
or she, shall or may be siable, or exposed to any censure, pain, penalty, or
Punishment whatsoever: upon pain and penaity that every person, who shall
offend contrary to this Statute, shall forfeit and pay treble Damages to every
Person thereby grieved, and the Sum of One Hundred pounds, to him or them who
shall first Demand and Sue for the same: Which said Treble Damages and Sum
of One Hundred Pounds, shall and may be Demanded and Recovered by Action of
Debt, Bill, or Plaint in any Court of Record, wherein no Privilege, Essoin,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed to the Defendant.

And be it further Enacted, That every Person who shall be once Convicted of
any Act, or Offense Prohibited by this Statute, shall for such Act or Offense
be from and after such Conviction, utterly dissabled to be or continue in any
Office or Employment in any Courts of Justice whatsoever, or to exercise or
execute any Power, Authority or Jurisdiction, by force of any Commission or
Letters Patents of the King his Heirs or Successors.

And be it further Enacted, That from and after the first Day of August, no New
Court shall be Erected, Ordained, or Appointed within this Realm of England, or
Dominion of Wales which shall or may have the like Power, Jurisdiction, or
Authority: as the said High Commission Court now has or pretends to have,
but that all and every such Letters, Patents, Commissions and grants made or to
be made by his Majesty his Heirs or Successors. And all Power and Authority
granted or pretended, or mentioned to be granted thereby and all Acts,
Sentences and Decrees to be made by Virtue or Culler thereof, shall be utterly
void and of no effect.

After the making of this Act all Jurisdiction of the Spiritual Courts, was
wholly dain'd as appears plainly by the Statute. Thus it stood still, 13 Car.
2d. Now in this Act of Car Primi, it must be observed that it meddles no
farther with the Act of Eliz. then that one branch about Commissions, it
meddles not with the Ecclesiastical power being in the Crown nor with the
Statute, 8 Eliz. Nor any thing of Edward 6. or Henry 8. which must be observed.

Thus then their power was wholly discontinued till the thirteenth of Charles
2d. And then coming into their Bishoprics and great Estates, they thought it
hard that they must have their Spiritual Swords tied, therefore all hands to
work to get loose, and so an Act is passed the 13 Charles 2d. For Repeal of
part of the Act Car Primi. And now they thought all was sure, but as it fell
out this will do them no good at all neither, for the Act which was intended to
Repeal this Act of the 16 of Charles the first has misrecited it, and called
it an Act made the 17 of Charles the first, not only in the Title but all along
in the body of the Act, which is plain upon the Roll, though not in the Statute
Books, viz.

An Act for Explanation of a Clause, contained in an Act of Parliament, made in
the seventeenth year of the late King Charles, Entitled an Act of Repeal of a
Branch of a Statute Primo Elizabethe, concerning Commissions for Causes
Ecclesiastical, viz.

Whereas in an Act of Parliament made in the seaventeenth year of the late
King Charles, Entitled an Act for Repeal of a branch of Primo Elizabethe
concerning Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical it is (amongst other things)
enacted: That no Archbishop, Bishop, or Vicar General nor any Ordinary
whatsoever, nor any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or
Minister of Justice, nor any other person or persons whatsoever exercising
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority or Jurisdiction by any Grant
License or Commission of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or by any
Power or Authority derived from the King his Heirs or Successors, or otherwise
shall (from and after the first day of August, which then should be in the year
of our Lord God one thousand six hundred forty one) Award, Impose, or Iuflict,
any Pain, Penalty, Fine, Amerciament, Imprisonment or other Corporal punishment
upon any of the Kings Subjects, for any contempt, misdemeaner, crime, offense,
matter or thing whatsoever belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance
or Jurisdiction without some doubt has been made, that all Ordinary power of
coertion and proceedings in causes Ecclesiastical were taken away, whereby the
Ordinary course of Justice in causes Ecclesiastical has been obstructed.

Be it therefore Declared and Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, by
and with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority thereof that neither the said Act,
nor any thing therein contained does or shall take away any ordinary Power or
Authority from any of the said Archbishops, Bishops or any other person or
persons named as aforesaid, but that they and every of them exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may proceed, determine, sentence, execute, and
exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all censures and
coertions appertaining (...) belonging to the same before the making of the Act
before recited, in all causes and matters belonging to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, according to the Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws used and
practiced within this Realm, in as ample manner and form as they did and might
lawfully have done before the making of the said Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that the aforesaid
recited Act of Decimo Septimo Caroli, and all the matters and clauses therein
contained (excepting what concerns the High Commission Court, or the new
Errection) shall be and is hereby Repealed, to all intent and purposes
whatsoever; any thing clause or sentence in the said Act contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is hereby Enacted, That neither this Act nor any thing
herein contained, shall extend or be construed to revive or give force to the
said Branch of the said Statute made in the said Year of the Reign of the said
late Queen Elizabeth, mentioned in the said Act of Parliament, made in the said
Seventeenth Year of the Reign of the said King Charles, but that the said
Branch of the said Statute made in the said First year of the Reign of the said
Queen Elizabeth, shall stand and be Repealed in such sort as if this Act had
never been made.

Provided also, and it is hereby further Enacted, That it shall not be Lawful
for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Chancellor, Commissary, or any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister, or any other
person, having or exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to
Tender or Administer to any person whatsoever, the Oath, usually called the
Oath Ex Officio, or any other Oath, whereby such person to whom the same is
tendered or Administered, may be charged or compelled to confess, or accuse, or
to purge him or her self of any criminal matter or thing, whereby he or she may
be liable to Censure or Punishment: Any thing in this Statute, or any other
Law, Custom or Usage heretofore to the Contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend or be construed to extend to give unto any Archbishop, Bishop, or any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or other person or persons
aforesaid, any Power or Authority to Exercise, Execute, Inflict, or Determine
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Censure, or Coertion, which they might not by
Law have done before the year of our Lord 1639, nor to abridge or diminish the
Kings Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters and affairs, nor to conform
the Commons made in the year 1640, nor any of them, nor any other
Ecclesiastical Laws or Cannons not formerly confirmed, allowed or enacted by
Parliament, or by the Established Laws of the land as they stood in the year of
our Lord, 1639.

So that then it follows that except they can find such an Act as this Repeals,
which must be one of the 17 of Charles the first, this will not help them for
they will not find that this in Law can repeal the Act made the 16 of Charles
the first. And what follows if they have acted all this while and had no legal
power, let the world Judge what a fine thread they have spun for themselves, if
either the King shall call them to account or any private man that has been
Excommunicated, but it will be objected that this may be remedied it being but
a mistake to which I answer it may be mended, but it must be in Parliament.

But then it is objected, That this Act of the 13th of this King intends them a
power to hold Courts.

The Answer is plain, very true it does so, but it must be according to the
Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws still, and it must be from and under him,
as by Law, and sure the Statutes before is the Law they must walk by, until the
same are truly and exactly Repealed.

But for a further Answer, If they observe this Statute well, and allow it to
be a mistake, as I affirm it is, they are not at all the better for this of
Car. 2d. as to their Ecclesiastical power they now Act by, if there were no
mistake at all for this of Car. 2d. does not help them in the least, for in the
last Paragraph of this Statute of the 13th of this King, it is expressly said,
They shall have no more power than they had in the Year 1639.

Then see what they had in 1639, it is most plain all the rest of the Statutes
were then in force against them both of Henry the 8th. and Edw. 6th. Q. Eliz.
and King James Laws.

For this very Sentence and Judgment in Parliament before recited, was but in
1610. And I do aver they had no other power then but what those Laws gave them;
thus I have done with matter of Fact, as it lies, I leave all Men to judge, and
govern themselves as they shall see occasion, and would be glad my Error might
be corrected by them, if in any thing I have misquoted or misrepresented the
Case, hopeing that a more judicious person will undertake to correct it in what
way or Method he likes best.

There are Two or Three several Objections which I have met with in this
Affair, the First is this, That the King permits it, and if any wrong be done
by the Spiritual Courts, it is to him, and what has any private person to do
to concern himself therein.

In that the King may pass it by, it is true, but wrong may be done by these
Courts to the Subject as well as to the King; and there may be Damage to a
single Person by these Courts by being Excommunicated, which cannot be to the
King, and whoever suffers under that Burden has cause enough to complain and
seek their Remedy, though the King think fit to forgive the wrong done to himself.

The other Objection, is, That the Course of the Ecclesiastical Courts has
been such time out of mind, and no hurt comes to the Subject by their Courts,
whether it be done by Commission or not.

To which I Answer, That I never yet heard of any Good ever did come from those
Courts, but many have been ruined and undone by them; And in the next place for
their Custom time out of mind, there is no such thing, if Custom should
prevail against Law, which it cannot be, for the longest time they can bring
for this Custom is but 1610 at the furthest time; and there are some persons
yet living, can remember that time. But I believe it will be hard for them to
prove that they exercised Ecclesiastical Power by their own Authority in any
time in the Reign of King James; However if they do they cannot make it a Law,
for an evil Custom against Law never yet made a Law, and for them to say
Custom will carry it, the Highway-Man may as well plead the same for Robbery,
and say, Oh Sir, I have been accustomed to Rob, though there be a Law against it.

There is another Objection which carries as little weight as the rest, and
that is the Opinion of the Judges in the Star Chamber, which ought to have the
Answer that before is given, that it was an Extra-Judicial Opinion, and given
at such a time, and by the same Judges that overruled the Plea of the Lord
Hollis and Elliot, which was many Years after reversed in Parliament.

Therefore to Sum up all, the case lies thus, before the 20 of H. the 8. The
Spiritual Jurisdiction and all the proceedings in England by the Ecclesiastical
Courts, was by from and under the power and authority of the Sea of Rome and by
there Cannon Law afterward to the end of his Reign all that power was invested
wholly in the King, and no authority belonged to them in any matters whatever,
but what must be derived by from and under him.

King Edward the 6. of Famous memory did by his honest and wise Council, not
only approve of what was dune in the Church affairs, in H. the 8ths. time, but
goes on further and takes away the very form and mould of the Spiritual Courts,
by making a Law that those Courts should not so much as beheld in their one
name, but in the name of the King and all there Citations and Prosses whatever
was to be in the Kings name as in Judicial proceeding at Law, and the Bishops
name of the Diosess to be at the bottom, as test to the writ and not as Lord
Paramount, the Kings authority: and by this Kings Law they were not to use any
Seal to the Court, but with the Kings Arms in Graven, so it rested in his time.

Queen Mary she came in Popishly affected, and by the help of Cardinal Poole
Legate from Rome, prevails with her for the good of her Soul and Honor to the
unholy Church of Rome, to pass an Act, called an Act of repeal to take away all
those Laws that abridged the Power and Supremacy of the Sea of Rome sense the
20 year of H. the 8. And as some will have it this Law of Edward the 6. must be
meant to be one of those, but what reason can be in Law given is not yet known
for it is not perticularly Repealed as other Laws are in that Statute of Repeal
and; then in the next place being not so perticularly, it is believed it could
not be Repealed by that Act of Repeal, because that in the very same Act it
does set fourth perticularly. all other Acts intended to be repealed, and not
that. Then Queen Elizabeth in her first year Repealed the Act of Repeal made in
Queen Mary's days, and restores all again, as was in Henry the 8ths. time, and
Edward the 6. And declared particularly that all manner of Ecclesiastical power
must be from, and under her, and by her Authority and none else, and more
particularly to show all the Church power, was then lost without new power
given by that Act, a Clause, is incerted in the said Act that She and her
Successors shall give command under the great Seal of England to such
commmissions, as she pleased from time to time to hold Court Ecclesiastical and
not otherwise.

To the same effect it is again declared by the Statute made the 8th of her
Reign. And it is most certain, that by Virtue of the Clause in that Statute
Primo Eliz. That gives power of granting Commissions to hold Spiritual Courts
they did Act, and without it neither Queen or King could grant such
Commissions, nor they hold any Courts, without such Commissions.

Thus then it continued all the time of Q. Eliz. and by such Commissions they
acted and no other Authority was known, nor from her time can they show other
Authority to empower them but on the contrary they will find themselves
lessened.

For in King James' time they acted by the same Authority, and in full
Parliament, in 1610, it was owned of all hands.

In King Charles the first's time the Spiritual Courts became a Burden to the
Nation, so great that the people were not able to bear them although they did
Act by such Commissions, or at least ought so to do which appears plain by the
Statute, 16 Car Primi, which takes away all their whole power, and as a reason
or means to take away their power; what do the Parliament do, why it is most
clear both by the Title and Body of the Act, they tell you they must repeal
that part of the Law of Q. Eliz. that gave power to grant Commissions for them
to hold Spiritual Courts. Therefore the taking away and Repealing that Branch
of the Statute of Eliz. that gives power to grant Commissions, it was taken for
grant, then that they had no power at all. For no more of that Statute was
Repealed is evident, then what related to the Comissions, they did not let them
loose to Act as before it was so far from that, that it appears they intended
not to let them Act at all, neither under the King in his Name nor any
otherways whatever then in this of Car. 2d. The Ecclesiastical persons meant to
Repeal the Act of Primo Car. But mistook the year, so in truth they did nothing
at all but they may be liable to be called to account, for all they have acted
ever since nor can they Act with safety, till this Law be mended for Acts of
Parliament must be punctually repealed, and exactly recited or else in Law it
will not do.

But if that had been well Repealed it is far short of giving them any power,
for it is only to take away the Clause, that was repealed about given
Commissions to hold Courts but gives them no new power at all, it does not tell
them notwithstanding the Laws of H. 8. Ed. 6. The rest of the Statutes of
Elizabeth, and the practice in King James time, that they shall hold Courts in
their own Names, no, it is so far from that, that the Act says expressly they
shall have no other power by this Act, or was it intended them, then what they
had in 1639, now if they can show that they had any power given them between
the year 1610, to the year 1639. Then I say, they are right and may go on, if
not, I appeal to all mankind what culler or pretense these men can have to hold
Courts Spiritual at all, much less by their own Prerogative or in their own
Names; which I take to be as unlawful, and as directly against the Kings
Prerogative as any thing can be, For that since all power Spiritual and
Temporal is by Law invested in the King, they may as well hold Courts again
under the Popes Authority, and in his Name, as in their own Names, and it is a
wonderful thing to consider that these Churchmen who cry down all for
Phanaticks, and tells the World at every turn they are Sedious and Disloyal
that do not obey the Kings Laws and say as they say, although sometimes they
say and do they know not what themselves. And yet what Phanatick is there this
day in England, does or ever did make so bold with the Kings Prerogative, as
these high Churchmen, who in every of their Courts as they call them, and every
process they make, say in effect as the great Cardinal Woolsey did, when in his
splender and glory in England, Ego and Rex meos. But I considering we are here
discoursing of Protestant Churchmen, and knowing well their very Tongues are
tipped with Loyalty. We must not therefore venture to say more or meddle
further then to beg their Charitable opinion once to a Discenter both from
their Courts, and Cannons.

FINIS.

