The WHIGS hard Hea^^ The Cause of this hard FROST. An Excellent New BALLAD
To the Tune of, Oh London! Thou Had better have built new Bordello's, etc.
^

I.
YE Whigs and Dissenters, I charge you attend,
Here is a sad story, as ever was told:
The River of THAMES, that once was your Friend,
Is frozen quite over with Ice very cold;
And Fish which abounded,
Though they cannot be drowned,
For lack of their Liquor, I fear, are confounded:
Then leave your Rebellious and damned Presbytering,
Or you may be glad of Poor-Jack and Red-herring.
II.
Now, had it been frozen with Brimstone and Fire,
The wonder had been much deeper at bottom;
Though some do believe your Sins do require
A Punishment great as ever fell upon Sodom:
But then the poor Fish
Had been dressed to your Dish,
And, stead of a Plague, you had then had your wish;
Pikes; Flounders; together with Gudgeons and Roaches,
Had served for the Luxury of these Debauchees.
III.
But, alas! to instruct ye this Frost now is sent,
As if it would show ye your Consciences hardened;
And if each Mothers Child make not have to repent,
How the Devil do you think ye shall ever be pardoned?
It Is a very sad Case,
As ever yet was,
That the River should suffer for every Ass!
Poor Thames! thou may curse the foul Lake of Geneva,
For whose faults Thou do penance, sans hope of Reprieve-a.
IV.
This Thames, (O ye Whigs!) brought ye Plenty and Pride,
So ye hardened your hearts with your Silver and Gold:
But if ever ye hope to redeem Time or Tide,
Hot must your Repentance, your Zeal must be cold;
Your damned hungry Zeal
For rank Commonweal
Will hurry ye headlong all down to the Deel;
Then melt your hard hearts, and your tears spread abroad,
As ever ye hope that your Thames shall be Thawed.
V,
Make have, and be soon reconciled to the Truth,
Or you may lament it, both old men and young;
For, suppose every Shop should be turned to a Boot
Oh, were it not sad to be told with a tongue!
Should Cheapside advance
Up to Pety-France,
And Londons Guild Hall up to Westminsters dance*
O, what would become of your wealthy brave Chan^^
If it were forced so far Westward to clamber?
VI.
Cook-shops with roast Victuals, and Taverns with (...)
Already are seen on the River with plenty,
Which are filled every morning before ye can dine,
By Two's and by Three's, I may truly say Twenty*
Jack, Tom, Will, and Hary,
Nan, Sue, Doll, and Mary,
Come there to devour Plum-Cakes and Canary
And if with their Dancing and Wine they be tired,
For a Tester apiece there is a Coach to be hired.
VI.
There Is Ginger-bread, Small-cole, and hot Pudding-(...)
With Bread and Cheese, Brandy, and good Ale and Be^^
Besides the Plum-Cakes too, there is large Cakes of (...)
Enough to invite him that will to come here;
All which does betide
To punish your Pride;
You Are plagued now with Ice, 'cause ye love to back- sl^^^
Methinks it should warn ye to alter your station,
For you have hither to built on a slippery Foundation.
VIII.
Ye Merchants to Greenland, now leave off your saili^^
And for your Train-Oyl your selves never solicit;
For there is no fear of your Merchandise failing,
Since the Whales, I Am afraid, mean to give us a visit
The great Leviathan
May sail to England,
To see a worse Monster, the PRESBYTERIAN.
Was ever a Vengeance so wonderful shown,
That a River so great should be turned to a Town?
Sold at the Entrance into the Old Spring-Garden near Charing Cross, 1683/4.


