THE WHIGGS LAMENTATION For the Death of their Dear Brother College, The
Protestant JOYNER.
To the Tune of, Now, Now, the Fights Done, and the Great God of War, etc. 4.
Nov. 1681.
(I.)
BRave College is Hanged, the Chief of our hopes,
For pulling down Bishops, and making New Popes;
Our dear Brother Property crawls on the Ground,
In Poland, King-Anthony never will be Crowned:
For now their resolved, that Hearts shall be Trump,
And the Prentices Swear, they will Burn the Old Rump.
(II.)
Brave College, both Champion and Carver of Laws,
Who dyed undaunte, and stuck to the Cause;
What mischief might thou, to the Godly have done
Had thy dareing Soul, dreaded the World to come?
And all thy dear Party to dainger expos'^,
If thou to the World, had thy secrets disclosed.
(III.)
But now thou art Hanged, and that fear is past,
Were all that is in question as safe in the Nest;
Then we some new means, might consult or contrive,
To drive on our purpose, to prosper or thrive:
But the Popish PLOT, has now quite lost it is Name,
And none thy bright Blunderbush dare to maintain.
(IV.)
What K -- but Great College, could er'e make a Pope
Though he was over ruled by the end of the Rope?
Great College, was certainly Jure Divino,
When the Tripple Crown, on the Popes Head did Shino,
He burnt him to Ashes, for pastime like Nero
Then strait made a new one, such Power had our Hero.
(V.)
Great College, must certainly dye a good Martyr,
Being Knight of the Halter, and above the Garter;
Our dear Brother Statesman, though bred in a Saw-pit,
Had Internal Genious, enough to or'ethrow Wit:
He framed a new Moddel, to limit the King,
In hopes Crown and Scepter, might truckle to him.
(VI.)
Great Britain, never bred such a Brother as College,
He made Seven Popes, in his Time on our knowledge;
Our Signals of Crimes, he put in the Popes Arms,
Which prudent Contrivance, our Function Alarms.
With threats in Petition, Kings Power to restrain,
Yet Towser, and Broomstaff, rides Admiral again.
(VII.)
Great Hanibals Conquest, nor Olivers Nose,
Could with such small Slaughter, subdue such great Foes,
As he in this three years, with help of our Party,
Has checked our three Kingdoms and Magne Carta.
The Head of our Church, and the Head of our Cause,
He would have maintained them by Perjury and Blows.
(VIII.)
He now may be called, a third Savior oth' Nation,
To save his dear Church, he Renounced Salvation;
Like Famous Cargile, he died for King Jesus,
Defying Church Idols, enough to amaze us:
He tied up together, both his and our Crimes,
And died like a Devil, to damp our Designs.
(IX.)
Our Case toth' Carrector-men, we must refer
To Shadvell, and Settle, to Curtis, and Carr.
To know who Succeeds, our Late Captain the Joyner,
He must be an Artist, some Carver, or Coyner,
To make our Solemn'ty, and some New Popes,
On which our dependency, hangs and our hopes.
(X.)
But when the time comes, that the Pope must be burned
I fear we shall find that the Tide is much turned?
For the Tory Party, has got so much ground,
To Head a Rebellion there is none will be found;
For now they are Resolved that Hearts shall be Trump;
And the Prentices Swear, they will burn the Old Rump.
(XI.)
Such a confused Monster, they swear they will Compose
Of all the Dissenters, that are the Kings Foes;
The Baptist, and Biter, the Pendant, and Quaker,
From which they will draw such a prodigious Creature:
More Diabolical Invective Far,
Then all Popes Solemnity's at Temple-Barr.
(XII.)
Our Common Counsel lets Summon together,
To Panel pack't Jury's, Let Us mak't our endeavor,
For an Habeus Corpus, insist on our Power;
To fetch our Great Patriots out of the Tower;
And then we will Dispute the Case, for Reformation,
And make the Proud Torys Resign us the Nation
LONDON, Printed for William Ring, in the year. 1681.


