A LIST OF SOME CHIEF WORKS WHICH Mr. WILLIAM WHEELER Offers to undertake;
He having already often performed many of them, and being able to demonstrate
his sufficiency for the rest.

Eccles. 9. verse. 10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it quickly,
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
vvhither thou go.

printer's or publisher's device

AMSTERDAM, Printed by GEORGE TRIGG, Dwelling by the Old Church. In the Bagijn
Street, Anno. 1651.

A List of some chief works, which Mr. WILLIAM WHEELER offers to undertake,
having already often performed many of them, and being able to demonstrate his
sufficiency for the rest etc.
I. He makes Engines which by the help of one man have delivered 500 tunns of
water in an hour, about three foot (as has bin tried at Amsterdam) and others
that deliver 1000 tunns in the same time, 6 foot high, with the help of one
Horse only. These works of his do not only raise three times more water, but
three times higher, then the draining Mills of the Low Countries, and vvithall
freeth the water which has bin raised, from what remains behind, which
theirs do not do, much of the water which has bin by them raised,
returning back again thither from whence it came. He applies these
instruments to the draining of ponds, meeres and all sorts of vvaterish and
fenny places, and consequently makes that Land to bear good grass, which
before afforded nothing but rushes, sedge and such other unprofitable
materials, whereby the increase of such Lands is multiplied to a very vast
proportion. He dreineth Cole-pits and Metall-Mines at far easier rates and
with less tireing and jadeing of horses, then by the ordinary way, and
performs such works of this nature, as by the means now in use are
impossible. Contrariwise, he hereby drovvneth or vvatereth dry-lands, whether
for making them more strong and defensible, or more fruitful, then naturally
they are. He can also hereby conveigh water to towns or Houses, that lie
very remote from, and very much above any spring-heads or Rivers. He
facilitates the ordinary devices of brevvers and diers in fitting their
furneses, and in general, does more in all respects of speed, quantity,
height, ease, etc. concerning the busynes of draining and drowning, then by
any other means and contrivances now extant, has bin or can be effected.

II. He undertaketh to bore timber with a wooden Augur faster, streighter, of
a bigger boar, and vvithall much better Cheap, and the Pipes thus boared (if
they be for the conveyance of water under ground to great distances) he so
lays and places, that they last twice or thrice as long, as they are wont
to do being laid the ordinary way.

III. He offers to pass boats over a deep River, running never so swift
and of great breadth, without the use of oars, sail, or ought else, that by
its noise or visibilitie, may give notice thereof: and on the other side of the
said River, to fasten piles into the ground, without making any noise
likewise; a matter of great use in the entering and taking of Towns
fortified by such Rivers. Where it is to be noted, that this way of driving
piles, is not so distructive to them as that other of violent knocking,
bruiseing and shaking them, must needs be.

IV. He makes beams, for the vveighing of extraordinary weights, by which
the trouble and cost of such vveighings may be much abated; and does more by
Cranes, then is any where usually done.

V. He has expeditious vvayes to cut iron and many secrets of that Nature.

VI. He has contrived better tools, both for dispatch, cheapenes and exact
vvorkeing, for sundry artificers and Gentlemen versed in the more curious
subtle and elegant Mechaniks: As namely savves, whereby ovales, sphaeres, or
any portions or segments of them, may with one svveepe of the same be taken
out of a body of timber or other material and consequently all curious and
difficult excavations and hollovves much desired for dialls etc. may be more
easily and more speedily made. Also vvashing-bovvles, cupps etc. May be made
more quickly and incomparably with less expense of the materials, then is
ordinarily done.

VII. He makes Instruments for the formeing of Stone, into all manner of
regular figures, whether right-lined, circular, or mixed, and the polishing
them so shaped, with more ease and beauty then ordinary.

VIII. He makes fulling-Mills, which with half the force by men or horses,
are equivalent in strength and effect to the common ones moved by vvind or
water. These fulling-Mills he was moved to invent, that the busynes of
fulling might be moderated and governed at the descretion of the Artist, which
requires another order and degrees of flack or vehement motion, then the
unconstant and unruly vvind or water will allow. Now the Art of fulling, is
that which gives as it were the very Essence to cloth and the faults
committed therein, do frustrate all that whereunto the goodness of the vvoll,
spinning and vveaveing might conduce; and are irreparable by the best art of
those that handle the cloth afterward.

IX. He can ad such helps to a ship already built, as shall enable it to
sail more speedily in a calm, or small gale and more safely in a storm.

X. He has an Artifice to supply the want of a Rudder in case it be carried
away with extremity of weather and can substitute another device in place
thereof that perhaps shall satisfy the Intentions and uses of a Rudder much
more effectually. And what advantage would such an invention bring to
merchants, when their voyages may be made with less expense of Sea-mens
wages and victuals and less subjection to the Casualties of the weather? And
what advantage to vessels of war in whom (it is well known) svviftnes of
sail is of more consequence, then a triple strength otherwise.

XI. He can in a manner secure a ship from being boarded by an Enemy, and yet
have great advantages to board them; which is the busynes, of all other, of
most importance in Sea Fights.

XII. He propounds a fort moveable and easily transportable, vvhither the
exigence of service requires it, furnished with twelve pieces of ordnance
more or less, and all other warlike habiliments; wherein the gunners shall
be secure from their Enemies shot, and the whole soldiery exempt from the
Annoyance of smoke: the ordnance being scarce dismountable, the whole fort
free from being shaken, broken and disordered; the labor of chargeing and
dischargeing the Gunnes lessened, the levelling and traversing them upon all
lines completely performed, with small and easy motions.

XIII. He undertaketh to make a Colonie defensible, within fortie-eight hours
after the first landing of the Planters, and within a weeks time of an
extraordinary resistance. Whereas we see that now our Europaeans when they
would occupy any of the better Lands in America, must be guarded with some
thousands of Men, which must be alvvayes kept in a body and that in a posture
of war, to prevent the Assaults of the natives (who are most plentyfull
upon the richest grounds) which is a mighty discommodity to young beginners,
who expecting a Land of Canaan and rest, find themselves in a Camp of war;
and to them such expense of time and cost are for the most part intolerable.

XIV. He can by Carts of a new fashion transport great burdens from Place to
place; and whereas the old ones spoil good vvayes, by making holes, Cartrouts
etc. in them; to the extreme prejudice of the poor Cattle that dravv them, to
the vexation of the drivers (who with their horses and carriages are often
times stuck fast in a Bogg, hole or slough) and to the displeasure and
irkesomnes of travailers: these new Inventions shall plain, and level, and
strengthen the said vvayes, in such sort, as if their whole use were but to
mend, what the others have undone and spoiled.

XV. Neither does he only take away the common loathsome discommodities of
High-vvayes, but can make the vvorst of them viz: the great roades within a
mile or two of Londen, or any other great City, where vvayes are bad, like
pleasant Promenadoes and walks of recreation in all kinds of vveather. For
want whereof most great Cities are so fare from shareing with Amsterdam in
its Character. 1. From being fair prisons, that they may deservedly be called
very foul and unvvholesome jakes and dunghils in comparison of it.

XVI. He undertakes to make the City of Londen a very fair svveet and
pleasant City; for, besides the aforementioned imbellishing the High-vvayes
and rodes about it, he doubts not but within a vveeks time, to make it so
clean within, that one may walk in slippers in all vveathers (except snow)
in the fovvlest streets thereof; and can settle a way whereby it may be so
preserved with less then half an hours labor a day, and with a very slight
and cheap provision. So that Houses scarce kept sufficiently clean with two
servants, may by his direction be put into that condition by one: to the great
preservation of clothes and shoeleather; as also of health and the invitation
of Countrey-Gentlemen to live in it, who do for no other reason more then its
foulenes, abhor to reside more frequently in it. And besides all this (which
may seem strangest) the very charge of scavengers shall be much lessened, and
the dirt which in time, being in so great quantities vvashed into the Thames,
will damm it up, shall be converted to other uses, and that water which
fowls the said River shall cleanse the Land upon all occasiones, and be ready
in certain Repositories or Cisternes, which he will make to run themselves,
vvhethersoever the necessity of quenching fires calls them. Whereupon the
confusion and vvast of breakeing up the streets, opening the vvater-pipes etc:
Made in such extremities, shall wholy cease, as being no vvayes requisite.

XVII. He will order that Bells may be rung with far less strength and
smaler sized ropes then usual, whereby we might oftener hear the pleasant
noise of Bells, without a tumult of Ringers.

XVIII. He is sorry to see Corn and fulling-Mills set cross rivers, so as to
hinder the passablenes and navigabilitie of them, and therefore has invented a
Mill, wherein one horse shall out-grind the strength of a great stream, and
others wherein one man may out-doe one horse. The which besides the other
uses, would be of no small benefit in besieged Towns, Colonies, etc. where
men cannot, or dare not, make use of other Mills.

XIX. He has by his observation found out sure and un-erring marks to know
where springs are, and has effectual vvayes of preserveing and increasing
them, and although they rise in very lovv grounds, he can transmit their
waters to houses and towns situate upon an hill; and not only bring them to
an house, but convert them to many very pleasant and convenient uses therein.

XX. His insight into Gardening extends to the nourishing and cultivatening
of outlandish plants and trees here at home, so as to make them prosper and
flourish as in their proper soil, howbeit with less and worse fruit; to
make our domestic more fruitful; to accelerate the budding and ripening of
fruits and flovvers, as also to produce them out of their natural seasons; to
make arbours; and particularly to plant fruit trees with advantage upon boggs
and fenns, that now yield little profit to their owners.

XXI. He can discover a certain vvood (whereof there is great store in
Engeland) hitherto wholy neglected and despised, fit for timber, fair, tough
and dureable, free from worms, not subject to rott either in the wet or dry,
fit for vvater-conduits, generally good for all joyners works, particularly
for vvainscot, and vvithall very light of carriage.

XXII. He makes a certain Cement, which may be molded into any figure and
being polished is so hard that no ordinary stone-tooles will touch it, very
beautyfull and dureable and of a very reasonable rate.

XXIII. He makes vvalls as firm and substantial as those of stone and brick
and with a little pains as beautyfull (if it be by the Seaside) and in other
places of pebble-stones, gravel, or such like rubbish; and with this matter he
can counterfeit either brick or stone, at a very easy rate.

XXIV. He undertakes to preserve Beef, Pork, Mutton and Venison a twelve
months time from stinkeing and putrefaction; and can so reduce tainted meats,
that the most discerning palate, after he has ordered them, shall never be
sensible of any such defect.

XXV. He can in all seasons and Countries whether excessively intemperate in
respect of heat, cold, or moisture; where meats will either not take salt at
all, or suddenly putrify being salted; remedy both the one and the other
Inconveniencie.

XXVI. Where there is occasion of building a fortress by the Seaside, where
all convenient materials, seem to be vvanting; he undertakes nevertheless to
find vvherevvithall to make a fort, at least Canon-proofe.

XXVII. He makes up Sea-breaches wheresoever they happen, more speedily and
firmly then by any way yet practiced.

XXVIII. He will raise a fountain out of a Levell-ground: whereas the
ordinary ones are brought at a vast charge from some adjacent hills, which as
they are cheaper then the others; so are they no vvayes inferior to them in
beauty and high-throvving of the water.

XXIX. Whereas it happens upon the draining of Mersh or Fennie grounds that the
materials as turf-lands (whereof the banks used to that purpose are commonly
made) are subject either to dry and burn away i^ summer; or to be burnt up by
mischeivous people, or to subside and sink in vvinter, he ^an secure such
works, from the (...) Inconveniences.

XXX. Moreover he can make these banks so, as by what they shall prduce to
defray the charge of their making.

Glory be to God the Father of Lights through JESU CHRIST. WILLIAM WHEELER.

Eccles. 9.16.18. VVisdome is better then strength.

VVisdome is better then weapons of war.


It is to be noted that in page (1.) it is meant Hollands (...) which has b^^^
approved on before the States General in the Hague, and at other places.


