A LETTER FROM Mr. Edward Whitaker TO THE Protestant Joyner Upon his Bill being
sent to OXFORD.
My true Friend,
I Cannot but with grief consider the approaching danger that attends upon your
Bill being sent to Oxford, where it is too much to be feared the Tory and
Tantivy Parties prevail against the Interest of our true Bromingham Friends,
and for that reason give you these Cautions, considering our Friends have not
been so careful to have good Sheriffs and good Mayors in all the Corporations
of England; which neglect I fear will prove fatal. Nay, most of our Temple Bar
Friends may feel the sad Effects of so great an oversight; for the making of
such provision in one place signifies nothing, unless they had don't every
where. But they took the Government upon 'em, and it is no matter if they smart
for their carelessness: You know well enough that I had no ill Design in
causing the L. H. of E. to be apprehended, if I could in any case but have been
secure; But the Gossips my Mrs. GilsLurt and Mrs. Fitz-Harris must be tatling
that which it had been better they had not; and I did no more then bare
necessity forced me to, which is well known to all our honest Friends. I was
not a little raised in Spirit the other day when I heard the good tidings Mr.
Ignoramus brought to our Garrison, and the Applause he met with from all the
young Squires of the Black Gown, besides some of our Friends Foot-boys, who (as
with one Fum) did it so exactly, that it might well be compared with the best
of our Discipline; and at the same time my Joy was not without Sorrow for our
dear Friend S -- y, who broke his Arm in endeavoring to speak to an honest
Friend of the Jury, before they went out upon your Bill; and indeed had I not
been Confined, I did intend to that my self, and would take care of your Oxford
Jury, if I could possible any ways find the way thither; but you knowing of my
Condition, I hope you will have me favorably excused to our Friends that will
be sent thither. My Friend, be cheerful, for I can assure you you're not
forsaken; for upon your Case hangs all our Cases, and if you hang, it is much to
be feared we shall few of us escape better. And, by the way take these
following Directions: When you come upon your Trial Be sure to except against
all the Tory and Tantivy- men that shall be Impannell'd; for it is impossible to
persuade any single man of that Party to move a quarter of an inch from the
true meaning of the Law of the Land; and by keeping to that Rule some of our
Bromingham Friends will chop in at last upon your Trial for Life and Death; and
you may well guess the men, (Friends will be there to give you the watchword,)
and they cannot want encouragement to be honest; and so far fear not, and bear
up manfully as you have hitherto done in despite of 'em all.

I could recommend our Agents to an Alehouse-keeper that lives near the
Theater; he is a very honest man, as I may say, and has had the
King's-Head-Letter ever since the beginning of the Plot; that is a man that may
be confided in, and will give you notice of all our true Friends that live in
those Parts, which at this season may be of great use to your Deliverance, (as
you know how) and I am well assured the good People will not be sparing in
their Labor, if they can any ways be inducted to serve you, and if they be
careful of inquiring among 'em, you will find that some of 'em will lend you a
hard word or two, (you know what I mean,) and 'twill be better taken then to
bring any of our battered London-faces to a place where they are so generally
known.

But if none of the forementioned shifts take place, and you must after all be
found Guilty upon your last Plea, tell 'em you have something of Importance to
declare in private, and in troth if it comes to that tell all, for I Am resolved
to do it my self, but that I keep as my last stake, and if you observe that, you
will easily judge how much you may be a saver by the Bargain, and let them
dance that have all along paid the Piper, for they have more Money and Wit to
defend themselves than we. And besides, it is almost morally impossible, if
there was as many Witnesses against 'em as standing one upon another would
reach to the top of the Monument near London Bridge, they would hardly be
discerned as the Cause is here secured, and so far they are secure from being
beholding to their Peers, unless the Oxford trick be put upon them; for if they
have been tatling there, (as it is too much to be feared they have) we have
brought our Hogs to a fair Market: I am plain, you need no Clavis to know what
is meant.

Honest Kisstel does intend to attend at his own Coffee-House near you for the
more secure entertainment of Friends: Indeed Richard should have done it upon
the stock-publick, but in this stress of business he cannot be spared from
home; for you know our Friends will not trust every one with the place where
they go, and will not be so public as they have been, except in the Stationers
Shops, Committees, or so; for if they do not keep up their Reputation there,
the Cause will never be retrieved. A good Journey, and as good a come off, is
the wishes of

Your true Friend E. W.

LONDON: Printed for N. T. 1681.


