In the Council Chamber, 6. die Novembris, Anno 21. Domini nostri Caroli
Regis. ^ur. Wardorum and Liberationum.

Whereas many petitions have been preferred to the Right Honorable the Master
of this Court, for obtaining grants of several Wards hips and Leases of the
Lands of his Masjesties Wards, And days have been appointed them to procure
the offices to be found, and attend with schedules and confessions of the
Ancestors Estates at the times appointed, to compound for the VVardships and
Leases, as the said cases should require. Many of which petitioners have
concealed the said petitions, and done nothing in pursuance of the Answers
given thereunto: And diverse other of the said petitioners have procured offices
to be found and returned; and schedules to be prepared, as though they intended
to compound forthwith for the Wardship and Leases, And so let them rest
without further proceedings; And others have compounded, but have not paid the
Kings fine, nor passed the grants: It is therefore Ordered, That all such of
the said petitioners, as have not, or shall not effectually proceed, according
to the direction given in Answer to their said petitions, before the end of
this Michaelmas term, shall lose the benefit of their said petitions, And it
shall be lawful for any others to petition for such Wardship and Leases, as
if no such petition had been preferred; And all other petitioners who have in
pursuance of such direction in Answer to such petitions, procured offices to be
found, and made composition with the Court, and not proceeded to pay their
fines, and passed their grants; And such others as have found offices, and not
yet compounded for the Wardship and Leases petitioned for, nor shall compound
and proceed in prosecution of their grants before the end of this term, shall
lose the benefit of their petitions and charges, And the VVardships, Lands, and
Estates of such Wards, shall be either sequestered into fit men's hands to to take
care of, and be responsall to this Court for the profits; or otherwise granted
to such persons as the Court shall think fit, the late Kings Majeties
instructions notwithstanding; And like proceedings to continue from term to
term, at the peril of the parties whom it does or may concern, until
further and other order to the contrary.

Will. Say and Seal. Benjamin Rudyerd. Row. Wandesford. Charles Maynard. James
Took.

Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons, at the
Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet.


