THE Absurdity and Idolatry OF Host Worship, PROVED, By showing how it answers
what is said in Scripture and the Writings of the Fathers, to show the Folly
and Idolatry committed in the Worship of the Heathen Deities.

ALSO A full Answer to all those Pleas by which Papists would wipe off the
charge of Idolatry.

And an APPENDIX against Transubstantiation; with some Reflections on a late
Popish Book called The Guide in Controversies.

By DANIEL WHITBY, D.D. Chantor of the Church of Sarum.

The saying of Averroes.

I have Traveled the World, and found diverse Sects in it, but none so foolish
as that Sect of Christians who eat the God whom they worship.

Dionsy. Carthus. in Sent. 4. Did. 10. Art. 1. LONDON: Printed for H. Brom at
the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, R. Bentley and M. Magnes in R^sselstreet
Covent Garden. 1679.

THE PREFACE.
FInding that Roman Catholics are much displeased at us for saying and
maintaining that they are guilty of Idoltry, and for making Laws, and wholesome
Constitutions forbidding them to practice that Idolatry within our Realms, I
have these things offer in our own defense:

1. That their displeasure is unjust, Peccant Contra hoc mandatum, Athei,
Apotatae, Judaei, Turcae, Haeretici. Esth. in Sent. l. 3. did.. 5.
and thwarts that Golden Rule of Nature, which says, do not you that to others
which you are not willing they should do to you. For they do peremptorily
conclude that Protestants are guilty of Idolatry, and therefore ought not to be
angry if we return the charge upon them. Their Casuists and Schoolmen do
frequently declare that Heretics are guilty of violation of that Precept which
says, I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other Gods but me. This
Doctrine is delivered in the Roman Catechism, Peccant in hoc praeceptum qui in
Haeresin labuntur. Part. 3. c. 2.. 7.
and so it is that Doctrine which they are obliged to own and vindicate. Now if
they do affirm that we are guilty of this crime by having other gods, they do
then manifestly say that we are guilty of Idolatry: But if they do conceive us
to offend against this Precept, as it injoins us to acknowledge God to be our
God, they must conceive us to be Atheists; and if they think it fit to pass so
heavy and severe a censure upon us, why should they take it ill that we accuse
them of a lesser crime, with better evidence?

2. I add that our Superiors have only done their duty in making of those Laws
which do forbid the practice of their. Idolatry within this Nation. For if the
Magistrate be keeper of both the Tables of the Moral Law, if it concern him to
see that all his Subjects do perform those great duties which they owe to God
and man, he cannot duly execute his Office, or be faithful to the trust
committed to him whilst he permits the violation of the first, and chiefest
Precept of that Law; but must by suffering God to be dishonored in so high a
manner, when it is in his power to hinder it, make himself partaker of other
men's sins. And if Magistrates may suffer God to be dishonored in this kind, I
know not why we should conceive them bound to punish Thefts, Schisms, Heresies,
or Infidelity, which crimes the Church of Rome excites the Magistrate to punish
with extreme severity. If we consult the Law of Moses, we shall there find that
God did frequently forbid Idolatry under the utmost and severest penalties. The
Books of Samuel, and of the Kings give us continual instances of Gods
displeasure against those Kings of Israel and Judah, who did countenance
Idolatry, or who neglected to remove it out of their Dominions. And suitable to
their proceedings was the constant practice of the first Christian Emperors.
Christ fully does acknowledge that the Church of Pergamus held fast his name,
and yet he does object this to her as an heinous and provoking crime, Rev. ii.
14.
that she had those amongst her who held the Doctrine of Balaam, and taught men
to eat things Sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit Fornication. The Church of
Thyatira was eminent for Faith, Charity, and Patience, and for proficiency in
the ways of Piety, and yet our Savior speaks thus to her, I have some few
things against thee, Rev. ii. 20.
because thou suffer that woman Jezebel which calls herself a Prophetess,
to teach and to seduce my servants to commit Fornication and to eat things
Sacrificed to Idols. Sermon. before the Parliament. p. 42, 43.


In the second of Judges (they are the words of the Reverend and Learned Bishop
Usher) God tells the Children of Israel what mischief should come to them by
tolerating the Canaanitish Idolaters in the Land, they shall be thorns in their
sides, says he, and their Gods shall be a snare to you. Which words contain in
them an intimation of a double danger, the one respecting the Soul, the other
the Body; that which concerns the Soul, is that their Idols shall be a snare
unto them, for God well knew that man's nature is as prone to Spiritual
Fornication, as it is to Corporal, as therefore for the preventing of the one
he would not havea common Harlot tolerated in Israel, Lev. xix. 29.
lest the Land should fall to Whoredom, so for the keeping out of the other, he
would have provocations taken away, and all occasions whereby a man might be
tempted to commit so vile a sin. The bodily danger that follows upon the
toleration of Idolaters is that they shall be pricks in their eyes, Numb.
xxxiii. 55.
and thorns in their sides, and should vex them in the land wherein they dwelt.
Now in both these respects it is certain that the toleration of the Idolaters
with whom we have to do is far more perilous than of any other, in regard of
the spiritual danger wherewith simple souls are more like to be ensnared,
because this kind of Idolatry is not brought in with an open show of impiety,
as that of the Pagans, but is a mystery of iniquity, a wickedness covered with
the veil of Piety; and the Harlot which makes the inhabitants of the earth
drunk with the wine of this fornication, is both gilded herself, and presents
also her abominations to her followers in a cup of Gold. If we look to outward
peril, we are like to find these men not thorns in our sides to vex us, but
daggers in our hearts to destroy us, not that I take all of them to be of this
furious disposition, but because there are never wanting among them some
turbulent humors so enflamed with the spirit of Fornication that they run mad
with it, and are so far transported that no tolerable terms can content them,
until they have attained to the utmost pitch of their unbridled desires, for
compassing whereof there is no Treachery, nor Rebellion, nor Murder, nor
desperate course whatsoever, that without all remorse of Conscience they dare
not adventure upon; and whether we have not just cause to say, as did our
Savior in another case, This day these words have been fulfilled in our ears,
I leave it to the discerning Reader to consider.

Let it be therefore manifested that our Church has erred in passing of this
heavy sentence on the Church of Rome, that in her adoration of the Host, and
her Mass. Worship she commits Idolatry, or else it must be granted that we
stand obliged in interest and duty to suppress that Worship.

And whereas some who are called mambers of the Church of England, rather choose
to say the Church of Rome is in this worship guilty of Superstition, than
Idolatry, I hope, they only choose to say the same thing which we do, in a
milder phrase; for they well know that Superstition, both in the Scripture, and
in the language of the Ancient Fathers, does signify Idolatry. The
Superstitious person, (...), etc. Strom. l. 7. p. 701.
says Hesychius, is a worshipper of Idols, an Idolater. He, says Clemens, is
the superstitious man who is a worshipper of Demons, and who advances Wood,
and Stone, and Spirits into the number of the Gods. (...). v. 16. (...).
Prepar. Evang. l. 1. c 5. p. 14. B. p. 16. (...) Contr. Cells. l. 6. p. 287.
And when St. Paul perceived that Athens was a City full of Idols, he cries out,
I perceive you are too superstitious. Act. xvii. 22. The Heathen worship is by
Eusebius styled, the superstitious error of the old Idolatry. And Origin
declares that the Philosophy of Plato was not sufficient to divert men from
that which Christians call Idolatry, and others Superstition.

We ought, I humbly conceive, to make this charitable construction of their
words who have subscribed and yielded their assent and consent to that Rubric
after the Communion, which speaks thus: The Sacramental Bread and Wine remain
still in their very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored; for
that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all Faithful Christians. Who, secondly, do
own the Canons and Constitutions of the convocation held A. D. 1640. and
published by the Authority of our Royal Martyr, Charles the First, for the due
observation of them, and which inform us, that at the time of Reforming this
Church from that gross Superstition of Popery, it was carefully provided that
all means should be used to root out of the minds of the people, both the
inclination thereunto; and memory thereof, especially of the Idolatry committed
in the Mass, for which cause all Popish Altars were demolished. Who, thirdly,
do affirm that the First and Second Book of Homilies (which above twenty times
do charge the Church of Rome with gross Idolatry, Hom. of the peril of
Idolatry. Hom. of the Sacrament, Part the first. Art. 35.
and in particular do mention the gross Idolatry of Mummish Massing) contain a
Godly and a Wholesome Doctrine. Who, fourthly, Art. 28.
do surscribe and hold, that the Sacrament of the Lord Supper was not by
Christ's Ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, and worshipped; and
therefore must believe that when in their Processions it is worshipped by the
Romanists as God, Christ is not present there, and so the Creature only is then
adored as a God. And this is all which I thing meet to say by way of Preface to
this little Book.

Errata in the Book.
PAge 14. Line 31. which, Read we, p. 30. l. 8. del. that, p. 36. l. 9. which
r. with, p. 62. l. 15. the r. this, so p. 66. l. 20. p. 126. l. 24. p. 83. l.
14. add (3.) p. 113. l. 4. add such. p. 130. l. 28. Tarusius r. Tarasius, p.
113. l. 1. Deacons r. Demons, p. 142. l. 22. their r. there.

In the Margent.
P. 75. consentiebant dele con, p 84. and deinceps, Brienw r. Brierw, p. 91.
Graeca r. Graecus, p. 101. quam r. quia, p. 128. qua r. quia.

In the Appendix.
P. 59. l. 12. their r. her, p. 63. l. 20. by r. be, p. 67. l. 21. their r.
your, so p. 97. l. 14. p. 84. l. 18. about r. but, p. 92. l. 18. to r. do, p.
95. l. 19. add he says, p. 98. l. 20. Charters r. Chartres. p. 106. l. 21.
these r. those, l. 22. seem r. seemed, l. 25. none r. not, p. 115. l. 30. add
(4.) p. 118. l. 28. Dessius r. Lessius, p. 119. l. 1. add (7.) l. 2. by r. of,
p. 122. l. 17. to r. of, l. 32, if r. it. Marg. p. 78. verb r. urbe.

CHAP. I.
The Contents.

The Introduction. I. The Trent Council teaches that the Host or Sacrament is
to be Worshipped with Latria, as being truly God.. II. And yet this Council
does acknowledge that by Christ's Precept the Communicants do eat, and some of
them do drink the Sacrament.. II. Heathens, Jews, Christians do all pronounce
it the extremity of folly to say or think that any man can eat his God.. III.
The Trent Council teaches that Christ is truly Sacrificed by their Priests..
IV. To the Ancient Fathers nothing did seem more brutish and absurd than to
Worship as a God what men did Sacrifice, or Sacrifice what they did Worship as
a God.. V. The substance of the Sacrament being Christ truly God according to
the Doctrine of the Roman Church, whatsoever truly is affirmed of it must also
truly be affirmed of our Blessed Lord.. VI. The Prophets and the Fathers deride
the Heathen Gods. (I.) Because they are carried upon men's shoulders, they
cannot go, and if they fall, they cannot rise up again.. VII. (2.) because they
may be carried Captive, and are not able to deliver or preserve themselves..
VIII. (3.) Because they needed to be preserved by Officers appointed for that
purpose under Lock and Key, and to be vindicated by their own votaries.. IX.
(4.) Because in times of war and danger their Priests did hide them, and
sometimes bury them in the earth.. X. (5.) Because they were exposed to injuries
of Fire, and consumed by it.. XI. (6.) Because they were exposed to Rust and
Moth, to Corruption, and the Injuries of the Weather.. XII. (7.) Because they
seemed to be contemned by those very Brutes who dung'd and gnawed upon them,
etc.. XIII. Upon all these accounts the Host, or Roman God, is subject to the
like derision, from. VII. to the XIII.

Prophets make it their business to represent those Deities the Heathens
Worshipped as impotent and lying vanities, and things most worthy of derision
and contempt, but most unworthy to be Venerated: and thence conclude that that
they who paid their Homage to them, were persons void of understanding and
consideration, and given up to a judicial blindness. This is so largely
represented by them, upon two accounts which more immediately did respect the
Jewish Nation.

1. That when they were to go into Captivity, and to be mixed with those
Heathens, by whom these foolish Deities were Worshipped, they might be kept
from learning of their ways. When you shall come to Babylon, Baruch vi. 4, 5.
says Jeremy, there you shall see Gods of Silver, Gold, and Wood, which create
terror to the Heathens, nnd which are carried upon shoulders; fear therefore
lest you should be confirmed to the Aliens, and be possessed with the dread of
them, seeing the multitude before and behind that worship them.

2. That they who had already been seduced to the Worship of them, might be
reclaimed by the consideration of so great a folly, and be induced to return
unto the Worship of the True and Only God. Beware you be not like unto these
Aliens, but say within thy heart, I ought to worship thee, O Lord. V. 6.

And if those Jews who, in this manner have transgressed, say these Prophets,
will but remember that Bell and Nebo, and all other Heathen Deities are born
upon men's shoulders, or the backs of beasts; that where they place them there
they stand, and are not able to remove from thence, that they themselves are
sometimes carried Captives, not being able to work deliverance for themselves;
If they remember this, and act like men, they must for ever be secure from
these delusions. In Compliance with this practice of the Sacred Writers, the
Christian Fathers in their Apologies, and other writings of the like nature,
have used the same Topics, the more effectually to reclaim the world from
Heathenish Idolatry, smartly deriding the impotency of the Gods they
worshipped, and seoffing at the folly of that Homage which they paid unto them.

If therefore that which the inspired Prephets and Primitive Professors of the
Christian Faith, did so unanimously produce, (in plain derision of the Heathen
Deities, and whereby they endeavored to demonstrate that they could not be
truly Gods) does equally concern that Host which by the Churh of Rome, and the
Trent Council is declared to be the Christians God, and which on that
presumption they require all Christians to worship with Latria, or with the
Worship which peculiarly belongs to the God of Heaven; as by applying what
the Holy Prophets, and Primitive Christians have alleged against the Worship
of the Heathen Deities, unto the Host, will be extremely evident; it follows
undeniably that they who are not yet seduced to pay this Worship to the Host,
must have sufficient reason to abstain from it; and also that they who have
already been induced to pay this Homage to it, must have as powerful motives to
reclaim them from so great a folly, as either Jew or Gentile had to renounce
the Worship of their Heathen Idols.

And now to make the matter evident beyond all reasonable contradiction, I
shall proceed to draw the Parallel betwixt the Adoration of the Romish Host,
and that of Heathen Deities, so much derided by the Jewish Prophets, and the
Christian Doctors.

And this I shall attempt, L. 5. p. 170.
as says Arnobius, in a Case like this, not that I take delight in thus
exposing of the Romish Mysteries, or representing of their Faith ridiculous;
but that the Romanists themselves may plainly see what injury they cast upon
their bon Dieu, of whom they are the Worshippers, the Keepers, and Avengers.

Nullis itaque d^bitandi locus relinquitur, q^i^ omnes Christi sidel^s pro
(...) in Catholica Ecclesia semper recepto, (N. B.) Latriae cultum, qui vero
debetur Deo, huic Sanctissimo Sacramento in veneratione ex^i^eant; neque enim
ideo minus adorandum est, quo faerit a Christo, at s^mat^r institutum. Council.
Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 5.
Trent Council teaches, that it is not to be doubted in the least but that all
Faithful Christians should exhibit the Worship of Latria to the Holy Sacrament,
that is, the Consecrated Wafer, even that Worship which is due to God alone,
and they pronounce Anathema against all persons who assert the contrary.

2. The reasons of this determination they assign in the ensuing words, Nam
illum eundem Deum praeclentem in eo credimus adesse, q^^m pater aeternus
introd^cens in orbem terrarum, dicit, and adorent eum omnes Angeli Dei. Q^^m
Magi procidentes adoraverunt; quem denique in Galilaea ab Apostolis adoratum
fuisse, Sereptura testat^r. ibid.
for we believe the same God is present in the Host, of whom the Father said,
let all the Angels of God Worship him, and whom the wise men of the East, and
the Apostles Worshipped. And therefore the first Canon of the thirteenth
Session of that Council declares, that Si quis negaverit, in Sanctissimae
E^charistiae Sacramento contineri vere, realiter and substantialiter Corpus and
sanguinem una cum anima and Divinitate Domini nostri Jesu Christi, a^ perinde
totum Christum, anathema sit, 1. Can.
if any person says that in the Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist Christ's body
and his blood together with his Soul, and his divinity, and so whole Christ, is
not substantially contained, let him be accursed. And accordingly in the Orat.
past miss^^^.
Rythm of St. Thomas to the Holy Euchar^t, they speak thus, Deum meum te
confitcor, I confess thee to be my God. Their Tenet therefore plainly is this,
That the Consecrated Wafer is God united to the man Christ Jesus, latent under
the species of bread.

3. Hence it must follow that, seeing they do eat this Consecrated Wafer, which
is as truly God and man as Christ now glorified is, they do professedly eat the
god they Worship; and that you may not doubt of this, the Council does
immediately subjoyn these words to the forementioned determination touching the
Worship due unto the Host, the Sacrament is not the less to be adored, Sess 13.
Cap. 5. vid. Supra.
because, according to the institution of it, it is to be eaten.

4. Hence it does also follow, that seeing they do drink what is contained in
the Consecrated Chalice, and that according to their Doctrine, is whole Christ,
God and man, contained under the Species of Wine; I say, hence it does clearly
follow, that they drink their God. This is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome,
most faithfully discovered to you from their Authentic Records, and if it only
did assert that Christians stood obliged to be Cannibals, to eat man's flesh,
and drink down human blood; even this assertion would contain what is repugnant
to the nature of man, what has been constantly esteemed by the sober Heathens,
a barbarous and inhuman thing; and lastly that which by the Ancient Fathers was
disclaimed and rejected with the greatest horror. But then if we conceive the
person who is thus devoured to be also God, and therefore look upon this action
as (...) the eating of our God and Maker, it is so full of horror, scandal, and
amazement, that nothing can be more prodigious, or more blasphemously profane,
Heathers, Mahumetans, Jews, Christians, have with one voice declared that it is
a demonstration of the extremity of madness, and stupidity, for any man to
worship what he eats, or eat what he does Worship; ( i.e.) to worship as the
Church of Rome commands all men to worship under the highest penalties, and
therefore it is plain Frenzy to imagine the determination of the Trent
Council, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome to be agreeable to truth.

When we call Wine Bacchus, says Cicero, and our Fruits Ceres, we use the Cum
frug^s Cererem, vinum Liberum dicimus, genere nos quidem Sermanis uti^ur
usitato: Sed e^quam t^m amentem esse putas, qui illad quo v^scatur Deum credat
esse? Cicero Not. De^r. Lib. 3.
common mode of speaking, but do you think any of us so mad as to imagine that
which he eats to be his God? Averroes was a learned Heathen, who flourished
about the XL Century when this portentous Doctrine first obtained in the
Christian World, which he could not forbear to brand in this sort, Apad Person.
E^^^. l. 3. cap. 29. p. 973. Vide etiam 12. Metaph.
I have enquired into all Religions and have found none more foolish than the
Christians, because that very God they worship, they with their teeth devour,
and thus he concludes, because the Christians eat what they do worship, let my
soul go to Philosophers. Lib. 2. de Euch. Cap. 12. 2.
And Bellarmin himself confesses that this amongst the Infidels was always
judged to be stuliissimum paradoxum, as from the words, says he, of Averroes
does appear. Hence as the highest calumny which the Mahumetans can cast upon
us, we are by them reproached as (...) or the Devourers of our God. And
Mounsieur La Boulay informs us that being angry with him, Voyag. Part. 1: cap.
10. p. 21. Armed. Ben. Edris apud Hosing. Hist. Eccles. Sec. 16. par. 2. p. 160.
they amongst other names of infamy, did call him Infidel, and Mange Dieu ( i.
e.) an Eater of his God. Nay they affirm that by thus eating of his flesh the
Christians use him worse than did the Jews that crucified him, because, say
they, it is more salvage to eat his flesh and drink his blood, than only to
procure his death: Baruch, vi. 72.
the Prophet Jeremy in his Epistle to the Captive Jews, informs them that what
the Babylonians worshipped should afterward be eaten, and by this, says he,
you may know they are no Gods; Why therefore should not the same argument
suffice to show the vanity of the supposed Godhead of the Host? If (as it
follows there) these Gods which shall be eaten be a reproach unto the Country
where they are adored, this Romish God must be a great reproach to all those
Christian Countries where he is eaten, and adored. Some of the Ancient Fathers
do represent this as the extremity of folly, that men should worship that which
other Nations eat: If it be pious for all the worship God, says Origin,
^Contra Celsum. 5. p. 249.
according to the custom of their Country, as Celsus pleads, then must some
worship that which by other Nations is destroyed, or eaten, and consumed at
meals; for some esteem it pious to worship a Crocodile, and to devour that
which is adored by others, some count it piety to adore a Calf, and others to
Deifie a Goat; and would not these things introduce a great confusion into the
Laws of Justice, Piety, Contra Gentes. p. 25, 26.
and Religion? This Athanasius reckons as an instance of the abominable, and
the repugnant worship of the Egyptians, that the same Fish which some of them
did Consecrate as a God, was made the food of others; The Egyptians (says he)
do adore a Calf, the Lybians worship Sheep, both which in other Nations are
sacrificed and fed upon, this, says he, is a certain indication of the folly
of the Heathen worship, can we then possibly conceive these very Christians did
daily worship as their God, what they themselves and others who participated
with them, did continually eat? Moreover some of the Fathers do represent this
as the most evident conviction of the folly of the Heathen Worship and
Religion, that they devoured what they themselves adored; Do you not worship,
Nonne and Apim bovem cum Aegyptiis adoratis and pascitis? p. 32.
and also feed upon an Ox which you call Apis, says Minutius, and is not this
as great a folly as the worship of an Asses-head which without show of reason
you object against us Christians? They says Theodoret) who changed the image
of the incorruptible God into the likeness of Birds, and beasts, and creeping
things, should have considered that some of those beasts were eaten by them;
and should not they by parity of reason who adore the Host as their Creator and
their incorruptible God, (...) Com. in Romans i. 23.
consider that this Host is eaten by them? but they, says he, through the
extremity of madness and stupidity, did Deifie the Images of that God which
themselves have eaten, and if the Host which they themselves confess to be
truly styled the Image of our Lord, be worshipped as a God, and eaten by them,
must not the Romanists betruly charged with like stupidity and madness? 3. Some
of the Fathers do expressly say that it is the extremity of madness to worship
what we eat; and that God by the prohibition of unclean beasts, and by
permitting his own people to eat the clean, designed to preserve them from the
irrational folly of the Heathens, who worshipped birds and beasts, etc. God,
says Theodoret, seeing that men would fall to such extremity of madness as to
worship beasts as Gods, the better to restrain that wickedness, permitted that
they should be eaten; which in the judgment of Theodoret was the most natural
preservative against this mad Idolatry; because, says he, (...) qa. 55. in
Genes.
it is the highest folly or stupidity to worship what is eaten; God therefore
does pronounce some living creatures clean, and some unclean, that abborring
the unclean they might not Deifie them. Again he adds, that God pronouncing
some beasts unclean, and others clean, persuades us not to think that any of
them could be Gods; for how can any man of sense think that to be a God which
he abominates as unclean, Quest. XI. in Levit. p. 104. D.
or which is offered to the true God, and eaten by himself. He farther says,
that God enjoined the Jews to eat those Creatures which the Egyptians
worshipped as Gods, Ser. 7. ad Graecos Infideles. p. 150. ed. Sylb.
that they might be induced to despise what they did eat. For knowing that they
were superstitious, and yet were lovers of their Guts, he cures one Disease by
another, and to their supperstition he does oppose their appetites; for,
causing them to abstain from Swines flesh as unclean, which was the only flesh,
the Egyptians fed upon, and by his Law permitting them to eat of other
creatures, as being clean; he constrained them through lusting after flesh, to
eat of the supposed Egyptian Gods: The Author of the Questions and Answers to
the Orthodox speaks to the same effect; (...) Resp. ad Quaest. 35. p. 412, 413.
viz. that because in Egypt all beasts were Deified, excepting Swine, God
therefore calls some of them unclean, some clean; and did permit them to
Sacrifice clean beasts, forbidding them to eat of the unclean, by bath these
things showing they were unworthy of the name and honor of the Deiey, both
because they were sacrificed and eaten, and because they were called unclean.
Since then the Roman Host is sacrificed and eaten, it must, by parity of Reason,
be unworthy of the name and worship of a Deity. If God by permitting of his
people to eat clean beasts, demonstrated to them that they could not be Gods,
he, by commanding all Christians to eat the Host, must have demonstrated to
them it is no God. If it be the extremity of madness to worship what is eaten
by us; and if no man of wisdom can conceive that to be God, the Romanists must
then be persons void of sense, and guilty of extremity of madness. Since then
the Ancient Fathers did pass as deep a censure on this God-eating, as did the
wiser Heathens, Turks, and Jews, it must be certain that this new Article of
the Romish Faith, that the same Jesus whom they daily worship, is also to be
eaten, by all faithful Christians, was utterly unknown in their days.

Corpus and sanguinem suum sub speciebus panis and vini Deo Patri obtulit; ac
s^b ear^^dem rerum symbolis, Apostolis, quos tanc novi Testamenti sacerdotes
constituebat, ut samerent tradidit; and eisdem, eorunque in sacerdotio
suscessoribus, at offerrent praec^pit per haec verba, Hoc facite. Sess. 22.
Cap. 1.
Trent Council teaches that Christ has instituted that he himself should
still be Sacrificed in the Church; or offered by the Priest under the signs of
Bread and Wine: he therefore being God and man, he must have instituted the
oblation of God-man to be continued in his Church.

2. They teach, U^a enim eademqae ^^^ Hostia. Sess. 22. Cap. 2.
that the oblation which Christ once made upon the Cross, and which the Priest
does daily make upon the Altar, is one and the same oblation: and so the same
God-man is offered by the Priest. They also do expressly teach, that what they
Si quis di^^^it in Sancto (...) Sacramento Christum unigenitum Dei sillium non
esse (...) etiam externo, adorandum, Anathema sit. Sess. 13. Cap. 8. Can. 6.
is to be worshipped with Latria, the worship proper to the God of Heaven.

Ancient Fathers nothing did seem more bruitsh and absurd than to esteem and
worship as a God what men did Sacrifice. Why are you Sacrilegious against your
Gods, (...) etc. p. 149.
says Tatian, ( as certainly you are) for you Sacrifice a Sheep and yet you
worship it: you have a Bull in the Heavens and you Sacrifice the likeness of
him. The Greeks being ignorant of God, (...) Clem. Strom. l. 6. p. 635.
says Clemens, not knowing him with that perfect knowledge which the Christians
have, they worship those things which God has given them for meat, the Fowls
of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, the Beasts of the Field, and they Sacrifice
their own food: and must not then the Romanist be also ignorant of the true
Christian knowledge of God, who does both Sacrifice and Worship what God has
given him to eat? You do object against us Christians, says Boum Capita, and
capita vervecum, and immolatis and colitis. Minue. p. 32. Praepar. Evang. L. 3.
Cap. 12.
Minutius, the worship of an Asses head, Who is so foolish as to worship it, or
to conceive that others worship it, unless it be your selves, who do both
Sacrifice and Worship the heads of Oxen and of Rams? That the Egyptians did
not conceive their Oxen to be Gods is very manifest, says Eusebius, because
they in their worship of the Gods did often Sacrifice them. This is a certain
indication, Contra Gentes. p. 26.
says Athanasius, of the folly and Atheisin of the Heathen worship, and an
assurance that it cannot long subsist, that what One Nation does esteem a God,
another Sacrifices, and what One Nation Sacrifices another worshipeth as a
God; for though they do not Sacrifice those very numerical Calves, and Sheep
which they have Consecrated as Gods, yet since they Sacrifice the like in kind,
they seem to Sacrifice the same. The Indians worship Wine under the name of
Bacchus, whilst others Sacrifice it to their Gods; the Egyptians do adore a
Calf, the Lybians worship Sheep, both which in other Nations are Sacrificed and
fed upon. There is scarce a God in Egypt who is not Sacrificed to Deities of
other Countries, so that they well deserve to be the laughing stock of other
Nations because they worship as a God not only what other Nations, but what
themselves do offer as a Propitiatory Sacrifice. God shows clean beasts to be
unworthy of the name and honor of a Deity, because that they are Sacrificed,
Quaest. and Resp. ad Orthod. Quaest. 35. vide supra. Adv. Graeons Sermon. de
Sacrif. p. 105.
says Pseudo-Justin. Lastly Theodoret declares that God did therefore cause
the Jews to Sacrifice those beasts, which they before had worshipped in Egypt,
that by so doing they might learn not to esteem as Gods those things which they
were wont to Sacrifice, and offer to him; this remedy, says he, their wise
Physician did preseribe for their Egyptian malady. From all which passages it
is extremely evident that to esteem or worship that as God which we do
Sacrifice, is in the judgment of the Ancient Christians, to be Sacrilegious
against God, and ignorant of the true knowledge of God; it is to be guilty of no
less than folly and Atheism; it is as absurd as the worship of an Asses head;
it is that which justly renders men a laughing stock to all their neighbors; and
therefore it is manifest that Roman Cathalicks, the greatest part of whose
devotion consists in this Mass-Service, this Sacrificing of that God they
worship, must in the judgment of these Fathers be liable to all those
imputations. And seeing the Fathers do declare that God by permitting men to
eat, and by commanding them to Sacrifice clean beasts, designed to convince
them that they were unworthy the name and worship of the Deity, and to instruct
them not to esteem that as a God which they were wont to Sacrifice to God: The
Romanists by commanding men to eat, and as they also do imagine to Sacrifice
the Host, must be supposed to instruct and to convince them, it is unworthy of
the name and worship of the Deity. (...) Anaxandr. apad Athenaeum 1.7. p. 299.
As therefore Anaxandrides said to the Egyptians I can have no agreement which
you because of the great difference there is betwixt our customs and those
which do obtain among you; for whereas you do worship Oxen, I Sacrifice them to
the Gods: an Eel is by you honored as a great God, by me it is eaten as
delicious meat. So may we say unto the Romanists, We can have no communion with
you, because you worship that as a great God, which we do eat: and what you
Sacrifice (at least in your imagination) we think most worthy to be worshipped,
and therefore 'twill be ever far from us to Sacrifice it. Genesis xliii. 32. Vide
Ainsw. in locum.
'Twas an Abomination to the Egyptians to eat bread with the Hebrews, because
the Hebrews did cat those Cattle which the Egyptians worshipped, says the
Chaldee Parpahrase. And Moses would depart from Egypt before he Sacrificed to
his God, Exodus viii. 26.
left he should Sacrifice to the Lord the abominations of the Egyptians before
their eyes (i.e.) the beasts which the Egyptians worshipped, and therefore did
abhor to kill, or to see killed for Sacrifice. We therefore who also do abhor,
as all the Ancient Fathers did, to see that Sacrificed and caten which we adore
as God, cannot eat of this Sacred bread with those of Rane, but must first fly
from Babylon, as it is Prophesied the Church should do, before we do
commemorate that Sacrifice which they repeat.

Roman Church, whatsoever truly is affirmed of, or does belong unto the
substance of the Sacrament, must also be truly affirmed of our Blessed Lord.
Now if we do compare those things, which are delivered in their Liturgy, and
most Authentic Records, touching the Host, with what the light of Nature
teaches, and what the Scriptures, and the Holy Fathers have delivered in
derision of the Heathen Gods which shall soon find that what the Scriptures and
the Holy Fathers have offered to expose the HeathenGods to the contempt and
indignation of their foolish votaries, L. 5. p. 160.
does more emphatieally expose that Host which by the Papists is worshipped as a
true God, to the derision of mankind. And truly as Arnobius says in a like
case, and on like ground; so say I here, had the malicious Jew, or the vilest
Infidel, designed to put affronts upon our dearest Lord, I know not by what
method, they could have done it more effectually; since the disguises which the
Romanists have put upon him, do certainly expose him almost to all the scoffs
which have, or can be cast upon the worst of Idols: nor did the Jews, or Herod
load him with half the ignominy, which is now cast upon him by the doctrine and
worship of the Roman Church.

Prophet Esa. does suggest. Chap. xlvi. 1.
To preserve the Captive Jews from paying homage to Bell and other Babylonish
Idols, he informs them, that the Priests bear them on their shoulders, they
carry them, and set them in their places; and where they are thus placed, they
stand and remove not front it. Remember this, salth he, and show your selves
men. Chap. x. 5. Bar. vi. 3, 4.
They must needs be born because they cannot go, says Jeremy, be not afraid of
them. In his Epistle to the Captive Jews, the first thing he informs them of is
this, that when they come to Babylon they shall see their Gods of Silver, Gold,
Wood, born upon shoulders, which the Nations fear; beware therefore, says he,
that you be not afraid of them, when you see the multitude behind them, and
before them worshipping them; and (Verse 26, 27.) they are born, says he, upon
shoulders whereby [N. B.] they declare to men that they are nothing worth. They
also that serve them are ashamed, for if they fall to the ground at any time,
Wisd. xiii. 16.
they cannot rise up again of themselves. The Author of the Book of Wisdom
says, that the Artificer, when he has made his Idol sets it in a Wall, and
makes it fast with Iron; for be provideth for it that it might not fall,
knowing that it was unable to help it self. On this account says he, they are
more to be blamed, than they who worshipped the lights of Heaven, who yet are
not to be excused or pardoned. (...) Contra Gent. p. 17.
The Heathen Gods, says Athanasius, have no power to stand, or sit, but must
remain in the same posture which the Artificer has given them, and therefore
do afford no Argument or Character of their Divinity. Ibid. p. 16.
What pardon can they hope for who place their confidence (...) in things
unmovable, Sermon. 10. ad Graecos p. 144.
and worship them for the true God? says the same Father, They cannot stand
being not fastened with pins, and if they be not born by others neither can
they go, so Theodoret. They are so rude and stupid, says St. Cyril, that they
carry up and down their Gods upon their shoulders, they see they are unable to
move and are carried whither the bearer pleases, and yet they pray unto them,
Cyril in Es. 1.4. p. 629, 630.
whereas, says he, what help can thou expect from them whom thou perceivest
to be void of sense and motion; but theu art as senslefs as they, and fallen
into the most extreme stupidity. And to the like effect speak almost all the
Fathers, who write in confutation of the Heathen Deities.

And yet these things do perfectly agree as well unto the Roman Catholics bon
Dieu as to those Idols which the Heathens worshipped; for the Trent Council
has determined that upon Declarat praeterea Sancta Synodus, pie and religiose
admodum in Dei Ecclesiam indactum fuisse hunc morem, ut singulis annis
peculiari quodam and festo die praecelsum hcc and venerabile Sacramentum
singulari venerations as solemnitate celeoraretur, utque in processionibus
reverenter and honorisice illud per vias and loca pablica circumferetur. Sess.
13. Cap. 5.
Corpus Christi day this Host (i. e.) the Roman God, should be carried in
Precession through public ways and places, at which times he is born upon
their shoulders or their arms, and he must needs be born, because he cannot go,
and when they come unto their tabernacula quietis, where their God must rest,
he stands in the place, in which they set him, and is not able to remove from
thence. They also have determined, Porro deferri ipsam sacram Eacharistiam ad
infirmes, and have usum diligenter in Ecclesiis conserva^i cum summa aequitate
and ratione conjunctumist. Quare sancts haec Synodus retinendum omnino
salatarem hune and necessarium morem statuit. Sess. 13. Cap. 6.

-- ut neque decidere, neque e pixide excati Sacramentum queat. Rituale Romans p.
72. Ed. Antuerp. 1617.


Chapter the 6. of the same Session, that this God must be carried to sick
people, and knowing that he is unable to help himself, they have provided, as
did the Heathens, for their Idols, that he might not fall, nor be shaken out of
the pyxis wherein he is kept says the Roman Ritua! Moreover this God falls
often to the ground, witness the Canon of the Mass which does enjoin Si hostia,
etc. locus ubi cecidit mandetur and aliquantulum abradatur.
that if the Consecrated Host does fall upon the ground, the place on which he
falls shall be washed and somewhat scraped; witness the reason assigned by
the Primum enim maxim cavendum erat, ne sanguis Domini in terram sunderetur.
Catech. Romans Part 2. Chapter 4. 66.
Roman Catechism, why the people are Sacrilegiously deprived of the Cup; viz.
lest the blood should be spilt upon the ground. Witness those other Canons
which command the Priest, when any of the blood does fall upon the ground, Si
per negligentiam aliquid sanguinis cecider it lingua lambatur -- Si super
lapidem ceciderit Altaris, sorbeat sacerdos stillam -- Si hostia consterata,
vel aliqua ejus particula dilabatur in terram reverenter accipiatur. ^an. de
defectibus in Ministerio occurrent.
with reverence to lick it up. And when this God is fallen, it is certain, that
he cannot rise again without their help. Witness the words of the same Canon
commanding, when the Host is fallen, that the Priest with reverence should take
it up. And may not we then say unto the Romanists as does the Prophet Esa,
Remember this and show your selves men, bring it again to mind, O ye
Transgressors? May we not hence conclude, according to the Prophet Jeremy, that
the Roman Host, as to its supposed Deity, is nothing worth? And when we see the
multitude behind it, and before it worshipping, have we not reason to obey the
Prophets Counsel, and to beware of being like them? Have not all they who serve
it the same cause to be ashamed as had the worshippers of Heathen Idols? are
not they equally blameworthy, inexcusable, unpardonable, who worship that of
which all these particulars as truly are affirmed, as ever they were spoken of
the Heathen Gods? May we not say with Cyril that they are rude and foolish, as
senseless as their Host, and guilty of extreme stupidity?

Prophet laughs at Bell and Nebo, the Babylonish Idols, because they might be
carried Captive, and were not able to deliver or preserve themselves; Esa.
xlvi. 1, 2.
Bell, says he, boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their Idols were upon the Beasts
and upon the Cattle, they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone
into Captivity. The Prophet Jeremy, is very copious on this subject, deriding
thus the Heathen Deities: be has in his right hand a Dagger and an Ax, but
cannot deliver himself from War and Thieves, whereby they are known not to be
Gods, therefore fear them not. Bar. vi. 15, 16. And again Verse 56, 57.
Moreover they cannot withstand any King or Enemy, nor are they able to escape
from Thieves and Robbers. P. 27.
To adore what thou have taken, says Minutius, is not to Consecrate a Deity,
but thine own Sacrilege. They could not possibly be Gods the Romans worshipped,
says Tertullian, because the Romans first took them Captive, Apol. 2.25.
and then worshipped them, so that their sacrileges were equal to their
Trophies; their triumphs over the Geds they worshipped were as many as over the
Nations they had Conquered. Shall not I look on this as a conviction of the
importency of their Idols, (...) p. 34, 35.
says St. Clemens, that thieves and enemies can take and spoil them? What
madness is it, says Lactantius, L. 2. c. 4. p. 154.
to fear that, of which thou fear that it may be stolen! And Chrysostom,
(...) Chrysostom. Tom. 1. p. 447.
upon occasion of that speech of Labans unto Jacob, Why have thou stolen away my
Gods? cries out, O hyperbole of madness! Are thy Gods such as can be stolen? Art
thou not ashamed to say, why have thou stolen away my Gods? Are thy Gods such, O
Laban, as being about to be stolen are not able to defend themselves? Apud Orig.
1.2. p. 62.
Celsus makes this objection against the Deity of Christ, that they cannot
esteem him God, who by the Jews was apprehended, and who, though he fled, was
taken, and carried bound to the High Priest, for it is, says he, unworthy of a
God to fly or be led bound or Cative. And Christ himself would neither fly,
when once his hour was come, nor yet be taken, till he had given sufficient
demonstration that it was in his power, not only to escape from, but also to
strike dead that band of men which came against him. In Esa. 1.4. p. 627.
Whence does the weakness of these ficiitious Gods appear, says Cyril? In
this, says the Prophet, that they cannot escape from War, but are themselves
made Captive, whereas had they been Gods, 'twas fit they should have both
preserved their votaries and showed themselves superior to their Enemies. Now
that the Host, or God of Roman Catholics, has often been stolen, or
sacrilegiously taken from the Altar, the Romanists do not deny: They have had
late experience of it, and have severely punished the offenders in that kind:
Epist. ad carol. quint. In Itiner.
and Geraldinus complains to Charles the V. and to Aegidius the Cardinal much
like another Laban, that the Sacrament, the body of his God could not be safe
from Thieves, Soothsayers, Magicians, Wizards, or from the fire of the wicked.
That they conceive their God in danger to be stolen or carried Captive, is
evident, because they have a Rubric which commands the Priest, Si timeatur
incursus hostium, Sacerdos accelerare poterit samptionem Sacramenti, omissis
omnibus aliis. De defeciibus Missae Cap. 10. D^^retal. 1.3. Tir. 44. c. 1. Apud
Jovium.
if he fears the incursion of enemies, to make have to eat him up, and to
secure him in his belly, from the danger imminent; and a Decree made by Pope
Innocent, that it be so well kept that no rash hand approach it: that he
already has been triumphed over by the Infidels, as well as other Roman Gods,
and was not able to withstand the Enemy, is clear from the known History of
Lewis the IX, who being beaten, and in great distress, even when his God was
with him, gave him in pawn to the Egyptian Sultan, who still by way of Triumph
in his Escutcheon bears the likeness of a Pix and Wafer. Seeing then these
things have frequently befallen the Host, and when they did, the Host did
nothing to defend and help it self, may we not put the question to the
Romanist, Dormiebat, sterteb at in hostilia castra desagerat! 1.4. p. 129.
as does Arnobius to the Heathens, Where was then their God, was he a sleep,
was he snorting, or as persidious persons use to do, did he fly unto the
Enemies Camp? May we not say as does the Prophet Jeremy, Why do you not
perceive that is no God which cannot save it self from War and Thieves? May we
not speak unto them in the expressions of Lactantius, What madness is it to
fear that of which thou fear it may be stolen? May we not cry out with
Chrysostom, O Hyperbole of folly! Are your Gods such as can be stolen? O the
excess of Error, are they such as being stolen are not able to defend, or to
preserve themselves? May we not look on this as a conviction of the impotency
of the Roman God, as Clemens did? May we not know according to the Prophet
Jeremy he is no God, and therefore is not to be feared? And lastly may we not
admire, as does the Author of the Qui ergo furari possant; Isti hominibus
sensam habentibus Dii debent videri? Clem. Recogn. 1.5. Cap. 15. p. 465. C.
Recognitions, that men of sense should once conceive that to be God which can
be stolen.

Fathers do plentifully deride the Heathen Deities, because they needed to be
preserved and vindicated by their own Votaries, and could not help, preserve,
or vindicate themselves, when any danger was ready to befall them, or any bold
affront was offered to them. And first the Prophet Jeremy declares the Heathen
Deities were neither to be feared, nor worshipped, because their Priests were
forced to preserve them under Lock and Key; Bar. vi. 13.
For as the doors are made fast on every side upon him that offendet the King,
even so the Priests make fast their Temples with Doors, with Locks, with Bars,
lest their Gods be spoiled by Robbers. O you, if you be certain, says
Arnobius, Adv. Gent. 1. p. 205.
that your Gods be in their Images, and dwell there, why do you keep them under
Lock and Key, under Bolts and Bars? why in the Cloisters? why do you protect
them from Thieves and Night-Robbers by Churchwardens, Sextons, and a thousand
Watchmen? If you believe that they are Gods, and that they siis not from their
Images, suffer them to take care of themselves, let the door of your Temple be
always unlockt, and if, any person go about to steal them, let them show forth
their Divinity by punishing the sacrilege. (...) etc. Apol. 2. p. 58.
Do they not see, says Justin Martyr, that it is a wicked thing to say or
think men should be Keepers of their Gods? How are they Gods that are defended
by human Laws, and not by their own strength, and who are kept from Thieves by
the defense of Cloisters? Recogn. 1.5. p. 454. B. Contra Gentes. p. 15. Ibid.
p. 24.
says Clemens. This is a most stupendous thing, says Athanasius, that even
those whom they preserve and keep under their Custody, they serve, as if they
were their Lords. On this account, says he, we do deservedly esteem them fools
that from those Gods they do expect their needs should be supplied, who, as
they are not ignorant, do need their care. Com in Es. p. 49.
The Prophet, says St. Cyril, shows the Council of the Jews to be ridiculous,
if they do go about to save those Gods they worship, for if they were Gods
indeed, they rather should expect to be preserved by them. But they, condemning
their own sentiments, and testifying their inability to do any thing, succor
their Gods. How then can they be Gods, (...) Ibid. Pudeat tutelam de iis
sperare quos tu ipse tueris. Cyprian ad Demetr. p. 328. L. 2. c. 4.
who stand in need of the assistance of their Votaries? They who do adore such
Gods are really as senseless as their Gods; and it becomes every pious man to
bid farewell unto their follies. It is your revenge, says Cyprian, which does
defend them when they are hurt, and it is your safeguard which keeps them shut
lest they should perish; but is it not a shame to worship them whom you defend,
and to hope for safety from them, who by you are kept safe? And what
perverseness is it, says Lactantius, to fly for refuge unto them, which when
themselves are violated remain unvindicated, unless their Worshippers revenge
them? Now evident it is, that all these things may be as truly spoken against
the Roman Host, as against any of the Heathen Deities. For first it is known
that in the Roman Church the Host is kept safe locked within a Tabernacle; that
they have Bolts and Bars, and Locks, they have their Ostiary and other Officers
to Shut, Bolt, and Lock their Churches; There is a Decree of Innocentius the
third in force amongst them, Ut in cunctis Ecclestis Eucharistia sub fideli
custodia conservetur, ne possit ad illam temeraria manus extendi. Dercetal. L.
3. Tit. 44. C. 1.
that in all Churches the Host be kept under safe custody, lest any rash hand
should come at it. This Host is therefore under Lock and Key, and has its
Keepers, as much as any Heathen Idol; If any person does affront it, when it is
carried in Procession, or otherwise reproach it; it is not left unto the Host
to punish their Profaneness, and to show forth his Majesty, in vindication of
himself; but he is either vindicated by the Inquisition, or the Magistrate, or
by the common Rout, or wholly does remain unvindicated. May we not then enquire
with Quid praestare colentibus possunt, qui se de non colentibus vindicare non
passant? D. Cyp. ad Demetr. P. 328.
Cyprian, What can they do for their Votaries, who do nothing against their
Contemners? Must it not be (...) a very wicked thing, according unto Justin
Martyr, for Romanists to say, or think that is their God which they themselves
do keep? May we not upon this account cry out with him (...), O the stupor of
such men! Must it not be ridiculous in them, according to St. Cyril, to consult
its preservation? Is it not in the judgment of Athanasius, a most stupendous
thing, that they should serve that as their Lord, which they preserve, and keep
under their custody? Must it not be according to St. Cyprian, Lactantius, and
Athanasius, their shame, their folly, their perverseness, to worship that which
they themselves defend, and pray to that for safety which themselves keep safe?
Lastly, must it not be extremely evident according to St. Clemens, and St.
Cyril, that the Roman Host, which needs the assistance of its votaries, and
is both kept and vindicated by them, cannot be truly God, nor so esteemed by
men of sense?

Bar. vi. 49.
Moreover when there comes any war upon them, the Heathen Priests consult,
says Jeremy, where they may with their Gods be hidden, how is it then that
they perceive not that they be no Gods? Esa ii. 49. (...) etc. in Es. C. 2.
Tom. 1. p. 1039.
The Prophet Esa, as by the 70. he is translated, and by the Fathers
Paraphrased, does Prophecy to the reproach of Heathen Idols, that their
Votaries should hide them, bringing them into Dens and Clefts of the Rocks, and
holes of the Earth; and by declaring, says St. Chrysostom, that they should
hide themselves together with their Gods, and go under the Earth, he does
sufficiently expose or render them ridiculous. Let them be filled with shame,
says Cyril, In Esa. p. 51.
who serve those Gods they hide before themselves, that they may not perish
being exposed to the lucre of the Enemy. It is a ridiculous Counsel of the Jews
to hide their Gods, says the same Cyril; (...) etc. Vid. Sup.
for by hiding them in Dens and Holes of the Earth, lest the Enemy should find
and carry them away with other Captives, they condemn their own sentiments, and
testify their Gods are not sufficient to do any thing. And yet we know that in
the times of persecution both by the Heat^en Emperors, and the Arians, the
Christians and the Orthodox, were forced to hide themselves in Dens, and
Caverns of the Earth, and if they then had any use or knowledge of the Romish
God, they often must have had him with them in the same Dens and Caverns. We
know that Romish Priests are forced still to hide themselves and their bon Dieu
in all those places, where it is penal to say Mass. Nay when they fear an Enemy
the Mass Priest is commanded to eat up his God, and hide him in his stomach.
How therefore is it, that they do not perceive he is no God? how is it that
they do not see with Chrysostom, that they sufficiently expose him, while they
do conceal him? or with St. Cyril, that they are ridiculous and men condemned
by their own sentiments, and that they by their practice testify their God is
not sufficient to do any thing? The Prophet Esa, says Theodoret, Ad Graecos
Infideles, Sermon. 10. p. 143, 144.
does tragically sing the downfall of the Heathen Idols, declaring that they
shall hide the Gods, which they had made, and bring them into Dens and Clefts
of the Rocks and Holes of the Earth; which Prophecy, says he, it becomes not
me so much to interpret, as you ingeniously to confess, that which has often
happened; but if you will not do so; yet is it evident to all who have seen often
times your Gods, which wicked men had hidden, intending by that concealment to
preserve and succor them, dug out of the Earth by Pious Christians, and
publicly exposed to the scorn of women and children. Now that which here
Theodoret speaks of the Heathen Gods, that they were often buried in the Earth,
and dug out thence by Christians, that which, says he, the Prophet tragically
mentions as the (...) or dissolution of those Idels, has very often happened to
the Host; for by an ancient Custom, which long prevailed, even against many
Canons to the contrary, both in the Eastern and Western Churches the Host was
buried with dead Corpse, In Can. 13. Con. Tral. ibid.
as Zonaras informs us; and Balsamon declares that even in his time the
Consecrated Bread was put into the hand of the Antistes, and so he was
committed to the Earth; and I my self with many others have seen the Chalice in
which the Sacred Blood was buried, dug up out of the Graves of diverse Bishops
buried in the Church of Sarum. And Humbert testifies concerning the Greek
Church, Humbert. contra. Nicet. Tom. 4. Bibl. Patr. Part. 2. p. 247. C.
that in the Eleventh Century it was their Custom Eucharistiam subterrare, to
bury under ground the remains of the Holy Sacrament. If then the Prophet Esa,
to express the great contempt the Heathens, in the times of Christianity should
offer to their Idols, Esaiah ii. 20.
Prophesied, that they should cast them to the Moles, what great contempt must
they have offered to this Roman God, who lodged him with the Moles and Worms,
and how unlikely is it that they who did so, should believe that what they
buried was God? How certain must it be that what this Prophecy foretold, has
been fulfilled as frequently and truly upon the Roman Host, as upon any Heathen
Idols? How easy was it also to dig up the Host, and to expose it to the view;
nay that this has been done, is evident from the relation which Ivo makes of
the translation of St. Othmars body, L. 2. vitae Othm. C. 3. apud Sur. d. 16.
Nov.
together with the Sacrament from its own dormitory, to the Church of St.
Gallus. And therefore all the inferences which the Fathers do hence make
against the Deity and worship of the Heathen Gods, as strongly do conclude
against the Host. Does Cyril say, that when they hid them in the Caverns of the
Earth, they could not then conceive them to be Gods? so may we say of
Christians. Does he say of that true God who is over all, that no man ever saw
him concealed, that he was never hidden, that he never sought the Clefts of
Rocks or Mountains? we may accordingly conclude touching that Host, which lies
so often hid, and has so often been buried in the Caverns of the Earth, that it
can never be, (...), or God over all blessed for ever.

Jeremy declares that Heathen Idols were neither to be feared nor worshipped,
because they were exposed to the injuries of fire, when fire falls upon the
house of Gods of wood, Baruch, vi. 55. (...). Clem. (...). p. 35.
their Priests will fly away but they themselves shall be burnt asunder like
beams. I know the fire can convince thee, says St. Clemens, and cure thy
superstition; if thou will cease from thy madness, the fire will bring thee to
the light, for it has burnt the Temple which was at Ephesus and Rome, etc.
Where was the thunderer, says Arnobius, ubinam fulninator, etc. l. 6. p. 207.
when by the fire his Capitol, his worship, his wife, and daughter were
censumed? Where was the Egyptian Serapis, when by a like misfortune he with
his Isis and all his mysteries were burnt to ashes? They blush not, says
Athanasius, to worship wood, Contra Gentes. p. 15. l. 2. c. 4. p. 154. Vide
Supra.
and stones, as not considering that they do burn and trample under feet the
like, and that a little before they were of common use. They worship, says
Lactantius, things that may be burnt, and what a madness is it to worship that
on the account of which we fear the fire? And yet it is certain that the Roman
Host, Nunc videmus igni tradi quaecunque remanere contigerit inconsumpta. Hes.
in Levit. viii. 32. Ivo. l. 2. c. 22.59. Burch. l. 5. c. 12, 50. Vide Supra.
at least as far as we are able to discern, may be consumed or burnt by fire.
Witness the Custom of the ancient Christians, recorded by Hesychius, to burn
all that remained after the celebration of the Eucharist; witness the Canons
extant in Ivo and Burchardus, touching the burning of the too stale and mucid
Host: Witness the sad complaint of Geraldinus that in Hispaniola the very body
of his God was in great danger to be fired by the wicked; witness the very Si
Musca vel aranea vel aliquidaliud ceciderit in Calicem -- post Consecrationem
-- Sacerdos extrahat eam and lavet came vino, finitaque Missa comburat, etc.
Missal. de defect. in Ministerio occur. Can. 5. Si per negligentiam aliquid de
Sanguine Christi cecilerit, locus iste quantum satis est radatur and abrasio
comburatur. ibid. Can. 12.
Canon of the Mass, which peremptorily decrees, that if a fly does fall into
the Chalice, then this God-drinking fly must when the Sacrament is finished,
instantly be burnt, so also must that Earth on which this blood at any time is
spilt, and consequently the God contained in the belly of the fly, or sucked in
by the soft Earth must burn together with them. And will not therefore the same
fire convince the Romanist, and cure his superstition too? May we not call upon
him in the language of St. Clemens to forsake his madness, and to be guided by
the light of this Host-burning-fire? May we not ask, as does Araobius, where
was your Lord and God, when fire seized, as it has often done, not only his
Temples, and his Altars, but his very body? May we not with Lactantius say,
What madness is it for you Romanists to worship that on the account of which
you fear the fire, as your own Geraldinus does confess? Have we not reason to
conclude with Athanasius that you therefore do not blush to pay this Homage to
the Host, as not considering that you do burn the like, or think as did your
Paludanus, Hostias consecratas quamvis mucidas comburere immane sacrilegium.
Pal. 4. d. 9. q. I. art. 3. Vide Tertul. de An. C. 51. Incende quod adorasti.
Greg. Turon. L. 2. C. 31. p. 287.
that even to burn a moldy Host, if it were truly God, must be immane
sacrilegium a very horid Sacrilege? Can we imagine that those Christians, who
always deemed it a cruelty to burn the Carcass of the meanest Christian, should
burn the sacred body of that God they worshipped? Or would Remigius have
counseled Clodovaeus, when he came to receive Christian Baptism, to show his
detestation of those Idols which he formerly revered by burning what he had
adored, if, even Christians did believe that what they burned was to be
worshipped as their God? To prove that Calvinists do offer the most vile
affronts to Holy Saints and Martyrs, Bellarm. de Reliq. Sanctorum. L. 2. C. 1.
To. 1. Controv. 7.
Bellarum tells us, that they have burnt their bodies and their Relics and
cast their ashes into Rivers. And must not then the ancient Christians offer
more vile contempt to their dear Lord, if they believed that Sacrament which
they so customarily did burn, to be that sacred body which with the Deity, to
which it was united, they worshipped as God?

Jeremy derides the Heathen Idols, Bar. vi. 12.
because they were exposed to rust and moth, from which they cannot save
themselves, says he, though they be covered with Purple Garments. L. 6. p. 262.
Do you not see, says Arnobius, that even these Images, whose feet and knees
you praying touch, decay by reason of those drops of rain that fall upon them?
that they dissolve by rottenness, and that they by the injuries of time do lose
their form and are eaten out by rust? Now these things, says he, which are
plain before you, ought to instruct and to admonish you, that you do nothing,
and pay your homage to vain things. And yet it is certain that the Romish God
does lie exposed to the like or greater injuries. It is in danger of being
washed away by inundations, Si timeatur incursus hostium vel alluvionis, etc.
witness the Canon of the Mass which does provide, that in that ease the
Mass-Priest should make have to cat him up. It Is subject to the injuries of the
wind, witness that Canon of the Mass, which says, Si Hostia consecrata vento
dispareat.
that if the Consecrated Host be blown away and disappear, the Mass-Priest
shall prepare another. It Is liable to be congealed by the cold air, Si in Hyeme
Sanguis congeletur in thalice, etc.
witness that Canon which provides that in this case it shall be thawed by
being put into warm water, or wrapped in warm clothes. It may be subject to
corruption, witness that Canon which does charge the Priest, if after
Consecration he perceive the Host to be corrupted, to eat it up, Si Celebrans
post consecrationem adverterit Hostiam esse corruptam, etc. de defect. Miss.
or to preserve it reverently, or give it to be eaten by some other person.
Lastly the Host is liable unto such change of qualities as will convert it into
poison, or render it destructive to the lives of men. Witness the Henry VII.
Albert. de Euch. l. 1. c. 19. p. 124.
Emperor, the Victor 2, 3. idem ibid.
Popes, and the Hen. Eboracensis. Matthew. Paris. in Stephano. Si aliquid
venenosum ceciderit in calicem. ib: Si aliquid venenatum contigerit Hostiam,
etc.
Archbishop, which have been poisoned by the Chalice, and witness also the
provisions that are made in such a case by several Canons in the Mass, about
the ordering of such poisoned wine. Now ought not these things, which are plain
before them, to admonish and instruct the Romanist, that to adore this Host as
God, is to employ his service on that which he does vainly call a Deity; for
can it be supposed, without horror, that Christ's immortal body should be
corrupted, or that his precious blood be congealed by frost, or so invenomedas
to destroy the lives of men.

Scriptures and the Fathers do more especially deride the Heathen Idols,
because they seemed to be contemned by the very brutes; Their Hearts, Bar. vi.
20, 21.
says Jeremy, are gnawed upon by things creeping out of the Earth, and when
they eat them and their Clothes, they feel it not. Upon their bodies and heads
sit Bats, Swallows, and Birds, and the Cats also, by this you may know that
they are no Gods, therefore fear them not. You may learn, (...) p. 29.
says Clemens Alexandrinus. from the very birds (...) that their Images are
void of sense; Erubescite vel sero at que ab animautibus mutis vias rationis
accipite, etc. Arnob. l. 6. p. 202.
for Swallows and other Birds cast forth their dung upon them, bearing no
reverence toward either their Jupiter or Aesculapius, their Minerva, or
Serapis. Blush at the last, says Arnobius, and learn the ways of reason from
these mute creatures, and let them teach you there is no Divinity in these
Images, which they do not avoid, nor fear to dung upon, following the Laws and
instinct of their nature; this is another sensible demonstration from which he
tells them they may learn the vanity of all that service which they pay unto
them. How many things do these mute creatures (says Minutius) judge touching
your Gods? p. 26.
The Mice, the Swallows, and the Kites perceive they have no sense, they gnaw
them, they tread, they sit upon them, and if you do not drive them thence, will
nest within the very mouths of your supposed Deities. Are thieves so foolish as
to fear Priapus, says Lactantius, L. 2. p. 153. In Ps. 11^. Con. 2.
when even the birds do sit and dung upon him? Better it were, says Austin, to
worship Mice and Serpents, and such like Creatures; for they after a sort do
judge of Heathen Idols, in which because they see no life, they do not fear the
human shape. Now that these things may happen to the Romish Host is evident
from their own Canons, which speak thus, Si Hostia consecrata dispareat ab
aliquo animali accepta. Missal. de defect. Miss. C. 3. S. 7. Ibid. C. 10. S. 5.
vide supra.
If any Consecrated Host be snatched up by some beast, and cannot afterward be
found, another shall be Consecrated. If a Fly or such like Creature fall into
the Chalice, he shall be taken out and burnt, or swallowed by the Priest; and
reason good, because whole Christ, being contained in every particle of the
blood, the little insect, if he drink any thing, must have him wholly in his
Guts; Gages New Survey of the West Indies. p. 447.
It Was this occasioned the Conversion of Mr. Gage a Romish Priest, viz. his
seeing a bold Mouse come from behind the Altar, and snatch a way his Wafer-God,
and eat half of him up before he could be rescued from his teeth. This also is
evident from reason, for will not any Mouse or Rat, Dog or Cat, following the
laws or instinct of their nature, gnaw, eat, devour, the Roman Host, provided
that the Mass-Priest do not drive them from it? And if it be so horrid to
conceive, according to St. Austin and Arnobius, that birds should nest even in
the mouth of God, must it not be more horrid to conceive that God should be
received, and drawn into the mouth and stomach of a beast? Would any of them
scruple think you, if they had occasion and convenience to dung upon the Host
or in the Chalice? And is it not then evident according to St. Clemens, that
these beasts do bear no reverence toward the Roman God? Do they not perceive
according to Minutius, and St. Austin, that it has no sense? May we not wonder
with St. Clemens, that Romanists have not yet learned from these birds their
Host is an insensate being? May not this sensible demonstration teach them,
according to Arnobius, that there is no Divinity in any Host, and that their
worship of it is a vain and fruitless service? Once was the time when Egypt
was made ashamed of their chief God, Theodoret Hist. Eccl. l. 5. cap. 22.
when they saw Mice creeping out of his belly; what would they have said, if
they had seen their God creeping down, as the Mass-God does into the belly of
those Mice or Flys.

CHAP. II.
The Contents.

8. The Scriptures and Fathers deride the Heathen Deities, and say that we may
knew they are no Gods, because they have no use of their outward senses.. I. 9.
Because they are made Gods by Consecration, and by the will of the Artificer,
part of that matter which is Consecrated into a God, being exposed to common
uses.. II. 10. Because they were imprisoned in their Images, or shut up in
obscure habitations.. III. 11. Because they lighted Candles to them.. IV. 12.
Because they clothed their Gods in costly Raiments.. V. 13. Because they might
be metamorphosed.. VI. All this may truly be affirmed of the Roman Host, from.
I. to. VI. The Roman God being eaten may be vomited up again, and voided at the
draught.. VII. An expostulation with the Worshippers of the Host in the words
of Arnobius.. VIII. All that the Fathers say against the Heathen Gods, is in
the person of a Heathen retorted on the Adorers of the Host.. IX. Corollaries
from what has been already praved. 1. That the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
or of the Aderation of the Host as God, was not acknowledged by the Ancient
Fathers.. X. A confirmation of this Corollary from three Considerations. 1.
That the Heathens could not be ignorant of this supposed Article of Christian
Faith, or of this practice of the Church, provided that they Anciently believed
and practiced as does the present Church of Rome.. XI. 2. That the Jews and
Heathens left nothing unobjected which could with any show of reason be offered
from any other Doctrine or Practice of Christianity against the Deity and
Worship of our Lord, and yet say nothing against this Doctrine, or this
Practice.. XII. 3. That the Fathers of the Church do largely answer all other
scruples of Heretics and Heathens which made them to suspect the Deity of
Christ, but never say one word of this.. XIII. This never was objected by
Heretic or Heathen as an absurdity till the Eleventh or Twelfth Century. ibid.
2. Corol. That the Host cannot be truly God, and consequently that Church, by
which it is Worshipped as God, is guilty of Idolatry.. XIV. The proof of this
Corollary is a sufficient vindication of the Church of England in the point of
Schism, and a sufficient confutation of the whole Mass of the Roman errors.

Psalmist smartly does deride the the Heathen Gods, Psalm. exv. 5, 6, 7.
because they have no use of any of their outward senses, They have mouths,
says he, but they speak not, eyes have they, but they see not, they have ears
but they hear not, noses have they, but they smell not, they have hands but
handle not, feet have they but they walk not. Chapter xv. 14, 15.
The worshippers of Idols, says the Book of Wisdom, are most foolish, and are
more miscrable, than very Babes, for they counted all the Idols of the Heathen
to be Gods, which neither have the use of eyes to see, nor noses to draw
breath, nor cars to bear, nor fingers of hands to handle; and as for their feet
they are slow to go. They are upright as a Palm Tree but speak not, says the
Prophet Jeremy. Chap. x. 5. Baruch. vi. 7.
As for their tongue it is polished by the workman, yet are they but false and
cannot speak. They are dumb Idols, says the Prophet Habakkuk, Hab. ii. 18, 19.
and have no breath at all in the midst of them. Woe therefore unto him that
says to the dumb stone arise, it shall teach. Do thou not see, says
Clemens, Nonne vides quod quem adoras non videt. Recogn. L. 5. C, 16.
that what thou worshippest cannot see or hear? Their minds have thoroughly
drunk of the juice of folly, says Lactantius, of the adorers of the Heathen
Idols; for having sense themselves, they worship things which have no sense,
which neither did perceive when they were made, Nec enim sensum Consecratione
sumpserunt. Lact. L. 2. C. 2, 4. Contra Gent. p. 15.
nor do they know when they are worshipped; for they receive no use of any of
their senses from their Consecration; they have indeed a mouth but such a one
as wants the use of teeth. Who would commiserate them, says Athanasius, who
seeing, worship those things which see not; who hearing, pray to that which
hears not; who being endowed with life, salute that as a God which does not
more at all? They have their senses and yet they have them not, for they have
no use of them, giving no Character, no demonscration of their divinity
thereby. St. Austin thought he had sufficiently disgraced the Heathen Deities
by saying that the Priest did scare the seeing beast from the blind God, the
bearing beast from the deaf God, Et illum non se moventem quasi potentem colit,
a quo meliorem deterruit. August. in Ps. cxiii. Conc. 2. In Psalm. cxv,
the walking beast from him that could not move, and that he worships him as a
powerful God, who has not power to move himself. The Psalmist, says
Theodoret, does many ways demonstrate the weakness of the Heathen Gods, saying
that they have mouths and speak not, their Images have sensuum domicilia, but
are deprived of their operations, and therefore they are more vile than the
least of living Creatures, than even Gnats and Flys, which have the use of all
their senses; and therefore they that make, and they that worship them, are
like to them, because they being men endued with reason, and falling into such
temerity, it is just that they should be deprived of their senses, as are the
Idols which they worship. They worship their Gods in the form of a dead body,
In forma corporis mortui adorant. In Psalm. cxxxiv.
says Hilary, whose mouth is dumb, eyes dull, ears deaf, noses empty, hands
feeble, feet stiff, and their whole body is immovable, Now all these things
which equal truth, may be affirmed of the H^st; and it is subject as much to
all these scoffs as any of the Heathen Idols; for do not Romanists affert, and
does not their experience oblige them to confess, that Christ is in the
Eucharist mortuo modo, Becau. de Sacr. in Specie. c. 19. qu 5.
in the condition of a man wholly dead, void of all sense and motion, not being
able to move one finger in his own defense? May we not therefore say of them in
the words of Hilary, That they worship their God in forma corporis mortui. Do
they not sometimes chase the seeing beast from their blind God, the hearing
beast from their deaf God, the walking beast from him that cannot move? And
notwithstanding they adore the Host which cannot move, as an Almighty God. Must
they not therefore have sufficient ground to see, that what they worship cannot
see? must they not know that it receives no use of any of its senses by virtue
of their Consecration? and that it gives no Character or demonstration of its
divinity by any of them? Have we not then sufficient reason to conclude, as do
the Fathers on the like account, and the inspired Prophets, that what the
Romanist does worship as a God, is a dumb Idol? and that it is not to be
feared, that they who worship it are drunken with the juice of folly; they are
more miserable and foolish than the very babes? Or in the language of the
Psalmist and of Theodoret, Hilary and Cyril, that they are, and deserve to be
made like unto their Host, and be as senseless as it is. I remember Clemens in
his Recognitions endeavors to confound and shame the Idol-Worshippers by this
inquiry, Would any of you be like unto these Gods you worship? Would you so see
as they see? So hear as they hear? And have no other use of any of your senses
than they have? This sure would be a curse and a reproach unto you. Quales ergo
Dii habendi sunt isti, quos imitari execrabile sit cultoribus suis? quorum
similitudidinem habere contumelia est? Recog. L. 5. C. 15. p. 465.
What kind of Gods most they be then, whom to be like would be an execration to
their Worshippers, and a reproach? And may we not with great advantage ask the
Romanist, would you be like your Host? would you so see as that sees, and have
no other use of any of your senses than that has? would you be swallowed down
or eaten up by Flys, and Rats, and Mice, as that has been? would you descend
into the stomach, would you be buried, and burnt as he has often been? If this
be truly the condition of our blessed Lord, St. Peter had more cause to say
when Christ instituted the Sacrament, than when he was about to suffer on the
Cross, Master spare thy self.

Prophet Esa speaks it to the shame of Heathens, Es. xliv. 16.
that when the Carpenter had hewn down a Tree, with part thereof he makes a
fire, with part he baketh bread, and with the residue he makes a God, he
falls down, he worshippeth, he prays to it. Hence he concludes, that God
had shut their eyes that they could not see, and their hearts that they could
not understand. The Potter, Wisd. xv. 7, 8.
says the Author of the Book of Wisdom, of the same Clay makes both the
Vessels which serve for clean and unclean uses, and employing his labor lewdly,
he makes a vain God of the same Clay. Materias sorores esse instrumentorum
communium quasi fatum consecratione mutantes. Apol. c. 12.
As far as I am able to discern, their Idols, says Tertullian, are of like
matter with our common Vessels and only become Gods by Consecration. Now do not
all these scoffs return upon the Host with equal evidence? Is it not made of a
like matter with our common bread, and only does become a God by Consecration?
May not one lump of Meal (to give an instance parallel to that of wood and
clay,) be used partly to wrap up the Apothecaries Pills, and partly to make
those Wafers which the Priest does Consecrate into a God? And then, as says
the Book of Wisdom in derision of the Heathen Idols, Chapter xiv. 20.
that is taken for a God which a little before was not honored as a man; and
have we not then equal reason to conclude touching the Romanists, that God has
shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot
understand? Perhaps the sione, P. 26.
the wood, the brass, the silver, says Minucius, is not yet God, when
therefore is this God produced? It Is melted, made, it is carved, and it is yet no
God, it is polished, framed and set up, but no God yet; but now behold, it is
adorned, consecrated, prayed unto, and then it is a God, when men will have him
so to be and dedicate him to that use; And may not all this be returned upon
the Host? Might not the Pagan say, You Christians grind and sift, and bake your
wheat and it is but yet a Wafer, you set it on the Altar, you elevate and cross
it, but it is yet no God; at last you speak five words, with an intention to
Consecrate this bread into a God, and the thing is done, tune Deus est cum homo
illum voluit and dedicavit. Recogn. l. 4. c. 20. p. 458.
Is it not plain, says Clemens, that the Idol is metal framed according to the
will of the Artificer, how then can any divinity be conceived in that which, if
the Artificer had not been willing, had not been at all; and it is not more
plain by the same argument that there is no Divinity in the Wafer, which if the
Priest did not intend, and therefore was not willing to Consecrate, would not
be God at all, and which if the Baker would not have made, would not have been
at all?

St. Austin, in his Book of the City of God, L. 8. C. 23.
discourses largely to this purpose, where first he introduces Hermes
asserting that some Gods, are made by men; this, says he, at first hearing one
would conceive he speak concerning Images, but these by Hermes are only styled
the bodies of the Gods, but to these bodies, this Hermes says, men by their
art do couple some invisible spirits, and this, says he, is making Gods, this
is that great and wonderful power man has received, and as God is the maker of
the heavenly Gods, so man is the maker of those Gods which dwell in Temples
near to men, which in the language of the Schools is only this, God makes them
by a new Creation, man by adduction, or by procuring their presence in the
Image by virtue of their Consecration. Now these things, says St. Austin, are
vain, deceitful, pernicions, and sacrilegious, and it was the design of
Christian Faith to free men from these Gods which man does make; to this effect
he cites the passage of the Prophet Jeremy, if a man makes Gods behold they are
no Gods; now are not Roman Doctors in this sense the makers of that God they
worship? do they not by the art of Consecration couple the Divinity of Christ
unto his body? Do they not bring him down unto their Temples? And make him
there to dwell with men? Whom, as the Scripture tells us, the Heavens must
contain until the day of Judgment? Does not their Consecration make him dwell,
as says the Heathen in Arnobius, under the signs? Wherefore their God,
according to St. Austin must be no God. Or such a God as Christianity designed
to free us from, and all their specious pretenses touching this matter must be
vain, pernicious, and sacrilegious.

Fathers do despise and vilify the Heathen Deities, because they were shut up,
and as it were imprisoned in their Images. We do deservedly account them mad,
(...) Contr. Gent. p. 24. (...), etc. Tom. 5. p. 517. Lin. 28.
says Athanasius; who do not blush to call on them as Lords of Heaven and
Earth, whom they shut up in little houses, hence, says he, any man may learn
their Atheism. Is it not the extremity of madness, says St. Chrysostom, to
conceive, they do not say, and do things filthy, rehen they endeavor to bring
their Gods into the Images of wood and stone, and there to shut them up as in a
Prison? The very Cyclops in Euripides when he was told that Wine was Bacchus,
stands amazed and presently declares it an indecent thing that God should dwell
in bettles or in skins, (...); Eurip. in Cycl. v. 528, 530.
These things seemed prodigies to him. Now we all know the Papists God is kept
imprisoned in his box or Tabernacle, that he is put into a bag, or skin when
the Priest carries him about his neck, that he may in the species of Wine, be
put into a bottle, and was so by the ancient Christians, and that he dwells
in his little Box or Tabernacle, (as they are pleased to call the Box in which
they place him) Arnobius is very copious on this subject, Their Gods, In gypso
ergo mansitant atque in testalis Dii vestri, l. 6. p. 203.
says he, can dwell in clay, and plaster, and that such vile things may
become more glorious, they suffer themselves to be shut up, and lie concealed
in the restraint of an obscure habitation. This therefore, says he, I desire
to know, whether they go unwillingly into these mansions, Invitine hoc faciunt?
ibid.
and forced into them by their dedication? or whether they do it willingly? If
they do this unwillingly, what can constrain their Divine Majesty? If
willingly, what is it that makes them to prefer these shells before the
heavenly mansions, since by so doing they lose the power of their Divinity? Are
they free to quit those Mansions, when they please, or are they necessitated to
stay there always? If they have power to leave them when they please, the signs
may cease then to be Gods, and so it will be doubtful when they are to be
worshipped, and when not. But if they are necessitated there to abide, what is
more miserable and more unhappy than they are? Intelligere debemus in
sigilliolis parvulis contrahere se Deos. p. 204.
Besides sometimes their Images are very little, and sometimes very great, the
Gods must therefore in the little ones contract, but in the great ones extend
themselves, when they sit, stand, or run, the Gods must sit, stand, run, and
must accommodate themselves to all the postures of the Image where they dwell.
Again the gods, say you, dwell in Images, do they dwell every one wholly in
each, or partly in one, and partly in another Image, so as to be divided
amongst all their Images? One God cannot be wholly in them all at once, put
case in many thousand Images of Vulcan, because what is but one, and singular
by nature, cannot be multiplied into many, and yet be one, or yet preserve its
own simplicity; for if you say the same being is in them all, all reason and
integrity must perish from the truth, if that be granted, that one can at one
time abide in them all, for then each God must be affirmed so to divide his
very self, as that he shall be both himself. and be another; which because
nature does reject, refuse, and spurn at, either we must confess there are
innumerable Vulcans, or that he is in none of all these Images, because he by
his nature is forbidden to be divided amongst them all. Now all these things so
palpably conclude against the Roman Host, that it is almost needless to make
out the parallel. Does not that God permit himself to be shut up, and lie
concealed in an obscure habitation? If he does this unwillingly, is there not
some restraint upon him? If willingly, what makes him to prefer these signs
before the Heavenly Mansions? Is he compelled to abide under these signs until
the species be corrupted? If so, what is more miserable, or more unhappy than
this God, who must abide under these species, even when they are devoured by
the vilest vermin, or mixed with the most loathsome vomit. But if he may depart
at pleasure, it will be always doubtful when this reserved Host is to be
worshipped, and when not. Moreover when a great Loaf is Consecrated, according
to the ancient Custom of the Church, he must extend, and when a little Wafer,
must contract his body. He must accommodate himself to all the postures of the
Wafer, move when it moves, stand still when it does so, he must dwell wholly in
every Consecrated Wafer (i. e.) in many thousand Wafers at a time, (which says
Arnobius, cannot be, it being inconsistent with his unity) or so divide his
self from his own very self, as that he shall be both himself, and another;
which nature does reject, refuse and spurn at. Baruch vi. 19. Accendunt
candelas velut in tenebris agenti. Jam se cum his inanibus officiis,
stultissimos esse cognoscant etc. Lact. l. 6. p. 544, 545, 547.


Jeremy laughs at the Heathen Custom of lighting Candles to their Gods: They
light them candles, says he, more than for themselves, of which they cannot
see one. They light Candles to God as if he was in the dark, says Lactantius,
now can he be esteemed compos mentis who offers for a gift Candles, or wax
lights to him who is the Author of light. Their Gods, Number igitur mentis sue
compos put indus est qui datori luminis candelarum manus offert pro mune ^ p.
546.
indeed because they are but Earthy, may want lights lest they should be in
darkness, whose worshippers because they understand not what is Heavenly, bring
their Religion down unto the earth; and by these rites, more than by any other
thing may their Gods be proved to be dead, because their rites are wholly
earthy. As for our God who could create the Sun and Stars to be a light to men,
he wants no earthly lights. When we assemble together, or publicly rejoice,
says Nazianzen, (...). 2. p. 106. Ed. Eton.
let not our senses shine with sensible light, for this is the Heathen Custom
at their new Moons: but let not us honor God with such things, which it becomes
us not to use, but with purity of soul, with the brightness of our minds, with
lights that lighten the whole body of the Church, I mean with divine Theorems
and Notions set upon a holy Candlestick and giving light to the whole world.
Lawpades coram eo plures vel saltem una die noctuque perpetuo colluceat.
Ritual. p. 64. Semper lumine praecedente. ibid. p. 71. Cum cereis seu
intortitiis comitentur. ibid.
And yet we know the Church of Rome commands that at the least one lamp shall
burn before the Host continually, if not more; that when the Host is carried to
the sick, there shall still be a light to go before it, and that the Parish
mers or the Fraternity shall be called to attend upon the Sacrament with wax
lights and torches. On Corpus Christi day, they are all, that run before it, to
carry wax lights in their hand. Now of these lighted Candles, it truly may be
said that the Host sees not one, which was the infamy the Prophet cast upon the
Heathen Idols: We may according to Lactantius conclude the Romanists have lost
their wits who do thus serve their God, that they understand not what is
Heavenly, that they worship a dead thing: we may say unto our brethren as
Nazianzen does unto his fellow Christians, Let us not honor God with such
things, for it becomes not us to use them. And Lastly with the Prophet we may
laugh both at their Host, and them who light unto it Candles more than for
themselves, of which it cannot see one.

Jeremy laughs at the Heathen Priests because they cloth their Gods with
costly raiment. Baruch vi. 72.
You shall know them to be no Gods, says he, by the bright Purple that rotteth
upon them. They deck them with Silver and Gold, says the same Prophet. Jer. x.
4. L. 2. C. 4.
They provide for them hoods and precious clothing, says Lactantius, who have
no use of any covering, and vainly do adorn them with Gold and Jewels, and
bring unto them frankincense and sweet odours. Whereas unto this Roman God
belongs a Tabernacle as richly decked with Gold and Silver as can well be,
Rituale Romans p. 64.
a white veil, and two Clerks going before him. Cum thuribulis effumantibus, he
therefore is accoutred much like a Heathen God: and if it were ridiculous to
deck, to cloth, to incense them, so it must be equally ridiculous to do these
things unto the Host.

Tatian to the Heathens, (...), etc. p. 149. (...). Apol. 2. 57.
are Metamorphosed, Rhea into a Tree, Jupiter into a Dragon. They are things,
says Justin, which have not the form or likeness of a God. And is not also
that supposed Christ whcih Roman Catholics do worship Metamorphosed into a
Wafer, and a drop of blood which also has no-form or likeness of a God?

Church of Rome, that their God being eaten, may by the squeamish stomach be
cast up again, witness that Canon Si sacerdos evomat Eucharistiam. De defect.
in minist. occur. Reg. 14.
Which does exhort the Priest when he does vomit up the Sacrament to wipe it,
and try once more to eat it. They also intimate that the Communicant may spit
him out upon the ground, Ne sumpto Sacramento statim expuant. p. 64. Propter
quod non danda est Excharistia habenti talem fluxum quod integrum emittit hoc
quod sumit. In 4. Sent. Did. 9. q. 1. Art. 2. Si oh aliquem morbum species
discenderent, consequenter and ipsam Corpus descenderet, and emitteretur, pudor
enim non debet esse in causa negandi veritatem. In Sent. 4. Did. 12. q. 1.
Art. 3.
witness the caution in their Ritual, that after the reception of the
Eucharist, they do not for a season spit, ne Sacramenti species de ore
decidant. And Lastly to complete their blasphemy, they do acknowledge that in
diseases which take away digestion their God comes whole out of the draught: So
it has happened, says Paludanus, so it must happen in this case, says Soto,
for shame should not constrain us to deny the truth. Now to be spit out of the
mouth, or cast out of the stomach, or to be ejected at the draught are the
peculiar excellencies of this Mass-God, which all the follies of the Heathens
cannot parallel. Pious and learned Origin demonstrates against Celsus, the
uncleanness of that spirit, which inspired Pagan Prophets by the unclean parts
he entered: and upon the same ground one may guess at the holiness attributed
to this God of bread, by the same parts he goes out of. I cannot write to this
purpose, what a civil man could not read, or a pious one but think of, and
therefore forbear to dilate on it. Learned men know what Rabbis say about the
worshipping of Baal Peor. This new Idol is twice as bad: for certainly, neither
ancient nor modern Expositors thought hitherto, that Holy Scripture should call
a Deity, Bosheth and Gillulim, that is a God of shame and dung, upon such a
literal and proper account. D. Brevints depth of the Romish Mass. p. 78. Chap.
8.

Arnobius, Whether it were not better much to blaspheme, L. 3. p. 106. Rectius
multo est deos esse non credere quam esse illos tales. Id. l. 4. p. 151.
revile, and speak reproachfully of Christ, than with pretense of piety to
entertain such base unworthy thoughts, such monstrous conceptions of him? May
not exclaim with him. Hoccine auairi sub mundi hoc axe, and l. 5. p. 173.
What, shall such tings as these be read, or heard under the Cope of Heaven,
and shall they who assert, and do them, be esteemed Saints, and pious men, the
guides and keepers of Religion? Estue aliquod sacrilegium hoc majus? Ibid.
Is there any Sacriledg greater than this, or is there any Nation under Heaven
which holds such impious opinions as these be, and does betray her belief of
them in her Sacred Mysteries? At least, I hope we may have leave to speak to
Roman Catholics as did this Father to the Heathens, Inscitiam nostram at
doceatis or amas, qua via intelligi possunt dii esse, nos eaim nihil horum
sentimus habere vim Numinis. l. 4. p. 127. Ad haeccine nos sacra. etc. l. 5. p.
177 Hoscine nobis deos importatis, injligitis quorum similes nec vos esse nec
alium velitis quenquam. ibid.
humbly desiring to know, if they do verily esteem their Wafers to be Gods, How
they can under, stand them so to be? for we, unless they will deprive us even
of common sense, must say, we are not able to perceive that they have any Deity
residing in them, or that they bear any similitude to our most Glorious Jesus.
Why is it then that you compel us, not only by your Excommunicaiton, but by
Fire and Faggot, to the worship of such Gods? What say you, O you Romans, is
this the sacred Worship which you by flames, exiles and slaughters, and which
is more than all, by inquifitions would compel us to? Are these the Gods which
you would introduce into this Nation, and inflict upon us, to which you would
neither wish your selves nor any if your kindred to be like? Do you not blush
to object unto us our neglect to worship things so infamous, that it is better
to believe that there are no Gods, than to imagine they are such as you do
represent them? And yet is our concernment less for what we suffer, than for
what our excellent Religion suffers by this Romish Worship. We should less
value the reproach of Schismatic and Heretic you cast upon us; did not your
Doctrine cast reproach upon our Dearest Lord, the offense you give to us were
more supportable; did not you also give offense both to the Jew and Gentile by
your Wafer Worship; did you not harden them in infidelity; did you not by it
minister just matter of excuse for almost all the follies of the Heathen
Worship, and furnish them with a reply to those most excellent Apologies the
Fathers made for our Religion, and those convincing demonstrations which they
brought against that superstition and Idolatry which then obtained. For to
discourse a little in the person of an Heathen, and to retort upon the
Christians the Arguments of these renowned Fathers.

(...) Justin. chort. p. 38. Athan. contra gentes p. 12. Clem. (...) p. 23.
Saturno infantes immolabantur. Minut. p. 34.
that our Saturn should attempt to cat his Son, or that our Jupiter should
banquet with the Aethiopians on human flesh; if Christians think it sacred to
eat and feast upon the Son of God? The Thyestaean Supper is even by our selves
esteemed so foul an action that the Sun could not behold it, and must it be the
choicest part of Christian Worship to feed upon human flesh? Is it so
prodigious in us to sacrifice our Sons and Daughters to Saturn, Moloch, or to
other Demons, and is it not prodigious in you Christians to Sacrifiee the Son
of God? Are we reproachful to our Jupiter by Sacrificing to him men, and is it
not more infamous in you to Sacrifice God Man to your Jehovah? Do we pollute
our Temples with such Sacrifices, and are yours hallowed with the like? Do you
conclude it barbarous to be initiated into the service of Bellona, Sanguinis
pabulo. Apol. c. 9. Cruoris hausut. Minut. p. 34. Jupiter homicidio colitur.
Minut. 16,
by eating, says Teritullian, by drinking humane blrod, say others; when you
your selves are consecrated unto the Service of Jehovah, by drinking of the
blood of Jesus? or is it so portentous to sacrifice to Jupiter, with human
blood, and yet so pious to sacrifice to your Jehovah with the blood of God? Is
it so monstrously absurd for us to think that when we carry an old Shield, Quid
de senticis jam vitustate putridis dicam? quae cum and portant, deos ipsos se
gestare humeris suis arbitrantur Lact. l. 1. c. 21. Non ut Deus obscure per
coeli evnlat sydera, sed velut animal brutum vshiculum quo. sustineatur petit
etc. Arnob. l. 7. p. 249.
our God is carried upon our shoulders, and must it not be equally absurd, for
you to think that Wasfer which you carry in your hands, or on your shoulders,
should be your Jehovah? Do you laugh at Aesculapius when he appeared like a
Serpent, because he flew not in the Air, nor rode upon the Clouds, but only
crept upon the earth, and seemed to want a Boat to waft him over, and to
preserve him from the Sea; when your new Aesculapius can neither fly, nor wag,
without the help of a Mass-Priest, nor pass the Seas without the like
assistance? Do you ask what a ridiculous thing it is to hear that Jupiter was
so incensed at the death of his Son Justin Cohort. P. 2. Athan. adv. Gent. P.
13. Tanto numini bumana fuerunt praesidia necessaria. Jul. Firm. p. 20.
Sarpeto preserve him from the attempts of other Gods; and is it lest
ridiculous to consider that your God is neither able, nor so much as willing to
preserve himself from the attempts of man or beast? Do you reckon it a disgrace
to our Palladium that when both Troy and Rome were burnt, it was preserved only
by the care of man, and is it honorable for you to worship such a God as only
is preserved by the same means from fire, thieves, and from brute beasts? Is it
rational for you to ask, Quid isti dii pro Romany possunt qui nihil pro suis
ad versus eorum arma valucrunt. p. 28.
as does Minutius, What can those Gods do for the Romans, who could do nothing
for their Votaries again the Roman Power? And is it not as rational for us to
ask what can that God do for us, should we turn Christians, who could do
nothing for his Votaries against the Arms of the Egyptians? (...) Just. ad
Diogn. p. 492, 493.
Do you conclude that we contemn, affront, reproach these Gods we worship, by
shutting of them up, and by appointing Keepers for them, and must not you be
also deemed reprochers and contemners of your God, who have your Keepers, Locks
and Keys, for the securing of your Consecrated Wafer? Or is it so ridiculous to
see our Jupiter hiding himself from the insidiation of his Father, (...) A
than. contra Gent. p. 13.
and is it not as worthy of our laughter to see what care you take to hide your
God from the incursion of an enemy or the inspection of the Protestant? Or to
secure him from the Witch, or the Magician, yea even the Mouse or Rat? Is it an
evidence, as your own Jerome has declared, that what is properly burnt cannot
be God, In Es. l. 12. p. 73. B. Hunc homines Deum putant? qui artus ejus and
artus ejus and nervos cremari, etc. Lact. l. 1. c. 9. (...) Just. ad Diogn. p.
492.493. Quid vos maneat qui haec colitis considerate. Jul. Firmie. p. ^.
and must your Host, which has so often been burnt, be the Great God of Heaven?
Must the flames our Hercules endured declare he was no God, and will not the
like flames declare the same touching your Sacramental Jesus? Is it sufficient
confutation of our Deities that they may be exposed to rust or rottenness; and
is it not as good a confutation of your Wafer God, that he grows musty, and is
corrupted in the Stomach? Do you call upon us to consider what judgments may
abide us for worshipping that Earth on which the winds do blow, and the rains
fall, and is subject to those tremblings which do betray its fears and its
infirmities; and may we not entreat you to consider what judgments you may look
for, who worship such a God, whom as you fear, and say, the floods may drown,
the wind may blow him quite away, and who has often by our Earth been
swallowed up together with the Temples where he did reside? Does it become you
so magisterially to ask touching our Gods, Hiemalia sentiant frigora, aut
solibus torrentur aestivis, etc. Arnob. l. 6. p. 191.
Whether they be exposed to winter colds, or summer heats, whether they lie
obnoxious to the ineursions of an enemy, or to the bitings of wild beasts? when
you yourselves confess your God both may and often has been subject to these
Calamities, and make provisions in your Rubricks for his defense against them?
Indigetes illi cum ranis and pisciculis degunt. Arnob. l. 1. p. 20.
Do you laugh at our Indigetes Dii, because they sometimes live with Frogs and
Fishes, and may we not as freely laugh at your Sacramental God who does not
only often live with Rats and Mice, and such like vermin, but even creeps
down into their Stomachs and their Guts? (...); Juit. ad Diogn. p. 49.
Do you render us little better than insensate creatures because we worship
that which is blind and dumb, that which wants motion, life and sense; and are
you men of a much deeper reach who worship for a God that Wafer which is to all
appearance as void of life, sense, motion, as any of our Statutes are?
Venerabar, O caecitas! lubricatum lapidem, tanquam inesset vis praesens
adulabar. Arnob. l. 1. p. 22. L. 1. C. 20.
Do you cry out, O your blindness! because you once did pray to an insensate
stone, supposing some Divine virtue had resided in it; and is it lesser
blindness to worship a thin Wafer upon the suposition of a Divinity united to
it? Does your Lactantites ask concerning our God Muta, what kindness can the
dumb God do unto her Votaries; and may not we with reason, say of your
Consecrated Wafer, Quid prestare colenti potest qui loqui non potest? Is not
our Jupiter (...) i. e. our Scare-fly Jupiter more worthy of our adoration,
Clem. (...) p. 24.
then is your Sacramental Jesus, who is not able to scare away or to remove the
fly that falls into, or drinks him up? Cease then to pity us, or to pronounce
us blind, as does your Athanasius, Contr. Gent. p. 37.
because we bear a reverence to what is void of life, when your own blindness
does more rationally deserve our pity. For do you judge it so absurd that we
should venerate a stone like unto these we tread upon, (...). Juit. ad Diogn.
p. 492.
and is it not absurd in you to worship what is like unto that bread and wine
which goes down into the draught? Does it spoil the credit of our Gods, that
other Gold and Silver might have been made like them, Just. Mar. ad Diogn. p.
493.
had the Artificer so pleased; and must it not then crack the Credit of your
Sacramental God, that other Bread and Wine, and other Wafers might, if your
Priest had peased to think upon them, been as good Gods as he? Do you laugh at
us because when we do Consecrate our Wine unto the Gods, Ne vinum omne quod in
callis at que Apothecis est est conditum esse sacrum incipiat. Arnob. l. 7. p.
236. Quid est aliud quam dicere tantum esto mactus, quantum vole. Ib. p. 237.
Nec carnis nec mentis oculis aspicit quod non potest esse deus, cujus pars igne
combusta est. Hieron. in Es. l 12. p. 78. B. Dives afficiebam contumeliis cum
eos esse credebam ligna, lapides, aut in hujusmodi rerum habitare materia.
Arnob. l. 1. p. 23. Non prima and maxima contumelia est habitationibus deos
habere districtos, tuguriold his dare? Arnob. l 6. p. 191
we say mactus hoc vino inferio esto, adding inferio lest we should Consecrate
that Wine which is contained in the Vintners Cellars. When any Roman Priest can
with four words, and an intention so to do, turn all the Wine in any Merchants
Cellar into a Christian God? Do you think it so absurd that what Wine shall be
Sacred to the Gods should thus depend upon the will and words of Heathen
priests, when it depends upon the words and the intention of a Roman Priest
what Wafer, and what Wine shall be transubstantiated into the Christians God?
Do you ask why we perceive not with the eyes both of our senses and our minds,
that what is partly burnt cannot be God; when you yourselves do not perceive
that what is partly baked, and partly drunk in Taverns is no God? Do you admire
at their blindness who, being Heathens, thought their Gods might dwell in wood
or stone, or such like matter, when being Christians you are obliged. to
believe your God does dwell in Pyxes, Chalices, and Bottles, and in the belly
of a beast? Do you affirm that we are contumelious to our Gods by shutting of
them up in little houses, and making for them little Cottages, and Cells, and
Conclaves; and are not you more contumelious to your Jesus by making for, and
cooping of him up in a small Pix and Tabernacle? bernacle? Is it ridiculous in
us to light up Candles in the day time to our Gods; Lucernas meridie vanas
prostituere. Tert. Apol. C. 46. p. 35. Lact. l. 2. C. 4. p. 157.
and must it not be so in Christians to do the like to their supposed God? Do
you deride our Jove because he hat a golden cloth upon him, or is adorned with
precious Garments; and shall not we esteem your God more worthy of our laughter
who has more Cloths and Trappings than a Lord Mayors horse? Do you ask the
Heathen, Ab aestibus sese frigorihusque tutari. Arnob. l. 3. p. 1 8. In Alitem,
taurum, and quod omnia Genera contumeliarum transiliat, in formiculam parvulam.
Arnob. l. 4. p. 145. ib. L. 7. p. 249, 250.
whether by clothing of his Gods, he seeks to defend them from the wind and
cold, and heat, and other inuries of the weather, when it is so casie to retort
on you the same enquiry? Is it so prodigious that our Jupiter should turn
himself into a Bird, a Bull, a little Ant, that Saturn should be turned into a
beast, and Aesculapius appear in the more ghastly Visage of a Serpent, and it
is not as great a prodigy that your own Jesus should be converted into the
shape of a thin Wafer, or a drop of Wine? Is it so ridiculous to conceive our
Jupiter should be contracted into the lineaments of an Ant; Dare ambiguls
contradictionibus locum essetne veras deus an nescio quid aliud longeque ab
supera sublimitate sejuctum. Arnob. 16. p. 250. (...) p. 33. In Matthew. xv.
Tertul. in Apol. C. 13.
and is it less ridiculous to see your Jesus shrink his whole Great self into
the smallest crum of Bread, or drop of Wine? If such things gave men reason to
suspect that they whom we adored as Gods were at the greatest distance from
that sublimity, as your Arnobius says, permit us to suspect the same of your
own Jesus. In fine, is it so great an infamy to our God Fortune, that the
Romans brought her to a Dunghill to be dedicated, thinking the draught a proper
Temple for that God; and is it not a greater infamy to your own Sacramental
Jesus, that, as your Origin declares from his own words, he goes down into the
draught? Is it so horrid to conceive our Saturn should be turned in Cacabulum;
and is it not exceedingly more horrid to conceive your God should be converted
in illud quod dicere nolo? Let me then speak unto your Fathers, Cujus est
pudoris, etc. l. 2. p. 93. Erroris alios and stultitiae condemnare and in
erroris ejusdem vitio deprehendi. l. 3. p. 109.
and Apologists, in their own language, I mean the words of your Arnobius, How
impudent and shameless is it to reprehend that in another which you do
yourselves? to condemn others of stupidity and error when you yourselves are
guilty of like crimes; and object that to the reproach of others which may be
presently retorted, and will reflect on you with greater infamy?

Transubstantiation, Corol. I.
and of the Adoration of the Host as God, was not acknowledged or received by
these Ancient Fathers who spoke so many things which are most plainly
inconsistent with, and perfectly destructive both to that Doctrine, and that
worship. For, 1. Let any man of reason judge from what has been discoursed,
whether all these considerations which have been offered from Scripture, and
from the Fathers to expose Heathen Gods to the derision, and reproach of all
men, and to reclaim the Heathen from his Superstitious follies, do not equally
concern the Roman Host! For that this Host is Sacrified and eaten, that it is
carried on men's shoulders, or in their arms and hand, and stands in the place
where it is set; that care is taken by them that he may not fall; that he
already has been stolen out of St. Sulpitius Church at Paris, out of the Church
at Boloyn, and out of other Churches; that this God has been carried Captive,
has been purloyned by Thieves, Magicians and Wizards, that he is under Lock
and Key, under the custody of men, and is defended by Human Laws, and
vindicated by Human Power, that he is often hid, and has been often buried in
the earth, that he has been exposed to the flames, and to the injuries of wind
and weather, that he is sometimes gnawed upon by things creeping out of the
earth, that he has not the use of eyes to see, or ears to hear, or hands to
handle, or feet to go, that he does dwell and has been often enclosed in Pixes,
Tabernacles, in Chalices, and Bottles, that he has Candles lighted to him of
which he sees not one, that he is clothed with costly Raiment, is strangely
metamorphosed, and lastly that by confession of some Roman Doctors he goes down
into the draught, all this has been already showed, and cannot rationally be
denied, and yet all these are things objected by the Fathers to the reproach of
Heathen Deities; these were the chief considerations which they offered to
prove that Heathen Gods were but dumb Idols, or inferior Creatures, on these
accounts they did continually charge the Heathens with Superstition and
Idolatry, and did endeavor to dissuade them from the owning of these Gods, the
practicing that worship which they received from the Tradition of their
Fathers. And can it reasonably be imagined that they, who thus condemned
others, did the same things themselves, and only did invite them to exchange
their Heathen, for a Christian Deity, subject to all that infamy, contempt, and
drollery which they cast upon the Heathen Gods, and way of worship? Can it be
reasonably thought that all those Fathers, if they had practiced, and believed
as now the Papists do, would speak such plain and frequent contradictions both
to their practice, and their Doctrine, and talk as if they equally intended to
confute, and render infamous the worship of the Christian, and the Heathen
Deities? Let any reasonable person judge whether these apprehensions and
assertions, ( that to worship as a God what we do eat is an abominable and
repugnant worship, a certain indication of the highest folly, stupidity, and
the extremity of madness,) could proceed from men who daily worshipped as the
Highest God, what they themselves did eat? or whether they who worshipped as
God that very Host which they did sacrifice unto God, could solemnly declare,
as the forementioned Fathers often do, that to adore as God what we or others
Sacrifice, is to be Sacrilegious against God, and ignorant of the true knowledge
of God, to be guilty of folly and Atheism; and to do that action which will
justly render us a laughing stock to all our neighbors. If this was the
deportment of all those Holy Fathers, we have just reason to cry out, Vbi
fides! ubi pudor! and to conclude that they had not one Grain of honesty, or
shame, or prudence in them.

Since that this Wafer-worship has obtained amongst the Latins, what Romanist
will say with Origin, the Sacrament, that is the God he worships, according to
our Saviors words, is voided at the draught; with Pseudo Justin that what we
eat or sacrifice cannot be worthy of the name or honor of a God: With Cyril,
that they are rude and stupid who carry up and down their God upon their
shoulders, or with St. Chrysostom, that it is an hyperbole of madness to own
that for a God which may be stolen. Since then the Fathers without distinction,
or exception, do frequently assert these things, and many more of the like
nature, it is extremely evident that they were not worshippers of the Host, as
is the present Church of Rome; for if no man would thus speak who does as the
Papists do, surely these Fathers were far enough from Popish practices in this
particular.

Moreover let it be considered, 1. Whether the Fathers would afford the
Heathens this great advantage to retort all that they argued against the
worship of their Gods, and to assert that that which they condemned in them,
was only what they daily practiced themselves, and taught all Christians to
observe; which certainly they did, if they believed and practiced as does the
present Church of Rome.

And, 2. Whether the Heathens, if this occasion had been offered, would have
been wholly silent, and negligent of this advantage? Put case, I say, these
Pagans knew that all which by the Christians was objected against their
worship, and their Gods, was of an equal force against the worship of the
Christian Host; that this Host was owned by them as the Highest God, and yet
was carried in their hands, because it could not go, was kept by Sextons under
Lock and Key, was sometimes burnt, and sometimes buried in the carth, that it
was clothed with costly Raiment, void of all apparent sense and life as any of
the heathen Idols; how could the Heathens, being acquainted with these things,
and many others of like nature, abstain from saying, Thou art inexcusable, O
Christian, whosoever thou art, that judge us on these accounts, for thou that
judge do the same things. For further confirmation of this Argument
consider,

Heathens could not be ignorant of this supposed Article of Christian Faith,
and this supoosed practice of the Church of Christ, provided that the
Christians really believed, and practiced always as does the present Church of
Rome. For,

1. The Fathers do themselves declare that 'twas impossible they should conceal
from Pagans what was done in their assemblies; thus, to that false suggestion
that Christians did eat the blood of infants, that they were guilty of cating
human flesh, it is replied by Athenagoras, Legate. p. 38. B.
that if the Christians did so, it was impossible that having servants more or
less, they old conceal this from them. We increase daily, Proficiente
multitudine reorum quid ita non proficit multitudo nuntiatorum Nationes. C. 7.
Apol. 7, 8.
says Tertullian, and the more we do so, the more we must be hated; now the
number of the guilty thus increasing, how is it that the number of informers is
not greather? Our conversation is more known, you know the days on which the
Christians meet, you often beset, detain, oppress us in our private meetings, but
yet who ever came upon us whilst we were eating of an Infant; were we guilty of
these things, when any persons came to profess the Christian Faith, the Priest
must first inform him that such things were to be done, or, Postea cognoscant
necesse est.
being once admitted into their Communion, he must behold them done, and how
could such a one, says he, abstain from the divulging of them? And if the
Priest did first inform him that if he would become a Christian he must worship
that which to all his senses, would seen Bread and Wine, as the Great God of
Heaven, or if, being once admitted to the Holy Sacrament, he was instructed so
to do, and beheld all other Christians doing so, how could this Proselyte
abstain from the divulging of this worship? for this by Infidels and Heathens
was always judged, says Bellarmine, L. 2. de Euch. c. 12.. 2. Ex illis.
a very foolish Paradox, this was to worship a new God obnoxious to almost all
those follies and infirmities, which had engaged them to renounce their Heathen
Gods.

2. That Christians could not conceal this practice from the Jew and Gentile,
will be extremely evident from this consideration, that many myriads who
embraced the Christian Faith were by the heat of persecution driven back to
Paganism, and therefore were concerned to save their credit by divulging what
they esteemed most liable to exception in the Christian Faith, or practice, and
therefore to divulge this foolish Paradox, as by the Gentiles, this plain
impossibility, as by the Jews it was esteemed. For not to mention the Apostasy
of all the Asiaticks, 2 Timothy i. 15.
and of Phygellus and Hermogens, when Nero raged against the Christians. Eusebius.
Hist. Ecc. l. 4. c. 15. p. 129. Epist. ad Trajan. l. 10. Ep. 97. Eusebius. H.
Eccles. l. 5. c. 1. p. 156, 160. and c. 2. p. 167.
The Apostasy of Quintus the Phrygian with many others under the persecution of
Trajanus, when many who had formerly been Christians declared to Pliny they had
ceased to be so, some three, some more, some twenty years ago. Nor the revolt
of tose ten Gauls under the Persecution of Aurelius Verus, who fell, with many
others from the Christian Faith, nor those who under the sixth Persecution were
forced by the severity of torments which Scapula inflicted on them, to desert
that Faith: I say not to insist on these less notable defections: St. Cyprian
complains that by the furty of the eighth Persecution, Ep. 8.. 6.
Christianity did suffer very much, that they were very few who then stood
firm; but they who languished were very numerous; Ep 9.. 4.
that the Church then with tears lamented the fall and funerals of very many;
De lapsis. 2.
that there was then a manifold decay of that once numerous people which
professed the Chrian Faith; Ibid.. 5.
that even at the first onset of the threatening enemy the greatest number of
the Brethren betrayed their Faith. The like we find recorded by Dionysius of
Alexandria even of the chiefest of the Christians, Apud Eusebius. Hist. Ecc. l. 6.
c. 40. p. 238. B. C. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. C. 2. p. 294.
at the first conflict in the tenth Persecution many thousands even of the
Rulers of the Church apostatised says Eusebius. Lastly, who knows not that the
Apostate Julian was once a Reader in the Church; and also that he received
Christian Baptism, and as a consequent of that the Blessed Sacrament? That in
the time of his Apostasy he prevailed on very many, Hist. Ecll. l. 3. C. 13.
Partly by flatteries, partly by bribes, and partly by torments to fly back to
heathenism, and to renounce the Christian Faith, as Socrates relates? Now it is
absolutely impossible that these Apostates should be ignorant of such a
constant and notorious practice of the Christians, as the adoration of the Host
must be, provided that it was then worshipped by them as their God and Savior.

Jews and heathens left nothing unobjected which could with any show of reason,
be offered frm any other doctrine or practice of Christianity, or any fame
concerning it, though never so ill grounded, against the Deity and Worship of
our Lord, Vel impossible esse vel incongruens ut Deus in uterum se mulieris
includeret. Lact. l. 4. c. 29. Arnob. l. 7. p. 249. Tatian. p. 159. Lact. l. 4.
c. 22. and 29. Ceisus apud Orig. l. 1. p. 51, 54. l. 2. p. 62. Minut. p. 25.
or the profession of the Christian Faith. They scoffed at all that any way was
liable to an exception from the Conception of our Lord, to his Ascension. They
very frequently declare that 'twas impossible, or at least incongruous that God
should be included in a Virgins Womb, and that it is unworthy of a God to be
made man, or to appear unto us in the form of man, or to descend unto these
lower Regions; that it did not become the son of God to fly to Egypt, to
escape the wrath of Herod; that a body so born, and nourished with meat as our
Lords body was, could not be deemed the body of a God, Lact. Ibid.
they confidently say that Divine Majesty could not subject it self to those
infirmities which might expose him to the derision and contempt of men? Were
Christ a God, say they, why did he make himself so weak, and so contemptible as
to become obnoxious to punishment from men? Why did he suffer violence from
mortal men? Why did he not repel their force by his Superior power? Why did he
not show forth his Majesty before his death? Why was he haled, as impotent, to
the judgment Seat, condemned as a criminal, or slain as mortal? Why lastly was
he not able to roll away the stone from his own Sepulcher, Celsus apud Orig. l.
5. p. 269.
but needed an Angel to perform that work? Now they who say these things, and
offer these, as they supposed, convincing arguments that our Messiah could not
be the Son of God, or a fit object of Religious Worship, could not have waved
those more plausible pretenses to except against his Deity which this supposed
adoration of him in the Host afforded. For is it not more incongruous that God
should be included in the Stomach, not only of the vilest wretch, but of the
meanest brute, than that he should be for a time included in the hallowed womb
of the most Blessed Virgin? Is it not less ridiculous to say God once appeared
in the form and fashion of a Man, than that he constantly does lie concealed
under the form of Bread and Wine? Is it unworthy of a God to fly to Egypt? and
must it not be more unworthy of him to be carried Captive thither? Is it
beneath his Majesty to take upon him the infirmities of living flesh, and is it
not much more beneath him to take upon him the infirmities of dead insensate
flesh, and even after his Ascension to come down among us as inactive as Aesops
God of Frogs? Is it absurd to say that God descends to the Earth, and is it
not much more absurd to say that he descends into the Stomach or the Draught?
Can not that be the body of a God which feeds on ordinary meat, and must that
be his body which it self is eaten? Does not this Sacramental Jesus make
himself as weak, and as contemtible, and does he not as much expose himself to
the derision both of Jew and Gentile by this conversion into a little Wafer, as
ever he was subject to in his infirmest state on Earth? Is he not as unable in
the Sacrament to scare away the Mouse that gnaws upon him, as in the Sepulcher
he seemed to be to roll away the stone? Does he not show less power there for
the repelling of the Thief, the Wizard, the Fly, the Vermin, than whilst he was
on Earth he showed for the repelling of his Murderers? Can it rationally be
supposed that they who did so constantly object all the forementioned
particulars to the reproach of Christ, and those that owned and worshipped him
as God from the beginning of Christianity, till the full triumph of it over
Heathenism; should never once object what in all these respects is more
ridiculous, had they then known, what if it had been true, they must have
known, viz. that this was then the faith and practice of the whole Christian
World, that every Christian believed the Sacrament was truly God, and
worshipped it as God? In the declining Ages of the Church, when this Idolatry
obtained among Christians, the Jew, Mohammedan, and Heathens did constantly
deride and pour contempt on Christians upon this account. Now the reproach of
Christians is not that they are Galileans, or worshippers of him that hanged on
the three, but that they are God-Eaters. Si hostia Deus e^, ^^^r situ obductus
corrumpi^^? Cur d pteribus and muribus corroditur. Quaest. Jud. Amstel. Edit.
An. 1662. p. 346.
On this account they do pronounce us, and that deservedly, to be the most
absurd and foolish Sect, that ever yet appeared in the world; and ask so
boldly, if your Host be God, why is it that by waxing moldy he corrupts? why
is it that the Bats and Mice do gnaw upon him? What then can be the reason that
those more subtle Heathens, and malicious Jews which lived in former Ages of
the Church, should offer nothing of this nature for their own defense, or the
conviction of their adversaries; but only this, that the belief and practice of
the Christians of those former times gave no occasion to these objections and
retorts?

Fathers of the Church do very largely answer, and upon all occasions encounter
all the other scruples which did possess the minds of Heretics, or Heathens,
Turpe hoc Deo and indignum hoc Dei filio. Apud Tert. de carne Christi c. 4.
Apud August. contr. Faustum Manich. L. 3. Cap. 6. (...) Con. Ephesians. Act. 3. p.
335. v. Act. 1. p. 265. (...). apud Cyril. lib. 6. adv. Jul.
and make them to suspect our Jesus could not deserve to be adored, or owned as
a God, or that he did not really assume the nature and infirmities of man, or
verily sustain the ignominies, and dolors of the Cross. When the Marcionites
and Valentinians conceived it was improper for the Son of God to be conceived
in the Womb; the Manichees that it was an unworthy thing to think the God of
Christians should issue from a Womb; when Nestorius declared that he could not
endure to worship one that was two months old, or nourished with milk. When
Julian scoffed at the Christians for saying that the Virgin Mary was the Mother
of God; when they, I say, suggested all these things, the Fathers spared no
pains to satisfy them in all these particulars. Lactantius does for this very
reason insist more largely on one of these particulars, because, says he, this
very apprehension, L. 4. c. 29. p. 448.
that it was impossible, or at the least incongruous, that God should be
included in a Virgins Womb, was that which caused many to turn Heretics. Now
since it is extremely evident that it is more improper, incongruous, unworthy,
to think the God of Christians should descend into, and be included in the
stomach of the most vile communicant, in every Pyx and Bottle that contained
the species of consecrated bread and wine, in every fly that sucked in the
least drop of Holy Wine, or every Mouse that swallowed the least crum of
Hallowed bread, why is it that these Holy Fathers do never offer the least word
to rid this greater scruple out of the minds of men? or to Apologize for this
portentous incongruity, compared to which, all that the Heretic or Heathen
could object were very trifles? Why do they not consider one of all those great
objections against the adoration of their Sacramental Jesus, which from their
very words we have collected? If you reply that they had no occasion so to do,
because this adoration, nor any of the consequents thereof, were ever scrupled
by the worst of Heretics. I answer this is very true, that among all the
formentioned Heretics, and many other, who were so highly scandalized at the
humiliation of our Savior, that they denied either his Deity or his Humanity,
or the reality of all his sufferings, we find not one that ever did except
against the adoration of him in the Sacrament, against the eating of their God,
the mixing of him with their spittle, or with the ferment of the most depraved
stomach; during a thousand years we find not one complaint from any Heretic
that any Christians owned or worshipped a God who presently went down into their
stomachs, and was exposed to the teeth of vermin; this reply therefore I
confess is true, but then it is the strongest confutation of the adoration of
the Host, and that Transubstantiation which the Romanists assert, that can be
possibly conceived, it being absolutely impossible for any rational person to
imagine that all those Myriads of Heretics should be so highly scandalized at
the Cross of Christ, and those infirmities he suffered in the flesh, and yet
that neither they, nor any other Christian should, for a thousand years, once
scruple, or be scandalized at those greater imperfections, and more palpable
absurdities which this supposed Sacramental God was subject to; nay more, that
they should all believe, and should allow that doctrine, and that practice
which did most palpably refute those very Heresies which they had broached:
this being a most perfect demonstration against the Ebionites, Photinians, and
all those swarms of Heretics who questioned the Deity of Christ, that he was
worshipped with Latria in the Sacrament, only upon the presumption of his
Deity, and therefore, if he there deserved that worship, must be God. And this
is also a perfect demonstration against the Marcionites, Docetae, Valentinians,
and all those Heretics who held that Christ assumed apparent, but not
substantial flesh, that he had only the appearance of a body, but no true real
body, and against the Nestorians, and Eutychians, who taught, that after
Christ's ascension his human nature was absorpt and changed into the divine;
against all these, I say, this is a perfect demonstration, that in the
Sacrament Christ's Body and his Flesh are truly and substantially contained, and
therefore that he had a true substantial body, and that his human nature still
remains. At the close of the twelfth Century, when this Idolatry began to show
it self among the Latins, how many Myriads were branded with the name of
Heretics for their stiff opposition, both to this practice, and to the
doctrine on which it does depend; and can it be imagined that in all former
Ages of the Church of Christ, in which so many Heresies abounded, not any
single person should once have broached this new Heresy, more obvious than any
of them all, had the known doctrine and practice of all former Ages administered
the like occasion fo to do? (...). Gr. p. 29. lin. 50. (...) ib. p. 30. lin. 1.
(2.) These Fathers in their Apologies do very carefully take notice of any
thing delivered by them which they imagined the Heathens might retort upon
them. When Theodoret had confuted the Heathen Polytheism, and had confronted to
it the Rule of Moses and of Christ, Who, says he, does command us to worship
the Creater only, N.B. he adds, that they perhaps may say the Christians are
not observers of the rule, because they worship the whole Trinity, and not the
Unity exclusively. (...). p. 104. lin. 50.
And then he gives a copious Answer to that objection. In his seventh book
having derided Pagan Deities, because they seemed to be pleased with the blood
and fat of beasts, he very honestly confesses that Heathens might plausibly
object the like against the God of Israel, Contra Julian. l. 4. p. 125. D.
because he also did require such Sacrifices to be offered to him. The very
same objection is taken notice of, (...) Cyril. contra Jul. l. 1. p. 9. A.
and answered by Cyril of Alexandria. Again the Fathers frequently object unto
the Heathens that diversity of Sects, and of opinions which was to be found
among their Philosophers, but then they spare not to acknowledge that this
objection may be retorted against them, and then proceed to give what answer
they think fit unto it. And when Tertullian had argued that the Heathen Gods
must be unjust, Hot utique in Deum vestrum repercutere est. Apol. c. 41.
if they by reason of the faults of Christians were induced to hurt their own
Votaries, he adds, that Heathens might retort this argument upon the Christians
God, and then proceeds to vindicate his God from that objection. And yet, if in
his days the Romish Sacramental God had by all Christians been acknowledged and
adored, not only this particular, but almost all that he, and the forementioned
Fathers had offered against the Heathen Deities, might have been evidently
retorted, as we have seen already, on the Christians God. Why therefore did
they not confess ingenuously in all those cases, hoc and in Deum nostrum
repercutere est, that they might be retorted on the Christians God? and spend
some time in vindication of their Sacramental God from these retorts?

Gorol. II.
we have as great assurance as sense and reason, and the concurrent judgment of
mankind can tender, that the Host cannot be truly God, and consequently that
the Trent Council does oblige all Christians, as much as in them lies, to
worship that as God which is not truly so, and that the Members of the Roman
Church are guilty of Idolatry by giving to it that worship which is due to God
alone. This charge, I know, does very much afflict the Romanists, because they
clearly see that if it be made good against them, our Church is justified in
her refusal of communion with them; seeing without consenting to, and frequent
practice of Idolatry, we cannot be admitted to communion with them, whence it
will naturally follow that their Church must be as truly guilty of a wretched
Schism, as Jeroboam and his ten tribes were, and consequently that the Major
part of the Western Church may be Schismatics, by virtue of these impositions;
and that no persons separating, on the account of the Idolatry required by the
Church of Rome, from the external communion of that Church, can incur the guilt
of Schism: that the Roman and other Western Churches united with it, and the
supposed head thereof, St. Peter's imaginary Successor, is not that true
Church-guide to which we are obliged to submit: that a reformation may be
lawful against the definitions of that Church: that abuses in Doctrine and
practice may be reformed by a National Church against, and then much more
without that Authority: that National Churches and Councils are not absolutely
subject to Patriarchal. Hence does it plainly follow that the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the half Communion, must be
false: hence also it is evident that we cannot safely acquiesce in the judgment
of the Major part of our Church Governors, concerning either the sense of
Scripture, the Doctrine of the ancient Church, or the consent of Fathers, or
any article of faith defined by them, nor safely practice all they do impose;
and consequently we may rest assured they are not infallible, and therefore
that there is no necessity for preservation of the Church from Sects and
Heresies, that they should be infallible, nor is there any promise of an
infallible assistance in their definitions in the Holy Scripture; nor can it
possibly be necessary to Salvation to believe the determinations of those
Councils which by the Romanists are styled general. Hence also it is evident
that there can lie upon us no obligation to believe or yield assent to any
Doctrines defined by them, and consequently that this submission is not the
only means of suppressing Heresies and Sects; that to dissent from any Doctrine
received or defined by them can be no mark of Heresy; that there may be great
hazard to the vulgar in adhering to the decisions of that Church, that a right
judgment may be assured; that these Church Governors have erred in making this
decision; that Christians without this infallibility may be sufficiently secure
in points of faith; that certainty from sense and reason may rationally be
pleaded for some Doctrines against the definitions of that Church, and her
supposed General Councils; that all that R. H. has said for confirmation of
any of these propositions must be false. And lastly, that if a Church
committing and teaching Idolatry is no true member of the Catholic Church, the
Church of Rome must cease to be so.

CHAP. III.
The Contents.

The objections of the Romanists against the charge of Idolatry are considered
and answered; as 1. The Objection that the Prophets have foretold that all
Idolatry should be extirpated by the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, is
answered.. I. Obj. 2. That if the Church of Rome be guilty o Idolatry then the
whole Church of Christ, for many Ages, before Luther, must be charged with the
same guilt, answered first in general.. II.. In particular by showing, (1.)
That Image Worship was not then received in the greatest part of the Western,
and in some part of the Eastern Church.. III. (2.) That the worship of Saints
departed with mental prayer, or upon supposition of their acquaintance with the
secret desires of the supplicant, was then no article of faith in the Western
Church; nor is it yet received in the Eastern Church as such.. IV. (3.) That
many in the Western Churches did not then, and that the Eastern Churches do not
yet give Latria to the Host.. V. That this practice is no necessary consequent
of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, nor is it necessary that they who do
maintain a Doctrine must practice every thing which follows from it. ibid. A
large account of the Greek Mass. VI. A full answer to all that R. H. offers
from that Mass, to prove the Host is worshipped with Latria by the Greeks..
VII. In the times of Arianism Idolatry prevailed over the major part of the
Church Catholic, and both the Fathers and the Romish Doctors teach that in the
time of Antichrist it will prevail much more.. VIII.

England, but all other Protestants, they do with all their wit and subtilty
endeavor to demonstrate the falseness of this accusation, and muster up
whatsoever they are able to produce and plead for their excuse. And therefore
whatsoever of this nature I have met with in their writings, I will impartially
consider, and then shall leave it to the judgment of the discerning Reader to
determine whether that which they offer in their own defense does carry in it
any weight proportionable to what we have discoursed here, and other treatises
have offered, to justify this accusation of the Church of England.

the Scripture does inform us, and the Prophets have foretold us, that all
Idolatry should be extirpated by the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, and
that his Kingdom was always to continue, and therefore that the Church of
Christ could not apostatize so far as to enjoin and allow the belief and
practice of Idolatry. If Doctor Stilling fleet will not deny, says, T. G. what
God has promised by the Prophet Zachary, Behold, P. 125.
the days come, and I will destroy the names of Idols from off the earth, and
the memory of them shall be no more; and this not for four or five hundred
years, but to the end of the world, for the Kingdom of Christ is to continue
always, let him give glory to God, and acknowledge his charge of Idolatry to be
false, and that Christ has done what he promised to do, that is, to deliver us
from all Idolatry. to put his laws into the hearts of Christians; Jer. xxxi.
33. Esa. xi. 9. Esa. lx. 21.
that they should never depart from him, that the knowledge of the Lord should
cover the earth as the waters cover the Sea; that the people of Zion should be
all righteous. Let then T. G. give glory to God, acknowledge that the Church of
Rome, which by their own confessions, and upon evident proof from all the
writers of these Ages, was overrun by ignorance and barbarity, and overwhelmed
with wickedness, during the 10, 11, 12, 13. Centuries, was not the Church of
Christ, or else confess the vanity of his own inference. Moreover the same
Prophets have informed us that the preaching of the Gospel should have this
influence upon the world, that they should beat their swords into plow-shares,
Mich. iv. 3. Hos. xi. 18. Esa. xi. 9.
and their spears into pruning books; that Nation shall not lift up a sword
against Nation, neither shall they learn war any more; that he would remove the
bow, the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and would make them to lie
down in safety, and that they should not hurt or destroy in all his holy
mountain. Let then T. G. give glory to God, and acknowledge that Rome Christian
which has been the cause of more wars, and shed more blood than even Rome
Heathen did, is very unlike to be Christ's holy mountain, or else confess the
weakness of what he thus infers from this passage of the Prophet Zachary. Let
him charge God with the failure of his promise, or confess that all these
places do only show that the Doctrine of the Gospel does naturally tend to work
these blessed effects in all that cordially embrace it, though through the
perverseness, lusts, the superstition and corrupt interests of men, it be far
otherwise; and then he has an answer to this slender scruple, viz. that what
he cites from Zachary does not affirm that after the coming of our Savior
there should be no Idolatry amongst professors of Christianity, but only that
his Doctrine had a signal tendence to the extirpation of it, did not the
wickedness and superstition of men, deserted by God, and given up to the
delusions of the Devil, incline them to the practice of it. 3. The words of
Zachary do only say that God would cot off Idols out of the Land (of Judah) not
out of the whole earth; he does not say that God would cut off all Idols, but
only the names of those Idols which they formerly had worshipped; in which
sense in was admirably true, for after their return from Babylon they
superstitiously abstained from that Idolatry, which they had formerly
committed. And, 4. This objection may be as speciously urged by the Arian
Idolaters, and the whole Heathen world, as by the Roman Church; for since the
words of Zachary, as they are rendered by T. G. contain a promise that God would
cut off the names of Idols from the earth, it does as much assure us that after
the coming of our Savior, and after the promulgation of his Gospel, through
the world, there should remain no Idols, nor any worship of Idols in the whole
surface of the earth, as that there should remain no Idols amongst those who do
profess the Christian Faith.

Romans R. H. disc. p. 75.
say they, be guilty of Idolatry in worshipping the Host, or Images; or praying
to departed Saints, then the whole Church of Christ for many Ages before
Luther, must have been guilty of Idolatry; for the same practices, say they,
for which we do affirm the Church of Rome to be Idolatrous, are, and for many
Ages were used in the Eastern Church. Answ. That the same practices on the
account of which we do affirm the Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry are, and
for many Ages before Luther were used in the whole Church of Christ, can never
be made good by Roman Catholics; in answer therefore to this whole Argument it
is sufficient barely to deny, what they precariously do assert in this
particular; and call upon them to prove that which they do with so much
confidence affirm, by some more cogent and effectual medium than the pretended
silence of Historians touching such persons as did not comply with this
Idolatry. For, 1. There is no necessity that all who did not inwardly believe
these Doctrines, should outwardly declare so much, when they considered that
they were likely to do themselves the greatest mischief by a free declaration
of their minds, and the Church but little good, by reason of the prevalency of
these errors, Multa hujusmodi propter nonnullarum vel sanctarum vel
turbulentarum personarumscandala liberius improbare non audeo. Epist. ad
Januar. p. 372. Dementie est tibi pernitiem accersere, si nulli prosis. Apud
Hotting. Hist. Eccl. Sect. 16. Part. 2. p. 29. Vid. etiam. p. 24, 25.
and the blind Zeal of many for them. For if St. Austin in his days found
reason to complain that some corruptions had so generally obtained that though
he judged they ought to be redressed, yet, as he tells us, he durst not freely
disapprove them: it is no wonder that, in these latter times of wretched
ignorance and looseness, men should be more shy of reprehending those
corruptions which in their judgments they disliked, concluding with Erasmus
that it was madness (though they were convinced as, he says, he was, that it
was very good that some things should be changed that had obtained in the
Church:) to hazard their own lives by speaking their minds freely, when they
could do but little good, and being more desirous it should be done by others
than themselves. Who knows not that when the reformation was begun by
Zuinglius, and Luther, they were encouraged, and approved of by the best and
the most learned of that Age? And that innumerable persons did presently
embrace and testify their approbation of their Doctrine, which is an evidence
beyond exception of their good inclinations to it. Does not Elias complain that
all besides himself in Israel had shamefully revolted to Idolatry? and yet we
are assured by God himself that the was certainly deceived. And if such a great
Prophet erred in his judgment, touching his own time, and his own Country, why
may not you mistakein thinking that in the former Ages of the Church, all the
professed members of it did bow the knee to your Baal?

2. There is no necessity there should be Histories or Records of all those
persons who disliked any of the practices which commonly obtained in the
Church; Apud Hott. Hist. Ecc. Sec. 16. Part. 2. p.
or were possessed with that hatred of the false worship generally received,
Cat. test. ver. l. 19. p. 867.
as Wesselus was: or said as did Domitius Calderinus, when by his friends
constrained to go to Mass, Eamus sane ad communes errores. Nor,

3. Is it necessary that all the Histories and Records of this kind which have
been written should remain, and much less that they should continue perfect and
uncorrupted, especially considering your Church, which had lately all the power
in her hand, has been so wickedly industrious by her Indices expurgatorii to
corrupt all Histories, Records, and Monuments of Antiquity which make against
her. But to omit all these advantages, I shall ex abundanti show the falsehood
of this suggestion in all those three particulars out of those Records which
yet remain, and have escaped her destructive hands: And,

Idolatry, as it imports (...), The worship or religious service of an Idol, or
the similitude of any thing in heaven or earth made to be worshipped in the
service of Religion; I say Idolatry, in this, which is the prime and natural
import of the word, was not the practice of the whole Church of Christ for many
Ages before Luther: For, 1. The German and the French Churches, says
Cassander, Consult. Cap. de Imag. p. 201.
after the Council held at Frankfort, most constantly continued for some Ages
in that sentence which they first received from the Church of Rome, viz. That
Images were neither to be broken nor yet to be worshipped. If then the German
and French Churches continued firm in this opinion for some Ages after the
Council held at Frankford A. D. 794. they must have constantly maintained it in
the VIII. and the IX. Centuries. And that they held the same opinion in the IX.
Century is evident from Agobardus Bishop of Lions, who was make Bishop by
consent of the whole Clergy of that Nation. For he wrote a Book against this
Image Worship, Sect. 30.
wherein he has declared, that it is contrary both to Scripture and Tradition
and the Doctrine of the Old Roman Church; Sect. 35.
and also that whosoever worships any molten or graven Image does not honor
God, Quod omnes tum in Gallia ut etiam Sirmondo observatum est consentiebant
Balhuz. Not. in Agobar. p. 88.
or Angles, or holy men, but Idols; and in which he does fully Answer the
exceptions and evasions of the Roman party. And yet Balbuzius and Sirmondus do
ingenuously confess that Agobardus has writ only that which the whole Church
of France did then acknowledge. Moreover in this IX. Century the Second Nicene
Synod was declared to be a Pseudo Synod, or falsely to retain the name of Synod,
L. Contra Hincmar. Laudun. Cap. 20. Ad. A. D. 792. A. D. 794. Chrot. A. D. 794.
because it Decreed for Image Worship, by Hincmarus Rhemensis, and Ado
Viennesis. In the X. Century it is so styled by Regino Abbas Prumiensis, In the
XI. by Hermannus Contractus an Author of great Credit and Reputation in the
world. And that the Germans continued of the same mind in the XII. Century,
Lib. 2. de Imp. Isaachi Angel. F. 199.
is evident from the plain words of Nicetas Choniates who says that then among
the Germans and Armenians the worship of Holy Images was equally forbidden. And
that the French Church then believed the Doctrine of the Second Nicene Council
to be against the definition of the Orthodox and Ancient Fathers, is evident
from the Continuator of Aimoinas, De Gestis Francorum, l. 5. c. 28.
who plainly tells us that the Fathers of the Nicene Synod otherwise decreed
concerning Image=worship, than the Orthodox Doctors had before defined. And Ivo
Bishop of Chartres then declared this to be the judgment of the Council of
Eliberis, Nos illas non adoramus, l. 1. c. 3. Number. 1.
that Pictures ought not to be worshipped, but that they only should be
memorials of what is worshipped. Was it then received by the French Church in
the XIII. Century? No, Durandus a French Bishop in his Rationale does expressly
say, we do not worship Images; and he moreover gives this admonition to them
that do so, L. 4. C. 39. N. 3.
If neither men, nor Angels are to be worshipped, let them consider what they
do who under pretense of Piety do worship diverse Images, for it is not Lawful
to worship that which is made with hands. Was it then received in the XV. Comp.
Theol. in explic. praecepti primi. Ed. Paris. 1606.
Century? No, Gerson Chancellor of Paris who flourished Anno Domini 1420.
says, we do not worship Images, and that they are forbidden to be worshipped,
and that the words of the commandment, Thou shall not bow down to them nor
worship them, must be thus interpreted, Thou shall not bow thy body or thy
knees unto them, thou shall not worship them with the affection of thy mind.
When therefore was it that this Image Worship obtained in the Gallican Church?
Answ. Pithoeus does ingenuously confess that it is but of yesterday; If we be
willing, says he, Praes. in Hist. P. Diaconi.
seriously to confess the truth, it is but very lately that our people began to
be in love with Images.

Moreover in the VII. Century it was condemned by Karolus Rex Franciae misit
Synodalem librum ad Britaniam, sibi a Constantinopoli directum, in quo, proh
dolor, multa inmconvenientia and verae fidei contraria reperichantur, maxim
quod poene omnium Orientalium doctorum unanimi assartione confirmatum fuerit,
Imagines adorari debere, quod omnino Ecclesia Dei execratur, contra quod
scripsit Albinus Epistolam ex authoritate divinarum Scripturarum mirabiliter
dictatam illamque cum eodem Synodali libro in persona Episcoporum and principum
nostrorum Regi Francorum attulit. Hoveden Annal. Part. 1. ad. A. D. 792. Simeon
Dunelm. ad. A. D. 793. M. Weslmonast. A. D. 793.
Alcuinus (Tutor to Charles the Great, and Scholar of Venerable Bede) who wrote
an Epistle against the Synodal Book of the Second Nicene Council, wherein it
was asserted that Images ought to be worshipped; which Epistle being
marvelously confirmed by the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, he carried to
the French King in the name of the English Bishops and Princes. This
Image Worship was condemned also by the Church of England in the XII. and XIII.
Centuries: For Simon Dunelmensis an Oxonian Doctor, and Roger Hoveden their
chief Professor, and Matthew Westmonasteriensis do all concur in this
assertion, that in the Second Nicene Synod are many things contained which are
inconvenient, and contrary to the true faith, and that in that Council was
established a Decree that Images should be worshipped, which thing the Church
of God wholly abhors. Where note that in these Writers we find not the least
hint of a distinction betwixt due and undue worship of an holy Image, or
betwixt worship which the Church of Christ allows, and worship which the Church
abhors, nor do they say the Nicene Council does assert eam adorationem
Imaginibus deberi quam Ecclesia Dei execratur, P. 146.
as T. G. in his translation of these words, does very fraudulently insinuate,
but they say only that the second Nicene Council had declared Imagines adorari
debere, quod Ecclesia Dei execratur, that Images were to be worshipped, and
that this was the Doctrine which Gods Church abhorred.

It was condemned in the XIV. Century, by Robert Holcot, one of our Country
men, and Professor in Oxford, Com. in lib. Sap. Cap. 13. voce Infelices.
who plainly does assert, That no adoration is to be given to any Image, nor is
it lawful for any man to worship Images.

It was condemned in the XV. Century, by Gabriel Biel, In canone Missae. lect.
49.
an Oxonian Doctor, who determines that to be the truest Sentence which holds,
That any Image is not to be worshipped, either for it self considered as it is
wood, or stone, or metal, nor yet considered as a sign er Image. And that the
Christian faith permits them to be reserved in the Church, non ut ipsae
adorentur, not that they should be worshipped, but that the minds of faithful
men might be excited to give reverence to them whose Images they are.

It was condemned, in the same Century, by Cornelius Agrippa, De vanit.
scientiarum. cap. de Imagine.
who says, That the corrupt custom and false Religion of the Heathens has
infected our Religion, and has introduced into our Church Images and Idols,
and many barren pompous Cereonies, none of which were found or practiced among
the primitive professors of Christianity. It was condemned by Polydore Virgil,
De invent. rerum. l. 6. c. 13.
who does acknowledge that it is testified St. Jerome, that almost all the
ancient Fathers did condemn Image Worship for fear of Idolatry.

It was condemned in the XVI. Century, by the excellent Cassander, who says,
Consult. cap. de Imagine. P. 205.
It was to be desired that our predecessors had stood firm in the opinion of
their Forefathers, viz. that I mages were neither to be worshipped, nor to be
broken down. And page 210, It seems fit, says he, to be advised, if matters
could be thus contrived, that things should be reduced to that moderation which
they obtained in the more ancient Church of Rome, and Germany, and France; ut
rerum gerendarum monumenta, non cultus instrumenta habeantur, that is, that
Images be used or retained as monuments of things past, but not as instruments
of worship.

It was condemned in the same Century, Com. in Act. Apost. cap. 7.
by Ferus a very Learned Person, who Preached at Mentz: for the expressly says,
that Images are to lerated in the Church, that they may admonish, not that they
may be worshipped, for otherwise they can admit of no excuse. And to assure us
that his private judgment was very suitable to the prevailing judgment of those
times, we find the same determination made by a Council held at Mentz. A.D. C.
14.
1549. during the Session of the Trent Council, which speaks thus, Let our
Pastors accurately teach the people that Images are not propouuded to be
worshipped or adored, but that we may by them be brought to the remembrance of
those things which we ought profitably to call to mind.

It was condemned also by the Church of Cologn, In Antididag. Colon. cap. de
Imag.
which says thus, We Christians, when we bend our knees before the Image of
the Holy Cross, do not adore the very wood, but him who died upon it for our
sins, and does conclude with Gregory the Great, that it is not lawful in any
wise to worship any thing that is the work of our own hand.

Moreover, from the XII. Century to the Reformation, it was condemned by the
Waldenses, the Albigenses, and the Hussites, who spread themselves throughout
the greatest part of Europe, and propagated their Doctrine through France,
Spain, England, Scotland, Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Saxony, Polonia, Lithuanid,
and other Nations.

Lastly, Dr. Still. defense. p. 837.838.
This Image Worship was condemned by the Armenians, from the VI. Century, to
this present time. For they having begun their Schism before this practice
found any countenance in the Church of Christ, not only do refuse to worship
Images, but roundly do pronounce Anathema on them that do so.

Roman Church is guilty of Idolatry in worshipping the Saints departed, because
they worship them with mental prayer, believing that they understand the
secrets, or inward motions of the hearts of them who put up to them mental
prayers. Now this we say was never any Article of Faith, Sess. 25. p. 527, 528.
even in the Latin Church, till the Trent Council had determined that they who
said it was a foolish thing to put up mental prayers to Saints departed were
guilty of impiety, and did pronounce Anathema On all that held or thought the
contrary; till then, I say, it was no Article of Faith, even in the Western
Church: For in the XII. Century, this Question was moved by the Master of the
Sentences, whether the Saints do hear the prayers of suppliants, and the desire
of petitioners do come unto their notice; and this Answer is returned to it,
that it is not incredible that the souls of the Saints, Lomb. Sent. l. 4. Did.
45.
which in the secret of Gods presence are joyed with the illustration of the
true light, do in the contemplation of it understand the thing that we done
abroad, as much as appertains either to them for jay, or to us for help.
Anselmus Landunensis who lived in the same Century notes this, that Ausim
says, Glass inter^. i^ Esa. lxiii.
that the dead, even the Saints, do not know what the living do, no not their
own sons. L. 2. de animd.
Hago de Sancto Victore says that, the spirits of the dead be there where they
do neither hear nor see the things that are done, or fall out to men in this
life; and again the dead indeed to not know what is done here whilst it is here
in doing; Decr. p. 2. Cause. 13. qu. 2. cap. 29.
and Gratian resolves the same question by the Authority of Esaiah. In Sun.
Part. 4. l. 3. Tr. 7. qu 6. cap. de Orat.
In the XIII. Century we are informed by Altissiodorensis that many did affirm
that we do only pray improperly unto Saints, because we pray to God that by the
merits of the Saints we may be helped. N. B. And Alexander Halensis determines
that God alone is simply to be invoked, Qu. 92. M. 1. Art. 4.
and that the Saints rather pray with us, than are prayed to by us. In the XIV.
Century, Gabriel Biel having set down the reasons which in his time were urged
against this opinion that the Saints departed knew the desires of men on earth,
In Can. Misslect. 30.
confesses that they moved not only Heretics but other Christians to deny it,
and at the last concludes no more than this, that it is probably said that God
reveals all things which are offered to them by men, whether in magnifying and
praising them, or in praying to them, Ibid. iect. 31. In 4. Sent. did. 45. qu.
4.
and imploring their help. And the determination of Scotus is in effect the
same, viz. That it is probable that God does specially reveal to him that is in
bliss such of our prayers as are offered to him. Pr^oe^ in quest. de orat.
sanctorum, etc. Missin Bibl. C^ll. Mert. Oxon.
And John Sharp in the University of Oxford, did publicly dispute these
questions, of praying to the Saints, and praying for the dead: because, says
he, it was esteemed by some famous men, and not without probability, N. B. that
such suffrages and prayers were superfluous in the Church of God, although some
wise men thought the contrary; whence it appears that what is now de fide, (if
indeed it be so) was then only probable; and might as freely have been denied
by Orthodox and Pious Christians, and persons famous in their times, as by
reputed Heretics. Aen. Snlv. de Orig. Eohem. c. 35. Ep. 19. ad Joh. Molin. p 1
109. Edit. Paris. 16 16. In Cant Sermon. 6. Hist. Bohem. cap. 35.
In the XV. Century the Thaborites maintained that the Saints Triumphant were
not to be prayed to. And in the XVI. Century Cassander freely does confess that
it was not necessary to hold that the Saints did understand our prayers. And of
this judgment were the Waldenses from the XII. Century to the Reformation, of
whom St. Bernard does confess that they derided them who prayed to Saints.
Aeneas Sylvius that they judged in vain to ask the suffrages of Saints departed
seeing they could not help us; Adv. Sectam Valdens. p. 68.
and Seysel adds that they affirmed that the petitions which were put up unto
the Blessed Virgin, or any other Saints, were vain. Now these Waldenses had
such multitudes of followers as caused Bernard to complain; Bern. Ep. 240.
That by reason of them, the Churches were left without people, and the people
without Priests.

2. Although some of the Eastern Churches do put up their petitions to Saints
departed, yet they ingenuously confess they do it not upon an apprehension that
the Saints do hear them, but only because they judge this service acceptable to
God whether they hear or not, they therefore may be rationally charged with
superstition in this case, but not with that Idolatry which is now taught and
practiced, or at the least allowed of by the Church of Rome; because they do
not pray to Saints departed, upon such principles as do ascribe unto them the
knowledge of the heart, or do require or suppose in them any farther knowledge
than is consistent with a creature: this will be evident from the confession of
the Greek Patriarch, 1 Resp. Patriarch.Hierem. ad Theol. wirt^^b. cap. 21.
who says in the behalf of his whole Church: We do not invocate properly the
Sai is, but God, for neither Peter nor Paul hear any of those that invocate
them, but the grace and gift that they have according to the promise, I will be
with you to the end of the world. 2. This will be still more probable from that
opinion which is generally received among them, viz. that the Saints before the
day of judgment, do net enjoy the beatifick Vision; this is the judgment of the
Sacra^^s p. 24.
Russians, the (...). p. 13.
Moscovites, the Scarga. l. 2. c. 12.
Greek Church; of the Bricrw p. 154.
Armenians and Bricrw p. 174, 179.
Marenites and more especially of the Brierw p. 154.
Jacobites who believe that the souls of just men do remain on the earth till
the day of judgment. Now in the judgment of the most famous Doctors of the
Church of Rome our prayers are only to be directed to such Saints as do enjoy
the Beatifick Vision.

Idolatry committed in the Roman Church, viz. the adoration of the Host as God,
was not in any Age before the Reformation, nor at the Reformation, nor is it
yet the practice of the whole Church of Christ.

For, 1. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation on which it depends, was V. Dr.
whithy Idol. of the R. chapter p. 87, 99, 100.
by the confession of some learned Romanists, no Doctrine of Faith before the
Council of Lateran, and if it had not been for that Council, it might, say
they, even now be lawful to oppugn it; It was, say others, not very ancient,
it was determined of late; the truth of which confessions has been
irrefragably made good by Mr. Aubertin.

2. About the time of the Reformation this Doctrine was not owned by all
Christian Churches; Albertin. p. 965.977, 978, 982, 986, 987.
for 'twas rejected by the Lollards in England, the Waldenses in the Confines
of France and Italy, by the Thaborites and Hussites in Bohemia. Brierw p. 173.
V. Joh. Lasic. de Rel. Arm. Lit Aethrop. Alphons. Jes. Edit. A. 1626.
It was then, and is still rejected by the Armenians, as is apparent from the
testimony of Nicephorus and their own Liturgy, and by the Habissines, or
midland Aethiopians, whose Liturgy, as even the Jesuits confess, is stuffed
with errors, and among others with this that they affirm the bread to be
Christ's body, which, as Bellarmine and others do confess, can be true only in a
Figurative and Metaphorick sense.

2. Although we should admit that all the Eastern Churches do at present hold
that Christ's body is corporeally present in the Holy Sacrament, yet hence it
will not follow, as some Romanists conceive, that they do worship with Latria
this most Holy Sacrament: For our Lords Body is no due object of Latria, and
that his Soul and his Divinity is there united to his body, they do not affirm,
nor can it be collected from these words, this is my body broken, and my blood
shed for you, his body broken, and his blood shed, being his body and his blood
disunited, or in a state of actual separation from his soul: if you collect
from reason, that if his body be there present, his Divinity must be there
also, because it is united hypostatically to the body, and therefore never
separated from the body, as R. H. Frequently insinuates. I answer, 1. That if
we must not be permitted to use our reason to confute this Doctrine, neither
are you to use your reason to establish it; for why a demonstration against a
Doctrine should not as well destroy the supposed truth of that Doctrine, as a
demon stration for it should confirm its truth, I am not able to conceive.
Besides, is it a contradiction to assert that Christ's Almighty power may
reproduce his body, not thus united to his soul, and his Divinity, or not! If
it be not, then may his body be thus extant in the Holy Sacrament: If you say
it is a contradiction to assert that the same body should be united to the word
and not united; I Answer, if the same body of our Lord, may be both eaten, and
not eaten, eaten by them who have received the Host, and not eaten by them who
have not yet received, eaten in the Host received, not eaten in the Host
reserved, if it may be under the species of bread, and not under the species of
bread, under the species of bread as it is in the Holy Sacrament, and not under
the species of bread as it is in Heaven; why may it not be united to the word,
and not united to the word, united to the word as it is in Heaven, but not
united to the word as it lies senseless on the Altar. When therefore R. H. does
so often mind us that Christ body was never separated from the divinity. I
Answer, that this is a most certain truth, when it is spoken of his Natural and
Glorified body, but is not so when it is spoken of his Sacramental body, of
which ten thousand things may be asserted, which agree not to his Celestial
body.

3. As it is certain that the Lutherans do hold the Consecrated Elements to be
Christ's real body and blood, and yet do never tender the worship of Latria to
them, so may the Eastern Churches also do, nay it is certain that they do not
tender the worship of Latria to them, as the Papists do, and are obliged to do
by the custom and command of their Church. Sacranus does inform us of the
Russians, that they do not adore the Consecrated Elements. Neither the Greeks,
nor Russians do perform any worship to them, says the Jesuit Scarga. L. 3. de
Sacr. Euch. c. 21.
The Greeks aster the Consecration of the Elements exhibit none or very little
reverence to them, says Arcadius; moreover the Cophti, and the Habassines do
not so much as elevate the Confecrated. Host, nor afterward reserve it, as
does the Church of Rome, Brievw p. 158, 167.
which is a farther evidence that they do not adore it with the worship of
Latria.

But says R.H. this adoration is a necessary consequent of the belief of the
real presence; Galde disc. 3. chapter 8.. 82. n. 3.
to this I Answer, 1. by denying that this is any necessary consequence of the
belief of Transubstantiation, and if it were so, we have hence reason to
presume the doctrine of Transubstantiation cannot be ancient, seeing this
necessary consequence of it was not observed in the Western Church before the
XI. or XII. Century, this adoration being not practiced, and much less enjoined
by the Church till then, De Cub. Lat. l. 7. cap. 44. and l. 3. cap. 19.
as Mr. Dally has demonstrated. 2. I Answer, that nothing is more frequent
than for Churches, and persons to maintain a doctrine, and yet in practice to
disclaim the necessary consequences of that doctrine. I hope R. H. does urge
against us nothing, but what he thinks will necessarily follow from our
doctrine, and yet he knows we do disclaim his inferences, and may, in due time,
show him we have sufficient reason so to do. Ibid. p. 265, 266.


R.H. does endeavor to prove that the Greek Church agree with them in giving
of this adoration to the Consecrated Host, from certain passages of the Mass
used among them; that the disingenuity and weakness of his pleas may be more
evident, Which are all taken from the Author of the Tract styled Perpet. de la
Foy, etc. and answered by Mr. Dally de cult. Lat. c. 3. c. 19. Chrysostom. To. 6.
p. 983. (...). p. 9.4. Ib. l. 29, 30. Ib. l. 35, 40.
I shall at large relate their manner of proceeding in the performance of their
Mass, and then return a satisfactory Answer to what he offers from these
passages for confirmation of his vain presumption. First then the Greeks begin
this Mass with worshipping or bowing thrice toward the East before the Image
of our Savior, and of the Blessed Virgin. Soon after they bow thrice before
the Table on which the Sacred Gifts, that is the Bread and Wine is placed,
though yet they be not laid upon the Altar to be Consecrated. Then the Priest
says, O God be propitious to me a sumer, and have mercy on me; and again, O
our Savior, thou being nailed to the Cross, and pierced with a Spear, have
redeemed us from the Curse of the law, and opened the fountain of eternal life,
glory be given to thee; then taking the Oblation ( i.e. the Bread which has
the figure of a Gross impressed upon it, called Sigillum) into his left hand,
and the spear into his right hand, he fastneth the Lance into the right side of
the Cross upon the Bread, Ib. l. 39. Ib. l. 41.
and says he was brought as a sheep to the slaughter; then fastening it in the
left side, he adds, that as an innocent lamb which is dumb before the shearer,
L. 43.
he opens not his mouth: then fastening it in the upper part of the Cross he
adds, P. 985, l. 1.
in his humiliation his judgment was taken away; then he fasteneth it in the
lower part and adds who can declare his Generation? L. 8.
his life was taken away or lift up from the earth. Then the Deacon says
sacrifice Sir, L. 10.
and the Priest sacrisiceth him, N. B. saying. L. 13.
The lamb of God which takes away the sms of the world is facrifieed for the
life and salvation of the world. Then the Deacon says pierce him Sir, L. 14.
and the Priest pierces him with the Spear saying, one of the Soldiers with a
Spear pierced his side, L. 16.
and forthwith came forth blood and water. After this follows a Prayer to this
effect, P. 986.
O God our God, who sentest the living bread which is the nourishment of the
whole world, viz. our Lord Jesus Christ, to be our Savior and Redeener, bless
this oblation, and reeeive it upon thine beavenly Altar. After this the Priest
and Deacon worship thrice before the Holy Table, P. 987. l. 30. P. 989. l. 42.
then the Priest takes thence the Holy Gospel, and gives it to the Deacon, and
so they make their lesser ingress, P. 9^0.
and both how their heads; then the Deacon brings the Holy Gospel to the
Bishop, if he be present, and he kisseth it, if he be not present, the Priest
Salutes it, then all the people Reverence the Gospel, Goer Not. in Mul,
Chrysostom. p. 125. n. 74. P. 990. i. 17. L. l. 18.
the Priest or Deacon saying, Come let us worship and fall down to Christ; then
the Deacon elevates it, saying (...) this is the true wisdom; then the Deacon
worshipping, and the Priest after him, they bring it to the H. Tribunal, and so
the Deacon does again place it on the Holy Table, and afterward worshipping it
with reverence, P. 991.
the Deacon comes to the Desk or Pulpit where the Holy Gospel is to be read, P.
992.
and the Priest saying, let us hear the Holy Gospel, Ibid.
the Deacon reads it; then follows a Prayer of the Catechumens entreating God
to look favorably upon them who bow their necks to him; after this follows a
Prayer said by the Priest silently, that God would enable him his Priest, by
the power of the Holy Ghost, P. 994.
to stand before his holy Table, and offer his holy and immaculate body and his
precious blood; for to thee, says he, do I how my neck, that thou would
grant that these gifts may be presented, or offered to thee, by thy sinful and
unworthy servant, for thou art he that offers and art offered, received and
given, Christ our Lord, or as the words may be rendered, who do present and
art presented, who receivest, and art given; then they adore three times, and
then the Deacon says God be merciful to me a sinner; Ib. l. 34. L. 38.
then says he to the Priest, elevate Sir, who removing the Veil called the
aer, which covered the Poly Dish and Cup, the Deacon takes the Holy Dish upon
his Shoulders, and the Priest the Cup, then coming to the Holy Altar, Ib. l. 44.
they say to themselves Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, then
when the Holy Dish is taken down from the Deacon, the Priest speaks thus, (...)
P. 995.
Joseph an honorable person taking thy incorruptible body from the Cross
wrapped it in fine linen, and preparing it for burial with spices, laid it in
a new Sepulcher; L. 13.
then they bow thrice before the Holy Table, then follows a Prayer, after the
placing of the Holy Gifts upon it, Ib. l. 35.
that God would enable them to offer gifts and spiritual Sacrifices, for their
sins, and grant them to find grace before him, and that he would accept their
sacrifice, and cause his Holy Spirit to rest upon them, and upon the gifts
there present. P. 996. Ib. l. 30. L. 31. P. 996. l. 43. P. 997.
Soon after the Priest worships thrice and says, I will love thee, O Lord my
strength, my fortress, and refuge, and after him the Deacon worships thrice;
then says the Priest, lift up your hearts, the people answer, we lift them up
unto the Lord; then says the Priest, let us give thanks unto the Lord, the
people answer, it is just and meet to worship the Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
then the Priest relates bow our Lord Jesus in the night in which he was
betrayed took bread, Ib. l. 25.
and blessing, hallowing and breaking of it, he gave it to his disciples,
saying; then the Priest bows his head, and blesses the Holy Bread, saying with
a loud voice, L. 30. L. 40. (...).
this is may body broken for you, and of the Cup, drink you all of this, this
is my blond of the New Testament shed for you, etc. then the Priest adds, out
of thine own we offer thine own to thee. All which is done the doors of the
Chancel being shut, L. 35. Goar Not in Miss. Chrysostom. p. 139. n. 132. p. 998.
and the people seeing nothing that is done; then the Priest adds this Prayer,
We offer to thee this rational and unbloody sacrifice, beseeching thee to send
thy Holy Spirit upon us, and upon these gifts that are before us; then the
Priest and Deacon worship thrice before the Holy Table, Ib. l. 10, 11.
and say, God be merciful to me a sinner; then says the Deacon, bless Sir the
Holy Bread, L. 17.
so the Priest crosses thrice the Holy Gifts, and says with a low voice, make
this Bread the precious body of thy Christ, L. 18.
to this Prayer the Deacon says Amen; then says the Deacon, bless Sir the
Holy Cup, and the Priest blessing it, L. 21. L. 23. L. 28. L. 30.
says, make that which is in the Holy Cup the precious blood of thy Christ,
changing them both by the Holy Spirit; and so the Deacon does reverence to the
Priest, then after the Lords Prayer the Deacon says, P. 1001.
bow down your heads to the Lord, the people answer, we bow down Lord to thee;
then the Deacon bowing down his head a little, and seeing the Priest
worshipping, does himself worship, and to let us know that this worship is
performed to God the Father, this Prayer immediately follows, L. 8.
Look down, O Lord, from Heaven upon us that bow our heads to thee, for we bow
not to flesh and blood, but to thee, the dreadful God, turn thou, O Lord, the
mysteries which lie before us, to us all for good, according to our several
needs, for the sake of thy only begotten Son, then follows the Prayer cited
by R.H. Attend, L. 20.
O Lord, etc. then the Priest and Deacon worship, saying thrice, God be
merciful to me, a sinner, L. 24.26. Non ita tamen ut a populo conspiciatur
elevat Graeca sacerdos Goar. Ibid. n. 158. l. 28, 30.
and all the people also worship, but all this is done before the elevation,
and whilst the people do not see the Host. When the elevation is made (which
yet the people do not see) the Priest says, Holy things to Holy persons, and
the people answer, there is one Holy, one Lord Jesus Christ; then the Priest
breaks the Holy Bread, and says, L. 35.
The lamb of God is broken and divided, the Son of the Father who is broken but
not divided, who is always eaten, but not consumed. Then the Deacon worships,
and after that the Priest giving him the Holy Bread, he takes it; and both
bowing their heads before the Holy Table, the Priest says, I believe, Lord, P.
1002.
and confess that thou art Christ the Son of the living God, etc. and again,
Lord I am not worthy that thou should come under my sorded roof. Then
calling the Deacon to receive the Cup, he comes and worships, saying, behold I
come to the immortal King; and again, P. 1003.
I believe Lord and confess, etc. as before, then they open the Gate of the
Holy Altar or Tribunal, and the Priest and Deacon taking the Cup with
reverence, say to the people, come with fear of God and Faith, L. 13. L. 14.
and the people answer, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, and
so the Bread and Wine are distributed to them.

Greek Mass, it will be casie to answer all that R. H. offers to persuade us
that the Host or that the Body and Blood of Christ, contained under the species
of Bread and Wine, is worshipped with Latria by the Greek Church. And,

1. That they give the worship of Latria to the Sacrament, or Consecrated Host
cannot be proved from any adoration which the Priest persorms before he takes
the Holy Bread to communicate with it, or from the Reverence the Deacon does
exhibit before he receives the Chalice, or from the adoration of the people.

For, 1. It is not certain that this reverence or worship is exhibited by
Priest or Deacon, or by the people, to the Sacrament there placed upon the
Table, and not to Christ spiritually and invisibly present: The contrary seems
to be plain from that Prayer which does immediately follow the admonition to
perform this reverence. For the Deacon having said, how bown your heads to the
Lord, the Chorus answers, we bow down, Lord, to thee. Then the Priest Prays
thus, We give thee thanks, O invisible King, who workest all things by thine
infinite power; look down O Lord from heaven upon us that bow our heads to
thee. We bow not to flesh and blood, but to thee the dreadful God, turn thou O
Lord the mysteries which lie before us, to us all for good for the sake of
thine only begotten Son. Which Prayer is evidently made not to flesh and blood,
not to the mysteries themselves, and therefore not to the Host, not to our Lord
Jesus Christ, but to God the Father for the sake of his Son Christ, to him
therefore was the adoration both of Priest and people made. 2. Suppose we that
by these actions they intended to reverence the Consecrated Host, it will not
follow that they did reverence it as God, but only as a Sacred Creature. We see
they worship and bow before the Image of our Lord, and of the Blessed Virgin,
Lit. Bas. apud Goar. p. 166.
before the Holy Table, and the Gifts, they worship the Holy Bible, and bow
when they receive the Hollowed Gifts, Sym. Thessal. p. 225. apud Goar.
or Holy Bible into their hands, and both the Deacon and the people worship the
Priest that Celebrates, and yet I hope R. H. does not imagine that they intend
to give Latria to the Priest, the Bible, the Gifts, the Table, or the Image of
the Blessed Virgin; that therefore which in the Mass they often do to things
which are not in their own judgments, fit objects of the highest worship, can
be no evidence, when it is done unto the Host, that they intend to pay the
worship of Latria to it.

2. Nor does this follow from the Prayer thus cited by R. H. Attend, O Lord
Jesus Christ, Guide ubi Skpra.
from thy Holy Habitation, come and sanctify us, who residest above with
Father, and here art invisibly present with us, and be pleased by thy mighty
hand to communicate to us thy immaculate body, and thy precious blood and by us
to all the people. Where note 1. That R. H. fraudulently leaves out these words
(...), Which words are in both the Liturgies of Basil and St. Chrysostom, and
are only left out in Amphilochius de vita Sancti Basilii. Goar. not. in Miss.
Basil. p. 187. Sym. Thessal. apud Goar. p. 229. and 222. (...) Off. Sancte
Baptism. v. Goar. p. 353.
which plainly do demonstrate this Prayer is made not to the Sacrament, nor yet
to Christ considered as invisibly present there; but to Christ sitting on the
Throne of his Kingdom. 2. Here is no Prayer directed to the Host or Sacrament,
as in the Roman Liturgies, but only an acknowledgment that Christ invisibly is
present with them whilst they celebrate by his powerful virtue in the
Sacrament, on which account the Priest says, Christ is in the midst of us, and
in this sense they do conceive him present in the Sacrament of Baptism, and
present in the hallowed Gifts, and present when the Gospel is read.

Nor will this follow from that Prayer which the Priest tenders to Christ
saying, (...)
Enable me thy' Priest by the power of the Holy Ghost to stand before thy Holy
Table, and offer thy Holy and immaculate body, and thy precious blood, for to
thee do I bow my knee, and grant that these Gifts N. B. may be presented to
thee by thy sinful and unworthy servant, for thou art he who offerest and art
offered, who receivest, and art given, Christ our Lord, where 1. Observe that
this Prayer is said long before the Consecration of the Elements, the bowing
therefore of the Priest to Christ, is only to him spiritually present with the
hallowed Gifts. Note 2. That these words thou offerest, and art offered, etc.
are spoken immediately of the oblation of the hallowed Gifts which the Priest
is said (...) to present (not of Christ's body and his blood which he is said
(...) to sacrifice) in these Gifts Christ is Typically represented, (...) Sym.
These. 16. p. 225. Apud Goar Not in Chrysostom. Miss. N. 36. Miss. Chrysostom. p. 985.
Sym. These. p. 233.
and is given; because there is an Image and representation or demonstration,
as says Cabasilas, of his passion, and yet Christ does receive them upon his
Heavenly Altar, and does present them to the Father.

4. This practice is not proved, because the Eastern Churches say after the
Consecration, God be merciful to me a sinner, for this they often say before
the Consecration, it is said by the Deacon when he prepares the Holy Dish and
Cup, M. Christ. p. 984. Ib. p. 994. M. Basil. p. 169. apud Goar.
when he does fume the Sacrament not yet Consecrated, and in many other places.
Will therefore R. H. plead that they make such addresses to the Holy Dish, and
Cup, and the Unconsecrated Elements.

Nor 5. Will it avail to prove this practice, that when the Cup is Elevated,
and when the Laity are called to come with fear and love, they say, blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord, for this is also said before the
Consecration by the Priest, M. Chrysostom. p. 994. Ib. p. 997.
and Deacon at the Completion of the greater. ingress of the hallowed Gifts,
and by the people before the Consecration.

Nor 6. From the Priests saying, when he Elevates the Consecrated Bread, Holy
things to Holy persons, to which the Quire answers, there is one Holy, one Lord
Jesus Christ, for though R. H. conceives this is so spoken in relation to the
Elevated Host, and is a confession that the Host is that Lord Jesus Christ they
speak of, yet Symeon Thessalonicensis will inform him, Apud Goar. p. 228.
that it is only an unanimous confession of the Incarnation of the Son of God,
who reigns over all, and that it is as if they should have said, Who of us is
pure, who holy? there is one only holy Jesus Christ, who lovingly does
sanctify us.

Nor 7. From what the Priest says when he breaks the Consecrated Bread into
four pieces, (...). Chrysostom. Miss. p. 1001. Goar in Not M. Chrysostom. p. 163.
viz. the Lamb of God is broken and divided into parts, the Son of the Father
who is broken, and not divided, eaten, and not consumed, but sanctifies those
that partake of him. For the Consecrated Bread being broken in memory and
imitation of Christ's Passion, it being broken, the Lamb of God, and the Son of
God may be said to be broken, it being distributed and eaten; the Lamb of God
may well be said to be so, as also to be cut into four parts; though I suppose
R. H. will not allow such a dissection of the true natural body of our Lord;
and not only of the Consecrated Bread they say break him Sir, etc. but of the
Unconsecrated Bread pierce him Sir, Miss. Chrysostom. p. 985.
Sacrifice him Sir, and when the Priest has pierced the Gifts he says, One of
the Soldiers pierced his side; when he sacrifices them, he says, The Lamb of
God which takes away the sms of the world is sacrificed, will therefore R. H.
hence infer that they believe the Unconsecrated Bread and Wine to be naturally
and properly the Lamb of God and truly sacrificed? if not, he cannot make the
like inference from the like words used after Consecration.

Nor, 8. Is this proved from that Confession and Prayer which the Priest makes
when he prepares himself for the reception of the Holy sacrament, viz. I
believe, Lord, and confess that thou art Christ the Son of the living God, and
again, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my sordid roof:
For, 1. The Priest indeed confesses that Jesus is the Christ the Son of the
living God, Matthew. xvi. 16.
in the words of St. Peter, but not that the Sacrament is so, he now makes that
Confession for himself which a little before the people had made for
themselves, which was to do what every tongue at the last day should confess,
says These alonicensis, Apud Goar. p. 228.
viz. that Jesus was the Christ, to the glory of God the Father. 2. The Prayer
which follows this Confession is, that this Jesus would make him partaker of
his precious body and blood, wherefore the Priest does not direct his Prayer to
the body and blood, (...) Min. Bas. apud Goar. p. 173.
but only to Christ for them. 3. The Priest sollicites Christ to enter not only
into his body, but his Soul, into which Christ's Body cannot enter, that he
would united them to the holy body and blood of Christ, that worthily receiving
the holy Mysteries they may have Christ dwelling in their hearts, and be made
the Temple of the Holy Ghost; not surely Christ as to his body, but his word
and Spirit, and so they do themselves expound themselves, praying that they
partaking of the sanctified things, and being enlivened by them, may be united
to Christ their true God (who says, Miss. Mist. Ante consecrat. apud Goar. p.
197, 198.
he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him)
that his word dwelling and walking in them they way be made the Temple of the
Holy Spirit.

Nor lastly will this follow from the Deacons saying, when he is called to
receive the Sacrament, behold I come to the immortal King: For, 1. He does not
say, the Sacrament is that immortal King, but only that Christ present, or in
the midst of them assembled is so; Christ being therefore invisibly present as
they assure us, and he himself has promised, in all his Ordinances, and more
especially in this by which he spiritually dwells in, and is united to the
due Communicant, well may be say when he receives those Elements with which
such blessings are conveyed, behold I come to the immortal King: Goar in
Miss. Chrysostom. n. 110.
2. It is their custom in their Liturgies to speak of that which represents
any thing, as if it were the thing it self. Goar in Miss. Chrysostom. n. 74. Sym.
These. ib. p. 222. (...). Goar. p. 478.510. (...). Ibid.
They speak of the Holy Bible as if it were Christ himself, when it is carried
by the Priest, they say, come let us worship Christ, when the Priest enters
with it into the Chancel, they add lift up the gates, viz. that the King of
Glory may come in. Because this Gospel bears some representation of the Son of
God, thus also in the Office of the little Habit, and the Angelick Habit, the
Superior tells the Monk when he stretches forth his hand unto the Gospel,
behold Christ is invisibly present here, when the Monk takes the Sizzers out of
the Gospel, thou take them, says he, from the hand of Christ, and why may
not the Sacrament be styled the Immortal King, by the same Metaphor by which
the Gospel is here styled Christ, v. Dallaeum de Cult. lat. l. 7. cap. 11.
without intending to perform any higher worship to it, than what they pay unto
the Gospel. What R. H. further urges from Cabasilas is only from a false
Translation, and so deserves no consideration.

To conclude, Sacramentum debito cultu tractet, religiose colat. Humiliter
adorent. Genuflexus adorat. Rit. p. 63, 64. Missal. saepius. vide ibid. Rythmum
S. Thomae ad S. Eucharistiam.
there be two signal differences betwixt the worship of the Host prescribed in
the Roman Church and that which is observed in the Greek; that whereas in the
Mass and Ritual of the Roman Church, we find frequent injunctions Religiously
to worship, and humbly to adore the very Sacrament, and frequent intimations of
worship due unto it, whereas they pray unto the Sacrament, and frequently
acknowledge it to be their God, there is not any thing of this nature to be
found in any of the Eastern Liturgies.

2. Whereas the Roman Host is by them worshipped as God, not only during the
Celebration of the Sacrament, when Christ invisibly is present, but also when
it is placed upon the Altar, and there Sacramentum Eucharistiae non servatur
apud nos in templis, ut fit hic apud Europaeos. Christoph. Licanatus Aethiopum
legatus apud Hotting. Hist. Eccl. Sac. 16. p. 44. vide Damian, a Goes de
Moribus Aethiop. p. 506.
reserved in the Pyx, and when it is carried in Procession. The Eastern
Churches have no such custom of placing it upon the Altar in a little Box, or
carrying it in (...). Metroph. Critopulus.
Pomp to be adored by the people; now in these adorations performed to the
reserved Hosts consists more especially and plainly, the Idolatry of Roman
Votaries.

R. H. and others do understand all Christians without exception declaring for,
and practicing those things which we esteem Idolatrous, we say that no such
Idolatry has been admitted by the whole Church of Christ, but if they
understand only the greater part of Prelates, or the most numerous part of
Christians, and say, as R. H. does, Cuid. di c. 2. c. 5.. 63. n. 2.
that they must be reputed as the whole, I Answer that Idolatry may in this
sense prevail over the Christian Church, as formerly it did over the Church of
Israel and Judah. For as in the days of Elias there was so great Apostasy, as
that the Prophet said, I only am left alone, and yet God had his Church
preserved in those 7000 who bewed not their knees to Baal, so may it also be in
the Church of Christ, there may be an Apostasy so great as to prevail on the
most numerous party in each Christian Church, and yet there may remain, besides
those numerous Churches and Persons we have reckoned up, even many thousands of
the Roman Church who did not in their hearts believe, or in their practices
submit to their Idolatry. The Roman Doctors, as well as Ancient Fathers, do
acknowledge that this has been the state of Christians, and that it shall be so
again; they do acknowledge that when Arianism prevailed, thus it was; Act. 6. p.
409.
the second Nicene Council informs us that Arius, Aetius, Eunomius, Eudoxius,
(...).
and others were the men by whom the Devil brought again into the Christian
world that Idol-worship which had been rooted out, and that through the
as2istance of the Emperors, (...) Ibid. (...) Ibid.
the disease grew strong and prevalent, so that all principalities contended
for it, says the Latin, were overpowered by it, says the Greek, and when
almost all the world had joined themselves to the prevailing part, God raised
up St. Basil, as an Elias under Ahab, to support the Priesthood which dfter a
manner was now fallen. This is the relation of that great Apostasy made by
Gregory Nyssen who lived in these times, and approved by the Second Nicene
Council, and more particularly by the Author of the answer to the
Constantinopolitan Synod, v. Whitbies Ans. to Cressie, chapter 9.. 21. p. 118.
and the truth of this assertion has been proved already from the clear
testimonies of Nazianzen, Basil, Vincentius Lyrinensis, and diverse others, to
whom add that of Athanasius who compares the Pious and Orthodox in his time to
Elias and the Prophets, Ep ad Solit. vitam agentes.
hid by Obadiah in a Cave, and who tells us that where there were any Orthodox
persons, they did either thrust themselves into the Dens and Caverns of the
Earth, or solitarily wander in the Deserts. Gaide. disc. 2. chapter 2.. 26. n. 2.
Ibid.. 27. n. 3.
Now let the indifferent Reader judge whether from such sayings we find no
ground to affirm that Arianism at any time had infected or pessessed a major
part of Christianity, as R. H. confidently says, and whether when these things
were spoken no question could be made but that the major part of the Prelates
of the Universal Church professed the Catholic Faith. I am sure the words of
the forementioned Fathers by no means will admit of such a sense, and therefore
R. H. thought fit not to produce them, but to spend a long Harangue, full of
intolerable faults, in confutation of their testimonies, under the Covert of
confuting Protestants. Moreover it is the judgment both of the Fathers, and of
Roman Catholics, that when the reign of Antichrist prevails, Ep. 71. p. 864.
the Church will be reduced to the like Estate. St. Basil considering the
wonderful prevalency of Arianism, cries out, has the Lord quite deserted his
Church, is it the last hour, and does the defection now take place by which the
Son of perdition is to be revealed. In Sophon. c. 2.
St. Jerome says, however it may seem at the first view absurd, he that
considers that of the Apostle, in the latter days there shall be perilous
times, etc. and that of Christ, when the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith
upon the earth? will not wonder at the extreme desolations of the Church, Chap.
xviii. 18.
which by the reign of Antichrist will be brought to solitude. Theophylact on
that of Luke, shall he find Faith on the earth? speaks thus, the Lord asks
the question because then there shall hardly be found any Faithful, Op. imperf.
in Matt. Hom. 49.
for so greatly will the Son of perdition prevail as to seduce, if it were
possible, the very Elect, And St. Chrysostom adds that the sacrifice of
Christians will be destroyed by Antichrist, Christians will fly to the Deserts,
none being left either to enter into the Church, or offer an Oblation to God.
Ep. 80. ad Hesyc. p. 236. P. 219. Edit. Colon. A. P. 1603.
Add to this that Prophetic testimony of St. Austin, that in the time of
Antichrist the Church shall not appear, being eclipsed by the persecutions of
ungodly men, and that of Ephraim Syrus (or whosoever is the Author of that
Tract which bears his name) that men should ask whether the Gospel be continued
upon earth? and answer should be returned in the negative. v. Hieron in locum.
And thus that place in Daniel Chapter ix. 27. He shall cause the Sacrifice, and
the Oblations to cease, is expounded by Hilary, and by Hippolytus and by
Apollmarius of the time of Antichrist.

And in this the Fathers are followed by whole Troops of Papists, in the times
of Antichrist, says Pererius, there shall be no sacrifice in public places,
In Dan. p. 888. Non quod omnes sunta fide catholica, sicut exponunt aliqui,
recessuri sed quam major pars credentium discedel a fide. De Pontifi. Romans l.
3. c. 7.
neither shall any public honor be given to it: the Holy Fathers tell us,
says the same Pererius, that then all Christians shall be either Martyes, or
Apostates, or shall lie concealed like wild beasts in Dens and Solitudes. Lyra
upon the Thessal. ii. 2. says that the Apostle seems to speak of a departure
from the Catholic Faith, not that all shall recede from it, but that the major
part shall do so. Bellarmin adds that it is certain that it will be so. L. 13.
Doct. Prin. c. 2. L. 2. de temp. nov. c. 15.
To the same purpose speak Stapleton, Acosta, with diverse others. And all this
they ground upon those passages of the Revelation which seem very concluding to
this sense, and clearly to intend it, as the slaughter of the two witnesses, by
whom the Orthodex members of the Church is understood, the flight of the woman,
that is the Church, into the Desert, and the worship which the whole world will
then pay to the Beast. Where note that these Witnesses, which represent the
Church, are but two, and they at last are slain, Rev. xiii. 7, 16. (...). Aret.
in locum.
and that the Dominion of Antichrist is over all Kingdoms, Tongues and Nations,
and he is said to cause the earth and him that dwells therein to worship him,
and both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive his mark.
All which seems to signify as much as the testiinonies forecited. Now seeing
it is Prophesied concerning Antichrist, that he should exalt himself above all
that is called God, Rev. ix. 20.
and of the people of those Antichristian times, that they should worship
Devils, and Idols of Gold and Silver, and of Brass and Stone, and of Wood which
can neither see nor hear nor walk, Rev. xiii. 12.
and that the earth and they that dwell therein should become worshippers of
the Beast, and of his Image, therefore it must be also Prophesied that Idolatry
should reign, and spread it self over the Christian World.

CHAP. IV.
The Contents.

Ob. 3. That if the Church be guilty of Idolatry, the Gates of Hell would have
prevailed against her, Answered by showing that by this phrase, the Gates of
Hell, errors in Doctrine or Corruption in manners cannot be understood, but
only the state of death.. I. Ob. 4. That if the Church be Idolatrous she cannot
be Holy, Answered by showing what is the Holiness of the Church visible. II.
Ob. 5. We grant the Papists may be saved and consequently must grant they are
not guilty of Idolatry, Answered (I.) by showing that moderate Papists grant
that Protestants may be saved, whom yet they charge with Heresy, and Schism,
and such like damning sins.. III. (2.) That their Repentance for their unknown
sins, and consequently their unknown Idolatries, may obtain mercy for those who
wanted means of better information.. IV. (3.) That in the same circumstances we
believe that Idolaters may be saved. ibid. Ob. 6. The Church of Rome cannot be
guilty of Idolatry because we do acknowledge her to be a true Church, Answered
(I.) By showing that true Church may still continue so to be when it is guilty
of Idolatry. V. (2.) That the Church of Rome may be a true Church in that large
sense in which the Protestants confess she is so, and yet be guilty of
Idolatry: they only saying that she is a true visible Church in that sensein
which Heretical and Idolatrous Churches may be so.. VI. To admit the Church of
Rome to be in this sense a true visible Church is sufficient to justify the
Ordination and Succession of our Clergy. (I.) Because the Ordination of
Heretics is valid.. VII. And so is also the Ordination of Idolaters.. VIII.
Some of our Divines acknowledge that in the Church of Rome, when Luther first
begun his Reformation, there was a saving profession of the truth of Christ..
IX. This acknowledgment is explained, and the inference thence made, that the
Church of Rome was not then Idolatrous, though Idolatry prevailed much in it.
ibid. Ob. 7. That if the Church of Rome be truly charged with this crime, she
must be guilty of Heathenish Idolatry, answered by showing that she is so only
in that sense in which all Idolatry may be styled Heathenish.. X. And (2.) by
diverse instances of such Idolatry, which in the judgment of the Romanists
themselves, is not exclusive of salvation. ibid.

p. 125.
But yet ex abundanti I will add some remarks upon those Arguments which T. G.
and R. H. do further offer to demonstrate (1.) That the whole Church of Christ
cannot be guilty of Idolatry, which is the minor proposition of this objection.
And first, T. G. thus Argues, that if the Church, which is Christ's Kingdom,
could Apostatize so far as to enjoin and allow the belief and practice of
Idolatry, the Gates of Hell would have prevailed against it, but the Gates of
Hell cannot prevail against it. Ergo.

the Gates of Hell, do not contain a promise of preservation of the Church from
sin, or error of what kind soever, but only signify that all true Christians
who die in the Lord, shall be delivered from death, and shall obtain a joyful
Resurrection; For the Gates of Hell in Scripture phrase do never signify the
power of Heresy, or Satan, sin, or error, but both in the Old Testament, the
Jewish writers, and the Ancient Heathens, it constantly is used to signify the
state of death, as will be evident to any person who consults the places cited
in the Synopsis, and does with them compare the passages in which this phrase
is used in the Old Testament, and in the Jewish writers. I said, Es. xxxviii.
10.
says Hazekiah, in the cutting off of my days (...), I shall go to the Gates
of Hell, I am deprived of the residue of my years, and what is in the Hebrew
(...) the Gates of death, is by the Septuagint Translated (...) the Gates of
Hell, Chap. xvi. 13. Mac. v. 37. (...). Praepar. Ev. l. 1. c. 3. p. 7. D.
Job xxxviii. 17. Thou have the power of life and death, says the Author of
the Book of Wisdom, (...), thou bring down to the Gates of Hell and raisest
up again: They cried to the Lord to have mercy on them now being even at the
point of death, (...), at the Gates of Hell: Nor did Eusebius doubt the truth
of this exposition of the words, for he declares that God had hereby promised
that the Church should not be overcome by death, and that by virtue of this one
voice, Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against her, the Church continues not subdued by her enemies, nor
yielding to the Gates of death. (2) This Scripture may concern the Church
considered as invisible, Ecclesia in iis est qui aedificant supra petram, i. e.
qui audiunt verba Christi and faciunt. Aug. de unit. Eccl. c. 16. c. 18. De
Bapt. l. 6. c. 3. 24. Contr. Don. l. 3. c. 18. Orig. in Matt. Hom. 1.
not as visible, for, as the Fathers say, it concerns those only which are
built upon the Rock, and such are only they who hear the words of Christ, and
do them. Now as in the defection of the Church of Israel to Idol Worship, 7000
souls remained who had not bowed the knee to Baal, so may it be in the
defection of the Church visible into the like sin.

R. H. of the Catholic Chuch, Disc. p. 75.
we say in our Creed I believe one Holy Catholic Church, but how is it Holy if
it may fall into, and teach so gross and so manifold Idolatry?

Israel and Judah was Holy, notwithstanding their Idolatry and wickedness, and
the City of Jerusalem was Holy, notwithstanding the wickedness of the people
that lived in it, the Church is therefore always Holy, Expos. on the Creed. p.
343.
says the Reverend and Learned Bishop Pearson, 1. In reference to the vocation
by which all the members of it are called, and separated from the rest of the
world to God, which separation in the Language of the Scriptures is a
sanctification, and so the calling being Holy, 2 Timothy i. 9.
for God has called as with an holy calling, the body which is separated by it
may well be called Holy. 2. In relation to the Offices appoined, and the powers
exercised in the Church, which by their institution and operation are holy, and
so that Church for which they were appointed, and in which they are exercised
may be called Holy. 3. Because whosoever is called to profess Faith in Christ,
is thereby engaged to Holiness of life, according to the words of the Apostle,
let every man that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. 4. The
Church is styled Holy because the end of constituting a Church in God, was for
the purchasing a Holy people, and the great design of it was for the begetting
and increasing Holiness, that as God is originally Holy in himself, so he might
communicate his sanctity of the Sons of men, whom he intended to bring to the
fruition of himself, to which without a previous Sanctification they cannot
approach, because without Holiness no man shall see the Lord. But as for real
inward Holiness, either it is necessary to constitute a member of the visible
Church, or it is not, if it be not, then can it not be necessary to constitute
any part of the whole Church visible, and consequently it is not necessary to
constitute the whole, and so it is not necessary to believe that the Catholic
visible Church is thus Holy; if it be said that this inward Holiness is
necessary to make a member of the visible Church, then are none to be reckoned,
or approved of as members of the Chuch visible, who are not inwardly Holy, nor
is a wicked Bishop or Church-Governor, to be obeyed, because such are not
members of the Church, and are without the Church, and therefore have no right
to Govern these within.

2. Seeing I can have no assurance that any members of a Council are inwardly
Sanctified, it follows that I can have no assurance of the truth of their
definitions, because I can have no assurance that they are members of the
Church to which the promise of Divine assistance is confined, Disc. 3. chapter 10..
115.
unless perhaps R. H. will say that the acceptance of their definitions is an
evidence of the Sanctification of the Major part of the Council, which he may
say with as much reason as that it is an evidence that they were truly Ordained
and Baptized.

Protestants confess that Papists may be saved, from which confession it will
follow that they are not Idolaters, because the Scriptures frequently declare
that no Idolater can be saved: P. 75.
Idolatry, says R. H. is an error which excludes from salvation, for it must
needs be a mortal sin, and so unacknowledged and unrepented of, it must not
only hazard, but destroy salvation.

Papists that Proestants may be saved, from which confession it will follow
that they are not guilty either of Heresy or Schism, because the Scripture
has declared concerning these offenses, Gal. v. 21.
that they who do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, that
Protestants may be saved, is confessed implicitly and consequentially, 1. By
those who do assert that even an Heretic, Vide St. Clar. Problem. 15.
whilst he conceives his own Sect more credible, is not obliged to believe,
because the Faith is not sufficiently propounded to him, for if he be not
obliged to believe, he cannot sure be damned for not believing what the Church
proposes. 2. That they are to be excused who labor under the want of Teachers.
3. That they do, many of them, labor under that ignorance which is invincible,
and therefore does excuse from sin, it is confessed more expressly by many sober
Papists, Exomol. p. 546. Ed. Par. 1647.
for Mr. Cressy has declared in behalf of all his Brethren, that Catholics
will not doubt to say that to many thousands of our Religion, neither their
Heresy, nor their Schism shall prove de facto damnable, but that, supposing
they die with an intention to renounce whatsoever of their opinions should
appear to them to have been erroneous, their invincible ignorance N. B. caused
by Education, misinformation of Catholic Doctrines, etc. may probably find
pardon from our merciful judge. The incomparable Chillingworth concludes from
the Concessions of Mr. Knot, Chapter 1. Part. 1. S. 4.
that whatsoever Protestant wants capacity, or having it, wants sufficient
means of instruction to convince his Conscience of the falsehood of his own, and
the truth of the Roman Religion, may be saved notwithstanding any error in his
Religion; which is indeed the conclusion of Mr. Knots discourse in these words,
thus we allow Protestants as much Charity as Dr. Potter spares us, for whom he
makes ignorance the best hopes of salvation; 2. That nothing hinders but that a
Protestant dying a Protestant may die with contrition for his Schism and
Heresy, and doing so may be saved, for says Mr. Knot, when the man that is
esteemed a Protestant dies, we do not instantly conclude him in Hell, because
we know not what light might have cleared his errors, or what contrition
retracted his sins. And this is suitable to the determination of many Roman
Catholics, that Christians may be absolved who are ignorant of that which
under pain of mortal sin they are obliged to know, because they may be contrite
for their ignorance and be desirous to learn. Prob. 15. p. 97.
Sancta Clara speaking of our English Protestants, says thus. I wholly judge
many of them free from all crime, and that if, after Baptism received, they
exert acts of contrition, they may be saved, and I piously hope many of them
are thus actually saved, and this I judge to be the more common sentence of the
Doctors, because it is commonly so Preached in their Churches. Moreover R. H.
himself cannot be ignorant that it does pass for current Doctrine in their
Schools, that ignorant persons may innocently be Heretics, 1. S. Clar. Prob.
15. p. 99.
when they are by their Priests misled into the grossest Heresies; that Laymen
erring with their Teachers, are by the common doctrine of the Schools and
Doctors wholly excused from all fault. Idem Ibid. Estius in Sent. I. 2. did.
42.. 7.
That all the seven Capital sins by reason of the imperfection of the act, or
other circumstances may become only venial; that ignorance invincible excuses
from sin, and that there may be ignorance invincible even of the things
commanded or forbidden by the law of nature or the Decalog, and therefore of
the Idolatry forbidden in that Decalog; how can he then pronounce so
decretorily against the Church of Rome, that no Salvation could be had by any
of her members, provided they were guilty of Idolatry, without a contradiction
to these avowed Tenets of the most famous Doctors of the Church of Rome? And
whereas the Bishop of Chalcedon says, that Protestants do allow Salvation to
the Roman Church, and to formal Papists; but Roman Catholics do deny saving
Faith and Salvation to the Protestant Church, and to formal Protestants, and
grant it only to such Protestants as are invincibly ignorant of their errors,
who are not formal Protestants, but rather Protestantibus credentes, persons
deceived by giving two much trust to Protestants: Bishop Brambal answers, Reply
Chap. 6.. p. 224. Ed. Dublin, 1677.
that we say the very same, viz. that we allow not saving Faith or Salvation to
formal Papists, but to such as err invincibly, and are prepared in their minds
to receive the truth, when God shall reveal it. Such are not formal Papists,
but Papistis credentes, such as give too much trust to Papists.

Sermon. 6. ad Pop. Part 1. p. 335, 336, 337.
how can Idolaters living and dying so without repentance, as the Papists do,
be saved? It is excellently answered by the Reverend and learned Bishop
Sanderson, in these words, I do not so excuse the Idolatry of our Forefathers,
as if it were not in it self a sin, and that without repentance damnable, but
yet their ignorance being such as it was, nourished by education, custom,
tradition, the tyranny of their leaders, the fashion of the times, not without
some show also of piety and devotion, and themselves withal having such
slender means of better knowledge; though this cannot excuse them from sin
without repentance damnable, yet it much lesseneth, and qualifies the
sinfulness of their Idolatry, arguing that their continuance in it was more
from other prejudices, than from a wilful contempt of Gods Holy Word and will,
and as for their repentance it is as certain that as many of them as are saved
do repent of their Idolatries, as it is certain no Idolater, nor other sinner
can be saved without repentance. But then there is a double difference to be
observed between repentance for ignorances, and for known sins, the one is that
known sins must be confessed and repented of, and pardon asked for them in
particular, that is, where God allows time and capacity, every kind of them
must be particularly confessed; whereas for ignorances it is sufficient to wrap
them up all together in a general and implicit confession, and crave pardon for
them in the lump, as David does in Psalm xix. saying, Lord cleanse me from my
secret sins. The other difference is this, that known sins are not truly
repented of but where they are forsaken; But ignorances may be carefully
repented of, and yet still continued in. The reason is, because they may be
repented of in the General, without special knowledge that they are sins,
whereas without such special knowledge they cannot be reformed. Some of our
Forefathers then might not only live in Popish Idolatry, but even die in an
Idolatrous act, and yet have truly repented (though but in the General, and in
the crowd of their unknown sins) even of those very sins, and have at the same
instant true Faith in Jesus Christ, and other Graces accompanying Salvation.
Now from these answers it is evident,

1. That we only grant that Papists may be saved in such circumstances in which
we do believe Idolaters may be saved also. For, as the Roman Casuists conclude,
that albeit the Scripture says no fornicator shall be saved, yet does not this
conclude against those persons who are deceived with a Leah instead of Rachel,
as good Jacob was; and albeit the drunkard be excluded by the same Scripture
from Salvation, yet will not this condemn a holy Noah, who knew not that the
wine he drank would have such ill effect upon him; and albeit the Scriptures
say no Murderer shall have eternal life, yet will not that conclude against
thoe persons who in simplicity of heart do serve their Prince in an unlawful
war; so neither will those Scriptures which say no Idolater shall have eternal
life, exclude the person who through like ignorance of fact, or right, commits
Idolatry. And thus Quae omnia non nisi secundum quandam peccati perfectionem
accipi debent, cum alloqui constet etiam ex ipsa Scriptura in his peccatorum
Generibus delinqui posse venialiter. Estius in Sent. l. 2. did. 42.. 4.
in all these passages of Scripture, says Estius, which in the general make
the effect of sin exclusion from Christ's Kingdom, destruction and eternal
death, or in particular do reckon certain kinds of sins amongst those works of
the flesh which exclude from Heaven, in all these passages, says he, we are to
understand the Scriptures only to speak of sins in general, or of those kinds
of sins secundum quandam peccati perfectionem, i.e. when they are knowingly
committed, and persisted in, and when they are not any way retracted by
Repentance; for otherwise it is clear even from Scripture, that in committing
of these kind of sins men may be only guilty of a venial fault.

2. Hence it appears that the Charity we exercise toward the Church of Rome in
this particular, is only that Charity which they themselves have taught us, and
which they exercise to others in like circumstances, when they pronounce them
guilty of sins in their own nature damnable, and that it is not any necessity
which lies upon us so to do, as R. H. wrongfully suggests, Disc. p. 78;
but it is only love of truth, and evidence of reason, which is the ground of
this our Charity. We being fully satisfied that the God of mercy will not
condemn the person who sincerely does Repent of all his unknown trespasses, by
reason of those errors of his understanding which he was not able to correct,
or which in his unhappy circumstances, he hardly could discover to be errors.

3. I answer, that if the defect of a particular Repentance for, or an
acknowledgment of every mortal sin committed by a Christian, will certainly
obstruct the possibility of his Salvation, then the Salvation of a Papist must
be exceeding hazardous upon their own avowed Principles, for it is evident
beyond denial, and proved by a late Author, that Roman Casuists do teach, The
Practical Divinity of Papists, etc.
that Murder, Fornication, Uncleanness, Adultery, Theft, Lying Anger, Revenge,
Reviling, Drunkenness, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry, and all those sins
which by the Scriptures are pronounced mortal, and so exclusive of the soul
from Heaven, are either in some cases, which may often happen, none at all, or
only venial sins; it is also certain that these Casuists are often subject to
very gross mistakes in passing this determination, when a sin is venial, and
when it is mortal, and very often contradict each the other, nay some of them
confess they are not able, (...) ^um. (...)ialia (...) a Gra(...)i non
ex^^^imur, tace^^^citra culpam ^^ssunt. Sess. 14. c. 5.
after all their study, to lay down any certain rules in this particular. If
then the Layman being deceived by his Priest judge that to be only a venial
sin, which in reality is mortal, he being also taught by the trent Council, and
his Roman Doctors, that he may without fault, conceal a venial sin, and not at
all confess it, he according to the Doctrine of R. H. must be condemned to
eternal misery, for following the judgment of his blind mistaken Priest.

true Church, R. H. Disc. 78.
whilst it continues so to be, cannot be guilty of Idolatry, since therefore we
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be, and to continue a true Church: we cannot
truly say that she is guilty of Idolatry.

Stilling fleet, Answ. to Sev. Treat. Part. 1. p. 20.
that this objection is very disingenuous, because it does not answer any of
those Arguments which we have used to prove the Church of Rome Idolatrous, but
only does oppose the judgment of Charity to that of Reason, which does engage
us to conclude they are Idolatrous, and therefore to believe that, if Idolatry
be not consistent with the true being of a Church, we err in this our
Charitable judgment, and therefore stand obliged to reverse it. For instance,
suppose one of the Church of Judah, should have called the Chuch of Israel, in
the time of Jeroboam a true Church, because they did acknowledge the true God,
and did admit the Law of Moses in all other matters; and did believe the
acknowledgment of those truths to be sufficient to preserve the essentials of a
Chuch among them, and afterward the same person should endeavor to convince
the Ten Tribes of their Idolatry in worshipping God by the Calves of Dan and
Bethel; would this be thought a sufficient way of answering him to say, that he
contradicted himself by granting them a true Church, and yet charging them with
Idolatry! No, the true consequence would be that he thought some kind of
Idolatry consistent with the being of a Church, and if this were not so, his
Charity must be mistaken, provided that his reason could not be gainsayed.

2. That a true Church may yet continue so to be when it is guilty of Idolatry,
may be made evident from the consideration of the Jewish Church. For first,
that the whole Church ws guilty of Idolatry in worshipping the golden Calf the
Romanists do not deny; the Scriptures having clearly said, that by so doing
they changed the image of the incorruptible God into the Similitude of a Calf.
Ps. cvi. 19, 20. That they who worshipped the Calf did offer Sacrifice to an
Idol, Acts vii. 41. and more expressly that they were Idolatrous, 1 Cor. 10.7.
2. That notwithstanding this Idolatry, they still continued to be Gods Church
and People, if he had then a Church on earth, is evident, and therefore Verse
14. it is said that God repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his
peoples.

Moreover that the worship of the Calves which Jeroboam had set up in Dan and
Bethel was Idolatry, is evident from these considerations, 1. That it was a
worship like to that of the Golden Calf, which we have proved to be Idolatrous.
2. God so esteemed this action, for thus he speaks to Jeroboam, 1 King. xiv. 9.
Thou have done evil above all that were before thee, for thou have gone and
made thee other Gods and molten Images to provoke me to anger. 3. These Calves
are by the Scripture called Idols, Hos. viii. 4, 5.

2. That even from the time of Jeroboam to the Captivity of Israel the worship
of the Calves was the Established Religion of the Ten Tribes. For, from the
time of Jeroboam even to the days of Hosea, that is, the time when Israel was
carried away into Assyria, we find not any King of Israel who Reigned above one
Month, of whom it is not said expressly that he walked in all the ways of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin.
Moreover it is said expressly that when once Jeroboam had prevailed with Israel
to commit that great sin of worshipping the Calves of Dan and Bethel, the
Children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did, they
departed not from them, till the Lord removed Israel out of his sight. Whence
it must necessarily follow that from the days of Jeroboam to the Reign of
Hosea, the Church of Israel continued in her Idolatry.

3. That God during that time, or at the least some portion of it, did still
esteem and own them as his Church and people; for Jehu was by a Prophet of the
Lord Anointed King over the people of the Lord, N. B. even over Israel. 2 Kings
ix. 6. Israel was therefore then the people of the Lord, though they continued
in the sins of Jeroboam, as also Jehu did, 2 Kings x. 29. 2 King. xiii. 6.
2. In the days of Jehoahaz it is Recorded that the Children of Israel departed
not from the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin, but walked in them, 2
King xiii. 23.
and yet it is Recoded also that then the Lord was gracious to them, and had
compassion on them, and respect to his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and would not destroy them, nor cast them from his preence as yet. Now his
Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was this, that he would be their God,
and the God of their seed after them; to have respect to this Covenant, must
therefore be to continue still to be their God, and own them for his people. 3.
They with whom God was present, amongst whom he walked, in the mid^^ of whom he
dwelt, and with whom he was; God in Covenant, were still his Church and People;
and he was still their God, according to his promise, Lev. xxvi. 11, 12. I will
set my Tabernacle amongst you, and will walk among you, and you shall be my
people, and I will be your God. And indeed God in Scripture is said to walk
among them by his gracious presence in his Tabernacle, 2 Samuel vii. 6. 1 Chronicles.
xvii. 5. Psalm. ix. 11. cxxxv. 21. Es. xviii. 4. Joel iii. 21.2 Chr. vi. 2.
xxxvi. 15. Psalm. lxxiv. 7. lxxvi. 2. lxxix. 7. Es. xviii. 4. Joel iii 17.2 King
xiii. 23. Hos. xi. 9.
he dwelt among them by dwelling at Jerusalem, in that Temple and that City, or
by continuing his special presence there, and upon this account in Scripture
the Temple is often styled his dwelling place. Now even in the times of the
Idolatry of Israel, and Judah, God still was present with them, he walked and
dwelt among them, and was their God in Covenant, he, I say, was still
graciously preent with, he walked and dwelt among them, for yet he had not cast
them from his presence, he was still the holy one in the midst of Ephraim, he
was not yet departed from them, for he by way of commination says Woe unto
them, Hos. ix. 12.
when I shall depart from them. After that they had even broken God with their
whorish hearts which had departed from him, and with their eyes which went a
whoring after their Idols, yet the glory of the Lord was not departed from the
Sanctuary, but still appeared in the Temple, Ezekiel. vi. 9, 13. Ezekiel. ix. 3, 4.
x. 3, 4. xviii. 19. Ezekiel. xvi. 20.
and between the Cherubims, they after this bare sons and daughters unto God.
Moreover that he was still their God in Covenant, appears from those
expressions of the Prophets, when pleading in behalf of this backsliding
people, they speak thus: Break not thy Covenant with us, thou art our Father,
Jer. xiv. 21. Es. lxiv. 8, 9. Jer. iii. 14.
we are all thy people; turn O backsliding Children, for I am married to you,
and from innumerable places, in which he owns them for his people still, and is
not yet ashamed to be called their God.

This will be farther evident from the New Testament, for in the Church of
Corinth there were many of the strongest Christians, who being in their
Consciences convinced that an Idol was nothing, and so could have no power to
defile the meat which had been offered to it; did upon this presumption sit
down with others in the Idol Temples, and eat and drink that which they knew
was offered to the Idol. This the Apostle plainly tells them was Idolatry, that
it was in effect to have communion with Devils, 1 Cor. x. 7, 11, ^0, 21,
to drink he cup of Devils, and to be partakers of the table of Devils, and yet
he clearly does insinuate that they who through that error or mistake, were
guilty of this Idol worship, might still remain his Christian brethren and
beloved.

Moreover that Babylon was the Mother of Harlots and Abominations, that she
commanded all her subjects to commit spiritual Fornication or Idolatry, St.
John does frequently inform us; Rev. xviii. 4.
and yet that even here God had his Church and People, is evident from that
voice from Heaven saying, Come out of her my people, for how could God have
said, Come out of her my people, had he not then preserved alive within this
Throne of Satan, a people to himself? Lastly the Jewish Synagog in the days of
our Savior Christ, had taken away the Key of knowledge, Luke xi. 52, Matt.
xxiii. 13.
they neither entered themselves into his Kingdom, who were the keepers of that
key, nor suffered others so to do. That little knowledge which remained among
them was damnably corrupted, not only with the Saducean Heresy, which mightily
prevailed amongst the wealthiest of them, but also with the leaven of the
Scribes and Phraisees, who had by their Traditions made void the Law of God,
Matthew. xv. 6; 9.
and rendered his worship vain; these Scribes and Pharisees are by the Baptist
styled a Generation of Vipers, Matthew. iii. 7. Matthew. xxiii.
by Christ Blind foolish Hypocrites, persons that coald not escape the damnation
of Hell. Of the whole people Christ pronounces that they were of their father
the Devil, Joh. viii. 44.
and his works they would do, and yet God had his Church even then among them,
in which both Zacharias, Elizabeth, the Virgin Mary, and our Lord was born, of
which both he, and his Apostles were then members, and into which they were
admitted by Circumcision. Their Priests were owned by our Savior who sent the
Lepers to them, Matthew. viii. 4. Matthew. xxiii. 2, 3.
he acknowledged that these Scribes and Pharisees still sat in Moses Chair, and
that obedience was therefore due unto them in all lawful matters. Nor could it
possibly be otherwise, seeing Christ's Church and Kingdom was not begun till
after his own Resurrection, nor do we read of any that were added to the Church
till then.

Rome may be a true visible Church in that sense in which our English
Protestants confess she is so; i. e. as having truth of visible existence,
though not truth of doctrine; and yet be guilty of Idolatry, will be apparent
from these considerations,

1. That the notion of a visible Church which they lay down, as the true ground
of this their Charitable judgment, contains in it nothing inconsistent with
the practice or allowance of Idolatry. For to the visibility of a Church, say
they, is only requisite an outward profession of those things which
supernaturally appertain to the very essence of Christianity, Eccl. Pol. l. 3..
1. p. 126.
and are necessarily required in every Christian man. So the judicious Mr.
Hooker.

Now among the things which supernaturally appertain to the essence of
Christianity, they do not reckon Moral Righteousness and Honesty of life,
because although the want of these excludes from Salvation, yet are they not
of supernatural Revelation, but are discovered to us by the light of Nature;
they are the duties as well of Heathens, as of Christians; and so concern us,
says Mr. Hooker, not as Christians only, but as men.

Hence they infer that every thing which excludes from Salvation excludes not
from the visible Church, this therefore cannot be, say they, essential to the
being of a Church visible, that it does hold or practice nothing which
excludes from Salvation. For instance, Despair, want of Charity, secret
Infidelity, the proud and envious spirit, are all exclusive from Salvation; but
none of them exclude a person who outwardly professes all the essentials of
Christian Faith, from being a true member of a Chuch visible. Should we then
grant that the Idolatry now practiced in the Church of Rome, was totally
exclusive of Salvation, it would not follow that she did not continue a true
visible Church in the forementioned sense. Agreeable to this we are told by
Zanchy, De Not. dei Praefat. p.
that in spite of Satan the Church of Rome retained still the chief
foundations of the Faith, though weakened with the Doctrines of men; it retained
the public Preaching of the word of God, though in many places misunderstood
and misconstrued, the Invocation of the name of Christ, though joined also with
the Invocation of dead men, the administration of Baptism instituted by Christ
himself, howsoever defiled with the addition of many superstitions, so as
together with the Symbol of the Covenant, the Covenant it self remained still
in her; the Church of Rome therefore is yet the Church of Christ. Apud Bishop
Hall, To. 2. p. 94.
In the Roman Church, says Dr. Primrose, God does still keep his word in the
Old and New Tetament, as the contract of his Marriage with her, in her is the
true Creed, the true Decalog, the true Lords Prayer, in her Christ is Preached,
though corruptly, in her the Trinity and Incarnation of Christ are believed, in
her the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are prayed to, though in an unknown tongue
to the most part, in her the little Children are Baptized in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and no man will deny that their Baptism is a true
Sacrament whereby their children are born to God, seeing we do not rebaptise
them, when leaving them, they join to us: Who then can deny that she is a true
Church, seeing out of the true Chuch there is no Baptism, and the Church alone
bears Children to God? Now the belief of all these things here mentioned by
Dr. Primrose and Mr. Zanchy are well consistent with the practice and allowance
of Idolatry, and therefore in their judgments the truth of the visible Church
may be consistent with it also.

2. They also add that a true visible Church may still continue so to be, even
when she most deserves to be Divorced, provided God does not give her a Bil of
Divorce, remove her Candlestick or take away the Kingdom of God from her. Two
things are requisite, Lect. in Apoc. p. 430, 431.
says Episcopius, to Unchurch a people, 1. That she merit a Divorce by reason
of some deadly or fundamental error. 2. That God does deal with her accordng to
her merit by sending her a Bill of Divorce, both these are necessary to cause a
Church to be so, for as a wife by being an Adulteress does not yet cease to be
a wife, whilst her own husband will acknowledge her, and not Divorce her from
him, so is it with the Church of God. The Church of Sardis is by Christ owned
as a Church, though as himself pronounces, Ibid. p. 521. V. Hall, To. 2. Tr.
of the Old Religion, p. 76.
she only had a name to live, but really was dead. The being of a Church, says
Bishop Davenant, does principally stand upon the action of God calling men out
of darkness and death, to the participation of light and life in Christ Jesus,
so long as God continues this calling to a people, though they, as much as in
them lies, darken this light, and corrupt the means which should bring them to
Life and Salvation in Christ, yet where God calls men to the participation of
life in Christ by the Word, and by the Sacraments, there is the true being of a
Church, let men be never so false in the exposition of Gods word, or never so
untrusty in mingling their own Traditions with Gods Ordinances. Thus the Church
of the Jews lost not the being of a Church when she became an Idolatrous
Church. Thus to gran that the Roman was and is a true visible Church, though in
Doctrine a false, and in practice an Idolatrous Church is a true assertion, and
of greater use and necessity in our Controversy with Papists about the
perpetuity of the Christian Church, than is understood by those that gainsay it.

3. They say that a true visible Church cease not to be so, though she does
add to the profession of those essentials which constitute her a true visible
Church, such tenets as by unseen consequence do overthrow some of them. The
Church of Rome, says Bishop Hall, Advertis. p. 51.
professing to hold those things diectly which by inferences she closely
overthrows, she is a truly visible Church, but an unsound one: Again the Church
of Rome, says he, under a Christian face has an Unchristian heart,
overturning that foundation by necessary inferences which by open profession it
avows, that face, that profession, those avowed principles, are enough to give
it claim to the true outward visibility of a Christian Church, nor can those
inferences Dischurch it, whilst those main principles are kept alive in that
crazy and corrupted body. And again p. 63. if we measure the true being of a
visible Church, by the direct maintaining of Fundamental Principles, though by
consequences indirectly overturned, and by the possession of the word of God
and his Sacraments, though not without foul adulteration, what judicious
Christian can deny that the Church of Rome has yet the true visibility of a
Church of Christ? In respect of the common truths yet professed among the
Papists, they may, Apud Bishop Hall, To. 2. Part 2. p. 82.
says Dr. Prideaux, and ought to be termed a true visible Church in opposition
to Jews, Turks, and Pagans, who directly deny the foundation, howsoever their
Antichristian additions make them no better than the Synagogue of Satan.

4. They, whilst they do allow her to be a true visible Church, do also say she
is Heretical, and do allow Heretical Churches to be true visible Churches,
Advertisement. p. 51.
also that which Rome holds with us makes it a Church, says Bishop Hall, that
which it obtrudes upon us, makes it Heretical; and elsewhere to this question,
is the Church of Rome still a part of the truly existent visible Church of
Christ? Reconciler, p. 61.
He answers; Surely no otherwise than an Heretical and Apostatical Church is,
or may be. Their Roman Church, says Dr. Crakenthorp is Heretical, yet must she
be accounted both, to be in the Church, and be a Church, not simply, not
according to the integrity of Faith, not according to any inward virtue,
Defens. Eccl. Angl. adv. Spalat. c. 16.
not so effectually that it should avail to Salvation for a man to be in it;
but yet a Church it is in some respects, according to the external profession
of Faith, and of the word of God, accordin gto the Administration of the
Sacraments, according to some Doctrines of true belief, by which as by so many
outward ligaments, she is yet knit to the Orthodox and Catholic Church. And to
this Question, Is the Roman Church at this day no part of the Church of God?
Appen. part 3. p. 883.
our learned Dr. Field thus answers. Surely as Austin notes that the societies
of Heretics in that they retain the profession of many parts of heavenly
truth, and the ministration of the Sacrament of Baptism, are so far joined with
the Catholic Church, and the Catholic Church, in and by them brings forth
children to God; so the present Roman Church is still in some sort a part of
the visible Church of God, but no otherwise than other societies of Heretics
are, in that it retains the profession of some parts of heavenly truth, and
ministers the true Sacrament of Baptism to the Salvation of the Souls of many
thousand Infants? We must acknowledge even Heretics themselves to be, though a
maimed part, yet a part of the Church visible, says the judicious Hooker,
Eccl. Pol. l. 3.. 1.
if the Fathers do any where, says he, as oftentimes they do make the true
Church of Christ, and her companies opposite, they are to be construed as
separating Heretics, not altogether from the company of Believers, but from
the fellowship of sound Believers.

Lastly, They also do assert that an Idolatrous Church may yet continue to be a
true Church visible. Lo, say the Romanists, Reconcil, p. 64, 65.
we are of the true visible Church, why then forsaken? Ans. Alas poor souls,
says Bishop Hall, do they not know that Hypocrites, lewd persons, Reprobates,
are no less members of the visible Church? what gain they by this but a deeper
damnation? to what purpose did the Jews cry the temple of the Lord, whilst they
despighted the Lord of that Temple? They are of the vi^^^le Church, but
shamefully Idolatrous in practice. Our Savior, says Mr. Hooker, ubi Supra.
compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a Net which gathers together good Fish
and bad, and to a Field where Tares, manifestly known and seen of all men, do
grow intermingled with good Corn, and even so shall continue to the
consummation of the world. When the people of God worshipped the Calf in the
Wilderness, when they adored the Brazen Serpent, when they bowed the knee to
Baal, and served the Gods of the Nations, when they burnt Incense, and offered
Sacrifice to Idols, true it is the wrath of God was most fiercely inflamed
against them, and they were forsaken of God in respect of that singular mercy
wherewith he kindly embraces his faithful children, howbeit retaining the Law
of God, and the holy Seal of his Covenant, the sheep of his visible flock, they
continued even in the depth of their disobedience, and rebellion; wherefore
among them od always had a Church not only because be had thousands who never
bowed the knee to baal, but even they whose knees were bowed to Baal, were also
of the visible Church of God. Of the same judgment are Bishop Davenant, Dr.
Primrose, Zanchy, and Episcopius, in the forecited places.

Rome to be, in the large sense, a true visible Church of Christ, serves no
designs of Popery, and is sufficient to justify the Ordinations, and
succession of the Clergy of the Church of England. For (I.) admit the first
Reformers of our Church received their Ordination from those Bishops which were
themselves guilty of Heresy, or Schism, or both, and therefore no true living
Members of Christ's body, nor any other ways to be reputed Members of the Church
visible than Schismatics and Heretics may be. This is abundantly sufficient
to justify our Ordination and Succession, and our entrance into the visible
Church by Baptism conferred by them. For of the Baptism of Heretics without
exception, and therefore of those Heretics, who by the judgment of the
Universal Church have been esteemed Idolaters, Sess. 7. cap. de Bapt. Can. 4.
the Church of Rome in her Trent Council has determined that it is valid, and
has pronounced an Anathema, on those who say the contrary. Jews, Heretics,
Part 2. Cap. II. Sect. 24.
and Infidels, may confer true Baptism, says the Roman Catechism, as many
Ancient Fathers, and Decrees of Council teach, particularly the General Council
of Constantinople, and the sixth General Council held in Trullo, the Council
held at Florence, and the Lateran Council.

Moreover that the Ordination of Heretics is valid, Preface to his Answer to
several Treat. Sess. 7. Can. 9.23. Can. 4. Cap. 68. Act. 1.
the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet has largely proved from the definition of the
Trent Council, from the Code of Canons of the African Church, from the judgment
of the second Nicene Council, from the General reception of this Doctrine in
the Roman Church, for as Morinus witnesses, De Sacris Ord. Part 3. Exercit. 5.
c. 1. n. 12.
the opinion of the validity of Orders conferred by Heretics has only
obtained in the Roman Church during the last four Centuries, to which I add the
definition of the first Nicene Council in the Case of the Cathari, Can. 8.
(...). Con. Nicen. 2. Act. 1. p. 68.
or the Novatian Heretics, that they returning to the Catholic and Apostolic
Church should remain in that Order of Clergy in which they were only receiving
(...) (or the imposition of hands for benediction and reconciliation) and that
if any of them were found either in Villages, or Cities, to be the only Bishops
that were there Ordained, they should continue in that same rank. Whereas
concerning the Pauliani, who, as St. Austin thinks, De Haeres. Cap. 44.
did not observe the essentials of true Baptism, the Council does determine
that, if any of them should be found among the Clergy, they should be
Rebaptized, and then receive (...) or Ordination by some Bishop of the
Catholic Church, Can. 19.
so that the Ordination of the Novatian Heretics, who were very numerous, and
whose Bishops had continued in a long Succession at Constantinople, Ephesus,
Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. cap. 38. p. 114. l. 7. cap. 11.
at Cyzicum, and in most other places, is by this great and holy Synod here
pronounced valid, and they who were Ordained by their Bishops were not received
into the Church as Greeks, or degraded into the rank of Laymen, whereas, by
reason of some fundamentla error in the case of Baptism, it is determined that
the Pauliani who were of their Clergy, should be by Baptism admitted first into
the Church, and then by Ordination of the Bishop into the number of the Clergy.
The judgment of St. Austin is so clear in this point, that we need nothing more
to evidence the Faith and practice which then obtained in the Church. For, that
the Ordination of Heretics is valid, he both asserts against the Donatists,
and proves by these two mediums. 1. That their Baptism being valid, according
to the determination of the Church; their Ordination must be deemed so; there
is no reason, Lib 2. Contra Epist. Parm. c. 13.
says he, that they who cannot lose their Baptism should lose the power of
giving Baptism to others, for they both of them are Sacraments, both of them
are given by Consecration, one when the person is Baptized, the other when he
is Ordained, and therefore in the Catholic Church, it is not lawful to
reiterate either of them. 2. Because, says he, a person who, after his
Ordination in the Church Catholic, Non sunt rursus ordinandi, sed sicut
Baptismus in eis, ita Ordinatio mansit integra, qua in praecisione erat vitium
non in Sacramentis quae ubicunque sunt ipsa vera sunt. Ibid.
becomes an Heretic must not at his return to the Church be Reordained, and
therefore neither must he be Reordained who has received Ordination out of the
Church Catholic, and hence it is, says he, that if any Bishops of the
Donatists are won over to the Church, and it does seem convenient that they
should bear the same Offices, which formerly they did, they are not by the
Church Ordained, but as their Baptism, so their Ordination remains entire. By
this determination the Doctors of the Roman Church are generally swaied, so
that there is, says Bellarmine, Bell. 1.4. de Romans P^ntif. C. 10. at emtra.
scarce any Catholic who knows not that they who are Baptized by Heretics are
Baptized truly, and they that are Ordained by Heretics are Ordained truly,
when the Heretic that Ordains is truly a Bishop, at least, as to his Character.

Heretics who really were, or by the Church have been condemned as Idolaters
or persons guilty of more heinous crimes, when these Ordainers were true
Bishops, was esteemed valid by the Church, the same Learned Person has
demonstrated, Desence of his Discourse. part 2. Chap. 4. p. 795, 798.
1. From the judgment of the second Nicene Council in the Case of Meletius, who
was ordained by Arian Bishops, and whose Ordinations were accounted valid by an
Alexandrian Synod in their Synodal Epistle, Eccles. Hier. l. 2. cap. 10. 9
which, says Petavius, contains the faith received in the whole Church
Catholic, and in the Synodal Epistle of the first Nicene Synod, which, says
Petavius, Idem App. To. 3. Eccl. Hier. l. 2. c. 3 4.
determined that they who were constituted and confirmed by mystical imposition
of hands, should be received into the Communion of the Church, and enjoy their
functions with these provisions, that they should be in every Church and Parish
after those Bishops and Presbyters which were ordained by Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, that they should have no power of electing whom they pleased, nor
of propounding of the names of those whom they thought fit to be chosen into
the body of the Clergy. 2. This he does prove from a fuller testimony of the
general sense of the Church of that age, Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 28.
recorded by Ruffinus concerning the admission of those who had received orders
from the Arian Bishops to the exercise of their Priestly Office, with which
decree of the Alexandrian Council about the receiving the Arian Bishiops and
Priests, upon disowning their Heresy, Adv. Lucifer. init.
though Lucifer did quarrel, yet Jerome says that it was universally received
by the Church: This will be farther evident from the 7. Canon of the second
General Council of Constantinople, and from the 95. Canon. of the Synod held at
Trullo, in both which Canons it is determined that the Arian Baptism should be
esteemed valid, Contra Epist. Parmen. lib. 2. c. 13. Sess. 23. c. 4. Synod.
Ephesians. Epist. ad Theod. and Vale t Imperat. Act. Synod. cap. 7. Audemus
Anathematizare Nestorii Idololatriam in homine. 2 Nic. Council. Act. 7. Epist.
ad Constantinum and Iren. Act. 1. p. 68. E. Haer. 80. n. 3. (...). 10 Act. 1.
p. 72. E. (...). Act. 1. p. 77. E. (...) Act. 4. p. 236. A Act 6. p. 357. B.
(...) Act. 1. p. 77. C. Act. 3. p. 160. D.E.
and not to be reiterated, and therefore, as S. Austin does infer, they must
esteem their Ordination also valid and not to be reiterated. Because in the
Sacrament of Orders as well as Baptism, says the Tret Council, an indelible
Character is impressed. Moreover.

That the Nestorians were Idolaters has been declared by the Church, and yet
their Ordination by the same Church has been accounted valid, says the second
Nicene Council.

That the Massaliani or Euchytae were worshippers of the Devil, Epiphanius does
inform us, and yet their Ordinations were allowed by the third General Council
of Ephesus, and it was there decreed, says the Second Nicene Council, that as
many of their Clergy as would renounce their Heresy and return to the Church
should remain in the number of the Clergy.

Concerning the Heresy of the Iconoclasts, it is determined by the members of
the Second Nicene Council, that it is (...) the worst of evils and of
vHeresies, What shall we esteem them, says Tarusius, who sitbvert Sacred
Images? They must be counted, says the Synod, as Atheists, Jews, and enemies
of the truth. They who reject them are like to Jews and Samaritans, faith the
same Synod; and again if the making of Images be likened to Idols, the mystery
of our redemption is made void, says the same Council: and yet this very
Council does determine that even these very persons who confessed that they
were born, and bred up in this worst of Heresies, should be admitted into the
Order of Priesthood which they had formerly received, and does accordingly
admit them.

Moreover from the Trent Council I thus argue, that power which is not
Temporary, and therefore never can be taken away, continues with Idolatrous
Priests and Bishops, as well as with other Heretics, but according to the
definition of the Trent Council, that power which is given in the Sacrament of
Orders, impressing on the receiver an indelible Character never can be taken
away; For so they do expressly testify in these words. Because in the Sacrament
of Order as well as Confirmation and Baptism a Character is impressed, In
Sacramento ordinis Character imprimitur nec delert auferri po. Sess. 23. 4.
which neitehr can be blotted out, nor taken away, N.B. This holy Syned justly
condemns their opinion who hold that Priests of the New Testament have only a
temporary power. Lastly, agreeable to this determination of the Trent Council
is the determination of the Schools, for that every Bishop is a Minister of
Scred Orders is so true, says Estius, In Sent. l. 4. did. 25. 3.
that no Crime how enormous soever, as Heresy, Schism, Apostasy, nor any
censure how weighty soever, as V.G. that of Excommunication, can hinder the
validity of any Ordination made by such a person, even out of his own
Jurisdiction, provided he observe the due rites of Ordination in things
essential to that Sacrament. This doctrine, says he, is sufficiently confirmed
by the continual practice of the Church, which never reordained any who
returned from any Heresy or Schisin whatsoever in which they were ordained.
Men, says Petavius, De Eccl. Hier. l. 2. Cap. 9. ^.
may be deprived of the Communion of the Church, of all honor, dignity,
function, and power ecclesiastical, as was the case of Anthimus the intruder
into the Sea of Constantinople, and may be censued as unfit to be accunted
Christians, which was the censure that Felix the Third, and a Roman Synod past
upon Acacius, but when the Church by proscribing, and condemning them has
taken from them all it can, it cannot ache away the power of Baptism and
Ordination, and therefore the Church Catholic has judged that they who were
Baptized and Ordained by Heretics, and Schismatics have both true Baptism,
and true Orders, and has rejected those that think otherwise as Heretics,
which both innumerable Synods, and Orthodox Fathers among whom Austin does
excel, have proved against the Luciferians, the Donatists, the Arians, and
other Pests of the Church.

Divines among us, who are, I hope not without reason, more candid in their
apprehensions of the Roman Church before the Reformation admitting it to have
continued, when Luther and his friends began their Reformation, to have been a
Church, in which Salvation might be had, not only for the ignorant, but also
for many others who did not openly renounce Communion with her. That we yield
no more to our Adversaries now than formerly we did, Appendix part 3. p. 880.
says Dr. Field, in that we acknowledge the Latin or Western Churches,
subject to Roman Tyranny, before God raised up Luther, to have been the true
Churches of God in which a saving profession of the truth of Christ was found,
and wherein Luther himself received his Christianity, Ordination, and power of
Ministry; I will first show that all our best, and most renowned Divines did
ever acknowledge as much as I have written. Now that which does induce them thus
to judge, was the consideration of these things.

1. That notwithstanding those very many and very grievous errors which then
obtained too generally, and which were too much countenanced by the most
powerful members of the Roman Church, there still remained a profession and
acknowledgment of so much truth, as being joined with Piety might be sufficient
to bring her members to eternal life. If at this day, says Bishop Usher,
Sermon before his Majesty at Wansled. p. 28.
we should take a survey of the several professions of Christianity that have
any large spread in any part of the world, as of the Religion of the Roman, and
the Resormed Churches in our quarters, of the Egyptians, and Aethiopians in
the South; of the Graecians, and other Churches in the Eastern parts, and
should put by the points wherein they differ one from another, and gather into
one body the rest of the Articles wherein they all do generally agree, we
should find that in those propositions, which without all controversy are
universally received in the whole Christian world, so much truth is contained,
as being joined with holy obedience may be sufficient to bring a man to
everlasting Savlation; neither have we cause to doubt but that as many as do
walk according to this rule (neither overthrowing that which they have builded
up, by super-inducing any damnable Heresies thereupon, nor otherwise vitiating
their holy Faith with a lewd and wicked conversation) peace shall be upon them
and mercy. Which doctrine he confirms, 1. from the constant practice of the
Apostles in their first receiving men into the society of the Church. For,
says he, in one of the Apostles ordinary Sermons we see there was so much
matter delivered as was sufficient to convert men to the Faith, and make them
capable of Baptism, and (yet) these Sermons treated only of the first
principles of the Doctrine of Christ in these first principles, therefore must
the foundation be contained, and that common unity of Faith, Ibid. p. 20.
which is required in all the members of the Church. Again p. 16. As there is a
common Salvation, so is there a common Faith which is alike precious in the
highest Apostle, and the meanest believer, for we may not think that Heaven was
prepared for deep Clerks only, and therefore besides that larger measure of
knowledge whereof all are not capable, there must be a rule of Faith common to
small and great, which as it must consist but of few propositions, for simple
men cannot bear away many, so is it also requisite that these Articles should
be of so much weight and moment, that they may be sufficient to make a man wise
unto salvation. If then Salvation by believing these common principles may be
had, and to Salvation none can come who is not first a member of the Catholic
Church of Christ, it follows that the unity of Faith generally requisite for
the incorporating of Christians into that blessed Society, P. 17.
is not to be extended beyond these common principles. Which may farther be
made manifest unto us by the continual practice of the Catholic Church herself
in the matriculation of her Children, and first admittance of them into her
Communion. For when she prepared her Catechumeni for Baptism, and by that door
received them into the cougregation of Christ's Flock, we may not think her
judgment to have been so weak as to omit any thing herein that was essentially
necessary for the making of one a member of the Church. Now the profession
which she required of all that were to receive baptisin was, for the Agenda or
practical part, an abrenuntiation of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, with
all their sinful lusts, and works, and for the things to be believed, an
acknowledgment of of the Articles of the Creed, which being performed solemnly,
she then baptized them in this faith, intimating thereby sufficiently that this
was that one faith commended to her by the Apostles, Ibid. p. 17.
as the other that one Baptisin which was appointed to be the Sacrament of it.
And that the creed of the Apostles as it is explained in the latter Creeds of
the Catholic Church, was esteemed by the general suffrage of the Greek and
Latin Fathers, and the whole Ancient Church, See P tters answer to Charity
Mistaken, 7. from p. 216. to 233. Mr. Chill. c. 4. 83, 8^. Bishop Tayor, diss
part. 2. l. 1. 4.
a sufficient Summary, or Catalogue of fundamentals, that even by the Trent
Council, the Trent Catechism, and the best learned Romanists, it is
acknowledged so to be, is very largely and convincingly demonstrated by many
eminent Writers of our Church.

2. They add that those prevailing doctrin^s which thwarted the great
fundamentals of our faith, and made salvation more difficult, were indeed
docrines strongly then prevailing in, but not received and owned as Articles of
Faith by all themembers of the Church of Rome. Answ. to Charity Mistaken. 3. p.
64, 65.
In the latter Ages before the Reformation, says Dr. Potter, though the Court
of Rome by cunning and violence had subdued many noble parts of Christendom
under her yoke, yet the servitude of that Church and her misery was somewhat
more supportable, because these base and pernicious adjections were not yet the
public decisions or tenets of any Church, but only the private conceits of the
domineering Faction. Of the Church, l. 3. chap. 8. p. 85.
We most firmly believe, says Dr. Field, all the Churches of the world wherein
our Fathers lived and dyed to have been the true Churches of God in which
undoutedly Salvation was to be found, and that they which taught, embraced and
believed those damnable errors which the Romanists now defend against us, were
a faction only in the Church, as were they that denied the Resurrection, urged
Circumcision, and despised the Apostles of Christ, in the Churches of Corinth
and Galatia. So Bishop Brambal frequently, Dr. Potter. 3. p. 76.
Others do charge these things not on the Church but Court of Rome, betwixt
which two there might be some considerable distinction then, though now there
is no difference betwixt them in any of those Doctrines which concern the
objects of their worship.

3. Dr. Field Append. part. 3. p. 881.
They add that the Roman Church that then was, though it had in it all the
abuses and superftitious observations it now has, yet it had also others who
desired the removal of all those abuses and superstitious observations which we
have removed; the Roman Church which then was, was the whole number of
Christians subject to Papal Tyranny, whereof a great part desired nothing more
than to shake off that yoke, which, as soon as he began to oppose himself, they
presently did; but the Roman Church that now is, is the multitude of such only
as do magnify, admire, and adore the plenitude of Papal power, or at least are
contented to be under the yoke of it still. The gross corruption of the service
of the Church was then complained of by all good men, Idem. Append. to his
third Book of the Church. p. 190.
and amongst other Articles of Reformation they desired that the Breviaries and
Missals might be purged. Now in respect of those persons who were the
prevailing faction of the Church, maintaining these corrupt Doctrines as
Articles of Christian Faith, and upholding these superstitious abuses and
pertinaciously persisting in their errors, the Roman Church, says Dr. Field,
was vere Ecclesia truly a Church, Append. 3. part p. 882.
that is, a multitude of men professing Christ, and Baptized, but not vera
Ecclesia a true Church, that is a multitude of men holding a saving profession
of the truth in Christ. But in respect of those who groaned under the yoke, who
secretly disliked and disowned her corrupt Doctrines, and earnestly desired and
wished the Reformation of her superstitious abuses, and of those also who
submitted to them only for want of better information in those obscure times,
the Roman Church was vera Ecelesia a true Church, that is a multitude of men
holding a saving profession of the truth in Christ. So the Church of the Jews
at the coming of Christ had in it the Scribes, Pharisees, and Saduces, as well
as Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon, and Anna; in respect of the former it was truly
a Church, but not a true Church; in respect of the latter it was a true Church.

Ob. But why then did not these persons, if they were of any considerable
number, more publicly oppose what they so much disliked?

Answ. If you look into Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent, you will
find them censuring most of their determinations, you will find there the
German Bishops determining against the adoration of Images in a Provincial
Council, and delcaring that the Saints departed are to be honored but with the
worship of society and love, P. 278, 279.
as also gadly men may be honored in this Life. Which Explications, says
Father Paul, being well considered do show how much the opinions of the
Catholic Prelates of Germany do differ fromt hose of the Court of Rome,
youwill there also find sthem quarrelling with that saying of the Synod that
Divine worship was due to the Sacrament, as improper, and saying it was well
corrected in the sixth Canon which said, that the Son of God was to be worshipped
in the Sacrament. 2. There was no reason to expect more open opposition of
these Doctrines and abuses, there being no probability of success against the
Court of Rome which was then very powerful, and had not only worsted mighty
Princes, but used extreme severity against such dissenters, destroying them
without all mercy; V. Mr. Dodwel Answer to Qu. 2. p. 59, 67.
which had all the Bishops engaged to them by their oaths, and worldly
interests, which lastly declared all things Heresy in which men differed from
them, and prosecuted them, upon that account, with the extremest infamy and
highest punishments: here then we have a true Western Church, not Idolatrous,
before the Reformation, in which Salvation might be had.

But says R.H. if the Church of Rome be guilty of that Idolatry with which the
Writers of the Church of England charge her, Discourse p. 76, 77.
she must be guilty of Heathenish Idolatry, for according to Dr. Stillingfleet
and others, her Idolatry is the same with that of Heathens, and surely that
excludes from Salvation, and must be inconsistent with a true Church.

Idolatry of the Church of Rome is the same with that of Heathens, we do not
mean that it is so either in reference to the object, viz. those evil spirits
which the Heathens worshipped, or in respect of the rites with which they
worshipped their Deacons, viz. human sacrifices, and unclean performances, but
only in this respect that both of them do worship the creature for the Creator;
or give that worship to the creature which belongs to God alone. 2. Although
the Papists be in some single actions guilty of Idolatry, yet do they in the
general service of their lives give God the honor due to him; they pray to God,
trust in him, they praise and love him, and perform to him all the positive
duties of the first Table, though they do not perform them all to him alone,
whereas the Heathens paid their whole worship to their Demons, and gave no
worship to the God of Israel, they were without God in the world, Ephesians. ii. 12.
says B. Paul, and God was without service from them, Romans i. 21.
and even they that knew God yet did not glorify him as God. Now that Idolatry
which robs God of his whole service, performing it entirely to evil spirits, or
in an undue manner, may very well be damnable, and inconsistent with the being
of a Church; whilst that which is consistent with the performance of all those
positive duties which we ow to God, and does not wholly rob him of any part of
our Religious worship, may not deserve so hard a censure. This is apparent 1.
From the instance of St. Leo, Sermon 7. in Nativ. Dom.
who speaks of some foolish persons who from some eminent places did adore the
rising Sun, a thing which some Christians think they do so Religiously, that
before they enter into the Church of St. Peter the Apostle, Quibus ad suggestum
area superioris ascenditar.
which is dedicated to the one true and living God, having got up the Stairs
which lead to the ascent of the High Altar, turning their bodies they bend them
to the rising Sun, bowing their necks in honor of that splendid Orb, which we
are troubled to see done, partly out of ignorance, and partly from a Paganish
spirit. For though perhaps some worship rather the Creator of this bright
light, than the light it self which is a creature, yet ought they to abstain
from the appearance of this service, which when one who has left the worship
of the Gods, shall find among us, will he not retain that part of his old
opinion as probable, which he sees common to Christians, and to Heathens? Let
therefore that perversiness which is to be condemned, be rejected from the
practice of the faithful. Nor let the honor which is due to God alone be
mingled with their rites who serve the creature, for the Holy Scripture says,
thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Matthew. iv.
10. Job xxxi. 26, 28.
And blessed Job, If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in
brightness and my heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my
hand, this is a very great iniquity, and a denial of the most high God: Where
1. Observe that he concludes this practice to be plain Idolatry, because, as he
insinuates, it is the giving of that worship to the light, which is a creature,
which is due only to the Creator of that light, It is, says he, the honor
which is due to God alone, the honor which is forbidden by Scripture which
says, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, etc. and which good Job refused to
do, because it was a virtual denial of the God above. 2. Observe that it was
Heathenish Idolatry, it was Idolary proceeding, says St. Leo, from a Pagan
spirit, common to Christians with the Heathens, it was the old opinion of those
who had left the Heathen Worship. And 3. Notwithstanding this, it was performed
by some Christians from an apprehension that they were Religious in so doing,
they therefore had no intention either to deny, or dishonor God by this service
paid unto the Sun, and therefre St. Leo calls them Christians, and beloved
Christians; he says, they did it partly out of ignorance, and sins of
ignorance we know, if they be generally repented of, exclude not from
Salvation. 2. The Host not Consecrated is a mere creature, the worship
therefore of the Host not Consecrated with Latria, must be Idolatry, because it
is the giving of that worship to a creature which belongs alone to the Creator.
And yet it may, and often does happen by the confession of the Multae sunt causae
propter quas potest accidere ut Christus non sit praesens: ut si sacerdos non
sit Batizatus, vel non sit rite ordinatus, quod pendet ex multis aliis causis
quibus fere in infinitum progredi possumus. Suarez. in 3. Th. qu. 79. Art. 8.
disp. 65. 2.
Romanists through many secret defects, which do not fall under the Cognizance
of him that worships, that the Host presented to the adoration of the people is
not Consecrated; it therefore may, and often does happen, that they who
absolutely worship with Latria the supposed Host, are guilty of material
Idolatry; and yet I hope R.H. would not condemn all those to everlasting
misery, who do incur this guilt in his own Church; here therefore is a second
instance of Idolatry which in their own opinion is not damnable, nor does
exclude a person from being a true member of the Church: 3. It is ingenuously
confessed by many Romanists, that many of the ruder sort among them are guilty
of Idolatry (1.) in worshipping of Images: For, says De vanit. Scient. Cap. de
Imag. where he also asks, Cur auferimus gloriam Deo, tribuentes eam picturis ac
statuis, ac si possent trahere in contemplationem Dei.
Cornelius Agrippa, it is not to be spoken how great superstition, I might say
Idolatry, is fostered among rude people by Image Worship; while the Priests
connive at these things, and make no small gain by it. Durand. Rat. l. 1. c. 3.
number. 4.
Durandus Mimatensis says, that weak and simple people by indiscreet, and too
much using of Images may be drawn to Idolatry. Biel. Canon. Miss. lect. 49.
lit. v. p. 114. B. Consult. Cap. de Imag. p. 206.
And Gabriel Biel add that some people are so foolish as that they think some
Deity, or Sanctity to be in Images. Cassander says, it is more manifest than
that it can be denied, that the worship of Images and Idols has too much
prevailed, and the superstitious humor of people has been so cockered that
nothing has been omitted among us either of the highest adoration, or vanity
of Painims, in worshipping and adoring Images. L. 6. De invent Rerum c. 13. p.
423.
Polydore Virgil complains that the people are grown to such madness that this
Piety (of Image Worship) differs little from impiety. For there are many rude
and stupid persons who adore Images of wood, stone, marble, and brass, or
painted windows, not as signs, but as though they had sense, and they repose
more trust in them than in Christ, or the Saints to whom they are dedicated.
Moreover they themselves confess that where the worship of the Image of a
Divine person is not transitive, but terminative, that is, where it stays in
the Image, and passes not to the exemplar; their Divine worship is
terminatively given to the Image, that is unto a creature. Now seeing it is
certain that the common people in worshipping the Images of Christ, and of the
Blessed Trinity, do often not mind God, when they do custormarily pay an act of
adoration to these Images, much less direct that act by an intention of their
minds unto the Prototype, their address being then actually to the Image, and
the mind not transferring it so much as by one thought toward the Prototype,
it will necessarily terminate in the Image, if any where, and so be certainly
Idolatry. A second instance of this nature is in the worship of the Saints
departed: For in this Ludovicus Vives does confess that many Christians often
sin venerating Saints of both Sexs no otherwise than they serve God himself
N.B. neither do I see, Annot. in Aug. de C.D. l. 8. c. 27.
says he, in many of them what difference there is between their opinion
concerning the Saints, Christiani vetuli and seniculi qui non minus fidunt aut
tribuunt divis quam Deo. utinam ment^ar and nulli sint hujusmodi. Annot. in 2 Timothy c. 3. P. 118. G.
and that which the Pagans held of their Gods: Claudius Especaeus complains
that in his time there were among them old and decrepid Christians who trusted,
and attributed no less to Saints, than unto God himself, concluding with this
honest wish, would to God I lied, and that there were no persons of this kind.
Now if R.H. will not condemn all these unto the Pit of Hell, he must acknowledge
that some Idolatry may be consistent with Salvation, although it be the same in
kind with that of Heathens.

FINIS.

