A SMALL PRESENT To a Roman CATHOLIC, IN Opposition to his present Hearsay
Tradition, as not agreeable to the Rule of Faith.

By one that desires to walk with meekness toward them of a contrary way, if
God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth,
and that they may awake out of the snare of the Devil; as others awaking have
wondered at their own vanity and misery, dreaming so long without any sound
reason.

By Henry Whistler, Bac. Theol.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Thomas Paybody dwelling in Queens Head Court, in
Pater Noster Row, 1657.

A small PRESENT To A Roman Catholic.
In opposition to his present Hearsay Tradition, as not agreeable to the rule
of Faith.
A Roman Catholic Neighbor, lately visiting me with usual respect, I, after
my usual manner of hearty affection, would have persuaded him to Reformation,
for the good of his soul.

He replied, If his soul and others like, were unsafe, they were most of any
men to be pitied, having so many things persuading to rest under the
Roman-Church Judgment for certainty. Before, I had long since given out some
Papers to prove the Roman-Church contradictory to herself in all her ways. So
the beam being broken, it would not be safe or just to weigh in her balances.

He desired of me something again in writing, for their learned to read;
whereof he had heard lately diverse say, that they wanted work, and for
reviving occasion, he brought Rushworths Dialogue which waveth my former
allegations, in effect thereby granted; and endeavors an other way of
certainty for his Disciple in dispute against Protestancy, not to trust either
Holy Scripture, or other Books alleged for the proof of the Roman Religion
through all ages, though commending such students as for their great and
profitable pains, but not appliable to the capacities of the Vulgar, who might
therein be entangled if they meet with a cunning Adversary: but rather securely
to rest in prepossession of the Roman Church, of the present Age; believing his
Christian Fathers in report from Christian Forefathers, of what they affirmed
age after age, to have learned as by Tradition universal from Christ and his
Apostles: without any known opponent, it seeming impossible that at any time
all Fathers should together deceive their children; or that all Children should
in all Countries be suddenly deceived without any known cause, or any known
time of such universal change: a mere Dream.

Before you require us to show such time of change, prove any such time, of
universal accord in the present points of the Roman Faith and practice. The
present points controverted, are not contained in the ancient Creeds, and
therefore not then believed to be necessary. The points of ancient Creeds are
sufficiently grounded in holy Scriptures: the Scriptures so sure, that the
Romans were delivered thereunto ( Romans 6.17.) to obey, not to overcome the form
of Doctrine to which they were delivered, as since they deny, what the
Canonical Epistle to the Romans affirms, (concupiscence to be sin) and
affirm what is therein denied (Justification by Works.) The Roman Church
opposed the whole Epistle to the Hebrews as not Canonical, witness Jerome and
Augustine, who nevertheless professed that they believed it to be Canonical;
A clear proof that they did not believe the Roman Tradition to bear the
rule. Tradition for the power of a general Council, alleged in public by
the general Council at Basil against Tradition, alleged in public for the
Popes power to be supreme. How excuseable from contradiction.

Hear now the Roman Catholique-Disciple his Interloquie.

I am told that some of our Doctors do maintain, that in the person of the
Pope, resides the Rule of faith by a singular gift and privilege bestowed on
St. Peter and his successors. And this so rigorously, that no General Council
(no not though the Popes Legates be present and confirm it) is of force to
oblige as of faith, till the personal confirmation of his Holiness be
obtained. Others they say, esteem the Council above the Pope, and so hold his
approbation unnecessary; and that the rule of faith rests in the Council.
Others, to make all safe, join both in one, and neither admit the Council
without the Pope; nor the Pope without the Council, to breed any Obligation of
Faith. And farther, I hear that, among these Divines (of what opinion soever
they be; touching the subject in which this Rule or highest Authority resides)
some think no new Doctrine can he breached or proposed as certain, and as an
Article of faith by what authority soever; unless it were esteemed certain
before, and always believed as such: yet they tell me, there are many who
maintain, that this highest Authority of the Church (where ever it is) may
define points of Doctrine not certainly known hitherto, nor ever expressly
believed before. And how all these opinions can be reconciled among themselves,
or stand with this, that Tradition is our Rule of Faith, I confess I know not;
says the Cosen in that Dialogue, to which the personate Uncle answers.

For the first part of your Objection, I see no great matter in the variety of
opinions among our learned: for they only seek out the Decider of points of
Doctrine (that is) by whose mouth we are to know (on occasions of dispute)
which be our Articles of faith, whether by the Popes, or Councels, or both;
which is not much material to our purpose, whatever the truth be. Supposing we
acknowledge no Articles of Faith, but such as have deseended to us by Tradition
from Christ and his Apostles.

Among Protestants, are not allowed such ungrounded suppositions (as petitio
principii) begging the thing in question, unreasonable to be granted; in things
of dispute where you acknowledge no certain Decider, whereby to know the rule
of your supposed sureness: the name of Tradition being equivocall, as drawn to
several senses in their threefold vehement opinions, so distinct about the rule
with mutual denunciation of curses one against another in public, as about
the Roman Catholic proposal of faith, therefore uncertain in it self, and
uncertain toward others: Particular men being unable to search all Books,
whether counterfeit, or not, in so many languages, or otherways to discern
what has succeeded in a traditionary way of all ages in their own or other
Countries.

The second part of your Objection seems of greater force (said the Uncle to
his To. to. Cosen) because some of the learned acknowledge an authority in the
(Roman) Church, not only to determine either speculative or practical points
of Doctrine, new or old; so as the whole Church is obliged to accept, or not
oppose its definition: but also that it can so decree even a speculative point
of Doctrine hitherto always held uncertain, and never acknowledged as
revealed, never esteemed an Article of Faith; that hereafter the whole Church
shall be obliged to believe it is a revealed and necessary point of Christian
Faith, which you must know is but an Opinion: nor do the Authors of it oblige
any to believe it as certain; nor condemn those who neither do, nor ever will
admit such Position: that there is now no Revelations for new points of
Doctrine; that Christ Jesus was our only Lawmakers in this kind, having
delivered to his Apostles, and they to their Churches, all that was necessary
to be known of this degree, and therefore

Stay Sir, out of such premises of such Roman Catholic Teachers (as are
agreeable to Protestants advisement) conclude not over hastily to make your
Disciple unsafe in not being troubled at your differences; since contrary to
your mind, those high Competitors for Authority, do decree new points of
Doctrine, and would oblige all others under pain of eternal damnation.

[Oblige and not oblige] How your speech crosses it self? and yet (as an
Aeger cutteth and smootheth) all smoothly submitted to Tradition: a name of
strong delusion, enchanting to receive, as if that had come continually fluent
from Christ, which is against Christ, and against the definition of general
Councils (as Image Worship against the commandment of God, and against the
determination of two several Councils, one at Franck ford abbetting that other
at Constantinople) and that at Constance forbidding to communicate lay people
under both kinds, notwithstanding the institution of Christ, and the practice
of the primitive Church, communicating the people under both; both Christ and
his Apostles calling the Cup, the Covenant in Christ's blood; which before the
face of Christ, barreth the plea of Roman Tradition therein: and that
(constantian non obstante) pleads but custom, and that abusively, being not
in memorial a part ante, before the beginning, whereof the Primitive practice
and institution are acknowledged on the contrary for us.

In full communion; to say no more of other new points in the profession upon
Oath, which you acknowledge to make use of at admission of others to your
Church, since P. Pius 4. Alas, unwarie souls, engulphed thereby to profess
the fatal insinuating guiles, under pretense of Traditions, not knowing what,
nor how many, nor how safely to discern among so many false, unrighteous and
evil; since evil spirits and false Teachers arose in the Apostles time, and
multiplying afterward, rendered Hearsay a most unsafe guide, especially since
that Council of Trent (through final devolution of all to Pope Pius the 4.
against the Papal confirmations of so many former Council's Acts) has
frustrated the discretive Rules, either by Pope or Council, or both Pope and
Council together, evaporating in your fume as but Opinions; although most
elaborate in so many named general Councils, the latter the worse
representative of your high minded Roman Church, all easy to be convinced of
contradiction, a bar against all hope of any certification by that your
imaginary Traditioning way, without any rule or form of certainty whereby to
discern pretenses of traditionall matters, either practical, or especially
speculative, experience enough in 2400 years from the beginning, when a man
living 800 or 900 years, Doctrines might more easily descend by Tradition,
from Grandfathers to Grandchildren; yet if then by the subtle enemy, Tradition
was poisoned, and cursedly did poison with Babylonion bitterness, in ambition
of an universal selfe-wise Monarchy, worshipping Images of the dead, and
worshipping the dead false gods; abominable Idolatry, superstition, cruel
persecution against the then worshippers of the only true God.

Traditionary wisdom so putrefying, mankind needed to have the Law written;
and at need God writ it with his own finger in Tables of Stone, and bid Moses
write in a Book, against which the evil spirit of enmity practiced by force
and fraud.

First by force of lesser Potentates; after that, by the four mighty Beasts
descried in Daniels vision Prophetically; the Babylonion, Persian, Grecian,
Roman, as in that Imperial outrageous public Edict to burn the Bible; the
Christians patience overcomming the Roman persecutors: thenceforth the subtlest
infernal enmity projected by fraud in Lamb-like profession, hypocritically to
defeat the power of Christian Religion, by subduing the written Word of God to
Tradition again, in two grand perilous impostures.

One, as if Tradition were more certain to men.

An other, as if Tradition were more perfect; so piecing out salvifical
Doctrine, partly by unwritten Tradition, and partly by depressing what is
written as it were uncertain, and having no certainty toward us, but in
dependence upon Tradition unwritten.

A fraud most mischievous, most wisely prevented by the providence of God, the
Holy Ghost, in Booking the New Testament, with those two glorious praises of
Certainty, and of Integrity.

More certainty by writing, then by preaching the Gospel, as affirmed in the
first verses of St. Lukes Gospel; admirable caution of Gods holy Spirit
enditing; so that the Papists own authorized Testament unfasteneth it not, as
an impertinent movable, but as the verses prime in that first chapter of St.
Luke.

Having heard and learned the Gospel truths from those that were eyewitnesses
and ministers of the word from the beginning, the very prime advantantage of
Tradition, (...) Tradiderunt traditioned, or by tradition delivered the same
from those first Teachers; yet it seemed good to me to write those things for
certainty: the Rhemists translate it Verity: that is not enough, it was Verity
before in the first Teachers, but in writing is more, assured certainty: yea
more yet, as beyond all fallacy, without all fallacious or fallible
incertainty; free, from (...) tutum safe to write, Phil. 3.1. For me to write
safe for you, ((...), the word here) security; secure verity taught before, yet
farther for security to be written, it is good to read it written for assuring,
securing, certifying the things wherein thou art instructed, (...) catechized
even in the Principles of saving Faith, although instructed, catechized by the
first Teachers, in the first spring of Tradition; yet it is safe, secure, to be
further secured of those things, most excellent Theophilus, by interpretation,
a lover of God.

The ancient Epiphanius Haeres. 51. found it not certain to be the name of any
particular man, but says, it might be spoken to every true lover of God, and
the Papists Annotations acknowledge it; as the Bereans were esteemed more noble
than others for searching the Scriptures, whether those things were so as they
heard preached. If the case were so at first when tradition was more easy;
much more now (after so long time has multiplied errors, and the spirit of
envy sowed tares, and numberless false Prophets have wrought their nets of
subtle fallacies) ought the lovers, if their own souls be lovers of Gods
written Word, to secure themselves, that as our Savior argued the Jews to have
been deceived by Tradition from their forefathers: so the Gentiles might not
unwarily be caught by pretended Tradition from the Apostles; as the Apostles of
us Gentiles, forewarned.

Here in Rushworths Dialogue, the 3d Sect. 9. the Nephew interposeth in season,
saying, P. 197. I have another great difficulty, that our Catechists and
Preachers, when they teach us Christian Doctrine, tell us, Thus you are to
believe, This you are to practice, without expressing the differences betwixt
the points of Doctrine; whereof some perhaps are but only the Answers of
learned men, some definitions of the Church, and some matters of Traditions.

The like I believe of former Ages; Christian Doctrine descending to us so in a
heap or confusion, that it is hard to distinguish what is of Tradition, what the
general consent of the Church, and what only Opinions of the learned; why then
may not some Position of this last rank, pass for a Tradition by the adoption
of some ages, in which it will be forgotten that ever it had its beginning from
the wit and industry of private Doctors? And Sect. 10 I fear it would break
the rule and certainty of Tradition: whereon relies the whole frame and
building of our Faith; according to your discourse, if truth not delivered by
Tradition, may pass for so delivered; what security can we have, that a
falsity may not pass in the same manner, and so bring in error among us.

A doubt wisely framed in the name of a Learner but not well answered by
Rushworth the Dialogist in the person of the Teacher, as appears in these his
words, P. 199. However the Vulgar people seldom observe any difference what is
Tradition, and what but of common Opinion. ( How does that seldom not
overthrow Tradition, so disabled from being the Rule or motive of their Faith?)
Nevertheless those know how to distinguish Doctrins of such different natures,
whom we call Divines, if truly such as the name requires. Who can be truly such
as the name requires?

Truly the name appertains to Gods attributes, and works; as divine wisdom,
divine power, divine goodness, divine sanctification, and divine indignation
for condemnation, of such as take his divine name in vain.

Therefore as learned Bellarmine in his Retractations, blamed his former Books
wheresoever he had given the names of Divus or Diva, to Saints of the Roman
Calender, because Divas and Diva were the Titles which Hethenisme gave to false
gods and goddesses: hearty zeal, wishes all would abstain from naming men
Divines.

But to take your meaning, out of your following words. Learned men know; of
Doctrine and Discipline, some parts are such as cannot be learned but by
immediate revelation; others such as no sensible person can doubt of, if he
believe the former: other points there may be, which need art and study to
deduce and draw them out of the two former -- every one (conversant in Logic,
and in judging the qualities of such propositions as belong to science) is
capable of understanding these Theological conclusions.

Beware of Delusions in false Conclusions, Seductions in pretense of
Deductions, at that very time in that manner. Under the last Head-ship of Rome,
grievous motions were to come, and so they came; Event the sure interpreter of
truth, against Novelties crept in, (subtle insinuations of that mystery of
iniquity foretold) the vulgar souls are enslaved to trust your Deductions by
man's discourse which is fallible and easily mistaken, and uncertain in various
Opinions; dependant on immediate revelations so long since, uncertain to this
Age, but by the Rule of Gods Word written on purpose to be Canonical, that is
regular to regulate Faith and practice, with assistance of the Holy Ghost the
Teacher, which Christ promised to teach his Disciples all things, ( John Chap.
14.) by virtue of his Prayer for the Believers of his Word, as well as for the
Teachers from age to age ( John Chap. 17.) Believers and Teachers are
co-ordained; Peter and Cornelius, as Ananias and Paul, prepared one for another
in heavedly vision, to prepare Teachers and Believers in ordinary dispensation,
to seek of God the fruits of his blessing to the glory of his Word, Heb. Chap.
4. The word of God is quick and sharper then any two edged sword, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart ((...)) judicative. God the
judge of all, could and would speak plain enough for judging all, if they would
regard him speaking plainly, Ioh. ch, 12 He that receives not my words, has
one that judges him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at
the last day, Rev. chap. 20. The dead were judged out of those things which
were written in the Books according to their works.

Prophecy speaks of things future in the praeterit form.

1. Because as sure as if they were already done. 2. Because ordained from
before. 3. Because in doing always as they shall be judged at the end; what
judges the end, judges all the means thereunto.
The end and the means, as under the same description.

1. By the Book of Divine Providence, describing what men were abled to do. 2.
The Book of divine Law, and Gospel, describing what men ought to believe and
to do. 3. The Book of divine Remembance, describes what men believe and do. 4.
The Book of Life, what they shall receive for believing and doing or not.
In this heavenly concatenation of divine Acts, shall men abusively calling
themselves Divines, advance the Roman to be more regularly judicious then God?
and the Roman word of Tradition, more indicatively regular than the word of God
our Judge; avaunt blasphemy, which instead of man's Ministry, prideth man's
Magisterality, to steal the glory from God, and his written Word, and his
almighty Spirit, which helps Teachers to judge as Teachers, and learners to
judge as learners; the ear judging words as the mouth tastes meats, and the
eye sees fire by its own light, and by its own efficacy; fire warmeth, and a
fiery sword burns and cutteth the hand that dasheth against it.

The written Word of God is all this, Manna the bread of heaven, light in the
face of Jesus Christ the Sun of Righteousness; fire of zeal among the
Cherubins, and their flaming sword; as bread feeding to life eternal, as light
shining in faithull men's hearts, as fire inkindling Charity; but as the
firy-flaming sword keeping out from Paradise, the proud scornfully refusing to
depend on God his written Word of grace for certainty; The first praise.

The second praise (of the new Testament written) is Integrity witnessed by
Luke the Evangelist in these large expressions.

1. Of the many which took it in hand to write, not excluding any that were
then known of credit. 2. The creditable witnesses, which saw, or heard, and
preached the word of the Gospel. 3. The matters from the beginning
indefinitely, without exception, all things fulfilled (as foretold) the things
wherein thou have been Catechized; things needful toward salvation by Christ
our Savior. 4. The manner, having diligently attained knowledge, (...), having
had perfect understanding of things from the very first. 5. The Author, the
Holy Ghost, it seemed good to write (...), the same word which is in the Acts
of the Apostles, Chap. 15.28. It seemed to the holy Ghost, and 2 Timothy 3.16. All
Scripture inspired of God; so this writing of the Rule was by divine
inspiration of the Holy Ghost. 6. The intent to make the Gospel Truth, by
writing, more certainly known than by mere narration, or unwritten Tradition.
Thus both the praises of Christ his Gospel by writing, the praise of more
certainty, with praise of integrity meet together in the Evangelicall intention
of Luke, and of St. John also, chap. 20. These are written that you might
believe, and that believing ye might have life; and Chap. 22. of the
Revelation, If any man shall add, God shall add to him the plagues that are
written in this Book: and if any man shall take away from the words of the Book
of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the Book of life. I Jesus
have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the Churches, the
seven Churches of Asia by name.

Christ Jesus not vouchsafing to name the Church of Rome, a sign of no such
love unto her, nor trust in her. The Angel of Christ his face or presence,
setting his right foot upon the Sea; Wherefore his right foot? Peter having not
walked with a right foot according to the truth of the Gospel, ( Gal. chap.
2.); and called Satan by Christ, ( Mat. 16.); and his pretended successor the
Pope ( Herod-like) suffering himself to be called God, to be worshipped and
married to the Church-spouse of Christ; high time in spirit of jealousy, for
the true trusty (messenger) Angelique presentative of Christ his glory, to
stand with strength of his right foot.

Wherefore upon the Sea?

1. The Sea is mystically significative of the general Council by decree,
whereof that Harlot-like Church married to an other, set her seat of pretended
full authority to sit over Nations as Rivers, meeting in general Council
against the decrees of so many former general Councils: by which contradiction
her general Councils (as the Red-sea-waters on both sides) afforded betwixt
them safe passage again, for the people of God in spirit to depart from
Egyptian bondage again, singing to the praise of God the song of Moses (and the
Lamb) again, Rev. chapter 15.

2 The Sea of the general Council, by whose decree that Harlotry-Church on her
superconciliar seat of Authority, forbids Christian people from communion of
the Cup at wedding supper of the Lamb: Christ ordaining the Cup to be the new
Covenant in his blood; in forbidding whereof, as if the peoples union with
Christ were by putting water to the Wine. Her Trent Council points at the
people as waters in the the 17. Chapter of the Rev. so discovering her to be
the Harlot there, over the people as waters.

3. And in the same Sea over Tongues, advancing her Latin above all others;
rank Babylonian policy for advancing her universal Monarchy: Babylon in
mystery commandresse over Hebrew and Greek, wherein was written the word of
God almighty.

1. By whose just judgment the Roman Church, stricken in brain; published two
contradictorious editions of the Bible in Latin, each to be received under
denunciation of the greatest curse: the first putting that out as not the word
of God, which the latter put in as the word of God; and the latter putting out
as not the word of God, which the former put in as the word of God: So the
Papists, whether they receive or receive not the Latin edition, are cursed by
the Roman Church; and the Roman Church, and they while subject to the Roman
Church, are under the curse of Christ, for adding and detracting from the
written Book of Christ, both falsely published in the name of Christ, both by
pretense of Trent Councill-authority; which not only thus dejecteth the Book
of Christ under the Roman word, as of more certainty for her adherents, but
imposes unwritten Traditions to be received with equal reverence.

For prevention whereof, Christ by his Angelical presence of his glory, bid,
Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the things
which shall be hereafter, Rev. Chap. 1. For the fall of Babylon, write Chap.
14. after the voice from heaven Come out of her my people. For holy communion
of Jews and Gentiles, write chap. 19. For Reformation of all, write, Until he
say, It is done, chap. 21. A voice from the Throne said, I make all things new;
write, For these words are true, importing Caution to beware of the unwritten
as untrue. In the midst of all that mighty Angel of the Covenant, with a
Rainbow about his head, swear, the mystery of God shall be finished, as he has
declared by his servants the Prophets: Are not their Prophecies holy
Scriptures? and did he not for that intent hold the Book open in his hand when
he swear? and set his foot in despite on the Sea, after which no more Sea, the
last Sea; and the Council of Trent boasted to be the last, after which no more
should need, no more intended by them, to hinder (the freedom of just and full
Reformation) by that oath of that P. Pius, for the Trent-frauds and unwritten
Traditions: how weak against Christ's oath, out of whose mouth the two edged
sword? How rashly does their last Annotation on the New Testament, pray Christ
to judge betwixt them and Protestants? has he not thus judged already? Christ
have mercy upon us all, that by his Grace we may repent, and be fully reformed,
to his Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

