DIRECTIONS FOR THE PREVENTION and CURE of the PLAGUE.

Fitted for the Poorer sort.

Wisdom 17. 12.For FEAR is nothing else but a Betraying of those Succors which
Reason offers. LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond, 1665.

Directions for the Prevention and Cure of the PLAGUE.
Fitted for the Poorer sort.
I. DIET.
LET every man's Diet be moderate, and of such Nourishments as are least subject
to putrefie and corrupt. A small Breakfast, a Dinner of solid and wholesome
meats, and a light Supper. Those who cannot go to the price of Flesh, may make
use of Fleshbroths, (which may be had at every Cooks) also of Bread and Butter,
old Cheese, Toste and Drink, Toste and Butter, and the like, drinking sometimes
in the day a draught or two of Purl^, or strong Beer or Ale, especially in the
morning.

Let them abstain from the boiled herbs of Colliflowers, Cabbage, Coleworts,
Spinach, and Beets; also from all wallowish and lushy fruits, as sweet Plums,
sweet Apples, Pears, Peaches, Mallacotoons, Cucumbers, Pompions, Mellons, ripe
Gooseberries, ripe Grapes, Apricocks unless eaten with the kernels; also from
raw herbs, as Reddish, Spinach, etc. But all fruits baked or thoroughly
corrected by the fire, are better than raw.

For Sallads, those that desire them may use Sampier boiled and pickled, and
served with Vinegar; and so Capers, Ashen-keys, Broom-buds, Elder-flowers,
Clove-gilliflowers. etc. Or for raw Sallads, Lettuce, Purslane, Woodsorrel,
common Sorrel, Tarragon, white Endive, Borage and Bugloss-flowers, both wild
and garden, served with a little Mustard (for them that can bear it) and
Vinegar and Oil, or at least with Vinegar; and all moderately used.

It is thought very expedient that all Brewers, both about the City and
Suburbs, do fume their empty Casks yery well with Brimstone before they fill
them; and withal add unto each Barrel about an handful of Bay Salt burnt in a
Crusible or Earthen pot unglazed till it leave crackling, together with a
handful of Bran, and both put into the same Barrel: For it may be a great means
to stop and cease the Plague, because it will reach even to the poorest sort,
who are otherwise (by means of their poverty) like to be destitute of any other
Preservatives.

II. PRESERVATIVES.
TAke every morning and evening one good spoonful of one of these Liquors
following, drinking immediately after it a draught of Mace-ale, or Purle, or
strong Beer, if they find themselves in any imminent danger.

1. Take the best White Wind Vinegar one pint, of London-treakle four ounces,
mix them well together in a glass, bottle and keep them close stopped. Or,

2. Take Carduus benedictus seeds, and Bur-dock seeds, Ivy berries, and
Juniper berries, of each well bruised one ounce; the roots of Celandine,
Angelica, Elecampane, and Valerian, of each 6 drams, Garlic half an ounce,
Baum, Mint, and Vervine, each half an handful; let them all be cut and bruised,
and then infused in 6 pints of the best White Wind Vinegar in a bottle close
stopped for 5 or 6 days, then strain out the Vinegar, and keep it for use as
before. Or,

3. Take of this following Electuary a dram, or half a dram, according to the
age and strength of the Patient, but for a Child much less, drinking after it a
draught of Purle, or as before.

Take Conserve of Wood Sorrel 2 ounces, of flower of Brimstone finely powdered
2 drams, Diascordium half an ounce, of the temperate cordial Species 4
scruples, of syrup of Wood Sorrel as much as will make it up into a moist
Electuary.

Let the Rooms of every house, especially such as are infected, be well fumed
at least twice every day, either with about half an ounce of Brimstone grossly
powdered, and lapt up in a paper, and laid on a piece of Board or Tile, and set
on fire, and carried from Room to Room till it be burnt out. Or with a Link
lighted, and carried in like manner from Room to Room till all be well smoked,
and then put it out.

It will be advantageous in the way of Preservation to forbid the sale or
carrying out any infected Clothes, or indeed any thing from infected houses,
till such time as it shall please God the Plague totally cease.

It is the general received Opinion of Physicians, that all those who meet in
public Congregations should beforehand take some little refreshment, and if
they are so accommodated, to make use of some Antidote withal; and not by
being altogether empty to expose themselves to receive any Contagion each from
other, which may easily happen when many (as is usually found) having the
Infection in their clothes or otherwise, do press into the same place. For
long Fasting draws in the Pulse and Vital strength, weakens the Animal Spirits,
and consequently induces Fear and Melancholy, whereby Contagion easily enters
the enfeebled Body, and so spreads and continues the Plague.

Further it is convenient for the preventing the spreading of the Infection,
that about half an hour at least before the people meet there be burned in the
Churches in several places some Powder of Brimstone, or some Pitch, or Tar, or
other Perfume of like nature and efficacy against the Plague, but there is none
like Brimstone.

It will without doubt be advantageous, that plenty of Sea-coles be timely
provided, that they may be had at reasonable prises, that so the Poor may be
able to keep Cole-fires in their houses, which will be a great Preservative
against the increase of the Sickness.

Also that there be especial care had about Burials of the Dead of the Plague.
First, that none be buried in the Churches. Secondly, that they be buried very
deep in the earth. Thirdly, that no Grave that has been made since the first
appearing of this Plague be dug up, or another made very near it, lest the
venomous reeks of the body break forth at the place opened, and infect the Air.
In case there be not room enough in the Churchyard, some other ground-must be
allotted and provided without the City and Suburbs, where the Dead may be
buried distinctly, and not heaped one upon another, because when many are
buried together, their putrid ferment will easily grow to that strength, that
the Earth will hardly be sufficient to suppress the steems of it. Fourthly,
that the constant Bearers be admonished not promiscuously and needlessly to
mingle themselves with others, nor entertain discourses with heedless Boys and
Children, who may easily receive harm from them.

III. CURE.
THose Poor People that are actually infected and begin to be sick, must by all
means (as they tender the possibility of their recovery) keep themselves within
doors, and avoid rambling out into the open Air, or looking out at windows,
either of which strikes the venom inward to the Heart and Bowels; wherefore
their safest course is presently to betake themselves to their beds, where they
must lie alone, and in bed take this Medicine following, or the like.

Take London-treakle a quarter of an ounce, one ounce of White Wind Vinegar,
one ounce of the juice of Wood Sorrel or juice of Orenges, 20 grains of the
Salt of Wormwood, and one ounce and an half of Plague-water of Matthias,
described in the College last book, page 13. and if they vomit it, renew it
again as soon as the Stomach begins to be settled. About an hour after let them
drink about half a pint of White Wind or other Posset Drink, and lie in bed as
quiet as they can, and sweat as long as they can well bear it, taking now and
then a draught of the same or other Posset Drink; and about 6 hours after the
first draught, take another of the same Medicine; and so continue every 6 or 8
hours till the poison of the disease be spent. In the mean time once in 12
hours at the least let them be refreshed with Water Gruel, Mace-ale,
Oatmealcaudle, Hartshorn gelly, Chicken-broth with Mace, Marigold-flower, and
Hartshorn, with a handful of Wood Sorrel boiled together, or any such like,
which they can best get.

Children and Women with child being infected may take Gascoine powder made by
the Apothecary, 20 grains in a spoonful of White Wind Posset Drink, drinking
immediately after it a good draught of the same with two spoonfuls of the
Plague-water, or one for a Child.

It is expedient in the course of cure that Blisters be raised in several parts
of the body, provided that not above four (if large) be applied at once; only
the disease continuing or increasing, others may be successively laid on some
two or three days after the first; lest otherwise if there should be too many
laid on at once, they should procure such a difficulty and pain in making
water, as will not easily then be born. The places most proper for Blisters are
the inside of the Arms a little above or a little below the Elbow, the insides
of the Thighs a little above the Knees, the insides of the Calves of the Legs,
also a little below the Croin, and a little below, the Armpits; likewise
behind the Ears: and upon the shape of the Neck, which may be near double as
large as any of the others. The place ought to be elected by the present
Physician; so that it may best evacuate the matter from the parts to which
Nature endeavors to thrust it.

Let the Rooms whereany sick persons are lodged be diligently kept clean and
sweet, free from allmastiness and sluttishness, and where conveniently there
may let Sea-cole fires be made; and sometimes let the Rooms be fumed with
Brimstone, as before directed. Some change their Linen before the disease be
fully sweated out, which is conceived to be very dangerous; therefore we advise
they do not change till all Symptoms cease.

For the Bubo or Batch.
Those that cannot apply such Poultisses as are appointed by the College for
want of attendance, may make use of this Plaster following.

Take Empl. de amoniac. and diachyl. simpl. of each half an ounce, and of the
Plaster of Muccilag. a quarter of an ounce, mix them at the fire, and spread it
upon thin leather puncht full of holes, and apply it to the place; it will
ripen and break the Sore, and draw out the Matter.

For the Carbuncle.
Take Wheat-flowre and Soot of each an ounce, sweet Soap, and Turpentine half
an ounce, make it up with the yolks of two Eggs, the Turpentine and Eggs must
be first mingled in a Mortar with a hot Pestel, then add the rest, and apply
it warm to the place.

There are two Cardial Sudonifick Powders, proper against the Plague, the one
for Men, the other for Women, at Mr. Coniers at the Unicorn in Fleet Street,
with Directions for their use.

FINIS.

