The VVhigg's Defeat: OR, The Mystery of Iniquity laid open.
Being a pleasant New Song by way of Dialogue, between WHIGG and TORY.
The Tune is, A Fig for France.
Tory. NOw now you sneaking Whigs it is plain,
your wickedness is brought to light,
And all your Projects are in vain,
Even maugre all your Factious spite:
Although that you hate Loyalty,
we still to serve our King are bent,
And with one mind we all will strive,
your Whiggish mischief to prevent.

Whigg. Nay Tory, not so rash I pray,
against the Brethren, for you know,
There was a time you durst not say,
what in our teeth you are pleased to throw
When all the Game went on our side,
when we were styled the only Men,
And 'twas but getting up and Ride,
alas! where were you Tories then?

Tory. You did Rebel against a Prince,
more Great and Just the world never knew
To Murder and Rob Innocence,
and all in Blood three Nations brew*
This was the Cursed Good Old Cause,
to pull down Monarchy and Laws;
And now you squint upon the Fate,
and would be acting Forty-Eight.

VVhigg. 'Twas Popery we did detest,
to root that out was all our aim,
Though some Men farther went at last,
for which we did them greatly blame:
A Reformation 'twas we sought,
but prithee tell me once again,
When we on Cock-a-Hoop had got,
where were you Blustering Tories then?

Tory. We held out Loyal to the last,
nor did we flinch for any fear;
Our Lives and Fortunes we did waste,
under the Name of Cavaleer:
Until by your cursed Villainy,
the best of Kings to slaughter went,
And now we with one voice do cry,
such VVhiggsh mischief to prevent.

VVhigg. But Tory that is now forgot,
we since have proved us honest men,
Which may wipe off that fatal Blot,
which so the Good Old Cause did stain:
You know we Loyalty express,
resist the Whore of Babylon,
But O could we our wish possess,
alack for you poor Tories then.

Tory. That Crime's forgot, and are you grown
so Loyal VVhigg, as now you say?
Has not your Loyalty been shown
of late, The c^ean Contrary way?
In your Cabals don't you inveigh,
against the best of Government,
Make sower faces, and often pray,
for Forty-One's Rump-Parliament?
That you might Plunder honest Men,
Ravish and Murder without Let,
That Cobblers might be Lords again,
and Britains Glory once more set:
To crush the neck of Loyalty;
but Heaven does frustrate their intent,
Long live the King is all o^r cry,
no Forty-One Rump-Parliament.

VVhigg. Well, now I see it is plain that you,
do to the Scarlet Beast belong,
And seek the Godly to undo,
by numbering up your former wrong:
Woe's we, poor VVhiggs, I see it plain,
we strive but now against the Stream,
But if we e're get up again,
woe to each Blustering Tory then.

Tory. Whigg, England is at last grown wise,
your Villainies are open laid,
And all your vile Hypocrisies,
in their own Colors are displayed,
No Cheat for Publique-Faith Money,
can you impose, could you invent:
God bless the King is all our cry,
and hang up Whiggish Government.

Printed for P. Brooksby, near the Hospital-gate, in West-smithfield.


