A SHORT TREATISE OF The Great Worth and Best Kind OF NOBILITY.

WHEREIN, That of NATURE is highly commended, That of GRACE is justly
preferred; The one from Humane Experience, The other upon Divine Evidence.

By HENRY WHISTON, Rector of Balcomb in Sussex.

Eurip. Hecub. (...).

Ambros. lib. de Noah and arc. c. 4. Familiae hominum splendore generis
Nobilitantur, animarum autem clarificatur gratia splendore virtutis.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes for William Palmer at the Palm Tree in
Fleetstreet. M. DC. LXI.

TO THE AUTHOR.
HAving perused your Book of, The great Worth, and the Best kind of Nobility; I
desire you would speedily present it to the public view: for as I find it in
it self Methodical, Perspicuous, and Ingenious; so for these times I judge is
very Useful: and therefore delay not the Publication, if you value the Opinion
of

Your faithful Friend, John Pearson.

To the Right Worthy Sir WILLIAM HAWARD of Tandridge in the County of Surrey,
Knight: Gentleman in ordinary of his MAJESTY'S Honorable Privy Chamber.
Right Worthy Sir, THIS little Treatise speaks somewhat of the great Worth and
best kind of Nobility; And as the Romans had a double Erat [antiquitus]
saccellum Pudicitiae patriciae in for^ Boario ad aedem rotundam Herculis --
Postea, Virginia in vico longo ubi habitabat ex part aedium quod satis esset
loci modico sacello exclusit aramque ibi posuit and convocatis plebeiis
matronis -- Hanc ego aram, inquit, Pudicitiae Plebeiae dedico, vosque hortor ut
quod certamen virtutis viros in hac civitate tenet, Hoc pudicitiae inter
matronas sit, delisque operam ut haec ara quam illa si quid potest sanctius and
a castioribus coli ditatur. Live. lib. 10.
Altar amongst them, one for the chastity of the Patricians, another for the
chastity of the Plebeians: So this sets up one Altar to the Nobility, and
honor of the Peers and ancient Gentry of the Nation; another to Virtue and
Piety, Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus. Juvenal.
The best kind of Nobility; and which we shall take leave to call, The
Nobility of the people or communalty. Not that we look upon Nobles and
Gentlemen as strangers to Virtue, and aliens to Piety, to which they sacrifice
daily, and which shine forth in them more then in any else illustriously; but
that Virtue and Piety advance the latter to that honor, in which they have no
part nor interest naturally. Now as our intention is in general to mind the
one, that they perfect what they have by Nature; and to persuade the other, to
gain what from their birth they have not, by Virtue: and as our desire is in
special to contribute something to the seasoning of Noble youth with Virtue and
Piety, Who are (as Ita nati estis, ut bona malaque vestra act remp. pertinea^t.
Tiber. de Neron. and Drus. Tacit. annal, lib. 4.
he said) so born, that their good or evil example makes much for the good or
hurt of their Country: So the dedication of all is devolved upon you, not upon
a single account, but upon several and different considerations. (...).
The Divine Powers are brought in still by the Prince of Poets, choosing fit
instruments for the designs they take in hand, suitable Agents for several
actions: and there is such a sutableness betwixt the subject of this Treatise,
and Your self: That as Quod mulicres uterum gestantes, quae ut seliciorem de se
sobolem gignant, in^uentur subinde oculis fixis and v^hementibus, in imagines
exquisite venustas. (Id quod Lacedaemoniis usitalum esse traduat). Id Eucherius
quoque fecit ut aliquid laud dignum effiag^ret. Videtur sihi duo^um maxim
praec^ll^ntium virorum non informs proposaisse imagines, nimirum Augustini and
Hieroaymi; quorum imitatione sive assiduo aspectu, penitiorique contemplatione
suos sic insormavit Commentarios, ut nihil illus si^ vel ductius vel
absolutius. Magdeburg. cent. 5. cap 10. Sic Cyprianus, Ambrosius, Theophylactus
proposuerunt sibi Tertullianum, Basilium, Chrysostomum, and alii alios.
some Writers are noted to propose such Authors for their Imitation; and Quod
mulicres uterum gestantes, quae ut seliciorem de se sobolem gignant, in^uentur
subinde oculis fixis and vehementibus, in imagines exquisite venustas. (Id quod
Lacedaemoniis usitalum esse traduat). Id Eucherius quoque fecit ut aliquid
laud dignum effiag^ret. Videtur sihi duo^um maxim praec^ll^ntium virorum non
informs proposaisse imagines, nimirum Augustini and Hieroaymi; quorum
imitatione sive assiduo aspectu, penitiorique contemplatione suos sic
insormavit Commentarios, ut nihil illus si^ vel ductius vel absolutius.
Magdeburg. cent. 5. cap 10. Sic Cyprianus, Ambrosius, Theophylactus
proposuerunt sibi Tertullianum, Basilium, Chrysostomum, and alii alios.
some women are said to set the fairest pictures before them for their better
Conception: So we may seem, in drawing up this Piece, to have had our eye upon
you; but that the picture falls much short of the Pattern.

This is certain, There is not a Virtue named in this Treatise, as belonging to
Gentlemen, but is singularly eminent in you. For matter of Learning, new and
old, you may be styled much better then Pindar. Olymp. Od. 6. de AEnca
chorodidascalo.
he of whom it was first spoken, (...), Secretary and Interpreter to the Muses,
their Ambassador or Nuntio, to communicate their secrets far and near to their
Disciples. (...), A sweet cup of pleasant and delightful Discourses; so I take
leave to interpret it. Neither does the book disable you as some, but fit you
for business. (...). Pindar. Nem. Od. 7.
When you look off from that, Wisdom does not look off from you, Psalm. 38.
but guides you with her eye, that you may Psalm. 112. 15.
guide your Affairs with discretion. That may be truly said of you, in your
Station, which was long since spoken of Pericles in his Generation, L'aus
Periclis in multis authoribus. (...). Idem. testatur de seipso in Thucid.
You know what belongs to your place, and can deliver your self accordingly;
without troubling, as he did Greece, or as others of late, either Country or
County. And if weightier business were imposed, there would not be wanting in
you, either These two are required in an Historian by Lucian, and do as well
become a Statesman. Lucian. de conscr. Histor.
(...), A Politic capacity; or, (...), A Rhetorical faculty, to manage them.
For matter of Religion; In quo cum pietate doctrina, cum conscientia scientia,
cum natura a^s, cum disciplina rerum usus certavit. Mom. de Hubert. Languet.
Learning and Piety, Science and Conscience are so tempered, that they give to
each other Luster and Beauty. For Humility and Courtesy (which are to every
Virtue in the Soul, what Beauty is to Health and soundness in the body; to wit,
an Ornament and Grace to them all); (...). Niceph. Greg. lib. 6.
They, as beautiful and fragrant flowers, are so resplendent in you, that they
attract the eyes, and hearts of all after you, and make not only your Society,
but very Name also pleasant and precious to the memory. What should we speak of
other things? We have called out, in this Treatise, some few Virtues to insist
on; but you have stored your self with the choysest in every kind. That not
this, or that, but all discover themselves in you in general. So that look what
(...). Julian. Epist de Zen.
Scholars and Gentlemen, are to others, that you are unto them, even an
Oracle, as it were, and Ornament unto, Both. And Interest inter eos qui in
Principis gratiam incidunt, and qui ^am promerentur. Strad. -- Vespasianus
venerabilis senex and patientissimus very, been intelligit coeteros quidem
amicos suos niti iis quae ab ipso acceperuit, Marcellum autem and Crispum
attulisse ad amicitiam suam, quod non a principe accepe^^^^, nic accipi po^uit.
Quintil. de Orator.
whereas many go only to receive Honor and Maintenance from the Prince; you
carry that to the Court, wherewith you are able to do Service and Honor to
your Prince, when He shall be pleased to employ you. (...). Pindar. Olymp. Od 6.
We scorn wittingly to stein our Credit, or Paper, with lies; or to render your
Parts suspicious by fabulous reports. Sidon. Apollinar. Epist. l 24.
Per unius or is officium, non unius pectoris profunditur secretum. One Pen
writes, but every true heart that knows you will give consent, and every
ingenuous tongue a testimony to the same truth. This, Sir, is the principal
cause of our fastening this Treatise upon you, that we might present our Reader
with a fair President, and give him not only dead, but (as one speaks in
another case) Cassius dicebat alios declamasse, Varium Geminum vivum coasilium
dedisse. Senec. Suas. 6.
living counsel. Again, if it were possible for any Honor to accrue unto any
by such a worthless Piece, we know none deserves it better then your self. The
high esteem which you bear to our Profession may call for it. Luke 7. 5.
You love (as they said of the Centurion) our Nation; and whereas many are
ashamed of our Coat and company, you seem rather to choose our society; (...)
(...)
Hom. ll. 1.
-- Arcana sic Fama crumpere porta,
Caelicolas si quando domus, li^usque rubentum
AEthiopum, and mensas amor est intrare minores.
Stat. Theb. lib. 5.

like Jupiter and the rest of the Gods in the Poet, who when they mean to feast
go to Sea, (...), and sit down with the blameless, though black, AEthiopians,
as guests. Your special favor to us might challenge it. When we were mere
strangers to you^ Person, though not to your Virtues, you offered to commend us
to the Patronage and Protection of a great Peer of the Realm, a personage of
singular worth and honor, Son of a Martyr (who resisted unto death for his
Sovereign then alive, and on Statua L Vitellii pro rostris hanc habuit
Inscriptionem, Pietatis immobilis erga Principem. Sucron. in vit. Vitel.
whose Tomb that may much more deservedly be engraven, then it was upon an old
Romans Statute, Pietatis immobilis erga Principem) and himself also of like
eminent Piety to King and Country, Learning and Religion. A favor that could
not but have pleased any, and would have been refused by few. Saepe fit, ut is
qui commendatus sit alicui, pluris eum faciat cui commendatus sit, quam illum a
quo sit. Cicer. de fin. lib. 3.
Indeed the person commended is easily most an end persuaded to forsake him
that commends and betroth himself for his interests sake to his service to whom
he is commended. (...). Zen. Cyr. paed. lib. 3.
But as that Princess told her husband (when he asked her whether Cyrus did not
seem to be a gallant Prince, who treated them both whom he had taken captive,
so nobly) That she did not so much as mind or look upon him; but her mind and
her eyes were upon him (meaning the Prince her Husband) who offered with his
life to purchase her Liberty. So, Sir, Let me tell you, we cannot but (
adoratis tamen a long adorandis) respect him who did so much respect our
advantage and advancement.

We have told you, or rather the World, the reasons of of this our Dedication.
Now as we gladly hear you talk in private, so we can as willingly talk of you
in public. (...). Nazian. Orat. 20.
The eye is not easily taken off from pleasant objects, nor the tongue from
pleasing subjects. But we must make an end, otherwise Critics will tell us
that we exceed the limits of an Epistle. (...). Basil. Epist. 355.
Yet shortness is no more of the Essence of an Epistle, then it is of a Man.
(...). Nazian. Epist. ad Nicob.
It is not the number of lines, but the occasion and business, that puts
limits to a Letter. We have more cause to suspect other Objections; but as
little cause, we think, to be troubled with them. Some will censure us for
writing so Preacher-like: We acknowledge it here a fault, but such as we are in
Seneca de Ovid. Non ignoravit vitia sua, sed amavit, Controv. 10.
love with, and are content the same Scoff should pass upon us, which the
Orator put upon Aristoxenus, for defining the Soul to be a Harmony, Cicer.
Tusc. quaest. lib. 1.
Hic ab artificio suo non recessit, This man departed not from his Art. Others
may look upon the multiplicity of Quotations, as matter of affection; But the
Piece (as we have mentioned) was written chiefly for the use of young
Gentlemen. And, as the Title perhaps may somewhat allure them who are such,
usually, as stand much on their Birth: So we set on, as they commonly on their
Garments, the more dressing; desiring to make it as acceptable to them, as they
themselves to others; A thing ridiculous in the Pulpit, but not altogether
improper for such things as come from the Press. A third sort may think us too
Satirical in some passages; but we have Spero me secutum in libellie meis tale
temperamentum, ut de illis queri non possit quisquis de se been senserit. Mart.
Epist. ad lect. praefix. lib. 1.
so writ, that none can conceit ill of us, that can rationally entertain a good
conceit of themselves. If any be offended for himself or others, that this or
that Vice is touched: Judge. 6. 31.
Let him plead (if he list) for Baal; and sacrifice still, if he think it can
stand with his credit and safety, to his vicious Humor. We cannot commend that
which the Scripture condemns, Es. 56. 10.
a dumb Dog; nor him that barks without cause. Nor do we think that appellation
given to Ministers, because they should be always (...). Nazianz. Orat. 23.
brawling; but we hope (as he said) to live and die Pindar. Nem. Od. 8.
(...), Commending what is commendable, and not afraid to cast a Reproof, as
salt upon unsavory persons.

Right worthy Sir, We have now done our business, and shall take our leave; but
(as the manner is at parting) not without a Prayer or good wish. And that shall
be, what we conceive is, the highest happiness which a Courtier can desire,
That you may stand in Favor, and with Honor in the presence of your Prince
here; and may enjoy the beatifical vision of your God hereafter: So he heartily
wishes, who shall always be

Yours, As he is much obliged to be, In all service, Henry Whiston.

Courteous Reader,

THat which the Poet looks upon as a sign of a coy and squeamish stomach, let
me beg as a favor of thee, which is, that in the first place spectares (...),
and that before thou take notice of mine, thou would correct the Printers
error in page 44. in the Section of Magnanimity, where receiving some few words
to insert immediately after the great Machabee, in memory of that invincible
spirit, which dyed for his late Majesty, he has unluckily thrust it under the
letter (y) into the margent. And if thou shall supply my short expressions, to
which the former precedents tied me with such a just estimation as that worthy
Personage, and his right Noble Family deserves, I shall look upon the mistake
as a happy error, and say of the hand that committed it, as the Poet did of his
that erred in a higher design: Si non errasset, fecerat illa minus.

ERRATA.
IN the Epist. Dedic. page 5. lin. 6. read (...), ibid. l. 2. marg. r. (...),
p. 8. l. 2. m. r. promereantur, p. 10. l. 20. r. Statue. In the Book, p. 2. l.
2. m. r. Joh. 6.45 p 3. l. 17. m. r. sacer, p. 5. l. 2. m. r. Psalm. 45.2. p.
11. l. 15. m. r. (...), p. 15. l. 11. m. r. Aret p. 16. l. 6. m. r. Areop.
ibid. l. 19. m. r. chon p. 18. l. 11. m. r. orientis, p. 20. l. 15. m. r.
(...), p. 21. l. 3. m. r. (...), ibid. l. 11. r. (...). p. 22. l. 1. m r. Deuteronomy.
34. 10. p. 33. l. 9 m. r. (...), p. 36. l. 5. r. Plebeian p. 37. l. 1. m. r.
(...), p. 38. l. penul. r. (...), p. 39. l. 8. r. (...), p. 44. l. 5. r.
threaten. ibid. l. 9. m. r. Live. p. 48. l. 1. 2. r (...) without a comma
between, ibid. l. 12, 13. r. (...), l penult. ibid. r. (...). p. 49. l. 16. m.
r. nutu atu, p. 50. l. 11. m. r. Laphdion, p. 51. l. 24. r. worst, ibib. l. 12.
m. r. jubebat. p. 55. l. 32. m. r. maliciae, p. 60. l. 14. m. r. (...), p. 62.
l. 1. r. Saleuci, p. 63. l. 7. r. natura p. 69. l. 13. m. r. adjutus, p. 71. l.
21. r. (...), ibid l. 8. r. (...) l. 9. r. (...), l. 11 r. (...), p. 74. l. 13.
r. the, p. 75. l. 1. r. that, ibib. l. 12, 13, 18. r. (...), and. p. 78. l. 8.
r. give, p. 80. l. 5. r. mare, ibid. l. 16. r. a light. p. 90. l. 18. r.
Stageplayers. p. 93. l. 13. r. irreligious, ibid. l. 1. m. r. (...). p. 94. l.
24. m. r. (...) l. 28. r. (...). l. 32. r. (...). l. 33. r. (...), p. 96. l.
22. m. r. Nabuth, p. 79. l. 4. r. obscurity. p. 99. l. 2. m. r. (...), p 100.
l. 9. m. r. (...), l. 10. r. (...). l. 11. r. vim. p. 102. l. 1. r. mere. p.
107. l. 12. m. r (...), p. 112. l. 11. m. r. Romans p. 113. l. 5. m. r. Mic. p.
114. l. 3. m r. Mal. 1. 10. p. 117. l. 21. r. ipsis, p. 120. l. 11. m. r.
(...), p. 127. l. 8. m.r. (...), p. 139. l. 9. m. r. (...), ibid. l. 16. after
(...) -- p. 130. l. 14. r. others, ibid. 7. m. after factus add e teria, p.
132. l 4. m. r. Jam. 2. 5. p. 133. l. 1. m. r. Mal. p. 134. l. blot out such.
p. 138. l. 1. m. r. (...).

The GREAT WORTH, AND BEST KIND OF NOBILITY.
Act. XVII. 11. These were more Noble then those in Thessalonica --
IT is an old Maxim, Quicquid recipitur, od modum recipientis. (...). Arist. de
anim. lib. 2, cap. 2.
Whatsoever is received, is received according to the model, capacity or
disposition of the receiver. This the present Text, and this common experience
does sufficiently confirm. Neither did the Apostles, nor have their successors
found entertainment according to the worth of their Doctrine, but according to
the temper and disposition of their Auditors. The one of old, the other at
present find some Luke 9. 62.
fitted for the Kingdom of God, Joh. 6. 4.
taught of God, and Act. 13. 48.
disposed for eternal life, who Luke 8. 15, etc.
with an honest and good heart hear the Word, keep it and bring forth fruit
with patience; others they find as profane as the highway, as hard-hearted as
rocks, as intractable as thorns, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2.
unreasonable absurd persons, which sometimes scoff as they, Act. 17. 18.
What will this babbler say? sometimes mock and make themselves merry as they,
Act. 2. 13.
These are full of new wine; sometimes grow mad, as mad (...). Plutarch.
as Tabred Tigres, Act. 22. 23.
as they who cried out against St. Paul, and cast off their clothes, and threw
dust in the air, and are ready to do outrage, or offer some abuse to them while
they speak. Quum Sarmatis, Dacis and Quadis soedera scriret and in suggestu
orationem haberet, barbaris male audienti^us quod ad hoc opus assueti non
erant, unus e Quadis sicessit and stercore alterum e calceis replevit, sub
vest tulit, and propius accedens in vultum concionantis projecit.
An Historian relates, How Constantius the Emperor making a speech to a mixed
multitude of Barbarous people, one of the many, because he could not hear him,
went aside, and filled his shoes with dung, and drawing near to him flung it in
his face. And what other usage can Ministers expect, when they deal with rude
people, but to have all manner of filth, and dung cast in their faces? And such
requital ( Id dedecus mereri puto qui inter rusticos aut Philosophaeri aut
Rhetorice loqui volu^t. ^om^on (...).
says the Historian) they deserve who will play the Philosopher or Orator
before Clowns. True it is, that as some slight learning, and learned men too
much, so Constantius doted so much upon it, and them; that more nicely then
wisely Nec in Senatum quenquam admisit nisi eruditum and in dicendi facultate
ita exercitatum, ut selutam ligatamque scriberet orationem. Zonar. tom. 3.
he would choose none into his counsel, but such as could write both Prose and
Verse; for which Lyps. not. ad 3. lib. Polit. Idem saepe de seipso loquitur ac
si esset voce and stylo humani generis quidam paedagogus.
he that as vainly looked upon himself as a grand Signior, a Master and Tutor to
all mankind, does not unjustly censure him. Yet we do not count it such a fault
to use both Philosophy and Oratory to the rudest in a plain, popular, and
intelligible way; and that Historian also who was so much in love with
Antiquity, that Tantus suit admirator Romanae vetustatis, ut Christiano Petri
nomine rejecto se dixerit Pomponium. Lud. Viv. in Bucholcer.
he changed his Christian name Petrus into Pomponius upon that account, needed
not to have looked far for Precedents in that kind, unless he would have us
think that neither Xenophon amongst the Greeks, nor Caesar amongst the Romans
did ever make use of Philosophy and Rhetoric in their Speeches to their
Soldiers, or else that there were no Rusticks but all were Philosophers and
Orators in their Armies. Whence arose those stories Movit Amphion lapides
canendo. Horat. car. lib. 3.
of Amphion, and Sylvestres homines saces interpresque deorum
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orphens:
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tigres rabidosque Leones.
Dictus ^b Amphion Thebanae conditor arcis
Saxa mo^ere sono testudinis.
Id. de art. Poet;

Orpheus drawing woods, stones, Tigres, Lions and all sorts of beasts after
them, and their building Towns by their music, but that they used it to all
sorts of people, and none so savage but some of them were civilized by the
power of their Rhetorique? (...) -- (...) -- (...). Luc. Herc. Gal.
Hercules also is fabled going about, and conquering all with his club,
wherewith he beat down all before him; we will not say, That he carried his
Club in his mouth; but this we will say, That Rhetorical Speech, sweet,
pleasant, courteous language will, if not knock a man down, yet make a man
stoop, yield and conquer him as soon as the roughest Club. And he that went
about conquering with his Club, had his Bow also and quiver full of Arrows, and
was pictured, or feigned at least to be pictured, amongst the Galls, drawing
all men unto him by the Ears, with chains that were fastened to his Tongue. And
wherefore this? but to show that he got the Conquest of men, not so much by
Force, as by Eloquence; and that the arrows which he shot, and which pierced so
deep into the sides of his enemies, were his sharp and subtle Speeches. But
though Rhetorique and Eloquence, may and has been used succesfully to all
sorts of men, yet it never was, nor will be succesful in all. There are some
metals that are not malleable, some rocks that cannot be broken, some beasts
that cannot be tamed, Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
some deaf Adders that cannot be charmed, let the Charmer charm never so
wisely. So that the effect still is in general according to the affection of
the Hearer, except God by his Almighty power do break in and subdue all before
him. This we know, There was an extraordinary grace in the very Speech of our
Savior, Psalm. 4. 5.
Grace (says the Psalmist) is poured out into thy lips, and Mat. 7. v. last.
He taught as one that had authority, and not as the Scribes and Pharisees. And
they that were sent to take him, were so taken with his speech that they forgot
their Arrant, and thought they had excuse enough, because Joh. 7. 46.
Never man spoke (they said) as he spoke. Yet this grace of his could not work
an impression upon all, but had various effects according to the variety of
persons that he spoke unto. Joh. 7. 12.
Some said, he was a good man. Joh. 10. 20, 21.
Others said, nay, but he deceives the people. Many said, he has a Devil and
is mad, why hear ye him? Others said, these are not the words of him that has
a Devil. Yea, which is a thing to be wondered at, Luke 4. 22, 29.
Some wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth; and yet
would in a rage have rid the world of him at once, by casting him down headlong
from the brow of the hill whereon their City stood. So St. Paul, though his
bodily presence were weak, and his speech in some respects ( Hieronym.
Cilicismos in Paulo notat. Prolog. Job. and post eum Salmas.
as it is noted, and himself confesses) rude, yet was he not rude in knowledge,
nor wanting in Rhetorique. When Act. 14. 12.
Barnabas as the more proper person perhaps carried away the name of Jupiter,
yet he as the best spokesman was termed Mercurius. And his writings show him to
be a great Mercurialist indeed, a prime artist ( Summus in tractandis
affectibus artifex. Quintil.
as he speaks of Cicero) in dealing with men's affections, and a singular Paulum
Apostolum proferam, quem quotiescunque lego videor mihi non verba audire sed
tonitrua. Legite epislolas -- and videbitis cum -- quam artifex, quam prudens,
quam dissimulator est eius quod agit. Videntur quidem verba simplicia and quasi
innocentis hominis and rustici, and qui nec facere nec declinare noverit
insidias, sed quocunque respexeris, fulmina sunt. Haeret in causa, capit omne
quod teligerit, tergum vertit ut superet, fugam simulat ut occidat. Hier. in
Apol. pro Libr. contra Jovin.
crafts-master in managing his disputations. And yet this great Artist, this
singular Craftsmaster, this Mercurius (...), could not always prevail, except
it were with Amphion to draw stones after him, 2 Cor. 11. 25.
Once I was stoned; or with Orpheus, the Trees, 2 Cor. 11. 25.
Thrice was I beaten with rods; or brute beasts as at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 32.
After the manner of men I fought with beasts at Ephesus. True it is, that the
miraculous power of God went along with him, and brake open the doors of men's
hearts, and made some way for the Word to enter wheresoever he came, but
otherwise his entertainment was according to the disposition of the people
amongst which he came. Act. 14. 13, 18, 19.
At Lystra he was welnigh stoned to death by the Heathen. Indeed at first
seeing him cure a lame man, they would have sacrificed to him and Barnabas as
Gods, and could scarce be restrained, but afterward upon the instigation of the
Jews, they had almost sacrificed them to their own malice. Act. 13. 50.
At Antioch the vulgus of the Jews stir up the devont women and chief men (who
usually stir not in such cases unless stirred by some calumniations) against
him and Barnabas. Act. 16. 18 -- 24.
At Philippi the Magistrate being in like sort incensed by the people, he is
whipped, imprisoned, stockt together with Silas. Act. 17. 5.
At Thessalonica he is greatly endangered by certain lewd fellows of the baser
sort who sought his life. Act. 19. 24.
At Ephesus Demetrius with his fellow craftsmen, brethren in iniquity, raise
the City against him, where he met with those beasts he spoke off. Act. 21. 31.
and 23. 12, 23, 24.
At Jerusalem he had certainly dyed had not Lysias the chief Captain rescued
him, and set him afterward out of the reach of those who had bound themselves
by oath not to eat or drink till they had slain him. If he found at any time
any better welcome, it was among the better sort. Act. 13. 7.
Sergius a prudent man desires to hear the Word from his mouth. Act. 18. 8, 16.
At Corinth Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue is converted by him, and
when the Jews, his constant enemies, laid it before Gallio the Proconsul
against him, he drove them from the Judgment seat, and would not admit their
So. Dr. Hammond interprets.
bill of complaint. When the beasts of the people came upon him at Ephesus, yet
the Act. 19. 31.
chief of Asia were his friends, and stood for him; and the Town Clerk, or
Recorder rather, a man of So the same Dr.
no mean office, speaks in the justification of him and his companions. Lysias
the chief Captain of the Roman bands secures him (as we have said) from open
outrage and secret conspiracy. Act. 28. 7, 10.
Publius the chief man of Melita, entertains him three days with all courtesy,
and curing the Father of Publius and others, he is honored there with many
honors, and laded with all things necessary for his voyage to Rome; and though
he met with (...) wicked men of the officers of the Court. Dr. Hamm.
a base and wicked sort of people at Thessalonica, such as your catchpoles that
wait upon Courts, who could they have caught him would have made him away, yet
at Beroea he met with men of a right noble disposition, who entertained him and
Silas with that respect which was due unto their place, receiving the Word with
all readiness of mind, and searching the Scriptures whether the things they
Preached were so or not; and accordingly the Spirit of God takes notice of
their carriage, and writes down their commendation to all posterity, not
without a sharp reflection upon those of Thessalonica. These men (to wit, the
Beroeans) were more noble then those of Thessalonica.

We have been too long in our Preface, yet the Quintil. lib. 2. cap. 13. Est
optimum in omni oratione mediam hanc tenere dicendi viam quantum opus est,
quantum satis est. Nec inor^ata debet esse brevitas, alioqui sit indocta, nam
and fallit voluptas and minus longa quae delectant videntur, ut amoenum, and
molle iter etiamsi sit spatii amplioris minus fatigat, quam durum aridumque
compendium. Id. (...). Arist. Rhet. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Masters of Rhetorique do not prescribe any certain limits, but leave the same
liberty therein as they do Quintil. lib. 2. cap. 13. Est optimum in omni
oratione mediam hanc tenere dicendi viam quantum opus est, quantum satis est.
Nec inor^ata debet esse brevitas, alioqui sit indocta, nam and fallit voluptas
and minus longa quae delectant videntur, ut amoenum, and molle iter etiamsi sit
spatii amplioris minus fatigat, quam durum aridumque compendium. Id. (...).
Arist. Rhet. lib. 3. cap. 16.
to a Commander to make the Front of his battle as narrow, broad and deep as
he please. And to have large Portals or Gate-houses with many lodgings in them,
is not unusual for Noble and Gentlemen's houses.

In the words, there is a commendation given to the Beroeans, and a special
thing commended in them, which is their Nobility. The men of Beroea were more
noble --

Now in that the Spirit of God is pleased to bestow a commendation upon the men
of Beroea, we may observe; That whatsoever is commendable in any, may have its
commendation.

So many Prophets (said De praescientia vero quid dicam? quae tantos habet
testes quantos habet Prophetas. Tert. lib. 2. advers. Marc.
one of the Ancients) so many testimonies of Gods divine praescience: So may we
say here, So many good men as are mentioned in sacred Scripture, so many
evidences of this truth. Their goodness some way or other is commended still
unto us. And as any of them have been eminent in any grace, so there is an
eminent mark set upon them in reference to that. Noah is reported singular for
his Godliness amongst the world of ungodly. Abraham, as Father of the faithful,
for his Faith. Joseph as a special pattern of Chastity, Moses of Meekness,
Daniel of Temperance, Job of Patience, Nathaniel of singleness of Heart. There
were gross errors, foul misdemeanors amongst the Corinthians, and in those
things St. Paul praised them not, but those did not so far blast their good
deeds, but that he did commend them for what they did well. 1 Cor. 11. 17.
I praise you (brethren) that you remember me in all things. Whom Christ loves
he rebukes, and so we find him reproving almost every one of the seven
Churches of Asia, but yet he forgets not to commend that which was commendable
in them. Rev. 3. 8.
Nay the Church of Philadelphia had but a little strength, and there was but 1
King. 14. 13.
something of good found in Abijah the son of Jeroboam, and yet the Lord passes
it not over in silence, but takes notice of it. Nay more, though Saul were a
wicked Prince, and David's mortal enemy, yet 2 Samuel 1.22, 24.
David, a man after Gods own heart, could find somewhat to lament, and
somewhat to comment upon at his death. Indeed, a pearl is not to be rejected
though lying in a dunghill, or found in a Toads head, nor Virtue to be misliked,
though lodged amongst many Vices; but as it was the custom of the (...). Schol.
in Arist. Ves. And hence Plutarch (as we suppose) to prevent curiosity, would
not have men read so much as (...), or (...), because commonly there was
nothing written worth reading, but (...). Plutarch. de curios.
Athenians of old, to write the names of such as were fair, handsome persons
upon their walls, or doors, or other places as it happened, thus, Such a one is
fair, such a one is handsome or comely: So if any do any thing handsomely, or
in comely manner, we need not fear to say, This was well or handsomely done.

And this, in the first place, is but a piece of Justice. As the conception of
all things was from the Goodness, so the disposition of all was from Iustitiae
opus est quod inter lucem and tenebras separatio pronunciata est, inter diem
and noctem, coelum and terram -- omnia ut bonitas concepit, ita justitia
distinxit. Tert. lib. 2. advers. Marc. c. 12.
the Justice of God. It was a work of Justice to make separation betwixt light
and darkness, day and night, heaven and earth: so it is a work of Justice to
distinguish betwixt good and evil, to separate the precious form the vile, and
set it forth in its proper luster. It Is an act of Justice to give to every one
his due, Romans 13. 7.
Tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor belongs. And Praise is a tribute proper for good deeds, and Honor
for such as excel in virtue. We should offer Frankincense ( (...). Socrat.
said the wise Heathen) to the gods, but praise unto men. Indeed, though we are
called upon and said also to praise God, yet not (...). Arist. Ethic. lib. 1.
cap. 12.
properly. Something greater and better, as Confession, Honor, Blessing and
Adoration belong unto him. Praise is a tribute proper to virtue and virtuous
men. And as Gloriosis dominis gratiosiora sunt praeconia quam tributa, quia
stipendium and tyranno penditur, praedicatio autem nisi bono principi non
debetur. Cassiod.
great ones are more delighted with Praises then with Tributes, the one being
paid even to Tyrants, the other to good Princes only: so if they deserve it,
it is but just that they should have it. And that not only as a just reward of
their deserts, but of Gods graces within them. When God, the righteous Judge,
shall crown at the last day the good deeds of his Saints, he shall crown but
his own gifts. And when we praise the graces of men, we praise but the goodness
of God. Quicquid in his miramur ab illo est.
Whatsoever we see in them, is infused by him. All their virtue and goodness is
but a drop from his Ocean, a spark of his flame, a beam of that sun. Now as he
should rob the sun as it were of his glory, who would not delight in and praise
its beams: as he should rob the fountain of its excellency, that should not
commend its streams: so he should rob the great sanctifier of souls, who should
not commend the graces of the Saints which he sees shine forth from the souls
of the Saints. Unless a man therefore will be unjust and rob God as well as
Man, he ought to give men the praise that is due unto their deserts. Neither
should that great wickedness which many times is mingled with a little virtue
in wicked men, rob them of the praise which is due to their virtue. That little
virtue, be it what it will, is the work of God; and as he does not let go any
good works Ezekiel. 29. 18.
unrewarded in this life, so neither should we.

2. As this is a piece of Justice, so it is a piece of Christian wisdom and
pious policy. We are not more kindly drawn on by any thing to virtue, then by
Praise. It is a bait that is suitable to our disposition, and such as we are
taken with as soon as with any temptation. Est ut Xenophon ait (...), utique si
te mereri putes. Plin. Epist. lib. 7.
There is no better hearing nor sweeter Music can sound in men's ears, then
that of their own praise. When people gazed on Themistocles at the Olympic
Games, (...). Plut. in vit. Themist.
Themistocles confessed, that when the people in the Olympic Games, left their
sports and fell a gazing and pointing at him, that then he received the fruit
of his labor for Greece. The same was wont to say, (...). Ibid.
Miltiades his Trophies would not let him sleep before, he so much thirsted
after that honor he saw conferred on him; and when he had attained the like
himself, then he thought himself well apaid. The one stirred up, the other
quieted his spirit. As the suggestions which Satan casts into our Hearts are as
fiery darts to inflame them to evil: so the commendations which are given our
selves or others, are as Great examples to generous minds are (...). Climach.
fiery darts, as Singulorum recordationes quasi scintillae singulae, immo quasi
ardentissimae faces devotos accendunt animos. Bernard.
light firebrands to set our hearts on fire with that which is good. (...).
Basil. in Gord. Marty.
The comfortable heat of the fire does not more affect us when we are a cold,
nor does the fragrant odor of sweet perfumes draw us more after them, then
does the commemoration of the Saints graces joined with their just commendation
draw us on to a virtuous imitation. And when men are once onward in the way of
virtue, (...). P^nd. Nem. od. 8.
the tender grass or young slips and plants, are not more apt to shoot forth by
means of sweet dews and pleasant showers that fall upon them, then they are by
continued praises and commendations to grow up to perfection. Hence to draw men
on they were wont to bestow several honors up-them, crown them according to
their several deserts with several Militares coronae multifariae. Triumphalis,
obsidionalis, civica, muralis, castrensis, navalis, ovalis, oleagina. Agel.
lib. 5. cap. 6.
garlands, write their names as they did the Conquerours at the Olympic Games
Moris erat in certaminibus Olymp. victorum nomina columnis insculpere. Arist.
in Pind.
on pillars; to which possibly Christ may allude when he says, He that
overcomes will Revel. 3. 12.
I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God.
Hence they erected statues and Images, set up pictures and such like
representations of men's persons, in honor of their noble deeds; which what
were they? but a (...). Plut. Mer.
kind of silent praises and Encomiums, as Encomiums and praises are a kind of
eloquent pictures, and representations of men's persons and deeds, and both
encouragements to whet on others to the like actions. And to this end the names
of the Martyrs in the primitive times were set down in Erant Tabulae duae
(vocata (...)) quarum uni vivorum, alteri desunctorum nomina inscribebantur --
cum se mutuo omnes salutaverint, mystica sacrarum Tabularum recitatio fit.
Pamel. ex Dionys. Ao^ep. in Epist. 10. Cyprian. Acacius labors to pacify
Chrysostomes followers called Iohannitae by putting Chrysostomes name into
those books or Tables, though that would not do it. The same man razes the
Popes name out. Mag. cent. 5.
sacred books or tables for that purpose, and read at the Altar, which were (
(...). Nicet. chron. praesat. ad Annal.
as one says of History) as the book of life to preserve their names and
virtues, and as the sound of the last trump to raise them from the dead, and
bring them upon the stage again, to converse with and animate the living. True
it is, as the Apostle says Romans 7. 10, 11.
of the Law, The commandment which was for life, I found to be unto death; For
sin taking occasion by the commandment deceived me, and by it slew me: so
those books which were ordained for life were found to be unto death. Etsi
initio tantum suit recordatio quaedam martyrum seu testium insignium veritatis,
and adhortatio ad similes virtutes, tamen paidatim acc ssit abusus and salsa
invocatio. Magd. cent. 5.
For blind ze^l took occasion by the commemoration of the Martyrs to bring in
quickly a religions Invocation, and by it slew men. What then? was that ( Romans
7. 13.
as the Apostle says again) which was good made death? No! but that the
corruption of men might appear, blind zeal wrought death in men by that which
was good, exceeding just and good. As the Law is holy, and the commandment in
it self holy, just and good: so the commendation of the Saints in it self, and
the commemoration of the Martyrs is holy, just, and good. (...). Pind. Nem. Od.
3.
It being the flower of justice to commend the good, and the (...). Nazian. in
laud. Heron.
choysest of good deeds, to take order for the praising of those things which
are well done: praise breeding emulation, emulation virtue, and virtue felicity.

This then condemns those who will not themselves, and are unwilling that
others should, give men the praise of their due deserts. The evil Steward in
the Gospel is commended because though he diminished his Lords revenues by
injustice; yet (as Licet Domini suistantiam vacuabat, subditos augebat. Bern.
St. Bernard reckons) he increased his Lords subjects by his wisdom: but many
as they are unjust in not rendering what is due to their Lords servants, so
neither have they the wisdom to increase their Lords subjects. The commendation
of Men to some, is as unpleasant (...); AElian. lib. 1. de animal.
as sweet ointment to Beetles. When the precious Spikenard was poured upon our
Savior, some had indignation and said, Matthew. 26. 8.
What needs this waste? When the children cried Hosanna, the Priests and
Scribes were displeased, and looking that our Savior should check them, cried,
Hear thou what these say? So the precious ointment that is powered on Christ's
members, move some to indignation, and though it be for their burial, as we
shall show anon, yet cannot forbear to cry, To what purpose is this waste? or,
Hear you what these flatterers say?

Others you shall hear, now and then, commending men, but much to their loss.
They will be anointing men with their Oil, but their precious Balm commonly
breaks their pates. Their commendations, like Scorpions, carry stings in their
tails, or are like some Deeds of gift that have in the close a reservation
which nuls the Conveyance, and frustrates the whole Donation. What they give by
a free Confession, they reverse by a malicious Exception. Some vice is still
related to stain the luster of the virtue before specified. Hoc est Alexandri
crimen aeternum, quod nulla virtus, nulla bellorum felicitas redimet. Nam
quoties quis dixerit; occidit Persarum multa millia, opponetur; Et
Callisthenem. Quoties dictum erit, occidit Darium penes quem tam magnum regnum
erat, opponetur; Et Callisthenem. Quoties dictum erit, omnia Oceano tenus
vicit, ipsum quoque tentavit novis classtinus, and imperium ex angulo Thraciae
usque ad Orientes terminos protulit, dicetur, Sed Callisthenem occidit. Senec.
natural. quaest. lib. 6.
Look what kindness Seneca reserves for Alexander, If any speaking of his
valor, should say, He slew thousands of the Persians; he would have it
replied, But he slew Callisthenes also. If it were said, He conquered Darius a
great Emperor; the reply should be again, But he killed Callisthenes. If it
were added, That he subdued all as far as the great Ocean, made an adventure on
that also with his Navy, and enlarged his Empire from a blind corner of Thrace,
to the sunrise; he would have it still answered, But he killed Callisthenes.
Such kind commendations have many for their friends. Such a one is, so and so,
A good Scholar, a complete Gentleman, a very religious man, but Proud, but a
Good fellow, but Covetous. Their praises are like the foul or smutty fingers of
those which defile the face they stroke; to which yet they would seem in
Hypocrisy, to add some singular grace.

A third sort commend, and commend highly, and are wholly in men's praises, and
speak not a word to their disparagement, yet all for their disadvantage. --
Eutrapelus cuicunque nocere volebat:
Vestimenta dabat pret osa --
Senec. Epist. lib. 1.

As Eutrapelus in the Poet, if he meant to hurt any, was wont to bestow
precious raiment upon them: So many clothe those well, and set them forth
highly with their commendations, to whom they intend no little mischief. 2 Samuel
20. 10, 11.
As Ioab complemented, kissed and killed Amasa at one and the same instant: So
many not by accusations or false aspersions, but (as the worst kind of
friends) do, if not kill men, yet work them a great deal of hurt by their
subtle commendations. Psalm. 55. 21.
The words of their mouth are smoother then butter, but War is in their
hearts. Their words are softer then Oil, yet art they drawn Swords. Crebra per
cos dies apud Domitianum absens accusalus, absens absolutus est, Causa periculi
non crimen ullum aut querela laesi cujusdam, sed infensus virtutibus princeps,
and gloria viri, ac pessimum inimicocorum genus laudantes. Tacit. de Agric. in
vit. (...). Polyb. lib. 4.
This (as is observed by Historians) is the art of Courtiers who by commending
men as fit for such and such employments, do place and displace, call home or
send abroad, take near or remove from the Princes ear whom they please.

A fourth sort will speak somewhat, as it shall happen, to the praise of the
living, but cannot away that any thing should be said in the commendation of
the dead. Cicer. Tuscul. quaest.
Nemo me lachrymis decoret. Let no man shed a tear for me, said old Ennius;
and, Away with suneral commendations, say some; New (I think) in their
opinions, they fit not the gravity, beseem not the majesty of a Pulpit. Cicer.
Tuscul. quaest.
but Mors mea non careat lacrymis, said wise Solon: (...). Pind. Nem. Od. 11.
and it is pity that they who are singular for Learning, or Piety, or any such
matter of eminence, should be buried in silence, and perish without memory,
Horat.
Vate quod caruere sacro, because they have wanted a tongue or pen to speak
them to posterity: so others. And the judgment of these last must carry our
approbation, though the other perhaps may have as pious an intention. To dawb
indeed with untempered mortar, to guild over a rotten post, to paint over a
deformed face, beseems no person, no place; and some are justly to be blamed in
this respect. (...).
Stratonice though she were bald, yet set the Poets on work to commend her
Hair; and so some are ready to hire, and others, which is more shameful, to be
hired, to commend those who had not so much (as Iccirco capite and superciliis
semper est rasis ne ullum pilum viri boni habere dicatur. Cicer. de Fan.
Chaerea Orat. pro Q Rosc. comoed.
the Orator speaks) as the hair of an honest man about them. (...), Lucian. de
Cynetho adulat.
Demetrius his slatterers having nothing else to praise him for, did highly
commend him for that having a cold, he coughed and cleared himself handsomely
by spitting; and so again many having nothing to say of abominable, worldly,
covetous persons, yet set them out for just men, and such as deal truly and
honestly with their neighbors; which is as much as if we should say, When the
Charity of men is altogether cold, wholly frozen, that they cough or spit and
clear themselves well nothwithstanding. It Is pity that such abomination should
be found in the holy place. But where there is true worth, dignity, and desert,
no place fitter for the commendation of it then the Pulpit. The practice of the
holy Ghost, is a sufficient precedent. The Scripture seldom speaks of the
death of the Saints, but it speaks also the praise of the Saints. Moses has
his praise, and Josiah his praise, and both so high that nothing can be said
higher. Deuteronomy. 33. 12.
No Prophet like Moses. 2 King. 23. 25.
No King like Josiah. Sometimes wicked men are commended for some special work,
but seldom are the godly laid in the grave, without some notable Epitaph, some
singular Commemoration. So that we cannot but wonder, that good and bad should
by some be equally honored in this kind, both buried alike without any
distinction, but while we speak of commending, we would not willingly
discommend any. The residue therefore which we have to say in this matter we
shall deliver by way of Instruction.

And in the first place, we are so unwilling that any should be defrauded of
their just praise, that sometimes we think it lawful even to flatter men, and
sooth them up Ironically in their own fond conceits and opinions, so it be
done without any hurt to others, or such like dishonesty. Domitius Afer
periculo proximus mirabiliter evasit. Nam cum Cajus in Curia lo igum contra eum
orationem habuit (omnes enim oratores se vincere putabat, and Domitium virum
eloquentissimum superare conabatur) neque quicquam contradixit, neque se
defendit, sed eloquentiam hominis se mirari eaque obstupescere simulans orabat
and supplicabat, seque oratorem magis timere quam Caesarem profitebatur. Quibus
rebus ille delectatus and Domitium a se dicendo superatum credens irasci
desiit. Zon. tom. 2. annal.
That Imperial beast Caligula, to recruit his treasure which he had foolishly
wasted, charges many with high Treason, and amongst the rest falls foul upon
Domitius Afer an eloquent Orator, whom he no less envyed for his worth in that
kind, then he did for his wealth. And how does the wise Orator redeem himself
out of his hands? why, he replies not a word to his charge, dares not so much
as attempt to defend himself, but pretending that he did admire and stand
amazed at the Eloquence of the Emperor, betook himself wholly to prayers and
supplications, and professes that he feared him more as an Orator, then he did
as he was Emperor. With which flatteries Caligula being much taken, was
pacified and persecuted him no farther. Cum omnes ei adularentur aliquando ad
L. Vitellium virum nobilem and cordatum dixit se cum Lund rem habere, eumque
rogavit an deae congressum vidisser? Is vero humum intuitus instar admirantis
exigua and tremula voce, Vobis inquit Divis duntaxat, Domine, intucri licet. Id.
The same crackt-brain Emperor pretends that he had familiarity with the Gods,
and brags one day like a Lunatique that he lay with the Moon, and asked
Vitellius a witty man, If he did not see him embracing the Moon. At which he,
as admiring his happiness, casts his eyes downwards as not daring to look up,
and with a soft and trembling voice, Alas, Sir (quoth he) it is for you gods to
see one another, we mortals dare not behold you. Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria inveighing against those that held God was corporeal, and had bodily
shape and members as men have; the Egyptian Monks that were of that opinion,
come out of their Cloisters with one consent against him, purposing in their
fury to dispatch him without more ado: and how does he break their rage? why as
Jacob before had done his brother Esaus. He comes out voluntarily unto them,
and speaks them fairly, Genesis 33. 10. Legatur Histor. in Socrat. lib. 6. This
Theophilus was a juggling Hypocrite.
When I see you (says he) me thinks I see the face of God. And surely had he
carried him as conscionably in other things, as he did cunningly in this,
future ages would have counted him as pious, as he was politic. Tell me why
should any man lose his life or his estate for the freedom of his tongue; which
as it is otherwise unseasonable, like to his that preached to them that were
robbing him, or like that of Ex^^abat permixtus manipulis bona pacis ac belli
discrimina disserens monere. Id plerisque ludibrio, pluribus taedia, nec
decrant qui propellerent, proculcaremque ni admoni^u modessissimi cu usque and
^liis minita^ibus emisisset intempesti^^m eloque entiam. Tacit. Hist. lib. 3.
Musonius, who discoursed in the Camp of the benefits of Peace to the Soldiers
that were ready armed, and fully resolved for War: So it may sometimes kindle
rage, increase suspicions, justify pretenses of Tyrants and wicked men, and
bring an inevitable danger; whereas a word wisely spoken, would preserve a man's
life, and reserve him for better times. In such cases therefore, a man need not
fear to sooth up men ironically in their ways, and to sprinkle them as he did
the people with holy water, and cry, Quandoquidem hic populus vult decipi,
decipiatur; Since this people will be deceived, let them be deceived. Surely
had not the King farther conjured him to speak the truth, the Prophet Micaiah
would have gone no farther then that ironical concession, 1 King. 22. 15.
Go and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver Ramoth Gilead into thy hands. And
Act. 23. 6.
what did St. Paul aim at when he cried, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee,
and the son of a Pharisee, but to save his head, by insinuating in a fair way
into the hearts of that Sect? and how could he, as he professes, become 1 Cor.
9.20,21, 22.
all things to all all men, A Jew to the Jews: To them that were under the Law
as under the Law: To them that were without Law as without Law, weak to them
that were weak; but that he must needs make himself much as they were, and
condescended a great way to their customs and carriages, opinions and
affections. Somewhat therefore even of flattery at some times and in some cases
may be admitted.

2. When we see men well given, or well disposed, or while yet we are uncertain
what course they will certainly take, it is not amiss to preoccupy their
affection by (as yet an undeserved) commendation. To commend them as those of
whom we are persuaded well in all things, as those that abhor wicked courses,
as those that will do so and so, approve themselves every way to God and Men.
This is as St. Paul speaks, to take men 2 Cor. 12. 16.
by guile; to persuade men to be such, while we praise them as such already.
And so we suppose St. Paul would have taken Act. 26. 27.
Agrippa, Believe thou the Prophets? I know (says he) that thou believe.
And yet, if he knew him thoroughly, he could not but know him to be a wicked
man, -- Dcinde adamas notissimus and Berenices
In digito factus pretiosior, hunc dedit olim
Barbarus inc^stae, dedit hunc Agrippa sorori.
Juvenal. Satyr. 6.
Legatur Joseph. lib. antiq. 20. cap. 5.

one that lived in Incest (which the Heathen took notice of) with that Bernice
which sat with him at that time on the Bench, one that by his life did give
little testimony of his faith, but this was the first time that St. Paul
preached to him, and not knowing but his words might work somewhat, he would
willingly have persuaded him to be such, as he would have had him. And thus
when Macrinus was first chosen Emperor, a cruel man, one whom his servants
called In vernaculis vel aulicis tam impius, tam pertinax, tam asper, ut servi
illum sui non Macrinum dicerent sed Macellinum, quod macelli specie domus ejus
cruentaretur sanguine vernularum. Jul. Capitol.
Macellinus, Butcher for his cruelty, the Senators with great wisdom
determined to give him the name of Pius, which though it were not taken by him
(but that of Felix assumed to his no little Quum illum Senatus pium and felicem
nuncupasset, felicis nomen accepit, pii habere noluit. ^^nde in eum Epigramma
illatum Graeci cujusdam Poetae videtur extare quod Latin hac sententia
continetur.

Histrio jam senior turpis, gravis, asper, iniquus,
Impius and felix sic simul esse cupit.
Ut nolit pius esse, velit tamen esse beatus:
Quod natura negat, nec recipit ratio.
Nam pius and felix poterat dici atque videri.
Cisi imperium infelix est, erit ille sihi.
Idem.
contempt, as if he could be happy and not pious) yet it took off from him the
keenness of his cruelty. But as the course is good when we see men well
disposed, or are uncertain which way the byas of their affection will carry
them: so nothing worse then when we find them vitiously inclined either to
cruelty or debauchedness. As the former will be ashamed not to be such as they
are in others estimation, so the latter will satisfy themselves with an empty
commendation. The one will seek to deserve, the other will content themselves
to have the reputation of good men. The one will grow better, the other worse
by being commended. Postquam cunctae scelera pro egregiis accipi vidit,
exturbat Octaviam sterilem dictaas. Tacit. annal. lib. 14.
When Nero found himself applauded in his cruel courses, he added cruelty to
cruelty, drunkenness to thirst, till blood touched blood; till he had murdered
not only the chiefest of other families in Rome, but those also of his own,
even all his nearest and dearest relations. As therefore praises are like
Cordials to good hearts: so they are Cankers to corrupt affections. As they are
Antidotes to those that have not tasted of vice, so they are rank poison to
surfeited stomachs. And no less Traitors are they that puff up cruel Tyrants
with false praises in public, then they that poison virtuous Princes in
private. True it is, they that wait in Gods and Princes Courts, both the one
and the other, may have sometimes a kind of necessity (if Nulla necessitas
delinquendi. Tertul.
there were any necessity of sinning) to speak well of that, to which they
stand very ill affected. Thus Burrhus while Nero was playing the Minstrel on
the Stage, stands by for fear, Tacit. annal. lib. 14.
and moerens and laudans, mourning and yet commending. Prexaspes reproves
Cambyses for his sottishness. He to show himself sober, calls for bow and
arrows, and setting Prexaspes son for a mark, fastens an arrow in his heart,
asking Prexaspes, An satis certam haberet manum. Ille negat Apollinem potuisse
certius mittere.
Thus Prexaspes commended that dart, which at once pierced both his child's, and
his own heart. But we cannot commend such commendations. Upon this Sencca,
Sceleratius telum illud laudatum est quam missum. Senec. de Ir. lib. 3. cap. 14.
That which is wickedly acted, is more wickedly commended. Yet as they mourned
inwardly, while they commended the Tyrants outwardly. So though we censure the
commendations of such, yet we cannot but mourn for their condition.

3. If we praise men that they may do well, then much more those that have done
well already, especially the dead, who have run their race and finished their
course in all godliness and honesty. Illorum lauda virtutem quorum jam certa
victoria est. Illos devotis extolle praeconiis quorum secure potes adgaudere
coronis. Bern. fest. omn. sanct. -- Quamdiu quis subjacet mutationi, non potest
cum securitate laudari -- Tunc stabilis and firma laus est, quando meritum non
poterit jam perire laudati. Salv. ad Eccles. Cathol. l. 4.
Then praise is free from flattery, and may be given with most safety. While
men live here, and are subject to mutability, they cannot be praised with
security. But when God has set a crown of righteousness upon them in heaven,
then may we set a garland of praise upon them on earth. Nay it is not good to
bury eminent persons in silence; lest we seem to envy both their virtues and
persons. He was a wicked and slothful person that hid his Lords money in the
ground without laboring at all to bring in some advantage unto his Lord; and
we do not think him so good and diligent as he should be, that shall without
more ado bury eminent graces, and never labor to bring in any gain or glory to
God. To give men their due commendation will be a testimony of our own good
meaning, and free us from suspicion of all evil and malevolent affection. But
here it will not be amiss to put in a double caution.

1. That we seek not to nourish, but correct rather, that itch after praise and
vainglory that discovers it self in many. Totus hic locus est contemnendus in
nobis, non negligendus in nostris. Cicer.
All this matter should be despised by our selves, but not neglected by others.
(...). Nazian. de Basil. Fun. orat.
We should not pursue, but be pursued by Honor. As soon as he had wrought any
miracle he left the place. Nam ei haud volupe erat apud eos qui ipsum laudarent
commorari. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 9.
Good Hilarion would not stay in the place where he was praised. And indeed it
is a (...). Plut. (...).
swinish passion to stand and suffer ones self to be clawed or scratched: A
senseless blockish business to be carried on to well doing only as (...). Ibid.
pitchers by the ears. Romans 2. 7.
True it is, we may seek by well doing for honor and glory, but not from men,
but God, nor think any praise any thing, but what comes from God. 2 Cor. 10. 18.
For he is approved, not whom men but God commends. When he that is Lord of all
men, does set out or speak well of any; such a man is higher then all, though
he be dispraised by all; whereas on the contrary, it will nothing prosit a man,
if the Lord praise not, though all with one consent do speak his praises. Let
us teach men therefore to seek chiefly approbation from God in respect of
themselves, though we teach them to commend others that God may be glorified,
and others, by that means may be gained unto God. 2. Whether we praise the
living or the dead, let us keep our selves within (...). Lucian, pro imag. --
(...). Ulys. in Homer. Il. 10.
the bounds and limits of Truth. Est illud quibusdam studium in speciem quidem
sanctum sed tamen ineptum, Sanctorum lauds in immensum a^^ollere, dum illis
tribuunt non quantum adfuit, sed quantum illis optant ads^isse. Hi Christum si
queant majorem quam est cupiunt reddere. Eras. in vit. Hieron.
Many are excessive in this kind, ascribing unto men not what is or was in
them when living, but what they themselves desire should seem to be in them. A
sort of men that would (as one says) if they could, make Christ greater then
he is. And such while they would seem learned and pious, do blazon their own
folly, and make themselves ridiculous; and while they endeavor to make the
praises of those whom they set out highly glorious, render all suspicious if
not as wholly fabulous. (...). Thucid.
For this is the nature of men, while the virtues of others go not beyond a
possibility of imitation, they are heard with good affection, but when they
seem to pass those limits, they are slighted through envy, or cast off with
scorn through their incredibility. A wise man therefore will so manage his
commendation, that it do not exceed its due proportion. (...). Lucian. pro.
imag.
The statues which were erected for the Conquerours in the Olympic Games,
might by no means exceed the stature of their persons; nor should men's
commendations be raised a jot higher then their just perfections.
4. If there be any thing singularly good in wicked men, we know nothing but it
may be commended, and their vices at death passed over in silence, as David did
Saul's. Yet lest by commending what was good, we should seem to justify what
was evil in them, we think it not amiss to use some such like expressions, as,
That we could wish, that they had discharged their duty in other things as well
as in this: That as they abounded in this grace, so they had in others also:
That they had acquitted themselves in every kind as well as in this, or the
like. An Orator we know should conceal as much as may be the faults of him whom
he commends. But Aliter censor loqui debet, aliter Rhetor. Agel. lib. 1. c. 6.
it is one thing to speak as an Orator, another thing as a Censor or Minister.
Or if any one will contend that of the dead nothing is to be said, or nothing
but good, we will not contest. Only as this was given in charge still by the
Romans Forma senatusconsulti, ultimae semper necessitatis habita est; ut
diceretur consulibus, nequid resp. detrimenti caperet. Live. lib. 3.
to their commanders, in dangerous cases; Nequid resp. detrimenti capiat; That
howsoever they acted, they should have a care that the Commonwealth suffered no
damage; So howsoever men act in this kind, let them have a care, that Piety
do not suffer. Ad impietatem obolum unum confer perinde valet ac siquis
conferat omnia. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 7. de Marco Arethus. He suffered great
crueltics, (...). Nazian. Orat. 1. contra Julian.
As he cried when he was urged to contribute money to the rebuilding of an
Heathenish Temple which he had puled down, I will not give a halfpenny 'to
wickedness: so let not half a word be spoken in commendation of wickedness, or
that may strengthen the hands of the wicked. 2 Cor. 13. 8.
We may do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. If there be any thing
Noble in any, it may, but whatsoever is otherwise, may not be commended. And so
I pass from the commendation to the thing commended, the Nobleness of the
Beroeans. These were more noble --

The Beroeans were more noble then those of Thessalonica. Some take the words
spoken in reference to their stock, birth, parentage, as Erasmus who interprets
the words not of the Beroeans but Thessalonians, thus, Illi autem erant summo
genere nati inter eos qui erant Thessalonicae; These were best born, men of the
greatest Nobility amongst those of Thessalonica. And the words in the Original
will bear that Translation, but the story, as any may soon see, will not bear
that construction of the words. Others take the words as spoken of the
Beroeans, and in reference to their manners, conditions, dispositions: Thus,
These were more Noble; that is, more ingenuous, more receptive of the Christian
doctrine, as our learned Oracle Dr. Hammond: More virtuous, more religious, as
Beza. Others think they may be referred to both, as Gorran, They were more
Noble; that is (says he) Genere vel animo; either in respect of their descent,
or in respect of their disposition. We conceive they are so called not in
reference barely to their birth, but their disposition also. And if they are
said to be more Noble in reference to their Ingenuity; then we may observe,
That they which are well borne, are more ingenuous, better conditioned then
others.

If they are said to be more Noble in reference (as most think) to their Piety,
then we may observe, That Piety is the best Nobility, or Godly ones are the
greatest Nobles.

And if we take the words in this last sense only, yet the former Doctrine will
nevertheless stand good. For godly men would never be said to be more Noble
then others, but that it is found even by common experience, and taken for
granted, that such are usually better qualified, better conditioned then
others. Tertul. de res^rrect. car. cap. 30.
De vacuo similitudo non competit, de nullo parabola non convenit. No man takes
a similitude or parable from that which is empty of all likelihood, and has no
ground of resemblance with that which is spoken of. Nothing can be an image of
Truth, unless it first truly subsist it self.

These two Doctrines therefore shall be the subject of our future discourse;
the first whereof is as we have said, That the better their birth is, the
better men commonly are. They that are well descended, are commonmonly better
gifted and better conditioned then others. They that are Nobly born, are
usually endowed with better abilities, and better qualities. Yea the natural
birth, if truly noble, is no bad preparation for the spiritual birth.

True it is Themistocles, Marius, Eumenes.
many of mean birth have proved great and good men in their geneneration. Many
have been great actors in War abroad, great Orators at home in Peace. The
Decii, Plebeiae Deciorum animae, plebeia fuerunt
Nomina, pro totis legionibus hi tamen and pro
Omnibus auxiliis atque omni plebe Latina
Sufficient diis Infernis terraeque parenti.
Juven. 6. 8. vide Mar. Senec. Controvers. 6.


Many Plebean souls have had Patritian spirits. Many whose Parents names have
scarce been known, have been of better note then the noblest of their times.
Romulus. Servius Tullus patre nullo, matre serva. Live. lib. 4.
It Is noted in two of the Roman Kings, that the one had no Father, the other no
Mother: yet both famous in their age, and no small founders of the Roman
greatness and glory. For all arts In hoc viro tanta vis animi ingeniique fuit
ut quocunque loco natus esset, fortunam sibi ipsi facturus suisse videretur --
Huic versatile ingenium sic pariter ad omnia fuit, ut natum ad id unum diceres,
quodcunque ageret. Live. lib. 39.
Livy writes of Cato the elder, That he exceeded all. That he had so much
spirit and wit, that he could have cut out his own fortune wheresoever he had
been born. And whereas others were excellent only in one kind, he was so good
at every thing, that you would have thought him born on purpose for that one
thing, whatsoever it was, he undertook. For Oratory, not to take notice of
Demosthenes and Cicero, whose mean birth (...). Plutarch of both. in vit.
Demost. Cicero of himself, Me hominem novum consulem fecistis; Orat. in Rull.
ad pop. Item, quemadmodum cum petebam nulli me vobis autores generis mei
commendarunt, sic quicquid deliquero, nullae sunt imagines, quae me a vobis
deprecentur -- Et pro Plancio, Ego huc a me ortus and per me nixus ascendi,
istius egregia virtus adjuvabitur a commendatione majorum.
all know, and was often cast in their teeth: Interrogatus quid esset (...);
nescire se quidem, sed si ad rem pertineret esse in suae declamatione
respondit. Quintil. lib. 2. cap. 11.
The great master in his Art tells us of one whom yet he names not, who being
asked, what such and such a figure was? Answered, He knew not, but if there were
any figure belonging to an Orator, he was sure he had it. For Government of
State affairs, a Franciscus Arauda vestitu and barba horridiore, quod viaelicet
renunciasset rebus humanis, alioqui ita accommodatus ad domos principum, quibus
diu praefuerat, moderandas, ut nusquam non and in consultandis and in
administrandis rebus and maturandis primas obtinuerit parts, idque sola
naturae bonitate atque ingenii dotibus, citra ullam scientiam ac citra ullas
propemodum literas, ut appareat ex homine nativis bonis excellenti, formari
potius praecepta sapientiae, quam ex praeceptis sapientiae formari hominem
excellentem. Laur. Vall. Histor. Ferd. lib. 2.
Modern Historian informs us of one, that by the goodness of his own nature
alone, and out of the stock of mere natural wit, without any knowledge, or
almost any letters, carried the credit away from all his fellow Counselors,
and passes this judgment withal, That the precepts of wisdom should be framed
rather from the excellent parts of nature found in a man, then that an
excellent man should be framed from the precepts of wisdom.

Such copies sometimes nature sets us in common births of excellent abilities.
And so for singular qualities, we may see some of mean descent excel Dilig^bat
dominus Iohannem sicut dicit Chrysostomus magis familiariter propter ingenitam
mansuetudinem, and propter virginalem puritatem, quae etiam caeteris paribus
facit hominem diligi magis tenere. Bon. lib. 3. distinct. 32 quaest. 2. resol.
in meekness and gentleness (for which as for his virginal purity some say
Christ loved John above others) and in Gentiles umbram ipsius reveriti sunt o^
insignem naturae bonitatem. Mag. ex Pallad. cent. 5.
goodness of nature, for which the Heathen did reverence even the very shadow of
Isidore. Alexander Halensis praeceptor ejus saepe de ipso dicere consuevit,
videri sibi Adamum in Bonaventura non peccasse. Sext. Senens. by blioth. lib. 4.
As Hales said of Bonaventure, some are so excellent, that Adam may have seemed
almost not to have sinned in them, that very little taint of original
perverseness may seem to rest upon them. As there be (...), so there be also
(...), wonders as well as monsiers in nature. But if we look to the common
course or (...). Jam 3. 6.
wheel (as St. James says) of generation, men's abilities and qualities,
caeteris paribus, are ordinarily according to their births. Nature brings not
any thing so excellent from a common, as she does from a noble stock. The old
proverb is true, (...),
(...).
Nazian. carm. Iamb.

The bounds of the Mysians and Phrygians are distinct: And the flights of
Eagles and Iayes are different. (...). Eurip. in Orest.
The natural parts of men of mean condition are commonly weaker and their minds
generally more sordid and base. And if any thing singular do put forth it self
at any time in them, yet it has a (...). Id. in Rhes. (...). Pind. Olymp. Od.
13. (...). Id. Nem. Od. 3.
tang of the stock from whence they came, and carries a taint with it, as good
wine that is drawn from a musty cask. If they strive to do better then
ordinary, yet many unhandsome carriages are mingled still with their best
actions; and though we shall find in many of them many good things, yet seldom
shall we see them come off in any with that grace as they that are better born
and bred shall do. (...). Niceph. Greg. Hist. lib. 8.
Apes, as they say, act as Apes, and Ants as Ants. If they cannot do as Eagles
or Lions, it is by reason of a deficiency in their nature, and for want of
sufficiency of discretion which should govern their actions. So that it was not
for naught, that Thales or Plato, or whosoever he were, did bless himself,
that he was born a Grecian and not a Barbarian. Good parentage is a great
blessing, and they that are well born (as Plato said) have (...). Aristot. de
Platon. pol. 2. cap. 3.
gold and silver, special excellencies mingled with their natures. Whereas
Artificers and Husbandmen are made up as it were of Brass and Iron. For
instance, we see by manifold experience, that men of noble and gentile birth
excel the vulgar sort.

1. In docility. They have more Quaedam sunt rapacia virtutis ingenia and ex se
fertilia. Senec. Epist. 95.
catching wits, more sudden snatching apprehensions then others. The doctrine
that is instilled into them, falls on them as the dew on the tender herb, and as
the showers upon the grass, and not as in others as rain on the highway which
without continual dropping can make no impression. Wisd. 1. 4.
Into a malicious soul wisdom (says the wiseman) will not enter, nor dwell in
the body subject unto sin: And the thick skin knowledge cannot pierce, nor
lodge in the rude and rougher constitutions of the vulgar. The very countenance
of noble youths does seem to smile and allure the Muses unto them, and the
Muses again seem to smile on them, and to be ready to embrace them as their
favorites, and afford them all the kindnesses they can as their choysest
darlings: whereas they shun the Country complexions, hate your mechanic
companions, and turn away from them, as holding themselves much disparaged by
such, when they make love unto them. If true Gentlemen court them in earnest,
they grow more familiar with them in short time, and dive deeper into their
secrets, then others that serve a full Apprentiship with them.

2. In ingeny. As their wit; are more catching, so they are more fruitful in
themselves. As they excel for capacity, so also for fertility. Like well
manured ground, they bring forth a better crop then your barren soil or Forest
lands. Mat. 13. 54.
Whence (say they in the Gospel) has this man this wisdom, and these mighty
works? Is not this the Carpenters son? Is not his Mother called Mary? and his
brethren James and Joses, Simon and Judas? and his sisters are they not all
with us? whence then has this man all these things? They might well wonder
indeed, that a Carpenters son should discover so much wisdom: Such mean births
can seldom say unto Wisdom, Prove. 7. 4.
Thou art my Sister, and call Understanding their Kinswoman. But we know well,
he had a Divine birth, a more noble generation, and thence did that wisdom, and
those works shine forth in him. And what are all the wise Sentences and pithy
Apophthogmes that are extant, but the productions commonly of more noble
births, or at least more noble educations. Eccl. 38. 33.
The vulgar sort are not sought for in public Counsel, nor set high in the
Congregation -- nor are they found where Parables are spoken. Whatsoever
savours of Ingenuity is suspected as not coming from them. The Tyrians were
sometimes driven out by their servants, who were resolved at last to set up one
to King it over the rest. And who should that be, but he that first spyed the
Sunrising. Whereupon Stratos servant looking Westward, by his Masters advice,
first discovered the beams of the Sun guilding the tops of the hills, before the
body of the Sun could be seen. The fact savoured not of a servile wit, and
inquiry being made, the device was found to be the Masters and not the Man's.
Tunc intellectum est quantum ingenua servilibus ingenia praestant, malitiaque
servos non sapientia vincere. Justin. lib. 18.
And by that they all understood, how much ingenuous dispositions do differ
from those of servants. Though they may exceed them in malice, yet they must
come short of their Masters in Wisdom.

3. In magnanimity. Though they have better wits then others, and could help
themselves many times out of danger, yet they scorn to make use of their brains
to save basely their skins. (...) sub. (...). Indecora, aut aliquid simile.
Eurip. sphig.
Men of mean condition have this advantage, they can in extremities take such
courses, and accept of such terms as noble personages cannot without loss, or
will not, lest they should in the baseness stain their honor. Does the enemy
overbear them in number? though they might do it without diminution of their
dignity, yet their spirits are so high, that they will not take an advantage or
help themselves by warlike stratagems or policy, lest they should seem When
Parmenio and the rest would have had Alexander fall upon Darius by night: he
replied, (...). Plut. in vit. Latrunculorum and furum ista solertia est quam
praecipitus mihi, quippe illorum votum est unicum sallere -- malo me fortunae
poeniteat quam victoriae pudeat. Curt. lib. 4.
to steal a Victory. Nay, Job 39. 22.
as the Horse in Job, they will mock at fear, and looking on a numerous Army
make themselves merry with the greatness of the company, Henry the V. of
England demanding of Captain Gam at Agincourt, what number of Frenchmen they
had to deal withal. He made him this notable answer, after view of their Army,
That there were enough to be killed, enough to be taken prisoners, and enough
to run away. Sir Wat. Ral. lib. 5. 1 part. Hist. World
as having before them the more to kill, the more to take prisoners, the more
to run away. Caesar when the Mariner was afraid and would have turned back, B^no
animo and securo osto, Caesarem enim and Caesaris fortunam vehis. Zonar. annal.
tom. 2.

Fisus cuncta sibi cessura pericula Caesar,
Sperne minas, inquit, pelagi, ventoque surenti
Trade sinum. Italiam si coelo autore recusas
Me pete, sola tibi causa haec est justa timoris
Vectorem non nosse tuum.
Lucan. lib. 5.
Do winds and waves oppose them? yet their spirits are as big as both, and they
will Act. 27. 15. (...).
(...) bear up against both, outface and outbrave both. Neminem equidem timeo
praeter Deos immortales. Philippus Flamin. Lib. lib. 32.
Do great ones, such as think themselves Lords of the world, treat? They have
learnt to fear none, but him that is indeed Supreme Lord of all. May they save
their life by flight? Neh. 6. 11.
Should such a man as I fly? said Nehemiah. (...). Joseph. lib. antiq. 12. cap.
18.
God forbid (said Judas) that the Sun should see me turn my back upon mine I
will no longer live
If Rebels life must give,
said: that peerless Peer, stout North-Hampton whose memory yet lives in his
right Noble posterity.


Enemies. Varro loco non humili solum sed etiam sordido ortus est. Patrem
lanium fuisse ferunt. Live. lib. 22.
At Cannae Varro, one of the Roman Consuls, a Butchers son flies, AEmylius
Paulus, a man of more noble descent, having lost the victory chooses rather to
die. Illa nobilior animi significatio quamlibet magna canum and venantium
urgente vi contemptim restitansque cedit, in campis and ubi spectari potest,
idem ubi virgulta sylvasque penetravit acerrimo cursu fertur velut abscondente
turpitudinem loco. Plin. lib. 8. Not. Hist. cap. 16.
The Lion is never seen in danger to run; and howsoever noble spirits may
sometimes run away from dangers with their When one told Brutus he must fly,
Omnino fugiendum respondit, verum manibus, and non pedibus; and hoc dicto
stricto gladio incubuit. Zonar. annal. tom. 2.
hands, yet they scorn to betake themselves basely to their heels. When one
would have had Consalvus retired, Consalvus aeterna memoria dignis verbis magno
animo rejecit, cum diceret optare se potius sepulchrum suum eadem hora pedem
unum ulterius habere, quam paucos cubitos retrocedendo vitae suo spatio centum
annos addere. Guiccard. lib. 6.
Yea they have vowed rather to march forward presently to certain death, then
by going back but a few cubits with dishonor from the enemy to add a hundred
years to their life.

4. In humility. That (as Nobilitatis soror humilitas. AEn. Syl. 1. cons. Basil.
one says) is the Sister of Nobility. Though Gentlemen and Noble personages
have great spirits, and do not love to be humbled, yet they know how to humble
themselves. They know how to carry themselves submisly toward God. The country
Shepherds take only the pains to visit, but the Wisemen fall down and worship
our Savior. In illis gratiae prior, in istis Humilitas amplior. August. Mat.
2. 11. Luke 2. 16, 17.
The one had priority in matter of devotion, but the other were more lowly in
their adoration. They know how to condescend to men of low estate. Theod. lib.
5. cap. 18.
Placilla the Emperor Theodosius his wife disdained not to visit the
Hospitals, to physic the sick, to wash their pots, to taste their broths, and
to do all the offices of a common servant. When Pompey the great, flying out of
the battle at Pharsalia wanted servants at supper to tend on him, Favonius a
Gentleman that was with him made no dain to wash him, and anoint him, and to do
every thing which servants were wont to do for their Masters. Which one
observing that stood by, cried out, (...). Plut. in vit. Pomp.
Good God, how every thing beseemes a Gentleman. Such things beseem them
indeed, and true Gentlemen do not think they misbeseem them. Whereas they that
rise high from low estates do think it a foul disparagement to condescend to
such base services. The one being great by their own native worth know, they
shall not lose but gain by their Humility: the other being raised by their
wealth, or being the Minions of fortune, shun the thought of such services as
remembrances of their former servile condition. The one being high of
themselves, think nothing better then to condescend to those below them: The
other being low of themselves think of nothing but equalling or transcending
those which are above them. The one are careful to give respect, lest they
should seem to neglect others: The other are careful to observe what respect is
given them, fe^ring to be contemned themselves. The one throw off, that they
may not be gazed on: The other put on more ornaments then beseems them, that
they may be the more adored. Primus ex auro v^ste quaesita serici ac purpurae
gemmarumque vim plantis concupinit. Aurel. Vict. De Dioclet. -- Compertum habeo
humillimos quosque maxim, ubi alta accesserunt, superbia atque ambitione
immodicos esse. Hinc Marius patrum memoria, hinc iste nostra communem habitum
supergressi. Id. Diocletianus edicto sanxit uti omnes sine generis discrimine
prostrati pedes oscularentur, quibus etiam venerationem quandam exhibuit
exornans calciamenta, auro gemmis and margaritis quod fecesse ante C. Caligulam
memorant. Pomp. Laet.
So did Marius, so Diocletian, both of base beginning. The latter of which,
besides what he bestowed on other parts of his body, did deck and adorn his
feet with gold and all manner of precious stones, that men (as they were
commanded) might with less disparagement fall down and kiss them. A custom
which his holiness of Rome who professes himself a servant of the servants of
God, and is but perhaps some beggarly Monk or Friar till he sit down in St.
Peter's chair, has taken up and will not be induced to lay it down, though one
sometimes (Let Cranmerus un^ cum comite Wiltoniensi in Italiam contendit,
quibus ad Papam accedentibus servus servorum dei pedem osculandum extendit;
cunctantibus autem illis pusillus catulus qui comitis Wiltoniensis fuit
ingressus locum cum pedem vidisset gemmis auroque lucentem, rem tam rarum
lascivus dentibus apprehendit atque momordit -- Fluddus hunc locum citans canem
hunc non appellat, canem Protestantis, sed canem protestantem quasi,
protestantium religio vel in cane esse posset. Francis. Mas. de minist.
Anglican. lib. 2. cap. 9.
him be a Protestant, seeing they will have it so) did (as such unsufferable
pride deserved) bitingly protest against it. Though one of them was wont to
laugh it out and say, That Sixtus V. dicere solebat se domo natum illustri.
Domus enim in qua genitus erat cum lacero tecto ex magna part esset
discooperta a sole maxim illustrabatur. Cicarel. in vit.
he was born domo illustri, in an illustrious house (the house being poor and
uncovered where he was born) yet in all his actions, he showed himself as proud
and arrogant as any of the rest in good earnest.

5. In courtesy. A grace proper to Gentlemen and Noble personages (as appears
by the name) which follow the Court, and such as if it were freed from that
Hypocrisy and guile, wherewith too often it is mingled, as Titus the Emperor
was called, The delights of mankind for it, so it might justly be called, The
delicacy of humane speech and society. Men love to be used like men, and (...).
Eurip. Hippol.
courteous carriage wins more upon them, then a clownish good turn. It was a
noble speech of Augustus, Augustus quendam joco corripuit; quod sic sibi
libellum Porrigere dubitaret quasi elephanto stipem. Suet. in vit.
That a Petition should not be delivered to a Prince, as Provender to an
Elephant, of which we are afraid. And it is the noble practice of Gentlemen and
great ones to put off roughness and austerity, and to treat all according as
their name prompts them with gentleness and affability. To do this, the
Country man has not faculty, and the new risen Gallant, cannot think it suits
with his Authority. (...). Plut.
As unskilful Statuaries or Carvers of Images do imagine the great Colosses
they make, will be more stately and magnificent, if they make them bear a great
breadth, and set them out also stradling and gaping: So some by their
commanding voice and great looks, by roughness of carriage and retiredness of
life, do labor to draw respect and reverence to themselves, though indeed they
make themselves as monstrous and ridiculous as those Colosses or Statues to
wise men. Others will not vouchsafe you a single, or at least but a short sight
of themselves, Rarus in publicum egressus idque velata part oris ne ^atiaret
aspectum, vel quia sic decebat. Tacit. annal. lib. 13.
like Poppaea in the Historian, who seldom came out in public, and then kept
part of her face covered, lest men should have too full a sight, or because she
thought that posture best became her. Others fling away in a rage or storm
like (...). Plut. (...).
another of that sex in the Poet who was wont, Eftsoon to turn her head away
Not daigning a salute to stay.
And all this to keep up the greater port and Majesty, though indeed they get
nothing but a jibe or mock thereby. Some have highly commended their Masters,
as not giving them an ill word in long journeys, nay in long service; and why?
because as proud Pallas (ajebat) Nihil unquam se dominisi ^^u au^u ma^s
significasse vel, si plura demonstranda ^ssent scripto usum ne vocem
conseciaret. Taci^^^nnal. lib. 13.
Pallas (sometimes bondsman to Claudius) they scorned to speak to them lest they
should profane or make their voice common.

6. In liberality. As they are Magnanimous, so Liberal also, and that even to
Magnificence. (...). Nicet. chon. de Axucho. lib. 1.
As their hands are taught to war, so their fingers also to do good to those
that want. Plut. in vit. Cym.
Such was Cymon amongst the Athenians, who laid open his grounds, and kept open
house, and carried young men still with him well clad and well monied, that he
might relieve those whom he met, if they wanted in either kind. Such was
Gillius among the Agrigentines, who was called, Liberalitis praecordia. Val.
Max. l. 4.
The bowels of Liberality. Nay, many have been even (...). Nicet. chon. lib. 7.
Seas of bounty, Abysses of pity, as one speaks of Manuel the Emperor, who
afterward took up, though uncertain whether voluntarily or of necessity. Hence
your great and noble personages were called amongst the Grecians, Luke 22. 25.
(...), Benefactors. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and
they that exercise authority upon them are called Benefactors. Lord was written
Laford, and Lafh is that which we call Loaf, but signifies Bread in general.
So that he was a Laford or Lord that afforded bread. So Lady was written
Laphdean, that is, a woman dividing or distributing bread. V^rst.
And the names of Lord and Lady amongst us were taken up at first from men's
bounty in distributing their bread to those that were in necessity. The houses
of such in former times, being, as free Schools for Learning, so free Inns for
Hospitality, or as Domus ejus quasi quaedam munificientiae essicina. Valor. de
Gil. Agrig. lib. 4.
one calls them shops of munificence, wherein the religious trade of good works
and charity was set up and driven commonly. Men of mean condition have not the
means, and they that raise their estates by their own industry, or good
husbandry, have not the heart to do good in this kind, but as they get their
riches most an end basely, so commonly they keep them as sordidly; whose wealth
is as fast glewed to their hearts, as a Habuerat ille a patre relicta scriniae
aureis argenteisque pro regionum diversitate numismatis reserta; and quod sando
vix cognitum, mall^o cuneata; idque non avaritiae modo sed lusus etiam ac
contumeliae gratia. Hospites enim qui, permulti ad eum familiariter
divertebant, sciscitabatur Cujusnam generis pecunia indigerent, respondentes
ejus generis, ut in quam quisque provinciam iter haberet, adducebat ad scrinia
and quantum v^llent capere jubebant frustraque conaros deridebat and hos sibi
de amicis jocos captabat novo genere dissimulandae avaritiae jactandarumque
epum. Laur. Vall. de duce Gand. lib. 3. Hist. Ferd.
Spanish Dukes wedges of Gold were riveted in his coffers, which he kept not
only for Covertousness, but for sport also, giving any leave to take as much as
they would: it being as impossible to writhe or wrest any thing from them, as
it was from his crowded Chests. Such cannot boast Job 31. 17.
with Job, that they eat not their morsels alone, who living most an end
retiredly feed homely, cry out upon Luxury and Prodigality, being much of that
Interrogatus aliquando, Sonorum omnium, quem molestius audiret, Maxillarum
inquit ossa frangentium. AEn. Syl. de Albico hist. Bohem. cap. 35. -- Albicus
jampridem dignitati cesserat cum familiam edentem bibentemque far non posset.
cap. 42.
covetous Wretches mind, who being asked, What noise he liked worse? Replied,
That of cracking of bones between the teeth; and left means and maintenance
rather then he would be at charge to maintain a family. (...). Arist. Ethic.
lib. 4. cap. 1.
They are always freest who do not get their Estates by their own diligence,
but receive it by Inheritance. For they never feeling do never fear want, and
the other getting their wealth hardly, love it and tender it the more dearly,
as parents the children begotten of their own body, and Poets the works
begotten of their own brains.

7. In mercy. The more noble, the more merciful. Cruelty and Gentility cannot
stand together. The disposition of Noblemen and Gentlemen is like that of Non
caede cuiusquam unquam laetatus, justis suppliciis illachrymavit etiam and
ingemuit. Suet. in vit. Vespas.
Vespasian: who so little joyed in the sufferings and death of any, that he
wept and sighed deeply at necessary executions; like that of the Beneficium se
putabat accepisse cum rogaretur ignoscere; and tunc proprius erat veniae, cum
fuisset major commotio irae: praerogativa ignoscendt erat indignatum fuisse.
Ambr. de Theod. Senior. Cuidam ex necessariis aliquando sciscitanti, Cur
neminem qui illi intulisset injuriam morte aliquando multasset sic respondit,
utinam potius mihi potestas esset eos qui mortui sunt ad vitam denuo revocandi.
Socrat. de Theod. Jun. lib. 7.
Theodosii, the elder of which took it as a courtesy to be petitioned to show
mercy; and the more angry, was the more ready and willing to pardon: The latter
would willingly have raised those that were dead to life, but was altogether
unwilling to put any man living to death. Indeed, great cruelties have been
acted by both sorts, noble and ignoble persons, but the latter generally are
more eager in the prosecution, and more savage in the execution of their bloody
designs. The descent of Joseph is well known, and the Scripture notes this of
him, that he was Dr. Hammond Annot. cap. Mat. V. 19.
a just man; that is, according to the Hebrew phrase, a pitiful, a merciful
man, of which it sets down this as an evident argument, That he was unwilling
to make Mary his espoused wife which he took to be guilty of Adultery, a
public example, but resolved to put her away secretly, that she might not,
though he thought she deserved it, fall into open punishment. Generous natures
do not love, except it be upon incorrigible persons, or for the prevention of
otherwise inevitable dangers, to take the rigor of the Law, and have looked
upon it as an office as hateful (as sometimes that of Publican) to be an
Informer, Accuser or Promoter. Delator siquis extiterit fidelis, and per
delationem eius aliquis fuerit proscriptus vel interfectus, placuit eum nec in
fine accipere communionem. Si l^vior causa fuerit, intra quinquennium accipere
communionem. Si catechumenus fuerit, post quinquennii tempora admittatur ad
baptismum. Council. Elibert. Can. 73.
Such in the primitive times, if any were banished or put to death upon their
Information, were not admitted, no not at death, to the Communion, nor under
five years Repentance, if the punishment were lighter. And the same crime was
held sufficient to keep off for five years the Baptism of those that were not
yet Baptized, but sued for admittance to that Sacrament. And howsoever Actum de
praemiis accusatorum delendis. Thereupon Tiberius cries, Irritas sore leges --
subverterent potius jura, quam custodes eorum amoverent. Tacit. annal. lib. 4.
Magistrates do, and may, and must of necessity in some wise make much of
Informers, yet it is but as we do of Dogs, or Hawks, that destroy evil Beasts
and Vermin, and bring in the prey. And when they reward them, it is but like
our spitting in their mouths, or fleshing of Dogs with Venaticos canes sanguine
intestinisque captae ferae illecebrari a venatoribus utile est. Blond. lib. 7.
triumph. Romans
the Paunch. They and all other generous natures do secretly spit at them, and
Tacit. ait genus esse hominum publico exitio repertum. Ibid.
hate them worse then Dogs or Serpents, that bite of a sudden, unseen, unhurt.
But now your vulgar natures (as my self and many others found of late days by
experience) are prone to cruelty, loving, provoked or not provoked, all words
that may do mischief, and are ready to fall upon any mischievous practices,
glad if by the advantage of the times they can make use of Law, and Magistrate
to flesh their covetous or satisfy their malicious spirits. If the dog-dayes
of persecution be in at any time they are senting and coasting straight,
hunting after their prey, filling the air with their barkings and clamours,
incensing the Magistrate to sentence, and provoking many times (being more
savage themselves) the Non audebant hominivorae bestiae admodum prolixo tempore
ad corpora piorum accedere, sed in alios qui extrinsecus ipsas incitabant
ferebantur. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 7. Eodem tempore Gentiles in Christianos
vialenter insultare qui se Philosophos praedicabant, frequentes concursa^e,
nefanda quaedam mysteria obire, pueros qui nondum ex ephebis excesserant tum
masculos tum foeminas quo exta eorum inspicerent mactare, illorum carnes
degustare caeperunt. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 11. Phamices ventre Cyrilli dissecto
jecur gustant qui primum dentes deinde linguas amittunt. Theod. lib. 4. cap. 7.

Labitur hic quidam nimia formidine cursum
Praecipitans, capiturque: est illum in plurima sectum
Frusta ac particulas, ut multis mortuus unus
Sufficeret, lotum corrosis ossibus edit
Victrix turba --
Juvenal. Satyr. 15.
unwilling beasts to execure, and Non audebant hominivorae bestiae admodum
prolixo tempore ad corpora piorum accedere, sed in alios qui extrinsecus ipsas
incitabant ferebantur. Eusebius. lib. 8. cap. 7. Eodem tempore Gentiles in
Christianos vialenter insultare qui se Philosophos praedicabant, frequentes
concursa^e, nefanda quaedam mysteria obire, pueros qui nondum ex ephebis
excesserant tum masculos tum foeminas quo exta eorum inspicerent mactare,
illorum carnes degustare caeperunt. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 11. Phamices ventre
Cyrilli dissecto jecur gustant qui primum dentes deinde linguas amittunt.
Theod. lib. 4. cap. 7.

Labitur hic quidam nimia formidine cursum
Praecipitans, capiturque: est illum in plurima sectum
Frusta ac particulas, ut multis mortuus unus
Sufficeret, lotum corrosis ossibus edit
Victrix turba --
Juvenal. Satyr. 15.
like dogs eating sometimes the flesh and licking up the very blood of those
which they have massacred. The cruelties of men of better Rank have been great
enough, but those of the Vulgar sort commonly are more Populi tyrannis eo forte
perniciosior est quo periculosier ignorantia, quae nec pondus nec mensuram nec
legem habet, quam malicia quae tamen ipsa aliqua regula, aliquo fraeno, aliquo
termino gubernatur. Guicc. lib. 2.
fierce and fell because they have nothing at all of knowledge, policy or civil
education to take them off from their rage; but will, and malice, and
stubbornness enough to set them on. What Prove. 12. 10.
Solomon said in general of the wicked, we may say, as taught by experience of
them, The mercies of the vulgar are cruel. And surely every one may make it a
part of his Letany, From the mercy of a Coward and a Clown, Good Lord deliver
me.

8. Lastly, In affection to, and advancement of Religion. True it is, at the
first going forth of the Gospel, such as they embraced it but slowly. 1 Cor. 1.
26.
Not many wise men after the slesh, not many mighty, not many noble. But, as Et
hercle just aestimantibus regem liquet bona naturae ejus fuisse, vitia vel
fortunae vel aetatis. Curt. lib. 10.
he said of Alexander, That the good things which were in him, were to be
ascribed unto his Nature; but his vices to Fortune or Age: So, that they
embraced not straightwayes the Gospel is rather to be attributed to external
causes, matter of fortune, politic respects, worldly concernments, iniquity
of the times and age wherein they lived, then to their inherent qualities of
nature, which are better in them then in others, and in themselves no bad
preparations for the Gospel. Besides God at first did pass them by, leaving
them to walk on still in their own ways, and choosing those of the Ut mira
potentia per praedicatorum linguas claresceret prius mirabilius actum est ut
eorum praedicamium meritum nullum esset. Greg. mor. lib. 33. cap. 21.
meaner sort both for the promulgation and profession of the Gospel, that none
might think they were chosen for worldly respects, or dignity, or that the
Gospel was carried on by humane force and authority. But when once through the
mercy of God from on high, the dayspring from above did visit them, they above
all became Esa. 49. 23.
nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to the Church, Rev. 21. 24.
and brought in willingly their riches and glory with themselves into it. And
as 1 Timothy 3. 15.
the Church is the pillar and stay of truth, so they in special manner became
the stays and pillars of the Church. To whom do our material Churches, and
such like places of Gods worship, and our Universities the Seminaries and
Nurseries of Learning and Piety, owe their beginning to, throughout
Christendom; but to them, and such as have been raised up by them to share with
them in the like honor and dignity? And who entailed that portion upon the
Ministers of the Gospel (which God did at first settle upon the Tribe of Levi)
and that by We have given unto God both for us and our heirs for ever. Mag.
Chart. Offero Deo atque dedico omnes res quae in hac Chartula tenentur insertae
-- Si quis eas inde (quod fieri nullatenus credo) abstulerit, sub paena
sacrilegii, ex hoc Domino Deo, cui eas offero atque dedico, districtissimas
reddat rations. Cont. 9. cap. 6. This was the manner of Dedication.
Solemn Vow, that it should never be cut off, but they? And who are they that
of late would have pulled down our Churches as places of superstition,
destroyed our Universities as the Pests (which they stuck not to call them) of
the Land, and stood ready (as Rev. 12. 4.
the Dragon in the Revelation over the woman) to devour the holy thing which
was left, but the Vulgar sort, and such who swallowing down much goods, as
(...). Nicet. Chon.
the Dragon much poison, do swell thereupon, and reckon themselves great
Gentlemen who have many times no greater ambition, then to be able to do those
a spite that are of our Profession.

Ovid. Ib.
Plebs superum, Fauni, Satyrique Laresque.
The meaner sort of the gods, the communalty;
The gods that in fields, woods, and chimney corners ly.
Such is the difference between noble and common births. The one would keep up
the Church and true Religion in luster and splendour with themselves; the other
would bring them down to as sordid a condition as their own Originals. And look
as Diocletian sought occidere Praesbyteros, Julian Praesbyterium. Sir Edward
Cook notes it, lib. 2. Report, fol. 44.
Julian an Usurper first of the Empire, and afterward an Apostate from the
Church, did not meddle with Ministers, as Diocletian who thought by killing of
them to root out Christianity, which lived still and flourished notwithstanding
their death; but by robbing the Church, and taking away the maintenance of
Churchmen, he destroyed the Ministry it self, upon which also ignorance and
decay of Religion presently ensued: So many, usurping the name of Gentlemen,
and apostatizing from the way of the Church, meddled not with Ministers
themselves (that was against Iulians and stood not with their principles) but
by taking away their Maintenance, would have rooted out the Ministry it self,
upon which Barbarism and Atheism must needs have followed. A work suitable to
their upstart Nobility, and newfound Piety, but such as could never yet find
entertainment by the truly ancient Nobility or Gentry. Genesis 47. 22.
Pharaoh will make no purchase of his Priests Lands, but reserves them till
better times, and allows them a portion, when their Land would not, himself. 1
King. 18. 19.
Iesabel entertains four hundred of Baals Prophets at her own Table.
Sacerdotiorum apud Romanos quinlaplex proventus, Beneficia, stipes, solutiones,
donationes, damnatorum bona seu consiscationes. Vid. Blond. lib. 2. triumph.
Romans
The Romans richly endowed their Priests. Qui bona fide Deos colit, amat and
Sacerdotes. Stat. Epist. praefix. libr. Syl. 5.
And whosoever (says the Heathen Poet) does in good earnest worship the Gods,
the same does make much also of their Priests. And as yet our Nobility have
thought rather of preserving then robbing their Ministry. And thus we see by
experience, that men of good descent are better conditioned, and do in many
things excel those of the Vulgar sort, and that a good natural birth in it
self, is no bad preparation for the spiritual. But how comes it to pass that
such as are well descended, do so far transcend others?

1. This happens by virtue of their generation. (...). Epicur. in Plut. Zeno
said that the seed was (...). Diog. Laert.
The seed is as it were the abstract of soul and body, and carries the
qualities of both along with it. Nunquid non in semine tota arbor? Vitium ergo
seminis, vitium est totius arhoris. Chrysol.
The whole tree is in the seed and if the seed be good, the tree is good, if
the seed be naught the tree is naught. Andronicus, reproved for his lust, puts
it off with a jest, (...). Nicet. annal. lib. 3.
If the first fruits be holy, the lump also is holy, and if the root be holy so
are the branches. Pabuli sapor apparet in lacte, and vini vis existit etiam in
accto. Senec. Nature. quaest. lib. 3.
The water in the pitcher rellishes of the fountain from whence it springs. The
milk savours of the Land whereon the Cattle feed; the Vinegar of the Wine of
which it came. Every thing has a smatch of that from whence it takes its
original. Fortes creantur fortibus and bonis. Est in juvencis, est in equis
patrum Virtus nec imbellem feruces progenerant aquilae columbam. Horat. car.
lib. 4. od. 4.
We see in the offspring of birds and beasts, the virtue and spirit of the
Pa^ent; and we may observe Generosa in ortus semina exsurgunt suos. Senec.
Troad.
the corn that is sown rising up to its growth according to the quality of the
grain. Nullo firmiore indicio sui seminis esse credebat quam scritatis. Sueton.
vet. Call.
Caligula took Drusilla to be his own daughter by her cursed conditions. And
Parents have no more certain way to judge of their own title to their children
then this, that they are like themselves in their dispositions. Alexandrum
posses etiam in moriente matre cognoscere. Justin. lib. 14.
Men might see (was it said) the spirit of living Alexander in his dying
Mother: and we may say as truly, the spirit of the dead Ancestors may be
discerned in their surviving children. For as Stat. lib. 9. Thebaid.
the Poet speaks of one that was killed in the water, Ille manet fundo, rediit
pro corpore sanguis.
The body lay beneath in the bottom, but the blood
Start up, and on the surface of the water stood.
So though the remains of men's Ancestors lie buried in the dust, yet their
blood runs fresh and quick in their childrens veins. As we see ordinarily (to
(...). Arist. lib. 2. polit.
omit the strange resemblances in the productions of brute beasts) Plurima
vultu Matter in^st. Stat. lib. r Achil. Amilcarem viventem redditum sibi veteres
milites credebant; c^ndem vigorem in vultu, vimque in oc^lis, habitum oris
lineamentaque intueri. L^v. de Hannibal. lib. 21.
much of Father and Mother in the Childrens countenance, garb, carriage, and
sometimes strange impresses on the body derived from Father to child: (
Saleucus Figura anchorae in faemore Salencui nata cum ipso parvulo fuit -- sic
filii nepotesque anchoram in faemore veluti notam generis naturalem habuere.
Justin. lib. 15.
had an anchor on his thigh, and so had his sons, and so had all his Nephews)
so we may observe the good qualities of the mind, the spirit of Magnanimity,
Hospitality, Policy, Learning, to be as hereditary in some Families (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). --
Nazian. car.

as the Lance to the Spartans, the Ivory shoulder to the Pelopidae, the
Grasshopper to the Athenians, or the scepter of Princes delivered over still by
succession to their children.

2. This happens by Education. The Virtutes cardinales radicaliter sunt a
natura, sed completive vel ab operum frequentia and perseverantia, vel a
gratiae influentia and praesidentia vel ex utraque causa -- equues ex sua
naturali compositione ap^iudinem ha^et ad been portandum and ambulandum; sed
illa aptitudo ad complementum potest reduci per ipsius equi assucsactionem, vel
per ipsius sessoris industriam, qui scit fraeno equum suum ducere, vel per
utraque. Bon. did. 33. quaest. 5. resolut.
virtues which they have radically by Generation are completed by Education.
The Virtutes cardinales radicaliter sunt a natura, sed completive vel ab operum
frequentia and perseverantia, vel a gratiae influentia and praesidentia vel ex
utraque causa -- equues ex sua naturali compositione ap^iudinem ha^et ad been
portandum and ambulandum; sed illa aptitudo ad complementum potest reduci per
ipsius equi assucsactionem, vel per ipsius sessoris industriam, qui scit fraeno
equum suum ducere, vel per utraque. Bon. did. 33. quaest. 5. resolut.
metalled horse is made much more serviceable by good training and mannaging.
The richness which is in some grounds discovers it self in far greater
fruitfulness by good husbandry and tilling of them. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Nazian.

The sparks that lie hid in flints, are drawn forth in great abundance by often
smiting and striking them. So the metalled disposition, the richness of nature,
the many sparks of virtue which are in some noble births, are drawn out to
greater perfection, through the care that is taken in their good Education.
Much is ascribed to the seed of which, much to the Carthaginienses fraudulenti
and mendaces non genere sed naturae loci, quod propter portus suos multis and
variis mercatorum and advenarum sermonibus ad studium fallendi quaestus studio
vocabantur. Ligures montani, duri and agrestes. Docuit ipse, Ager nihil ferendo
nisi multa cultura and magno labor quaesi^um. Campani semper superbi bonitate
agrorum and fructuum. Cicer. agrar. 2. Sunt tam civitatum quam sin gulorum
hominum mores Gentesque aliae iracundae, aliae audaces, quaedam timidae: In
vinum, in venerem proniores aliae. Live. lib. 45. Legate. Socrat. lib. 4. cap.
23. Flagrat vitio Gentisque suoque Ovid. de Tereo. Cui Gentile nefas hominem
revocare canendo. Stat. lib. 3. Thebaid. de Thessal.
place where, much to the Boeotum in crasso jurares aere natum. Horat. lib. 2.
Epist. Athenis tenue coelum ex quo acutiores putantur Attici: crassum Thebis,
itaque pingues Thebani and valentes. Cicer. de fat.
air wherein, men are born. What virtue there is in the seed, we have said. The
place where men are born by reason of the richness or barrenness of the soil or
situation in reference to the Sea, may confer somewhat toward men's manners.
The air according to the subtlety or grosseness thereof makes no little
difference in wits, colors, complexions, dispositions: but education is all in
all, and is sufficient almost of it self alone to alter all. It has been
questioned, though I think no great question need be made of it, Which conduces
most to good living, A happy brith or good breeding? As it was said of
Demosthenes the Orator, Alterum Demosthenem matter, alterum industria enixa
est. Val. Max. lib. 8.
That his Mother brought forth one Demosthenes, and his own labor and travail
brought forth another: So may we say here, Generation brings a man forth in one
sort, and Education in another. A happpy birth lays a good foundation,
Breeding carries on the building to perfection. And great Personages having the
advantage usually of others in their education do attain thereby to a far more
noble and generous disposition.

3. This happens by reason of good examples which they have about or nearer
their eyes then others. The Trophies of Miltiades would not suffer Themistocles
to sleep. Alexander the great was greatly animated by the gests of Achilles.
Caesar's spirit was stirred up by Alexanders acts, and he grieved that he had
done nothing at that age wherein the world was conquered by him. And if
foreign examples have wrought so much, how much more may we imagine, Disce
puer virtutem ex me verumque laborem
Fortunam ex aliis. --
Virgil. AEneid. 11.
Sis memor and te animo repetentem exempla tuorum
Et Pater AEneas, and avunculus excitet Hector.
Ibid.
-- Nec externo monitore petendus
Virtutis tibi pulcher amor, cognata ministrat
Laus animo. --
Stat. Syl. lib. 5.
(...). Arist. Ethic. lib. 10.


The domestic examples of Parents, kindred, alliance will excite us, whom
naturally we love and desire to be like, and to whom we are as loath to be a
shame our selves, as we are unwilling others should cast shame upon them. Erat
haec stimulatio ingens, exprobrantibus rectis cotidie, Imbecillem dominum
intrare alienum triumphum. Plin. nature. hist. lib. 35. cap. 2.
The Romans did wisely who would by no means suffer those that bought the
houses of Noble personages to remove or take down their Images. They knew the
standing of them would be a great spur, a huge incitement to virtuous
atchieveme^ts. The very houses otherwise would upbraid the weak owners for
entering upon other men's honors, and doing nothing worthy of honor themselves.
And does not the same consideration, think we, work as well, if not much more
upon noble issues to keep up the honor of their own houses, as it did upon
strangers, that they might not seem unworthy to lodge in those that they
purchased from others? Yes surely. And were it not for this, Nihil aliud video
in Nobilitate appetendum, nisi quod nobiles quadam necessitate constringuntur
ne ab Antiquorum probitate degenerent. Hieron.
wise Governors would not suffer the dignities and titles conferred on the
Ancestors, to pass and descend at a venture by succession upon their children,
but that by this means they would bind them by a kind of necessity not to
degenerate from the virtue of their Ancestors.

4. Lastly, This happens surely not without some Divine influence from above.
(...). AElian. de margarit. lib. 10. de animal. cap. 13. Legatur. Am. Marcel.
lib. 23.
Pearls are not engendered in the Sea without a flash of Lightning. And these
more precious Pearls of the earth are not begotten certainly without some
Divine flash or influence from heaven. The Heathen had their Heroes whom they
reckoned betwixt gods and men. And we know Deus excitat peculiares Heroicos
motus and impetus, in quibusdam etiam non renatis. Chemnit. exam. de oper.
Infid.
no Divines but are willing to allow Heroic motions, by which those whom we
may rightly term Worthies, were guided in their actions. And what we allow them
in their lives, may not without reason be granted in their births also. True it
is, the workings of God are free, and not tied to persons or families; but yet,
as the Spirit of God which is tied to no sort of men, was most commonly poured
out upon such as in Scripture are called the Sons, i.e. the Disciples of the
Prophets, who were trained up in the Schools of the Prophets, and by the study
of the Law, were fitted and disposed for the receiving of the Spirit (what 1 Samuel 10. 11.
else is the meaning of that proverb? Is Saul also among the Prophets? but that
(though it sometimes fell out otherwise Amos 7. 14.
as in the case of Amos, who was no Prophet, nor Son of a Prophet, but an
Herdsman, and gatherer of Sycamore fruits) it was unusual, that persons never
applying themselves to such courses, should be so suddenly and strangely
invested with the Spirit of Prophecy?) So I make no doubt nor question at all,
but that the Divine grace and blessing, though not tied to any, does most
usually fall in some special manner upon those Families whose Ancestors have
done worthily, and who set themselves after the example of their Ancestors to
do worthily in the places where they live. And when all these, Birth and
Breeding, special examples below, and special blessings from above, do concur,
when Heaven and Earth do consent and conspire together as it were in one for
their good, they must needs excel in matter of abilities, and have a
pre-eminence above others in respect of noble qualities.

Now this may let us see, first, How justly Noblemen and Gentlemen are in all
places prized, preferred, honored above others. Such are better born and
better bred then others; and so when Honor is cast upon them, a luster is cast
upon Honor. Honor it self being in a sort ennobled, when Noble persons are
honored. Whereas on the contrary, the advancement of men of mean birth and
condition, is a debasement of the Dignity to which they are advanced. And
(...). Plutarch. de Alexand. fort. lib. 2.
look as unskilful mechanics who set little statues upon great bases or
Pedistals do show the smalness and contemptibleness of their statues so much
the more: so those that raise men of sordid condition to high places of Honor
and Dignity do lay open their inabilities, and discredit them the more,
tottering and shaking this way and that way through their Instability. Judge. 9.
6.
The Shechemites raised up Abimelech, the son of a maidservant to be King over
themselves: but, as Iothan told them, They carried themselves therein
ingratefully; so the event showed them, that they dealt therein but
impolitickly. Prove. 30.21, 22.
When a Servant reigns, the earth is disquieted: neither will it be at rest
till it has vomited him up, as the stomach the meat that offends it. Then
Kingdoms and Common-weals are peaceable and prosperous, when Places and Persons
of Honor are sorted and suited to each other. True it is, the Nobility and
Gentry have always had many mouths opened against them: but they always
Nobilitas blanda conciliatricula --. Omnes boni semper Nobilitati favemus, and
quia utile est reip. nobiles homines esse dignos majoribus suis, and quia valet
apud nos clarorum hominum and been de repub. meritorum memoria etiam mortuorum.
Cicer. pro S^xt.
won upon the affections, and found favor with good men, both in love to their
Ancestry, and in hopes to have from them a like generous Progeny. Herodes cui
Israelitarum genus nihil conserebat, conscientia ignobilitatis impulsus,
generum eorum descriptiones exussi^: hoc se pacto nobilem futurum vatus, si nec
alius quispium publicis commentariis ad wus, genus suum ad patriarchas, and
proselytos, and advenas Israeli olim immix^os, refer possit. Eusebius. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
Herod being an Idumaean burnt all the Jews Genealogies, envying them that
antiquity whereof himself could not glory: so many being basely born
themselves, would root out the Nobility and Gentry; and, like the Fox that had
lost his tail himself, would have the entailment of Honor cut off from their
Posterity. The Peasant ordinarily boasts, how serviceable and useful he is to
the Commonwealth, and complains as they in the parable, that Gentlemen are not
only made equal, but set up far above them who bear the burden and heat of the
day. But AEstimandum est unde obveniat tanta dignitas auro and argento; cum and
consanguineis quantum ad genus, and potioribus quantum ad utensilitatem,
materiis praeferantur. Tert. de habit. mul.
Who knows not that gold and silver are deservedly preferred before Iron and
Brass which yet are more for use and service then they? Qui solas exstruere
divitias curant, nihil volunt inter homines melius credi quam quod ipsi tenent.
Iactantur igitur quacunque ratione possunt literarum amatores, ut videantur
illi quoque infra pocuniam positi. Petron. Quidam omnia prae divitiis humana
spernunt, neque honori magno locum, ^neque virtuti putant esse, nisi ubi effuse
affluant opes. Live. lib. 3.
The rich man cries up riches above all. And truly where a free, noble,
generous and rich mind goes along with rich means, no man can reasonably envy
any honor; and such might be infinitely serviceable to Church and Kingdom: but
when rich men would have themselves, as Nebuchadnezzars golden Image adored
only for their riches, and would have Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, fall down and
worship and bow before them, and yet have no more heart or spirit to do
themselves or country good, then dead Images; those we think deserve as justly
to be cast down as Images, and they that deal so with them, to be called as
deservedly Great, as (...). Plutarch. in Vit. Pomp.
he amongst the Romans for casting out the rich slaves that had crept in
sometimes into the Senate. Others would have virtue only honored in the Parent,
and no honor at all derived to the Children, till it appear they tread in
their Parents steps, and discover that they are not only, (...) but (...), well
born but well natured, fit for service, fit for action. And, that they would
have Dum nullum fastiditur genus in quo euiteret virtus, crevit imperium
Romanum. Live. lib. 4.
a passage open for all by virtue to honor, we dislike not. (...). Herod. lib.
6.
We commend not the custom of the Egyptians and Spartans, with whom Cooks sons
must of necessity be Cooks, Cryers sons Cryers, and Trumpeters sons Trumpeters.
Nor do we approve the practice of Id. lib. 6.
Clisthenes, who called the men of his own Tribe (...), that is, Rulers of the
people; but nicknamed other Tribes by the name of (...), Swineheards, (...),
Assekeepers, (...), Hoggards, and the like. Montaig. Ess. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Nor do we like the conceit of those of Calecut, with whom no tract of time, no
favor of Prince, no wealth, no office, no virtue, can give one that is not so
born, the name of a Gentleman. But that honor should not descend from Father
to Son, has we conceive many inconveniences. This crosses the common custom
of most Countries, which usually preserve their Genealogies, and keep up the
splendor of ancient Families: and makes way for sordid equality, which suits
not but with a Turkish Tyranny, or Helvetian Democracy. This cutteth off the
hope and exspectation of a worthy progeny, together with the reverence that is
owing to a Family. This ministers occasion to lay aside, that which is all in
all, the more careful and special manner of childrens education. This wrongs
the living and the dead: The dead whose memory by this means does die with him
presently; the living by depriving them of that honor which their Ancestors
purchased for them, perhaps with their blood. (...). Eurip. Elect.
What though children do not always patrizare, but sometimes degenerate from
the virtue of their Progenitors? The (...). Pindar. Nem. Od. 11.
tree which is barren this year may bring forth fruit the next. The ground that
lies fallow or brings forth nothing but thorns and thistles may in aftertimes
recompense its former barrenness with exceeding fertility. And the stock of
that family which now seems withered and dead, may sprout forth again and raise
up it self, and the land where it is planted, to singular glory. Though the
heart of David's children were not perfect with God as David's was; yet for
David's sake did the Lord his God give him a 1 King. 15. 4.
Lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his Son after him, and to establish Jerusalem.
The single service of one man may deserve to be kept in perpetual memory, and
to be honored for ever to all posterity. As that of our Great Albemarle, to
whom (though he did but his duty) yet, we conceive, the Kingdom will be ever
endebted.

2. This should be an admonition to men of good birth, of Noble descent that
they dishonor not their honorable Original: we remember the saying of (...),
AEsop to Solon: he replies, (...). Plut. in Solon.
AEsop to Solon, That men's discourse with great personages should be very short
or very sweet. And we would very unwillingly offend that rank of men who
always befriended, never offended us; but we judge the (...), AEsop to Solon:
he replies, (...). Plut. in Solon.
wise man's reply to savor, though not so much of policy, yet more of honesty,
That our discourse with great men should be short or very sovereign; very
brief, or such as should dictate the best things unto them. It is one thing to
be a Minister, and another thing to be a Courtier; one thing to be a lover and
honourer, another thing to be a flatterer and corrupter of Nobility and Gentry.
We cannot but testify what has been observed, and what every man cannot not
but testify to have too much Truth in it.

First, that men of great birth do seldom make any addition to those Honors
which they have from their Parents by succession, but contenting themselves
with the purchase of their Ancestors, do live and spend as Prodigals upon
their reputation.

Secondly, that coming with ease to Place and Authority, and being corrupted
and drawn aside by flattery, they break out many times into all kind of
Luxury; their very goodness of their nature being a great promoter and advancer
of their wickedness. For Non alibi fanctiorum virtutum exempla piorumve
facinorism, quam in Italis animis cernas: and quod quidam de Attica dicebat,
Nullibi vel atrocior cicuta est, vel suavius apes exactis digestisque floribus
cellas implent. Barcl. icon. animor. part. 4. cap. 6. (...). Plut. in Dion.
as it is noted by Modern writers of Italy, and long since by ancient
Historians of Athens, That no where better honey, nor more killing hemlock; no
where men of better nor worse dispositions. So it is true, and delivered also
by Plato the Divine Philosopher, (...). Plat. in Plutarch. in vit. Demetr.
That great natures bring forth great vices, as well as great virtues: even as
the richest soil brings forth, not being well dressed, the rankest weeds. And
therefore it concerns them that are well-born to look carefully that they
disgrace not a Noble birth by an ignoble life. And Vide ne dum pudet te parum
optimatem esse, parum diligenter quid optimum sit eligas. Caecil. Ciceroni
Epist. familiar.
thus whilst they disdain not to be ranked in the number of best men, they
little regard to deck and adorn themselves with the best manners. And to this
end, as Ulysses sometimes said to Achilles, when by his Mothers counsel,
contrary to his birth and breeding, and indeed to his own natural inclination,
he found him disguised, and spinning amongst other Virgins, that so he might
avoid the expedition which was then on foot to Troy, and his own fatal destiny
which was foretold should be at Troy, Plutarch adds (...). De nud. Poetis.
(...)
(...).
What will thou put out the bright luster of thy kin,
Sitting with women, son of stoutest Greek, to spin?
So give me leave to put some few questions of like nature to some that already
do, and to young men that they may not, degenerate from their Noble nature.

1. Thou that art descended from Noble and learned Parents, will thou according
to Epicurus fugere omnem disciplinam naevigatione quam velocissima jubet.
Quintil. lib. 12. (...). Idem. in Laert.
Epicurus his counsel take shipping and flee with swiftest sails, and as far as
possible may be from all learning; and, rather then use a little pains and
industry, quench the light, and bring in darkness and blackness of ignorance,
and Barbarism into thy Family? Filium M. Ciceronis Pop. Romanus non agnosce^ at
loquentem. Sidon. Epist. 4. lib. 7.
What a blot was it to the Son of Cicero, that it should pass into a kind of
proverb, That the people of Rome could not know Cicero's Son by his speech, and
that his sottishness should be as great as his Fathers eloquence. Indeed it is
a shame for any that bear any place or authority in a State to be altogether
ignorant of Letters. Praedicere porcorum recens natorum qui praeclare adulturi
essent, aut contra: posse equis calcitrantibus prope assistere, usinos
calcitrantes art quam longissime vitare, de mulis optime judicare qui oneribus
qui sessori commodissime ferendo apti essent -- Haec eius fuerunt prima aetate
studia, quibus and postremis suis se^e jactavit temporibus -- Adeo in literis
componendis tardus erat and syllabis consiciendis ut librum alius facilius
perlezeret quam ipse sui nominis elementa recenseret. Cedien. in Zonar. annal
tom. 3.
What a disgrace was it to Michael, surnamed Balbus, Emperor of
Constantinople, and to the Empire it self, that his best skill should be, to
tell which were likely to prove the best Pigs: what Asses would kick, and how
to avoid them: what Asses were fit for burden, and what for saddle -- And that
for matter of Learning, he should be so ignorant, that another should sooner
read a book, then he write his name. Forte die quodam cum apud Ferdinandum
inter Familiam controversia foret ata, altercatio, Uter praestantior in bello
extitisset Hector an Achilles, intervenit Johannes Ferandis quaesivitque
Quaenam tanta omnium altercatio esset? Nemo enim non alterutri parti aderat Ubi
controversiam audivit, Absit, inquit, optime Rex, u^ hoc apud te quaeri
patiaris; and fortissimum omn^um and long praeclarissimum Hectorem cum faedo
and stagitioso Achille comparari Qua admonitione adductus Rex edixit, Siquis
domi suae Achillem nominaret, continuo cum nunquam reversurum exploderent Cast
quidem Rex and religiose^ sed Johannes imperite sane and indocte. Val. lib. 3.
hist. Ferdinand.
What a ridiculous business was it, though the Historian excuse it? that a
question being propounded, who was the better Soldier Hector or Achilles, a
Prince upon the suggestion of an ignorant fellow, that Achilles was a
flagitious Letcher and no ways to be compared with Hector, should make
Proclamation, that if any did but name Achilles in his house, as the King had
forfeited his wits, so he should forfeit his house and all he had to make
amends to the King. And is it not a shame also, that Gentlemen of great birth
and dignity should be so illiterate and ignorant even of the Latin tongue,
that they understand nothing at all of it, except there be an Interpreter,
Epiphanius ait exorcistas fuisse interpretes linguae in linguam, sive in
l^ctionibus, sive in colloquiis. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. cap. 7.
or Exorcist, as sometimes he was called, to conjure out the meaning, not
altogether unnecessary sometimes for the understanding the Devils Oracles? Nay,
how can many be blamed and shamed enough, who so for cast all knowledge behind
their back, that though Interpreters do bring out unto them the Muses naked as
it were, and prostitute them to their pleasures: Genesis 19. 8.
as Lot did his Daughters to the men of Sodom (whether with like intention,
lest the one should do worse, and as little discretion in betraying the honor
of the other, I will not determine) yet they will not be tempted to meddle with
them. They are so chaste, that they leave them untouched, unsaluted, unseen. And
hence it comes to pass that either they betake themselves wholly to worldly
business, raking and scraping together all that may be got without regard of
honor many times, or honesty, and gaining to themselves no other name then
what Caligula gave Caligula called Silanus auream pecudem. Tacit annal. l. 13.
Diogenes a rich man and unlearned (...). Diog. Laert.
I. Silanus, and Diogenes to all illiterate persons, namely, that of golden
Cattle: or else they gave themselves entirely to sports and pastimes, Hawking
and Hunting, things not unlawful nor unuseful, but pursued most an end with too
much expense of treasure, and time the greatest of treasures. For, Aiebat sibi
sufficere centum viros qui canes and quingentos qui accipitres curent; nec se
co stultitiae procossurum, ut velit alere hominum tantam multitudinem propter
rem quandam vanam and novam. There were 7000 before employed for that service.
Chalocond. lib. 7.
as Mahomet the Turkish Emperor said when he had greatly lessened the number of
those that kept his Dogs and Hawks, that there were yet enough left for a vain
and foolish sport: So some few hours at certain seasons might suffice for such
game, and the rest be employed and spent in the pursuit of knowledge, a thing
of infinite more use, and far more excellent name; and yet others, which is
worse, having great means, do give themselves up to all manner of riot without
measure (of which more by and by) and hating all discourse that savours never so
little of any learning or ingeny, admit none usually but flattering parasites
into their company, being like unto nothing so much as Diogenes said, (...).
Diog. Laert.
those trees which grow on the top of great Praecipices, the fruit whereof is
eaten by Ravens and such like Fowl, there being no access unto them for men to
seize on them for food. Ille in ea opinione erat ut putaret se ^cire quod
quisquam in domo sua scierit. Senec. de Clavisio Sabin. Epist. 27.
Now if that Roman were looked upon as sottish, who keeping Scholars still
about him, was of that opinion, that whatsoever any of his house knew, he knew
also; then much more sottish are they, who know nothing themselves, nor will
admit of any willingly that do. For whereas the great (...). Diog. Laert. de
Aristot. (...). Id. (...). Diog. Laert. (...). Alexander Pindari familiae
parfit and haec verba pro aedibus inscribi jussit. Ex prolegom. Schol. in
Pindar. Literae non dico apud bonos sed mediocriter malos infularum loco sunt.
Senec. Epist. 14. Alphonsus ac Ferdinandus. Hispaniae and Siciliae reges, alter
a Tito Livio, alter a Q. Curtio valet^dinem amissam, quam a medicis non
poterant, recuperarunt. Bodin. in proaem. ad method. hist. Scripsit Gregorius
in Job, cum crebris viscerum doloribus torqueretur, ad leniendos cruciatus quos
fracta stomachi virtute and continuis lentisque febribus supervenientibus
patiebatur. Sixth. Senensi. lib. 4.
prerogative of Letters are, that they are an ornament in prosperity, a refuge
and protection in adversity, a comfort in age, a solace in solitariness, a
remedy for the wearisome burden of idleness, and a cure for crosses, and
sometimes also for sickness: the one did or might at least, if he had been
capable, enjoyed some shadow of these; but the other can glory only in
sensuality, which Sardanapalus counted his chief felicity, whose manners, as
his Sardanapalus incidi jussit in busto,
Haec habeo quae edi quaeque exsaturata libido
Hausit, at illa jacent multa and praeclara relicta.
Cicer. Tusc. quaest. lib. 5.

Epitaph, suited better with a beast then a man.

2. Thou that art the Son of a Magnanimous Father, will thou bring cowardice
into thine Ancestry, and discredit thine Heroic line with a base spirit as
with a kind of bastardy? (...). Herod. lib. 5.
Was it not ominous that a man should bring forth an Hare in Xerxes army? And
was it not infamous that such Dii boni! quas tenebras ex quo sulmine nasci
passi estis? Val. de African. filio. l. 3.
slugs should follow after such thunderbolts, such darkness after so great
lightning in Ninus, Cyrus his, and Scipios family? But here many do not fall
short, but far exceed both in word and deed, our ancient Nobility and Gentry.
The godly in Scripture are said Eccl. 9. 2.
to fear an oath, but some Gentlemen have too great spirits to be restrained
and stand in aw of any such leight matter. Hos. 13. 1.
When Ephraim spoke, trembling. And if fearful Oaths give men just cause, as
indeed they do, they cannot but tremble to hear some of them speak. They
thunder and lighten (as (...). Aristoph. Acarn.
'twas said of Pericles) and when they fall into a passion: as he by his
powerful Oratory, so they by their dreadful Oaths put all into a combustion. Or
Hic cum in medio patrum agmine constitisset eminens inter alios, velut omnes
dictaturas consulatusque gereas in voce ac viribus suis, unus impetus
tribunitios popularesque procellas sustinebat. Live. l. 3.
as Livy writes of young Ceso, that he spoke so confidently, as if he carried
the power and virtue of all Dictatures and Consulships in his own voice and
strength: so they swear so stoutly, as if all power in heaven and earth were
given unto them, as if their tongues were absolutely their own, and they had no
Lord over them. It Mat. 5. 34.
is the command of our Savior, That we should not swear at all; neither by
heaven, because it is the Throne of God; nor yet by the earth, because it is
his footstool; nor by our head, because we cannot make one hair black or white.
And so it is, they observe in some sort his command. They swear not by heaven
or earth now, but by God himself. They swear not by their own head; but, oh
impiety! oh horror! by the head, wounds, heart and blood of God. They spare
themselves, but rend and tear God in pieces with their Oaths. It were well, and
much to be wished, that as Gentlemen of all other are most courteous and civil
toward men, so they would learn to be a little more civil toward their God.
But the magnanim^ty of some is such, that it makes them forget all civility.
And what they are in words, the same we may find some also to be in their
deeds. (...). Pluta. Sympos. lib, 1.
As Cyrus the younger wrote to the Lacedaemonians, That he was more Princelike
then his brother, as for other things so for this, That he could bear away his
wine much more stoutly: So many now adays do outstrip their Ancestors, in that
they can carry away their Liquor much more gallantly. The time was when out
English Gentlemen exercised themselves with Military fears, and made themselves
and the nation famous by warlick exploits; but now the daily exercise of many
is, Whose belly shall hold most, and whose sconce shall bear most; and he that
can get the victory, glories in it as a great mastery. The time was when full
feeding, if any, was our fault; and Bacchus was a god that was much served by
the Dutch and Flemmish, and little known in our Island; but we have received
the Idol long since into our heart and inmost dowels, and every day sacrifice
unto it, drinking unreasonably, drinking unmeasurably, drinking (...). Plut.
Mor. de pueror. Educ.
as if our Parents had begot us when they were drunk, drinking not only the
Anacharsis made but three cups (...). Laert.
cup of necessity, strength, mirth, sleep, with might sometimes be excused; but
of folly, madness, lust, fury. And indeed many, unless as Nos, nisi damnosi
bibimus, moriemur multi.
-- Et calices poscunt majores.
Horat.

the Poet has it, They drink damnably, think they shall die unrevenged, die
ignominiously. And so they call for greater weapons, and Isa. 9. 5.
the battle is with confused noise, with tables and garments baptized in the
blood of the grape, and with vapor, and smoke, and burning, and fuel of fire.
We have read or heard of the Danes, that they think (and it may be some are of
their opinion) That what enters into a man defiles not, but what is vomited
out: but the Music would sound but harshly in their ears, if we should say,
They deserve to be restrained, as some were by Excogitaveret inter genera
cruciatus, etiam ut larga meri potione per fallaciam oneratos repent veretris
deligatis fidicularum simul urinaeque tormento distende^et. Sueton de Tiber. in
vit.
Tiberius with fidle-strings, lest not sinning in filling they should sin in
emptying themselves. We delight not in cruelty, but a restraint surely is
necessary, and diverse have in several Not above three cups allowed in
symposiis. Ter bibe -- Auson. Excusare caepit morem quod amica se non
dimisisset tribus nisi potionibus ex m^re siccatis -- Synod. Nannetens. defined
the same number. Democritus wrote a book, that four cups were not to be
drunken. Some would have Magistrates look that none drink too much. Plato calls
them (...). The same also called (...) quod toti Argei and oculei essent in
convivarum compotationes. They were called likewise moduperatores. Legate.
Commentator in Sedon. Apollin. qui nunc non est in manibus. Legi etiam
alicubide Edgard quod clavos argenteos vel aureos v^sis affigi jussit ut dum
metam suam quisque cognosceret non plus subserviente verecundia vel ipse
appeteret vel alium appetere cogeret.
ages thought of, and applied several remedies. And it is time in this age to
think of something; not only Learning, but Manhood also, being drowned under
this Deluge, and nothing of it appearing in many Gentlemen, except it be that
rising from their benches like Psalm. 78. 65.
Giants (at least in their own conceits) refresht with wine, they send out a
chartel of defiance for the maintenance of the truth, which they never belyed;
or that they enter the field and fight, as (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Nazian. Car.

the champions of old (...) for some Lady, which was never by themselves nor
must by others be abused. An argument not of manhood but of madness, not of
courage but of outrage, not of magnanimity but (to speak the lightest of it) of
youthful bravery and vanity. Wisemen abhor such actions and reject such
motions, and the supposed Homerum siquis caecum genitum putet, omnibus sensibus
orbus est. Paterc.
blind Poet saw clearly this, that it did not stand with the valor and dignity
of his Achilles to fight for (though then in stead of wife) a captive Lady. And
therefore as he brings in Agamemnon in great choler threatening to bereave him
of his Briseis; so he brings him in, with much discretion replying: Homer.
Iliad. 1.
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Forth' Damsel! with thee, or other, I will not fight,
Her you gave: Her again to you I do behight.
But touch ought else of mine which in my ship does lie,
His blood spins out about my Speer. Let who dare try.


We know no other Lady any Gentleman has to fight for, but she that begat him
and nourisht him, and which ought to be deerly tendered by him, his own native
Country; but many have been found in all ages and Nations that have ravished
and much abused, and made such deep wounds and gashes in her face, that not
only strangers but her own children could scarsely know her. Few that have with
true courage and magnanimity maintained her honor and dignity.

3. Thou that give thy self out as descended of free and noble Parentage,
will thou dishonor it by wretched Covetousness? Was Hospitality all thy
forefathers glory, and do thou only pleas thy self with sordid Parsimony?
Did they keep open house for all comers, and do thou still shut up thy
doors, lest others should come and eat up thy commons? Did their liberal hearts
devise Isa. 32. 8.
liberal things, and do thou practice thy self, and teach also thy children
all -- cogit minimas ediscere sordes. Juvenal. de avar. Satyr. 14.
sordid arts? So it is that Hospitality is well nigh lost, and almost wholly
buried in the dust. The Roman Censors being wont to take the manners and
affairs of their Citizens into cognizance, sent sometimes (as we have somewhere
read) their messenger to the good men of the City to make their appearance. The
messenger goes to the Tombs and Sepulchers of the dead, calling all of Repute
by their names, and charging them to appear before the Censors in their proper
persons; and being demanded the reason, he replied, That time had worn out the
good men of the City, and therefore none being to be found amongst the living,
he was forced to seek them among the dead. And surely, if we will find out the
good Housekeepers indeed, we must go seek them in the Grave. The earth, the
earth, covetousness and worldlimindedness have long since devoured them. The
soul of Hospitality is every where almost turned into the body of bravery. In
stead of feeding the bellies of the poor, men cloathe their own proud backs;
and whereas the Job 31. 20.
loins of the poor were wont to speak thanks and blessing to the rich, now the
loins of the rich speak hunger and thirst to the poor. God has set up the rich
ones of the earth to be gods as it were unto the poor to do good unto them, and
to distribute to their necessities; but the graces and favors which are
received, do not countervail sometimes the Sacrifices and Peace Offerings that
must be given to these Deities. When any petitions are put up to them, they
stand as (...).

Aristoph. de. imagine. deorum. in concion.


the Images of the Heathen-gods with the palms of their hands upwards and open,
not as willing to give but as ready to receive; and if any bounty fall from
them on solemn times and seasons, it is but as moisture that falls from the
Heavens, which the Sun first drew up from the earth.

Neither is Hospitality only lost, but those other Virtues also which we spoke
of, as proper to Nobles and Gentlemen. In stead of Humility, behold Pride; some
scarce daining a word or look to others, and yet as much offended as Esther 3.
5.
Haman with Mordecai for the omission of a knee to them, and ready to fall foul
upon a man for lack of some few cringes and congies, as (they say) evil
spirits are on them that conjure them up, if the least line or figure be
omitted in their magic ceremonies. In stead of Mercy, behold Cruelty; the
condition of diverse being like those Surrentine Wines which some commended, but
Tiberius called, Tiberius Caesar dicebat consensisse medicos ut Nobilitatem
Surrentino darent; alioquin esse generosum acetum. Ca. Caesar qui successit
illi,' nobilem vappam vocabat. Plin. lib. 14. cap. 6. Not. Hist.
Generosum acetum, Generous Vinegar, savouring rather of the Crab, then of the
Grape or any such like generous stock. But who are these? Judge. 9. 13.
The true Vine cannot lose her pleasantness wherewith she cheereth God and Man.
These gross failings are seldom in the true, but in those that pretend to, and
are climbing up to the Gentry. And such may know, that they take not the right
course to hit the mark which they aim at. For, what was said of Dare,
curialissimum est; auferre autem quod ^i, quod contrarium est, rusticissimum.
Alan. in Perald.
one, is true of all these virtues, Hospitality, Humility, Courtesy, Mercy, are
each of them a most Courtlike quality; and the contrary savours strongly, and
suits best with the Country. Let us make but one demand more and we have done.

4. Thou that art descended of Noble Parents, such as were great Patrons of
Learning, great advancers of Piety; Will thou by putting down Learning and
debasing the Ministry pull down Religion, and bring an everlasting blot upon
thy Family? What; Is not Learning worth the countenancing? One that knew the
worth of it will tell thee, Pl^beis argemi, Nobili^us auri, Principibus
gemma^am loco, literas esse debere dixit. Pius 2. in Plut.
That common people should esteem of it as silver, and Nobles as of gold, and
Princes as of precious Pearls: And they have been thought happy, Equidem beatos
puto quibus deorum muncre datum est, Aut facere scribenda aut scribere legenda.
Plin. ad Tacit.
to whose share by the gift of God it has fallen, To do things worthy to be
written, or to write things worthy to be read. But these were Scholars, and
pleaded their own cause. True! but we have as much also from Noble Personages.
Ego doctrina anteire mallem quam copiis and opulemiis. Agel. lib. 20. cap. 4.
Alexander the great, if it were put to his choice, said, He would rather be
great for Learning, then for wealth or War. Hujus oration fertur, ad Se^atum
missa, tantum habuisse eloquentiae ut illi statua non quasi Caesari sed quasi
Rhetori decerueretur. Vopisc.
Numerianus professed, That he had rather have a Statue erected for him as an
Oraet^r then an Emperor. And Sigismundus interrogatus a principipibu^ qui
literas oderant, Cur homines obscuro generenatos ob literarum commendationem
tanti faceret, respondit; Se jure illos colere qui caeteris singulare^ dono
divino autecellerent: Illos a Deo solo posse creari; verum in sua potestate
esse ut titulis and praediis nobiles faciat quoscunque and quandocu^que velit.
Bucholcer.
Sigismund of late years preferred Scholars before others, as being in his
judgment better then others, saying, that, He could create Noble men, but God
only Learned men. Or do you think that Religion and Learning will stand alone
without any helps and encouragements? So thought Justinian an Emperor Fere
2000 libros in 50 titulatim digessit opera^ Treboniani, Theophili, and
Dorothei: and uberrimam legum materiam brevissima epitome, quae Institutionum
titulo inseri^itur, contraxit: and ipse tamen, (...), omnium literarum expers.
Magdeburg. Cent. 6. cap. 3.
who digested much Law into books, but little Learning into his brain. And
therefore taking away Ad templorum aedificationem cum infinitis egeret
pecuniis, stipendia liberalium artium Magistris olim constituta in omnibus
Urbibus sustulit, quas vacan^i^us literarum ludis rusticitas invafit. Zonor. in
vit. annal. tom. 3.
salaries from professors, he fell to building of Temples; but while Temples
went every where up, which made, he thought much for his glory, Learning went
down, and Barbarism and Rusticity overrun the Empire, to his no small infamy.
Or, do you think that true love to Learning and Religion can stand with the
contempt of the professors of the one, and Ministers of the other. It was
(...). AElian. hist. lib. 13.
feelingly and fully spoken by Themistocles as suffering in that nature, I
cannot commend those that have the same cup to drink and to piss in. Can we
drink and piss, piss and drink in the same cups? Can we prise and despise,
use and abuse the same persons? So some have done, but not Graeci Scenicos
actores non parvo civitatis suae honor dignos existimaverunt. Aug. De Civit
Dei. lib. 2. cap. 10. Romani cum artem ludicram scenamque totam probro
ducerent, genus id hominum non modo honor civium reliquorum carere, sed etiam
tribu moveri notatione censoria voluerunt, cap. 13. Quomodo autem abjicitur
scenicus per quem colitur Deus? Et ^heatricae illius turpitudinis qua front
notatur actor, si adoratur exactor? -- In hac disputatione hujusmodi
ratiocinatio summam quaestionis absolvit. Proponunt Graeci, Si dii tales
colendi sunt, profecto etiam tales honorandi sunt: Assumunt Romani, Sed nullo
modo tales homines honorandi sunt: concludunt Christiani, Nullo igitur modo dii
tales colendi sunt. Ibid.
sutably to their Religion, nor agreeably to their profession. The Greeks
honored their gods with obscene and filthy Stage Plays, and reckoning them as
a great piece of their Religion, they had their Stage-plaies also in great
veneration; but the Romans (which was strange) honored their Gods with the
same Plays, but gave no honor at all to the Players; making use of their Art,
but rejecting the Artificers as Infamous. And if St. Austin did thereupon
wittily reason thus:

The Greeks lay down this proposition,

If such Gods be to be honored, then such persons ought to be honored.

The Romans come in with the assumption,

But such persons are no ways to be honored.

The Christians make the conclusion,

Such Gods therefore are by no means to be honored.

Then we may argue as truly:

The Christian proposes,

If Religion ought to be regarded and maintained, then due regard and
maintenance ought to be given to the Ministers thereof.

The Sectary assumes,

Neither maintenance nor regard ought to be given to Ministers.

The Atheist concludes,

Therefore Religion is neither to be maintained nor regarded.

But the Nobility and Gentry of the Land have hitherto in the worst times
forbid the conclusion, by making another kind of assumption; and we are
confident, while any true blood runs in their veins, neither due regard nor due
maintenance shall be withdrawn from the Ministry. And indeed whatsoever
phansies may run in some men's heads, yet assuredly nothing can be carried on in
Church or State, with good command, till Magistrate and Minister go together
hand in hand. The Hydras head of sin will never be destroyed, except the one
cut it off as (...). Nazian. Epist. 127.
Hercules, and the other as Iolaus commit it to the fire; neither will they
ever get the mastery over their enemies, except as the Hom. Iliad. 23.
two Sons of Actor in Homer guide the chariot, the one holding the reins, the
other the whip: (...)
(...)
These were twins: the one held the reins still in his hand,
The reins still in his hand, the other did with whip command.
So they both of them guide the Chariot of the Church with joynt-authority, and
contribute both their power to each other for the gaining of the victory. And
truly as the Piety of our ancient Nobles took up the Clergy into the same
Chariot with them, not only as 2 Kin. 10.15, 16.
Iehu did Ionadab to see, but also to guide and regulate their zeal, and to act
with them in the Supreme Authority: so it will not be an act unworthy their
successors to raise them again (being unexpectedly raised themselves) to that
dignity from whence they were cast down of late, and that in respect of outward
distempers, not without some Iniquity. A difficult work we confess to bring
about, but seeing God has brought home again our Royal Sovereign (...).
Pindar. Olymp. od. 13.
(...) contrary to the oath of his enemies, and (...) beyond the hope of his
friends, we know not but he may raise up also the Sacred Order (...) contrary
to the Sanction which has passed against them. This would not be dishonorable
for the Nation, and ( quicquid aves contra minores (...)) not unlawful in
religion. The case may in such sort be stated and determined, as it has been
long since by no unlearned Gerson -- Legatur hujus disputationis epitome in
Nauclero. Vol. 2. Gener. 37.
or Religious Person. Envy cries, Toll, toll, Take, take, all from the Clergy
that is called Temporal. 2 Timothy 2. 4.
No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he
may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier. Flattery cries, Oh quanta
sublimitas Ecclesiasticae dignitatis; Oh how great is the sublimity of
Ecclesiastical dignity! Mat. 28. 18.
To Christ, all power is given in heaven and earth, and none can have any
power, but what they receive from his Vicars here beneath. But discretion looks
to the original of things, distinguishes betwixt dues and favors, considers
the differences of times, and circumstances of things, and finds that that may
be given, taken, and managed by them now, to the great advantage which could
neither be given, nor taken, nor managed by the Apostles without the prejudice
of Christianity. Howsoever therefore some may be as good friends to the Clergy,
as Varii vary hanc rem tradunt. Cum multi delendum Atheniensium nomen,
urbemque incendio consumendam, censerent, negarunt se Spartani ex duobus
Graeciae oculis, alterum eruturos. Justin. hist. lib. 5. (...) Plutarch. in
Vit. Lysandr. (...) Dunaeus in Orat. ad Reg. Jacob.
the Thebans to the Athenians, who would have had them wholly rooted out by the
Lacedaemonians, yet nobler spirits, like Varii vary hanc rem tradunt. Cum multi
delendum Atheniensium nomen, urbemque incendio consumendam, censerent, negarunt
se Spartani ex duobus Graeciae oculis, alterum eruturos. Justin. hist. lib. 5.
(...) Plutarch. in Vit. Lysandr. (...) Dunaeus in Orat. ad Reg. Jacob.
the Phocians will intercede for them, as they for the Athenians, who looked on
Graece as wanting an eye, if Athens should be wanting. This is certain,
whosoever considers the benefits that are derived unto them by the Clergy,
cannot but say as Will. Cecill Lord Burleigh.
He that was in his age as great a Politician as any. God bless them by whom
God blesses us, and will not be unwilling to raise them on earth by whom God
raises them to heaven. Nor can any envy them a seat with them here, who shall
be willing to see the Apostles of Christ sitting with him on twelve Matthew. 19.
28.
thrones, and judging the twelve tribes of Israel hereafter.

To wind up this Admonition, Let such as are descended of ancient families,
take heed they do not bring dishonor upon them by the forenamed, or any such
like, enormities. As it is common with them to stand upon their Gentility, so
let them have a special care that they be not justly charged with gross crimes
in matter of morality. Is it not a shame and a grief, to see rare parts of
nature either drowned with sottishness, or overrun with vice for lack of
tillage? Is it not strange to think that men should run such races, and follow
such debauched courses, that if their Quid facies talem sortilus Pontice servum
Nempe in Lucanos aut Thusca ergastula mittas
At vos Trojugenae vobis ignoscitis and quae
Turpia Cerdoni Volesos Brutosque decebunt.
Juvenal. Sat. 8.

servants should do the like, they would bestow on them a hundred honorable
titles, and think no stocks or houses of correction sufficient to punish their
debauchedness, and yet pardon all in themselves, and pass it over as matter of
mirth and pleasantness. Is it not ridiculous to see men of great birth and
wealth, to have little wit or worth? And that a man should have never a good
condition, not one good quality, and yet please himself with that of the Poet,
Juvenal. Sat. 8.
Ast ego Cecropides, but I am a Gentleman of great antiquity. A man of mean
birth Homer. Iliad. lib. 10. de Hectore.
(...) (...) neither Son of Lord nor Lady, has all liberal arts under his
Omnis liberalitas studiorum quatuor nuis angulis tegitur. Tert. de pallio.
Coat, Law, Divinity, feats of Chevalry, and can a hundred ways do service to
his Country; and the other is nil nisi Cecropides, nothing but a Gentleman of
great Antiquity. Every creature is valued according to its own inherent worth,
and must man alone take up his credit from without himself, from his Noble
birth? Sed Venale pecus Corithae: Sic posteritas et
Hirpini si rara jugo victoria sedit.
Nil i^i majorum respectus, gratia nulla
Umbrarum --
Juven. Sat. 8.
(...). Basil. de Vit. and Virt. Conc. 1. Non datur Nobilitati palma sed
cursui: deformior est victus, in quo and Nibilitas generis periclitatur.
Ambros. lib. de Nabath. cap. 13.


The dull jade is not the better accepted, because his Sire has run many a
race; nor the dog because his dam has often won the chase. (...)
(...). Nazian.

If thy breath slink, or thou be deformed, will thou say, Thy father was sweet
or fair? Or if thou be weak and sickly, will thou plead, Thy father was stout
and debonaire? The virtues of our Ancestors will not heal our vices; but the
luster rather of their glory, like a bright shining Majorum glo^ia posteris
quasi lumen est; neque bona neque mala eorum in becullo patitur. Salust. in
bell. Jugur.

Incipit ipsorum contra te stare parentum
Nobilitas, claramque facem praeferre pudendis.
Juvenal. Sat. 8.
light, will the more blazon our Infamy. What do eminent birth, and eminent
vices purchase for men, but more notorious ignominy? When the meanness and bad
manners of others lie both hid in obscurity. Suppose the Noble acts of mean
progenitors do Majorum virtus nunc vitia nostra sustentat. Senec. consol. ad
Helvid. cap. 10.
prop up for a while, the defects of their Successors, as Shores do rotten
Edifices; yet as the one, except they be repaired, so the other at last will
sink and -- Miserum est aliorum incumbere famae
Ne collapsa ruan^ subductis tecta columnis.

fall to ground through their own vices. In short, if men of good birth be
vicious, they are but as pools which receiving good water from the springhead
do stand and putrify; or if, not being given to much vice, yet they be not
virtuous, they are at best but like (...) -- (...). Basil. in cap. 2. Es.
the Cedars of Lebanon which mount up to a great hight but never fructify. We
laugh at the Romanists who glory that they sit in St. Peter's chair, when God
knows they dwell where Rev. 2. 13.
Satan himself has his Throne: and style themselves the successors of the
Apostles, when they have neither any affinity with the manners, Ecclesiae quae
nullum ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis authorem suum proferunt, ut multo
posteriores; quae denique cotidie instituuntur; tamen in eadem fide
conspirantes, non minus Apostolicae deputantur pro consanguinitate doctrinae.
Tert. de praescript. (...). Naz. in laud. Athan.
not consanguinity with the doctrine of such predecessors. And is it not also
ridiculous for men to take to themselves the Honors of Noble Personages, and
allow to themselves such vices as are not sufferable in ignoble persons? Either
glory not of the Nobility of thy birth, or grace it with the goodness of thy
life. (...). Eurip. Hell.
This is the credit of Nobility and Gentry indeed to let the world see clearly
that they inherit not only the Honors, but the Virtues of their Ancestors.

3. Forasmuch as they that are well descended, are better mannered, better
conditioned; men should learn to match themselves into a good house, a good
kindred. Absurda est Sophistarum contra Nobilitatem calumnia, qui vulgaria
etiam and omnibus notissima non considerant, nempe quod generandae sobolis
gratia generosi equi and canes emu^tur; item vitium and olearum and reliquarum
arborum optima quaeque semina. Homini autem nihil ad futuram successionem
generis Nobilitatem confer putant, sed tantundem valere sive barbaram sive
Graecam originem. Stob. Sermon. 86. vide sis plura.
In other things of nothing so great concernment, we are wisely enough and
carefully provident. That we may have a good stock of cattle, we will look to
the breed. For the sowing of our ground, we pick the choysest seed. And shall
we think in the procreation of our children, that it matters not what the
original be, Scythian or Barbarian, bond or free. De Ulysse Homerus,
Instillatae patris virtus tibi, tanquam assereret ad paucas seminum guttas
paternae virtutis bona conslucre. Ibid.
The virtue and goodness of the seed discovers it self both in man and beast. A
generous seed, a generous brood. And look as it was said of Cato, Ex eodem
naturae utero and Continen^^a nata est, and Cato. Valor. lib. 4.
That Cato and Continency came both out of the same womb: so may we say, that
of the same seed, Nobility and Ingenuity, Nobility and Magnanimity, Liberality,
Courtesy, and every good quality does most an end proceed. And yet howsoever
men may praise and commend highly Nobility, wealth for all that does commonly
make the Marriage and contract the affinity. So men can raise their Estates,
they care not many times what blots and steins they bring into their houses, to
the great (...). Eurip. Heracl. (...). Id. Herc. sut.
dejecting of their childrens spirits when they shall hear them charged upon
them in aftertimes, and themselves be conscions of their Parents vices. But a
wise man will rather seek a virtuous then a wealthy Issue, and choose rather to
leave his children the treasure of (...). Id.
an ingenuous confidence arising from the knowledge of his good Parentage, then
a stained or tainted inheritance. True it is, that some evils (as, proud and
scornful spirits) do cleave to great births; And women especially that are
derived from great Families, do reckon Malo Venusinam quam te, Cornelia matter
Gracchorum, si cum magnis virtutibus affers
Grande supercilium, and numeras in dote triumphos.
Toll ti^um, preco^, Hannibalem, victumque Syphacem
In castris, and cum to^a Carthagine migra.
Juvenal. Satyr. 6.

the conquests, triumphs, honors of their Ancestors, as a part of their
Husbands dowries, and a man shall have need of a (...). Niceph. Greg. lib. 7.
good God (as one says) and a Sea of water to wash away their insolences. But
these are not the vices of Nobility it self, but of some few Noble Personages,
and are recompensed generally with eminent Virtues.

4. Lastly, this should be for Caution to Parents, that they set not their
children as much backward for lack of education, as they help them forward by
conveighing a Noble nature to them in their generation. True it is, that as
some constitutions of body are stronger, so some dispositions of mind are
better then others. So that two being trained up under the same discipline, the
same Laws, one notwithstanding may surpass the other by many degrees; and yet
for all this, every disposition is Doctrina vini promovet insitum,
Rectique cultus pectora roborant.
Hor. lib. 4. car.

helped forth, or hindered much by good or bad education. Diogenes dicebat
Medaeam sapientem non veneficam fuisse: Acceptis enim mollibus and effoeminatis
hominum corporibus confirmasse ipsa, and exercitiis robusta ingentiaque
reddidisse. Hinc samam emanasse quod coquendo carnes in juventutem restitueret.
Stob. de assiduit.
Medea had more Wisdom then Witchcraft in her, who taught men to bring their
soft and effeminate bodies to a better temper by military and manly exercises.
Hence the report arose, that by boiling anew their flesh, she brought them back
from age to youth, and made them look lively again and fresh. Whereas this new
devised concoction, was nothing else but a better advised institution. It were
well, many Noble youths were not quite spoiled by their Parents Witchcrafts and
sorceries, or by the Enchantments and flatteries of base Parasites, which by
the Parents countenance creep into Noble Families. (...). Plut. de puer. educat.
But as Lycurgus showed the men of Sparta, That of two whelps of the same
Litter, coming both from one Dam and one Sire, the one for lack of nurture
proved a ravenous Cur, good for naught; whereas the other being better tanght,
minded nothing more then what he was bred to, the sport and game. So it falls
out too often, that in the same Noble Families some for lack of good discipline
are good for nothing but the pot; whereas others being better educated, grow
either by Learning or Military arts renowned, and gain for themselves and their
Country a great name. A mean birth may be supplied by a noble education, and
made fit for any great design or notable action; whereas for lack of discipline
and culture, there seldom comes any thing very excellent from me Nobleness of
nature. Gold it self, the best of metals, is not so good when it comes from the
Oar, as when it has passed the fire; nor yet is it of that worth or price,
till it be wrought by the Goldsmiths artifice. Nature is brought by art to its
full perfection: and so should generous births by suitable education. Toga
praetexta bis addita, ut ex purpurae rubore ingenuitatis pudore regerentur.
Macrob. Saturn. lib. 1.
The Romans were wont to cloth their children with purple that from the very
color of the cloth which they ware, they might learn bashfulness and modesty,
which is the color of virtue. And it is but fit that by all good ways
(whether silent symbols which are emblematical, or sovereign discourses which
are more emphatical) the hatred of Vice should be wrought in the hearts of
Noble youth; that so shame might stein their cheeks, when by vicious courses
they stein their Noble Births. And look, (...). Plut. ibid.
as Gardiners are wont with props and stakes to stay up their young plants,
that they may shoot forth, grow and fructify the better: So ought good Parents
to stay up their children by good Precepts, Counsels, and Instructions; which
growing up with them may engender such Virtues, Properties, Qualities which
shall be agreeable to their Birth, Place, and Dignities: and may season their
hearts with the fear of God, and true Piety; which is, if not the only, yet,
the best kind of Nobility. And so we come to the other point which we
observed, That Piety is the best Nobility; or, Godly ones are the greatest
Nobles.

(...). Plato in Laert.

(...) -- (...). Nazian. Orat. 28.


We find four several sorts of Nobility mentioned by the Ancient, who going
their several ways, and following their several conceits, might give occasion
to others to multiply divisions; but we conceive all the kinds thereof may fall
under a triple Enumeration; Created, Natural, Acquired.

The Created again is double. One conferred by God, who stamps some part of his
Image upon the soul of every man that comes into the world: and so we think
either may be said, that all are alike noble, being all are made after the
image of God; or that none are noble at all. As if all men were Kings, (...).
Plut. in Vit. Pyr. Urbem templum sibi visum, Senatum regum esse consessum
dixit. Flor.
as Cyneas said of the Senate of Rome, we might truly say, there were never a
King in a Kingdom. The other conferred by Princes ( A kind of gods on earth)
either for love or money, called by Nazianzene, (...), and not amiss termed by
another, Charron.
Parchment Nobility, which is as far from true Nobilility, as painted from
native beauty; and deserves as much to be reverenced, as the Ape when he is
dressed up to personate the Lion.

The Natural is that which is by descent from Parents, by succession from
Ancestors; to which one of the three former of those kinds mentioned by Plato
may be reduced. For whether men descend from those which are good men for their
piety, or great men for their rule and authority, or famous men for some
special service or excellency, unless they be such as their Parents were
themselves; they have only the matter and not the form, and are heirs only of
a natural, and no better then a nominal Nobility.

The Acquired is that which is gotten by a man's own virtue and industry, which
is therefore called Personal also, because it is the purchase of his own
deserts, and not his ancestors glory. And this though it cannot be matched with
that, which is both natural by succession, and personal by acquisition; yet if
the natural be not accompanied with virtue, which is the form of Nobility, the
personal and acquired must have the preheminency. Now this personal Nobility,
whether taken by it self, or in conjunctiion with the natural, may be
considered, either as consisting in moral virtues only, and such like
qualities as are beneficial to the Commonwealth, according to which the
Nobility of the Heathen, and such like is to be reckoned: or else in
supernatural graces, the fear of God, and true piety, which make for the glory
of God, and the good of the Church, according to which Christians are to be
accounted noble; and this we say, is the best Nobility. Though the name (there
is no doubt) were first imposed upon that which is carnal or civil, and
afterward translated to that which is spiritual; yet as in other things of like
nature, not that which is carnal or civil, but that which is spiritual is
best. The spiritual kindred is best. Mat. 12.50. and 6.156.
He that does the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother,
my sister and my mother. The spiritual food best, John 4.34.
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work, and, my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. The Spiritual Fast best.
Isa. 58.5, 6.
Is it such a Fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his soul, to
bow down his head like a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him:
will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable day unto the Lord? Is not this
the Fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, etc. The
spiritual ornaments best. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.12.
Put off concerning the conversation in time past the old man, and put on the
new man. And as the elect of God holy and beloved, put on the bowels of mercy,
gentleness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering. The spiritual
freedom best: Joh. 8. 36.
If the Son shall make you free, you shall be free indeed. The spiritual
sacrifices best: Psalm. 51. 17. Heb. 13. 16.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, and to do good and to distribute
forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. So the spiritual
Nobility is best. The fear of God and true piety. Though the carnal have the
priority in nature in all these, yet the spiritual kindred, food, fasts,
clothing, freedom, sacrifices Nobility is best. And for the last however the
great ones of the world brag much of their Nobility, yet godly men surpass them
therein in every respect.

1. In respect of their Parentage; they are descended from the most High. 2
Cor. 6. 18. Joh. 1. 13.
They are the Sons and Daughters of the Almighty. They are born not of blood,
nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. That which was
the vain ambition of some of the Heathen, as (...). Plut. Vit. Alex.
of Alexander and others, is their happy condition, They are the Sons of God.
And whereas the great Ones of this world, notwithstanding their goodly
Parentage, are the children of Ephesians. 5. 8.
night and darkness, Ephesians. 2. 3.
children of wrath, children of death, children of hell (the Luke 16. 16,24, 25.
rich Glutton, that spoke himself the son of Abraham, was tormented in the
flames of the infernal pit) all the godly are 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5.
the children of light and of the day, the children of Romans 9. 8.
promise, the children of the Mark 2. 19.
wedding-chamber, and not only children Matthew. 8. 12.
as wicked men may be, but certain Romans 8. 17.
heirs of the Kingdom of God. For their mother, the womb wherein all godly men
lie, is that of Christ's Spouse; The Rev. 21. 9.
Lambs wife, who is a great Queen, and has Psalm. 45. 9.
Kings daughters and honorable women for her attendants, is their Mother. They
are all Sions children. And as the (...). Herod. l. 1.
Lycians take their name from their Mother, and if their Mother be Honorable,
reckon their children so, whatsoever the Father be; and the children base born,
if the Mother be so, though the Father be never so Honorable: So they call no
man Matthew. 23. 9.
Father on earth, but count it their honor that they are the children of the
Church; which though she be on earth, yet is not of the earth, but has her
original from above. Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem from above is the mother of them all. So that as they excel all by
the Fathers side, they surpass also by the mothers side, Ierusalems, which is
their mother, descending also from God. Indeed upon a true, account, and at
first rise Jam. 1.18.
God may be said to be both Father and Mother to them. Jam. 1.18.
By his free goodness a Father. Isa. 66.9.
By the power and fruitfulness of his grace, a Mother. Even as also the
Ministers of God, the inferior and subordinate agents in their generation, are
sometimes called fathers, as begetting them; 1 Cor. 4.15.
In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. And sometimes mothers,
as bearing them, and bringing them forth; Gal. 4.19.
Of whom I travel in birth again, till Christ be formed in you. Those virtues
and excellencies, which in carnal and corporal agents are divided, being more
eminently and perfectly in spiritual agents united.

2. In respect of their divine nature and qualities. They are children of God,
and so are born not of 1 Pet. 1. 23.
corruptible seed, but incorruptible. The word of God is the seed of which they
are begotten. And as there is vis (...), a formative virtue in the corruptible
seed of man, by which it comes to pass, that one man differs from another in
conditions: so there goes a formative virtue with the word of God, even the 2
Cor. 8.
spirit of grace, which begets in them a disposition above that which is
humane, and forms them after the Col. 3.10.
image of God, makes them partakers of the divine 2 Pet. 1.4.
nature and Heb. 12.10.
holiness of God, and works in them such affections, and conditions whereby
they excel all others, which are not born of the same seed, nor have the same
seed of God abiding in them, which they have. The spirit works in them the same
mind, will, affections, desires, dispositions which are in God, and makes them
in all, holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.
as he is holy, and 1 John 3. 3.
pure as he is pure. There are as we have showed special excellencies to be
found in those that are noble according to the flesh, whether Christians or
others; truly Religious, or not: and they that are spiritually noble come not
behind them in any thing, and excel them in all those things, that have any
excellency by nature above the rest. They lose not any privilege which they
have by the flesh, but gain over and above that which comes by the Spirit.

1. They are as docil, and ingenious, and as capable of any humane Wisdom and
Learning, as the best. Acts. 7. 22.
Moses was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians: And we see daily the
children of God come as Nonne aspicimus quanto auro and argento and vest
sufsarcinatus exierit de AEgypto Cyprianus, Doctor suavissimus and Martyr
beatissimus; quanto Lactantius, quanto Victorinus, Optatus, Hilarious. August.
de doctrine. Christian. cap. 40.
richly laden out of the Schools of men, as ever the Israelites did with
spoils out of the Land of Egypt. Julian a learned Emperor, but wicked
Apostat, saw it, and was grieved at it. Propriis pennis vulneramur: ex nostris
enim armati conscriptionibus contra nos bella movent. Magdeburg. Cent. 4. c. 3.
We are wounded (says he) with our own quils: out of our own books they take
weapons, which in fight they use against us. We may see the learning of those
Fathers, some of which as living before him, or being contemporary with him, he
complained of, and may reap the fruit of that with joy, which was a grief of
heart to him. Si ad Sanctos patres pro comparatione veniatur, instruit ut
Hieronymus, destruit ut Lactantius, astruit ut Augustinus, attollitur ut
Hilarious, submi^titur ut Joannes, ut Basilius corripit, ut Gregorius
consolatur, ut Orosius affluit, ut Ruffinus stringitur, ut Eusebius narrat, ut
Eucherius sollicitat, ut Paulinus provocat, ut Ambrosius perseverat. Sidon.
Apoll. de Claudiano. Epi. l. 4.
We may see how destructive a pen to error Lactantius had. How instructive in
good manners Hierome. How assertive in doctrine Austin is. What a high strain,
Hialry; What an humble vein Chrysostom has. How Basil reproves. How Nazianzen
comforts. How fluent Orosius is. How short and trusle Ruffinus. How Eusebius
tells his story. How sollicitous Eucherius is. How Paulinus begins. How Ambrose
proceeds. His arguments are called fulmina by Vincent. Lirinens.
How Tertullian thunders and lightens. How more Loquitur diserta, sed magis
fortia quam diserta; neque tam loquitur fortia, quam vivit. Eras.
stoutly Cyprian speaks then eloquenly; and yet how much more strength there is
in his life then in his speech.

2. Pass we from Learning and Wisdom to matter of courage and magnanimity, and
we shall find that the godly fall not short of any. Exodus 15. 3.
The Lord is a man of war, and Psalm. 144. 1.
he teaches their hands to war, and their fingers to fight. Psalm. 18.32.
He girds them with strength to subdue their enemies. Besides what they have by
nature, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
He gives them also a spirit of might and power, as being to wrestle not only
with Ephesians. 6.12.
flesh and blood, but with principalities and the rulers of the darkness of
this world, spiritual wickednesses in high places, which do every day vanquish
the men of this world, and are every day vanquished by the children of God: who
being armed with a double kind of armor, are carried on with as undaunted a
courage as any, against their two kind of enemies spiritual and temporal. And
indeed to yield them so far as justly we may the pre-eminence in all things;
Some of them have had no peers either for learning or valor, wisdom or
courage. All the Lawgivers of Greece cannot match one Moses. Nor all the wise
men one Solomon. Nor all their Worthies one Iosuah or David. Nor all their
feigned Herculesses one true Sampson.

3. If the Nobles of the world again think they have wherein they may trust in
matter of manners, the children of God more. Are the one humble, the other as
being born of God, more. Psalm. 113.4.6.
The Lord is high above all Nations, and his glory above the heavens, and yet
humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth. So they are
high in Gods, and in all good men's eyes, and yet low in their own; and Raro
genere exempli, altitudinem tuam humilitate sublimas Sid. Apel. de Felice lib.
2. Epist.
raise themselves higher by their lowly carriage. Genesis 18.27.
I am dust and ashes, faith Abraham. Genesis 32. 10.
Less then the least of all thy mercies, says Jacob. Prove. 30.2.
I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding of aman, says
Agur. Mark 1.7.
I am not worthy to unty Christ's shoes, says John the Baptist. Matt. 8.8.
That he should come under my rook, says the Centurion. Ephesians. 3.8.
I am less then the least of all Saints. The 1 Timothy 1.25.
chief of sinners, says Saint Paul.

4. Are the one courteous, the other as the true children of God, more. Luke
6.35.
The Lord is kind to all: 1 King. 19.11, 12.
He appears not in a rough wind or terrible earthquake, or burning fire, but in
a still and soft voice. He Zach. 1.13.
speaks good words, comfortable words, he speaks friendly words, he speaks to
the Hos. 2.14.
heart of the Church. So his children are full of kindness; full of courtesy,
Their Religion does not make them rude and rustic, but as it teaches them to
maintain good works, so also to keep up good manners. They hate indeed
hypocrisy, but they love courtesy; and account, as we may learn by their Rev.
16. per totum.
practice, the omission of a salutation to be no small sin in civil
conversation.

5. Are the one liberal, given to Hospitality; the other as the true children
of God, more. As the Lord has manum extensam to help, so he has manum
expansum to give. Psalm. 145.
Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desires of every living thing. 1 Timothy 6.17.
He gives richly all things to enjoy. So his children are free-hearted, and
open-handed. True it is, there be some Gentlemen (as we said) and some
professors, that have a thrifty, frugal, saving Religion: but as the one are
mock-Gentlemen, so the other are mock-Professors. There is not a child of God
mentioned in Scripture, as touched with covetousness. Psalm. 10.3.
God abhors it, and they all abhor it; and whereas other shut that they may
keep out, they have still opened, and Genesis 18.1.
stood at their doors to take in whom they might relieve who thereby Genesis
19.1. Heb. 13.2.
entertained Angels, who came not so much to feed on their cheer, as to feast
upon and reward their charity.

6. Are the one merciful? The other, as children like their Father, more. Number.
7.18.
The Lord delights in mercy above all. He delights in mercy, and rejoices over
the sons of men to do them good: but to the work of Justice he proceeds as to a
Es. 28.21.
strange work; and to the act of judgment, as a strange act. Hos. 11.8.
His heart is turned within him, and his repentings are kindled together. And
while there is any hope he spares, and when there is no remedy yet he does not
stir up Psalm. 78.38.
all his wrath, nor execute the fierceness of his anger upon his people. And as
He is to them, so are his children to others, as willing to impart mercy to
others, as they are to receive it themselves; as ready to pity, as to be
pitied; to pardon, as to be pardoned; to forbear in expectation of amendment,
as they would be forborne; and while there is hope of cure, dressing and
cherishing as their own members, and when all hope is past, as loath to have
them cut off, and as sensible of their smart, as if they were a part of
themselves.

7. Does the one stand well affected and seek to advance Learning and the
nurseries thereof, and the Religion which they profess, and if they be
Christians, the Church of God and Ministers thereof? The other as the true
children of God more. Psalm. 87.2.
The Lord loves the gates of Sion more then all the habitations of Jacob: and
how he provided under the Law both for the safety and livelihood of those that
ministered in his Courts, is well enough known Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: and Who amongst you shuts
a door for naught, Mal. 11 1.
or kindles a fire on mine Altar for naught? And though he has expressed no
quotum for them under the Gospel, as having given a sufficient precedent under
the Law by his own example; yet he has spoken Luke 10.7. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Gal.
6.6.1. Tim. 5.17.
enough to that purpose, and in all times made sufficient provision for them.
When they had least of all, yet then we find they did not Luke 22.35.
want at all: When I sent you (says Christ to his disciples) without purse and
scrip, and shoes lacked you any thing? they replied, Noth^ng. And he that
commanded the 1 Kings 17.4.
ravens to feed Elias, has still kept such a commanding power over the hearts
of men, that though they be never so covetous, never so ravenous over this
worlds goods, they have not quite eaten up all, but afforded his Ministers a
competent allowance. It was long before prophesied, and we have long since seen
it fulfilled, that Kings as nursing fathers, and Queens as nursing mothers,
should make abundant provision for the Church of God. Constantine begun, and
all Christian Princes have followed him, and the more Religious men have been,
whether public or private persons, the more liberal they have been in this
kind: and never any took away the means of the Church, but persecutors and
apostates, and such as meant to destroy the Church it self. As for those who
bo^e the Sword among us of late, and had it in their minds to rob and spoil
the Church, which their predecessors labored to enrich: We may say of them, to
their reproach, what the Poet speaks to the honor of Clytemnestra, who
preserved her husband, when all the rest of her Sisters destroyed theirs, That
they had (...). Pindar. Nem. Od. 10.
(...), a single-conceited, and a single-opinioned Sword by themselves. The
Sword of the Lord, and the Sword of his Religious Vicegerents, have hitherto
been for the defense and maintenance of the Church and Ministers thereof.

8. In all these things they excel. But that which sets them clearly above all,
is the dominion which they have over their passions, through the work of
Mortification, and that divine temper which they have in respect of worldly
things by their heavenly conversation. The Nobles of the World, though they do
worthily and seem to fly high upon the wings of Virtue; yet (as it is said of
Birds) Climach.
(...), They fly still with their passions about them. Whithersoever they go,
some passion of Envy, Lust, Malice, Anger, or the like, goes along with them,
which defiles every action: And as Birds though they mount high, yet turn their
backs to heaven, and Mos est aquilae ut irreverberata acie radios solis
aspiciat; sed cum refectionis indigentia urgetur, eandem osulorum aciem quam
radiis solis infexerat ad respectum cadaveris inclinat; and quamvis ad alta
evolet, pro sumendis tamen carnibus terram petit. Greg. mor. lib. 9. cap. 23.
look down-ward, and have their eye still upon the earth: so their minds are
still upon the earth and earthly things, in their very noblest and highest
designs. So that what is said in general of all men, (...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
Eurip. Hecub.
Hac servo nocebit si ostenderis quis non sit. Alius libidini servit, alius
avaritiae, alius ambitioni; omnes spei, omnes timori. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1.


That they are never wholly free, but must serve either the law, or their lust,
money or the base multitude; may be said in special of them, They are servants
still to some base lust or corruption, and while they rule over men without
them, are slaves to the beasts within them. And look as men of mean birth,
though they do many things well, yet still discover their lack of breeding, by
some rude and unhandsome action: So the Nobles of the World do stein their best
actions, and discover still their carnal generation by some base vice or
corruption; to which, if not openly, yet in secret they pay their constant
devotion. Multis saepe superbia luxuriae seminarium suit, quod dum cos Spiritus
quasi in altum erexit, Caro in infirmis mersit. Hi enim prius in secreto
elevantur sed postmodum public corruunt; quod dum occultis intumescunt molibus
cordis, apertis cadunt lapsibus corporis. Greg. moral. lib. 26. cap. 12.
Yea while men glory too much of their birth, we may observe, How they are by
Gods just judgment given up to looseness of life. While they lift themselves
up, and look over others in pride of spirit, they stumble and fall through the
Simeon accusatus falso stupri, ita esse assensus est, seque carnem gestare rem
sane quam lubricam. Euagr. lib. 4. cap. 33.
slipperiness of the flesh; while they please themselves with the conceit of
their native excellency, they are supplanted by the deceit of their natural
concupiscence. We may remember how Postquam semel hominis spiritum superbia
cepit, mox se ad corruptionem carnis extendit: quod in ipsi quoque hominibus
primis agnoscimus, qui dum post perpetratam superbiam pudendae membra co^egunt,
patenter indicarunt, quia postquam apud semetipsos intus arripere alta conati
sunt, mox in carne for as erubescenda pertulerunt. Greg mor. lib. 32. cap. 12.
Genesis 3. 7.
suddenly the pride of spirit in our first Parents, was punished by the
Rebellion of the flesh. While they conceited to themselves high things in their
minds, they suffered instantly shameful things in their members. Romans 1.21,
26, 27.
And so the Gentiles when they grew vain in their imaginations were given up
straight to vi^e affections; and while they waxed wanton, and played as it were
with their natural wits, were delivered up by God for a reward to unnatural
wickedness. Thus Ecce earo mersit quos superba scientia sublevavit, and a
volatu volucrum ultra appetitum lapsi sunt jumentorum: atque inde sub se
prostrati sunt, unde super se ire videbantur. Greg. mor. lib. 26. cap. 12.
Diabolus in eis quos ad stultitiae luxuriam excital, jumentum est. In eis quos
ad nocendi maliciam inflammat, draco est. In eis quos in fastu superbiae quasi
alta sapientes elevat, avis est. Id. mor. lib. 33. cap. 20.
the lust of the flesh humbles them, whom the pride of heart lifts up. Thus
they fall from the h^gh Ecce earo mersit quos superba scientia sublevavit, and
a volatu volucrum ultra appetitum lapsi sunt jumentorum: atque inde sub se
prostrati sunt, unde super se ire videbantur. Greg. mor. lib. 26. cap. 12.
Diabolus in eis quos ad stultitiae luxuriam excital, jumentum est. In eis quos
ad nocendi maliciam inflammat, draco est. In eis quos in fastu superbiae quasi
alta sapientes elevat, avis est. Id. mor. lib. 33. cap. 20.
flight of Birds, beneath the sensual appetite of Beasts. Thus they are cast
down below themselves by their inordinate affections, who set themselves up
above themselves in their fond imaginations. But now the godly, though they be
Jam. 5. 17.
subject to the same passions with others, yet they are not subjected to the
same enormous corruptions. As their Carnal birth, wherewith great ones please
themselves, leads them on to carnal lusts: So the godly being born again of the
Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the flesh by the same spirit. Gal. 5. 24.
They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts.
Mat. 8. 32.
The whole Heard of them is drowned by them like the Swine in the Gospel (...).
Climach.
not by a Monkish profession, but in a dead sea (if I may so call it) of
Mortification. Or if any of them live. yet they shut them up as close, as Josh.
10. 18.
Ioshuah the five Kings in the cave, and keep them as fast Prisoners as
Tamberlain did Bajazet in an Iron cage. And for the world, though they be in
it, yet they are not of it. Though they live on the earth, yet Phil. 3. 3, 20.
their conversation is in heaven. Psalm. 39. 6.
While other men walk in a vain shadow, and disquiet themselves in vain heaping
up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them: They walk with God, and
seeking rest and happiness, seek it only in him whom is centrum quietativum,
the only Center of all true rest and happiness. Exodus 32. 16, 19.
While the multitude, as the Israelites, stay at the foot of the hill, and fall
to Idolizing the creatures, doting upon, and dancing about, as they about the
Golden Calf; The godly are in the Mount with Moses, talking, and conververfing,
and solacing themselves in God. And as they say of Some say of Atlas, Quod
elatus sit super nubila atque in viciniam Lunaris circuli. Plin. lib. 5. cap.
1. Others deny. Id. Mons hic verticibus petit arduus astra duobus,
Nomine Parnassus, superatque cacumine nubes.
Ovid. It Is written of Olympus, Atho, and A^las, That they surmount all winds
and clo^ds, and that the Pagan Priests sacrificing on those Mountains, do not
find the Ashes remaining of their Sacrifices blown thence, nor washed off by
rains, when they return; yet experience resolves us, that these reports are
fabulous. Sir Walt. Ral. lib. 1. os 1. part.


some Hills, That they are so high, that they are little or naught infested with
clouds or winds: So the spirits of the godly are so Mentes sanctorum
transitoria cuncta despiciunt and sub se labi quicquid superbit, quicquid
praeterit contemplantur, and quasi in quodam rerum vertice constitutae tanto
sibi omnia subesse conspiciunt quanto semetipsos verius autori omnium subdunt,
atque inde cuncta transcendunt, unde Creatori cunctorum vera se humilitate
substernunt. Greg. mor. lib. 26. cap. 14. Legatur cap. 15. lib. 22.
sublime, that violent passions and turbulent affections do seldom or never
discompose or distemper their minds. True it is, That as the mists which rise
out of the earth, do many times hang on the brow of high Hills: So the mist of
some passion may sometimes hang on the brow of their understanding, and obscure
and darken for a while their reason: but as of the one, by the beams of the
Sun; so of the other, by the beams of Gods Grace, we soon see a sudden
dispersion. True it is again, (...). Pindar. Pyth. Od. 1.
That as the Eagle which sits (in the Poet) on Jupiters Scepter, lulled asleep
with sweet and delicious music, does hang the wing, and seem ready to drop off
from her high perch and sublime station: So the children of God being lulled
afleep sometimes with the pleasures and delights of this world, do flag and
fail much in their wonted devotion, and seem ready to fall quite off from their
high calling and heavenly profession; but 1 John 3. 9.
the seed of God abiding in them, they recover themselves, and answer again
their Noble birth, and Divine generation. It is with them in such cases, as
with men that are intent on their business, though they be surprised sometimes
with sleep, yet while they sleep, their Cant. 5. ^.
heart wakes, and the least warning, check, or call makes them start up, as
Judge. 16. 9.
Samson out of Daelilahs lap, and break loose from the withs and cords of sin
and vanity wherewith Satan for a time did blind and bind their Imagination. It Is
impossible that the fogs and mists of Passion should hang long about their
brows, who are clothed with the Revel. 12. 1. Sancta Ecclesia, quia superni
luminis splendore protegitur, quasi sole vestitur; qui cuncta temporalia
despicit, lunam sub pedibus premit. Greg. mor. 1. 34. c. 16.
Sun; or, that inordinate thoughts and cares for this world should trouble
their heads, who have the Revel. 12. 1. Sancta Ecclesia, quia superni luminis
splendore protegitur, quasi sole vestitur; qui cuncta temporalia despicit,
lunam sub pedibus premit. Greg. mor. 1. 34. c. 16.
Moon and all sublunary things under their feet.

And thus both for Parentage and Divine Nature, the godly surpass all. Their
Nature, by the work of Gods Spirit upon them, being in a sort Divine; their
life pure and holy, as the life of God; their Virtues, as being freed from all
violent passions, and inordinate affections, eminent above all other; and
indeed not so much to be termed Virtues as Graces. Whereas the virtues of the
Heathen and irreligious Christians, being tainted still with some lust or
secret corruption, are not so much Virtues as glittering Vices. Or if their
virtues could be free from that pollution which we now speak of, yet would they
not so be free from all aspersion, there being nothing at all of Gods glory,
either first or last in their Intention. Omnis doctrina Philosophorum sine
capite and --
As Lactantius said of the Heathen, That their Learning was without a head;
That their Religion was a headless Religion, because they knew not God: So may
we say of all virtues which the Nobles of the World make show of, They have no
good grace, they are graceless virtues. The original of them being only the
dictates of reason, and their end, their own glory; or at best, the good only
of the Commonwealth, without any respect to God, and so no better in the
judgment of the most High, then Treason. But all the virtues of the godly are
most properly Graces, Ephesians. 1. 6.
Their beginning being from Grace, and their 1 Cor. 10.31.
end, as the godly themselves, the praise and glory of God.

3. They surpass all others in their Relations and Privileges- The Nobles of
the earth stand much upon these, and will reckon up, if need be, their
Ancestors (...). Morel. in Stat. ex Libanio.
to the twentieth and thirtieth Generation; and are so vain sometimes, as to
claim kindred with the Rex regum Sapor, particeps syderum, frater solis and
lunae; Constantio Caesari, fratri meo, salutem plurimam dico. Am. Marcel. lib.
16.

Qui cognata licet sibi astra fingens
Phoebea tumeat propinquitate;
Mortalem hic tamen implet obsecrando.
Sidon. de Persa. lib. 8. Epist.
Stars, and write themselves children to the Sun and Moon; but when they have
gone the highest, they fall yet far short of the godly, who have Christ for
their elder Hebr. 2. 11.
brother and all the Saints, the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly
fellowship of the Prophets, the noble army of Martyrs, all the children of God
throughout the world, for their brethren. And for their privileges, they are
the Ephesians. 2. 19.
Citizens of heaven, and Peers (if I may say) of the Kingdom of God. They 1 John 1. 3.
have fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; yea, and with
the blessed Spirit also. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with you all. So that there is not a dram of Power in the
Father, of Merit in the Son, of Comfort in the holy Ghost, but they have an
interest in it. So that they may always delight themselves in the love of the
Father, relieve themselves by the Grace of the Son, and solace themselves in
the Comforts of the Spirit. And having this fellowship with God, and being as
it were Peers of his Kingdom, it is no wonder that they have also Tutelam
Imperii, the guard of the Almighty, the ministry and protection of the Angels
about them. Heb. 1. 14.
They are all ministering spirits sent forth for to minister to them who shall
be heirs of salvation. So that there is nothing spoken so highly and
vaingloriously of their Kindred and Privileges by others, but it is made good
in a higher way to the godly in the greatest truth and reality.

1. And this in the first place lets us see the reprobate minds and
dispositions of those who have the godly in lowest estimation who ought to be
in highest repute with them for their Piety and Devotion. Let men be singular
for Learning, or any art or mechanique profession, they are admired and adored
by all; but good men are looked upon, and talked of, but (...). Plut. mor.
as monsters of Nature, or some new mixture or strange composition. They that
keep themselves carefully from the filth and offscouring of the world, are
generally reputed 1 Cor. 4. 13.
as such by those that are the filth and offscouring of the world indeed. Yea,
let the great Ones of the world busy themselves much in matters of Piety, and
they shall run presently the hazard of forfeiting, with some of their own rank,
the honor of their Nobility. That which Salvian long since complained of, is
as true in our times. Iam vero illud quale, quam sanctum, quod siquis ex
Nobilibus converti ad Deum coeperit, statim honorem Nobilitatis amittit? aut
quantus in Christiano populo honor Christi est, ubi religio ignobilem facit? --
si honoratior quispiam religioni se applicuerit illico honoratus esse desistit.
Salv. de gubern. lib. 4.
If any Noble man shall begin to turn toward God, presently he begins to loose
the credit of a Noble man with men. Oh how little is the name of Christ
esteemed amongst Christian people! when Religion makes a man ignoble, and Noble
men are compelled to be wicked, lest being good, they should be looked upon as
worthless. Montaign. Ess. lib. 1. 24.
The Turks are of opinion, that Learning does soften and emasculate men's minds:
and the like Heathenish opinion, have some of Piety, that it does weaken and
effeminate men's spirits, and take them off from every thing that is manly. True
it is, godly men cannot swear, nor drink, nor drab it so stoutly, nor give a
sudden stab, nor enter the lists upon every trifling occasion so desperately,
as they that think and speak of them so contemptuously. But, let the glory of
God, and service of their Country require it, and none shall quit themselves
more nobly. Let Julian the Emperor command his Christian Soldiers saying,
Ambros.
Producite aciem pro defensione reip. Bring forth the Battle for the defense
of the Commonwealth, and every one obeyes: Let him change the word and cry,
Producite arms in Christianos, Bring forth your weapons against your fellow
Christians, and they acknowledge another Superior, and regard not what he
says. They are cowards arant cowards to do evil. They can do nothing against,
but have spirit and courage enough, for the truth. Let sword, fire, beasts,
whips, wheels, wracks, be prepared for the Martyr Gordius, Gordius is prepared
not to die once, but (...). Gord. in Basil.
ten thousand deaths (if possible) for Christ. Let Romanus be threatened first
with the wrack, and then be spared by reason of his noble birth, he will
renounce the Honor of his birth, rather then loose the Honor of being a
Martyr.

Prudent.
Absit ut me Nobilem
Sanguis parentum praestet, aut lex Curiae:
Generosa Christi secta Nobilitat viros.
God forbid that blood of Parents (says he)
Or court of honor should ennoble me
Christ's generous sect gives Nobility.
(...). Lucian. in Chrysostom. Sanctus nec proprium nomen nec gentem, nec civitatem
unde erat, neque servusne vel liber esset; sed ad cuncta interrogata Romana
voce respondit, Christianus fum. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Let Sanctus, let Lucian be tortured and questioned of what Country they are,
They each reply, I am a Christian. Of what Profession? I am a Christian. Of
what Parentage? I am a christian. To every demand, I am a Christian: showing at
once their courage and constancy, and that Christianity is the best Nobility.
Did these want valor? or may they not seem to have drunk of the cup of
spirits, which some talk of? Or does not the Spirit and life, which were both
in their words and actions, show clearly, that they had drunk indeed at John 4.
14.
that fountain, which springs up in Gods children to eternal life, and that the
1 Pet. 4.14.
Spirit of glory, and of God, did rest upon them. And have not Women also in
like sort played the Men, and marched along with them in the same Equipage,
showing, that they are indeed not only flesh of our flesh, but (...), Julitta
in Basil.
bone of our bone, by their incomparable courage.

We have read of a Prince, that was called 12th king of; Navarre, Montaigne in
Ess. lib. 1. cap. 54.
Tremblant, by reason of the trembling of his flesh when his armor was wont to
be put on, who being demanded the reason by some who had his valor in
suspicion, told them, You have little knowledge of me; for if my flesh knew,
how far my courage would ere long carry it, it would fall into a flat swound.
But surely we have so much knowledge of those that usually vilify the valor
of true Christians, that should the same conflicts be presented to them, which
were sometimes to the Martyrs, not only their flesh, but their hearts would be
tremblant, and they ready for lack of spirit to encounter them, to fall (as 1 Samuel 28.20.
Saul in his distress) flat on the ground. None but the Christian spirit could
endure the brunts, which the Christian has undergone. Well and good may those,
which are Noble according to the flesh, want, as we see too often by
experience, the spirit of Piety, but the true Christian can never want the
spirit of Magnanimity; or if a Christian should possibly prove a coward, he
has that, as other infirmities, from the flesh, not the spirit: even as the
other, if they prove Religious, have it from the spirit, and not from the flesh.

2. This lets us see, how little cause some have to please themselves with
their Nobility, who have no regard to godliness, no respect to piety. Such are
not so happy upon their own account, in respect of their Noble birth; as they
are miserable upon a true account in respect of their wicked life. Such (as
Seneca says) are Seneca de beneficiis lib. 3. c. 28. Proponit mihi inania
Nobilitatis, id est, hominum arrogantium nomina; qui non tam me impediunt quod
nobiles sunt, quam adjuvant quod noti sunt. Cicer. orat. vol. 1.
noti magis quam nobiles, of greater note then Nobility. As Ishmael is more
noted for his Genesis 21.9.
scoffing humor, and Esau for his Heb. 12.16.
profaneness, then that the one was descended from Abraham, or the other from
Isaac. And indeed howsoever some pride themselves in that they are descended
from such and such ancient families, yet both (...), in Psalm. 7.
sacred, and (...) Eurip; Troad.
profane writers fetch usually their pedegrees from other roots, and derive
them from other Originals, calling as the virtuous from the qualities which are
notable in them, Children (as we have said already) of light, day, wisdom: So
the wicked, not from their Ancestors but from their manners, Children of
darkness, envy, murder, death, and the like. And what honor can proceed from
a noble birth imbased by a sinful life? What credit was it to the Jews to be
the children of Abraham by generation, when they were reckoned by our Savior
the just Judge of all men to be John 8.44.
the children of the Devil by imitation. What advantage was it to Ishmael to be
born, and by his wickedness to be Genesis 21.10.
banished out of the same family? What benefit to Esau to be the firstborn in
the house of Isaac, and by his profaness to lose his Genesis 25.33.
birthright first, and afterward, by the just Judgment of God upon him, Genesis
27.36.
the blessing? Or what comfort was it to the poor woman in the Gospel to be the
daughter of Abraham, when she was bound by Satan, and so far bound to the
earth, that she could not Luke 13.11.1.16.
lift up her self toward heaven. If men will be truly noble, let them not
satisfy themselves with this, that they are well-born by nature after the
flesh, but let them labor to be born again by grace after the Spirit. Let them
not content themselves that they are descended from ancient families, but
endeavor (which few like in any sense) to be novi homines, new men, new
creatures. Let them not build upon the good deeds of their Ancestors, but see
that they lay up a good foundation for eternal life by their own good works.
Our Savior commanded them silence, that proclaimed him with a loud voice to be
the Son of God, and why? If we will believe Saint Confitentibus. Dei filium
imperabat lacere, ut operibus magis quam sermonibus Deus agnosceretur; and tu
Nobilem te dicis qui es factus? Ambros. in Psalm. 119.
Ambrose, Because he desired rather to be acknowledged God by his own good
deeds, than by other vain words: And this we find certain, that John the
Baptist knowing the humor of the Jews to be such as is common with Nobles and
Gentlemen, charges them to give the world some evidence of their own worth, and
not to think highly of themselves, only because they were descended from
Abraham Mat. 3. v. 9.
Bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance, and think not to say within your
selves, We have Abraham to our father. Abraham quidem salvatur; sed te
Nobilitas generis non salvabit, nisi fidem servaveris. vid. plur. in Ambros.
ibid.
Not the descent from Abraham, much less from any other ancestors whatsoever,
but the like faith, and piety alone, which was in Abraham, will save us It was
feelingly replied by Polynices to his mother in the Tragedy, when she asked him,
If his noble birth did not stand him in much stead, did not greatly advance him
in his banishment. Alas ( (...) Eurip. Phoenis.
said he), it is a a wretched thing to be poor. My noble birth fatted me not,
fed me not: it is wealth alone gains honor amongst men, and he that is noble
if poor, is as good as no body. So may we say to those that think highly of
themselves in regard of nobleness of birth, and have no respect to godliness of
life. Alas, it is a wretched thing to be poor in grace. Nobility sanctifies not,
saves not, keeps no sin from any soul, not any soul from Hell. Though it may
find admission for a man into Princes Courts on earth, yet it will make no way
of it self alone into the Court of heaven; For Heb. 12.14.
without holiness, no man can see God. It is piety, and holiness, which God
has respect unto alone, and if a man have all other natural and civil
ornaments, and want piety and holiness, he is, though he think himself with
Simon Magus to be some Acts 8.10.
great one, but (as Saint Paul professed of himself to be 1 Cor. 13.2^
without charity) just nothing.

3. This is direction both for noble, and ignoble, how the one may gain that
which as yet he has not, and the other may enhance that, which he has
already. (...). Plutar. praecept. nuptial.
As Socrates advised young men, If they were ill favored to correct their
deformity by virtue, and if they were fair, not to stain their beauty with
vice. So let men of mean and low birth ennoble themselves by a godly life, and
Phil. 3.14.
press to the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ: and let
those that are of an high and honorable birth, take heed how they debase
themselves by low and sordid manners; but add rather a godly conversation, as
a great grace and ornament to that which they have by their birth, a noble
disposition. There is a way left open by God for the ignoblest, if they will
seek it Romans 2.7.
by well doing, to attain to honor and glory, and they that are of the meanest
repute with the world, may yet by a pious life obtain with the Saints Heb. 11.2.
a good report in the world, and leave a blessing to their posterity, and
treasure up a recompense for themselves to all eternity. They that are the
least in the world, may become great and glorious by becoming godly and
gracious; and there is no defect in any sort or condition of men, but it may be
made up by a Religious conversation: the simple by this means may become Deuteronomy.
4.6.
wise and understanding, the poor by this means may be Jam. 2.15.
rich. The weaklings of the world may thus become the 2 King. 2.12.
the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. They that have not a rag to their backs
may by this means be arrayed in Rev. 19.8.
fine linen, clean and white. They that have not a morsel of bread to eat, may
feed every day of John 6.33.
Manna, angels food They that are servants and slaves may by this means become
1 Cor. 7.23.
free. They that are deeply indebted, may thus have their bonds Col. 2.14.
cancelled. They that are reckoned 1 Cor. 4.13.
the filth and offscouring of the world may by this means become the Mat. 3. 17.
Lords jewels. They that have not Act. 7. 5.
a foot of Land may thus have a Col. 1. 12.
part in the inheritance of the Saints in light. They that are but dust and
ashes, may be made partakers of the 2 Pet. 1. 4.
nature, Ephesians. 4. 18.
life, and Heb. 12. 10.
holiness of God: Thus Piety does supply every want, defect, ignominy. Thus
Scribit haec Philo de religiosis in AEgypto. Videtur viris istis universa legis
Scriptura animanti similis esse, ita ut superficies verborum corporis, sensus
vero in verbis reconditus animae sit loco, quem ipsorum religio praecipue quasi
per speculum nominum eximiam sententiarum pulchritudinem relucentem observans
contemplari cepie. Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 18.
(...), by those forenamed forms, phrases, and expressions as by a glass
darkly may be seen, Explica totos fastus, constitue omnes currus triumphales,
nihil tamen morum principatu speciosius reperies. Valor. Max. lib. 8. Haud
parvae rei judicium senatunt tenebat, qui vir optimus in civitate ess^t. Veram
certe victoriam ejus rei sibi quisque mallet quam ulla imperia honoresve
suffragio ceu Patrum, ceu Plebis delatos. Live. lib. 29. Hic honor habitus
Scipioni Nasicae. Vid. lib. 30.
(...), the transcendent prerogatives, privileges, beauties, excellencies,
glories, partly bestowed, and partly prepared, and to be conferred hereafter
upon the godly. Thus as the very Heathen could acknowledge, Nulla ingenia tam
prona ad invidiam sunt, quam eorum qui genus ac fortunam suam animis non
aequant, quia virtutem and bonum alienum oderum. Live. lib. 35.
Let a man be Godly and Religious, and all the Victories, Trophies and Triumphs
in the World, shall not make him more conspicuous, more illustrious. True it
is, Inter Agathaltos and Achanthides tantum est odium, ut, si sanguis little vi
misceatur, continuo secernat se ac dissiliat: Sic inter Patricios and Plebem,
siquando pro rerum usu conjungan tur and conspirent, durat tamen usque odium
natural. Cornel. a Lapide citat. tanquam ex Plutarch. in cap. 30. Proverb.
the profane great Ones of the world, will still despise those of mean birth,
notwithstanding their godly life, and do scorn generally to have any commerce
with them, or society in any office, not only if they be low and Mechanic
persons, which might give just offense; but though they be as able as
themselves in any politic or civil capacity. It has been observed by
Naturalists, That there is such such an Inter Agathaltos and Achanthides tantum
est odium, ut, si sanguis little vi misceatur, continuo secernat se ac
dissiliat: Sic inter Patricios and Plebem, siquando pro rerum usu conjungan tur
and conspirent, durat tamen usque odium natural. Cornel. a Lapide citat.
tanquam ex Plutarch. in cap. 30. Proverb.
Antipathy betwixt two Birds, that though their blood be mingled together by
force, yet they soon sever and divorce themselves again from each other: And it
has been observed also by Moralists of the Nobility and Communalty, Inter
Agathaltos and Achanthides tantum est odium, ut, si sanguis little vi misceatur,
continuo secernat se ac dissiliat: Sic inter Patricios and Plebem, siquando pro
rerum usu conjungan tur and conspirent, durat tamen usque odium natural.
Cornel. a Lapide citat. tanquam ex Plutarch. in cap. 30. Proverb.
That howsoever they sometimes join together upon some common services, yet
they soon break again, and upon the lest occasion fall quite in pieces. Great
Ones bear themselves commonly so high upon their birth, that they care not that
any should come nigh them, though never do well qualified for parts and life.
Nor can they willingly give others that Quod ex aliena vir^u^e sihi arrogant;
id mihi ex mea non concedunt. Sic queritur Marius in Salust.
honor for their own, which for the most part, they arrogate to themselves
merely for the Virtues of others. But look now as the profane great Ones
despise the godly for their mean birth; so God despises them for their wicked
life. As they look upon the godly as a base, so God looks upon them as a black
brood. His own people, descended from fair progenitors, he ranks, by reason of
their vicious manners, which the foul-faced Ethiopians, Amos 9. 7.
Are ye not as the children of the Ethiopians unto me, O ye children of Israel,
says the Lord? As they reproach the godly for their mean beginning: So God
reproaches them for their wicked living. Es. 1. 23.
The Princes are Rebellious. Hos. 9. 15.
The Princes are revolters. Ezra 9. 2.
The hands of the Princes were chief in the Trespass. Neh. 3. 5.
The Nobles of Tekoah refused to put to their neck to the yoke of the Lord.
Thus they are branded to eternity, partly for their wickedness, partly for
their averseness to the works of Piety. And as God, so all good men, though
they be honorable by reason of their outward condition, yet hold them as vile
persons by reason of their filthy conversation. And Satan surely cannot but
laugh to see them stand extremely upon their birth, and yet make themselves the
children, yea, the very firstborn of Hell, by their wicked life; as if they
desired to be chief in the lower, as they are here in the upper world.

Et centum Graecos curto centusse licetur. Sic in Poet. Pers. Sar. 5.
-- Crassum ridet Vulfenius ingens
Atque horum centum curto centusse licetur.
Great Vulfenius laughs at such in grossest wise,
And hundreds does scarce at hundred farthings prise.
We hate the exposing of any to derision, but we would, not unwillingly, have
our words make some impression. We would have great Ones and Gentlemen see what
little cause they have to brag of their Nobleness and Gentility, while they
make themselves the children of the Devil, and liable to the same condemnation
with the Infernal spirits, by their profaneness and impiety. For why? Are not
the Devils (if I may so say) as well-born and descended as the best? Are they
not the Sons of God, and the children all of them of the Highest? But not
keeping their Jude verse. 6.
first estate wherein they were created, that is, their holiness, they soon
forfeited their happiness, and forsaking their proper station by disobedience
at the same instant they lost that excellency which they had over others of
Gods creatures, and their native pre-eminence. A wonderful measure of knowledge
indeed, and no less Quamvis internae felicitatis beatitudinem perdidit, naturae
sa^en suae magnitudi^em non amisit; cujus adhuc viribus humana omaia superat.
Greg. mor. de diab. lib. 34. cap. 13.
power remains in them still; but, their holiness being gone, the good Angel is
wholly dead in them, and the evil spirit alone does survive: And should they
now please themselves and be proud of their endowments, having forfeited the
honor of their Creation, and exposed themselves assuredly to eternal
perdition? Our condition is naturally the same with theirs, but that they are
fallen without recovery, and there is a way opened for us to redeem our selves
from our misery. The only thing that preserves the elect Angels, and which must
raise lapsed man, is Holiness. Shall we then content our selves with our
present greatness, and not seek to recover by a holy life our former happiness.
Prove. 12. 16.
The righteous, not the Greatman, Nobleman, Gentleman, is more excellent then
his neighbor. And shall the godly, though mean of birth, rise up and lay hold
of eternal life by Righteousness; and shall the great Ones and Nobles of the
earth perish as the dung of the earth in their dung, their own Wickedness? Men
aim generally at Greatness, and labor to be as high as the best; and did they
seek it by Holiness, they would certainly attain it first or last. But now this
(...). Nazian. Orat. 28.
right hand and left, upper place and lower, precedence and concomitancy turns
all things topsie turvey, and brings them in the end, which otherwise might
stand like innocent sheep at the right hand, into the place of Pendentem summae
capream de rupe videbis:
Casuram speres, decipit illa canes.
Matt. lib. 13.

clambering Goats on the left. Nothing at the last day will avail us but faith
and sanctity when Christ shall come to be 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all that believe. If men were
wise, they would not only as the children of this world provide for the
present; but, as the children of light, look through the present to future
advancement. They that mind only the present are like those that see with one
(...). Naz. orat. 20.
eye alone, which seldom see well, and are not very sightly themselves to be
seen: but they that look to the present and the future, are like ambidexters
and lay hold at once both of this life, and that which is to come. Let great
Ones then and Gentlemen look with both eyes to the present and future felicity;
and attaining by their birth, to present Dignity, like ambidexters, let them
lay hold of the future by Godliness and Piety. And that they may be assured,
let them content themselves with nothing that is less then Piety. Mat. 5. 40,
47.
As Christ says, If you love them that love you, what reward have you? Do not
even the Publicans do the same? And if you salute your brethren only, what do
you more then others? Do not even the Publicans so? So may we say here, If men
have Wisdom and Learning, and Magnanimity, have they more then the Heathen? If
they affect the Religion which they profess, and seek the advancement both of
it, and those that administer thereunto; Do not the Heathen do so? We have
showed, that these things may be in singular manner in natural men, in such as
are Noble only by Nature. Let not Christians therefore, be they Noble,
Gentlemen, or others, content themselves in going thus far; but as St. Peter
after he had reckoned up many virtues, Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, bids,
Add to all these 2 Pet. 1. 5. 6.
Godliness. As if he had said, Let men see that they be all managed by the word
of God, and all tend to the glory of God. This is the nature of Godliness, to
make another Alpha and Omega, another beginning and end of all that is within
us, and all that comes from us. And as all the stars in the firmament cannot
make day without the Sun, nor an infinite sight of Ciphers arise to the
smallest number without the addition of some figure: So neither can all the
excellencies in the world, without Piety, make any thing in Christian Divinity,
nor add any thing of moment to the spiritual Nobility. Let none therefore,
great or small, content themselves, as we have said, with my thing but
Godliness; but rather labor ^o wind themselves up to the highest pitch of
Christian Nobleness. To subdue our passions, to mortify our inordin^te
affections, to conquer our lusts, to mind the things which are above, to have
the desires of our heart still upon God, and the remembrance of his Name, to
stand for God in opposition to the world, and depend wholly upon his
Providence; to contemn both the profits and pleasures of this world, neither
suffering our hearts to be overcharged or besotted with the one or the other,
is true Godliness, and that which few attain unto, true Christian Nobleness. We
may observe many that stand much upon their Gentility, that are infinitely
sottish; and many that pretend much to Piety, that are infinitely Covetous; and
both of them despising and scorning each other. (...). Plut (...).
As Bernice the wife of Deiotarus, and a certain Spartain Dame meeting one day,
turned their backs to one another suddenly, the one as it should seem abhorring
the perfume of sweet powder, the other the smell of rank butter: So these
usually keep aloof off; the first scoffing at the others sordid Piety; the
second at the others sottish Gentility. And do we not think that there is a
third man that may justly scorn both as having nothing in them of true
Christianity? Do we not think to find Virg. AEneid. lib. 1. Accommodat hunc
versum etiam Seneca Catoni: qui talis fuit Caesari and Pompeio, qualis Achilles
Agamemnoni and Priamo. Epist. 104.
Atreiden, Priamumque, and saevum ambobus Achillem.
The drunken sot, and the wretched worldling,
And the good man, both alike detesting.
He that is master of his passions, that has command of his affections, that
has his conversation in heaven, and keeps communion still with God; that
infinitely scorns the world, and is wisely temperate in the use of the
creatures; he only is the true Christian. And he that is such a one is truly
Noble. And though his birth be never so mean and low, yet if his parts advance
him in the Commonwealth to any office or dignity Juven. Satyr. 8.
Agnosco procerem, and look on him as meet to increase the number of the Gentry
or Nobility. Godliness (as it is said of the Crown) takes off all taindours of
blood; and, caeteris paribus, makes any birth passant and good. Yea Godliness
alone has a Crown laid up for it. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Hence forth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness. God has
promised it to Piety, and he that has promised, will one day set it upon the
head of the Godly, and being set on, there it shall rest to all eternity.

4. This should make the children of God careful to answer their birth, and to
walk worthy of the Lord, who is not ashamed to be called their Father, and has
bestowed upon them the honor of being called his Sons. We see that Nobles and
Gentlemen stand much upon their Honor, and are careful not to stein it
themselves, and give this, as he in the Poet, in charge to their children.

Homer. Iliad. 6.
(...)
(...) --
To excel still others in worth and dignity,
And not to stein the honor of their Ancestry.
How much more then should the Sons of God, the children of the most High,
stand upon their Honor, and be careful to approve and practice the best
things, taking heed, lest they do any thing whereby that worthy name, by which
they are called, may be blasphemed. Herba generi respondet suo. Tu non
respondes tuo? Tritici granum sparsum terrae, generis sui gratiam reddit: and
tu degeneras? Fruges non adulterant sui sinceritatem seminis, tu adulteras
puritatem animae, vigorem mentis, corporis castitatem. Ambros. Hexam. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
Yea seeing the earth brings forth grass and herb, yielding seed after its
kind, and the tree brings forth fruit after his kind; They which are the
offspring of God, and of kin (if I may so speak) to heaven, should be ashamed
not to answer their kindred. It was a foul shame which the Son of the great
Scipio brought upon his family, Propinqui a manu ejus annulum, in quo caput
Africani sculptum erat, detraxerunt. Val. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 5.
To have the Ring whereon his Fathers head was graven, plucked from his hand, as
having nothing of that wisdom in his head, or stoutness in his hands, which
gave his Father a seat in every noble Romans heart. It (...). Xiphil. in Neron.
was a far greater shame, that the trifling spirit of Nero, and the cowardly
spirit of those that durst not withstand his humor, brought upon the Romans,
that not only the Knights, but the chief Senators of Rome, should come into
the Theaters, and condescend to take upon them the parts of Common-Players on
the Stage. That the Noble families which had sent forth Consuls, Commanders,
Conquerours; should now send forth Fiddlers, Dancers, and Fencers. That they
should be now Actors of those things whereof their Ancestors scorned to be
Spectators: That they whose Trophies and Temples were to be seen, as monuments
of their Noble Families, should now be made the mirth and maygame of the common
people: That the conquered coming into the City, should point at the Conquerers
saying. See the sons of those that sometimes conquered Kings and Kingdoms, and
led them in triumph through their streets, become now themselves the grand
Pageants and pastime of Rome. And is it not as foul, though it be not accounted
so, because custom has made it common, That the children of God should
prostitute themselves so far, as to play the same parts, which none but the
vilest were wont to play upon the stage of the world: That the Church which was
wont to send forth Armies of Saints, Confessors, Martyrs, should now send forth
in greater number, Swearers, Drunkards and Covetous worldlings: That they
should be Actors of those things which sometimes it was a Ephesians. 5. 12.
shame to speak of; and commit those things commonly which heretofore might not
be so much Ephesians. 5. 3.
as named amongst the Saints: That they which were more then conquerours over
the Devil, the world, and the flesh; and whose virtues erected so many Temples,
to the eternizing of their memories, should now be themselves the grand
conquests of Satan, Revel. 18. 2.
The habitation of Devils, the holds of foul spirits, and cages of unclean and
filthy lusts: That men may justly point at them with the finger saying, See the
children and successors of the Saints, who sometimes conquered and converted
the world, become now themselves the shame and scorn of Religion. Such
intimations as these (we know) sound harsh in the ears, especially of great
Ones (who Nero ut faciendis scelerihus promptus, ita audiendi quae fecerat
insolens erat. Tac. annal. lib. 15.
though they many times act, yet seldom hear of, their dishonorable actions)
and are as unpleasant to us, as we make no doubt it was to the Princely Prophet
to call the great Ones of Israel, Esa. 1. 10.
Princes of Sodom, and Rulers of Gomorrah. Such reproaches cannot so much
grate men's ears, as such carriages Ephesians. 4. 30. Es. 63. 10. Ezekiel. 16. 43.
grieve, and vex, and free (as the Scripture phrases are) the good Spirit of
God: The things spoken of, being not only a shame to those that profess
themselves the children of God, but an infinite dishonor also to God himself.
For what is Godliness, but the imitation of God? And wherefore are we styled,
and profess our selves the children of God, but that we ought, and take upon
us, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
to be holy as God is holy; and to ^1 Pet. 2. 9.
show forth the virtues of him that called us out of darkness into his
mavelous light? Now when a man shall profess himself a Painter, and take upon
him to make the picture of a King; if he mishape him, and give him an ill
Phismony or ill feature, stangers will be ready to judge of the Kings person as
of an ill-favored creature: So if the life of Gods children (which be as
little pictures or Images, visible representations of the virtues of the
invisible God) be wicked and profane, Heathen and Infidels will be ready to
blaspheme the name of God while they judge and speak of him according to his
Counterpain. Thus the cruelties of the Spaniards in the Indies, who styled
themselves, The children of him who is the Father of mercies, and yet committed
fearful butcheries, gave occasion to that and the like Blasphemies; Qualis
(malum) Deus isle est, qui tam impuros ex se filios and sceleratos genuit? Si
pater siliorum similis, minime profecto bonum esse oportet. Benz.
What a God (with a mischief) is this, who has begotten such impure and wicked
sons? If the Father be like the Sons, there is little goodness of a certain in
him And if Pagans should live amongst us, and see how multitudes do abuse the
name of God, sometimes for their politic ends, and worldly gain; sometimes
altogether needlessly and in vain: How the most commit the greatest sins
constantly, and salute God every day as confidently in his Ordinances; What
would they think but that the God which we serve, were a dead Idol, a leaden
God, such as Sir W^lt Raleigh in his Preface to the Hist. of the World.
one of the Kings of France was wont to wear in his cap, kissing it and begging
pardon of it when he had committed any foul murder, and promising it should be
the last, and yet by and by fall to killing and kissing again? And why should
they who keep as constant a course in Gods service as they do in sin, be
thought to sin less grossly though not so ridiculously as he? What is it to
use the ordinances and offices of Religion so, but to use them as the
ordinances and offices that belong to a dead Idol, and not to the living God?
Does not God himself complain of this as of a gross and ridiculous deportment?
Jer. 7 9, 10, 11.
Will you steal, and murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn
incense unto Baal, and walk after other Gods whom ye know not, and come and
stand before men this house which is called by my Name, and say. We are
delivered to do all these abominations? Is this house which is called by my
Name, become a den of Robbers in mine eyes? Behold even I have seen it, says
the Lord. Hypocritae re^. virtuti intimae ad de corem sumunt visioni externae;
and qui ant supernum jud cem nu di conscientiae in in fidelitate consiscunt
ante humanos oculos professione sancta ver bo tenus palliantur Gregor. moral.
lib 25. cap. 15.
Thus they put on Religion, a matter of it self of inward excellency, to set a
better face upon their outward pomp and glory; and they which before the
Supreme Judge of all, were full of abominable corruptions, stood fair in the
eyes of men by a formal Profession. And this is a common carriage with men, and
passed over as a matter of nothing; but we may take notice of that (which the
Psalm. 50. 21.
Psalmist says) That the Lord sees, though for a time he be silent, and that
he utterly dislikes those actions, wherein Hypocrites think him like
themselves, and that he will set those things at last in order before their
eyes, which they would not set, as they should have done, in right order before
his. We should therefore be more careful of our demeanor for the time to come;
and as we call God 1 Pet. 1. 17.
Father, who without respect of persons, judges according to every man's work,
we should pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. We should take all
heed, lest we any ways dishonor our Noble Parentage, and labor in all things
to be imitators of our Father Ephesians. 5. 1.
as dear children. Our Life should answer our Name, and our Conversation, our
Profession, lest otherwise the issue be thus: Nomen congruat actioni, actio
responde at nomini: ne sit nomen inane and crimen immane, ne sit honor sublimis
and vita desormis, ne sit deifica professio and illicita actio. -- Ne sit
gradus exceisus and deformis excessus. Ambr. de dig. Sacerd.
A good Name and an ill Fame: a fair Profession and abominable Transgression.
We did set before you but now, the wicked practice of an evil Prince; we shall
put you now in mind of a better precedent, who used a Picture, Gestabat de
collo suspensam in pectus auream laminam, in qua nomen and imago patris
insculpta erat, qua subinde memoriam ejus refricaret, and quicquid vel faceret,
vel loqueretur, sic ageret quasi inspiciente omnia and exaudiente patre.
Chromer. de Bolesho lib. 6. de reb. Polon.
the Picture of his Father, to better purpose, taking it out and viewing it
when he was to act any thing of great concernment; that beholding his Fathers
image in the frame, he might do nothing unworthy his Fathers Name. Let us
abominate the former practice, and learn from the latter, to give much more
that honor to the Father Heb. 12. 9.
of our spirits, which he did to the Father of his Flesh. Let us do nothing to
dishonor Him, from whom we derive the greatest honor to be called his
children. Let the Image of his Divine virtues be always in our minds, engraven
upon our hearts; and let us carry our selves so holily, so mercifully, so
perfectly in all things, that all that see us, may Deuteronomy. 28. 10.
see that we are called by the Name of the Lord, and that we are a Es. 61. 9.
seed which the Lord has blessed. Si hominibus laetum est and gloriosism
filios habere consimiles; and tunc magis generasse delectat, si ad patrem
lineamentis paribus soboles subsiciva respondeat: quanto major in Deo Patre
laetitia est, cum quis sic spiritaliter nascitur, ut in actibus ejus and
laudibus divina generosilas praedicetur? Quae justitiae^ palma est? quae
corona? esse te talem de qu^ Deuteronomy non dicat, Filios genui and exaltavi, ipsi
autem spreverunt me. Cyp. de zel. and livor. Isa 1. 2.
It is a pleasure to Parents to see their own resemblance in their children,
and it is an honor to children to keep alive the virtues of their dying or
deceased Parents. And it is no less pleasing to God, that the life of his
children should answer their birth; no less joy to the Almighty to see his
Sons 2 Epist. John, verse 4.
walking in the truth, after the Commandment which they have received from
their Father; to see them carrying, like Gedeons Judge. 7. 16.
Soldiers, a Divine light burning in their earthly Pitchers. To see them
exercising the graces of his immortal spirit in their mortal bodies. And how
signal and triumphant a badge of righteousness, and how great a crown of glory
is it for them to behave themselves so holily and obediently, that God shall
not have cause to complain of them, as he did of some, I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me? But shall willingly
speak to their eternal both commendation and consolation, Es. 63. 8.
Surely they are my people, children that will not lie, children whose words
and works are suitable; children who will not carry truth in their lips, and a
lie in their Es. 44. 20.
right hand; children that will not carry God in their profession, and the
Devil in their conversation.

5. Hence they that be poor and pious may take solace, though they suffer many
times in this life much disgrace; their Nobility is as good as that of the
best, though they live here under a cloud of obscurity. What repute great ones
have with the world, They have with God and good men; the one are the only
excellent Ones with the sons of men, the other with the Psalm. 116.3.
children of God: The one are the the Worthies of the world, the other are the
Lords Worthies, of whom the Heb. 12.39.
world is not worthy. The one are the Jewels of Kings, the other the Mal. 3.17.
Jewels of the King of Kings. The one are the glory of Princes Courts, the
other the 2 Cor. 8.23.
glory of Christ and his Kingdom. And howsoever there be (to use the words of
the Prophet in another sense then he spoke them) upon this glory a Esai. 4. 5.
covering, so that the world knows not their worth, yet the Lord knows it, and
shall in due time manifest it to the world, as it was said of Viginti
clarissimarum familiarum imagines antelatae sunt, Martii, Quintii, aliaque
ejusdem Nobilitatis nomina; sed praefulgebant Cassius atque Brutus, eo ipjo
quod essiigies eorum non visebantur, Tacit. Annal. lib. 3.
Cassius and Brutus his image, which were concealed in Iunia's Funeral, when
twenty others of less note were brought forth, that they shone the more because
they were not seen at all: so may it be said of the godly, The less conspicuous
they are with men, the more illustrious they are with God. Summa apud Deum est
Nobilitas, esse clarum virtu^i^us, Quid apud Deum ^ viris Nobilius Pe^ro? qui
piscator et ^^^per fuit. Quid in ^oeminis beata Maria ^llustrius, quae spo^sa
^a^ri ^escri^itur? Sed ^li pisi atori et pau^eri caelesiis r^g^i a ^hristo
creduntur cl^es: bac sp^risa sa^i mer^i esse matter ^^ius a quo ipsae cla^s
dilae sunt, Her. p. 18. ad Celant.
Who more despicable with men, then Peter a fisher man and poor? who more
honorable in the sight of God? What meaner creature then the blessed Virgin
espoused to a poor Carpenter? who higher in the favor of God her Maker? To the
one were given the keys of heaven! To the other it was given to be mother to
the God of heaven! And though all attain not here to the like honor and
dignity, yet all are greatly beloved of God, and shall partake hereafter of the
same glory. 1 John 3. 2.
Now they are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what they shall be,
but when Christ shall appear they shall be like him, then they shall be as he
is himself, Exodus 115. 1.
glorious in holiness: having sanctified and cleansed them, he shall Ephesians. 5.
26,27.
present them to himself a glorious people. Though they Psalm. 68.13.
lie among the pots here, yet shall they be hereafter as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. Though in this life
they be Cant. 1.5.
black, like the tents of Kedar, yet in the life to come they shall shine as
the brightness of the Dan. 12.3.
Firmament, yea as the Dan. 12.3.
Stars, yea as the Matt. 13. 43.
Sun in the Kingdom of their father. And what then is the glory of the of the
Nobles and Potentates of this world, compared to the glory which shall be
revealed in the Saints? What are all the Titles, Ensigns, and Badges of Honor,
which the various Fancies of men have invented to set out the great Ones of the
earth, to the splendor and luster, beauty and Majesty wherewith the wisdom
and power of God shall invest the heirs of heaven. That which the Apostle
speaks in honor of the Gospel above the Law, may we fitly speak in honor of
the spiritual Nobility above the carnal. 2 Cor. 3.10.11.
That which is glorious has no glory in this respect by reason of the glory
that excels; For if that which shall be done away is glorious, much more
that which shall remain is glorious: And we may close up this with the words of
Saint James a little altered, Jam. 1.9,10.
Let the brother of low birth rejoice in that he is exalted, and let him of
Noble birth rejoice in that he is made low, and taught to seek a new Nobility,
in a way common to all, by virtue and piety; for as the flower of the grass he
shall pass away, and nothing but his virtue and piety shall remain and make him
truly Noble and happy to all Eternity.

6. And, in the last place, if men of Noble birth be virtuous also and pious,
What should be their joy, and what their Crown of rejoicing, but this, that
they have crowned their Nobility with Virtue and Piety? It was the speech of
dying Otho to his Nephew Non patruum sihi Othonem fuisse, aut oblivisceretur
unquam aut nimium meminisset, Tacit. Histor. lib 2.
, That he should never forget that his Uncle was Emperor, nor yet let his mind
run too much upon it. And so, we think great Personages should never wholly
forget, nor too much mind their Noble birth, but mind this rather (which will
be their only comfort) that they lead a religious and godly life. Jer. 9.23.24.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might: Let not the rich man glory in his riches: Neither (may we add) let
not the Noble man glory in his Nobility: But let him that glories glory in
this, that he understands and knows the Lord. Though a Noble Ancestry be a
great honor with men, yet it is only Piety, that procures them honor with
God, Es. 43.3.
Since thou was precious in my sight thou have been hoouurable. Though Gold be
better then other metals, yet it passes not for current coin in the kingdom,
till the Kings image and superscription be instampt upon it: and though Noble
persons be better by descent then others, yet they cannot pass for honorable
in the Church, the Kingdom of God, till righteousness and holiness, the image
and superscription of God be graven on them. Theodosius therefore rejoiced more
that he was a Theodosius magis se gaudere dixit, quod membrum Ecclesiae Dei
esset, quam quod in terris regnaret, Ambros.
member of the Church of God, then that he reigned on earth as Emperor amongst
men. And howsoever it be all one in some kind for a Prince to assume a small
Title to that of Kingl, as it is for him to wear a Sacrosancta majestas quae
ritu sacerdotum ungitur, unde Christi vocantur, non necesse habet post haec
titulo Equerii decorari, exili, frivolo, and ex ignorantia nato. Ausim dicere,
quod pace tum aliorum, tum praecipue, Regum, dictum sit: Con^umeliam Regiae
Majestati faciunt, qui ha^c dignitatem, si hoc nomen meretur, suscipiunt; non
secus atque si supra diadema sertum ex rosis, floribusque suspenderent, Laur.
Val. de Ferdinand. equerio facto lib. 3.
garland of roses and flowers on his Crown of gold; yet Lewis the ninth of
France, counted it his greatest honor to be called Lewis Lewis IX. being asked
by his Lords, What title of honor he would assume, as the Roman Emperors and
Kings of France in remembrance of their Acts and Victories; answered, My
greatest victory was obtained against the Devil when I was baptized in the
Church of Poissi. And in his familiar Letters he did not entitle himself King
of France, but, King of Poissi.
of Poissi, because there he was baptized, and received as a member into
Christ's visible Church. To be born of Noble Parents is, as it were, matter
Generari and nasci a Principibus fortuitum, nec ultra aestimatur. Galb. ad
Pisonem in Tacit. lib. 1. histor.
of fortune and chance; but to be Virtuous and Pious, matter of divine Grace
and special Providence. The number of Noble men every where in comparison is
not (...). Arist. lib. 5. polit.
great: The number of those that are morally virtuous (though more then can be
engraven (as one scoffingly said, all good Princes might) on Vides quam pauci
sunt principes boni, ut been dictum sit a quodam mimico scurra, In uno annido
bonos principes posse perscribi atque depingi. Flav. Vopisc. in vit. Arelel.
a Ring) is less; but the number of those who by true Piety seek for Glory and
Immortality, is less yet by far. And the greater their paucity, the more
eminent and singular is their glory, and as surpassing their felicity. As their
birth is noble, so their life being holy, their end must needs be happy. Their
Luke 10. 20.
names by reason of Holiness are written in heaven, as an assurance of their
happiness. Whereas otherwise notwithstanding their Noble birth, they should be
written, as the Prophet speaks, in the Jer. 17. 13.
earth, and all their glory at their death should be buried with themselves in
the dust. What one Noble man that lived an Atheist said he would have engraven
on his Tomb when he was dead, the same may all of them say at their death,
which rest only in their Noble birth; Haec verba Nobilis quidam qui Atheistice
vixerat, voluit monumento suo inscribi, Haec mihi porta ad Inferos. AEn. Syl.
This is the door that opens to the regions below; this is the inlet to the
Infernal pit. Whereas they which add to their Nobility Virtue, and to Virtue
Piety, may say of Death, as Jacob did of Bethel, Genesis 28. 17.
This is the gate of Heaven; and with the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 11.
By this an entrance shall be administered unto us into the Kingdom of Christ.
And whereas the former, as Princes and Rulers of the earth, draw multitudes
after them to sin and profaneness: The latter as Princes have Genesis 32. 28.
Power with God and men, and prevail with many to walk with themselves in the
way of Virtue and Godliness. And as, to the one, Power and Rule, and Authority
is given wholly, the world does Revel. 13. 2, 3.
wonder and wander also after them to their utter ruin and destruction: So the
other, as it was said of Constantine, are raised up by God Hic Imperator
virtute tam eximius ex Dei sapientia mortali hominum generi donatus fuit,
tanquam res quaedam peregrina quae homines in admirationem traduceret. Eusebius.
in Vit. Constable. lib. 3. cap. 2.
tanquam res quaedam peregrinae, as strange spectacles, to draw others after
them for their eternal welfare and salvation. And as great punishments follow
the one, suitable to their great profaneness: So great rewards abide the other,
answerable to the greatness of their deserts. True it is, both aim at Honor,
and would not (as the Apostle speaks) be 2 Cor. 5. 4.
unclothed, but clothed upon, even with honor upon honor. But to the one, at
death, an addition of Honor is given to that which they have; and from the
other Mat. 13. 12.
even that which they have is taken away. Wherefore? Because (as it was with
Jew and Gentile in matter of Justification Romans 9. 30,31, 32.
by faith and works) the one rest in that honor which comes by Nature, and
seek not after that which comes by Piety: The other mind chiefly that which
flows from Piety, and rest not in that which they have by Nature. And thus
they gain while the other lose, and raise themselves to new, when others fall
from their ancient Dignity. As Nature puts a luster upon them, clothing them
with the honor of Nobility; and as they Job 29. 14.
put on righteousness, and cloth themselves with Piety, wearing it in their
lives as a Robe and Diadem: So the Lord, after death, clothes them with glory
and immortality. And as it was wished in the behalf of one, who was both a good
Man, and a good Bishop, That one Crown might be given him for his own piety,
another for his pains which he bestowed on his People.

Fortunatus de Felice Episcop. Gallican. urbis Nannet. Magdeburg. Cent. 6. cap.
10.
Vna corona tibi de te tribuatur ab alto:
Altera de populo vernet adepta tuo.
Let one Crown for thy self be given thee from on high:
Let another spring from thy peoples Piety.
So when men are both Noble by birth, and notable also for a pious life, God
rewards them accordingly: bestowing as it were a double Crown upon them, one
for their own, another for the illustrious precedents, and singular patterns of
Piety which they give unto others.

THE END.
These Books are Printed, and are to be sold by William Palmer, at the Pa^^tree
in Fleetstreet.
1. THe Parley of Beasts; or, Morphandra Queen of the Enchanted Island, wherein
men were found, who being transmuted to Beasts; though proffered to be
dis-inchanted, and to become men again: yet in regard of the crying sins, and
rebellious humors of the times, they prefer the Life of a brute Animal, before
that of a Rational Creature: with Reflexes upon the ^^^sent state of most
Countries i(...), by J. Howel Esquire in Fol. 2. Occul^ (...) or, The three
Principles in Nat^^^ Anatomised by Philosophical Operations taken from
Experience, in three Books, by W. Williams, in 8. 3. Phil-Anglus: Some Sober
Inspections made into the Carriages and Consults of the late long Parliament,
by J. Howel Esquire in 8. 4. Metamorphosis Anglorum; or, Reflections Historical and
Political upon the late change of Government in England, by S. D. in 12. 5. A
Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Dorothy Lister, with a Character of her,
How she lived and dyed, by Ed. Smith. M. A. 6. Monarchy Triumphing over
Traitorous Republicans; or, the Transcendent Excellency of that Divine
Government, fully proved against the Utopian Chimera's of our Ridiculous
Commonwealths-men, by G. S. in 8. 7. Ecclesia Restaurata; or, The History of
the Reformation of the Church of England, by Dr. Heylyn, in Fol. 8. The
Parentts blessing their Children, and the Children begging on their knees,
their Parents blessings, are pious Actions warrantable by the Word of God; with
a Model of Private Prayers, or occasional helps of Retired Devotions, by D.
Wolly. D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, in 8.

