THE PROTESTATION OF JOHN WHITE DOCTOR IN DIVINITY, which he caused to be
written the day before his death, to the end the Papists might understand he
departed out of this world, of the same opinion and judgment he maintained
both by preaching and writing whilst he lived.
IN THE NAME OF GOD AMEN. I John White Doctor in Divinity, weak of body, but
of perfect remembrance, being fully persuaded of Gods love and mercy to me, do
briefly make this my last Will and Testament in manner following: First I
bequeath my soul into the hands of Almighty God, who infused it when I was
borne, and all the days of my life has enriched it with such graces and
habits, as have enabled me unto the services whereto he has called me, of what
nature soever they have been: And my body to be interred at the pleasure of my
dear and loving brother Master Edward White, where and in what manner he
shall think good.

And touching Religion, and the state and disposition of my conscience therein,
I profess that I depart in peace, believing with a Christian faith all things
contained in the Apostles Creed, and other Creeds received in the Church of
England: To whose judgment I perfectly adhere, in the articles of the Deity,
Trinity, Creation, the fall and Reparation of mankind; Redemption by Christ
alone, Justification, Faith, and necessity of good works, etc. touching the
nature and institution of the Church, authority of the Scriptures, use and
number of Sacraments, and doctrine concerning death, and the resurrection of
the dead, and the state of the world to come: And all that which our Church
does uniformly teach against the Church of Rome.

And whereas I have these twenty years past, by preaching and writing,
published in two books, engaged my self against Papistry, I profess I have
done nothing therein against my conscience, but desire all men to assure
themselves, that if any error have escaped me, it has passed me through
oversight; for I always bended my self to that work of writing with much
humility to God, and such diligence as I was able to use; and having the books
always by me, I writ nothing but what I found in antiquity, and in the
writings publicly received in the Church of Rome it self. And I do constantly
avouch, that what I have written is the truth, and have been the more confirmed
therein by the unconscionable dealing of my adversaries against me, when no
learned man amongst them has encountered me, but only such as use base
courses of railing and scurrilitie, unbefitting Christian Religion. The which
my writings I commend to my children, praying God they may live and die
therein, without opening their ears unto seducers: and to all my people to
whom I have preached; and generally to all people that have been acquainted
therewith And this my Protestation I was desirous to insert in my will, wishing
it were also printed in my books; nothing doubting but Romish Priests and
their followers, when they shall hear of my death (according to a common
practice of theirs) will be ready enough to diuulge some tales or other
touching my uncertainty in Religion.

And having finished his Will and Testament, seeing himself almost spent, he
used these words following:

I am scarce able to say any more, greater occasion calls me off, my own
weakness and more necessary meditation with God, breaks me off, and have
taken me by the hand; with whom I hope to be shortly, having a steadfast
persuasion, that through faith in Christ, I shall see him, and enjoy him, and
live with him for ever. Which he grant of his abundant mercy, who will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy; and will show compassion on whom he will
show compassion. Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT OF A LETTER WHICH DOCTOR WHITE WRlT to a friend of his, who
having found comfort thereby, is desirous it should be printed for the comfort
and good of others also.
LET him that will live reposedly, and die cheerfully, hear, pray, meditate,
do. First hear Gods word in the Scriptures, and in the pulpit, in the
Scriptures daily, and in the pulpit make choice of a fit teacher, and stick to
him; for the practice of Gods word gives knowledge, works holiness, breaks
down natural corruption, and fills with strength and comfort against all
assaults.

Secondly, prayer has three rules: daily, without intermission: free, that the
mind be unladen. Go to prayer as you go into the water to swim, go not hot in,
but take a time, and first cool your self, feeling that the words touch your
soul. The day I neglect either Gods word or prayer is unhappy. That God being
so near, and within me, I should neither speak to him, nor he to me, that
were too much between a man and his wife.

Thirdly, meditation is the mod sovereign cure of the soul that is. My course
is this: I miss no day but I retire my self (if I be at home) to my study,
or the field, and there first I pray to God to give me a recollected mind;
secondly, I enter into consideration of my sinful state, and examine my self,
I call for help to God; thirdly, I take notice of my passion, disposition and
inclination, and so I come to the knowledge of my self. Fourthly, I arm my
self by vows, resolutions, and prayer, to conquer my, self as a City.
Fifthly, I call to mind if anything has passed between my neighbor (any
other) and me: if I remember any unkindness offered, or received, I wash it
out, I clear the score, I suffer no man's infirmity to possess me with
conceit. Sixthly, I enquire after the day of my death in this sort; first I set
it before my eyes; next I examine whether I be fit, prepared, ready, willing
to die: thirdly my cowardly soul I encourage, and teach it to look death in
the face: Lastly I end this point with flying to my Savior for help, till I
become more then a conqueror. I will with great and tender passion, in this
point power out my self and weakness to him. Seventhly I think also (in the
next place) of my worldly state; and if it prosper, I give thanks, and lay
humility and compassion in my mind: if it be poor, I pray for supply, and
bethink me of some honest and lawful means: (here I remember wife, children,
servants, and purpose to bring them toward God.)

Fourthly, doing is the life of all; for it is nothing to be religious in
ceremonies. Here are four principal points. First, beware of doing against
your conscience. Secondly, omit no occasion, place, or time, or person, if you
can do good. Thirdly, follow the good of your own calling: too many meddle
with the good that belongs to others to do, as Vzzah. Fourthly, the best good
in the world, is compassion, and alms, and comforting in distress, as
sickness, etc.

Life is short, the days are evil, our company is small, the account is
certain, the comfort unutterable.

London, Prtnted for William Barret.


