A SERMON IN CONFUTATION Of R. H. the AUTHOR OF The Guide in Controversies.

SHOWING That his most plausible Arguments produced against Protestants, do
more effectually conclude for Judaism against Christianity.

BY DANIEL WHITBY, D. D. Chantor of the Church of Sarum.

Religio nunquam magis periclitatur quam inter Reverendissimos. Luther. London:
Printed for H. Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard, R. Bentley and M.
Magnes in Russelstreet Covent Garden. 1679.

A SERMON ON John vii. 47, 48, 49.
Are ye also deceived? have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on
him? But this people who knows not the law is accursed.
THE Miracles of our Blessed Savior, by which his Doctrine was confirmed, were
so exceeding many, and exceeding great, that they prevailed on those plain
hearted people who beheld them to believe that he who wrought them was indeed
the Christ. For many of the people believed on him, saying, when Christ comes
will he do more miracles than these? Verse 31. These apprehensions of the
Vulgar did so Alarm the Chief-Priests, and Pharisees, who saw their Interest,
Authority, and Credit with the people must decline, as fast as that of Christ's
prevailed, that they forthwith dispatched their Officers to take him, and bring
him to them, Verse 32. These Officers when they had heard the gracious words
which issued from the mouth of Christ, were themselves taken by him, they who
were sent to bring Christ to the Priests and Pharisees, were themselves brought
to Christ, and so these Converts neglect to do the Office of the Highpriests
Sergeants. And being asked the reason why they had not brought Christ, they
boldly answer, that they had heard such gracious and heavenly words proceeding
from him as never man before him spoke, and therefore could not think it fit to
apprehend so excellent a person, as he was. The Pharisees, hearing this answer,
do presently conclude their Officers must be deceived in these kind thoughts of
Christ, and offer this, as they supposed, convincing Argument, to prove it,
viz. that though the giddy multitude, who had no knowledge of the Law, and
therefore no capacity to understand the mind of God contained in it, might be
inclined to think that Jesus was indeed the Christ, yet since the Rulers of the
Church, the Sanhedrim, seeing the Doctors, and Expounders of the Law, the
Scribes and Pharisees believed not on him, but did unanimously reject him as a
vile Impostor, they must be certainly deceived, who apprehended otherwise
concerning him, because they followed the verdict of the ignorant, and giddy
multitude, in opposition to the better judgments, and the mature deliberations
of their Church Guides, and learned Clerks.

Now amongst all the Arguments by which the Emissaries of the Church of Rome
endeavor to beguile unstable souls, and beget in them a suspicion that they
have been seduced from the Church, none is more plausible than this which by
the Pharisees is here laid down. I therefore shall endeavor,

1. To propound the Argument which is here urged by the Pharisees to prove our
Jesus could not be the true Messiah, in its full strength and vigor. And

2. To show that what the Papists do produce to prove that Protestants must be
deceived, is exactly parallel to what the Pharisees did, or might produce
against our Savior, and the same arguments might with equal reason have been
urged by the unbelieving Jews against our Lords Disciples, and those who laid
the first foundations of, and became early converts to the Christian Faith; As
they are urged by the Papists against our departure from the Church of Rome.

Now the Argument contained in the Text is this, viz. You must be certainly
deceived if you believe that Jesus is the Christ; Because you do, by
entertaining this persuasion, contradict the judgment of your Church Guides
which God has set over you. For they have frequently assembled for the
determination of this grand debate, Whether this Jesus was the Messiah promised
to the Jews or not, and they have constantly determined that he was not the
Christ. And have unanimously concluded that he deserved to be punished as a
vile Impostor, and that all who did confess that he was the Christ, should be
excommunicated. In an assembly consisting of Chief Priests, and Pharisees, they
positively declare that Christ could be no Prophet because he was a Galilean.
John vii. 52. Verse 41, 42.
This all, say they, who search the Scriptures may plainly see. Moreover they
determine in my Text, Verse 47, 48, 49.
that all who so esteemed him were themselves deceived, and that they lay
exposed to this delusion for want of knowledge in the Law. In the ninth Chapter
of St. John, Verse 16.
the Pharisees again declare that this man could not be of God, because he did
not keep the Sabbath. (...). John ix. 22. xii. 42.
Moreover these Pharisees, and other Rulers of the Church, determined and
agreed together, that whosoever did confess that Jesus was the Christ, should
suffer excommunication. They therefore thought themselves infallibly certain,
Disc. chap. 4. S. 64, 65, 69.70.
(if excommunication be as R. H. informs us, an evidence of a claim to be
infallible) that Christ was not the true Messiah. Mark iii. 22. (...).
Elsewhere the Scribes and Pharisees do positively conclude that Christ did
only Cast out Devils through Beelzebub. Joh. xi. 47, 50, 53.
After some days they again call a Council and there determine that it was fit
that Christ should die. This the High Priest declares, and all the Pharisees,
Luke xxii. 66.
and the Chief-Priests agree to execute. A full Assembly consisting of the
Highpriests, and all the Chief-Priests, Presbyters, and Scribes, Christ being
brought before their Council, do with one voice declare that he was worthy to
die as a Blasphemer, and also that by their Law he ought to die, because he
made himself the Son of God. After his death the Chief-Priests, and the
Pharisees, with one consent pronounce him a deceiver. When the Disciples began
to witness that he was risen from the dead, Matthew. xxvii. 63.
the Highpriests, Rulers, Elders, Scribes, and all the kindred of the
High Priest assemble at Jerusalem, and strictly do command them not to speak at
all, Act. iv. 6, 18.
or teach in the name of Jesus. Soon after the High Priest, the Sanhedrim, and
all the Elders of Israel, Act. v. 40.
being met in Council, repeat the same command, and chastise the Apostles for
their disobedience to it. If therefore the decrees of many Councils, consisting
of the Guides of the whole Jewish Church, may be esteemed sufficient to decide
a Controversy, it must be certain that Jesus Christ was not the true Messiah
promised to the Jews, but a Deceiver and Blasphemer. Now as a Romanist,
Rational Account, Disc. 1. Chap. 6. S. 59. P. 58.
having produced five Provincial, and two General Councils, falsely so called,
for that portentous Doctrine of Transubstantiation, says, If the Decrees of so
many Synods, so often weighing the Adversaries reasons and evidences, was not
sufficient for settling such a point, at least as to the obedience of future
silence, and noncontradiction, and as to suffering the Church to enjoy her
peace, what can hereafter be sufficient? Or can we ever hope that any
Controversy shall be finally determined, or ended by any future Council, if
this, (of the Messiah) is not by these forepast? Can there be any ground here
to question the integrity, or lawful proceedings of so many Councils, all
concurring in the same judgment (for a Corporal presence, says the Romanist,
that Christ was a Deceiver, says the Jew?) Or could there be any new light in
this point attainable in those times, by the private person, or Christian
Convert which those (Guides of the Jewish Church, who condemned your Jesus)
were not capable, or had no notice of.

2. They who so often, and so unanimously condemned your Savior, and his
Doctrine (says the Jew) were the Church-Guides by God appointed Levit. x. 11.
Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 10. Mal. ii. 7. Ibid.
to teach the Children of Israel all the Statutes which the Lord had spoken to
them by the hand of Moses, to teach Jacob his judgments, and Israel his Law,
and by whose lips the knowledge of it was to be preserved. They were the men who
are in Scripture styled the Messengers, or the Ambassadors of the Lord of
Hosts; that is, the men appointed by him to declare his message to the people.
Deuteronomy. xvii. 8, 12.
They were the men Ordained to Minister before the Lord in every Controversial
matter, 2 Chronicles. xix. 8.
men who were set for the judgment of the Lord and for Controversies, In
Controversy they shall stand in judgment, Ezekiel. xliv. 24. Deuteronomy. xxi. 5.
says the Lord, and by their word shall every Controversy be tried.

Deuteronomy. xvii. 12.
Wherefore to act in opposition to the judgment of these Guides, must be to act
presumptuously, as God himself declares, to despise the verdict of Gods
Messengers, and in a Controversial matter of the highest moment, to reject the
sentence of those men, who are by God Ordained to define it, and by whose
words, according to his Ordinance, it must be tried.

3. As for the common people, who in this matter did oppose their private
judgments to the Decrees of their Church Guides, not acquiescing in their
Conciliar determinations, that your Jesus was not the true Messiah, they, says
the Jew, must act against that Rule which both the Law of Moses, and the
Prophets have prescribed, for by that Law they are commanded under pain of
death when any Controversy should arise among them to go to the Priests and
Levites, and to the Judge then living, Deuteronomy. xvii. 8.12.
to enquire the sentence of judgment from his mouth, and to do according to the
sentence which they shall show them, and according to all that they inform
them, not declining from it to the right hand, or the left. Hag. ii. 11. Mal.
ii. 7.
They by the Prophets are instructed to ask the Priests concerning the Law, and
to seek the knowledge of it from their mouths. They therefore stood obliged to
assent to the determinations of the Sanhedrim, and the Conciliar Decrees of
Priests and Levites, Scribes and Pharisees confirmed by the High Priest, and so
they were obliged to believe that according to the true intent and meaning of
the Law, your Jesus could not be the true Messiah. And consequently they must
err who quitting the Decisions of the Pharisees, and other Rulers of the
Church, embrace that Tenet of the ignorant and giddy multitude.

Thus the Jew pleads from Scripture, against our Blessed Lord. And if you do
compare these pleas, and others of like nature, which might be offered from the
Scriptures by the Jew, with what the Romanists do offer for the infallibility
of any of their Councils, you will soon find that all their pleas for this
infallibility from the New Testament, are paralleled, or rather over-ballanced
with places of like nature in the Old, which do more strongly plead for the
infallibility of the High Priest, and Rulers of the Jewish Church. For,

1. Matthew. xxviii. 20.
Does the Romanist plead Christ's promise to be for ever with his Church?

Answ. The Jews had equal reason to expect Gods presence among them, Exodus
xxix. 42, 43, 44, 45. Mic. iv. 7. Psalm. cxxxii. 13, 14. 2 Chronicles. vii. 16.
because he promised to dwell among the children of Israel, to meet them at the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and there speak with them, to Reign over them
in Zion from henceforth and for ever. He chose Zion for his habitation, and
said of it, this is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, and of Jerusalem, that
he would put his name for ever in that place, and that his eyes, and his heart
should be there for ever.

2. Matthew. xviii. 20.
Do they add that Christ has promised that where two or three are gathered
together in his name, he will be in the midst of them?

Answ. Psalm. cxxxiv. 3. Exodus xx. 24.
God also promised to the Jews that he would bless them out of Zion, and that
wheresoever he did record his name, there would he come and bless his people,

3. Luke x. 16. Matthew. xviii. 17.
Do they alledg these sayings of our Lord to his Disciples, viz. He that
hears you hears me. He who neglects to hear the Church shall be accounted
as a Heathen and a Publican.

Answ. Deuteronomy. xvii. 12.
God also said that he who will not hearken to the Priest that stands to
minister before the Lord, even that man shall die for his presumption.

4. Heb. xiii. 7, 17.
Do they say that Christ's Apostles commanded Christians to obey those that had
the rule over them, and to follow their faith?

Answ. Matthew. xxiii. 3.
Our Jesus did command his hearers to do all that the Scribes and Pharisees did
say unto them, and that because of their Authority derived from Moses, Deuteronomy.
xvii. 10.
and God himself commanded all his people to do according to all that they
should be informed of by the Priests. And

5. John xvi. 13. Chap. xiv. 26.
Do they plead Christ's promise made to his Apostles that he would send the
Spirit of Truth to guide them into all Truth?

Answ. Whereas this promise does personally belong to the Apostles, John xiv.
26. John xvi. 13.
and not to their Successors (for it is a promise to bring to their remembrance
by his Spirit, what he before had said to them and to show them things to come,
to which Spirit of Prophecy the Roman Doctors do not now pretend.) I say
whereas this promise did belong to the Apostles only, God stood obliged by
Covenant to cause his holy Spirit to remain among the Rulers of the Jewish
Church. Hag. ii. 5.
For thus he speaks, according to the word that I covenanted with you, when ye
came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you. Numb. xi. 17.
Moreover God promised to the Sanhedrim that he would put the spirit of Moses
upon them, and in compliance with that promise he came down in a Cloud, and
took the spirit which was upon Moses, and gave it to the seventy Elders, so
that they Prophesied and did not cease. Or,

6. Do they argue for their infallibility, because the Church is styled by St.
Paul, 1 Timothy iii. 15.
the pillar, and the ground of truth, by reason of that truth which is
preserved by her Governors?

Answ. God also has declared touching his Priests, Mal. ii. 6. Zech. viii. 3.
that the law of truth was in their mouth, and of Jerusalem that she should be
called the City of truth. And if the Church of Judah has since failed, so also
has the Church of Ephesus, of which alone St. Paul affirms that it was the
pillar, and the ground of truth.

7. Ephesians. iv. 11, 12.
Do they conclude that the Church-Guides must be infallible, because God has
placed in the Church some Apostles, some Prophets, some Pastors and some
Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, that we henceforth be no more children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine?

Answ. Were not the Jewish Priests placed also for this end, for the work of
their Ministry, the perfecting of their Saints, the edifying of their Flocks?
Were not their lips to preserve that knowledge which should restrain the people
from their errors? Ezekiel. xxxiv. 4.
Were not they appointed to heal that which was sick and bring again that which
was strayed? Or,

Lastly, Do they triumph in that promise of our Lord, Matthew. xvi. 18.
that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against the Church?

Answ. Jer. xxxiii. 20, 21.
God also promised that his Covenant made with his Levites, Priests and
Ministers, should be as certain and perpetual, as that of day and night. So
that I need not add, that by this Phrase, Essay. Chap. 3.
Christ only promises that pious Christians shall not for ever be detained
under the power of the grave, which I have elsewhere showed, to be the natural,
and only import of these words, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the
Church.

Moreover the plain meaning of the foregoing words, viz. Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my Church, is, as Si quia dixerit Petro Dominus,
Super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, id circo praesumis and ad te
derivasse solvendi and ligandi potestatem, qualis es evertens and commutans
manifestum domini intentionem personaliter (N.B.) hoc Petro conferentem, sic
enim and exitus docet, in ipso Ecclesia exstructa est, id est, per ipsum. --
ipse primus in Christi Baptismo reseravit aditum caelestis Regni. De Pudicitia
cap. 21. p. 574. B.
Tertullian well informs us, only this: Thou who have first of all my Disciples
acknowledged me to be the Christ, thou shall first preach this Doctrine to the
World, and, by so doing, lay the first foundations of a Christian Church. Which
he accordingly performed, first laying the foundation of a Acts 2.41.
Church among the Jews by the conversion of three thousand souls. And after
laying the foundation of a Church amongst the Gentiles, by the conversion of
Cornelius, and his friends, Christ having, to fulfill his promise, Acts 15.7.
made choice of him among the rest of the Apostles, that the Gentiles by his
mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. Now to pretend to be St.
Peter's Successor in this matter, is in effect to say, that the foundations of a
Christian Church are not yet laid.

If therefore Roman Catholics conclude from these ambiguous and obscure places
for the infallibility of Councils, or of the major part of the Church guides
concurring with the Pope in any Sentence or Decree, although these places do
not speak one syllable of any Pope, or major part of the Church-Guides, and
much less of the Romish Prelates, and less of their infallible assistance, what
Ovations and Triumphs would they have made, had it been said expressly of their
Cardinals and Councils, as it is said of Jewish Priests, that they were set for
judgment and for Controversy: had God fixed his glorious presence at Rome, as
he did at Jerusalem? and settled there a seat of Judgment, and a continual Court
of highest judicature, as was that Sanhedrim which in Jerusalem was settled? had
he dwelt in St. Peter's as he dwelt in the Temple? had he left with them, as he
did with the Jewish Priests, a standing Oracle, a Vrim and a Thummim to consult
with on all occasions? so that this plea being much stronger for the
infallibility of the Superiors of the Jewish Church, than for the infallibility
of the whole Western Church, or any of its Councils, the Roman Doctors must
acknowledge either that they fallaciously urge it against Protestants, or must
confess that it stands also good against the Christian, and is a confirmation
of all those traditions which were condemned by our Savior, and a sufficient
plea for all those errors and corruptions, which, as the Prophets do complain,
were generally taught and practiced by the Church-Guides, in the declining Ages
of the Jewish Church. V. Stillingfl. Sermon upon Acts 24.14. p. 39.
For if these Arguments be good now, they were so then, and if they were good
then, for ought that I can see, the High Priest, and the major part of the
Church Rulers of the Jews were always in the right, and Christ and his
Apostles, with the Holy Prophets, must be in the wrong.

Moreover had we no evidence from Scripture, may the Jew say in prosecution of
this Argument, reason seems very strongly to conclude for this submission of
the common people, and some few Priests to the concurring judgments of their
Church-Guides, and of the major part of Jews, who joined with then in
condemnation of your Jesus, as a Blasphemer and false Prophet, and of his
followers as Heretics and Schismatics, or men who worshipped God after that
way which by the Jews was called Heresy, Acts 24.14. ibid. v. 5.
and were Ringleaders of a Sect. For still to argue after the manner of the
Romish Doctors.

1. Is it not reasonable to conceive that they who were Gods Ministers
appointed for this very thing to judge in controversial matters, and to make
trial of such as did pretend to Prophecy, as was the Jewish Sanhedrim: I say,
is it not reasonable to conceive that the assistance of the Holy Spirit should
be vouchsafed to these Rulers of the Church, and Doctors of the Law, rather
than to those common people who bore no such relation to God, had no commission
from him to direct others in the meaning of his word, but had so many, and such
express injunctions to seek it at the mouth of their Church-Guides? Can we
imagine that these Pharisees and Rulers should be the men ordained by God for
Controversies, and by whose words they must be tried; and yet should be such
blind and stupid Guides, as by your Jesus they were said to be, that he who was
led by them must fall into the ditch?

Moreover were no assistance from above to be expected in this case, is it not
reasonable to think that these great Doctors of the Law, those numerous Priests
who made it their whole business to study, Vid. Answ. in Numb. xi. 16, 17.
and search out the meaning of the Law of Moses, those Members of the
Sanhedrim, who were still chosen out of the most Learned Persons, and the most
eminent for wisdom, I say, may we not reasonably conceive such Persons to be
fitter and more able Judges of the sense and meaning of that Law, or of the
truth of any miracles pretended to be wrought by Christ, or his Apostles, than
was that rude and giddy Multitude which had no knowledge of the Law? They
therefore considering their Superiors study and Learning in such things Divine,
and also their own ignorance; R.H. discourse Chap. 13. p. 13.
they considering both the special ordination, and commission of their
Superiors from God to teach them in necessary truths, and his charge laid upon
them to obey their Ecclesiastical Superiors, ought to depend upon, and adhere
to their directions so much the more in any point of faith, by how much it is
esteemed more necessary, as wherein there is a much greater hazard if they
should err.

3. All that your Gospel does suggest, or reason may pretend for the exemption
of the first Jewish Converts from obedience to these decrees of their Superiors
in the Jewish Church, may, says the Jew, be fully answered from the plain
Principles, and almost in the words of Roman Catholics. For to proceed in the
expressions of R. H. the Guide in Controversies, with very little variation of
them.

1. Will you affirm that all the Priests and Rulers, Scribes and Pharisees, and
the whole Sanhedrim acted against their faith and conscience, in these
determinations by which your Jesus was condemned as an Impostor?

Answ. Discourse 1. Chapter 3.. 37, 38. p. 26.
R. H. will tell you there is a moral certainty that so many such persons
cannot conspire in such a matter, viz. a necessary to Salvation, to falsify
the truth against their own belief and conscience, to their Subjects and
Posterity, with an Anathema to all dissenters, or an excommunication of all who
preached, and believed that Christ was the Messiah promised to the Jews, and
was already risen from the dead, when their own consciences could tell them
that these things were true. Ibid. p. 25.
If any can be so uncharitable as to credit of them so great a wickedness, that
the Supreme Councils of the (Jewish) Church should with design decree an error
contrary to their faith, (or knowledge) in this necessary matter, and then
enjoin all their Subjects to believe it under Anathema, he must believe that
they most certainly do devote themselves to eternal perdition. And therefore,
if not out of Charity, or reverence to such sacred persons, yet from the
irrationality of such a defense, it is much better to pass over this objection.

2. Will you say that these Superiors were only to be appealed to in doubtful
matters, and that this thing, whether the Scriptures declared your Jesus to be
the true Messiah, was not doubtful?

Answ. R. H. informs you that a right judgment cannot but account all those
places doubtful, Disc. Chap. 3.. 44. p. 29.
in the sense whereof either the Ancient or present major part of Christianity
are of a contrary judgment from himself. That must be therefore doubtful,
according to the ground and reason of this Rule, which you presume not to be
doubtful, since it was that in which the major part of the then present Jewish
Church was of a contrary judgment from the Christian Convert.

3. Will you plead in favor of the vulgar, that they were bound to hearken to
these Jewish Guides no longer than they followed the Rule of Scripture?

Answ. Ibid. p. 28.
Be it so, But says R. H. Who is appointed judge of these supreme Judges, when
they transgress against this Rule? their Subjects? who are from them to learn
the sense of the Rule where difficult, and disputed, and who are bidden to
follow their faith? The right exercise of Judgment will not judge so. For if
the vulgar may pass this judgment of the Decrees of many Councils, and the
concurring judgment of their Superiors and Church Guides, I hope the matter
must be evident even to the vulgar sort that notwithstanding the contrary
judgment of Chief Priests and Rulers, Scribes, Pharisees and Elders, and almost
all the Jewish Nation, that sense of Scripture must be false, which their
Ecclesiastical Guides alleged, to prove that Jesus was not the true Messiah,
and that according to their Law he was to die, and that sense of the Scripture
must be true which by the Apostles, and their few Converts, was alleged to
prove that Jesus was the Messiah promised to the Jew. Ibid. p. 143.
Now how vainly, says R. H. does any one pretend, or promise himself a
certainty of any thing wherein so many Councils, and a much major part of the
Church, having all the same means of certainty as he, judges contrary?
Rational account. disc. 3. Chap. 4.. 42. p. 179.
where it seems the Scripture may be so doubtful that the sense of the (then)
Catholic Church, or its greatest Councils, they say, can be to them no certain
or infallible interpreter of it, where the judgment or common Reason of these
Councils thinks it self so certain of the contrary, as to Anathematise
dissenters, or cast them out of the Church. On what grounds here these private
Persons, or new erected Churches could assure themselves of their own sense of
Scripture to be true, they having left that of the Churches Councils, and of a
major part of (Jews) who also judged their sense false, I understand not.
Surely they will not say, they have this certainty from the Scripture, because
the true sense thereof is the thing so mainly questioned, and the certainty or
infallibility of the traditive sense of the (Jewish) Church they renounced, and
then, which only is left, their own judgment, or their own common reason, when
that of their greatest Councils, or major part of their Church-Guides, differs
from it, one would think should be a more fallible ground to them, than the
judgment or common reason of the Church. For a man to presume himself certain
in a matter of faith, Ibid. disc. 2. Chap. 2.. 15. p. 95.
or in his own sense of Scripture, (though the literal expression he never so
clear,) where so many Learned and his Superiors, (comparing other Texts, etc.)
are of a contrary judgment, this, says R. H. is the same as if in a matter of
sense, a dim sighted Person should profess himself certain that an object is
white, when a multitude of others, the most clear sighted that can be found,
having all the same means of a right sensation as he has, pronounce it black,
or of another color. V. Rational account disc. 2. Chap. 5.. 42. p. 141.
Moreover if these Scriptures, or reasons be so clear even to the ignorant and
unlearned Jew, must they not be as clear to their Church-Guides, and may not
then their judgments more securely be relied upon, at least for any thing which
is presumed to be clear? Disc. Chap. 3.. 37. p. 24.
For if Scriptures be maintained so clear in necessaries, that every one using
a right endeavor cannot mistake in them, then shall the Church Governors much
rather, by reason of this clearness, obvious to every Rustic, not err in them;
and so shall the people, the more the Rule of faith is proved to be clear, the
more securely rely on, and be referred in them to their direction.

4. If you pretend a more sincere endeavor in those few converts to find out
the sense of Scripture, or search out the truth in these matters, which, in the
case of the Beraeans, your Scripture seems to assert.

Answ. I Answer still with the same Author, Disc. Chap. 1. p. 4, 5.
that since all parties do pretend sincere endeavor in the right understanding
of the Scriptures, and after it do differ so much in their sense of it, it
follows that such sincere endeavors being indifferently allowed to all
parties, the sense of Scripture, (and the verdict of true reason) ought to be
pronounced clear, if on any, on that side as the major part does apprehend it;
(which certainly was not the Primitive Converts, but the unbelieving Jews, and
their Ecclesiastical Superiors.) Ibid. p. 24.
For surely we have reason to presume that the Chief Guides of the Church, in
their consults concerning a point necessary to Salvation delivered in
Scripture, (as that of the Messiah was) use at least so much endeavor as a
plain Rustic does to understand the meaning of it. And whatsoever other thing
is supposed necessary besides sincere endeavor, or is understood to be
included in it, (as freedom from passion, and secular Interest, or also a
freely professing the truths which their sincere endeavor discovers to them,)
none can rationally imagine but that these supreme Church Governors should be
as much, or more disengaged herein, than private men. Ibid. p. 145.
And that passion and interest blind private men, or our selves, sooner than
General Councils, or a major part of the Church.

See therefore here the wisdom of the unbelieving Jews, who to preserve
themselves from erring, in this matter, made use of the securest way that
reason could imagine, Rat. Account Disc. 1. Chap. 7.. 77. p. 74.
says R. H. or that Christians are prescribed, whilst for the sense of the
Scriptures that were controverted in this point of the Messiah, they chose not
to rely on their own judgments, but on that of the Supremest Guides of the
Church, and Judges of Divine Truth that were afforded them on earth, and so if
they erred, yet took the wisest course to have missed erring that Religion, or
Reason could dictate. To which Guides also the subjects of this former
Communion all believed submission of their private judgments to be due, and to
be commanded, from whence also it follows that till they are convinced of error
in this point, viz. that no submission was due, to the Decrees of all these
Councils, and the concurring judgment of those Spiritual Guides by whom your
Jesus was condemned, they are not capable of being convinced in any other
matter,

If lastly, you affirm that the common people had conviction, and demonstration
from the Miracles of Christ of the falsehood of the Decrees, and the
Interpretations of their Church Guides in this matter, and of the truth of that
Christianity which they embraced in opposition to those said Decrees.

Answ. This I confess is a great truth, but then the Roman Doctors cannot plead
it, without rejecting most of their professed Tenets, and their strongest pleas
for absolute submission to the Major part of their Church Guides. For,

1. Admit our Savior, and his Apostles wrought true Miracles, how did the
vulgar perceive them so to be but by their senses? and how did they infer from
them the truth of Christianity, but by their private Reasons? Rat. Account
Disc. 1. Chap. 6.. 62. p. 63.
Now the evidence of sense and reason must be both neglected, says the
Romanist, when a Divine Revelation declares any thing contrary to them, This,
and this only, being their defense of Transubstantiation against the common
sense and reason of mankind. Now of the certainty of a Divine Revelation, or
the true sense of Scripture, they make the judgment of the Major part of their
Church Guides to be sufficient evidences, and so there was sufficient evidence,
according to this Rule, that all the Miracles which Christ, and his Apostles
seemed to work, were done in opposition to Divine Revelation, or the true sense
of Scripture.

2. Certain it is that the Rulers of the Jews, and the prevailing part of the
whole Nation, differed from the converted Christians in their apprehensions of
these Miracles, and judged them all Diabolical Impostures, or trials of their
Faith, etc. Rat. Account Disc. 4. Cons. 2. p. 384.
Now this seems necessary to be granted, says R. H. that in what kind of
knowledge soever it be, (whether of our sense or reason, in what ever Art or
Science) one can never rightly assure himself concerning his own knowledge, that
he is certain of any thing for a truth, which all, or most others of the same,
or better abilities for their cognoscitive faculties, in all the same external
means, or grounds of the knowledge thereof, do pronounce an error. So that where
all, or most differ from me, it seems a strange pride not to imagine this
defect in my self, rather than them, especially when as all the grounds of my
science are communicated to them, and when as for my own mistakes, I cannot
know exactly the extent of supernatural delusions. According therefore to this
Rule, it was strange pride in the first Converts to Christianity among the
Jews, to judge the Miracles of Christ, or his Apostles true, when most of their
own Nation, as well as Heathens, differed from them in that apprehension, and
spoke so freely every where against the Sect of Christians.

3. The truth of the pretenses of our Lord, and his Apostles, depended on two
things, Stillingfl. ibid. p. 42.
viz. the fulfilling of Prophesies, and the truth of his Miracles. Now
according to the Roman Principles no man could be certain of the truth of
either of these without the Authority of the then present Church. For the
fulfilling of Prophesies depended on the sense of many obscure places of
Scripture, of which, say they, the Major part of the Church-Guides must judge.
And for Miracles, they tell us that there is no certain way of judging true,
from false, but by the Authority of the Church. Now if these things be so, what
ground could the first Jewish Converts have to believe Christ was the true
Messiah, or a worker of true Miracles, when in believing both these things,
they must oppose the Authority of the then present Church.

4. All that has been discoursed in answer to the former pleas, serves also
against this. For who shall be judge whether these Miracles were true, and were
sufficient to confirm the Christian Faith? those Persons whose Office it was to
judge both of true Prophets, and true Miracles, or those who had no power or
commission so to do? Was not the Jewish Sanhedrim and other Rulers of that
Church more able Judges of the Truth, and the validity of any Miracles
pretended to be wrought by Christ and his Apostles, than was that Multitude
which, as experience teaches, may be imposed upon with ease? Were not those
Guides who were appointed to be Judges in all other matters, the proper Judges
of this Controversy? Have we not reason to believe their judgment was as free
from interest and passion, and their endeavors to search out the truth of these
relations as sincere, as was the judgment or endeavors of the Laity? When
therefore these Church-Guides did notwithstanding those pretended Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, conclude unanimously that Christ was a Deceiver, was
it not absurd to say that what they so universally determined, might be
discerned by any private judgment to be the clearest falsehood? that vulgar
persons had demonstration in this matter against the judgment of the whole body
of their Guides, and that their common reason was able to discern that to be
manifestly true, which the same common reason of their Superiors, judged to be
manifestly false?

Thus have we seen that Scripture and Reason do more countenance the Jew
pleading against our Lord, and the first Christian Converts, than they do
countenance the Papist pleading against Protestants. In the last place the Jew
may argue from Tradition thus, viz.

These Spiritual Guides in making this determination and passing of this
judgment concerning Jesus were guided by that Rule, Synod. Tri^. Sess. 4.
which by the greatest part of Christians, I mean the Roman Catholics, is
highly magnified, and equaled with the Holy Scriptures, viz. Tradition,
acknowledged by the present Church for such. And so your Jesus must also upon
this account be deemed an Impostor, or the pretenses and pleadings of the
Romanist against the Protestant, from the Tradition of the Church, must be
acknowledged to be vain. For,

1. It is most certain that the Jews had a Tradition generally received amongst
them that their Messiah at his coming should restore the Kingdom to Israel.
That he should subdue the Nations under them, and should erect a Temporal
Dominion in the Jewish Nation over all their Enemies. Even the Disciples of our
Lord did constantly believe this Article, till by the Holy Ghosts descent upon
them, they were better informed. Matthew. xviii. 1. Matthew. xx. 21.
Witness their contests who should be greatest in that Kingdom, and the desire
of the Sons of Zebedee to sit one at his right hand, another at his left hand
in it. This was our Faith, says Cleopas, Luke xxiv. 21
we trusted that this Jesus should have Redeemed our Israel. And when they were
assembled, after the Resurrection, their first enquiry is this, Act. i. 6.
Lord will thou now restore the Kingdom to Israel. It is therefore certain that
this was the received Tradition of the whole Jewish Church, grounded as they
supposed, upon the Scriptures which did necessitate them to expect a glorious
Messiah, (...). Dial. p. 249. B.
not such a one, says Trypho, as your mean and despised Jesus was.

2. It was also a Tradition which generally obtained amongst the Jews, that
their Elias, who was called the This bite, was to appear again in person before
the advent of the true Messiah, Mal. iv. 5.
so was that place of Malachi Translated by the Seventy three hundred and
eighty years before our Saviors coming. Behold I send unto you Elias (...)
before the great and glorious day of the Lord come. (...). Dial. p. 268. A.
(...). Mark ix. 11.
All we expect, says Trypho, that Christ should be anointed by Elias, who is
for to come, and because this Elias is not come we think your Jesus cannot be
the Christ. Accordingly the Scribes, or the Expounders of the Law, did with one
voice declare it necessary that Elias should first come.

3. It was the general Tradition of the Jews that the Law of Moses should be
perpetually obliging to them; and that it was to be observed even in the days
of the Messiah. On this presumption certainly it was that Christ's Disciples,
after his Resurrection, were strict observers of the Law of Moses for a
considerable time; and so were also many thousands of the Jewish Converts. St.
Peter was so nice in observation of the Jewish customs that till he was
informed better by a vision, he thought such meat was utterly unlawful as was
forbidden by the Law, so that when in that vision he was bid to slay and eat,
he presently cries out, as a man tempted to an unlawful act, Act. x. 14.
Not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is unclean. St. James gives
an account to Paul of the great Zeal that all the Jewish Converts had to the
Law of Moses in these words, Act. xxi. 20.
Thou see Brother how many thousand of Jews there are which believe, and they
are all zealous of the Law. He farther tells him how highly they were all
offended with him, Verse 21.
because they were informed he had taught that they were not obliged to yield
obedience to the Constitutions and Customs of the Jewish Law; and lastly does
exhort him to do what might be proper to cause these Zealots to believe that he
also walked orderly, and kept the Law. Verse" 24.
Chron. 2.
St. Jerome, and Lib. 2. c. 45.
Sulpicius inform us that fourteen immediate succeeding Bishops, with their
flocks, were all observers of the Law of Moses. And by the unbelieving Jews
nothing was more abhorred than the thoughts of changing their Mosaic Customs.
For upon this account St. Stephen was accused of Blasphemy against Moses, and
the Law, Act. vi. 11, 14.
because he said that the Messiah should change the customs which Moses had
delivered to them. This accusation before the Scribes, the Elders and
High Priest, was deemed sufficient to prove him guilty of that capital offense
of Blasphemy. On this account they bring St. Paul before the judgment seat of
Gallio, because, say they, he did persuade men to worship God (...) Act. xviii.
13.
, against, or otherwise than was commanded by the Law of Moses. And this
opinion they grounded chiefly upon those places which seem to speak of the
perpetual duration of those Statutes, Deuteronomy. xxix. 29. Levit. iii. 11. Exodus
xii. 17.
and say they shall be ordinances to them for ever, and consequently seem to
infer a Declaration from the mouth of God, that they should not be altered.

Moreover it is certain that, as the Protestants condemn as sinful and
pernicious, many Traditions and Customs of the Roman Church, so did that Jesus
whom Christians honor as the true Messiah, as frequently inveigh against, and
solemnly condemn many Traditions which then were generally received, and
practiced in the Jewish Church, as vain and sinful customs, and such as tended
to make void the Scriptures, and render the whole Jewish worship vain. He
therefoce seems to have been as great an enemy to Ecclesiastical Traditions,
though they were generally owned by the then present Church, as such as
Protestants can be esteemed.

Lastly, Certain it is that the Superiors, and Church Rulers, or at the least
the Major, and prevailing part of the Church Rulers, did then as firmly, and
unquestionably believe that those Traditions which were condemned by your
Jesus, and which so evidently proved, if true, he was not the Messiah promised
to the Jew, were both agreeable to the word of God Expounded by their Church
Tradition, and were delivered to them by Moses and the Patriarchs, and
Prophets, and were continually practiced by their Forefathers, as does the
Roman Church believe that her Traditions were taught, and practiced by Christ
or his Apostles, and by their Successors throughout all Ages of the Church.
(...). Matthew. xv. 2. (...). Gal. i. 14.
Hence are they often styled by them the Traditions of the Ancients, or the
Traditions received by succession from their Fathers.

And in their later writers they are always held to be derived from God by
Moses together with the written Law, and as an explication of it. Hence, like
good Roman Catholics, (...). Act. xxi. 21. Act. xxviii. 17.
they were more exceedingly zealous for the Traditions of their Fathers, than
for the Law it self. They accuse all who walked not according to these customs
of their Fathers, as persons who forsook the Law of Moses. And to do any thing
against these customs of their Fathers was reputed Criminal: This being so,

I ask why the tradition of the major part of the Church Catholic or
Christians in any Age whatsoever, and their concurring judgment that what she
does at present teach, and practice, she received from Christ and his Apostles,
should be esteemed sufficient to render all those persons guilty of Heresy and
Schism, who do not yield assent to what they teach, or a compliance with their
practices as Roman Catholics assert, and yet that the general tradition of the
then present Jewish Church, even including the Disciples of Christ, should not
conclude them Schismatics and Heretics, who being Members of that Church,
would not assent unto what they so generally taught, or comply with that which
they practiced as delivered to them by Moses, and the Patriarchs, and Prophets.

But to apply these things, if it be possible, yet more particularly unto the
pleadings of the Roman Church, and to show the weakness and the pernicious
results of their most specious pretenses. I add,

1. That notwithstanding it was the duty of the Priests and Rulers of the
Jewish Church both to preserve and teach unto the people the knowledge of the
Law, yet did the major part of these Church-Guides, both often and dangerously
swerve from this their duty. For they did teach and practice, and direct the
people into those ways which were destructive to the eternal welfare of their
Souls, God by his Prophets does complain without exception of them, Esa.
xxviii. 7. Ibid. v. 15.
that they erred in vision, and stumbled in judgment, that the teachers of his
people made lies their refuge, and under falsehood hid themselves, saying, the
overflowing scourge shall not come to us: Isa. xliil. 27. Isa. lvi. 10, 11.
that their Interpreters had transgressed against him, that his watchmen were
blind, they were all ignorant, all dumb dogs that could not bark, sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber; that they were greedy dogs that could never have
enough. Jer. ii. 8.
Shepherds that could not understand, that the Priests said not, Where is the
Lord? and they that handled the Law knew him not, that the Pastors also
transgressed against him, and the Prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after
things that did not profit. Jer. v. 31. Jer. vi. 13, 14.
That his Prophets prophesied falsely, and the Priests bare rule by their means.
That from the Prophet to the Priest every one dealt falsely. That they heald
also the hurt of the Daughter of his people slightly, saying, peace, peace,
when there was no peace. Jer. viii. 9. Jer. xxiii. 1, 2.
That his wise men had rejected the word of the Lord. And that the Pastors
whose business it was to feed his sheep, destroyed, and scattered, and drove
them away, and did not visit them. Ibid. v. 11. Ezekiel. xxii. 26.
That both Priests and Prophets were profane. That they had violated his Law,
and had profaned his holy things, putting no difference betwixt the Holy and
profane, the clean and the unclean, and hid their eyes from his Sabbaths. Ezekiel.
xxxiv. 1, 6.
That the Shepherds of Israel fed themselves, but did not feed the flock, the
diseased did they not strengthen, neither did they heal that which was sick,
nor bring again that which was driven away, nor seek that which was lost, but
with force and cruelty they Ruled, so that the sheep were scattered because
there was no Shepherd. Hos. iv. 6. Zeph. iii. 4.
That they rejected knowledge, so that Gods people were destroyed for lack of
it. That her Prophets were light and treacherous persons, her Priests had
polluted the Sanctuary, they had done violence to the Law. Mal. ii. 8.
That they had forgotten the Law of their God, they departed out of the way,
they caused many to stumble at the Law, they corrupted the Covenant of Levi.

Moreover of these Guides it is expressly said, Isa. iii. 12. Chap. ix. 16. Jer.
l. 6. Matt. xxiii.
That they which led his people caused them to err, and destroyed the way of
their paths. That the Leaders of the people caused them to err, and they that
were led of them were destroyed, and that their Shepherds caused them to go
astray. Our Lord declares, that they were fools, blind Guides, full of
Hypocrisy, and of iniquity, that they had taken away the key of knowledge, Luke
xi. 52. Matt. xxiii. 13.
and had shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, not going in themselves,
nor suffering them that were entering to go in. That they made many false
decisions in matters of so great importance as to make void the Law of God,
Matt. xv. 6, 9.
and render his whole worship vain. That they transgressed the commandment of
God by their Traditions. That notwithstanding their instructions the people
were as sheep without a Shepherd, Matt. ix. 36. Matt. xv. 14.
or only had such Guides as would most certainly, if they submitted to their
guidance, lead them to the pit, Hence therefore I infer,

1. That even those Spiritual Guides who are by Gods appointment constituted to
instruct his people, and to feed his flock (for such our Lord acknowledged the
Scribes, and Pharisees, and Rulers of the Jewish Church to be) may scatter, and
destroy that flock. And they who are set for the judgment of the Lord, and for
controversies, may violate, corrupt, pervert that Law they should interpret,
they may be partial in it, they may depart out of the way, they may make the
Commandments of God of none effect, and his whole worship vain by their
traditions, they may cause their sheep to err, stumble, and go astray, and that
so dangerously that they who are led by them shall be destroyed with them, and
find no entrance into bliss. And hence, I hope, I may assume the boldness to
conclude against the Infallibility of our Spiritual Governors, or the
concurring judgments of the major part of them: which is sufficient to root up
even the foundations of the Romish Babel.

2. Hence I infer that notwithstanding all the formentioned Scriptures, which
say it was the duty of the people to ask of their Spiritual Guides the meaning
of the Law, and seek the knowledge of it at their mouths, and to enquire after
their judgments in all those Controversies they were not able to resolve. I
say, hence I infer, that notwithstanding this, the people were not absolutely
obliged to rest in the decision of the major part of these Church Guides, or
bound to practice all that they approved, for then an obligation must be laid
upon them, not only to err in judgment with them to countenance false Prophets,
and to speak peace to themselves when there is no peace, but also to violate
the Law, and to comply with their false glosses, and corrupt interpretations of
it; nay which is more unreasonable, they must be then obliged to be destroyed,
to fall into the pit, and to exclude themselves from the enjoyment of Christ
Kingdom. Whereas it is a contradiction to say that God obliges any Person to
transgress his Law, and it is little less than Blasphemy to say h^ does require
them to destroy themselves, to fal^ into the pit, or to deprive themselves of
the enjoyment of his Kingdom. Hence therefore I infe^ this Corollary:

That neither are all Christian people, Churches, (...) Nations absolutely
bound to rest in the decisions of the major part of Christian Bishops, or to
practice all th^^ they approve and impose. Which proposition overthrows that
absolute and blind obedience to their Church Guides, or Councils which
Romanists ^^ stiffly plead for.

3. Hence it is also evident that private persons, or that the minor part of
the whole Church may have sufficient ground, either from reason, or clea^
Scripture, for their refusal of assent, and of submission to the Authority and
definitions of the major part of their Church Guides, for the Jews were bound
to believe Christ to be the true Messiah, although the High Priest, and the
Elders had pronounced him a deceiver, and a Malefactor. They were obliged to
believe his Miracles were wrought, not by Beelzebub, but the Spirit of God; that
Christ's Kings was not of this world, that John Baptist was that Elias which was
for to come, and that to eat with hands unwashed, to heal the sick, to pluck
some ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day, were not unlawful actions, although the
major part of their Church Guides taught, and believed the contrary. Matt. xv.
5.
They were obliged not to void that Law of nature which required Children to
relieve their own distressed Parents, and therefore stood obliged not to comply
with those traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees, which made the word of God
of none essect, and would not suffer them to yield obedience to it. (...). Mark
vii. 8.
And seeing they had many traditions and decrees of the like nature, which
obtained amongst them, and only were rejected by the Saduces, and the Disciples
of our Lord; in none of these could they comply with their Church Guides
without the violation of that Law of God, which sure they had sufficient ground
and reason to observe. In a word, in all those cases in which they were not
bound to rest in the decisions of the major part of their Church Guides, or
practice what they did approve, that is in all the cases mentioned in the
former head, they must have had sufficient ground, either from Scripture, or
from Reason, for their refusal of submission to them. Now these three
inferences do fully justify the Reformation of the Church of England.

4. From what has been discoursed we may see the weakness of those pleas the
Roman Doctors make in their own defense, and of the Arguments they use to show
that it is impossible they should be guilty of those corruptions in Doctrine, or
in manners which we charge them with. For their most specious pretenses are to
this effect, that we confess the Church of Rome was once both true, and
Orthodox, show then, say they, how we did cease to be so, whether by Schism or
Heresy? With Schism you cannot justly charge us, R. H. Rational account, disc.
3. Chap. 5.. 63. p. 203.
for that can never be of a much major, and more dignified part, in respect of
a less, and inferior, subject to it; because this main body in any division is
rightly taken for the whole, from which a separation is Schism, and to which
every Member ought to adhere, as to the body, and head here upon earth to which
it belongs; we therefore being the much major, and more dignified part of the
Church, cannot be Schismatics in reference to Protestants who are, and were at
their departure, a less and an inferior body to us. If Heresy be the crime
charged upon us, by what Church were we condemned? what body of men, before
you, found fault with those corruptions which you, pretend to reform? for sure
it was not possible for so many errors and corruptions to come into the Church,
and no one take notice of them? could this be so, where was the watchful eye of
providence over the Church? But if we could suppose this providence was
unconcerned for preservation of the Church, could all the Pastors fall asleep
at once? or could they all conspire together to deceive their Posterity?
Moreover since God will always have a visible Church, what can you mention
besides that which holds Communion with the Church of Rome, as the then present
visible Church of Christ, when you began your reformation (except perhaps some
Eastern Churches which you dislike almost as much as that of Rome?) And if that
Church could teach such errors as you charge her with, as matters of the
Christian faith, what assurance can you have she has not erred in defining the
Canon of Scriptures, and delivering some Book, or Books for the word of God,
which are not so? This is the sum of all the pleadings of the Roman party in
their own behalf. And they are only such as the Jewish Doctors might have
pleaded with as much plausibility against our Lords Disciples, and that first
Christian Church which they planted in that Nation. For,

1. Where, may they say, Vid. Stillingfl. Sermon 24. Acts xiv.
will you produce the men of former Ages who taxed the Jewish Church with such
errors and corruptions as your Jesus did? and bid men beware of the leaven of
the Scribes and Pharisees, that is, the most holy and learned Members of our
Church? Do not the Christians themselves acknowledge that we were once a right
vine, and the beloved of the Lord? how, or when therefore did we cease to be
so? If by Schism; produce that major part, or body of the Jewish Church from
which we separated, when first your Jesus, like another Luther, appeared among
us? Or if by Heresy we ceased to be so; by what Church, what Councils were we
condemned? Who can believe that God would ever suffer such dangerous Doctrines
to prevail in his own Church, and raise up no Church Guides, no Prophets to
discover things so destructive to her very being, till these new Teachers and
Reformers first arose? Where then had God a true Church in the world, if not
among the people of the Jews? what other Church could Christ or his Apostles
mention, besides that which he so often taxed with voiding the Commandments of
God, and rendering his worship vain, because of some traditions which they had
received from their Forefathers? If then God suffered this Church to be all
overrun with such a fatal leprosy, and gave no clear discovery thereof, where
was the watchful eye of Providence? Where was that God who promised that he
would put his name for ever in Jerusalem, and that his eyes, and heart should
be perpetually there? But suppose that Providence was unconcerned, did all our
Pastors fall asleep at once? or could they all conspire to deceive posterity?
Were not the Oracles of God committed to us Jews, did not you Christians
receive them from us, if then our Church might teach her Children such
destructive errors, as you charge her with, how can you be assured that she
has not erred even in that Canon of Scriptures which from her you have
received?

Now though this instance, which I have largely prosecuted, may be sufficient
to show the vanity of the most plausible pretenses of R. H. against the
Protestants, both in his Rational account, and his Discourse. It might be
farther manifested that they as strongly plead for the Heathen world, against
the Jew, for the Mahumetan against the Christian, for the Priests of Baal,
against Elias and those seven thousand who had not bowed the knee to Baal, for
the prevailing Arian, against the Orthodox, for the Fornicator, the Simoniack,
the Covetous and the Debauched person in all those Ages in which these were the
Epidemical, Vide. Appen. Chap. 3.. 10, 16.
and almost general diseases of the Clergy, that is from the tenth, to the
sixteenth Century, and lastly for Antichrist himself, when he, according to the
predictions of the Scripture, and the confession of many Rnman Catholics,
shall drive the Church, that is the Orthodox Professors of the Faith into the
Wilderness, and slay the Witnesses of Christ, and of his Doctrine. But,

To conclude, If this be truly the result of the most specious pretenses of the
Roman party to draw our souls into their deadly snares, if all their fairest
pleas do make for Judaism, more naturally than they do for Popery. If what they
urge to prove ^he Potestant Divines to be Deceivers of the people, does more
strongly prove our blessed Jesus a De^eiver, which is the highest Blasphemy. I
hope that ^o true lover of this Jesus will be much tempted ^y such pleas to
entertain a good opinion of the Romish Faith. It being certainly that Faith
which cannot be established, but on the ruins of Christianity, nor embraced by
any Protestant, but ^o the greatest hazard, if not the ruin of his ^oul.

FINIS.

