A COMMENTARY Upon the Three First CHAPTERS OF The First Book of Moses Called
GENESIS.

By that Reverend Divine JOHN WHITE. Late Preacher of Gods Word at Dorchester
in the County of Dorset.

Search the Scriptures, For in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they are
they which testify of me, John 5.39.

For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: For he wrote of me.

But if ye believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my words, John 5.46,
47.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and are to be sold by George Calvert, at the
Sign of the Half Moon, and Joseph Nevill, at the Plough, in the New Buildings
in Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

TO The HONORABLE DENZEL HOLLIS, Esquire;
Honorable Sir,
IT being the purpose of the deceased Author my Father (having some thoughts
in his Lifetime, upon the Earnest solicitation of some friends of exposing
this Treatise unto public view: had not the continuance and increase of our
then general distractions altered his resolution at that time, and induced him
to defer it for a more seasonable opportunity) to dedicate it unto your self
being one of his Hearers, as an acknowledgment of your great friendship, and
the several Courtesies he had received from you. I thought my self bound by
duty, as not any longer to deprive the Church of God of so profitable a Work;
so to present it, being now at last (after some considerable delay, by the
death of a faithful friend into whose hands it was entrusted for that purpose)
made public to recommend it unto no other hand but yours: not doubting of your
favorable acceptance in what duty binds me unto. If it may be any way
profitable unto your Self, and the Church of Christ, as the Author shall
receive the fruit of his Labor; so it may be an Encouragement unto the
Publisher, to commit some other Treatise of the Authors unto the Press, which
may be of general use. That God would give you more and more to discern, his
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness in his Works both of Creation and Providence, and
lay open before you the Wiles and Depths of Satan; so as you may shun and avoid
them, (unto both which this Small Treatise may through the blessing of God
afford You with others some Light) is and shall be the Prayer of Him who is
devoted

To Honor and Serve You, John White.

Mr. Stephen Marshals Letter to Mr. John White, in Commendation of these
Labors of the Deceased Author his Father.
My Dear Friend,
SAlutations in Christ premised, I have according to the Authors and your
Desire read over this Treatise. Briefly I shall tell you my Thoughts of it,
it is a most Excellent, Learned, Judicious and Holy Piece, worthy of Mr. White
his Heart and Pen; the farther I proceeded in it, the more I was delighted: the
Exposition solid, the Observations most of them clearly raised, strongly
proved, excellently applied. I think I should have been at the Cost of
transcribing it, but that I doubt not you will get it Printed, which I desire
you would hasten, it is pity the Church should want it: One only Observation I
stick at, not the matter of it, but the raising of it, it is upon Chap. 3.
Observation 13. I made a mark at it, I cannot consent to have Satan's practice
propounded as a Direction. I only desire you to consider of it, it may be my
sticking at it is but needless. Once again I desire you to get it Printed
speedily. The Great Bishop of our Souls guide you and prosper your great Work,
which he has done, and I hope will do.

Your Loving Brother, Stephen Marshall.
Ipswich. December 12. 1653.
To the READER.
Good Reader,
IT is not unfitly said by Id verum quodeunque primum et adulterum quodcunque
posterius est. Tertull. ad Praxeam.
Tertullian, That is truest which is most Ancient; for though in the course of
Nature the Night be before the Day, yet in matters of a Moral Concernment the
method is quite otherwise: Innocence is before Sin, and Truth before a Lie, for
a lie is the corruption of truth; now among the blind Gentile World there is no
true piece of Antiquity to be found: Pat. apud Plat. in Timaeo.
One of their own said, that The Greeks were always Children, as being utterly
ignorant of the state of the truly Ancient World, and darkning all things with
fables of their own devising.

Certainly a Clear Light into the Old World is a great satisfaction to the
understanding, but it is no where to be had but in the Writings of Moses, who
had this knowledge not by Tradition only, but Divine Inspiration; the
Originals of Nature and Nations are every where else very obscure. Plutarch.
Sympos. lib. 2. quaest. 3.
Plutarch a wise Heathen has a Dispute which is first, the Hen or the Egg;
Or, the Egg or the Hen: which as to their light was indeterminable, but in the
Church by Divine Revelation all is clear and open; and a Boy out of a
Catechism can give a better Solution to that Question, Heb. 11.3.
How the World was made, than the great Doctors of the Gentiles by their
profound Researches and Study of Nature; for surely in this Case it is most
true. That Philosophy seeks after Truth, but Divinity only finds it.

The most Ancient Mon^ment and Record of our Religion are the Books of Moses,
which if they were more Studied and Considered by us, Atheism would not be so
rife and common; for thereby we may not only discern the Sweet Harmony of this
part of Scripture with all the rest, but come to understand how the state of
that Religion which we do profess was at first laid, and what Accessions and
growth it received by a clearer manifestation in every Age.

But chiefly the Three first Chapters of the Book called Genesis deserve to be
considered by us, as delivering that fundamental doctrine concerning the
Creation of the World, the Fall of Man, and the Promised Seed who should be our
Restorer, upon which all the rest of Scripture is built.

In Opening these Chapters many have labored Worthily, and among the rest this
Our Author has his Peculiar Excellency; for whiles some deserve esteem for
clearing the letter and phrase, for vindicating the doctrine therein contained
in a Controversal Way; Others by other ways of Illustration and giving Light
to the Text; That praise which was reserved for our Author, was, besides a
solid Exposition of the Text, The deducing of Apt and pertinent Observations,
together with fit and proper Reasons to each Point, which with what Judgment
and Acuteness it is performed, I leave to the Reader to judge.

To speak of the Worth of the Author is needless, his praise being already in
all the Churches: only I must profess my sorrow, that, he being a Person of
so much Eminency and Note, none has as yet Collected the Memorable passages of
his Life: If his Mr. Ben of Dorchester.
Reverend Colleagve that was so intimately acquainted with him, would do
something in this kind, it could not but be very acceptable to the godly of
this Nation. For surely the Long and Various Experiences of such a Captain in
the Lords Hoasts, such a Veterane in Christ's Service, must needs yield much
matter of Comfort and Profit, when we shall come to the notice of them.

If this Book had proceeded from a meaner and more obscure hand, its own Worth
would have sufficiently pleaded for its esteem, and the Observations with their
Prosecutions being every where so Solid and Judicious, could not but be very
Savoury to a gracious appetite; but coming from such an Hand, and, as the
product of some years Serious Meditations, certainly it will find much
acceptance with Christians abroad: As much of it as my leisure would permit me
to peruse, gave me such refreshing, as I could not but heartily desire the
publication of it; and doubt not but it will be judged as useful a Tractate as
has been set forth in these last years. This being signified, I subscribe my
self,

Thine in the Lords Work, Tho: Manton.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER Of the First BOOK OF MOSES called GENESIS.
THe Hebrews give the name unto this (as they do likewise unto the other four
Books of Moses that follow) from the first words, wherewith the book begins in
their Language, and call it Bereshith, which in our Tongue we render (In the
beginning). As for the name Genesis, it was given by the Greeks, and signifies
Generation or Begetting, pointing at the Most eminent Subject which the Book
handles, the Creation, or Generation of the World. From the Author that penned
it, it is called Moses his Book; as our Savior in like manner calls Exodus his
book, Mark 12.26. And because Moses is the Author of the four next Books that
follow, for distinctions sake, this is called his first Book.

This Title of the Book challenges our best Attention.
1. From the Author Moses, graced, 1. with the honor, to be the first Penman
of holy Scripture. 2. with the privilege to be Gods familiar, with whom he was
pleased to confer mouth to mouth, Numb. 12.4. 3. With the Title of the first
Instrument, employed by God, for the founding of the Church and State of the
Jews: And for that cause, of so honorable a name and memory, amongst that
people, that God thought fit to conceal his Grave, for the preventing of
Idolatry, in succeeding Ages, as most Interpreters conjecture out of Deuteronomy. 34.6.

2. From the subjects which the Book handles, being the most eminent, and
remarkable in themselves, and most nearly concerning men to know, and the most
difficult to be found out, of all things that can come within the compass of
humane knowledge, Namely, the Creation of the World, the Fall of Man, and his
Restitution by Gods goodness, with the Estate into which he is restored, the
propagation of mankind, and peopling of the World, the Founding the Church, and
the Infancy thereof, things unheard of, and unknown amongst the Heathen,
described, and recorded in no other Writings in the World, but only in this
Sacred History.

Of the Authority of Moses his Writings.
IT cannot be denied, that the Writings of Moses have the same Authority with
the rest of the holy Scriptures, being delivered, as the rest of them were, by
the same Divine inspiration of the Holy Ghost. And yet withal, these Five
Books of Moses, may, in some respects, be conceived to gain some kind of
praeeminence above the rest of the Scriptures, seeing that they are not only
the first in order, but in some sort the Fountain, containing the sum of
those holy Writings that follow. For the histories of the Old Testament are,
for the most part, but as so many instances of the fulfilling of the several
Sanctions of the Law, delivered by Moses, as well in Judgment, as in Mercy: And
the Writings of the Prophets are but applications of the Law, and the Sanctions
thereof, to particular places, times, and persons, interlaced with diverse
Promises, the Heads whereof we find in these five Books. And the Books of the
New Testament contain, for the greatest part, the relation of those promises of
Grace, first recorded and set out by Moses, and after repeated, and enlarged by
the Prophets (to which use our Savior applies them both, Luke 24.27, 44.),
together with a clear, and full unfolding of that state of Grace, into, which
we are restored by Christ, shadowed out, in a great part, by Types, in the Law
of Moses. Hence it is, that in many of the Writings of the Prophets, and much
more in those of the Evangelists, we have the Books of Moses so often cited,
and thereby the Authority of them the more fully established, and confirmed.

Now as concerning the Means, by which Moses might get the knowledge of the
things which he relates in this First book of his, whereof all were acted
before his time, and some (as namely the Creation of the World) before all men's
times, if we suppose he had no help of any Records, to inform him (which the
Church might then have, though they be now lost); or if we make no great
account of the Tradition of the Fathers, whose memories were the Registers of
the Church, before the Scriptures were written: Notwithstanding, it suffices;
that the same Spirit that guided his hand in writing, withal informed him
fully, and infallibly, of those Truths which he was to leave upon record to
posterity. And yet we must take notice, that all that is contained in the four
Books following (except the histories of his own Life, and Death) were
confirmed unto him, by his own knowledge and experience; his own eyes, and
ears being witnesses of all that he writes. A circumstance from which some of
the Evangelists and Apostles, justly challenge credit unto that which they
deliver, Luke 1.3. 1 John 1.1.

The Division of this Book of Genesis.
THis Book of Genesis, contains (as it evidently appears, by casting up the
particulars of the times mentioned therein) an history of 2368 years. Namely,
from the Creation of the World, to the Flood, 1656 years; from the Flood to the
Birth of Abraham, 252 years; and from Abraham's birth, unto Joseph's death,
which closes up the Book, 360 years. And it seems naturally to divide it self
into Two unequal parts, containing in them the Histories,

1. Of the Creation of the World, Cap. 1. 2. Of the Administration, and
Government of it, especially of the Church of God therein, unto the end of the
Book.
The Government of the Church, is described unto us, in a twofold estate of
Mankind.

1. In the state of Innocence, before man's fall, Cap. 2. 2. In the state of
Corruption, In, and After his fall: And that also, 1. Before the Flood, unto
the end of Cap. 6. 2. In and After the Flood; and that likewise of the same
Church, 1. Scattered over the whole World, to the end of Cap. 11. 2. Founded in
Abraham's Family, and Posterity, till Joseph's death, to the end of the Book.


CHAP. I.
IN this first Chapter of Genesis, is described unto us the Creation of the
visible World, with all the Creatures therein contained, in a plain, and
compendious narration, setting before us only the Order, Means, Manner, Times,
and Estates, in which all things were Created, and appointed by Gods Ordinance
to continue, as they do unto this day, Psalm. 119.91. Wherein is laid down
before us the work of Creation, 1. In General, expressing What was made, and
how, Verse. 1. 2. More particularly, recounting the several parts of the work,
and therein, 1. The rudeness out of which all things were made, Ver. 2. 2. The
forming of the several Creatures out of that lump. 1. Serving for general Use,
as the Light, the Earth, the Firmament, the Stars, etc. which serve for the
benefit of all the creatures here below, to the end of verse. 10. 2.
Diversified, in their particular forms, and natures, to the end of the Chapter.




Verse. 1.
IN the beginning] Of time, as some supply it; or (as others) of the Creation.
Or, to speak more clearly, Of the Creatures: To make this the sense: The first
beginning which the Creatures had, when there was yet none of them, they
received in this manner, which is afterward expressed. A like phrase of
speech, or rather to the same sense, we read, Psalm. 139.16. where the Psalmist
tells us, that his members were fashioned, by God, in continuance, when there
was yet none of them.

God] The word, Elohim, which we render God, signifies properly the Almighties,
or Mighty Powers, and seems, in this place, to point at that wonderful Power,
which God manifested in this glorious work, when he created the whole world out
of nothing; the very consideration whereof is sufficient to astonish any one
that thinks of it.

Created] That is, made of nothing, or without any matter at all; An act
peculiar to God alone, wherein he gave all things that now are, or have been in
the world, since the beginning thereof, a Being, when they were not at all; Now
because the word Bara, which we render Created, is in the Original tongue put
in the singular number, and joined with Elohim, which is of the Plural Number,
some have drawn thence an argument, to prove the Trinity of the Persons in the
Godhead, as employed in the word Elohim, being of the Plural Number; and the
Unity of the Godhead, as intimated in the word Bara, which is of the Singular
Number. But that fundamental truth, is more fully strengthened by many more
clear and evident arguments, out of other places of Scripture; Although we deny
not but that this also may be a probable collection, out of those words, seeing
we know the Holy Ghost cannot be conceived to take up any unusual phrase, or
form of speech, but upon reason, and with a mind to conveigh thereby something
unto us for our observation.

The Heaven and Earth] Or (as the Apostle calls it) the world, and all things
therein, Act. 17. v. 24. So then this verse is the sum of this Chapter
following, setting before us in one word, what was done: the manner How, and
order Wherein, is particularly described in the verses following. There are
notwithstanding some, who by Heaven, in this place, understand that glorious
body, which the Apostle calls the third Heaven, 2, Cor. 12.2. the seat of the
Blessed, and under the same name, include the Angels, which have their dwelling
there, and came to have been made before the Creatures here below, Job 38.7.
whose creation they conceive, Moses could not omit: and therefore having not
mentioned it elsewhere, they conjecture it must be pointed at in this word. But
that Argument appears to be grounded upon a supposition that wants evidence,
namely that Moses intended, in this history, to give us the description of all
Gods creatures Visible, and Invisible, where as it seems much more probable,
that he contains himself, to discover unto us, only the Creation of the
visible world. So that we may probably conceive, that in this place he intended
only Indefinitely to signify, that it was God alone that gave a Being to all
things that are, which they had not before, without pointing at any particular;
As for the Angels, this general intimation must necessarily imply, that they
also were Gods Creatures, although their creation be not described, or pointed
at in particular, as not so needsul to be known by us, whom it concerns most,
to understand the state and condition of those visible things, with which we
have most to do.

The first circumstance which here offers it self to our consideration and
observation is the phrase and manner of speech which the Holy Ghost makes
choice of, in this narration, which we see, is as Plain as it is Brief without
any manner of insinuation, by way of preface, and without any garnishing by
art, or eloquence which men usually make use of, for the setting out, and
gracing of their writings: the Spirit of God suddenly, as it were, darting out
the truth which he delivers like the Sun beams breaking in an instant as out of
a cloud, as being a light visible, and beautiful in it self, and therefore
needing no other ornament, or varnishing to commend it to the world: Whence we
may

1. Observe, Divine Truths sufficiently commend themselves, without the help of
any Ornaments, of Art, or Eloquence.


Let us then desire, both to hear, and preach the Truth of God, as Saint Paul
sets it out to the Corinthians, in plain and clear expressions, demonstrated,
and displaied by the Spirit, rather than garnished with the entising speeches
of humane Eloquence, 1. Cor. 2.3.4. The great art in Preaching, is to make
things clear, and evident, by expressing them spiritually, as they are
spiritual in themselves, which needs more help of Logic, than of Rhetoric,
but more Experience than them both. Notwithstanding, the use of Eloquence is
not to be denied, even in the work of the Ministry, so it be neither affected,
nor depended on, either by the Preacher, or by the Hearer.

The next observable circumstance, in this brief Compendium, of the history of
the Creation of the world, the sum whereof is comprised in this first
verse, is, the order here observed by the Holy Ghost; who first lays down unto
us this ground of Truth, that God made the world, and afterward expresses
how, and in what order he created it, in every particular; by this order
which he observes in this narration, pointing out unto us in a sort, the right
order in believing Gods Truth; so that we may thence

2. Observe, We must first give our assent unto the Truth of God; and search
into the fuller understanding of them, afterward.
Jeremy believes and acknowledges Gods Justice first, and then examineth
how the prospering of wicked men may stand with that Justice of his
afterward, Jer. 12.1. And the blessed Virgin, first believes the Angels
message, that she should conceive a son, Luke 1.45. and then enquires how it
should be brought to pass, verse 34. In this manner, reason must wait and
attend upon faith, and not go before it. Reason 1. The Infallibility of Gods
Testimony, who cannot lie, and therefore must be believed upon his own word,
although we know no reason for it. 2. By this means only, we glorify God, when
receiving his Testimony, because he has said it, we thereby set to our seal
that God is true, John 3.33.

Let it then be our labor to bring our hearts to a full assent unto Gods
Truths upon his own Testimony, though we cannot sound the depth of them, nor
understand How, When, in what Manner, or by what Means they are, or shall be
accomplished. That we shall rise again from the dead, although we know not with
what body, 1. Cor. 15.35. That we shall be like unto Christ, though we know not
how, 1 John 3.2. That we shall be fed, as Elijah was, and did believe he should
be, though he knew not how, nor wherewith; As we believe natural things though
we know not the secret ways by which they are brought to pass, by the power
of him that makes them all, Ecle. 11.5. Whose ways are past finding out, Romans
11.33.

After the Phrase, and Order, which the Spirit of God uses in this expression:
we are in the next place to take into Consideration, the Matter it self which
is expressed; and therein first, the time of the worlds Creation pointed out
unto us in the first words, In the beginning of the world: or, of the
Creatures, being (as we said before): a Truth so much questioned amongst the
Heathens, whether the world had a beginning, and by the most of them, rather
not denied, then believed upon any good assurance; at the least, the world was
conceived by them, to be many ages elder than it is. Now the Holy Ghost here
tells us, that, not only it had a beginning, but by the following narration,
makes it evident, that it began to be, but a while ago. Whence

3. Observe, The world had a Beginning, nay it began but a while ago.
Job. 8.9. if we measure them according to Gods (that is according to the True)
Account, to whom a thousand years are but as yesterday, Psalm. 90.4. in which
estimation the world is not yet six days old.

1. Admire it not. What are five or six thousand years to Eternity? which God
enjoyes, who is from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90.2. Much less should
we make any reckoning of the age of men, of whom the world has outworn so many
generations

2. Trust it not. That which has a beginning must have an end, 2. Pet. 3.10.
But rest on him whose years fail not, but his Age, Reign, and Faithfulness
continue to all generations, Psalm. 146.10. and 119.90. And consequently they
that wait on him, shall never be made ashamed, Jer. 17.8.

Next the Time, we have set before us the Author of the worlds Creation, the
work man that made it, expressed by this Name Elohim, the Mighty God. Now of
necessity, God must be before his work that he wrought, before the beginning,
that is, before all time, which took beginning with the world which was made in
it. Whence

4. Observe, Before the World was, God is.
Psalm. 90.2. Prove. 8.23. Isa. 43.13. Heb. 1.10.11. Known therefore by his Name
Jehovah, that is (I am) as he terms himself, Exodus 3.14. One, of whom it
always was, and ever will be true, that he Is.

Admire, Fear, and Depend upon him alone, who abiding, and continuing the same
for ever, is consequently able, both to save such as seek, and love him, and to
execute vengeance on those that hate him, Exodus 20.5, 6. Heb. 7.25.

The name by which God is expressed in this place, may not be passed over:
There seems to be some cause why the Holy Ghost, rather chooses the name,
Elohim, to express him by, than the name Jehovah, which is more usual. It may
be it is for the strengthening of our faith, that we should not think this
great work, of the Creation of the world, impossible to him who is Almighty (as
the word Elohim imports) and consequently, able to give beings to things that
had none before; Or perhaps, to stay us withal, upon the admiration of the
work, being the effect of so great a Power, and consequently in some sort
answerable thereunto. Howsoever

5. Observe. Creation is the work of a mighty Power.
Isa. 25.18. Able to do any thing, Isa. 52.4.5, 6. Jer. 32.17. that cannot
faint, nor be weary, that is, to be weak in power (as faint and weary men are)
or unable to effect what he will, Isa. 40.26.28.

Let us make Use of the meditation thereof, to amaze our selves, with the
consideration of Gods infinite Power. The stretching out of the heavens, the
Founding and settling of the earth, the bounding of the Sea, commanding of the
winds, casting out of lightnings, and the like: being works beyond the power of
men and Angels, are every where mentioned, as arguments of Gods infinite Power:
but what are all these to the Creation, by which all things received their
Being that had none before? the very meditation whereof is enough to swallow
up any man's spirit. Let this meditation support our vveak faith, and let the
consideration, of the supporting of the Creatures, by the same hand, that they
continue according to his Ordinance, and are continued in the propagation of
their kinds, which are but in a sort a renewed Creation, affect us daily when
we behold them.

Next to the time of the worlds Creation, and the Work man that made it,
follows the consideration of the work it self, which is termed a Creation, by
which, that which was not before, received a being, and became that which it
now is. Afterward, even to this day, God ordinarily makes one thing out of
another, but in the beginning he made the very being it self, that very
something (as we may term it) out of which the several Creatures were
taken. Whence,

6. Observe, The World was Nothing till God gave it a Being.
Heb. 11.3. No marvel then, though God account all Creatures as nothing, Isa.
40.17. as indeed they are, considered in themselves, apart from God, in whom
they have their being, Act. 17.28.

Reason. It must needs be so, else it had been Eternal, of it self, and
consequently a God. Now seeing there can be but one Being, or Jehovah, all
things besides him must needs be Nothing, Of themselves, and In themselves.

Depend not then on the world, or any Creature in it. Will thou set thine eyes
upon that which is nothing? Prove. 23.5. What Creature soever it be, it was
nothing at the first, and is nothing at present in it self, farther then God
upholds it, Heb. 1.3. nor in Gods account, before Whom all the Inhabitants of
the Earth are reputed as nothing, Dan. 4.35. and shall be, after a little
while, nothing of that which now it is, Isa. 51.6.

Let men stay their hearts upon God, when Means fail: He that made all of
nothing, can at his pleasure provide means where there are none. Numb. 11.23.
or do, and supply all without means: as he gave water without clouds, 2 King.
3.17. and as he sustained Moses, Elijah, and Christ 40 days without food.

The last cousiderable Circumstance, in this brief sum of the Work of
Creation, is the Subject, or Matter, that was made, the Heaven and Earth. He
names the Heaven first, as being First, if not in time, yet at least in
dignity, and therefore usually acknowledged to be the chiefest amongst Gods
Works. From whence we may

7. Observe, Heaven is more excellent than the Earth.
Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect, as they are termed, Heb.
12.23.

Let us then make Heaven our chiefest care and desire, Matthew. 6.33. the scope
of all desires, and negotiations, which the Apostle terms, the having of our
conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. whither we make over our estates, Matthew.
6.20. where we make us friends, Luke 16.9. and lay the foundation of our
building, 1 Timothy 6.10. as being strangers here on Earth, Heb. 11.13. heavenly
in our better part, and partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. having an
inheritance in heaven, Col. 1.5. and the earnest of it already, Ephesians. 1.14. our
head Christ in heaven, Heb. 4.14. from whence we look for him, Phil. 3.20. to
take us up thither to himself, Joh. 14.3. to behold his glory, Joh. 17.24. that
we may be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. and be satisfied with his
likeness, Psalm. 17.15.

Let us learn of the heavens to stoop to those which are below us, as we are
advised, Romans 12.16. cherishing them with out influence of love, and the fruits
thereof, and serving them with our abilities, as the Heavens do the Earth; nay,
as Christ does his Church, Mark 10.45. teaching us to do the like by his
example, Joh. 13.15. though we receive nothing from them again, Luke 14.14. as
the heavens afford their influences to the earth, though they receive nothing
from it back again.

Now though the Heavens be first named, yet the Earth is not left out; that
also, and all the store of it, is affirmed to be Gods Workmanship, who created
the one, as well as the other.

Whence,

8. Observe, Even the Earth and all the store of it, is the Work of Gods hand.
ISa. 45.12, 18. The Earth as well as the rest of the World, he formed from the
beginning, Psalm. 90.2. bears up the Pillart of it to this day, Psalm. 75.3. and
renewes the face of it from time to time, Psalm. 104.30. and so will do, as long
as it shall continue.

1. Let all men then depend on Gods Power, and faithful providence, for the
supporting and guiding of things here below, which he can and will abase
himself to look upon, though he dwell on high, Psalm. 113.5, 6. to take care of
and make provision for them, Psalm. 145.15, 16. God is not like the Ostrich, Job
39.14, 15. Whatsoever he has made, he takes care of: 1. Because he is a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. 2. And besides, because he has made all things
for himself, Prove. 16.4. that is, for his own glory, which although it be
advanced above the earth, Psalm. 148.13. yet is manifest in the earth where all
his Creatures praise him, Psalm. 148.7. and 145.10.

2. Acknowledge God alone, even in the Conservation and Dispensation of earthly
things, looking at him as the only true owner of them, Psalm. 24.1. seeking at
his hands even our very bread, and allowance for every day, referring all to
his glory, 1 Cor. 10.30. and using all things according to his direction.

3. Observe the hand, and work of God, in the ordering and disposing even of
the things here below, amongst these visible Creatures, which both in their
Creation, Romans 1.20. and much more in their administration, manifest the
invisible things of God, and were Created for none other end, but that in them
he might manifest his Wisdom, Power, Righteousness, Mercy, and Truth, and
therefore to be searched into, by those that fear him, Psalm. 111.2.

Verse. 2.
WIthout form, and empty] That is, without Ornament, shape, or furniture, and
void of any Inhabitant. The same phrase we find used in the same sense, Isa.
34.11. (which we there render Confusion and Emptiness) and Jer. 4.23. to
represent and express an utter Desolation, or Confusion of all things, and
emptiness thereby.

Darkness was] That is, there was no light yet created, the absence whereof is
darkness: how long that darkness continued, that is, how long it was before
this light, which was after created, appeared, after the creation of this rude
mass, is not here expressed; sure we are there was light the first day, and
that this darkness was no Creature, as being a mere Privation, and therefore
could have no positive cause: Notwithstanding as Darkness is taken for
Affliction, so God is said to Create it.

Upon the Face] Or upper part, which first appears unto, and is seen by the
eye, as being derived from a word, in the Hebrew Language, which signifies to
look upon; the same word signifies sometimes Presence, and sometimes Person.

Of the Deep] That rude, unformed Mass, a mixture of Earth and Waters, and
covered by them like a Sea, Psalm. 104.6. But that place, 2 Pet. 3.5. which some
apply to this purpose, where the Apostle says, The earth consisted out of the
water, and in the water, seems rather to note the present state and form of the
earth, Consisting and appearing out of the Waters, since God gathered them into
their channels, and Subsisting and abiding still firm in the midst of them.

Spirit] The Third Person in the Trinity, to which all Operations are most
properly ascribed, and by which God still renewes the face of the Earth, Psalm.
104.30.

Moving] Or, Hovering, as a bird does over her Eggs or Young ones, as the same
word is rendered, Deuteronomy. 32.11. intimating the cherishing of that Mass by a
secret influence of that quickening power of the Spirit, by which it drew all
the Creatures, out of that gross lump or mass, into their several forms, and
natures, in which they were all formed, and perfected successively, and in
which, themselves, or the kinds of them do continue and remain unto this day.

Thus the Holy Ghost in the first place lays before us this misshapen and
confused Mass, which was the Matter out of which all these various and
beautiful creatures (some whereof we do, and that deservedly, behold not
without admiration) were taken; that looking upon them and considering them in
their first Original, we may be the more sensible both of our own and their
vileness; a meditation hinted by the order in which things are expressed in
this Narration, which we may therefore think to be intended by the Holy Ghost:
And may

1. Observe, The best way to judge of things aright, is to look back and
consider them in their first Original.
Adam back to the dust out of which he was first formed, Genesis 3.19. The
Children of Israel to the rock whence they were hewn, Isa. 51.1. to a Syrian
their Father ready to perish, Deuteronomy. 26.5. and their Mother an Hittite, and to
the blood in which they were born, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4. To the same end also we are
often minded of that natural Corrupt condition in which we were, as we were
born, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ephesians. 2.1.

Let every man that desires to judge unpartially of himself exercise himself
seriously and often in that meditation; Our Bodies, in their Original base and
vile every way, in their substance, place of Conception, manner of birth. Our
Souls, which is our more excellent part, though not in themselves, yet by the
corruption that cleaves unto them more base then our bodies, a mass of sin,
which has overspread all the parts of them, in which there was nothing to be
discerned but the hateful and deformed Image of the Devil. A Meditation of
singular use unto us, 1. To bring down our Pride. 2. To quicken our Endeavors.
3. To fill our mouths with praises to him that has made us what we now are,
considering what we were at first, and by our own deserts might have continued
to be still, without his free and infinite mercy.

But if we consider this description of the Original of the World and all
things contained therein, as we find it positively laid down unto us by Moses
in this place; we may

2. Observe, All Creatures, how Glorious, and Beautiful soever they appear at
present, were Base and deformed in their Original.


Let it bring down every high look, and take away all Vaunting from the sons of
men, who can challenge nothing as their own but baseness, and deformity;
whatsoever they have more then that, is but borrowed, and is the beauty that
God has put upon them. And let it take off our hearts from admiring any
Creatures as unworthy of honor and estimation in themselves, if we consider
whence they came.

The Earth (as the Holy Ghost tells us) was not only without any form, but
Empty too, that is, unfurnished of that variety of Creatures, wherewith every
part was afterward, and is now stored, which the Psalmist calls the fullness of
the Earth, Psalm. 24.1. Whence,

3. Observe, The Earth was Empty, till God furnished and stored it.
Isa. 45.18. but was ordained and fitted by God to be the habitation of men and
other Creatures, but was Empty of it self till he himself furnished both it,
and the Seas out of his store, so that both the one and the other are full of
his riches, Psalm. 104.24, 25. so that he justly claims both beasts and fowls
and all to be his own, Psalm. 50.10, 11.

Let all men admire Gods All Sufficiency, who so easily, speedily, and richly
furnished the Heaven Earth and Seas with such infinite variety of Creatures,
which we cannot behold but with admiration, considering with what labor and
difficulty we furnish a poor Cottage that we have built; or stock a small Farm
that we have purchased, and that too with such things as we do but borrow out
of Gods Store.

Darkness (says Moses) was indeed upon the face of the deep, but not made by
God, as the Heaven, and Earth, and other Creatures were, as being only a mere
privation, and want of light, and could not be the effect of any positive
cause, as we have showed. Whence,

4. Observe, Imperfections and Wants are no part of Gods Work.
Eccles. 7.29. but sin entered in by man, Romans 5.12. allured by Satan and not by
God: As for other wants, they came not in by any act or work of God, the effect
whereof is sufficiency and perfection, but by his ceasing and forbearing to
work any longer.

Let us, if there be any thing wanting to us, not lay the blame upon God,
whether it be in Outward things; either within us, as strength or usefulness
of the parts of the body; or without us, as want of necessaries for the
sustaining of our lives: or in Inward defects of the mind, wants of Knowledge,
Faith, Holiness, or the like; but blame our sins, that hinder good things from
us. Rather acknowledge his mercy and bounty, if we have any thing, in bestowing
what we have, which is more than either we had of our selves, or can any way
deserve, or do use as we ought.

Moses, having set before us the condition of the Earth what it was at the
first, and beginning now to show us, how it became to be that which it now is,
points out unto us first the Agent by whom it was brought to this perfection,
the Spirit: and the manner how it wrought; it moved, or hovered upon the
waters. So then all the Creatures which are afterward described to be formed
into their several kinds and natures must necessarily be the effect or work of
that Spirit. Whence,

5. Observe, The forms and natures of all sorts of Creatures are the work and
effects of Gods Spirit.
Elihu acknowledged that he was made by Gods Spirit, and that the Breath of the
Almighty gave him life, Job. 33.4. Yea the Spirit sent forth from God creates
all things to this day, and renewes the face of the Earth, Psalm. 104.30. How
much more then must man's Renovation, and the life of Grace wrought in him
thereby, be the effect of the same Spirit?

1. Pray earnestly for the power of that Spirit to fashion our hearts anew,
with the Prophet David, Psalm. 51.10. Even the Spirit of Sanctification, as it
is termed (from that effect, 1 Pet. 1.2.) by which we must be born anew, John
3.5. and Established and upheld, Psalm. 51.12. and by the power whereof we must
mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. And where the power of that Spirit
is wanting, there the Word is a dead letter, the Sacraments dead Elements, and
we dead Creatures; It is the Spirit that gives life, 2 Cor. 3.6. and quickens,
Joh. 6.63.

2. Let us ascribe all unto the Spirit that we receive from God, whether it be
in the works of Nature or Grace; whatsoever be the means, or instruments; the
shape of our bodies, the abilities of our minds, much more all spiritual
graces, as Knowledge, Faith, Holiness, and the like, which are all the effects
of the Spirit which works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 11. Grieve not then
that Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Resist it not, Act. 7.51. but walk in it, Gal. 5.16.

The darkness then which was upon the face of the deep, did not hide this rude
mass from the eyes of God the Spirit, notwithstanding that darkness came down
upon it, or hovered over it, and so was present there notwithstanding the very
darkness it self.

Whence,

6. Observe, The Spirit of God is present every where, yea even in the midst
of the greatest darkness.
Psalm. 139.11, 12. The Land of darkness, that is, the state of the dead, Job
10.21. and Hell, the Kingdom of darkness; these are naked before him, and have
no covering; nay the very conscience of a man, in lightened by the Spirit, is a
light, in the most secret closet of the he rt, searching and discovering the
very hidden parts of the belly, says Solomon, Prove. 20.27.

Reason 1. God himself is light, 1 John 1.5. and consequently there can be no
darkness to him, as there is none in him.

2. And it must be so, that the Judge of all the World may do right, judging
the very secrets of men, Romans 2.16.

Let all men then tremble and fear before him, even in their secret places,
nay, in the very secret thoughts of their hearts, which he knows afar off,
Psalm. 139.20. whose eyes run to and fro through the whole earth, 2 Chro. 16.9.
and searching the very reins, Jer. 11.20. much more observing the ways of men,
and their works, though done in the most secret corners, which he shall one day
bring to light, even the most hidden things of darkness, and make manifest
even the very counsels of men's hearts, 1 Cor. 4.5.

The manner of this work of the Spirit follows in the next place, It is said
to move, or hover upon the face of the deep. Thus the Holy Ghost is pleased to
stoop to men's weak capacity, to speak to men in the phrase and expressions of
men, rather shadowing out unto us, than opening the manner of that Wonderful,
and secret work, which, when all is done, can neither be Expressed, nor
Comprehended by us, as it is. Only we must suppose, that by the expressing of
it in such an obscure form, there is employed, both a secret, and yet withal an
effectual working of the Spirit upon that unformed and rude mass, to bring it
into those various shapes and forms, of several kinds of Creatures, which we
do now behold. Whence,

7. Observe, The Way of Gods Working is secret, and undiscernable, though the
effect when it is wrought be manifest.
ways are past finding out, Romans 11.33. The word, in the Original, has very
great force, and signifies, that God leaves no print of his steps behind him,
by which men might trace him out, in his goings. Job tells us, that one cannot
behold him, though he work fast by us, upon the right, or left hand, Job 23.9.
As we cannot behold the Workman, so we cannot the manner how he works; neither
without us; we know not how the corn grows, though we can s^e that it is
grown, Mark 4.27. nor how the wind blows, John 3.8. although we hear the sound
of it; nor how the clouds are balanced, and the like, Job 37.16. Nor in our own
bodies, the Mother knows not how the child is fashioned in her womb, Eccles.
11.5. nor any man how his meat nourishes, and quickens him, nor so much as how
his clothes keep him warm, when the South wind blows, Job 37.7.

Reason 1. That we might admire God the more, in all his ways, and be the more
abased in our selves, by the consideration of our own ignorance.

2. The work it self is sufficient to discover unto us God himself, and to
direct us in our duties, though we know not how it is wrought.

Let it silence our carnal reason, in enquiring curiously into that, which God
has purposely hidden from our eyes, that we might be sensible of our own
weakness, that cannot understand the ways of God, in those works that we
behold with our eyes. It is true indeed, that the works of God Are, and Ought
to be sought out of those that fear him, Psalm. 111.2. but that which they
search out in them, is the manifestation of his power, Wisdom, Psalm. 104.24.
Loving kindness, Psalm. 107.43. Righteousness and Holiness, Psalm. 145.17.
that we might honor, fear, and trust in him. As for the manner of his working,
we are at present unable to comprehend it, nor could profit by it, if we knew
it.

We cannot but take notice of the degrees, by which the Creatures were brought
on to perfection. First, they were nothing at all; next, they are a rude lump.
Lastly, the Spirit moves upon them, and by degrees gives them their several
shapes and natures, which now they have. Whence,

8. Observe, All Creatures are perfect by degrees.
AS they were in their first Creation, so are they much more in their
successive generation. Man himself has his body fashioned in time, Psalm.
139.16. And experience shows us, that Corn grows up, first into a blade, then
to an ear, and at last comes to be ripe corn, Mark 4.28.

Reason 1. That we might the more easily take notice of Gods workmanship, upon,
and in them. For we are not able to observe those things that are done in an
Instant.

2. Because if all things were made perfect, at the first, Perfection might be
conceived to be natural to them, if they received that together with their
being.

Let it quiet all our hearts, in observing the work of grace, which is wrought
in them. Let us take notice of our present infirmities, with the Apostle, 1
Cor. 13.9. yea, be sensible of them, and groan under them, Romans 7.24. striving
earnestly to a farther degree of perfection, Phil. 3.12. Heb. 6.1. but without
murmuring at our present condition, or despairing of attaining to farther
perfection, having Gods promise to perfect that which is begun in us, Phil.
1.6. Ephesians. 5.27. Although at present, he think fit to leave us in much
weakness, and wants many ways; and that, 1. To humble our hearts and keep
them low. 2. To quicken us both to fervent prayers, and constant endeavors, to
attain what we want. 3. To manifest our Faith, and dependence on Gods Power,
by which we are supported, in the midst of our wants, and weakness. 4. To
increase our thankfulness, when we feel any farther enlargement, and growth in
that grace, which we have received, and which we find increased in us in some
measure at present, and are assured will be perfected hereafter.

We have considered the Agent, or Workman, with the manner of his secret
working; the matter upon which he wrought follows; it is called the Deep, than
which nothing could be more vile, no not the dirt it self; a rude, unformed,
unprofitable mass, or lump: this was it which the Spirit overspread, or
fomented, and left it not, till he brought it into several forms and shapes of
infinite variety. Whence,

9. Observe, God is pleased to abase himself unto, and to take care of, and
cherish the very meanest, and basest of all his works.
Psalm. 113.6. but yet he is pleased to take care both of man and beast, Psalm.
36.6. of Oxen, 1 Cor. 9.9. of the young ravens, Psalm. 147.9. yea of every
living thing, Psalm. 145.16. and that so far as to support and uphold them, Heb.
1.3. to satisfy their desire, Psalm. 145.16. to provide them food, Job 38.41.
to cloathe them, Matthew. 6.30. nay, to observe, and direct all their ways,
Matthew. 10.29.

Reason 1. They could not otherwise subsist, seeing in him all things live, and
move, and have their being, Act. 17.28.

2. It magnifies his mercy the more, Psalm. 113.5, 6.

Let none despair, being in never so mean a Condition; Job's breath may be
strange to his Wife, and his Maids might account him as a stranger, Job 19.15,
17. but God hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners, Psalm. 69.33.
gathers the outcasts of his people, Psalm. 147.2. looks upon the Church in her
blood, when no eye pitied her, Ezekiel. 16.6. even upon men in sin, Romans 5.8. Nay,
even for such persons, though more vile then the earth, God gives his own Son,
bestows upon them his own Spirit, makes them up amongst his own Jewels, Mal.
3.17. and reserves them to eternal glory. Only the proud, and such as rebel
against him, he knows afar off, Psalm. 138.6.

VERSE 3.
HItherto have been described the matter, out of which all Creatures were to be
framed, the Workman that undertakes the work, with the manner of his working.
In the rest of the Chapter, we have laid before us the description of the
several Creatures, which were made successively, with the means whereby, and
manner how they were formed, and took their being, expressed with wonderful
brevity; yet so, that the Holy Ghost, in this relation, forgets not to show us
distinctly,

1. The Order in which they were made successively. 2. The Author of the Work,
which was God himself. 3. The Means, which he used in Creating them, His Word.
4. The time, in which every Creature was made, distinguished by several days.
5. The Effect, or Work it self. 6. The Approbation of every work in Particular,
and of the Whole in General, by the Lord himself, the most Able, and most
Impartial Judge of his own Work.
In the Order, which God was pleased to observe, in making the Creatures, we
are to take special notice, that he first Creates those things that were
either for General Use, to all Creatures, as the Light, Air, Heavens, Seas, and
Earth; or for more particular Use, to the Creatures afterward to be made, as
the Plants before the beasts, which were to be nourished by them; and not
only of them, but of the beasts too, before he Created the Man, that was to
make use of them all, discovering therein both his Wisdom, and Providence, in
taking care for the comfortable subsistence of the Creatures, before he made
them. Whence,

1. Observe, The General good of the Creature, is Gods First, and Chief care.
Psalm. 143.16. And by the strange course of his Providence, by which he has
still upheld the kinds of the Creature, in the midst of the continual decay
of so many particulars; and is farther evident, by that principle, that he has
planted in the hearts of all men, that States, and Societies of men, must be
supported even with the loss, sometimes, of particular persons.

Woe be then to those Monsters of men, that take care, and seek with all their
endeavors, themselves only, and their own good, without any respect at all to
the Church, or State; A Common evil, as appears by the Apostles complaint,
Phil. 2.21. and yet approved as a principle of great wisdom by too many, Psalm.
49.18. A Sin against nature, even in Heathen men's judgment. A sottish sin, as
if any person could possibly subsist, or any member continue in any comfortable
condition, without the preservation of the body: And a sin, that deservedly
deprives a man of all love from men, and reward from God.

Let all that are godly, imitate God, in caring for, and with all their
endeavors furthering the General, more than their own private good, according
to the Apostles direction, 1 Cor. 10.24. and example, verse. 33. As, 1. More
desirable in it self. 2. Most tending to Gods honor. 3. Most furthering our
own good involved in, and supported by the general welfare. 4. And being that,
for which we were principally ordained by God. 5. And which God will surely
reward, and men honor, as they did Jehojadah, 2 Chr. 24.6. which a man may
warrantably challenge at Gods hand, Neh. 5.19.

We find but one efficient cause of all the Creatures, God himself, whom we may
withal take notice of in every particular work, as the Spirit of God points
him out unto us. The Means likewise used in the production of every Creature,
is only Gods Word, or Effectual decree. For we may not conceive God speaking
with an articulate voice, having none but himself, at least no Creature that
had ears and understanding, to speak unto. This Means, which God made use of,
in Creating the World; if we take into consideration once for all, we may
warrantably from thence,

2. Observe, God needs no other Means to effect any thing, but his own Word,
and Will.
Psalm. 33.6. to sustain and support, Psalm. 119.89, 91. to prevail upon, and
order, all Creatures, Psalm. 29.3, 4. Upon the Sun, to stay the course of it,
Josh. 10.13. nay to bring it back, ^ King. 20.10. Upon the Sea, to remand, and
hasten it into the Channel prepared for it, Psalm. 104.7. In the works of Grace,
the Word of God is quick, and powerful, Heb. 4.12. to cast down strong holds, 2
Cor. 10.5. to renew, quicken, subdue, and comfort the heart, and to work in us
both to will and to do, according to Gods good pleasure. Thus he does
whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 135.6. so that his counsel
stands, and the thoughts of his heart, to all Ages, Psalm. 33.11. and his Word
or Decree brings to pass whatsoever he will.

Depend upon that Word with the Prophet David, Psalm. 130.5. as being in it self
unchangeable, Isa. 45.23. as God himself is, that utters it, Mal. 3.6. who will
not alter the Word that is gone out of his lips, Psalm. 89.34. whether it be for
good, Numb. 23.19. or for evil, Numb. 14. comparing verse 12. with 25.35. And
is as effectual in the event, 2 King. 10.10. much more than the word of Kings,
Eccles. 8.4. because he is strong, and faithful that utters it. Trust in it
then firmly, it is surer than the strongest Evidences. And fear it, it is
firmer then the Laws of the Medes and Persians.

Light, is the first of all the Creatures that God makes, as being it self most
generally useful, especially to the end which God principally aimed at, which
was to make all the rest of his works Visible, and thereby capable of
observation, which was the principal end wherefore he made them. This Light,
being a Creature, must needs infinitely differ in nature, from that Eternal
brightness, which God, who only has Immortality, is said to dwell in, from all
eternity, 1 Timothy 6.16. In what body it was fixed, and how spread over the face
of this unformed mass, it is not easy to conjecture, (especially seeing at
present we know not the way where the Light dwells, Job 38.19.) nor needful
to enquire after, seeing the Holy Ghost passes it over in silence. Only,
because all the works following, must needs be created in the Light, which was
created before them all, We may

3. Observe, God loves to do all his Works, in the light.
Tim. 6.16. The manner indeed of his working is secret, and not observable or
visible to men; but the work it self is brought forth into the light, and made
manifest to all. He declares his strength, Psalm. 77.14. and his righteousness,
Psalm. 58.11. and 92.2. and has therefore published in his Word, the rule by
which he proceeds, and the end at which he aims, in all that he does, and has
besides planted in all men a light of understanding, by which they may both
comprehend, and judge of all his works.

Reason 1. Because his work is Perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. and therefore able to
endure the light, John 3.21. which none hide their works from, but evil doers,
verse 22.

2. Because one special end of all his works, is that he might be known In, and
By them, Romans 1.20. and be honored for them, Psalm. 111.2, 3, 4. and 145.10,
11. for which cause, he has also left his most memorable works upon record, to
posterity, that men beholding all his ways might know and fear him, and trust
in him, Psalm. 78.6, 7.

Let us then search into, and heedfully observe Gods works, which is the duty,
and practice of all those that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2. A study, 1.
Pleasant. 2. Profitable. 3. Necessary, both by Gods Command, and because they
nearly concern our selves. Unto the true understanding whereof, there needs
Outwardly the direction of the Word, Psalm. 73.16, 17. and besides that, Inward
light of the Spirit, which discovers unto all, the Counsels of God, as far as
they concern us.

Let us also, after Gods Example, Walk, and Work in the light, 1 John 1.7. as
being Children of the Light, Ephesians. 5.8. ordained by God to shine as Lights in
the world, Phil. 2.15. that our works being seen of men, they may glorify our
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.16. doing those things that may abide the
light, and be approved by it, Joh. 3.21. and setting all that we do before the
light of our own consciences, and before Gods presence, Psalm. 139.23, 24. Yea,
if need be, before the faces of all men, when Gods honor, and our own
necessary justification, and the credit of Religion thereby, require it at our
hands. Otherwise, even works of the light, are to be done in secret, Matthew.
6.3. unless the encouragement of other men, or the necessity of the work it
self require the performance of it in a more public manner; As even modest
women choose rather to uncover their breasts before others, than to suffer
their children to cry for hunger.

In this Relation, although the way where the light dwells be not discovered
unto us, yet the Author who Created it, is expressly mentioned. Light, as well
as all other Creatures, was the effect of Gods decree. Whence,

4. Observe, Light, as well as all others Creatures, is the Work of God himself.
Psalm. 74.16. Isa. 45.7. How much more is God the Author of Wisdom, and
Understanding, the Inward light of the soul? seeing he is the Light that
enlightens every one that comes into the world, John 1.9. but more of his own
children, whom he enlighteneth with that true knowledge of the glory of God, in
the face of his Son Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.

Let all men then seek the Light of Wisdom at Gods hand, as we are directed,
Jam. 1.5. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. and that by the means which he has ordained, his
Word especially, which is a light, Prove. 6.23. shining in a dark place, 2 Pet.
1.19. enlightening the eyes, Psalm. 19.8. and directing the steps, Psalm.
119.105. and yet not comprehended by the darkness, John 1.5. which rests upon
the hearts of all them that remain in their natural condition; and that this
light may be discerned, the eyes of the mind must be opened by the Spirit,
which must be begged of God, by fervent and frequent prayer, as David prays
God to open his eyes, Psalm. 119.18.

Let us acknowledge the light, as a special blessing from God, without which
our life were both Uncomfortable, and Unprofitable, and all the Creatures to
us, for the most part unserviceable: as we see in the Egyptian darkness, which
fixed men to their places, that they moved not for three days, Exodus 10.22,
23. and was an immediate forerunner of a greater plague. Much more let us
acknowledge the light of our minds, to be his blessing, who has opened our
eyes, and shined into our hearts, when he has left the rest of the world to
perish in their ignorance. Our thankfulness for so great a mercy ought to be
manifested, by walking in that light, and persuading others to walk in it with
us, Isa. 2.5.

We cannot but take notice, that God brought this Light out of Darkness; for
there was nothing but darkness upon the face of the Deep, when God commanded
this light to shine forth; as there was nothing but deformity, till God brought
beauty into the world. Whence,

5. Observe, God can, and often does, bring Light out of Darkness.
Isa. 58.10. and the darkness of ignorance into the light of knowledge, 2 Cor.
4.6. as being able to do whatsoever pleases him in heaven and earth, Psalm.
135.6. nay, he makes misery, to yield comfort; and Errors, direction and
Wisdom to walk warily for time to come.

1. Admire his Work, and compare his Power, with men's weakness. We can bring
one body to borrow light of another, as the candle of the fire; but where is he
that can make light, where there is none? And we can bring light into dark
places, but who is he that can turn darkness into light, and cause light to
shine out of darkness, not only where it was not before, but where it was not
at all? This is a Wonder of all wonders, sufficient to astonish all men, to see
salvation brought out of destruction; one contrary out of another: these
wonders God does alone, Psalm. 136.4.

2. Despair not in the greatest outward Evils, Mic. 7.9, 10, 11. see that
wonderful change of the Jews condition, resembled by Ezechiel's dried bones,
of which themselves concluded, that their hope was lost, Ezekiel. 37.11. Let us be
of like comfort, in the inward agonies of our spirits, when our soul refuses
comfort, when God, hiding, for the present, his face from us, we doubt that his
Promises fail for evermore, Psalm. 77.2, 8. Remember, in such a condition,
Christ's promise, Joh. 16.20. and his Commission from God, Isa. 61.1. who
creates peace, Isa. 57.19. and comes with healing in his wings, changing Gods
wrath into love, and the sentence of death into a gracious promise of Life.

The Word and Decree of God for creating light we have heard, the Effect
follows immediately, There was Light; as he had Commanded, so it came to
pass. Whence,

6. Observe, Gods Word and Deed are all one.
HE spoke the word, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast, Psalm.
33.9, 11. Sometimes the word and effect go together, as in the Judgment upon
Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 16.31. and upon Ananias and Sapphira, Act. 5.5, 10. Or
at least the Word is fulfilled in the appointed time, as in the Judgment
denounced, Numb. 14.33, 34, 35. then it shall come, and not tarry, Hab. 2.3.

Reason 1. Gods Truth, and Power, neither of which can fail, he cannot lie,
Tit. 1.2. nor faint, Isa. 40.28.

Let us then rest confidently upon his Word, which is firmer then the earth.
Tremble at his threatenings, sometimes executed as soon as they are uttered, as
we have seen in Dathans case; or perhaps the next day, as in the Plagues of
Egypt; or after a few years, as the flood came upon the old world after 120
years; and be no more mockers, with those, 2 Pet. 3.4. lest your bonds
increase. And trust in his promises, which are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.
seeing God cannot repent, Numb. 23.19. nor fail in power, Numb. 11.23. but
speaks Righteousness, Isa. 45.19. failing none of those that wait for him,
Isa. 49.23. in the way of his Judgments, Isa. 26.8.

That God by his Word made the light, is evident in the letter of the Text,
how he carried and spread it over the world, and in what body he fixed it, is
much disputed. That it could not be the Sun, which now carries the light about
the world, it is evident; seeing the light was made the first day, and the Sun
not till the fourth. It could not be planted in the element of fire, which some
imagine compasses the World, for then it must have shined night and day, and
then how came the darkness of the three nights following? But since it is
expressly said, that where was light, but where, and in what body it was fixed,
is not expressed, why does it trouble our thoughts? sobriety is best, where the
Scripture is silent, and thereby, in effect, commands us silence. Sure we are,
that though it please God now, to make use of the Sun, to carry the light of
the World, he had power to spread it abroad, and to take it in again, without
the help of a Creature, and it is here expressly affirmed, that he sent out the
light in the day, and withdrew it in the night, before there was any Sun.
Whence,

7. Observe, Though God be pleased, ordinarily, to make use of second means,
yet the want of them cannot hinder his work.
Kings 3.17. Provide bread for his people, without corn; and flesh without
flocks, or herds, or the fishes of the Sea, Numb. 11.22, 31. When there was no
man to help, he could help without man, Isa. 63.5. as he shall be able, and
will hereafter supply all things to his servants, without any means at all,
Rev. 21.23.

Reason 1. Even the means themselves are, not only created by him, but receive
all their strength to work any effect, from him, Isa. 54.16, 17. which
therefore he can as easily conveigh, and put forth without them, as by them, if
he please.

2. It is fit for God to work without means sometimes, that his power may be
the more clearly seen, and acknowledged, as he tells Gideon, Judge. 7.2. which,
where means are used, men are more apt to ascribe unto them, than to him that
works by them.

Let not want of means, or Insufficiency of means, be any impediment to our
faith, and dependence upon God; no more than it was to Abraham, to believe that
he should have a son by Sarah, though it were beyond the course of nature; or
to the blessed Virgin, to believe the Angels promise, that she should conceive
a Child, though she had known no man. This is indeed to give glory unto God, to
believe in hope, against hope, Romans 4.18. And is of the very nature of Faith,
to be an Evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.

Hitherto of the Creation of the Light: The Approbation of the Goodness of it
by God himself, and the distinction of the Light from the Darkness, both in
succession of time, and in name and appellation follows.

VERSE 4.
ANd God saw] Looking back, as it were, upon his own work, not as if he then
first knew it to be good, by experience, when it was made, and not before. For
we are sure that God knew the goodness of it before he made it, as well as he
did afterward. But this is spoken after the manner of men, who being weak in
their judgments, find many times errors in their own works, by Experience,
when they have made them, which they foresaw not before, so that they find them
unanswerable to their own intentions, and expectations. In Gods works it was
otherwise: they all of them proved as good as they were intended, and that in
the most exact Judgment of God himself, who having in himself all Perfection,
must needs be the best Judge of it. So then (seeing) in this place signifies no
more then Knowing, or Approving.

That it was good] In the Nature of it, Perfect in the highest degree,
according to the proportion of that Creature; and in the use of it fit and
serviceable to that end for which it was made, wherein the greatest goodness
of a Creature consists. Thus, when God has made his works, he overlooks them,
and passes his censure upon them, which is nothing else but a continued
approbation of, and rejoicing in, his works, as the Psalmist terms it Psalm.
104.31. So that we may from thence,

1. Observe, God takes a view, and notice, of all his Works that he makes.
mercies may be over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. and lastly, that he may order
and direct them by his wisdom, to the ends that best please him, Psalm. 33.14,
15.

Let us, in imitation of God, observe all that he has done, or does, in
heaven, or earth, either in the works of Creation, or of Providence: 1. It is
the end wherefore God has given us understanding, more then the beasts of the
field. 2. It oftentimes furnishes us with rules, for the directing of our
ways. 3. Sometimes it yields us ground of comfort and encouragement, for
staying up of our hearts, in times of doubts and fears, Psalm. 77.10, 11, 12. 4.
It is a great means of increasing Love, Fear, and Reliance upon God, by the
discovery of his wisdom, and faithfulness, in all his ways, Psalm. 104.24.
And lastly, fills our hearts and mouths with his praise, Psalm. 145.5, 6.

2. Let us learn to look back upon, and try our own ways, and works, that it
may minister unto us matter either of rejoicing in well doing, Gal. 6.4. (and
yet not in our selves, but in God who furnishes us with power, and guides us
by his counsel, in that we choose as David does, Psalm. 16.7.) or of
humiliation, in our failings, with the same Prophet, 2 Samuel 24.10. The neglect
of this duty is justly taxed in Gods people, Jer. 8.6. We have indeed cause to
be the more careful in the performance of this duty, 1. Because of our
manifold errors, in all that we put our hand unto. 2. Of the account which we
must give unto God, of our well, or ill doings hereafter, when God shall bring
every work into Judgment, Eccles. 12.14.

It is worth our observation, that Gods allowance of his own work, is set to
it, as a sufficient seal, to pass it for current, without control, or farther
examination. For the Holy Ghost, commending Gods work unto us, as every way
good, and perfect, tells us that he saw and approved it to be so. Whence,

2. Observe, God is a sufficient Witness to himself.
JOhn 8. for which cause he swears by himself, Genesis 22.16. and all men do, or
should swear by Him alone; as if, when their credit is doubted of, they would
appeal to a witness that is without exception, as being an Oracle or Standard
of Truth.

Reason 1. Because he knows all things, and is truth it self, whereof if any
Creature partake in any proportion, it receives it from God; and therefore if
God take in any witness from man, it is in effect his own Testimony; yet
infinitely weaker then his own, because it passes through the hand of those
that are subject to Error.

2. It is an high honor to God, that his Word should carry such Authority with
it, as an Oracle of Truth, without any debate, or contradiction, whereby his
Sovereignty, Wisdom, and Truth are acknowledged by men, and Angels, when they
receive his Testimony without farther trial (as we do that coin, that the King
has stamped and allowed) when we acknowledge both his Sovereignty and
Faithfulness.

1. Let us receive his Testimony for his own sake, because he has spoken it,
as our Savior requires us to do, Math. 5.20. Who can neither deceive, Tit.
1.2. nor be deceived. And that, 1. in obedience to him, who is the Lord of our
faith. 2. As the readiest and surest way, for the settling of our own hearts. 3.
As the only means to give God his due honor, by setting to our seal, that the
is true, Joh. 3.33. Gods Testimony we call either his Word, or the Testimony of
the Spirit agreeable thereunto.

2. Admire Gods goodness to men, who having no need of their Testimony, Joh.
5.34. as having greater of his own, ver. 30. is pleased notwithstanding to
honor them so far, as to accept them for his witnesses, Isa. 43.10. and
besides to reward their Testimony, as a good service, done unto himself, Genesis
15.6. Luke 12.8.

This Testimony that God gives unto the works that he made, severally, that
they were good; and generally, that they were very good; must be understood of
their goodness every way, and in all respects. They were good in their Being,
Good in the perfection of their Being, according to their kinds, in their
proportion; Good in their fitness to their uses, for which they were Created,
and Good in their mutual correspondence: and thus this goodness of the Light
is to be understood, in this place, by occasion whereof to avoid needless
repetitions, we may once for all,

3. Observe, All that God does, is exceeding Good and Perfect.
Psalm. 104.24. In the administration of the Creatures, his work is perfect,
Deuteronomy. 32.4, and all his ways, Psalm. 18.30. yea every thing is made Beautiful
in its time, Eccl. 3.11.

Reason. 1. They must needs, in their proportion, be answerable to the workman,
to God that made them; now God is Good, and perfect every way, and therefore
cannot make any thing Evil, or imperfect: because he has power in his hand,
to make what he will, and how he will; which men, who are imperfect themselves,
and have no power, but what they receive by dispensation from him, cannot do.

2. His works need to be Good and Perfect, because they cannot be mended. No
man can add to, or take from them, Eccl. 3.14. supply that which is wanting, or
make strait that which is crooked, Eccl. 1.15. Men can only apply Gods works to
their uses, but can neither alter them, nor add unto them.

3. Gods works are made to show forth, and manifest God unto us, even the
invisible things of God, Romans 1.20. They must therefore be all good and
perfect, that they may represent unto us his goodness, and perfection, that is
the Author of them.

1. Let us then acknowledge them to be so. All the works of nature, even those
the end or use whereof we understand not; the meanest, and basest whereof, even
a fly, a louse, a toad, the most curious workman in the world, cannot frame,
much less give life unto: And all the works of Providence, afflictions of the
godly, Psalm. 119.75. The prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.18. as all working
together for good. Romans 8.28. though we discern it not, by reason of the error
of our Judgments, who know nothing as we ought to know; yea let us acknowledge
our approbation of Gods ways and works, both by setting out their praise, and
by quieting, and contenting our hearts, in whatsoever events befall our selves,
or others.

2. If they prove not so to us, let us blame our selves, and not the work of
God, much less him that wrought it; we are out of order, and not any Act of
Gods, wherefore let us leave complaining, and fall to searching and trying our
ways, Lam. 3, 39.40. Not wishing any act of Providence altered, but our
selves; seeing the inequality is not in Gods ways, but in our own, Ezech.
18.25. And we must needs acknowledge, as it is testified of him, Psalm. 145.17.
That he is righteous in all his ways, and Holy in all his works.

3. Let us labor to imitate God, in our works, as far as we are able. Do that
which is good in it self, correspoudent every way, and useful to others, which
is, and will be our honor, Comfort, and ground of reward from God in time to
come, Romans 2.6, 7.

The goodness of the Light, as it is a work of God, considered in General, we
have observed: If we consider it apart, as we find it here in particular
approved by God, and testified by him to be good, We may,

4. Observe, Light is a good Creature.
Psalm. 104.4. exceeding comfortable, and delightsome, Eccl. 11.7. For which
cause a prosperous and comfortable condition, is every where expressed by
Light: of singgular use to the Creatures, as discovering and making all things
manifest unto them, Ephesians. 5.13. and thereby directing, and guiding them in all
their ways, (for which cause Gods Law, according to which all men's ways ought
to be ordered, is expressed by that name, Prove. 6.23. Psalm. 119.20.) And
consequently furthering all employments; which when the Egyptians wanted; they
were fain to sit still every one in his place, Exodus 10.23.

1. Acknowledge it unto God with all thankfulness: as a special, though a
Common blessing, that we enjoy the Light, comparing the comfortablenesse of the
Light of the day, with the shadow and darkness of the night; the manifold
benefits of the sight, with the uncomfortablenesse of blindness: and the
dangers unto which it makes men subject. Much more let us rejoice in that
glorious Light of the Word, and Gospel, and the knowledge and understanding of
heavenly things, which we gain thereby, by which God himself is in some measure
discovered unto us, and the things freely given us by him, by which our hearts
are revived, our steps directed, and our selves stirred up, and strengthened to
walk in a safe way, till God bring us in peace to the Light of glory hereafter.

2. Let us then use the light well, This Outward light, to exercise our selves,
by the benefit thereof, in profitable employments, Psalm. 104.23. Not to trifle
it out in idleness and vanity, much less abusing it to the acting of the
works of darkness, and surfeiting and drunkenness, and the like. But
especially the Spiritual Light of the Word, and not trifling with it as the
Jews did, Joh. 5.35. as children that set up a candle to play by: but
attending and taking heed to it, 2 Pet. 1.19. and walking in it, as Children of
Light. See Romans 13.12. Ephesi. 5.8.

Something may yet farther be observed in this Testimony of God, concerning
both the Light, and other Creatures which he forms afterward; That the Holy
Ghost thinks this sufficient to commend Gods Works unto us, that they were
approved by God himself, and allowed as good. Whence,

5. Observe, That, and that only, is good which God Approves.
Romans 2.29. 2 Cor. 10.18. Whence it is, that God lays a special charge upon
his people, to do, Not that which is right in their own eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8: But
that which is good in the eyes of the Lord their God Deuteronomy. 6.18.

Reason 1. He only has Authority, to allow and approve, as Princes have to
stamp Coin; and that justly; seeing he has only wisdom, to understand and
discern things aright; and thereby to put a true difference between good and
evil; and besides, his will is that which makes things good.

2. There could otherwise be no certainty in the world, unless there be One,
and that an unchangeable, and infallible Rule, for men to walk by; and one
balance, in which all men and their actions may be equally weighed, and
approved thereby.

Let no man please himself, either with his own, or with the worlds censure,
concerning himself, or his ways, against which St. Paul protests, 1 Cor. 4.3,
4. Considering, 1. That the Creature has no Authority to justify or condemn,
Romans 14.4. 2. Neither is any Creature furnished with such a measure of wisdom,
as to set a right esteem on men's Actions, the grounds and scope whereof they
cannot reach into, much less of their persons, seeing they can look only on
the outward appearance; so that God reverseth their Judgments, abhorring many
times, that which they highly esteem, Luke 16.15.

After the Approbation of the Light, follows the distinction and separation of
it from the darkness; which as they are oppositein nature, and so cannot
subsist together, so God separated them in time, appointing them to succeed one
another mutually in their turns. Whence,

6. Observe, Light and Darkness cannot subsist together.
Cor. 6.14.

Let all those that are of the Light, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. nay Light in the Lord,
Ephesians. 5.8. abandon darkness, with all the works thereof, Romans 13.12. Ephesians.
5.11. together with the society of all that walk in them; as being, 1.
Uncomely. 2. Unprofitable and unfruitful. 3. Dangerous, as wholly opposite to
the state unto which we are called, and hindering our communion and fellowship
with God, who dwells in the Light, 1 Timothy 6.16. nay is altogether light,
without any darkness at all, 1 John 1.5, 6.

Now though God divided the light from the darkness, yet he took not the
darkness clean away, but continued them both still, though not confounded
together, yet to take their turns successively, and come in one another room,
in the order that he appointed. Whence,

7. Observe, Light and Darkness take their turns, and succeed one another, in
the Order that God has appointed.
Psalm. 30.5. so that weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning; and that also by Gods appointment, who has set the one against the
other, Eccles. 7.14. to keep all upright.

Reason 1. They are both useful in their times, the Light and Day for action
and employment, Psalm. 104.23. The Night and Darkness, for rest and sleep, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. Prosperity to quicken, and encourage, and afford us opportunity to
be doing, Joh. 9.4. Adversity, like the cold of VVinter, to keep-in our
shooting up, and putting forward into outward works, that we might take root
downwards, and recollect our spirits, and exercise our thoughts upon our
selves, in trying our ways, searching our hearts, strengthening our faith, and
the like.

2. Even darkness is needful, that it may be a means to remember us of Gods
mercy, in causing the light to shine out of it: as sin, even in sanctified
persons, is left in them, to manifest unto them from what a fearful bondage
they were delivered, when it reigned in them, which they find so burdensome,
when it does but dwell in them.

1. Let every one of us, even when we are in the light, prepare for darkness,
expecting still a mixture of Joy and Heaviness, as being, 1. Our portion
allotted us by God himself, Eccles. 7.14. which, upon that very ground, we have
reason to be well pleased withal; with holy Job, who blesses God for his
afflictions, Job 1.21. 2. As being besides necessary for us, Eccl. 7.2, 3. as a
yoke for wanton bullocks, Jer. 31.18. to keep them in a right way, as David
acknowledges afflictions did him, Psalm. 119.67. 3. Being sure they will end in
the fullness of joy at the last, Mic. 7.9. when all tears shall be wiped from
our eyes, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away, Isa. 35.10. 4. And are easy
to be born in the mean time, by the secret support of the Spirit, when we are
troubled, but not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; so that we faint not for the light affliction, 2 Cor. 4.8, 17.
The best means to prepare our selves for such changes, is, 1. To keep a good
conscience in all things, that we add not the weight of sin to the rest of our
burdens. 2. By improving the light, while we enjoy it, to our best advantage,
in our times of peace, performing whatsoever our hand finds to do, with all our
power. 3. By sustaining and supporting our hearts by faith in Gods gracious
promises, with which David quickened and revived his heart, Psalm. 119.92. 4. By
expecting afflictions beforehand, lest if we be surprised upon the sudden, we
be discouraged, and take offense, with those resembled to the stony ground,
Matthew. 13.21.

2. Let us long for heaven, where is light without darkness, Rev. 22.5. Joy
without heaviness; yea the fullness of joys, and pleasures for evermore, Psalm.
16.11. And in the mean time, let us draw near unto God, holding fast our
Communion with him, in whom is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. and the light of
whose countenance shall revive and establish our hearts in the midst of the
greatest darkness, even in the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4.

VERSE 5.
ANd God called the Light Day] Not that God needed any name to distinguish
things by, as men do. Some therefore conceive, that those words import no more
but this, that either he directed, and appointed them to be distinguished by
those names, as they were in nature, or that man afterward by that wisdom that
God gave him, called them by those names. As for the names themselves, Day, and
Night, Jom], which in the Hebrew Language signifies Day, is conceived to be
given it from the hurry and tumultuous noise, that fills the air, by the
business and multitude of employments of men, in the daytime; and (Lajelah)
which is the name of the Night, to point at the yelling and howling of wild
beasts, which in the night time creep out of their dens, as the Psalmist
affirms, Psalm. 104.20, 21. Howsoever, the name Day, is taken in a double sense,
in this verse. Here, where it is distinguished from the Night, it is taken for
a Civil day, that is, that part of 24 hours which is Light; but in the latter
end of the verse, it signifies a Natural day, consisting of 24. hours, and
includes the night too.

And the Evening] That is, thus the first day ended with Creating the Light,
and God forbear to create any more, until that Evening was past, and the next
morning came. By the Evening, we must here understand the whole night, or space
between the shutting in of the light, and the dawning of the next day. Now
Moses names the Evening first, because the darkness was before the light. In
the same manner runs the computation of Times, among the Hebrews to this day.
Now, why it pleased God to make no more but the Light, the first day, it is
Curiosity to enquire.

This only we may take notice of, that God, as he makes his Works, so he gives
them names; or at least appoints names to be given them: questionless, some
way expressing their natures, and for the better distinction of one thing from
another. Whence,

1. Observe, All things must be called, and distinguished by names proper unto
them, and, as much as may be, agreeable to their natures.


Woe then to those, that labor to bring in confusion, by misapplying names to
things of contrary natures, calling light darkness, and darkness light, Isa.
5.20. putting Wolves into sheeps clothing, and gracing evil with specious
names, that it may have some appearance of good, and so may be embraced and
entertained by those, that judge of all things, as they are represented to them
by their names. A practice of dangerous consequence, by which many simple
persons, embracing evil instead of good, destroy their own souls.

God is here represented to us, in the Creation of the world, proceeding by
leisure, and taking the time of Six days, to perform that, which he might have
as easily dispatched in a moment of time, if he had so been pleased. So that we
may thence,

2. Observe, God is pleased to take Time, and Leisure, in bringing things to
pass, though he might end his work in an Instant.
Psalm. 139.16. The Corn, Herbs, and Plants grow up by degrees, the light comes
forth in time, increasing more and more till it be perfect day, Prove. 4.18. And
in the work of Sanctification, though the life of Grace, as well as of Nature,
be given in an instant, yet the graces of the Spirit come on by degrees,
growing up, and increasing in us day by day: whereas God might fill us with his
Spirit, and perfect our Sanctification in an instant. And this he does,

1. Because we could not otherwise observe Gods works, if they were done in an
instant; we can take notice of noth^^g but that which is done in time; so great
is our weakness.

2. That our hearts might be the longer stayed upon the meditation of Gods
works, while we wait for the perfecting, and full accomplishing of that, which
we see to be already begun.

Let it move us to wait upon God, in the way of his providence, with the
greater care, and watchfulness, when we see how far God condescends unto our
weakness, and applies himself to our weak and slow understandings, heedfully
observing the beginings, taking notice of the Progress, and waiting for the
full accomplishment, and perfecting of any work that he has in hand. Thus
should Gods works be sought out of all that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2.

VERSE 6.
LEt there be a Firmament] Or Body spread out, like metals that flow abroad,
when they are melted: and as then, they waxing cool, grow firm, and stiff
withal. Some conceive this name (Rakiah) imports the Firmness of the
Heavens; which opinion the Greeks seem to favor, who translate it (Stereoma)
which we, in our Language, render (Firmament) signifying, not so much the
Grossness, or Thickness, as the Strength, and Compacted firmness of the
Heavens, unto which Elihu seems to allude, Job 37.18. when he styles it strong,
and as a melted Lookingglasse. But it seems more probable, that Rakiah, implies
only the Extention, or spreading out, (as Psalm. 104.2.) not the compacted
firmness of the Heavens, seeing that under this name Firmament, we must
necessarily comprise, as well the air which is spread out, over, and round
about the earth, as that firmer body of the Heaven above; of which, more anon.
That the heaven above is understood by the name of Firmament, it is evident,
because God set the Moon and the Sun and Stars in the Firmament, verse. 14.
And, that it includes the Air also, is as Evident, seeing God appoints the
birds to fly in the open Firmament, ver. 20. Now if we conceive the Planets
and Stars to move in the Air, which many with very great show of reason
maintain, the opinion may seem to be favored by the Holy Ghost in this
Chapter, who calling both the Air where the birds fly, and the Heaven in which
the Stars are carried, by one name, may seem to imply, that they are both
carried in the same body of the Air, though at a great distance one from the
other. Howsoever it is most probable, that the word Firmament, in this place,
includes at the uttermost no more, then the sphere in which the Stars are
carried, which is the uttermost bound of the visible world, the making whereof
was that which Moses only intended to describe in this place, where we find
nothing at all mentioned concerning the Third Heavens, or the Angels who have
their residence therein.

In the midst of the Waters] That is, as it is expressed in the next verse,
to be between the waters, and to separate the waters above, and below the
Firmament. Now what these Waters be, that are below the Firmament, we see; but
what is meant by the Waters that are above the Firmament, is much questioned.
Some place them above the Stars, and imagine them to be either a kind of
Crystal sphaere, which is termed Waters, for the resemblance which it has
unto waters congealed; or else that there are true real waters there indeed.
Others by the Waters above, understand the waters which are carried in the Air,
above the Earth, in the Clouds, and bound up in them, Job 26.8. Which opinion
if we embrace, we must understand the word Firmament by a Synecdoche, for the
lower part of the Firmament; in, and above the lower part whereof the clouds
are carried.

And let it divide] That is, by receiving, and taking up part of the waters,
which are to be carried in clouds in the air, and employed in watering the
earth, by consequent separate and divide them from the waters which remain here
below.

Thus we see the first of those creatures which were formed out of that rude
mass, this huge vaste Firmament which our eyes can hardly measure, of an
extent almost incredible. This is notwithstanding a part of Gods work, created
only by the Word of his mouth. Whence,

1. Observe, The vaste and almost boundless Body of the heavens is the Work of
God.
Psalm. 8.3. and the Heavens of the Lord, Lam. 3.66.

Let it set before us the infinite power of him that made it, nay stretched it
out like a Curtain, Psalm. 14.2. and compare with this work Nebuchadnezars
Babylon, Dan. 4.30. or Ahasuerus hangings in the Palace at Shushan, Hest. 1.6.
or Solomon's Temple, or that which was after enlarged and beautified by Herod,
so much admired, Matthew. 13.1. and the rest of the famous works, wrought by men,
which they accounted the wonders of the world: and so whether they be if
compared with this work, so much as a drop to the whole Ocean, and let it
swallow up our Spirits with the admiration of the greatness of him whose work
it is, and whose immensitie, notwithstanding the large extent of the heavens,
cannot be contained in them, 1 King. 4.27.

We have already showed, that the Air is included under this name firmament,
or body spread out, as well as the higher heavens. So that the Air also is a
part of Gods Work, which we may not pass by, without taking special notice
thereof. Wherefore,

2. Observre, The Air in which we move and breath is Gods Creature.


Let us acknowledge the Air also, among none of the meanest of Gods blessings,
taking notice of the manifold uses thereof, unto the lives, and comfortable
being, and subsisting of our selves and other Creatures; as, 1. serving for
Respiration, or breathing, the immediate means of preserving our lives, as we
know for to take away breath, is to take away life, Psalm. 104.29. And when God
is said to have power over our lives, he is said to have our breath in his
hand, Job. 12.10. Dan. 5.23. 1. It transmits the Light, and Influence of the
Celestial Bodies: and so furthers their use, and service to the earth, and to
the Creatures here below, which are cherished and quickened thereby, and so
becomes in a sort a common band, and means of union between heaven and earth.
3. It makes way both to the motion of our selves, and every other moving
Creature, by the yielding nature thereof; without which the places in which we,
and other creatures are, would become our prisons: and consequently would make
both them and us utterly unfit for any service at all. 4. It sustaines the
clouds, in which the rain is bound up, and maks way to their moving about the
Earth, and lets down from them the soft rain: without which, all herbs and
plants must wither of necessity, and by consequent, the Earth must become
wholly barren and unfruitful. The truth is those common blessings, which all
Creatures enjoy, the Light, Air, Water, and the Earth whereon we walk, and by
the fruits whereof we are sustained, are of an infinite, and inestimable
value, infinitely beyond gold and silver, which we set at so high a rate; and
yet are despised, because they are enjoyed in common; and therefore ought to be
the more thoroughly enquired into, and observed by Gods Children, whose hearts
ought to be enlarged unto thankfulness, by the Consideration, and taste of
Gods goodness, communicated to us in every one of his Creatures.

The dividing of the waters from the waters (which is conceived to be one use
of the Air) is a work worth the scanning, especially if by the waters above we
understand the clouds, which contain the rain which is raised in thin vapors,
and consequently severed thereby from the waters below: and carried about over
our heads, and let down upon the Earth, without which a great part of it would
be utterly unfruitful; for God having gathered the water here below into one
Chanel, that the Earth might be dry, and by that means habitable, howsoever in
his Wisdom and Providence he has so ordered it, that waters issuing out from
the Seas by secret passages, and breaking out into Fountains, and Rivers, may
thereby make fruitful the valleys and lower parts of the Earth: yet we know
they reach not to the higher grounds, much less to the tops of the hills. It
was therefore needful that some water should be carried on high above the
hills, and higher grounds; that from thence they might distill, and fall down in
just showers upon the mountains and higher places of the Earth, to moisten
them too, that no part thereof might remain barrain and unprofitable: and might
thereby further manifest the care and Providence of God, in cherishing those
parts from Heaven, which seem to be most unprovided, and in a sort neglected,
in the constitution of the World and the several parts thereof. Thus Moses
affirms that Gods Eyes and Care, were more for Canaan, then for Egypt: because
that was overflowed by waters below, which might be carried hither and thither
by the industry of men, to make their grounds fruitful; but Canaan was watered
from Heaven, with seasonable rains, Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11, 12. Whereupon the Prophet
taxes the Jews of great unthankfulness, for not fearing God, that gave them
rain from Heaven; the former and the later, and thereby brought about the
appointed weeks of harvest, Jer. 5.24. So this division of the waters, must
needs be acknowledged, to be a special work of Gods Wisdom, disposing them
so, as they might be most useful to the Earth. Whence,

3. Observe, God so orders all things, as they may best serve for use.


Reason 1. His Wisdom and goodness, which together both moved, and enabled him
to dispose of all things, for use and profit, which is not the least part of
his honor.

2. Gods end in all his works, was to make all for use and service: for the
mutual support of Creatures one by another, that they might be all knit
together in a straight band of Love, grounded upon, or strengthened by the
mutual help and supply which they have one from another, without which they
could not subsist.

Let it quiet all men's hearts, which are so apt to quarrel, at the distribution
of the Commodities of the Earth, the division of men's habitations, and
disposition of their estates: which howsoever we conceive, out of a partial
respect to our selves, to be full of ertour, and inequality; yet we shall find
upon due examination, to be equal and just, directed by the Wisdom of God; to
the send for which all things were made, the honor of himself, and the
general good of his Creatures. It should indeed silence all our murmurings,
that God may do with his own what he will; and if we understand not, in every
particular, how he has done things well, let us in modesty blame our own
ignorance, who cannot search into the depth of his counsels, whose ways are
past finding out, Romans 11.33.

2. Let it move us to dispose of our selves, as we may be most serviceable to
others, and employ our abilities and means to the good of others, as having
received whatsoever we have for that end.

The Creation and Use of the Firmament we have seen, the matter whereof could
be none other then that which was taken out of that rude and confused mass,
which before was described to be without shape, or form: out of that deformed
and misshapen heap, were taken those glorious bodies of the Heavens, Sun, Moon,
and Stars, the beauty whereof we now behold, with so much admiration. Whence,

4. Observe, God can put beauty and excellency on the basest things that are,
and raise Earth to Heaven if He please.
Ezekiel. 16.14.

Reason 1. God has all beauty and excellency in himself, and therefore can
easily bestow it where he pleases, even where it is not.

2. He delights to do it, that no flesh might glory, but the eminency that
appears in any Creature might be wholly ascribed to him, when it appears, that
in it self it had nothing but baseness and deformity, and consequently the
excellency that is found upon it, must be acknowledged to be bestowed by him
that made it.

Let us then depend on God for the adorning and beautifying of our corrupt
Souls made abominable in their own nature through the defilement of sin, and
deformed by the Image of Satan upon them, which he can and will make without
spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. comely by his beauty, Ezekiel.
16.14. even the Image of the Son, which is renewed in us, in righteousness and
holiness, and thereby made glorious in his eyes, without spot, Cant. 4.7. Nay,
depend on him to cloth these base bodies of ours, so vile in their Original,
so full of weakness and Corruption at present, and so odious in and after
their dissolution, with honor and glory, even this Corruptible with
Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.42. Yea, to lift up both body and soul from these
earthly tabernacles, and to place them in heavenly habitations, in which he
has made us sit together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.6. who is gone before to take
possession for us, and to prepare us a place there, Joh. 14.2. that we may be
where he is, Joh. 17.24.

VERSE 7.
ANd God made the Firmament] By that Word or Effectual Will and Decree of his,
which the Psalmist calls his Commandment, Psalm. 33.9.

And divided] He made not only the body of the Firmament, but withal made it
serviceable to the use for which he had appointed it. Thus both in this, and in
the narrations which follow, the Holy Ghost punctually sets before us the
Effect answerable in every particular Circumstance to the Will and Decree of
God by which it was appointed to be so. Whence once for all we may,

1. Observe, God performs all things, and that in every particular
Circumstance, according to that which he has decreed.
Abraham long before, Genesis 15.13. the children of Israel came out of Egypt,
Exodus 12.41. In the same instant that the years foretold by Daniel were
accomplished in the Children of Isreal's captivity, the Decree came out from
Cyrus, for their return, Dan. 9.20, 23. In the place, the dogs shall eat the
flesh of Jezabel by the wall of Jezreel, 1 King. 21.23. which was made good in
every tittle, 2 King. 9.36. Our Savior Christ came at the time, was born of
the Stock, and in the place, and condition foretold by the Prophets; Lived,
Did, Spoke, and Suffered, according to all that had been prophesied of him.
Thus nothing falls to the ground of all that God has spoken, 2 King. 10.10.

Reason 1. T^^ God, that does whatsoever he pleases in heaven and earth, (...)
all deeps, Psalm. 135.6, can as easily do when and where, and how he will, as
what he will.

2. Circumstances, as they grace and commend the actions of men, so they do
Gods also; he makes every thing beautiful in his time, Eccles. 3.11, And
therefore it concerns God, if he will commend his Work, and make it wonderful
and glorious, to Grace it both in the substance, and circumstances of every
action that is done by him.

If we desire to give unto God the due honor of his glorious Works, in which
he makes himself known unto us, let us, 1. Take notice of all the
Circumstances, as well as of the substance of every work of his, there to seek
out his work, Psalm. 111.2.2. Compare them all with his Word, as Jehu did the
Judgments upon Ahabs Family, with Elijahs Prophecy, 2 King. 9.25, 36. and
10.10. 3. In reading Gods Word, let us carefully lay up in our hearts,
whatsoever we find written therein, concerning his Decrees, either of Mercy, or
Judgment, with every Circumstance thereof, that we may know what to expect for
time to come. This will be the means to discover unto us more clearly all the
ways of God, by which our hearts may be quickened to fear, admiration,
thankfulness, and an holy rejoicing in him, and be strengthened to an holy
dependence, and reliance on him. In all which we shall yield unto him the due
honor of his Wisdom, Power, Mercy, Faithfulness, and Truth, which as it is
the end that God aims at in his works, so it should be of our Observation of
them.

God is said not only to make the Firmament, that might divide the waters, in
the former Verse, but in this, the very act of dividing the waters above, from
those below, is ascribed unto him also. So that he both made the means, by
which the work should be done, and yet did the work too. Whence,

2. Observe, Even where God provides the Means, yet it is he that Does, and
Must, perform the Work by them.
we live not by it, but by every word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, Deuteronomy.
8.3. He sends rain upon the earth, yet the fruitfulness of it is by Gods
blessing; it is He, and not the showers, that prepares the corn, and blesses
the springing of it, Psalm. 65.10. Much more in spiritual things; Paul plants,
and Apollo waters, the Ministers that God sends; but they effect nothing of
themselves, it is God alone that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.7.

Reason 1. The very Means themselves have no power in them, to produce any
effect, they have all their force, and efficacy from God, and work in his
might, 2 Cor. 10.4. When Paul labored more abundantly then all the rest, yet
it was not he, but the grace of God with him, as himself acknowledges, 1 Cor.
15.10.

2. It is most fit it should be so, that no Creature might share with him in
his honor: which cannot be reserved entirely unto himself, till it be
acknowledged, that it is done by him, who works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.6. and
in whom all things consist, Col. 1.17.

1. Let God have all the honor and glory for all that is wrought In us, or By
us. Of our Natural, and of our New birth; of the nourishment of our bodies, and
of our souls; of the subduing of our Outward, and of our Inward enemies: Love
the instrument, but honor only the hand that works by it.

2. Let no man be discouraged, when the means are either weak, or none at all.
Seeing the effects of all things are not from them, but from him who can work
without them, what he pleases, and will not fail to work what he has
promised. Only neglect not means, where God offers them, but use them
conscionably, depending not upon them, but upon him that works In and By
them, for the success of all that we take in hand, and still ascribing all
that is effected, to Him Alone.

Now Moses expressly tells us, that God divided, or separated the waters above
the Firmament, from those below, which if we understand of the clouds, and rain
contained in them; We may

3. Observe, The Clouds and Rain are Gods works, and are raised up only by his
Power.
prepares the rain for the earth, and covers the heaven with clouds, Psalm.
147.8. and carries them about by his counsel, Job 37.12. and makes small the
drops of water, Job 36.27. which have no other Father, Job 38.28. neither can
any of the vanities of the Gentiles give them, Jer. 14.22.

Acknowledge both the Rain, and the fruitfulness of the earth, to him only, as
his blessings. 1. By seeking them at his hand, with Elijah, Jam. 5.17. As we
are directed to do, 1 King. 8.35. 2. By returning thanks to him, and holding
our selves engaged by such mercies, to his fear, and service (the neglect
whereof is taxed, Jer. 5.24.) as blessings of inestimable value, the want
whereof; in one year, might ruin the world.

VERSE 8.
ANd God called] What is to be understood by that phrase, see ver. 3.

The Firmament, Heaven]. The Original Shammajim (signifying, as much as there
be waters) is taken in Scripture, 1. For the lower part of the Air, wherein the
birds fly, the clouds are carried, and the winds blow, Genesis 8.2. 2. It is
taken for the place where the Sun, Moon, and Stars are settled, Genesis 1.17. 3.
It signifies the dwelling of the Saints, and blessed Angels, Matthew. 22.2.
called the Third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. If we comprehend All, or only the two
first, under this name, the work is of vaste extent, as we have seen already,
which if we compare with the means by which it was raised, and stretched out,
and fixed in the place which God assigned to it, which was only his Word, We
may

1. Observe, The glorious, and vaste frame of the heavens, was raised up, and
settled, only by the Word of God.
PSalm 33.6, 9. God spoke, and it was done, the Heavens, and all the host of
them by his Word, and by the breath of his mouth, and according to his
Ordinance, they are settled, and continue to this day, Psalm. 119.89, 91. [See
the Second Observation on the Third; and the First on the Sixth verse.]

The Evening and Morning keep their course, as they did the first day, and so
do they all the days ensuing; yea, as we see even to this time, as they shall
do to the worlds end. Whence,

2. Observe, Whatsoever God has once Settled, does, and shall, continue for
ever, in that Order that he has appointed.
laid the foundations of the Earth, that it should not be moved for ever, Psalm.
104.5. bounded the Sea by a perpetual decree, Jer. 5.22. set the Sun and Moon a
constant course, which they still observe, Psalm. 104.19. Yea, appointed earing,
and harvest, Summer, and VVinter, to continue as long as the earth remains,
Genesis 8.22. which continue all of them according to his Ordinance, Psalm. 119.91.

Reason 1. Because the same power that Created them, continues the same for
ever to uphold them, Heb. 1.3, 12. And the same Wisdom orders and directs them
still, which at the first determined and decreed them.

2. Because God, that appointed and made them, is capable, neither of Error,
nor Inconstancy, James 1.17. and therefore there is neither cause for him to
alter his mind, nor any disposition in him, to alter it without cause:
wherefore his counsel must of necessity stand for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart throughout all Generations, Psalm. 33.11.

Let all men then depend upon that, which God has once settled and decreed, as
a foundation that cannot fail: As we do in the course of natural causes, so
much more in the decrees of his Word, which is firmer then heaven and earth,
Matthew. 5.18. Whether it publish unto us the Covenant of Grace, established
with his servants, Jer. 31.35. and 33.20. Isa. 54.10. or the decrees of
vengeance upon the wicked, Exodus 17.24. In both which, Gods honor is most
manifested and advanced, and unto the execution of them both, he is necessarily
and freely, carried on by the righteousness of his unchangeable Nature, for
the manifesting of his Truth, in making good, both his mercies promised, and
his Judgments threatened.

VERSE. 9.
ANd God said] After he had disposed the waters above the Firmament, he now
takes order with those which are here below, gathering them into one place,
within their Channels; for the cause afterward expressed. Some there are that
imagine, the work of gathering the water into their channels, and discovering
the dry land thereby, to be a part of the work of the Second day: As well,
because they conceive it likely, that when God began to dispose of the waters,
he made an end of that whole work at once, and did it not by halves, part on
one day, and part on next: As also because that, unless these two verses be
taken into the history of the second days work; the work of that day wants
Gods Approbation, which we find annexed, to the works of all the other days,
both before and after, And besides, if we make these two verses part of the
description of the third days work, we have a double approbation of the work
of that day, which we find in none of the rest: although there seem to be as
great, or a greater occasion, of doubling that approbation upon the sixth
days work, than there is here. But whether upon these conjectures it be fit to
allow an inversion of the order of the Text; (although upon manifest, and
undeniable reasons, we are enforced to do it in some other places) let the
Reader judge: Few Interpreters follow this opinion.

Let the Waters be gathered] Which before covered the face of the earth, as by
nature they should, seeing the earth being heavier then the waters, must
necessarily sink into them, and so be covered by them. How they were gathered
into one place it is needless to dispute. He that was able to make them, by
his Word, could more easily gather them together, by the same word. Many
conceive this work to be described, Psalm. 104.7.8.

Into one place] Called One place comparatively, because before God thus
gathered the waters into the Sea, they covered every place. Although (if we set
aside the rivers, and lakes, which are scarce worth the naming, in comparison
of the Ocean) the Sea may justly be accounted but one great body, branched out
into diverse limbs: so the place or Channel thereof, may not improperly be said
to be One, although the bounds thereof be extended as far as the world is wide
in compass.

And let the dry land appear] That was indeed the Principal, although not the
sole end of gathering the waters together; without which, the earth could not
be made habitable, either for man, or beast, or yield any fit nourishment or
food, for either the one, or the other.

Thus we see the waters are put from the place which they possessed before, at
the Lords Commandment, for the furthering of the common good; and brought down
into their Channels, the place whereunto God had confined them, there to abide,
and continue, as they do unto this day, according to Gods Decree. Whence,

1. Observe, It is the Will of God that all Creatures shall depart from their
own Private, for a Common good.
Heb. 1.14. No marvail then, if God require his Children, to condescend to
those of the lower sort, Romans 12.16. not seeking their own profit, but the
profit of many, 1 Cor. 20.33. And though they be free, yet becoming servants
unto all, 1 Cor. 19.19. after our Savior Christ's example, Phil. 2.4.

Reason 1. No Creature has any wrong by it, seeing it enjoyes nothing, in its
own right; but has all by Gods free gift, who therefore has just right, to
appoint the employment of that, which himself has freely bestowed.

2. All Creatures were ordained, not for themselves, but for Gods honor, and
for their mutual support, for the preservation of Community. So that in
forgoing their own, for a common good, they are carried on unto their proper
end; for which they were at the first Created.

3. The applying of our selves to further a Common Good, is our greatest
Honor, profit, and safety: and certainly recompensed with a large reward from
God, who fails not to make up our losses, which we freely make for his
service, in furthering the common good, with a larger proportion of gain,
usually at present, but undoubtedly hereafter, according to his own promise,
Matthew. 19.29.

Let no man have respect to his own Right, or Honor, or Profit, in any ease,
wherein God requires any service for himself, or for his Church, after the
example of Jothans Trees, Judge. 9.9.11.13. Which 1. savours strongly of
Self-love, which is always joined with an unloving heart toward others. 2.
Argues great unthankfulness, and disobedience unto God; when a man denies
himself, or his estate, or abilities to him that gave them, and is still Lord
of us, and of whatsoever we have. 3. And discovers a distrustful heart, as
questioning either Gods Will, or Ability, to recompense his service, wherein
we wrong God in an high degree who will be no man's debtor.

It was no sooner spoken, but it was done, and that with speed: when God had
spoken, the waters fled, they hasted away; as the Psalmist represents unto us,
the effect of this Decree of God, Psalm. 104.7. So his Word, that had created
the waters, prevailed upon them, to carry them speedily to their places, and to
settle them there. Whence.

2. Observe, All the Creatures in the World, obey the voice of God.
Psalm. 148.6.8. That prevailed upon the waters, to gather them together, into
their Channels, Psalm. 104.7, 8. and to shut them up there, Job. 37.8. as in
Storehouses, Psalm. 33.7. At it the earth melts, Psalm. 46.6. And the foundation
of it are discovered, Psalm. 18.15. The Sun stays its course, and stands
still, Josh. 10.13. Nay turns back again, 2 King. 20.11. The winds cease and
are still, Matthew. 8.27. Yea the hearts of the most rebellious stoop, and are
calmed, and their rage is pacified, Genesis 31.29.

Reason 1. Why should not that voice command them, which made them, at first;
and limit their motions, which gave them their being.

2. Otherwise it were impossible for God, to do all things, according to the
counsel of his own Heart, and consequently to govern the world in
righteousness, if he had made Creatures which he could not rule.

Let all Creatures then tremble at his Power, whom the very winds and Seas
obey, Matthew. 8.27. Jer. 5.22. Whereof all the Monarchs on the Earth, are not
able to stay one wave or blast. And let all his Saints trust in him, even in
the greatest extremities, with the Church, Psalm. 46.2. That God who can command
the Earth, the Seas, Winds, and Heavens, can still the tumults, and ragings of
the people; nay of the most bloody Tyrants, Psalm. 65.7. and will not fail to do
it, for the good and safety of his Servants.

The end why the waters were thus gathered together, and confined to their
Channels; was especially that the dry land might appear, without which, there
could not have been either food or habitation for men, or beasts, nor place for
any herb, or plant to grow on: which quickly appeared, when God let loose the
waters, and overwhelmed the Earth by them, in the general deluge. So the
appearing of the dry land, and making it habitable, by the gathering together
of the waters, was none of the least of Gods Mercies. Whence,

3. Observe, It is only Gods Powerful restraint of the Seas, and Waters, that
makes the earth habitable for man and Beast.
Noah is a sufficient evidence of this Truth, which is likewise often
manifested by smaller inundations since, which have deprived many people of
their dwellings, and not a few of their lives.

Let all men lay it to heart, and bless the Author of this great Mercy, when
they look upon the firm foundation of their houses, the fruits of their
grounds, the increase of their cattle; when they enjoy the Air to breath in,
the dry ground to walk on, and the seas to trade in; and do their business
there. And let men walk in fear before that Mighty God, who more easily might
let loose the Sea, then keep it in, within those weak bounds that he has set
it, Jer. 5.22. and thereby choke all flesh in an instant.

But it may be questioned, why God did not take away the waters, as well as he
gathered them into their Channels; seeing the Earth had thereby been much
enlarged. And it cannot be doubted but he had so done if he had found it good,
either for his own Honor, or for the benefit of the Creature. Whence,

4. Observe, Even the Huge and vast Seas are the Creatures of God, and ordained
for special use unto Man.
use of man's life it is beneficial, 1. By furnishing them with more plentiful
provision of food, by the infinite store, and variety of fishes that are bred
therein. 2. By affording the means of intercourse, between Nation and Nation,
and thereby, in some measure, uniting the far distant parts of the earth, and
making way for the dispersing of those various commodities, in which some
Countries abound, when others want them; so that by this means, all the fruits,
which the earth produces, are communicated to every part of it.

VERSE 10.
ANd God called the dry Land, Earth] The word Eretz in the Original, (to which
our English, Earth, comes very near; and the Radical letters whereof, both the
Latin, and some other Languages seem to retain) whether it be derived from
Rutz, which signifies to Run; or [Ratsats] which is to wear, or press down
(both which seem to point at either the Firmness of the Earth, which yields
sure footing, to the Creatures that run and tread upon it: Or, at the
Situation of it, which by its own weight is pressed down into the lowest
place, the other Elements of Air and Fire (if there be any such) circuiting and
being carried about it in a perpetual motion) comprehends the whole body of the
dry land: so that it seems to be more general then (Tebel) which signifies only
the habitable earth.

Seas] Or, Waters; called Seas by a kind of Eminency, because all the waters,
to speak of, are contained in the Seas. And God terms them Seas, in the Plural
number, because that collection of waters has many parts, and branches. This
name of Sea, we find also given to Lakes: as the Lake of Genesaret, is also
called the Sea of Galilee, Matthew. 4.18. nay, to Solomon's huge brazen vessel,
which he made for the Priests to wash themselves in, 1 King. 7.23.

This separation of the Waters from the Earth, and the discovery of the dry
land, by gathering them together into one place, God Looks upon and Approves as
good, as he had done the Light before; and does the rest of his works in
particular afterward, and all of them taken together, when he had ended them,
verse. 31. Out of which particular view and approbation of every work apart, we
may

Observe, The goodness of every Creature of God, ought to be considered, and
observed, in Particular.
How manifold are thy Works, O Lord? in wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm.
104.24. Thus God having first given Job a view of the world in general, takes
him (as it were) by the hand, and leads him to the Observation, and
Consideration of diverse Creatures in particular, Job 38. ver. 39, 40, and 41.
Now if the Queen of Sheba were so much astonished, when she beheld, and took a
particular surview of the order of Solomon's house, the meat at his Table,
sitting of his servants, attendance of his Ministers, 1 King. 10.5. what
impression ought the consideration of the infinite multitude, and various kinds
of the Creatures, all supplied out of Gods own store, and directed, and ordered
by his VVisdome, to make upon our hearts?

VERSE 11.
LEt the earth bring forth] He means Presently, as he does in all the rest of
his Commands, in his Chapter, (for God will not endure that the earth should be
barren for a moment) and withal Constantly, not only for the present time, but
for continuance, in all times to come. Now we know the earth yields nothing,
but the Matter of the herbs and plants. The several forms and shapes of them,
especially their life, is from God, who makes the grass to grow upon the
Mountains, Psalm. 104.14.

Grasse] Or, Tender grass; a name which some conceive signifies only such
herbs as grow of themselves, without seed: and then we have here mentioned two
sorts of herbs, some that spring up of themselves, and others that grow of seed
which is sown.

Herb yielding seed] By which, when it decays it self, yet the Kind of it
might be renewed and continued, those are herbs that spring not of themselves,
but grow only out of seed; otherwise there is neither herb, nor plant, but
either bears some seed, or has at least a propagative root, which is instead
of seed by which it is or may be increased and multiplied in the kind thereof,
as experience shows.

And fruit Trees] And all trees have some fruit, or something answerable to it,
by which they propagate themselves; as appears in those that seem least
fruitful, as Elms, Populars, and the like. Some think that poisonous herbs, and
briars, and thorns, were not within the compass of this Decree, but were the
effects of Gods curse on the earth, for man's sin, Genesis 3.18. Although others,
more probably, conceive, that even all these were created at the first, and
became hurtful only by the curse of God upon man for sin; as it happened in
beasts, which were all made in the beginning, but for man's sin, of useful and
profitable servants, diverse of them were made untractable and dangerous enemies.

After his kind] That is, according to the nature of the plant on which it
grows. A matter worth our admiration, that Trees and Herbs should produce (as
we see they do) every one of them their proper seed, nothing like unto the
plant it self, on which it grows, and yet infallibly, out of it self produces
such another body, of an herb, or plant, as it self grew upon.

Whose seed is in it self] Not received from another, as it is usual in
Animals, which are propagated by the mixture of sexes, whereof one receives
seed from the other, as we see by experience.

And it was so] Not only at present (for the earth was presently clothed with
all variety of herbs, and plants) but continues so, until this day, according
to the same Ordinance and Decree of God, and shall do to the worlds end.

VERSE 12.
ANd the Earth brought forth] Every particular, in the Event, answers the
Decree in every point; wherein the admirable and unchangeable order that God
has set in nature, offers it self to our consideration. First, that all herbs
and plants, having the matter of their nourishment, and being produced by the
same Earth, and cherished by the influence of the same Heavens, yet grow up
into several forms, having their natures and kinds, still distinct one from
another, every several kind answerable to it self in every one of the
individuals. Secondly, all of them grow to perfection, and continue the way of
their propagation in the same uniform course, first the blade, then the ear,
and at last the full and ripe corn in the ear, Mark 4.28. The seed falls into
the ground, and shoots up into a tender grass; that grows into a stronger
stem, and sends forth in some a flower, in others another form; under the
flower comes and ripens the seed again, the same in form and nature with that
from which it sprung at first. That this distinction between the several kinds
of creatures, all produced by the same common causes, and the Identity of every
kind, and agreablenesse thereto of every individual in that kind, through so
many variations into several shapes and forms, till it come to perfection,
should be constantly and unchangeably preserved, can come to pass by no other
means; but by the unchangeble law which God has set in nature, by which he
gives to every seed his own body as it pleases him, 1 Cor. 15.38. And to every
plant and herb his own seed, so that men gather not grapes of thorns, nor figgs
of thistles, as our Savior speaks, Luke 6.44.

In the order of this decree, for the production of herbs, and plants, it is
observable, that all these are Created before the Sun, or any other of those
Celestial bodies, by the influence whereof they are now cherished; without
which either they spring not at all, or at least come to no perfection, that we
may know them to be the effects of Gods Power, and not of any natural cause:
and were produced before the beasts, or Man, that were to be sustained by them,
to manifest Gods Providence; who fails not to make provision for all his
Creatures, which he foresees, and takes care to supply even before they need;
nay before they have any being at all.

Upon this ground, that herbs, and plants, were produced in their full
ripeness, some conclude that the world was created in the Autumn, when all
things in the course of nature, come to their full growth and ripeness. An
argument that might be easily answered, since God must be acknowledged, in
their first Creation, to do all things Miraculously: and therefore did not bind
himself to observe the course of nature at all, in that work (as appears in the
Creation of the man and woman, not Infants, but of full growth; in the first
moment of their Creation) and to regard as little, the time of ripening herbs,
and plants, as he did the causes that should produce them. In the time of
producing those herbs, and plants, that as soon as the Earth was dried, that
is, was fit to receive them; he stored it with such great variety, of so many
useful Creatures, and gave it that fruitfulness to produce them, for time to
come; We may,

1. Observe. God will have nothing barrain and unprofitable.
Heb. 6.7. Not the herbs, or plants: which all of them yield their seed and
fruits; Not the beasts, Fishes or Fowls, which are fruitful in propagation,
useful by their labors, and serviceable for food, and clothing: Not the
clouds which empty themselves upon the Earth, Eccl. 11.3. Not the Sun, Moon,
and other Celestial bodies, which by their light, and influence, cherish all
things here below.

Reason 1. It is the end for which all things were made, that they might
support one another, by their fruitfulness, and service.

2. God thereby testifies his overflowing bounty, and goodness, by the
fruitfulness and usefulness of all the works of his hands.

Let not men then for shame, be barrain, either in any duties of obedience unto
God, or services of love to men; but be fruitful both ways, nay filled with
fruits, Phil. 1.11. Always bringing them forth in their season, and abounding
more therein even to their old age, Psalm. 92.14. and increasing therein, Rev.
2.19. As being, 1. ordained by God more especially thereunto, Joh. 15.16. 2.
Having all needful helps to that end, not only outward, as the word and
Sacraments falling on us, like the first and latter rain, Hebr. 6.7. To which
the word is resembled, Isa. 55.10, 11. Or generally by the influence of Gods
fructifying Power, by which he blesses the springing of all things, Psalm.
65.10, 11. But particularly, and inwardly the assistance of his Holy Spirits
which is able to work in us both to will, and to do. 3. Having our fruits
ordained to a more excellent end, both Gods Glory, Joh. 15.8. and the
furthering of our own account, Phil. 4.17. Wherefore we are justly threatened
with the greater plague if we remain barrain and unfruitful, Matthew. 3.10. Heb.
6.8. The means to be used to make us fruitful, are 1. to be engraffed into
Christ, Joh. 15, 2.2. To live under the continual dropping of the clouds, that
is the Ministry of the Word. 3. To be often purging and cleansing of our
hearts, whence are the issues of life, Pro. 4.23. and all our actions, whether
good or evil, Mark. 7.21, 22.

The Order observed by God, in producing the herbs and plants, ministers unto
us matter worthy our meditation. 1. That they were created before the causes,
by which they are now, according to the course of nature, ordinarily produced:
which make manifest the Power of God, that can effect what he will without
means, Numb. 11 23. [See the observation before upon verse 3.] 2. That God made
provision, for the sustaining of Man, and Beasts before he created them;
wherein he discourse his provident care of his Creatures, in providing for them
before hand. But the Observation to be drawn from thence we shall defer till we
come to verse 26.] In describing the Creation of the herbs and plants, Moses
lays before us first the Author by whom; and then the time When, they were
produced out of the Earth by his Command: he bad the earth bring forth, and it
did so. Whence,

2. Observe, Even the Herbs, and Plants of the Earth, are Gods Creatures.
PSalm. 104.14.16. Not only Jonahs Gourd, which was prepared by God
extraordinarily, but even the Corn which the Earth produces by humane Culture,
God is said to prepare, Psalm. 65.9. To which, as unto all the rest, he gives a
body as it pleases him: yea, and clothing too, unto the very grass of the
field, Matthew. 6.29.30.

Let us then take notice of Gods Work, in all the fruits of the Earth,
observing in them 1. the infinite variety of them, according to their several
kinds. 2. Their beautiful shape and proportions, exquisite tastes, and
delightfulness of many of them. 3. The strange variety of several forms,
through which they pass, before they come to their full perfection, from small
seeds to tender herbs: from thence to stronger stemms, divided many times into
several branches, Covered with leaves, and after that garnished with flowers:
and lastly yielding such seeds as themselves sprang from at the first. 4. Take
notice of their life, by which they grow and increase, which all the Potentates
in the World cannot give, nor any Art of man imitate, Let all these
considerations, strike into all men's hearts an awful apprehension, and
admiration of Gods wonderful Wisdom, and Power, that our mouths may be filled
with his praise. And let it bring us all, to an acknowledgment of Gods infinite
Mercy, and Justice, in bestowing, or taking away those useful Creatures;
without which we cannot subsist, that we may receive them as a gift from Gods
Hand, with all thankfulness; and use them with all moderation, and sobriety,
unto the Glory of his Name, who both made them, and bestowed them upon us.

These plants and herbs God commands to spring out of the Earth, which yields
them the substance of that Body, which they have, and nourishment by which they
are maintained: Whence,

3. Observe, The substance of all Trees and Plants is from the Earth
David, Psalm. 14.104. and our Savior himself tells us that the earth brings
forth fruit out of her self, Mark. 4.28.

Let us then behold, and admire the wonderful power of that God, who out of
the same mass of the Earth, is able to produce such infinite variety of
Creatures, so far different one from another, in Shape, Nature, and Use; so
many comely proportions, out of such a rude lump, so many various Smells, and
Tastes, out of that which of it self has neither Taste, nor Sent at all: Nay,
life it self, out of that which is wholly without life; as the Earth is, which
notwithstanding yields such variety of sundry sorts of living Herbs, and
Plants, which may occasion us farther to

4. Observe, God can, and usually does, draw Life out of Death it self.
Ezekiel. 37.10. This he does in the whole course of nature: All seeds dye before
they be quickened, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15.36. Yea, our own bodies
are nourished by dead food, and receive Life and strength thereby.

Reason 1. God can do it, who is the Life, and has Life both In and Of
Himself, Joh. 5.26. and therefore can quicken the dead, verse. 21.

2. And it is fit he should do it for his own honor, that he may be the more
wonderful, and admired of all men in all his ways and works.

Let it strengthen our faith, when in our own judgment we seem to be in a dead
condition, as feeling in our selves, no power of Grace, no Life: the Spirit of
God that quickened us when we were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. both
can and will certainly recover us out of that seeming deadness of our hearts:
that sickness is but like unto Lazarus his short death, only for Gods further
glory, Ioh. 11.4. And let it encourage us to expect the resurrection of our
bodies, with holy Job, Chap. 19.26. by the power of him that quickens the
dead, Romans 4.17. whereof the ordinary course of natural effects, give evident
testimony, as the Apostle proves at large, 1 Cor. 15.

We see besides, that God takes further order, that these herbs and plants
should every one of them have seed in it self, by which, though they perish
daily, yet the Kinds of every one of them might be preserved, lest the
Creatures should in time be utterly destroyed: Whence,

5. Observe, God provides for all his Creatures, that though they decay daily,
yet they shall not wholly perish.
yet he has ordained that by propagation they should be renewed in their
kinds, Psalm. 104.30.

This continual decay and change, God has in his Wisdom decreed,

1. To show his own unchangeable continuance by the mutability of the Creature,
Heb. 1.11, 12.

2. To quicken us to a longing desire after heaven where all things are durable
and constant; whereas here below they are subject to change every moment. He
has likewise decreed the renewing of the face of the Earth: Partly to show
himself a faithful Creator: And partly, to preserve his own works to be
monuments of his Goodness, Wisdom, and Power.

Let Gods example teach us, to extend our care, to make provision for
Posterity, not only in our own Children, in whom every man desires to continue
his name; and in furnishing our own store with continual supplies, (although
God is pleased to make use of such private respects, for the preservation of
Community) but in General, to provide for posterity, that is to come after:
that we may leave all things, and deliver them over, into the hand of
succeeding ages, in as good estate as we found them; since we cannot but
acknowledge, that God has, as it were, put his stock into our hands, not to
waste and consume it, but to manage it discreetly, for our own use, and
necessary preservation, and to deliver it over to our Successors, for the same
end.

God, we see, not only provides for the perpetuation of the Creature, by
successive Propagation; but besides, that the nature of every Creature might
continue the same, without change, takes order, that the Seed of every plant
may be according to the kind of the plant that yields it. Whence,

6. Observe, Fruits ought to do, and certainly Will, resemble the Nature of the
Stock of which they come.
Matthew. 12.33. so that men gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles,
Matthew. 7.16. And this seems to be thus ordered by the Wisdom of God; 1. For our
sakes, that we might more fully, and perfectly know the kinds and natures of
things, which are manifested by the fruits which they produce: And, 2. for the
manifesting of his Truth, who desires that every thing should appear as it is,
seeing He himself is as He appears.

1. Let good men then endeavor to show forth the renewing of their nature, by
the works of the Spirit, and not of the flesh, that men may know and approve of
them by their fruits, and for them glorific God, Matthew. 5.16. lest they
otherwise dishonor God, scandalize Religion, and corrupt others by their ill
examples, which men readily take up, when they have the countenance of any
godly man's failing, to cloak the evils of their ways.

2. Let all men abhor all hypocrisy, 1. As being in it self unnatural. 2.
Extremely dishonorable both to God and to Religion. 3. Dangerous to others,
when they are graves that appear not, Luke 11.44. 4. Damnable to our selves,
seeing we cannot be hid from him that sees in secret, and knows our thoughts
afar off, Psalm. 139.2. or left unpunished by him, who being a God of Truth,
must necessarily pour out his wrath upon all false dissemblers.

VERSE. 14.
LEt there be Lights in the Firmament] They that conceive, that the Sun, Moon,
and Stars were made the First day, because otherwise there could have been no
distinction of Day and Night, as we see there was; and thereupon conceive, that
in these verses, there is related only the fixing of them to their places, it
seems never well considered the letter of the Text. For Moses does not say
here, Let the Lights be in the Firmament, as pointing at the disposing of that
which was before; but, Let Lights be, as Creating now that which was not at
all. Again, there is something more considerable in this expression, which
differs from the decree of Creating herbs and plants. There God says, Let the
Earth bring forth, which words import a fructifying power given to the Earth,
to bring them forth both at present, and for continuance. Here he says only,
Let there be Lights; not, Let the heaven bring forth Lights, seeing there
needed no new generation of Lights, which are not subject to Corruption.

Lights] The word must be taken in an Active signifi^ation, implying, that they
were not only to have, but to g^^ Light. It must be chiefly understood of the
Sun, which has Light in it self, and diffuseth unto the Moon and Stars the
most part of that Light which they have and conveigh unto the earth.

In the Firmament] The place where these Lights were fixed; whether it be the
Air, or in some higher and purer Celestial bodies, that carry them about the
world, let Philosophers determine; only we see that God has placed them far
above us, as Ornaments of his Throne, as well to show forth his Majesty, as
withal that they might the more conveniently cast their Light, and Influence,
over all parts of the world. It may be besides, to manifest that light comes
only from heaven, and from the Father of Lights, without whom the world must
needs abide in darkness. Besides all this, the heavens are most agreeable to
the nature of these Lights. And lastly, by their moving about the world at so
great a distance, they help to discover the vaste Circuit of the Heavens, which
could by no other means be found out.

To divide the day] To limit or set out the bounds of the Civil day, which is
the space of the motion of the Sun above our Horison, during which time the
Light which the Sun casts upon the Earth contin^es with us, as by the absence
thereof the Light ceasing, when the Sun being under our Horison, the darkness
of the night succeeds, and so Day and Night are divided or distiuguished one
from the other, by the motion of the Sun, although it be here attributed to the
light Indefinitely. Now God had before, divided the Day and the Night, but that
was done by an extraordinary means; which hence forward is ordained to be done
by the constant and regular motion of the Sun. So that we have here no new
division of the Night, and Day, but only the giving and ordaining of a new
rule, and means of settling what God had ordained before.

For signs] Of natural effects which they produce, as of Rain, Cold, Heat,
Winds, and the like. Nay, perhaps of some remarkable mutations in humane
affairs, which God foreseeing, and foreordaining in the Course of his
Providence, may give intimation thereof by Eclipses, and unusual conjunctions
of Celestial bodies, appointed by the same providence, to fall out in an
Ordinary course of their Natural motions, but yet at such time as they may
concur with such events, though they be not caused by them. As we use to set
our Alarmes to go at such a set hour, (although the wheels that move them, be
regulated by the poises, that keep them going) that thereby we may be put in
mind of some set time when we would have business undertaken or dispatched.

Seasons] The word is usually taken for opportunities of doing things, and
signifies here the different estate, and disposition of the times of the year,
which offer men opportunities of Planting, Ploughing, Sowing, Reaping, and the
like, which we know long before, by observing the motion of these Lights.

And for dayes] That is, for computing and accounting times by days, months,
and years, which all Nations from the beginning of the World, have, and do
calculate, according to the Revolutions of the motions of the Sun, and Moon,
and Stars.

In this description of the Creation of these heavenly Lights, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, Moses sets before us,

1. The Decree; 1. What should be made. 2. Where they should be placed, In the
Firmament of Heaven, 3. To what Uses they were to serve. 1. To stint men's
labors by distinguishing the day serving for labor, from the night, wherein
thye are to rest. 2. For the directing of men's employments, by pointing out fit
seasons for them. 3. To rectify men's accounts, of the times of things past,
and to come. 4. To further men's labors, by giving Light to direct them in all
their works, and Influence to prosper many of them.



2. The Execution of the the Decree is, 1. pointed at in general, ver. 15.2.
described more particularly, ver. 16, 17, 18.

Thus we see whence those glorious Creatures, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which
men (and that worthily) behold with so much Delight, and Admiration, had their
first beginning, they were neither Eternal, nor, of themselves; we see here,
When, and by Whose Power they were Created. Whence we may,

1. Observe, The Sun, Moon, and Stars, and no gods, but Gods Creatures.
Psalm. 33.6. Those great lights, Psalm. 136.8, 9. and Jer. 31.35. so that they
are truly the work of his fingers, Psalm. 8.3. and are still his servants, Psalm.
119.91. observing the order that he has set them, Psalm. 104.19.

1. Honor them not as gods, as some have done, and that not only the Heathen,
but even amongst Gods own people, both Princes, as wicked Manasseh, 2 Chronicles.
33.3. and the whole body of the State, Jer. 44. that it is no marvail though
God so precisely forbid it, to his own people, Deuteronomy. 4.19. An evil, that men
are so prone unto by nature, that though they fall not into that gross evil of
adoring them, yet by depending more upon their Influence, then upon Gods
providence, they ascribe that unto them, that is peculiar to God alone.

2. Honor God in and by them, with David, Psalm. 8.1. standing amazed at his
glory, who inhabiteth the light which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.16.
seeing we are not able to behold the brightness of the Sun, which is but a
shadow of it, without the dazzeling of our eyes; no marvel then, if the Angels
themselves, that stand in his presence, cover their faces, as being not able to
behold his glory, Isa. 6.2. To this if we add Gods wonderful Power, by which
he guides them in their courses, stays them, or brings them back at his
pleasure, Josh. 10.13. 2 King. 20.11. and by their Influence makes them
serviceable, to cherish and bring forwards the fruits of the Earth, it cannot
but fill our hearts with the admiration of his greatness, and glory, and fill
our mouths with his praises, that has prepared such glorious Creatures to do
us service.

Before the Creation of the Sun, the Light was in the World, and appeared in
the day time, although we know not in what body it was carried; but, now the
Sun was made for that service, God has planted it in the body thereof, and
by it conveighs it unto, and carries it round about the world. Whence,

2. Observe, When God has prepared and affords means, he does ordinarily
perform and conveigh all things by Means.
THus he brings forth Herbs and Plants, by the seed of them makes the ground
fruitful, but by man's labor, Prove. 12.11. though he can do it, as well
without it, as he did in the Land of Israel, in the seventh year: And
strengthens man's heart, by his food, though man lives not by bread, but by
every word that proceeds out of Gods Mouth, Deuteronomy. 8.3. As appeared in the
examples of Moses, Elijah, and Christ. And this he does 1. To humble us, by
making us to stoop to the means, whereas in the state of Glory, he shall convey
all unto us, without means. 2. To manifest his Wisdom in making the means,
though weak in themselves, useful, and effectual. 3. To unite the Creatures in
love one to another, and to move us to take care of them, when we find them so
useful by daily experience.

Let all men then make use of such means, as God offers unto them, but yet in
a right way; 1. In obedience to the Will of God, and in submission to his
Ordinance. 2. As depending still upon God, for the issue and success, making
use of them only as instruments in his hand, who works In, and By them,
according to his good pleasure, still praying for and expecting success, in
the use of them, by his blessing only, 3. Ascribing the success, and effects
by means, unto him alone with thankfulness; who has given, both the means
themselves, and that efficacy unto, hem by which they work for our good.

The place, which is assigned to these Lights, is the Firmament of Heaven. So
that God, not only gives them their Nature, but withal assigns unto them
their place, where they shall be: and besides, limits them their use, they must
be What, Where, and for What service he appoints them. Whence,

3. Observe, The Places, and Uses of all Creatures, as well as their Being, are
assigned unto them by God himself.
Job. 38.4.6: The Sea kept, and penned up within the Channels, which God
prepared for it, Jer. 5.22. Psalm. 104. The Air above them both, and the
Heavens higher then all, The Stars and Planets placed in the Firmament, the
Birds and Beasts upon the Earth, The Fishes in the Sea, and all by Gods
appointment. Who as he has disposed them in their places: so he has
appointed, and limited them their uses: Giving the Stars for Light and
influence, the Air for Breath, the Earth for habitation, the Seas for
Navigation, the herbs and plants for food and medicine, Beasts and fowls for
Labor, Nourishment, and clothing: and amongst them the Horse for the saddle,
the Ox for the plough, the Ass for burdens, and the like in many others. And
amongst men some for one kind of employment, and others for another.

Reason 1. That he might manifest, both his Sovereignty, and Wisdom in
ordering and disposing, as he did his Power in creating all things.

2. That he might establish a settled order amongst the Creatures, which without
it, must necessarily be in confusion; and which without assignment of them to
their stations and employments, by God himself, were impossible to be preserved.

Let the disposition of all Creatures, by the Will and Decree of God, direct us
both in the disposing of our dwellings, and making use of any Creature for our
service. Let it be our care to abide in the places, and exercise our selves in
the employments unto which God in his Providence has assigned us. He set the
bounds of the people, Deuteronomy. 32.8. And called them to their employments as
Moses, and Aaron, Bezaleel, Aholiab, David, and others, either by his own
immediate call, as Moses, Amos, Chap. 7.14. Or by the Ministry of men,
furnishing them diversely, with proportionable abilities, to their implyoments,
1 Cor. 12.8. Let man abide then in the same calling, wherein he was called, 1
Cor. 7.20. 1. To testify his obedience to the Will of God. 2. At that which
God in his Wisdom knows to be every way best, both for himself and others. 3.
As being assured, that in the way that God has set him, his prospering hand
will not fail to be with him, both to assist, and give effect to his
endeavors, and to protect him in his way, and to reward his Obedience. Besides
it may direct us in the use of the Creature, to apply them to those ends, for
which they were ordained; abhorring the vanity, and folly of those, that turn
the Natural use of them, unto that which is against Nature, Romans 1.26.

Now when we consider the uses and services unto which these Creatures are
designed by God and reflect upon their places, and great glory wherewith God
has clothed them. We may.

4. Observe, All sorts of Creatures, though never so high, and glorious, are
ordained by God for Use, and Service.
Deuteronomy. 4, 19. But even the glorious Angels themselves, who though they excel
in strength; yet do his Commandments, Psalm. 103.20. in the service of the
Elect, as he has appointed, Heb. 11.14. This order the Lord has established
to continue amongst all his Creatures, to the worlds end: when God shall be all
in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. and then, and not before, the service of the Creature
shall cease, Rev. 22.23.

Let all men of what rank, or condition soever they be, apply themselves to be
serviceable in one employment or other, for the good of others, Gal. 5.13.
Stooping even to those of the lower sort, Romans 12.16. As being by God ordained
thereunto. Mark. 10.44.2. And most honored thereby; seeing the perfection of
every creature in this present world, is, the Use of it for service. 3. And
bound thereunto by that love, which we are bound to owe unto all men. 4, And
knowing that, for such services, we have an assured reward laid up for us in
heaven, Ephesians. 6.8. And lastly having Christ himself for our Precedent, who came
not to be served, but to serve, Matthew. 20.28. though he were Lord of all, Phil.
2.6.7.

The first use of those lights, was to distinguish the day, from the night: and
to set the limits unto them both, which is indeed performed by the Sun, as we
know. Whence,

5. Observe. Distinction between the day, and night, though it proceed from a
cause in Nature; yet is an Ordinance established by God.
Psalm. 104.20. So that both day and night are his, Psalm. 74.16. who has
appointed unto them their periods, and natural succession. And that to set
bounds unto men's labor, which would if they were continued without
intermission, soon waste men's bodies and spirits. 2. In diverse parts of the
Earth to temperate the Air, which is inflamed there, by the extreme heat of
the Sun. 3. To make way for the falling of those sweet and comfortable dewes,
by which the Earth; especially in those hot countries, is much refreshed. 4.
And to manifest by experience, the comfortablenesse of the Light, by
interrupting and cutting it off daily by the darkness of the night; and so
discovering the comfortablenesse of the presence of that glorious Creature, by
the terrors occasioned by the absence thereof.

Let no man in Use confound those things, which God has severed in nature, by
turning day into night, and night into day, shutting, and closing their eyes
against the Light of the day, by unseasonable sleeping, and opening them to the
darkness of the night: using the day for their rest, and the night for their
sports and pastimes, surfeiting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness: a
Custom, though sometimes countenanced by great examples; yet in true estimation
preposterous, and every way unprofitable; and commonly by experience found to
be as much prejudicial to health, as it is undoubtedly cross to Nature.

The next use of these Lights is to be for signs, or Indications of events,
which are to follow, as natural causes, are Prognostickes oftentimes, of their
effects to ensue; now seeing God has among therest, appointed them for this
end, we by warrant may,

6. Observe. It is not unlawful by the Stars, and Planets, to guess at some
events that are to follow.
Genesis 8.22. And which we constantly, and upon good ground expect, according to
the Revolutions of those heavenly bodies: or probably only, as Heat, Cold,
Rain, Drout, whereof there may be some slight guesses by the conjunction of
those Celestial bodies, but more probable conjectures, when the effects
themselves begin to appear, as rain in the sky, which is lowering red; which
our Savior himself allows to be a sign of Rain, presently to follow, Math,
16.3. Only we must take heed, that we ground no more but conjecture, upon such
signs as these. Nay beyond all this (as we have already intimated) although
these general Causes, work very uncertainly upon things here below; yet the
conjunctions of the Planets, especially in Eclipses, though they point not out
the particular events to follow, in the Persons, Places, Times, Measure and
Manner thereof, yet they may not unprofitably stir us up to the expectation of
some observable events to ensue, which experience shows us to fall out
accordingly sometimes.

Let no man, upon this ground, undertake by the observation of those Celestial
bodies, to guess at the knowledge of such future events, as they were never
appointed for, neither in their own Nature can foreshew; as, the disposition of
men's minds, success of their affairs; Length of their lives, kinds of their
death, Mutations and Periods of Kingdoms and Cities, and the like Curiosities,
which are condemned by God, Isa. 47.13. and unprofitable to men to busy their
heads about; seeing Constellations have their operations in such events only as
general causes, which effect nothing farther then they are seconded by the more
immediate working of particular causes. 2. The nature of many of them, is
rather guessed at, than distinctly known; and consequently, our guess at their
operations must needs be very uncertain. 3. If their Nature could be fully
known, yet the Impediments of their Operations: partly, by the frequent failing
of Particular and Immediate causes; and partly, by the different disposition of
the Subjects on which they work, are so many, that the effect has an exceeding
uncertain dependence on them, which the frequent failings of the predictions
grounded thereupon, does evidently discover

A Third Use of these Lights, and Celestial bodies, is for the determining of
Seasons, by which the labors of men, and their affairs are directed. Thus we
see what a stroke God has, by the Influence of these heavenly bodies, on
things below, in all the affairs of men. Whence,

7. Observe, All, especially the chief of the affairs of men, are ordered and
directed by God himself from heaven.
FAring and Harvest have their dependence on the Spring, Summer, and Autumn
included under the names of Summer and Wanter, Genesis 8.22. all of them appointed
by God, in their seasons, by the Motions of the Celestial bodies. The light of
the day sets men on work, Psalm. 104.23. then comes the Night, when no man can
work, Joh. 9.4. Fair weather invites men to labor abroad; the Snow and Rain
seal up their hands, Job 37.7. and confine them to their houses. Nay, much more
is the success, and prospering of all men's labors from heaven. From thence
they are prospered, Deuteronomy. 28.12. Mal. 3.10. or blasted, Deuteronomy. 28.23, 24. Hag.
1.10. So that Good, and Evil are dispensed, as it were out of his storehouse,
that men may know his work, Job 37.7.

Let all men then have their dependence upon God, who only Rules and
disposes of the Heavens, Stars, yea, of the Clouds, that let down the rain on
the Earth, which are turned about by his counsel, to do whatsoever he commands,
whether in Mercy, or Judgment, Job 37.12, 13. He must hear the Heavens, and the
Heavens the Earth, and the Earth the Corn and Wine, Hos. 2.22. Let us then pray
to him, 1 King. 8.35. as Elijah did, 1 King. 18.42. Fear him. Jer. 5.22. and
behold his Metcy, or Judgment, in all these dispensations, Job 37.13. that our
hearts may be sometimes quickened to thankfulness, and at other times be
humbled before him.

The last Use of the Lights, is for days, and years, that is, for Computation
of Times; without which, neither could we well, either give directions for
things to come, nor take account of things past, without such a means of
computing Times, which must needs cause great Confusion in all men's affairs.
So that amongst diverse blessings which we enjoy from God; this rule for the
computation of Times, is not to be accounted the least.

VERSE 15.
TO give light] And not only to have it in themselves. Now under this name of
Light is included that secret and effectual Influence, which those Celestial
bodies cast out with their Light, upon things here below, to make all things
fruitful, and to cherish the Creatures.

Upon the Earth] Which has neither light, nor life in it self, but that which
it borrowes from above. It is not amongst the least of Gods Wonders, that these
Celestial bodies should cast out their light and influence at such an
incredible distance, as we shall see anon. Now this Light and Influence, which
they convey unto the Earth; although it be especially serviceable to men, yet
we find by experience to be a singular benefit to the rest of the Creatures, or
at least to the most of them. We cannot but take notice, that this Light which
God has now planted in the Sun, was notwithstanding Created before it, that it
might be the more evident, that it is not so much a quality, flowing from the
Nature of the Creature, as planted in it by the Creator, who could as well have
continued it without the Sun, as he Created it before the Sun. Whence,

1. Observe, The Excellencies of the Creatures, are not of themselves; but are
bestowed on them by Him that made them.
Matthew. 6.30. the feathers of the Ostritch, and Peacock, Job 39.13. Strength
and Courage of the Horse, verse 21, 22. and diverse others: Much more the wisdom
of men, which God has put into the inward parts, Job 38.36. Most of all their
spiritual gifts, Romans 12.8. 1 Cor. 12.8, 11. So that all Creatures are comely,
or graceful, by his beauty, as himself speaks of the Church, Ezekiel. 16.14.

Reason 1. Because, Excellencies and Perfections are Originally in God; and
therefore, wheresoever else they be found, they must come by dispensation from
him, according to his Will.

2. That the honor of all might return to him alone, who bestows all, by
which any Creature excels, according to his own good pleasure.

Let all men then acknowledge all their abilities to that God that gives them:
1. Seeking all at his hand, who bestows freely, Jam. 1.5. 2. Enjoying them
without Pride, or lifting up our selves above others, always remembering, that
we have nothing, but what we have received, 1 Cor. 4.7. 3. Giving thanks
always unto Him for his free mercy, in bestowing that on us, according to his
good pleasure, which he has withheld from others, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Job 35.10, 11.
4. And using whatsoever we have received, to his glory, as being his own, 1
Cor. 6.20. and bestowed on us, that he might be honored by them, lest he take
away that which we abuse, Matthew. 13.12. As he did Nebuchadnezzar's
understanding, when he was lifted up in the pride of his heart, Dan. 4.31, 33.

What it was that carried the Light about the World before the Sun was made, is
uncertain; only this is evident, that when God had created the body of the Sun,
and made it fit for that use, he planted the Light therein; and then that other
means ceased, whatsoever it was: So that we may,

2. Observe, Wheresoever God provides Ordinary Means, there he usually takes
awry those which are Extraordinary.
Canaan, then the Mannah from heaven ceased, Josh. 5.12. And when once they had
a King, then God forbear to raise them up extraordinary Judges, as he had done
before, Judge. 2.16. The widow of Zarephath's meal and oil, shall multiply and
last no longer, than till God send rain on the earth, 1 King. 17.14. And
Apostles, Miracles, and the gift of Tongues, and Prophesying, are now taken
away since the Government and Ministry of the Church is settled in an ordinary
course.

Reason 1. Because God makes nothing in vain, and consequently must needs take
away that whereof there is no farther use.

2. Lest otherwise Ordinary means should be despised, if those which were
extraordinary should still continue.

Let no man expect, or depend upon Extraordinary Means, when God supplies us
with those that are Ordinary. If we have Moses and the Prophets, let us not
look for a Messenger from the dead, Luke 16.29. Look not for Grace by a
Miraculous Influence of the Spirit from heaven, when God offers us a supply of
it by the Ministry of the Word, in an Ordinary way. No man expects to be
supported forty days without food, when he has in his house sufficient
provision of food to sustain him, Seeing it is neither Means Ordinary, nor
Extraordinary, that produce the effect, but God alone that works by and in
them, or without them at his pleasure, doing All in All, 1 Cor. 3.7. Who by
providing us Ordinary Means, not only directs us to the use of them; but
besides, to expect his blessing on them, as being his own Ordinances, which he
never gives us in vain.

Now though the Sun be wonderfully adorned, and made glorious, by the Light
that is planted in it, above all other Creatures, that are visible; yet we see
here, that it has this light given it by God, not for it self, but for the
use, and service of the world below, and of the Creatures therein. Whence,

3. Observe, The Light, which God bestows upon the Creature, he gives for the
use of Others, as well as for those that Receive it.
Aholiah, and Bezaleel, but it was to enable them to perform the work about
building the Tabernacle; a Spirit of Government to the Seventy Elders, to rule
the people, Numb. 11.17. and to Solomon, to judge the people at all times, as
he desired it for that end, 1 King. 3.9. And for the same end he bestows all
graces upon men, 1 Cor. 12.9. and abilities upon other Creatures; Fruitfulness
on the ground, to furnish men, and beasts with food; healing properties on
herbs and plants, and the like.

Reason 1. That no man might esteem that to be his own, wherein other men have
an interest as well as himself.

2. That the benefit of any good, might be doubled to the owner, who by
employing it to the good of others, shall find the benefit received by them put
to his account hereafter, and considered in his reward.

Let every man improve that Talent, which he has received, for the good of
those for whom he has received it: Abilities of body, to labor for the good
of others, as well as for his own, Ephesians. 4.28. Wealth to relieve other men's
necessities, 2 Cor. 8.13, 14. Knowledge, to instruct and build them up, Col.
3.16. Duties of holiness, to provoke others to imitation, by our example, 1
Pet. 3.1, 2. And all Graces, to Admonish, Exhort, Reprove, and Comfort, Luke
22.32. 2 Cor. 1.4. Heb. 1.13. As, 1. Being members one of another, by
consequence every member of the body, may justly challenge an interest in
whatsoever any part enjoyes. 2. Whatsoever we receive, is given to that end,
that thereby we might be useful and serviceable one to another: of our
faithfulness or failing wherein, we must at the last come to account before
him, that bestowed what we have 3. Our faithful employing what we have
received, for that end, invites God to trust us with more. See Matthew. 13.12.
and 25.29.

It has been noted, that it was not the least of Gods Wonders, that these
Planets cast their influence upon the Earth, at the distance of so many
millions of miles, so that the wide space between heaven and earth, hinders
neither their light nor influence, upon the Creatures of this lower world.
Whence,

4. Observe, No distance can hinder us of the fruits, and effects of Gods Care,
and Providence over us for our good.
Psalm. 11.4. and he looks on things below, Psalm. 113.5, 6. And that not with a
regardlesse eye, but he takes care for them, 1 Pet, 5: 7. Even for bruit
beasts; 1 Cor. 9.9. and supplies the wants, and satisfies the desire of every
living thing, Psalm. 145.16. which he can the more easily do, because there is
no distance between God, and the Creature, Act. 17.27, who fills heaven and
earth, Ier. 23: 24. Psalm. 139:8.10. though we discern him not, Ioh. 23.8.9. The
distance is between us and the Creature, whose power and Virtue God can yet
easily conveigh unto us, seeing they work in his might, who is present with us
every where, and at all times.

Let no man's heart fail him, because God seems to us sometimes to be far off,
so that some are ready to complain, that he has forsaken the Earth, Ezech.
8.12. Yea even the godly sometimes complain, that he is far off, Psalm. 22. But
that is their folly; Abraham indeed may be ignorant of his posterity, Isa. 63,
16. and distance of place may deprive us of the help even of our own parents;
but the Lord is a present help in time of need, Psalm. 46.1. Whose eyes are upon
the righteous, and his ears open to their Cry, Psalm. 34.15. They are graven
upon the Palnis of his hands, Isa. 49.16. And he is near that justifies them,
Isa. 15.8. Yea the everlasting arms are underneath them, Deuteronomy. 33.27. that
they shall not utterly be cast down though they fall, Psalm. 37.24. This
meditation may be sufficient to quiet all our hearts.

2. Let not distance, either in place or Condition, hinder our dedesires or
endeavors of furthering other men's good. Let none take up Nabals exception,
They be strangers, I know not whence they are, 1 Samuel 25.11. Sure if we
understood our selves aright, our distance one from another is not so great, as
we conceive it is: we are all of one blood, Act. 17.26. all one flesh, Isa.
58.7, And for distance of degree, the Apostle requires us to condescend unto
those of the lower sort, Romans 12.18. As the head disdaines not to stoop to the
foot; Especially they that are graced with Gods Titles, and represent his
person amongst men, are to be admonished to follow his example, to abase
themselves to look upon things below, Psalm. 113.5.

We have already showed, that when God had planted the Light in the Sun, the
other means, whatsoever it was, by which that Light was conveyed about the
world, ceased: So the world had Light before the Sun was, and now it has
Light by the Sun. Whence,

5. Observe, Although God be pleased to make use of means, yet he binds not
himself to work all by means.
Elohim he gave water out of the Wells, Exodus 15.27. Where there was no
water, he supplied them out of the Rock at Horeb, Exodus 17.6, And thus first he
may do, who gives all the efficacy to means and therefore can work the effect
without them. 2. And does so, that men may depend upon, and ascribe all unto
him alone, and not unto the means by which he works: see Deuteronomy. 8.3.

Trust not then upon Means which God can easily make ineffectuall, when he
pleases, Hag. 1.6. Nor stagger when means are wanting with that incredulous
Prince, 2 King. 7.2. Nay with Moses himself, for which God justly taxes him,
Numb. 11.21, 22. The Lord is no more bound to any certain means now, nay to any
means at all, then he shall be hereafter, when he shall be unto us All in All
without means, Rev. 21.23,

VERSE 16.
TWo great Lights] Both great, not only in outward appearance; but really, and
indeed in themselves, although the Moon be far less then any of the stars, two
only excepted: it seems therefore that Moses calls them great in respect of
their opinion and estimation of men who judge of them as they appear to the
veiw.

The Greater Light] He means the Sun, exceeding the whole Earth in bigness
more then 162. times; or, as some say, 166. times if we may believe
Astronomers. Now the Sun is called the greater Light, not only in respect of
the huge bulk of the body of it; but because the Light being planted in it, it
shines more glorious, and heats more fervently then the Moon and all the Stars,
which borrow all or the most part of their Light from the Sun; And so, as they
must needs have it more imperfectly; so they must show it forth less clearly
and gloriously-

To rule the day] Not only to appear gloriously, as Rulers and Princes do in
their Dominions when they appear in state, but besides by directing men in
their affairs by the Light which it gives, which shows them what to do; for
when the night and darkness comes, no man can work. Now direction is a Branch
of Rule and Government; withal the Light and influence of the Sun have a
special operation on the Creatures here below, by which the affairs of men are
much furthered.

And the lesser Light to rule the Night] It is true, the Moon has her
Operation in the day time also, as appears most clearly in the Ebbs and floods
of the Sea, which are questionless governed especially by the Moon; But
because in the day time her Light is obscured by the Sun, and her beauty and
splendour appears, only in the Night, the Moon is not improperly said to have
the rule and guidance of the Night. For which cause God in his providence, has
so ordered the Course of those two Planets, that the Moon is most serviceable
unto us when we have least help from the Sun, so that she shines brightest
and longest, when the nights are longest and darkest: for in the winter season
the Moon at the full is in her highest exaltation, and is at the Summer time in
her lowest declination, when there is least need of her light.

The stars also] Which the Holy Ghost passes over in a word, as being less
observable by our eye then either Sun or Moon, although in themselves the
least of them be a most glorious Creature, and of incredible greatness, the
least fixed star being many times bigger then the whole Earth, if we may
believe Astronomers.

These be the ornaments of Gods glorious Throne, which ravished the Prophet
David with astonishment, Psalm. 8.3. To which if we compare, those beggarly
shows of blazing lights of Torches and Tapers, wherewith the Princes of this
world, set out their Palaces by night and grace their Persons, when they desire
to appear glorious to men, we shall find just cause to smile in our thoughts at
the baseness and beggary of humane glory, and to cry out with the Prophet,
Cease from the man whose breath is in his nostrils for wherein are they to be
esteemed? And turning away our eyes from those which dwell in houses of clay,
whose foundation is in the dust, and who wanting Majesty in themselves strive
to appear glorious in the Ornaments of other Creatures baser then themselves,
to amaze our selves with the Majesty of him whose Throne is in the Infinite
Circuit of heaven, adorned with so many glorious Lights of such incredible
greatness, of such glory in brightness, and excellency in their uses: All
which the Creator of them so far exceeds in glory, dwelling in the light that
no man can attain unto; that we may justly take up the Prophet David's
exclamation, O Lord our Lord how excellent is thy name in all the Earth, who
have set thy Glory above the heaven! Psalm. 8.1.

These Lights are great in their appearance unto us, greater indeed in their
true measure, although nothing in comparison of him that made them, for the
manifestation of his own greatness and Glory. But seeing the Holy Ghost sets
them out unto us as great Lights, and calls them so, that we might take the
more notice of them, we may warrantably, Thence

1. Observe, We may take notice of any Eminency of the Creature so far as
thereby to lead us to the Admiration of the Supereminent Perfection of the
Creator.
Psalm. 104. Thus Elihu advises us to magnify Gods Work, Job 36.24. And God
himself with wonderful variety of words sets out the eminency of diverse of his
Creatures, Job. 38.36, 40, 41. The truth is, this is a special part of our
wisdom to consider the Work of God, Eccl. 7.13. and search it, Psalm. 111.2. For
which purpose he has set the world in our hearts, Eccl. 3.11. So that it
cannot be denied that we may lawfully advance the Creature as Gods
Work-manship, the effect of his Power Wisdom and Goodness; that we may bring
all the glory of the Creatures, and lay it down at Gods feet who Created them,
and to whom therefore it solely and properly belongs.

Both these lights being Created for the ruling of the day and night, God in
his Wisdom bestows most light upon that which was of greatest use, and
whereas the day was to be the time of men's business, and employment, and
therefore needed the greatest and clearest light, for the directing of men in
their ways, and works, he bestowed the greatest and clearest light upon the
Sun which he had appointed to rule the day: Whence,

2. Observe. God uses to proportion the Abilities of his Creatures according
to the uses in which he employes them.
Moses while he was to rule alone had a double measure of the Spirit, which was
shared in a great part amongst the Seventy Elders when they were joined with
himin the government, Numb. 11.17, God gave Solomon a great measure of wisdom
and largeness of heart above any that were before him, or that came after him,
1 King. 3.12. According to the largeness of the employments whereunto he was
designed, to build the Temple and to settle the State, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and to raise Gods People unto the top of their Outward glory.
And the Apostles who were to publish the Gospel to all Nations, to settle the
Church, to encounter the great and mighty men of the world, were furnished with
the gift of Tongues, Wisdom, and Courage proportionable to those great
employments unto which God designed them.

Reason 1. God infinite Wisdom and Sufficiency, by both which he is enabled
and carried to make all things Beautiful both in time and measure, Eccl. 3.11.

2. The necessity of furnishing the workman with sufficiency for the
accomplishing of his work, lest otherwise, 1. He be oppressed and overlaid with
too heavy a burden: And, 2. The work it self fail, to the dishonor of God
that employes him, and to the hurt of the Creature; as it falls out where a
Message is sent by the hand of a fool, Prove. 26.6.

1. Let it be a direction to us in the choosing of men to any place of
Employment public or private, Civil or Ecclesiastical. Let us observe whether
God has marked them out to such a work as we employ them in, (for God is only
with those whom he designs both to Assist and Protect them) and has sealed
them (as our Savior terms it, Joh. 6.27.) which we shall discover by observing
what abilities God has furnished them withal, as he did by pouring out his
Spirit on the Seventy Elders, upon Joshuah, Deuteronomy. 34.9. upon Saul, 1 Samuel 10.9.
upon Solomon, 1 King. 3.12. yea even on Bezaliel and Aholiab, Exodus 31.3.

Let those that receive much from God dispense unto others according to the
proportion of the Abilities which they have received, Romans 12.6. as Christ,
having received Grace without measure, dispenses to all his Members Grace for
Grace, John 1.14, 16. Thus let men bestow their labors for the Churches
service according to the measure of their Abilities, their Alms according to
the measure of their estate, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. that they may be rich in good
works, as they are rich in wealth; remembering the account which must be given
up unto God according to men's receipts, Luke 12.48,

The Reason why God gave a greater portion of Light for the day, was, because
that is the time for employment and dispatch of men's business, in which they
need the help of the Light for their direction. Whence,

3. Observe, Men must make Use of Light to guide and direct them in all their
Employments.
Night no man can work, Joh. 9.4. Because he knows neither what he does, nor
whither he goes, Joh. 12.35. wherefore the Egyptians in that plague of
darkness sat still and could not move out of their places, Exodus 10.23. But
much more need they the Light of Wisdom and Counsel, which is profitable to
direct, Eccles. 10.10. and in that respect more useful than strength and
weapons, Eccl. 9.16, 18. excelling folly as far as light does darkness, Eccl.
2.13. Only let it not be our own wisdom, Prove. 3.6, 7. but that which the Lord
gives, Prove. 2.6. the rules whereof are delivered in his Word, which is a Lamp
and a Light, Prove. 6.23. by which David guided his steps, Psalm. 119.105.

Now though the day (which needs it most) was furnished with a greater measure
of light by the Sun, yet the night is not left without some light. The Moon,
the lesser light, is appointed to rule and shine in the Night, as well as the
Sun was designed to shine in the Day. Whence,

4. Observe, Though all the Creatures be not furnished alike, yet none of them
wants that which is competent for their use and employment.
Psalm. 145.16. All men are fed, though not deliciously; clothed, though not in
Purple; dwell conveniently, though not in Palaces; are illightened, Joh. 1.9.
though not furnished with Solomon's wisdom. This Competency is a proportion
fitted to the necessary support of the Creature, and the Being and estate and
use thereof, in which it is to be employed.

Let no man then repine at his own condition, nor envy any other man's. If it be
but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse, 1 King. 17.16.
why should we trouble our selves as long as it is sufficient? If God rain down
bread from heaven upon us, as he did Mannah upon his people in the
Wilderness, that is, give us at once no more than the portion of the day,
(which is as much as he warrants us to pray for) so that we are filled to day,
though we know not where to dine to morrow: Let it not disquiet us, that we
have not goods laid up in store for many years, with that fool, Luke 12.19. If
other men fare better then we, or are better clad, Let us ask the question of
our selves, which our Savior puts to his Disciples, when they had neither
purse nor scrip; Do we lack any thing? Luke 22.35. If we observe it well, the
wants, whereof we complain, are in our minds, not in our estates; our
allowances may come short of our desires, but shall never be found unanswerable
to that condition, which God in his wisdom has thought best and most
convenient for us.

These two Lights then are termed Great, as exceeding the Stars, although not
in the true measure of their greatness; yet in Outward glory; and yet between
these two we shall find great inequality both in their Greatness and in their
Glory; and such a difference we shall find in all the rest of the Creatures:
Whence,

5. Observe, Although all the Creatures are Perfect in their several Kinds, yet
they are Unequal in Degrees of Excellency.
Dan. 12.3. The Stars all of them shine, yet one Star differs from another in
glory, 1 Cor. 15.4. and yet the most glorious amongst them, shines not like the
Sun in his strength. Amongst the Creatures below some have a being, some have
life but not sense; some have sense, but no motion; some have all these, but
have no understanding. But amongst them all, is not found a greater inequality
then there is amongst men, in their Outward estates, in their Endowments either
of body, or mind, and in their Uses for Employment.

Reasons 1. That God may show himself Lord of all, when no Creature can
challenge any thing, but must enjoy only that which God is pleased to bestow
upon it. See our Saviors Parable, Matthew. 20.13.

2. To humble men in the sense of their own defects, and make them thankful for
what they enjoy above other Creatures.

Who, and where, are they that desire Parity? Are we not all Creatures? and
consequently not to be Limited by our own wills, but by the Will of Him that
has made and disposed us in our several ranks as it pleased Him. And yet we
see the greatest part of men are transported with that vain humor, which we
cannot but condemn in others, To be unquiet in our own condition, because we
are not Matches with other men; wherein if we could attain our desires, we
would be as much troubled, because we are not their Superiors.

The Sun, as we see, being the greater light, is designed by God to the more
eminent office, To rule the day; and yet the Moon, though lesser, and
inferior, has an Office too, although much inferior, To govern the night:
and is thereby made useful and serviceable to the Earth, although in a lower
place. Whence,

6. Observe, Those which are of weaker abilities may notwithstanding be useful
and serviceable for some kind of employment or other.
Exodus 35.26. Nay, the very Gibeonites, that could be admitted to no higher
service, did hew wood and draw water for it, Josh. 9.23. The foot may support
and carry the body, though it cannot direct it as the eye does; and the
Creatures that cannot serve us to till our grounds, or carry our burdens, as
Horses, Oxen, and Asses do, yet may be made use of for some other service, as
dogs to keep the house; or to be used for sport or the like: even those that
seem altogether useless, or perhaps hurtful, yet have this use at least, by
their variety to manifest the wonderful wisdom and goodness of the Creator.

As for men, those that have not abilities for government, may be made use of
for servants, if not in the greatest, yet in the lowest offices; wherefore
despise none: Seeing, 1. we cannot comfortably subsist without the performance
of the meanest offices about us. 2. We know not to what degree of glory men of
the lowest rank and meanest parts may be advanced hereafter.

The day (as being of most use for the dispatch of men's affairs) is first
provided for, and yet God neglects not the night, but takes order that it
should be governed too, although by the Moon, the lesser Light of the two.
Whence,

7. Observe, God takes care for the Government of the Night, as well as of the
Day.
Psalm. 74.16. his Providence watches over both according to his promise, Psalm.
91.5, 6. and 121.6. Which he manifested to his people, in delivering them by
night out of Egypt, and afterward in their passage through the red Sea, Exodus
14.22. As he did afterward wonderfully manifest himself in destroying
Senacherib's Host by night, 2 King. 19.35. yea many times he appears to his
servants in visions of the night, as they are termed, Job 4.13. gives songs in
the Night, Job 35.10. and makes their reins to teach them in the night, Psalm.
16.7.

Reasons 1. He can do it, seeing the Light and darkness to him are both alike,
Psalm. 139.12.

2. And it is needful for him to do it, that he may keep the world in Order,
which otherwise would soon be out of frame, if there were no care taken of the
Night; which we find by experience to be so fit a vail for all manner of
villainy.

Let it appale the spirits of such as make that the Covering for their lewd
practices, Watching for the Twilight, Job 24.15. Prove. 7.9. and endeavor to
hide their Robberies, Adulteries, and Drunkenness under a vail of darkness,
as if God had only reserved the day to himself, and abandoned the night to the
Devil and his Angels: let all wise men walk with God in the dark as well as in
the light, as those that must give account to God of all their Carriage, even
of the very thoughts upon their beds in the night season, as well as of their
works in the day.

The Stars Moses names only, that we may take notice of them also to be Gods
workmanship; but because they were ordained to no special use that men might
take notice of, they are only named, though being Creatures in themselves
worthy of admiration.

VERSES 17, 18, 19.
ANd God set them] The Sun and Moon he means, whereof he had spoken before, as
the words ensuing do evidently declare, although it be more then probable, that
the Stars withal be included, as giving some light unto the earth, and as it
were assisting the Moon in the Government of the Night.

In the Firmament] Whether he fixed them in several Orbs to be turned about
with them as a nail in the wheel, or placed them to abide and move therein of
themselves, as birds do in the Air, and, yet regularly by a proper motion of
their own, (which he might as well give to every Planet, as to the Orb wherein
it is supposed to be fixed) its not needful to be disputed at present. This
only is certain, That where God set them, there they continue to this day
according to his Ordinance, Psalm. 119.91.

To give light upon the Earth] All that God had decreed was accordingly
performed in every particular. Only in relating what was done, Moses omits one
of the uses to which these Lights were designed, that they should be for signs,
as being a use of less moment then the rest; but howsoever that use also must
be conceived to be employed, as being decreed by God as we have seen, though it
be not here repeated. The Observations which might be raised from hence, have
been handled already.

VERSE 20.
L Let the waters bring forth] The word here used in the Criginal can hardly be
expressed in any other Language a^to the full force of it. It implies as much
as to bring forth abundantly; but how can the waters which have no life in
themselves bring forth living Creatures? These words then may be conceived to
note, not so much either the efficient cause, by which the Fishes and Birds
were brought forth, which is Gods own Decree and Word, or the material cause
of which their bodies were framed; for neither is water the matter of fishes
bodies, nor the Air of the birds, though the temper of either of them do most
resemble those Elements: Only by those words (Let the waters bring forth) is
noted 1. the places where the fishes are produced; 2. There may be employed
their waterish composition, in which they much resemble that Element which is
Predominant in them. 3. There seems to be given to the waters a cherishing
Power to nourish and maintain them, which seems to be far greater, then that
which the Earth has to preserve beasts, seeing the waters not only nourish the
fishes, as the Earth does the Beasts; but besides preserves their spawn, and so
becomes as it were the womb in which it is cherished, till it be brought to
perfection. Nay some conceive that some fishes are bred of muddy waters
themselves as, Eels and some others, although the most kinds of them come of
spawn.

Moving Creatures] Or Creeping as some render it; Indeedhe word Sheretz,
signifies any thing that slides away swiftly, either without distinction of
their motion by steps; as Birds fly in the Air, Fishes swim in the Sea, and
Worms and Serpents creep on the Earth; or with so insensible a distinction of
steps that it is not easily observed, as VVeesels and Mise are reckoned amongst
creeping Creatures, Levit. 11.29. Because, by reason of the shortness of their
feet, going so near the ground, the motion of their feet is not so much
observed as in other Creatures.

That has life] Or soul. The word Nephesh, in the Original, comes from a word
that signifies, to Breath, which is the first and last act of life. Now that
fishes too, have a breathing life, although not altogether after the manner of
other living Creatures, is not questioned; The same word is taken merely for
breath, Job. 33.4.

In this description of the Creation of Fishes and Birds, Moses sets before us,
1. The Decree and Command of God, for their Creation, and therein, 1. The order
in which they were created. 2. The manner of their Creation, in these words,
Let the waters bring forth. 3. The kinds of the Creatures to be produced;
Fishes, and Birds. 4. The Places in which they were either bred, or to abide;
the Waters and the Air.
2. The Execution or performance, of that which was decreed. 3. The blessing of
God upon the Creatures that were produced.


In the whole course of this history of the Creation, we may take notice, how
Gods works still go on forwards, toward a farther degree of perfection. First
there is Created the rude mass, out of which all the Creatures were made; Then
the Heavens, vast, and Glorious Creatures, but without Life. Thirdly, the
Herbs, and Plants, that have life indeed, but without motion. Fourthly,
Creatures with Sense and motion, but without Reason. Lastly Man, with a
reasonable Soul, Created after Gods own Image. Out of this Order which the
Lord observed in the Creation of all things, we may

1. Observe, Gods Works always are carried on toward Perfection.


Reason 1. Because the state of all things is imperfect at present, and is
therefore both capable of farther degrees of perfection, and firt to be brought
thereunto, that God might have this honor ascribed unto him, that his work is
Perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

2. That men by the several steps of the perfections of the Creatures, which
are found in one above another, might at the length ascend up unto God, in whom
all perfections are to be found.

Let it both Quiet, and Raise up the Spirits of Gods Servants, when they look
upon their present imperfections, both in knowledge, and every grace, 1 Cor.
13.10. Seeing 1. God Himself has undertaken the work of our Renovation, who
having all Perfections in himself, can easily perfect what he has begun in us.
2. And will do it, partly to make good his promise, Phil. 1.6. partly, to the
end for which he has ordained us, that we might be without blemish, Ephesians. 5.17.
As well that the Excellency of his work in us might appear, as also that we
might, by that means be fitted to enjoy an Holy and Everlasting Communion with
Him. And let it not discourage us that the work goes so slowly on, and receives
many interruptions: God is pleased to make us sensible of the difficulty of the
work, that when it is perfected (as it shall be hereafter) we might not only
honor him Alone; but withal Honor him as a God, able to do all things, even
those which surmount our hope and expectation.

2. Let all that are Godly imitate God, striving earnestly to go on to
perfection, both in knowledge, Heb. 6.17. and in every Grace, 2 Pet. 1.5.6. For
which end God has furnished us with sufficient means, 2 Timothy 3.17. Even that
we might be perfect (in our measure) As our heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew.
5.48.

How God by gathering the waters into their Channels, had drained the Earth,
and made it habitable, and presently furnished it with herbs and plants, as
soon as it was capable of them, we have seen already: In like manner he deals
with the waters, as soon as he has gathered them together, he takes order,
that they also shall be furnished with their Inhabitants. Whence,

2. Observe. God leaves nothing Empty that he has made, but furnishes all
with his Store, and riches.
Psalm. 104.24, 25. The reason whereof is, thereby to manifest both his
All Sufficiency, and withal the riches of his bounty.

1. And will God then leave his Children empty, the vessels which he has
formed for himself? will God stock the whole world, and not stock his own
Garden? has God given his children hearts capable of Grace, and will he leave
them barrain and empty of Grace? Surely the time will come, shortly, that every
vessel shall be filled; and in the mean time, we shall not be utterly left
empty and naked.

2. Let men be ashamed that delight in empty houses, or lands unpeopled, that
they may dwell alone, Isa. 5.8.1. Houses were made for habitation, and Lands
for Culture; and it is a fearful plague threatened by God Himself, to leave
both without inhabitants. 2. It is our shame to cause desolations, and
discovers, not only our weakness (as it does Gods sufficiency, that he leaves
all things full); but besides a disposition cross to God, in the course of his
Providence, to labor to make that empty, which he has ordained to be
replenished.

In casting our eyes upon that infinite variety of all the works of Gods Hands,
we cannot but admire his infinite Power, to work all things, in All and out of
All. If there be Nothing at all, he makes something; if there be something, be
it never so deformed, and confused, be the nature of it what it will, God makes
out of it, what he pleases; The glorious Heavens, and the Stars therein, all
out of that rude lump; living plants, and herbs, and fishes, with life, and
motion, out of the dead Sea, and Earth; so that nothing is hard to him which he
purposes to do. Whence,

3. Observe. God works all things, out of all things, and in all things,
according to his good pleasure.
Psalm. 135.6. All in all, 1 Cor. 12.6. Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Genesis
18.14. It must needs be granted that if he be Almighty, it is easy for him, who
has made all things, and that out of nothing, and has still the same power in
his hand, to make what, and when, and where he will; seeing He has nothing to
limit his power, but his own will.

1. Let men depend upon him at all times, and in all places, for all things; He
is the God of the Mountains, as well as of the Valleys, 1 King. 20.28. He can
provide bread for his People in the Wilderness, as well as by the flesh pots
of Egypt; water in Horeb, as well as in Elim. Nay, flesh in the Wilderness,
without herds, or flocks, Numb. 11. Only trust in him at all times, Psalm. 62.8.
and do good, Psalm. 37.3. and then thou shall be fed assuredly.

2. Let us take notice of the weakness of men's power, in comparison of Gods;
Their skill reaches, every man's to the work of his own hand. One plants
Vinyards, another sowes Corn, another feeds Cattail, as Cain and Abel did: and
others are able to work the works of their own trade. But God alone does all
things Himself, and by his own Power, Job. 42.2. Now if a man were able to do
all things, he cannot do all things every where, he cannot make all things out
of Nothing, as God has done.

It is worth our consideration, that God has not only Created such Variety of
works, of sundry sorts, but he has fitted them to places, answerable to their
natures, the Fishes to the Sea, and the Birds to the Air, as he does
afterward dispose of the beasts upon the Earth. Whence,

4. Observe, God disposes all Creatures, in such places, as are most
convenient and agreeable unto them.


Let the Consideration of our disposition, and temper of our hearts direct us
in the choice of the places of our abode. What should fishes do on dry land? Or
beasts of the Earth, in the midst of the Sea? David in Mesech, Psalm. 120.5. The
plants of the House of God can flourish no where, but in the Courts of God,
Psalm. 92.13. God indeed can support and preserve Jacob, in Idolatrous Labans
House, Joseph in Egypt, Elijah in Zarephath, Saint John in Patmos, if he call
or send them thither; only we are to feel some unquietness in such places as
David did, Psalm. 120.5. And to long for our own dwellings with Jacob, Genesis
28.21. Above all, for heaven prepared for us, Joh. 14.2.

2. Let it Comfort our hearts in the expectation of those heavenly Habitations
unto which God has designed us, and for which he will fit us with bodies and
minds answerable thereunto, Heavenly and Holy, according to his promise, Ephesians.
5.27. 1 Cor. 15.49. Only for the present he clothes us with earthly
Tabernacles fitted to the Earth, in which we dwell, and Spirits both Earthly
and sensual, in a great part, according to the Condition both of our estate
and place, in which he has thought fit to continue us for a while.

The first Creatures that received breath and life of all that God had made,
were the Fishes and the Birds, and they received it, as we see, together with
their Being, by the Will and Decree of God. Whence,

5. Observe, Breath and life are the Gifts of God alone.
Job 12.10. and he gives breath to the people upon the Earth, and Spirit to
them that walk therein, Isa. 42.5. Even to all life and breath and all things,
Act. 7.25. And that 1. Because he has only life in himself, Ioh. 5.1.
Because its fit for him to keep the disposing of that in his own hand, as well
that all may acknowledge so great a benefit in him alone, as that he may govern
and order all things according to the Counsel of his own Will, having in his
own Hand, Power to kill and to make alive, Deuteronomy. 32.39. By giving and taking
away Breath and Life at his own pleasure.

1, Let every man be careful to preserve in any Creature so precious a gift;
for why should he take away (unless it be by warrant from God) that which he
cannot give, nay that which all the Princes in the world cannot restore? A good
man, (says Solomon) regards the life of his Beast, Prove. 12.10.

2. Let every man glorify that God in whose Hand his Breath is, Dan. 5.23. And
walk in fear before him, who can more easily take it from him, then he gave it
at the first; who can trouble us, if he do but hide his face, and if he call
for our breath, we die, Psalm. 104.29. Nay, is able not only to take away this
Temporal Life, which is but for a moment, but our Eternal life also, Matthew.
10.28.

3. Let it teach us to abase, and to despise all man's works in Comparison of
Gods. Men in deed, can make Pictures and Statues, but cannot give them breath;
can set Flowers, Plants, and Trees, but cannot give them life by which they may
grow; can sow corn, but cannot make it take root: may beget Children, but God
must breathe in them the Breath of Life, that they may become living souls:
and as he must Give, so he must preserve it too, so that in him we live and
move, Act. 17.28.

We have already taken notice of sundry Creatures, which God made in Heaven and
Earth. If we add unto them the various kinds of Fowls, and especially of Fishes
which we have now in hand, and of the Beasts and creeping things which are
mentioned afterward, we cannot but stand amazed, and be filled with
admiration. and may,

6. Observe, The variety and diversity of Gods Works is Infinite, even to
Admiration.
David seems to be ravished with observation of them, Psalm. 104.24. As all men
must needs be that shall take notice, of the infinite and diverse kinds of
them, the variety of their shapes, and diversity of their parts, difference of
their qualities and properties, multiplicity of their several uses and
operations: so that they shall find all expressions too short to manifest their
admiration at the wonderful Wisdom of him that made them.

The flying of the Fowls above the Earth in the open firmament of heaven, we
see is founded upon Gods Decree, and consequently their several motions must
needs be guided and directed by his Will, seeing whatsoever moves by his Power,
cannot but move within the Limits of that Will. So that from this particular,
we may in general,

7. Observe, The Motion, as well as the Being of every Creature is Ordered and
Limited by the Will and Decree of God.
live, and move, and have their Being, as the Apostle affirms they have, Act.
17.20. For then they can move no farther nor longer then he supplies them with
ability to move; and therefore they can only move when, whither, and as long as
he will. Neither does this derogate at all from Gods Majesty, that he abaseth
himself to take care for such trifles, as the hopping of Birds from one branch
to another. The Queen of Sheba was ravished, and astonished, at Solomon's
Wisdom; when, among other things, she beheld the sitting of his servants, the
attendance of his Ministers, and their apparel, and the like, 1 King. 10.5. No,
it infinitely commends Gods goodness, that he abaseth himself to look upon
things that are below, Psalm. 113.6. that he takes care for Oxen, 1 Cor. 9.9.
feeds young Ravens, Psalm. 147.9. and remembers every Sparrow, Luke 12.6. And
his Wisdom, that he can comprehend all these things without distraction. Nay,
if we acknowledge, that God makes provision for every Creature by which it is
sustained, Psalm. 145.16. we must needs confess, that he must give order, for
their Motions, and Use, for which they were Created, and are still supported,
whereby the honor of God is as much advanced as by their Creation.

Let it quiet all our hearts, and put away all fear of harm from any Creature;
which cannot hurt us, seeing it cannot move without the Will of our heavenly
Father, and therefore shall not move to hurt those, whom God will preserve,
Isa. 54.16, 17. as we see in the motion of Jeroboam's arm, which was dried up,
when he stretched it out against the Prophet, 1 King. 13.4. and in the case of
Daniel in the Lions Den. Seeing we know God takes such care for his children,
that he numbers their very hairs, Luke 12.7. and engraves them upon the palms
of his hands, Isa. 49.16. and is as tender over them as over the apple of his
own eye, Zach. 2.8.

VERSE 21.
GReat Whales] Or, Dragons, as the word in the Original fignifies in some other
places of Scripture. A Whale is called Leviathan, Job 41.1. and Psalm. 104.26.
from Lavah, which signifies to cleave unto, because his scales are shut so
close together, Job 4.7. The same name is figuratively applied to signify men
of great power; as Pharaoh, with the Captains of his host, are called
Leviathan, Psalm. 74.14. and so is Nebuchadnetzar, Isa. 27.1. Of huge bulk of
body, that which many have seen with their eyes cannot but astonish them; but
many things that are written of them are uncredible.

According to their kind] Different in Nature, and form; and continuing so by
the Law which the God of nature has established amongst those unreasonable
Creatures, which withholds them from mixing themselves with those of another
Kind, with which notwithstanding they converse daily.

In the Execution of this Decree, we see, as we have done in the decrees passed
before, the Event answerable to it every way. In the relation whereof, the Holy
Ghost, omitting the rest, singles out one most remarkable above them all for
the huge bulk of the body, and may thereby give us occasion to,

1. Observe, The Eminency of any Creature ought especially to be observed for
the magnifying of the Work of the Creator.
Job his Greatness and Almighty Power, by reckoning up the most eminent of his
Creatures, setting out Leviathan and Behemoth, by the vastness and huge bulk
of their bodies, the Horse by his Conrage, the Peacock and Ostritch by the
beauty of their Feathers; the Lion, and the Unicorn, and the like, by their
several eminencies, that Himself the Creator of them might be the more admired
in them.

This is now the Second time that we find the greatness of the Creature
mentioned. Before we had Great Lights, now we have Great Whales: But in the
Creation of Man, we have him (though the most excellent of all Gods visible
works) marked only by this. That he was Created after Gods Image. Whence,

2. Observe, Many other Creatures excel and go beyond man in outward things.


Let not the strong man glory in his strength; how many Creatures excel all
men that way? Nor the rich man in his wealth; the Earth is richer then all the
Princes of the world. Nor the fair in their beauty, and the like; neither let
any man delight in, or affect any of these; Jer. 9.23. Only wisdom is that by
which man excells all creatures, Job 35.11. and Holiness and Righteousness,
that by which one man excells another, Psalm. 16.3. Prove. 12.26. Let only these
be our desire and delight.

God, who had appointed birds to fly in the open Firmament, withal mentions
their wings, wherewith they fly, in the description of their Creation. The
fishes that are appointed to move swiftly, or slide through the waters, are
furnished with finnes, which are unto them instead of wings, by which they move
swiftly in the waters, as the Birds do in the Air, although they be not
expressly mentioned, in this place; as the wings of the Fowls are. Whence,

3. Observe, God furnishes every Creature with Parts, and Abilities, needful
for the Nature of it, and use, to which he has assigned it.


We need not doubt then, but that the same God, who has manifested so much
Wisdom, and Goodness, in furnishing the natural bodies, not only of Men, but
of all Creatures, will much more take care, that the Church, the mystical Body
of his own Son, may be fully supplied in every part thereof, according to the
effectual working of the Measure in every Part, Ephesians. 4.16. He that has given
wings to the Birds, to sport themselves withal, in the Air, will not deny
means to the Soul of man to raise up it self from Earth to Heaven, to enjoy
God, and have the conversation of it in Heaven: Till Bodies and Souls be
carried up thither to be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.

What was the Matter, of which the Bodies of the Fishes and Fowls are
composed, is not expressed; whatsoever it was, considering the infinite variety
of Plants, and Herbs, wherewith the Earth was furnished in the former days
work; and here, of Fishes, and Fowls; and in the next day following, of Beasts
and Men, all drawn out of the same Principles of Composition; the wonderful
Power of God must be looked upon, with astonishment, who draws such infinite
variety, and diversity of Creatures, of several Kinds, Shapes, and Natures,
out of the same materials. Whence,

4. Observe, God can, and does, out of the same mass draw out infinite variety
of several shapes and natures.


All those works, even the Fishes of the Sea, and Fowls of the Air, God after
he had made them, he looks back upon, and pronounces this censure of them all,
That they were Good. Now out of this regard that he had to the works of his
hands, we may

5. Observe, God respects, and takes special notice of all, even the meanest of
the works that he has made.
Matthew. 6.30. to support, feed, and direct, and order them according to his
Will; and this he does, 1. Out of his Goodness and Faithfulness, for he is a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. 2. And withal out of Necessity, least otherwise
he should have Created them in vain, seeing they must needs perish, and come to
nothing, if they be not supported by his hand.

1. Let the meanest, and those which are neglected and despised by men, depend
upon his care and Providence; the Children of the needy, whom Christ shall
Judge and Save, Psalm. 72.4. The hungry, Prisners, Blind, Bowed down, the
Fatherless and Widows, Psalm. 146.7, 8, 9. Whom God takes care of, relieves,
contends for; and sometimes from the dunghill advances to high places, Psalm.
113.7, 8. Much more those that he has chosen, to be partakers of his Glory
hereafter, even poor Lazarus himself, Luke 16.22.

2. Stoop to the poor, and such as are despised of men: Oppress them not,
Prove. 22.22. Job 31.13.21. Contend for them, Job 29.12. Cherish them, Isa.
58.7. Consider them every way, Psalm. 16.1. Remembering that they are such as God
Himself cares for, that they bear his Image, and are abased by the same God,
who has advanced us, may perhaps be higher in Gods esteem, richer in Grace at
present, and our Companions and equals in Glory with Christ for ever hereafter.

All these Creatures that he had made, God does not only look upon after he
had made them, but besides approves and sees them even the meanest of them to
be good. Whence,

6. Observe, Even the meanest of the Creatures, that God has made, are Good.
Psalm. 145.10.2. In themselves as they are all of them perfect in their kind.
3. In relation to the rest of the Creatures unto which they are profitable and
serve for some use or other, especially unto men which if we discern not, we
must impute to our Ignorance; and if, instead of useful Instruments, they
prove dangerous or hurtful unto us, we must lay the blame upon nothing but our
sin.

Let us herein set Gods Works before us for our pattern, let us put our hand
to nothing, but that which may find and approve and delight in as good; such
let all our thoughts, our words, and works be, yea even our very sports and
pastimes, all of them ordered by a right rule, and directed to some profitable
end, for the good both of our selves and others, especially seeing, we know we
must pass an account of them before God hereafter.

The last Considerable circumstance in the Creation of Fishes and Fowls, is his
blessing for increase and propagation; wherein may be considered, both the
blessing it self in their increase and multyplying all of them in their
several kinds, and the measure of it, till they filled the Sea.

VERSE. 22.
ANd God blessed them] Not declaratively, as Isaac and Jacob blessed their
Children; nor Petitionally as Rebech's friends blessed her, Gen, 24.60. And as
they blessed Ruth cap. 4.11, 12. But effectually; God decreed, and bestoed a
blessing upon them to make them fruitful. But why are the Fishes, and Fowls
blessed, and neither any Creature that was made before; or the Beasts that were
Created after them? Questionless, God blessed them too, that is both decreed
their Continuance in the Natures and Uses, and ordained the propagation of them
in their kinds, as many of them as needed to be multiplied; as the Herbs, and
Plants, and Beasts. So that the question cannot be, why God did not bless
them, but why Moses passed over their blessing in silence, which it were too
much boldness curiously to inquire after; Although we may see some probable
ground, why Gods blessing upon Fishes and Fowls is expressly mentioned, for the
largeness of it; for no Creatures multiply faster then fishes and fowls. As
likewise that the blessing upon man is expressed for the eminency of his
person: the blessing upon other Creatures, he leaves us to suppose, but
forbears to mention, for brevity sake.

Saying] Not that God uttered the Blessing vocally (especially to the Fishes
and Fowls that could not understand it, but that he decreed and willed it only.

God then having created the Fishes and Fowls, that they might be continued in
their kind, bestows upon them this blessing of fruitfulness. Whence,

1. Observe, Fruitfulness is a Gift bestowed only by God himself.
Psalm. 127.3. Whence it was promised to Abraham as a special blessing, Genesis
13.16. and 22.17. Yea the fruitfulness of the Earth and cattle, is a gift from
him alone: it was Gods prospering Hand, that Isaac had an hundred fold increase
of that which he sowed, Genesis 26.12. Wherefore he promises it, Deuteronomy. 7.13. and
bestows it on men especially, Psalm. 113: 9. And withholds it at his pleasure,
Genesis 30.2. As he does from the Earth and cattle, as appears by the Curses
threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. and Levit. 26. Good reason it should be so, both that the
greatest of all outward blessings that can be bestowed (for increase is the
riches of the world) might be reserved in his own hand, that for them men might
honor and serve Him. And secondly, because both Creation and Propagation
(which therefore is called Creation, Psalm. 104.30.) are both the effects of the
same power and Consequently can be bestowed by none but by God alone.

Let all men then seek the blessing at Gods Hand by prayer, the fruitfulness
of our bodies, as Isaac did, Genesis 25.21 and Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.27. And expect it
from him by Faith with Abraham, Genesis 15.6. And the fruitfulness of our grounds
and cattle promised to us in a course of Obedience, Deuteronomy. 28.5. And return all
the praise and thankfulness, for such mercyes to him alone, as Jacob does,
Genesis 33.5.11. Which his people were Commanded to do in offering the first of
all their increase to Him, accounting the fruitfulness of all things, amongst
his gifts and wonders, as David does the framing of his body, Psalm. 139.14.

The name (Blessing) both here, and in many other places of Scripture, is taken
for the blessing of fruitfulness, as if that were the most eminent of all
Blessings. Whence,

2. Observe. Fruitfulness in the Creatures is a special blessing of God upon
them.
Psalm. 9, 13. or wicked children to their own shame, Prove. 10.1. Or perhaps to
the hazard and loss of their own lives, as it fell out to Senacherib, 2 King.
19.37. But yet in it self a special blessing; As yielding unto us, 1. That
which is of greatest value on the Earth, living Creatures, which in a due
estimation, are more worth then all dead treasures. 2. A blessing of that
nature, that by it the Earth subsists, which would soon decay, if by
propagation and fruitfulness of the Creature, it were not preserved and
renewed from day to day. Yea by the fruitfulness of the soil, the King himself
is supported, Eccl. 5.9.

Esteem it so, not only the fruitfulness of the fields, when they fill our
Garners with their increase, of which the Fool made so much account, Luke
12.19. Or of our flocks, when our sheep bring forth ten thousands in our
streets, Psalm. 144.13. But much more the fruitfulness of our own bodies, when
our Children stand like Olive Branches round about the Table, Psalm. 128.3. Our
Sons are like plants grown up in their youth, and our Daughters as
Corner-stones polished, Psalm. 144.12. It is in comparably a greater blessing,
to be the Father of Many Children, than to be the Lord of many flocks. Let us
never fear (as most worldly men do) that they will beggar us; he that gave them
life, will not fail to provide them food; and he that bestowed on them their
bodies, will give them clothes to put on. No man was ever beggered by his
Children, but such as breed them up to be unprofitable, both to themselves and
others.

God would have the Sea stored, and filled with fishes, and yet he Created not
at the first so many as might fill it, at that instant, no more then he
furnished the Earth with men, and Cattle; but appoints that to be done in time,
by a suckessive propagation, and multiplication of the Creatures thereby, in
their several kinds, whereof themselves must be the Instruments. Whence,

3. Observe, Though the blessing of Propagation be from God alone, yet it
pleases him to make use of the Creatures as his Instruments.
Sarah, and Elizabeth; but yet so that they conceived seed by their Husbands.
Now this Course God holds, 1. That by this means the Creatures might be the
more firmly united in love, and every one of them might be stirred up to
provide for his own flesh. 2. That the Power of God might be the more
manifested in the weakness of the Instrument, which propagates life to
another, which it neither had from, nor can continue in it self.

When we Consider the vastness of the Sea, we can never sufficiently admire the
infinite power, that appoints it to be replenished with fishes. This indeed
has been a great vanity and folly, for any man to undertake, as work beyond
his power, but God undertakes and performs it. Whence,

4. Observe, There is nothing so Vaste or Wide, but God can easily Furnish and
Fill at his Pleasure.
1. Seeing he has abundance of Spirit, Mal. 2.15. which enables him to create
Millions, as easily as to create One. 2. Because he created nothing in vain,
but proportioned, in his Infinite Wisdom, the works which he made, according
to the measure of the Creatures that should store it; seeing we account it
folly in men to build a Large House for a Small Family.

Let all men depend on Him for sufficiency; He that stored the Earth, the Sea,
and the Heavens, shall we doubt whether he can furnish one of our poor
Cottages? fill every one of our bellies? provide Portions for a few of our
Children? Or shall we fear that he who satisfies the desire of every living
thing, will neglect his own, or increase his Family beyond the portion of his
provisions? There remains even in the best a Leaven of Atheism, by which we
are prone to measure God, according to the scantlet of Men. Moses himself
doubts, where God can find means to fill the bellies of six hundred thousand
men with flesh, Numb. 11.21. but if God undertake, we see he makes it good. Out
of the same heart of unbelief it is, that we are questioning what we shall eat
or drink, or put on, Matthew. 6.31. As if he that made this world out of nothing,
could not as easily have made and furnished a thousand if he had thought it
fit. Nothing shall be left empty of all that he has made; only our unsatiable
desires, which he never made, he never promised, nor intended to fill.

VERSE 24.
LEt the Earth bring forth] Or, cause to come forth, as it were, out of the
womb. A phrase that notes rather the place wherein, than either the Efficient,
or Material cause, or Manner in which they were produced. As for the Manner, it
was merely Supernatural by a work of Creation, in which the Earth could have
no efficacy at all, it being an Act of Gods immediate Power alone. The Matter
of which they were Created, was, in all probability, taken out of the Earth; as
we see afterward the Body of Man was: but that is more then this phrase
implies, which notes only, Out of what they were produced, which was out of
the Earth; and Where they were to abide.

The living Creature] Plants and Herbs, we know, are said both to Live and Dye;
but because that is but an imperfect life, as wanting the two main faculties in
which Life is exercised, Sense and Motion; therefore those Creatures that enjoy
that more perfect life, exercising those faculties, are termed by an eminency,
Living Creatures.

After his Kind] By which, as they were distinguished in their first Creation
both in Form and Nature; so, they here ordered and appointed by God to continue
to the worlds end, distinct one from another in their successive propagation,
by which they were to be multiplied.

Cattel] The word Behemoth, which Moses uses in this place, as some think,
signifies most properly the greater kinds of Beasts: But we find it generally
(when it is put without any addition) used for any kind of four-footed beast.
But in this place it seems to be set in opposition against the beasts of the
field, and therefore is conceived to signifies tame Beasts, which men keep
about them in their Grounds or Houses, for Food, Labor, or Pleasure.

Beasts of the Earth] Wild Beasts; called Beasts of the Earth, because they are
not within any Enclosures, but have the wide earth to range in at their
pleasure. As for the name Caijah, by which they are called in the Hebrew
Language, it is derived from a word that signifies to live; whether it be given
them for their Liveliness, in which many of them surpass tame beasts; or
because they are many of them beasts of prey, and are nourished by other living
Creatures, it is not much material.

Why God made not the Beasts with the Birds and Fishes on the fifth day, but
made them on the sixth day, together with man, it is Curiosity to enquire, God
had power to make What, and When, he would; and is not to be accountable to us
for any of his actions, or for any Circumstance of them. It is enough to stop
all men's mouths, That it pleased him so to do. Yet we may probably guess,
that seeing Beasts were nearer to men in their dwelling, God was pleased to
make them together, which were to dwell together. Only we are to take notice,
that the Beasts were produced out of the earth, out of which (as we shall see
by and by) the body of Man was taken too. Whence we may,

1. Observe, Man and Beasts are of near Alliance.
Thou art my Mother and my Sister, Job 17.14.

Let us then bless Him that has put so great a difference between them and
us. 1. In Nature, having given men wisdom and understanding, which he has
denied unto the Beasts of the field, Job 35.11. 2. In our advancement, who has
put them under our feet, making them our Vassals, and us their Lords, Psalm.
8.6, 7. 3. In our Spiritual estate, in making us at present members of his Son,
and thereby his Children by Adoption, and heirs of his glory. Let it please us
with our Condition; encourage us to his service, who has so highly advanced
us; abase us in our thoughts and esteem of our selves; and move us to Mercy and
Compassion even to the beasts, upon the consideration that they also were
Creatures framed by the same powerful hand of God: which prevailed with Job in
another case, Job 31.15.

The Earth is here commanded by God, to bring forth the Living Creature, after
his kind: not by any power that it had in it self to give life to other
Creatures, which it had not in it self; but by the Power and Will of God, who
appointed and decreed it. And shall not the same Will and Decree of God, that
produced living Creatures out of the Dead Earth, cause the same Earth to yield
up her dead, and the Sea her dead? Rev. 20.13.

The difference between the Creation of Beasts and Man cannot be passed by
without special observation. Man's Body was indeed taken out of the Earth, as
well as the Bodies of the Beasts; but his Soul was not from the Earth, but from
Heaven. But in the Creation of Beasts, the Body, and Soul or Life, is wholly
out of the Earth; for the Earth is Commanded to bring forth the Living
Creature, that is, the Creature, with the Life thereof. So that we find no
Original of the Soul, or Life of the Beast, but from the Earth only. Whence,

2. Observe, Beasts are Wholly Of, and Out of, the Earth.
Levit. 17.11. and thence it is that all their motions are wholly Earthly, and
after Earthly things, and all the Operations of their Souls, in Nutrition,
Motion, or Sense, exercised merely by Bodily Instruments. And in their very
dissolution their Spirit goes downwards to the earth, from whence it was at the
first taken, as Solomon tells us, Eccl. 3.21.

Were it not then a foul shame for Men, endowed with understanding, to imitate
Beasts, and to take them for their pattern? Surely men, that understand not,
are like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. whose wisdom is sensual and
earthly, Jam. 3.15. Their mind only upon earthly things, Phil. 3.19. by which
they corrupt themselves as bruit beasts, Jude 10. becoming wholly sensual, Jude
19. walking altogether by Sense, and not by Faith, as Gods Children either do,
or at least should do, 2 Cor. 5.7.

By the Word and Decree of God both the tame and wild beasts, and every
creeping thing, were Created. Whence,

3. Observe, All the Beasts on the Earth, being Gods Creatures, are Gods Store,
and at his Command.
Psalm. 50.10. he sends forth his Spirit and creates them, Psalm. 104.30. he
opens his hand and feeds them, ver. 27, 28. and he gives out his Word and
commands them; and orders all their goings, directing them to execute his
Will: as appears in the example of the two she-Beares, 2 King. 2.24. and
she-Lion, 1 King. 13.24. and the Lions in the Den, Dan. 3.

Let us then ascribe all the store that we have, unto God; 1. Looking upon it
as a gift from God, as Jacoh does, Genesis 31.9. and made fruitful, and useful
by his blessing, Psalm. 144.13, 14. 2. Seek all at his hands. 3. And serve and
honor him with all that we possess, yea, with the first of our increase,
Prove. 3.9. 4. And use all that we have according to his direction; in Mercy
toward the Creature, and in a way of Sobriety to our selves.

VERSE 25.
ANd God made] Though God had commanded the Earth to bring forth the Creatures,
yet it was his own Power, giving efficacy to his Will, and Word, that was the
only means by which they were produced. This making of the Creatures, was not
by means, according to the course of nature, but the Creating of them without
means, supernaturally by the power of the Creator. Whence,

1. Observe, God not only Decrees and Commands, but Performs and Brings to
effect, whatsoever he Wills.
Moses to do any thing, he shall not lift up his hand in vain, but the
stretching out of it over the waters shall turn them into blood; the Ashes of
the Furnace, by sprinckling them into the Air, shall turn in Sores and Blains
upon men's bodies; his Word alone shall bring forth Froggs and Caterpillars,
Murrain upon the Cattle, Hail and Lightnings from Heaven, Darkness upon the
Land, and ^eath upon the first born. And this God does, not only in
extraordinary miraculous works that are Supernatural, but even in those that
are according to the course of nature. He decreed that Summer, and Winter,
Earing, and Harvest should not cease, while the world lasted, and we see they
continue to this day; He commanded their Propagation and sustentation, and they
continue according to his Ordinance unto this day, Psalm 119. Living, Moving,
and having their Being in him; Act. 17.28. And by his Word our food gives us
nourishment and str^^gth, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Nay, he wills our Sanctification and Holy
conversation, and he works in us both to Will and to do, Phil. 2.13.

Let this Consideration, stay up and support the hearts of Gods Children:
whatsoever God has engaged himself, unto by his Word and Promise, he will not
fail to bring to pass, to give Grace at present, and Glory hereafter, Psalm.
84.11. For he speaks Righteousness, Isa. 45.16. Never look either upon the
weakness of the Means, or the greatness of the work; but look upon the
Power, and Truth of him that has promised it: It is Gods Word and it shall
stand when Heaven and Earth shall fail. And let this bear up our spirits, when
they are sincking under the sense of our weakness; Indeed, without Him we can
do nothing, Joh. 15.5. But as he can do all things, Job. 42.2. So, in him that
strengthens us, we shall be able to do all things, Phil. 4.13. And he will work
In, and For us, Isa. 26.12. Only let us undertake nothing in our own strength
but all in the Power of his might.

That which might be observed, out of the particular enumeration of the
Creatures, which God made, we have taken notice of heretofore; as also of the
Execution of the Decree, and answerablenesse of it, in all things, according to
that which he had appointed.

There follows in the last place, the Creation of Man, the last, and
perfectest, and the Crown, and Glory of all Gods visible Works; for that cause
described more at large, and with more variety of Circumstances, then any of
the rest, and Consequently more needful to be attended, and more carefully
enquired into, by us, especially seeing withal it more nearly concerns us.

VERSE. 26.
LEt]. Before, God gave out his Command to the Creature, as to the Earth, and
Sea, to bring forth Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts: or, more Generally commands
things to be made, Let there be Light, Let the waters be gathered, Let there be
great Lights. Here he puts as it were, his own Hand to the work, and in a sort,
incourageth himself, to undertake it, as if he had an hard task to undertake;
if we may speak of God (as the Holy Ghost here represents him) after the manner
of men.

Us] He means the three Persons in the Trinity, whence it is that Elihu calls
him, God my Makers, Job 35.10. as the Original has it; and the Psalmist in
like manner, Let Israel rejoice in his Makers, Psalm. 149.2. Thus we have
represented unto us, a Consultation before hand, a Counsel of Gods advising,
and resolving upon the Creation of Man that our hearts might be raised up, to
the Expectation of some extraordinary work to follow (...) usually Counsels,
are the forerunners, and foundations of great Actions to ensue.

Man] The name of the kind of man, not of the person of the first man. And the
word Adam signifies properly, Red or Red Earth, pointing at the matter of which
man's body was framed. The same Word is sometimes used to express the base
condition of man, as Psalm. 62.9. That which we render men of low degree, are
vanity, and men of high degree, are a lie, is, in the Original The Sons of
Adam, are vanity, and the sons of Jsh a lie.

In our Image] That is, A resemblance and Answerableness to our nature; And it
is worth our observation, that this term Image, is put in the singular number,
Implying that these (Us, that is the Three Persons, that are brought in here
consulting together) have but one Image, that is, but one Nature: of which, Man
is in some sort partaker, 2 Pet. 1.4. This Image of God in man some conceive,
to comprehend three things. 1. Man's nature, by which he was made a reasonable
soul, and therein resembled God in his Wisdom. 2. His Uprightness by which he
was, in some degree, answerable to God in Holiness. 3. His State, in his
Dominion over the creatures, wherein he may be conceived, to be answerable to
God in Dominion, and Sovereignty. But, if we speak after the manner of the
Scripture, the Image of God in man, seems most properly to imply his
Resemblance, not so much in his Nature, as in the Rectitude and Holiness
thereof; for, now the Image of God in man is defaced, yet the reasonable soul
and the faculties thereof continue still, though much empaired. And the
renovation of Gods Image in us, is in Righteousness and Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.
Whereunto if we add knowledge, Col. 3.10. (by which the Apostle understands,
not natural Reason, or understanding; but the Supernatural Knowledge of
Heavenly things) we have the full Character of Gods Image, as it is expressly
called in both these places. Besides, when Adam, Genesis 5.3. is said to beget a
Son in his own Image; he begat not an unreasonable, but only a sinful,
Creature. So that Gods Image, in which man was Created, must needs consist, if
not solely; yet, especially in the Rectitude of his Soul, and of the Faculties
thereof, both the Understanding, and Will, and Affections: Although it must
needs be granted, that man draws nearer to God then any other creature does,
in his Dominion over Gods Works, in the Majesty of his Person, and in the
Natural Abilities of his mind.

After our Image] Some conceive that Image, and Likeness, import the same
thing. Others conceive, that by Image is meant such a Likeness, as may leave
in Man a resemblance of God, in some proportion. Others think that Image,
imports a resemblance of God in man's Natural abilities, of Wisdom, and
Understanding; and Likeness implies his Supernatural Abilities, of Wisdom and
Holiness, which were given him above Nature.

And let them have Dominion] That is Authority, and Power to Rule, Command,
Order, and dispose, and make use of them, as needful occafions shall require,
which the Psalmist, in a significant phrase, calls putting under our feet,
Psalm. 8.6. So that the fear of man is upon them, as God Himself speaks, Genesis
9.2. Of which still we have, in many things experience at present, but was more
general, at the first, in man's Innocence, and more perfect. This Dominion must
be understood, not to be Absolute; seeing it descended not, by any natural
right, but being of free gift, must be limited by the will of him that bestowed
it; that is, in ruling over them, in Love, and Mercy, for their good, and
preservation; for which he was trusted with that Power over them.

Over the Fish of the Sea] The Extent and Limits of this Soverainty, by which
it is bounded, are expressed in the next place. In Heaven he has nothing to
do, the Creatures there are for men's service, but not under his Command, which
is Limited to be over the Creatures here below, and is extended not only to
Fishes, Fowls, and Beasts; but to the Plants also, and Herbs, of which he has
commission to make use, for his food, ver. 29. but because that Grant is
extended to the beasts also, it is passed over here in silence, where that
power, which is given to Man alone, is only expressed.

In this history of the Creation of Man, the Holy Ghost sets before us, as he
had done formerly, in the history of making the rest of the Creatures. 1. Gods
Decree, wherein we have. 1. The Author thereof, the three Persons in the
Godhead. 2. The manner of their proceeding, by way of Consultation. 3. The
work appointed to be made, which was Man. 4. The fashion after which he was to
be made, After Gods Likeness, and Image. 5. The estate in which he was to be
placed, To be Lord over all Gods works here below.
2. We have the Execution of this Decree, and therein is expressed, 1. The
perfecting of the Work, Man was made, in all things, as God had Decreed to
make him, and that in both Sexes, Male, and Female. 2. The Blessing of God upon
Man, after he was made. 3. His Investiture into his Sovereignty. 4. The
Allowance of provision for the Support of man and beast.



THe Order, and Place, in which man was Created, which was after the rest of
the Creatures, is fit to be considered; It is true that it depended merely on
Gods Will, to make him, both what, and when he pleased; yet he may be probably
conceived in creating man last of all his works, to have respect unto three
things. 1. To the Order, which he had observed in all his former Works, which
was to go on still toward perfection, reserving the best of all his works unto
the last. 2. It seems to be convenient, that seeing Man was to make use of
other Creatures, for his service: they might be first made, that man might come
into the world ready furnished, and stored to his hand, with all manner of
provisions needful for his Use, and Comfort, which also the more Commended
Gods Bounty, and provident care for his Good. 3. That it might the more
evidently appear, that Man had no hand in making any of those works, which were
Created, before he had any being at all.

The Author of this Decree for man's Creation, which were, all the Three Persons
of the Trinity; the manner of their undertaking, this work which is by way of
Consultation, Gods interessing himself, in the Work and Resolution to go about
it himself in person, and the pattern according to which, he intends to make it
after his Own Image; all those Circumstances laid together, cannot but raise up
our hearts to the Expectation of some great and extraordinary piece of work to
follow. So that we may,

1. Observe, Man is a singular and Extraordinary Piece of Work.
Psalm. 8.5. and Crowned with honor, advanced above all the Creatures of this
Visible World, in the Majesty of his Person, in the Abilities of his Mind, Job.
35.11. in Sovereignty over all the Works of Gods Hands: but above all in his
Spiritual Estate, wherein he is made a Member of Christ, a Son of God, and Heir
of Glory, that the consideration thereof, may justly ravish us with Admiration,
as it does Holy David, Lord what is man, that thou art so mindful of him,
Psalm. 8.4.

1. Then questionless he must be Gods Chiefest Care, more worth in himself
then many Sparrowes, Matthew. 10.31. than Oxen, 1 Cor. 9.10. created after the
most perfect pattern, the Image of God Himself, Purchased at the Dearest rate,
even with the blood of the Son of God, and ordained unto the highest end, the
Advancing unto, and enjoying of Glory. And shall he that so graciously clothes
the Lilies of the Field, that so carefully feeds the young Ravens when they
cry, satisfies the desire of every living thing, neglect to provide necessary
supplies for man, the Glory of all the Creatures, and Lord of all the works of
his hands? See how our Savior presses this Argument, Matthew. 6.26.30. and
10.30. And the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.10. Now if men in general may rest upon those
grounds, the assurance of Gods Children, must needs be much stronger; both for
needful supplies and protection, seeing he, that has given unto them his own
Son, cannot but with him give them all things, Romans 8.23. Especially being
Members of his Body, who is Lord of all things; and therefore cannot suffer his
own Members to pine for hunger, to starve for cold, to be persecuted,
afflicted, and tormented, having received besides, a charge from his Father, to
lose none of those that are given him; but to raise them up at the last day,
Joh. 6.39. So that he cannot but be the Savior of his own body, Ephesians. 5.23.

2. Let men who are so far advanced, above all other Creatures, do him service
above them all; Let the rest of the Creatures, which in their places continue,
according to his Ordinance, Psalm 119.91, stir us up, that more especially are
appointed for his service, engaged by greater Mercies, and furnished with
greater abilities, to serve and honor him, with all our Endeavors; rendering
unto him proportionally, to what we have received of him, that as God has put
more Honor upon us, then He has done upon any other Creature: so we may
advance and Honor him in a greater Measure, then any other Creature.
Remembering, that we must give up an account unto him, of the Talent which we
have received from him, and according to the proportion of what we have
received: as it is represented unto us by our Savior Himself in that Parable,
Matthew. 25.

Before we come to the examination of the particular circumstances,
Considerable in Man's Creation, it will not be amiss to take notice of the
Order in which he was Created: he was the last of all Gods Visible Works, when
the Heavens were framed, and furnished with Lights, both to guide and cherish
him; the Earth made dry for him to walk and dwell upon, and furnished with all
variety of Herbs, Plants and Cattle for food, Service, and Delight; when
nothing was wanting, which was needful and useful, for him, then was man made.
Whence,

2. Observe, God provides before hand, all things needful and convenient for
man's supply.
Psalm. 21.3. causing his Care and Providence to go before our necessities. Thus
when he had resolved to call for a Famine upon Canaan, and the Countries
adjoining, he provided, and sent into Egypt, Joseph before, to make provision,
and to lay up store of corn beforehand, Genesis 45.7. And thus, before any
request be presented unto him, he considers beforehand what we need, Matthew.
6.32. And in the course of nature, God provides milk for children before they
be born, as their Parents provide them clothes, whose care notwithstanding
comes far short of Gods, as David found by experience, Psalm. 27.10. Out of the
same provident care of his, he brings forth store of provisions in the Summer,
to supply the pinching necessities of the Winter following, which if he should
forbear to do, all flesh must necessarily perish.

Moses in this History of man's Creation, to apply himself to our weak capacity,
sets God before us, undertaking and proceeding in his work, after the manner of
men, by way of advice and consultation beforehand, as men use to do, when they
undertake any business of importance; although it be true, that God who
apprehends all things at once, cannot be capable of deliberation; but thus far
he is pleased to abase himself, in compassion toward us to shadow his ways
unto us, by the actions of men, that we may the better understand them. Whence,

3. Observe, God is pleased, in compassion of our Weakness, to express
Himself, and his Actions, unto us, many times, after the manner of Mon, and
their Actions.


And this he does, 1. That he may condescend to our weakness, which moves him
to feed us, as Paul does his hearers, with milk, because we cannot brook strong
meat, 1 Cor. 3.2. representing Heavenly things to Earthly men, by earthly
means, as our Savior speaks, Joh. 3.12.

And, 2. To affect us the more, by representing spiritual things, by those,
which being Earthly, are nearest to Sense, which usually works most on our
affections.

Let it fill our hearts with the admiration of Gods mercy, and compassion
toward such unworthy wretches as we are, unto whom he is pleased to descend so
low, seeing we cannot ascend up unto Him, clothing himself, as it were, with
our flesh, and appearing to us, in a sort, in the form of a man, laying aside
his own Glory and Majesty for our encouragement and instruction.

A special end, which the Spirit of God aims at, in setting out this history
of Man's Creation, with such variety of Circumstances, and representing God
consulting in such a manner, is, to raise up our hearts to a more serious
consideration of, and diligent searching into, the work it self, which must be
supposed to be of more then ordinary importance, unto which there is such
unusual preparation. Whence,

4. Observe, Eminent and Extraordinary Works of God, require of Men, more
Especial and Extraordinary observation of them.
Job 36.24. even the most ordinary, as the distilling of the very drops of rain
from the clouds, ver. 27. as having, and representing unto us something of God:
How much more does the Prophet David, when he looks upon the Heavens, the Sun,
the Moon, and Stars, break forth into the admiration of Gods glory, Psalm. 8.3.
Wherefore we find Gods people justly taxed, for not taking notice of that
wonderful work of God, in making the Sands the bounds to keep in the Sea, Jer.
5.22. When Moses saw the bush burn, and was not consumed, he conceived it to
be some extraordinary thing, and drew near to enquire what it should be, Exodus
3.3. And when men see wicked men's own tongues to fall upon them, they take
special notice of, and wisely consider, that it is Gods doing, Psalm. 64.9. And
when God will show Ezekiel that great act of his, in gathering his dispersed
people, and uniting them into one body again, he stirs him up to the serious
consideration of that great work, by representing it unto him in the vision of
the dried bones, Ezekiel. 37.1. But above all, the Redemption of the world by
Christ, not only the Prophets themselves diligently searched after, but the
Angels desire to look narrowly into, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12.

To consider the Circumstances of this History more particularly, Moses
represents God after the manner of men, consulting, and as it were, taking
advice, before he undertake this great Work of Man's Creation; implying, that
this is either the Use and Custom, or rather the Duty of men, to proceed in the
undertaking of great works in such a manner; So that we may,

5. Observe, Works that are of Moment and Importance, ought to be undertaken
with Advice and Counsel.
Solomon) that establishes every purpose, Prove. 20.18. and in the multitude of
Counselors there is assurance, Prove. 15.22.

The Reason, 1. Because we see not (as God does) all things at once, but by
Reason draw one thing out of another.

2. Because every man sees not all things, and therefore we need more eyes then
our own, to help us to find out all that should guide our Judgment.

3. And lastly, Those things that are of Moment in themselves, draw on
Consequents of moment, upon which the safety either of particular Persons or
States depends; whence Solomon tells us, that Where there is no counsel, the
people fall; but in the multitude of Counselors there is safety, Prove. 11.14.

God indeed is here represented, as Advising, and Consulting; but it is only
with Himself, he calls no Creature into Council, to advise withal; but only
the Three Persons of the Deity, they deliberate, and determine, what shall be
undertaken and performed, in this work of Man's Creation. Whence,

6. Observe, God in all his Ways and Works is guided by no Counsel but his Own.
Romans 11.24. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord? or being his Counselor,
has taught him, Isa. 40.13, 14?

Reason 1. He needs none, as being of Himself of Infinite Wisdom, Psalm. 147.5.
Comprehending in one view all things, Past, Present, and to Come.

2. Seeing He Only has Counsel and Understanding, Job 12.13. it must needs
follow, that any Understanding that is in the Creature is from him; so that in
advising with the Creature, he should but consult with Himself.

3. It suits not with Gods absolute Sovereignty, to advise with any about what
he means to do, seeing all things are to be guided by his Will, and to be
effected by his Power.

How dare men take upon them, the boldness, to advise God in his ways? Now
this we do, at least by Implication, in many of our vain wishes, unadvised
censures, and causeless complaints, of many things done, or desired by us to
be done, in the Course of his Providence, which when we Choose according to our
own Wills, what do we else but Limit God, and either chalk him out his Way
before hand, or (which is worse) call him, in a sort, to account for that which
has not been done according to our minds: Which must needs savor, both of
Sottish Folly, who think our selves wiser then God; or of Infinite Pride, and
rebellion, when we deny his Sovereignty, as if he had not power to do with his
own what he will, unless it be according to our wills.

Again, out of the same Circumstance,

7. Observe, Man has no Maker but God Alone.
Mal. 2.10. Our bodies (though they be begotten by the help of our Parents) yet
his hands made, and fashioned as clay, poured them out as milk, crudled them
like cheese, clothed them with skin, and fenced them with bones and sinews,
Job 10.8, 10, 11. And as for our Souls, he infuseth them, Eccl. 12.7. and
makes them; as Zedekiah acknowledges, Jerem. 38.16.

Let then the praise, and honor, and thanks, be returned unto him alone, who
made us alone by his Own Wisdom, without any Creatures Counsel; by his own
Power, without any Assistance; Out of his Own free Love and Goodness, without
any Solicitation, or Engagement; who alone supports us by his Providence; nay,
Redeemed, and Saved us alone, by his own Son. Let it be our Care to Honor him
alone, to give up our selves to his Service alone, harkening only to his
voice, and doing his Will alone, glorifying him in our bodies, and in our
spirits, which are his, 1 Cor. 6.20.

The Pattern after which Man was made, was Gods own Image and likeness,
appearing especially in the Abilities, and Endowments of his Soul. Whence,

8. Observe, Man, in his first Creation, was made by God after his own Image.
Pet. 1.4. Not so much of Gods Being (for therein all Creatures have some
resemblance of him) nor at all of the full Measure and Infinite Perfections of
his Being, Of his Simplicity, Immensity, Eternity, Omnipotency, which are
utterly Incommunicable to any Creature, whose nature is altogether incapable of
them. But the Image of God in man consists in some resemblance, which he bears
of those communicable Properties of his Wisdom, and Holiness, (as has been
showed already). That which moved God to advance men unto so much honor, must
needs be his own Goodness, and Free Love, which provokes him to bestow without
measure, as they are without measure. Although withal, we may conceive, that he
had, 1. Respect therein to his own honor, which is much advanced by bestowing
such gifts upon men, as advancing them to so high a condition above all other
Creatures, and cannot but discover the Admirable, and Transcendent Perfections
of the Creator, that bestowed them, in whom those Eminencies of Wisdom and
Holiness must needs be acknowledged to dwell more abundantly, beyond all
proportion. 2. This Creating of man, by God, after his own Image, seems some
way needful, for the admittance of man into a nearer degree of Communion with
God; otherwise God might have delighted in man, as he does in the rest of the
works of his hands, Psalm. 104.31. but could never have had Communion with him,
as he has with all those, whom he has chosen in Christ, 1 John 1.3. and
renewed for that purpose after his Image.

Let it move all those, who are Created after Gods Image, to carry themselves
answerable thereunto, in Wisdom, approving and esteeming only things spiritual
and heavenly, God himself, and the things freely given us of God, and in
Holiness, answering his Will in all our affections, desires and endeavors.
This, 1. is our greatest honor, to be, as near as we may be, like unto God; a
dignity that the ambitious men of the world have endeavored to arrogate unto
themselves, Isa. 14.14. though they sought it in a false way. 2. Will move God
to delight in us, Prove. 11.20. and 12.22. 3. Will bring us a sure reward, when
by walking worthy of Him, Col. 1.10. we move others to glorify him, Matthew.
5.15.

Let it be a means to raise up all men's hearts to the detestation of sin, which
not only defaced this Image of God in us, but besides has stamped upon us the
character of Satan, whom all men that are born, and still remain in the
corruption of their nature, resemble both in their disposition, and in their
actions, Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.8. Abiding, Walking and Delighting in Darkness,
as Satan does, whose dominion is also called the Kingdom of Darkness; and
walking in perverse and crooked ways, contrary to God, who therefore must of
necessity walk contrary to them.

It cannot but be granted, that this Image of God, according to which he formed
the most excellent Creature, of all the works of his hand, must needs be the
greatest ornament and crown of glory, that could be set upon the head of a
Creature, not only because God bestowed it, as a special and eminent favor,
upon the chief of all his works; but besides, because there cannot be
conceived, a greater perfection in a Creature, then the nearest resemblance of
the Creator. Whence,

9. Observe, Gods Image in Man, is his greatest Glory.
more Excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. Whence it is that the Saints
have that title given them, that they are called the Excellent, Psalm. 16.3. as
if holy men only were worthy to be so called; and for the other part of Gods
Image, which is Wisdom, Solomon tells us, that it excells folly, as far as
light excells darkness, Eccl. 2.13. We must understand by it that wisdom which
consists in the knowledge of the most High, without which Agur acknowledges
himself to be altogether brutish, Prove. 30.2, 3. Wherefore our glory whereunto
we are reserved, (though we know not in Particular what we shall be) is in
General described to be this, that we shall be like unto God, because we shall
see him as he is, 1 John 3.2.

Let us then, despising the vain shadows of honor, which vain men so much
affect, 1. Labor to gain this true honor, to come as near to God as we can,
in Wisdom, and Holiness, climbing up from one step of this dignity to another,
Giving all diligence to add unto our Faith Virtue, to Virtue Knowledge, and
the rest that follow in the Apostles direction, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. And by patient
continuance in well doing, seeking honor, Romans 2.7. striving to adorn, not our
bodies, but our hidden man of the heart, which only God sets much by, 1 Pet.
3.4. and commends, Romans 2.29. As for outward ornaments, that grace the body, or
Titles, or places of honor, which advance one man above another, in the eye of
men, without the inward, and true Ornaments of Wisdom and Holiness, they are
but like the paintings of Sepulchers, and advance not a man one step above the
beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. 2. According to this true honor, of the stamp
of Gods Image upon a man, let us esteem both of our selves and others, which is
godly men's property, Psalm. 15.4. who judge as God judges.

After the Pattern according to which Man was made, follows the estate unto
which he was advanced; God bestows on him the Dominion over all his Creatures,
that as he was in some degree Partaker of his Nature: so, he might in some
sort, resemble him in his Sovereignty, and so be, as it were, his Deputy here
on Earth, Commanding under him, and in his Name, all the works of his hands, or
at least the greatest part of them. Whence,

10. Observe, God has advanced Man to have the Dominion and Lordship over all
the works of his hands.
Deuteronomy. 28.12. Job. 36.28. and to be subdued by us, The Earth by habitation, and
Culture, the Sea by Navigation, and fishing. But above all the rest, the Cattle
are most at our Command, which besides the food and clothing, which they
afford us; in their labors, do us a kind of voluntary homage, in obeying our
directions, and submitting to our government. So that all things are put under
our feet, Psalm. 8.6. So that as they are all Gods Servants, so we may with all
thankfulness acknowledge, that he has made them our Servants too. Now,
howsoever we had, by rebellion against God, forfeited this Lordship of ours,
yet God in mercy has restored it, in some measure by Christ, whom he has
given to us, and with him all things, Romans 8.32. So that in him we may say, All
are ours, 1 Cor. 3.22. And this in part God manifested, in renewing this Patent
to Noah (and in him to all the faithful) saved out of the waters, in the Ark,
which was a Type of Christ, Genesis 9.1, 2.

1. Let no man doubt of a sufficient supply for the necessities of this Life,
seeing God has given us all things, abundantly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17. How can
any man want food, and clothing, that has all the Creatures in Heaven and
Earth to do him service? Only let us walk in Faith, and Obedience; to which
the promise of sufficiency belong, Psalm. 37.3. Otherwise as sin forfeited our
Lordship over the Creatures in Adams Apostacy, so it may and will still hinder
Good things from us, Jer. 5.25.

2. Let us be careful to use the Creatures well, both for their good and our
own, ruling over them like Lords, and not as Tyrants, endeavor to preserve
them; a Righteous Man regards the life of his Beast, Prove. 12.10. Using them
as supplies for o^r necessities, and not as Fuel to our Lusts, remembering that
we enjoy them only by grant from God, and not by any right of our Own, and
therefore are to use them within the bounds and limits, which he has set us;
unto whom also we must render an account, as his stewards, how we have employed
them for his honor, and our own good.

3. For shame, let not us abase our selves, to our own Vassals, to serve them,
which God has put under our foot, setting an high price upon things of no
value, stooping to them in our Affections and desires, which is a mark of
subjection, Genesis 3.16. And making them our Delight, and Confidence as most men
do, Prove. 18.11. Luke 12.19.

This Lordship over the Creatures Man could not challenge by right of Creation,
seeing he was but a fellow Creature with them, it was Gods free Gift to make
him their Lord to express his bounty to man the more abundantly. Whence,

11. Observe, Man's dominion over the Creatures, is no right belonging to him by
Nature, but bestowed on him, by Gods free Gift.
Psalm. 8.6. and out of his bounty gave the Earth to the Sons of Men, Psalm.
115.16. The truth is, Man could not by right claim any Dominion, over that,
which had no dependence on him, neither by Creation, nor by present
sustentation: seeing the dependence of one upon another, is the foundation of
all Subjection, and Sovereignty. Neither could any bestow this Sovereignty, but
the Lord Himself, who by right of Creation has interest in all things as his
own, and has power to bestow them as he will: so that the Earth is his alone,
and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. Neither can he pass it over to man any
other way then by free gift, seeing he is no man's debtor, neither can any man
challenge him, that he has given unto him first, Romans 11.35.

1. Let all men freely refer all that they enjoy, to the honor of him that
bestowed it, which is the only quit-rent that he reserves unto himself, for
all his bounty, and which costs us nothing, but brings us more honor, then we
bring unto him. This we do, 1. When we acknowledge all that we receive, with
thankfulness unto him that bestows it, as Jacob does, Genesis 31.9. And that
with a sensible feeling of our own unworthiness, as we are directed to do,
Deuteronomy. 26, 5, that we may look upon that we enjoy, as a free gift. 2. When we
honor him with our substance, both in employing, and consecrating some part of
it to his service, Deuteronomy. 26.10. And 2. Besides, by refering all the strength
that we receive, by the free use of his Creatures, to encourage, and enable us
to serve him with cheerfulness: this is indeed to Eat and Drink, and to Do
all that we do, to the honor and Glory of God as we are directed, 1 Cor. 10.31.

2. Let us all, whom God has entrusted with his Creatures, use them according
to the will of him that has committed them unto us, remembering that he has
reserved the property of all unto himself, and has made us only stewards of
that which he has put into our hands, to preserve and cherish the Creatures,
and to make use of it to our selves, when our necessities require it, but still
within the bounds of sobriety, for our own good, and not for our hurt, for
strength and not for surfeiting or drunkenness; and our clothes for warmth and
not for pride, or wantonness. And the remainder, that which our necessities
require not, to bestow as God directs us, imparting our overplus to others, not
out of courtesy, but of duty, Prove. 3.17.28. especially to the Saints, Psalm
16.2.3. and household of faith, as the Apostle so calls them, Gal. 5.10.

We cannot without injury unto God, pass over the largeness of his gift unto
Man, which the Psalmist for that purpose sets out (as the Holy Ghost does here)
by the enumeration of all the particulars, contained in it: He gives, not like
Man, but like Himself, bestowing upon Man at once, no less than the Dominion
over all the works of his hands. Whence,

12. Observe, God gives, not like Man, but Bountifully like a God.
David looks upon that very promise, that God had made unto him, and his
Family, 2 Samuel 7.19. that it was not according to the measure of a Man's gift.
Thus he dealt with Abraham giving him an Estate like a Prince of God, Gen, 23,
6. With Job, giving him a family and estate almost without measure, Job 42.12.
With Solomon, besides some measure of wisdom which he begged, a large heart,
and an overplus (which he asked not) Riches, and Honor, above all the renowned
Men of the World. But what speak we of those, that are little more then the
Crummes that fall from his Table? To his Children he has given Jesus Christ,
his own Son, and with him all things, Romans 8.23. Grace and Glory, Psalm. 84.11.
All manner of Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.3. Thus he gives
richly, 1 Timothy 6.17. and freely without upbraiding any Man, Jam. 1.5. And this,
1. he can do, because none has a Treasure like him, Riches, Honor, Power and
might are all his, 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12. Yea Grace and Glory. 2. He can do no
otherwise, being, as he is, Love it self. 1 John 4.16. Plenteous in mercy,
Psalm. 103.8. So that his Mercy is above the Heavens, Psalm. 108.4. 3. He must be
honored like Himself, and none with him; and whereas nothing is honored in
him like his mercy, He must do good above all, that he may be honored above
all.

1. Let all Men depend on him, for any thing, though never so great,
Considering his Nature, he is God, and not Man: and therefore cannot, in any of
his dispensations, but show himself like a God, 2. His Promise, Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 18.10. Especially his Promise made unto us by
Christ, in whose Name he has promised to deny us nothing, John 16.23. 3. His
Engagements, He that has given us his Son, what can he deny us? Romans 8.32. See
how the same argument is proved, Isa. 43.3, 4. 4. The end of his bounty, which
is to set out the exceeding great riches of his grace, in the Ages to come, as
the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.7. He then that made all things for himself, that is
for his own glory, Prove. 16.4. will bestow them for his glory.

2. Serve him alone, and that cheerfully, which he requires, upon this very
ground, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Considering, 1. His All Sufficiency and fullness, compared
with men's Emptiness and beggary. 2. His bounty, who bestows all things
freely, as having no need of any thing, in recompense of what he gives; whereas
men for the most part give upon hard terms, looking for something again, either
to be profited by our service, or one way or other advantaged. So that
concerning them, one may take up Solomon's complaint, Most men will proclaim
every one his own bounty, but a faithful man who can find? Prove. 20.6.

The last particular, Observable, in this large gift bestowed upon man, is the
enumeration of the Particulars included therein, as Fish, Fowl, the beasts of
all sorts, yea, the whole store of the earth. Which the Holy Ghost is pleased
to set down, 1. For our greater assurance, as it is usual with men to do, in
their Conveyances, for avoiding of questions, and doubts that might arise. 2.
To raise up our hearts to greater admiration of the largeness of Gods bounty
unto man, by taking notice of all the particulars, contained under this large
Grant thus distinctly set before our eyes. Whence,

13. Observe, Gods Blessings upon his Children, ought not only to be remembered
in General, but to be recounted in Particular.
Psalm. 78. and 105. And thus the Godly not only sum them up in gross, as
Psalm. 18, but besides, upon Particular Mercies or Deliverances, both He, and
others compose diverse Psalms. This indeed is a way of singular Use, as well to
affect our hearts the more feelingly, with the sweet taste of the variety of so
many mercies, of several kinds, which withal work the deeper impression,
because Particulars are nearer to Sense (which most works upon the Affections)
than Generals are. As besides, to strengthen our hearts to a more Firm and
Constant dependence upon God, in Particular Cases (wherein our Faith usually
most wavers) when we remember, that we have had experience of Gods favor
toward us, in the like, in times past. As David remembering Gods mercy in his
former deliverances from the Lion and the Bear, assures himself of prevailing
likewise against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.35.

Let it serve for a Direction to every Godly person, to take notice of, and to
lay up in our hearts, the remembrance of Gods mercies toward us particularly
and distinctly. Whether they be outward and Temporal Blessings, in supplying
our wants daily, in giving food and raiment, and houses to dwell in, delivering
us from outward dangers, sometimes restoring, and always preserving our
health, and giving us peace and liberty, and the like; or greater mercies, in
spiritual things, in pardoning our sins, guiding us by his Counsel, preventing
our slips, recovering us from our backslidings, supplying us with strength in
our souls; such examples we have laid before us, Psalm. 103.2, 3, 4. and 107.8,
15, 21, 32. And hereof the Psalmist makes special Use, for the bearing up of
his fainting spirit, Psalm. 77.11. And it is an exercise, as, needful upon all
occasions, when we have fresh experiments of mercies received; so, to be
constantly performed on the Sabbath day, set apart of purpose to be a day of
rejoicing in God, for his mercies to his Church in general, and to our own
souls in particular.

VERSE 27.
SO God created] That is, as he had resolved, and decreed, so he did: and it is
observable, that the word Created, is thrice repeated in this Verse. Perhaps to
make man the more sensible, that he, as well as the rest is but a Creature,
howsoever made little lower then the Angels, and crowned with honor and
dignity, lest any man should think of himself above that which is meet. Or, it
may be withal, to make the deeper impression of Gods goodness, that made him
so excellent a Creature as he is.

In his own Image] Such an Image, as is expressed in the former Verse, in which
he carried the likeness or resemblance of God, which though it be not here
repeated, must be supplied, out of the Verse precedent.

In the Image of God] These words are added, both to take away the Ambiguity of
the former expression, wherein that clause (his own) being appliable, either to
God, or Man, that the mind of the Holy Ghost might the more clearly appear, he
adds, that he was Created, not after Man's own Image, but after the Image of
God: and (which is more probable) to fix our hearts the more fully, upon man,
above all other Creatures, that was made like unto, and after the Image of God
himself.

Male and Female] That is, both Sexes, the man, in the manner, and of the
Matter after mentioned; and the woman, in the manner, and of the Matter
expressed in the Chapter following. And but one of either Sex, as the Prophet
testifies, Mal. 2.15. as a Cake of bread, and a flaggon of wine, 1 Chronicles. 16.3.
is said to be but One cake of bread, and one flaggon of wine, 2 Samuel 6.19. as
the Original has it.

What God intended, and resolved to do, we have seen; whatsoever he purposed he
performs, in all things, as he intended. Whence we may,

1. Observe, Gods Purposes, and Promises, are all of them Yea, and Amen.
Observation 6. on Verse. 3. and Observe. 1. on Ver. 7.

The often repetition of this special honor, which God put upon Man, expressly
mentioned in the former verse, and twice repeated here, of the Image of God, in
which Man was Created, gives us just occasion to,

2. Observe, Gods Special, and more Eminent Favors, ought to be seriously
Weighed, and often Remembered.
Moses, Exodus 15. upon the deliverance of the Children of Israel at the Red
Sea; of Deborah, Judge. 5. upon the like occasion; Of Nannah, 1 Samuel, 2. when God
had given her a son; And, of the blessed Virgin, Lake 1.

For the same End God was pleased to Ordain the Sabbath, that it might be the
employment of his Children, to exercise themselves in the meditation of Gods
great Works in the Creation, Conservation, and Redemption of the World; and the
Sacraments, to preserve in the hearts of Men, the fresh Remembrance of the
Sacrifice of Christ, and the benefits purchased to the Church, and to our
selves in particular, thereby.

In Man's Creation, we have special mention made of the distinction of the
Sexes of Man and Woman; and it is affirmed, That God both Created them, and
distinguished them by their Sexes; he made them Male and Female: both their
Persons, and the distinction of their Sexes were his work. Whence,

3. Observe, The Distinction of the Sexes of Man and Woman, is Ordained by God
Himself.
Matthew. 19.4. That he that made them at the first, made them Male and Female;
which distinction, as he made in Nature, so he appoints in his Law to be
manifested, in the difference of their garments, Deuteronomy. 22.5. It is true, that
he observed the same rule, in making other Creatures, though it be mentioned
only in the Creation of Man. Whether it were to draw us to the more serious
consideration of the Work it self, by reckoning up so many particulars, in
relating the History thereof: or to teach man, being of the worthier Sex, not
to despise the woman as the weaker vessel; and the woman not be displeased with
her condition, though she be inferior in sex, seeing God that gave them their
being, gave withal, and appointed that distinction in their Being: or for any
other end, it is not easy to determine.

VERSE 28.
ANd God blessed them, and God said] The Name of God, twice mentioned expressly,
in this place (which might without it as easily be understood here, as it is
before, in the benediction of Fowls, and Fishes) seems to intimate the desire
of the Holy Ghost, to move us to have God still in our eye, in the
contemplation of the whole Work of Man's Creation, in a more special manner,
and that in every particular Circumstance of so great a work.

Thus we have after Man's Creation recorded, Gods blessing upon him for
propagation, and after that his solemn investiture, into his Dominion over the
beasts of the field, and the rest of the works of his hand. Whence,

1. Observe, It is by Gods blessing, that Man must be sustained, and upheld; as
well as it was by his Power, that he was Created.
men. Wherefore we find that he renewes it unto Noah, after the flood, Genesis
9.1. almost in the very expression, wherein it is given unto Adam here; and is
bestowed upon Abraham as a special favor, Genesis 12.2. which the Patriarchs
made over unto their Children, and Posterity after them (by special warrant
from God) as their best inheritance, and is a special reward, annexed by God,
as a special Encouragement unto all that walk in an holy course of obedience
before him, by which his Children should prosper in their Persons, Posterity,
and Estates.

Let all men labor to interest themselves in Gods blessing, as their best
portion, the showers of Blessings, as the Prophet terms them, Ezekiel. 34.26.
which make the Wife, the Cattle, and the Ground fruitful, make our Labors
successful, the means that we use effectual, and our Wealth and increase
useful and profitable unto us for our good. This blessing must fall upon us
from Christ our Head, as the oil from Aarons head run down to the skirts of his
garments: and is continued upon the just, Prove. 10.6. only in a way of
obedience, according to Gods Sanction, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.

The same Blessing that God bestows upon Adam, he had given before unto the
Fishes and Fowls, for the greatest part; but there he rather speaks Of them,
than To them. Here he speaks To the man, whom he had endowed with
understanding, to know what it was that he received; which seeing he
pronounces, and causes the man to understand before he effects it, we may,

2. Observe, God will have men to take notice of, and understand, the Blessings
that He bestows upon them.
Hos. 11.3. yea, even in Ordinary blessings, Jer. 5.21, 24. much more are they
charged with their stupidity, and foul unthankfulness, that understood not,
nor remembered those Extraordinary favors of God, of which they had so much
experience in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Psalm. 106.7. An argument of a
brutish and senseless heart, and the ground of a spirit of rebellion, and
especially the forerunner, and occasion of fearful plagues, the just reward
of that foul sin of unthankfulness.

But, whereas God had a residue of Spirit, why does he make but one Couple? It
may be it was to unite all men in love one to another, as being the children of
One; so that we cannot shut up our bowels of compassion from any man, of what
Nation or Kindred soever he be; but we must hide our selves from our own flesh,
Isa. 58.7. Or, it may be it was to manifest his Power, in multiplying two
persons into so many Nations, as we may see now overspread the whole face of
the Earth. Whence,

3. Observe, God can easily bring Multitudes out of One, if he please.
Abraham, Genesis 15.5. and performed it, as the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11.12,
though the stock out of which they sprang seemed to be as good as dead. Thus he
multiplyes his Church into great Multitudes, out of an Handful of Corn sown
on the top of the Mountains, Psalm. 72.16. And no marvel, seeing it is much
easier for Him to bring Many out of One, then it was to make All out of None,
as he did in the Creation in the beginning.

Walk before him in fear; He that made Many out of One, can more easily bring
Many to One, nay, to None, if it please Him; as he dealt with Ahab's numerous
kindred, and posterity, as he had foretold he would do, by the mouth of Elijah,
2 King. 10.4, 5. and as we see, He does daily, blotting out the very memory of
many great families, as he threatened to do unto Amalek, one of the first of
the Nations, Exodus 17.14. Again,

4. Observe, All the Men, and Nations in the World, are of one Blood, and have
all of them but one Father.
Acts 17.26. And in the renewing the face of the Earth, drew out of one Stock,
all the Kindreds and Nations of the World, which came all out of Noah's loins;
so that all men have but one Father, on Earth; as well as they have but One
Maker, in Heaven, One God, and Father of all.

Let all men then love as Brethren; Looking upon all men, not only as
Neighbors, as we are commanded in the Law, but as of the same flesh with us,
Isa. 58.7. And let us endeavor to manifest it, in showing Courtesies to
strangers, as we are commanded, Exodus 23.9, 12. Heb. 13.2. Forgiving our
Enemies, and doing good to all men, Gal. 6.10.

Of fruitfulness, at which the blessing of God points, in this place, we have
spoken already, upon Ver. 22. Unto the blessing, is annexed a Direction, or
Command, to subdue the Earth, and take the charge of the Creatures.
Replenishing of the Earth, includes, at least, a blessing, as expressing the
measure of man's fruitfulness, which should be so great, that his Posterity
should fill the Earth. Notwithstanding it cannot be denied, that it carries
with it besides, the force of a Command (as some men think) unto men, to
disperse themselves abroad upon the face of the earth, till they have filled
every habitable part thereof; at least it must be allowed, as a warrant unto
them, so to do, as Occasions and Opportunities shall invite them thereunto. And
indeed, how men should subdue the earth (which must be done by culture) without
inhabiting it, it is hard to imagine. Whence,

5. Observe, Man's Subduing, and Replenishing the Earth, is by special Warrant,
and Command from God Himself.
Noah, after the Flood, Genesis 9.1. who was (as it were) the Second Founder of
the Earth. Hence it is that the Psalmist tells us, that God has given the
earth to the sons of men, Psalm. 115.16. and, as Moses speaks, divided them
their inheritances therein, Deuteronomy. 32.8. And good reason it should be so, seeing
the Earth being his, and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. no man can warrant
his title to any part thereof, unless he can derive it from God, either
Immediately, which is by a Natural title, by first subduing it; or Mediately,
by a Civil title, which is derived from thence.

Let every man labor to derive his title to his possessions from God. Now we
hold Lands from God, when we hold them by just Title, warranted by him; which
may be either Natural, or Civil. A Natural Title, men gain, by possessing and
subduing any void portion of the Earth, which is the firmest and surest
holding, in the World. A Civil Title, is that which is gotten by Inheritance,
Gift, or Purchase from those, either Immediately or Mediately, which formerly
possessed it by such a Natural Title. We must withal labor to add unto this,
a Religious Title, that having forfeited all our right which we had unto the
earth, and the blessings thereby, by Adams rebellion, being now restored by
Christ, (whom God has made heir of all things, Heb. 1.2.) we may enjoy
whatsoever God has allotted unto us in Him, in whom we have the Promises, both
of this life, and of that which is to come; and from whom Abraham, through
faith, derived his Title to be heir of the World, Romans 4.13. By that title,
Psalm. 37. those that wait on the Lord, ver. 9. the Meek, ver. 11. the
Righteous, ver. 29. and Psalm. 25. ver. 12, 13. those that fear the Lord, shall
inherit the Earth.

But God not only warrants man to replenish, and possess the Earth, but
appoints him withal to subdue it, that is, by Culture, and Husbandry, to
Manure and make it fit to yield fruits, and provisions, for the sustaining both
of men, and beasts: which God has appointed to receive their food out of the
Earth, which is done by Planting, Earing, Sowing, and other works of Husbandry.
Whence,

6. Observe, Those that have possessions in the Earth, must withal so manure
and husband them, that they may be made useful, and fruitful.
Genesis 3.19. So that plenty of bread is now annexed to hard labor, Prove. 12.11.
and 28.19. And withal, such kind of labor is not only for necessity, but
exceeding profitable to man, both for the preserving of the health of his body,
and for preventing those distempers of the mind, that Idlnesse would certainly
pester it withal. So, our present condition considered, in labor there is
profit every way, Prove. 14.23.

But besides the dominion of the Earth, God is pleased to put under man's feet
the rest of the works of his hands, the Fowls, Fishes, and Beasts of the field,
and to make him Lord over them all, both to govern them, and to make use of
them for his service. Whence,

7. Observe, All the Creatures of the Earth, are the Servants of Man, by the
Appointment of God Himself.
Observe. 10. They were indeed so ordained to be by God, and continued to be,
till man's Apostasy. And even since the Fall, God has been pleased to renew
this privilege, which sin had forfeited; as we see he did in express terms to
Noah, Genesis 9.2, after the Flood. Which also we still enjoy in a great part; so
that the fear of man is upon the rest of the Creatures still. And howsoever
they serve not so willingly, as they should have done, if man had not fallen,
yet we see the power of man prevails over them, to master and tame them in a
great part, Jam. 3.7. An argument of the great power of God, that we prevail
over such Creatures, as both in the fierceness of their nature, and strength
of their bodies, do far excel us.

If then the Creatures obey us not, or if they do it rather by force, then
willingly, and sometimes cast off the yoke, and offer violence to their
Masters; thank Sin for that, as well as for many other mischiefs: but from the
beginning it was not so.

VERSE. 29.
BEhold] That is, Take notice of a special favor, although all the Creatures
are mine, as being the work of mine own hand, yet am I well pleased that some
of them should perish, to preserve, and keep you alive. It may be withal,
that, by this particle of Observation, he points at Gods provident Care, in
providing means to sustain Man, before he had Created him.

I have given you] Who am Lord of all, and therefore have power to dispose of
mine own as I please: And though you can claim nothing in your own right, yet
you shall receive all of my free gift. And [I have given] expresses the full
ratification of the Gift, as not to be expected hereafter, but to be enjoyed
presently from that very instant.

Every herb bearing seed] By which, though you spend the herb, yet the kind of
it may be still preserved; and so the provisions for the sustaining of your
lives renewing daily, may be sufficient to yield you a lasting supply of food,
for time to come.

Which is upon the face of the Earth] Which you are to replenish, and subdue.
The words seem to enforce a double encouragement to labor; The first from
necessity, as if he had said, Husband the Earth well, for it is the
fruitfulness of the Earth, by which you must support your lives. The Second,
for the Interest which God gave them in the fruits of their Labors: As if he
had said, Bestow your labor in husbanding and manuring the Earth well, for you
shall eat the fruits of it; so that you shall labor but for your own good.

In which is the fruit of a Tree] For it is only the fruit of any tree, that we
make use of, for food. The leaves may be sometimes useful for Medicine; but,
only the fruit is our food.

To you it shall be for meat] Thus God expresses the use of the Herbs, and
Fruits, which he had given Man, that they should be for their food: in which
clause is withal included a secret Blessing of God upon them, that they should
not only be meat, but nourishment too. For Herbs, and Fruits, are not
presently nourishment, because they are eaten; neither do they prove so to all,
nor at all times. It is true, that Man lives not by bread alone, but by every
word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, that is, by his blessing upon the bread,
which gives it power to nourish us. Our nourishment by food may indeed justly
be accounted amongst Gods wonders, much more amongst his blessings.

In this, and the next Verse is clearly set before us, both the Goodness, and
Provident care of God, in allowing and appointing of provision of food, both
for Man, and beasts, which God annexeth, to the Dominion given to Man over the
Creatures, and that (as we may probably guess) partly to enconrage him, to
take care of the Earth, the fruits whereof must sustain his life. And partly to
temper his thoughts, in the consideration of his new dignity; He was to bear
rule over the Earth, but he must be supported by it; he was a Lord, but a Lord
that could not stand by himself, but must be supported and upheld by the daily
food, which was to be supplied unto him, by those very Creatures, that were put
under his feet.

But why does God abase Man so far, in this his happy condition, as to support,
and as it were to prop him up, by the Creatures, whereas he might have
preserved Man, as he does the Angels, by immediate Influence from himself,
without the help of any Creature at all, and have continued his life, as well
without food as by food? It seems that God from the beginning, appointed Man's
present condition in this world, to be an estate of abasement, in comparison of
that glorious condition which was to follow; a step lower then the Angels,
although he was Crowned, even at present, with Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8.5. For
1. he was here on earth as a Sojourner for a time, to be removed hence to his
everlasting habitation afterward. 2. He was at present, although not utterly
shut out from Gods presence, yet admitted only to behold his back-parts, and to
enjoy him by means, as being incapable, in his present condition, to behold
him face to face, and to see him as he is, which he could not do in his flesh,
but was to expect afterward. Thirdly, as he enjoyed not God on Earth
Immediately: So he was not to be supported by him Immediately, but from him, by
the Creatures. Lastly, he suffered some abasement in the employment, wherein,
while he was to continue on Earth, he was to serve him, for the most part, in
the service of the the Creature, Ordering that, and governing it, according to
Gods direction; whereas hereafter all his services shall be immediately
directed unto God, in praising and rejoicing in him continually: So that it
appears evidently many ways, that from the Creation, God intended some degree
of abasement to Man in his present condition in this life, reserving him unto
the hope of enjoying the fullness of Glory, in the world to come: into which he
was to be translated, not by death, but by such a change, as the Apostle
mentions, 1 Cor. 15.51. The manner whereof, is neither known, nor curiously to
be enquired after. From this Consideration,

1. Observe, Although God Created Man without means, yet it is not his will to
preserve him without means.
Moses, Elijah, and Christ, each forty days without any food at all; but that
he will not do it, the constant course of his providence makes it evident, yea
the petition, which our Savior directs us to present daily unto God, for bread
for the day, makes it manifest, that though Man lives not by bread, as Moses
speaks, Deuteronomy. 8.3. yet he lives not without it. Thus has God ordained it, 1.
To humble us in this our state of baseness, as has been showed already. 2. To
lead us to the Consideration, of the wonderful ways of Gods Providence, by
which he has appointed us such means of nourishment, as plainly discover the
same Power of God in maintaining, and supporting our lives, which he showed in
our first Creation, as appears in maintaining our lives by dead things; For
such is our nourishment, which neither is quickened it self, nor quickens us,
except it die. And next in working such changes, and alterations, in our
nourishment, both in the form and nature of it, as might justly amaze us all.
When we observe, so many several sorts of Creatures, as we feed upon, of such
different qualities and natures, all changed into one substance, all
transformed into blood: and that blood again, not returned into the same
substance, of which it was made; but altered into as many, or more several
natures, of a different temper from what they were; some hard, as bones; others
soft, as flesh; some strong and tough, as Sinews; others subtle and pure, as
spirits, and the like: which wonders, if they be well weighed, may be esteemed
little inferior to any miracle.

Let us then both make provision for, and make use of such Creatures as God
has allowed and appointed unto us to be means of supporting our selves, and
that too in obedience to his will, yet so, as, 1. To labor for them without
care, 2. To make use of them without dependence on them, but resting our hearts
upon Him that gave them. 3. And affecting our selves, not so much with the
goodness of the Creatures, as with the bounty of him that gave them. 4. And
still longing after our future estate, wherein these means ceasing, God shall
be unto us All in All, 1 Cor. 15.28.

Before, we beheld the Creation of Man and Beast, here we have set before us
the provision, that God makes and bestows on them for their food: He that
gives them their Life and Being, takes Care for, and bestows liberally, means
for their support, and preservation. Whence,

2. Observe, That God, that has given us Life, will not fail to provide, and
bestow upon us means for the preservation of our life.
Matthew. 6.15. Because the life is more worth then food, and the Body then
Raiment, that covers it; especially if we consider, that we receive, and expect
both from the hand of a faithful Creator, as the Apostle terms him, 1 Pet.
4.19. And therefore can neither Hate, nor neglect, any thing that he has made.
And besides, unless he should provide for his own Creatures, all flesh should
soon perish, and then God should have made his works in vain.

Let us then bring our hearts, to depend upon God, for all needful provisions
for our lives: Considering, 1. his Nature, who is good to all, Psalm. 145.9. 2.
His All Sufficiency, who has the store of the whole Earth in his hand, Psalm.
24.1. 3. His promise, Psalm. 37.3. and 34.10. which is more firm then the Earth.
4. His engagements many ways, in Creating, Redeeming, and Supporting us, from
our first being hitherto: and we know he does nothing in vain, but where he
begins, he makes an end. 5. His disposing of things in the Course of Nature;
which by his providence, are so ordered, that all things are fitted, as well
for Sustentation as for Procreation; every Mother of Man and Beast, has a
fountain of food in her own body, for that fruit which she brings forth, ready
prepared, before it comes into the World. Every winter has provision stored up
in Summer precedent, to supply all the necessities thereof before they appear,
6. The Superiments of the suplies which God provides, not only for our selves
ever, since we had a Being, but for all Creatures, whose eyes wait upon him,
and do from him receive their meat in due season, Psalm 145.

It is not to be passed by, that before this promise Moses prefixeth a special
note of observation (behold) used ordinarily either to tax, and awaken our
heedlesse hearts, in not observing what we ought to have taken notice of, or to
raise them to an expectation of some great work in hand, which requires more
then ordinaty observation when it is performed. Whence,

3. Observe, The Goodness and Providence of God, even in supplying us with
necessary provision for our lives, requires special observation.
Deuteronomy. 8.2, as to be observed allwaies, so sometimes to be solemnly and
publickely acknowledged unto God himself, in presenting unto him the first
fruits of every years provision, Deuteronomy. 26 9.10. And that to exercise Men's
hearts in a more serious meditation and thankful remembrance of his goodness,
Deuteronomy. 8, 18. The neglect of which duty, God justly taxes in his People, Hos.
11.3, 4. as either a means to draw them on to an Apostasy, and revolt from
God, or at least a sign of the breeding of this dangerous sin, Deuteronomy. 5.23, 24.

It were then a shame for Men to receive their food at Gods Hand, like beasts,
that have no understanding, who gather their food indeed, Psalm. 104.2. but
without observing whence, or from whom it comes; Let it be our care to take
special notice of Gods Hand, and goodness, in all the blessings of this life,
that we receive; taking notice both What, and of what Condition, of what
Variety in their several kinds; and in what Abundance God pours out his
blessings upon us even in Outward things, prospering all the Labors of our
hands, and watching over the land where we dwell: so that his Eyes are upon it
from one end of the year to the other, Deuteronomy. 11, 12. Making the fruits of the
Earth to Spring and grow up, and ripen, while we sleep, and look not after
them, that it may warm our hearts with the taste of his goodness, and raise
them up to an holy rejoicing before him, and to cheerfulness in the service of
so liberal a Master.

God (as we have seen) had made Adam Lord of the whole Earth, and had put all
his Creatures under his feet; and yet we see here, that he comes to give him
allowance of that store, which he had prepared for him, and bestowed upon him
for his food, and gives him, in a sort, bread to put in his mouth. Whence,

4. Observe, Men that have the greatest possessions in the World, must
notwithstanding receive their allowance out of it, continually, from Gods Hand.
Solomon, Eccle. 5.9, and consequently by Gods allowance, who brings forth food
out of the Earth. It must be God, that must hear the Heavens, and the Heavens
the Earth, and the Earth his People Israel. 2.21, 22. Which unless he should
do, daily pouring out his blessing upon the Earth, to make that fruitful to
yield us bread, and upon the bread to give it strength, to yield us
nourishment, the Kings of the Earth must starve as well as the poorest beggars.
Wherefore our Savior, in that Prayer, which we call the Lords, directs all
that call God Father, to beg daily, the portion for the day, at Gods Hand, as
well Kings themselves as their meanest Vassals.

Let this consideration humble all those that flatter themselves with the food,
Luke 12.19. and, depending upon the store of their provision, or revenewes of
their Lands, conceive it needless to seek unto GOD; neither praying unto Him,
nor depending on Him, nor serving Him, because they live, as they conceive upon
their own stock: They are not greater Lords then Adam, who had the whole Earth
for his inheritance, and yet had no bread to put into his Mouth, till God gave
him his allowance out of it: let none then despise the meanest, nor advance
himself above them, Rich and Poor, Kings and Subjects, all must receive their
provision for food, of Alms and by allowance from God day by day.

In relating Gods grant of food for the sustaining of Man's life, Moses
expresses, 1. the Author that bestows it, God Himself, 2. What was given,
both in the kind of it, Herbs, and Fruits, and in the variety of it Every herb,
and the fruit of every Tree. 3. For what Term, which being without limitation,
must be extended both to Himself and his Posterity after him. 4. For what Use,
to be unto them for food. From the first Circumstance,

5. Observe, Man's food is the Gift of God.
Psalm. 155.15. He commands blessings for them for that purpose, and opens his
Treasures for them, Deuteronomy. 28.8.12. And that not only in General but more
particularly, He shares out unto us every one his particular portion, see Psalm.
146.7. Whence it is that our Savior directs us to beg at Gods Hand the portion
of every day, which also He proportions as He did the Mannah which He rained
down upon his People according to every Man's eating Exodus 16.16. This Holy
Jacob found so true by his own experience, that he acknowledged, that God had
fed him all his life, Genesis 48.15. This portion for every Man's allowance, though
God sometimes conveighs unto them by extraordinary means; yet he usually
supplies by the Ministry of Men, or by their own labor and industry, by which
he gives them a just title to the bread that they eat, so that they may truly
call it their Own as the Apostle does, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. Because God gives unto
them a blessing upon their obedience, in laboring with their hand the thing
that is good, Ephesians. 4.28. Notwithstanding, even that also is to be acknowledged
as Gods Gift, who gives seed unto him that sows, and bread for food, 2 Cor.
9, 10. And gives ability to get wealth, that he may establish his Covenant and
keep his Word with us, Deuteronomy. 8.18. But not to pay us any debt that He owes us.

1. Let every one then depend upon God for necessaries, for the supporting of
his life; 1. begging it of him by prayer, as our Savior directs us, and as
Jacob does, Genesis 28.20. and Agur, Prove. 30.8. As acknowledging our own beggary,
that have not bread to put in our mouths, unless he bestow it; and unability
to get it by any means that we can use, unless he prosper them; and
unworthiness to have it from Him by any desert of our own, unless he bestow
it out of free bounty. 2. Depending and trusting on him by Faith, as we are
directed, Psalm 37.3. grounded on his Promise, I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee, Hebr. 13.5. 3. Walking in a Course of Holy Obedience; to which,
sufficiency and abundance in all blessings of this life, is promised, Deuteronomy.
28.13. and Psalm 81.13.16. Especially to diligence in an honest Calling; he
that tilleth his Land shall be satisfied with bread, Prove. 12.11. He that
labors with his hand the thing that is good, shall have both to supply his
own wants, and an overplus to give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.

2. For shame, Let us serve him faithfully, who feeds us as it were, at his own
Table; nay, prepares a Table before us, and makes our Cup to run over, Psalm.
23.5. And besides, Warmes us and cloatheth us, with the flieces of his own
Flocks, which He gives as he did to Abraham, Genesis 24, 35. Yea, abaseth Himself
so low, as to take off our yoke from us, and to lay our meat before us, Hos.
11.4. And beyond all this, supports and protects us by his Power: so that the
Everlasting arms are underneath us, Deuteronomy. 33.27. So that we dwell in safety
alone, verse 28. and no evil comes near our dwellings.

The kinds of the provisions, which God allowed unto Man, follows; Herbs and
fruits of trees must be his food: both of them but a little before: and
produced out of the Earth by the powerful Word of Gods Mouth, upon the third
day, verse 11. So that we may out of that Consideration,

6. Observe, All the Provision, that God has allowed Man, for his food, is
drawn out of Earth.
Psalm. 104.14. And, if we consider it well, what are Corn, Fruits, Cattle and
their flesh on which we feed, but Earth, as it were refined, and changed both
in shape and quality, but not in substance? Neither is this more true then
necessary, that Men's bodies, which are themselves out of the Earth, should be
nourished out of the Earth, that is, with a kind of food that is proportionable
to themselves: neither is it more necessary then it is Convenient; that the
heart of Man by the consideration thereof, may be kept low by the
representation of the baseness both of his Original and End, that he came out
of the earth, and thither must return again, set before him, in every dish at
his Table which he feeds upon.

It justly taxes both our niceness and foolish pride, in making that an
occasion, and means of lifting up our hearts and glorying to others, by which
God most endeavors to humble and abase us, our food and clothing; being both
of them Evidences of our Weakness, Baseness and Shame, who being made of
Earth, dwelling in houses of Earth or Clay, as Job calls them, Job. 4.19. and
getting our bread and food out of the Earth, are withal clothed with no
better then Earth; from whence we draw our finest linen immediately, and from
whence the flieces of our flocks, the skins and costly furs which we borrow
from the backs of beasts, are derived in the second descent. O Earth, Earth,
Earth, know thine own vileness, and glory not in thine own shame, as wicked
Men are justly charged to do, Phil. 3.19.

If we lay together the dispensations of God unto Man, we may easily observe,
and have cause seriously to consider, how strangely God levels Man's ways
thereby, and tempers together, our Advancement, and Abasement. First, Adam is
made as it were a God upon Earth; and now a Worm feeding, as it were, upon the
dust: first, a Lord over all the works that God had made, to rule, and Command
them; and now made to stoop in a sort, to his own vassails, and to make use of
them for the sustaining of his life. Whence,

7. Observe, God does strangely counterballance our Honors, and Abasements in
all his dispensations unto us.
David professes that God did lift him up, and cast him down, Psalm. 102.10.
Thus he dealt with Jacob, whom he advanced in his Birthright, and Blessing,
above his brother Esau, and made him his Lord; and not long after, brings him
down before him on his knees: Makes Moses the reputed son of Pharaohs daughter,
and by and by an Exile and Shepherd in Midian; and from that base condition
advances him to an estate above the greatest Monarchs of the world. Thus he
dealt with David, Job, and many others. And in the same manner he deals with
all his children, in spiritual things; tempering our advancement with
abasement, (as he dealt with S. Paul, 2 Cor, 12.7.) our Consolations with
Heaviness of spirit, our Holiness with manifold Corruptions. And thus it
pleases him to deal with us, 1. To fit us to that condition of baseness, in
which he has placed us in this World. 2. To keep our hearts low and humble,
which (especially in this state of Corruption) we are so hardly brought unto;
lest we forget both our selves, and, which is much worse, Him that made, as all
things, so us also for his own honor; which Agur feared, Prove. 30.9.

In the kinds of the food which God allowed to Adam, we cannot but take notice
of the homeliness of that provision that God appoints him to feed on, no way
answerable to those delicates that our Luxurious Palates so much affect and
delight in; but wholesome and vulgar, easily to be found in any place, where he
should set his foot. It cannot be denied, but that those Herbs and Fruits,
before Gods curse came upon the Earth for sin, exceeded, both in Taste, and
Virtue, those which the Earth now brings forth; Notwithstanding, since God
makes such vulgar provision, for the greatest Monarch that ever the Sun saw, we
may,

8. Observe, Plain and Ordinary Fare, may, and ought to content the best
amongst men, and is most agreeable to the Mind and Will of God.
Genesis 18.8. and themselves fed upon Pottage of Lentiles, Genesis 25.34. Food
convenient will content Agur, Prove. 30.8. And our Saviors own provisions were
but barley loaves, and small fishes, John 6.9. It is true, that John Baptists
feeding upon Locusts and wild honey, was extraordinary, and therefore not to be
drawn into imitation. And it must be granted, that both for Civil and Religious
Respects and Occasions, we are permitted to a more free and liberal use of the
Creatures for our food. Rulers, as Solomon implies, Prove. 23.1. and as appears
by the provision which he made for his own Table and Family, 1 King. 4.23. and
that of Nehemiah, Chap. 5.18. and all other men of Abilities and Large Estates,
are permitted to make provisions for their Tables according to their Places and
Conditions: Yea, men of ordinary rank upon Special Occasions of Marriages,
Birth of Children, entertaining of friends, holy feastings, and like, are
allowed to exceed their ordinary proportions; Provided always, 1. That they
affect not delicacy in their food. 2. Make not the Creatures fuel for their
lusts; eating still for hunger and health, and not surfeiting and drunkenness,
Eccl. 10.17. 3. Exceed not the proportions of their estates, nor hinder their
liberality in relieving those that need; as that rich Glutton did, Luke 16.19.
4. Use it not at unseasonable times; which God so sharply taxes, and severely
punishes, Isa. 22.13, 14. Otherwise God is best pleased with Moderation and
Competency; as appears, 1. By the large provision that he has made for
ordinary and vulgar food, whereas Creatures for delicacy are few and scarce. 2.
By his Blessing upon our food. Simple and plain fare best maintains our health
and strength, and thereby fits the body for employment; whereas abundance and
delicates over-burthening nature, both impair the health and strength of the
body, and make way besides for the raising up and nourishing of corrupt lusts
in the heart.

Let no man be discontented with his mean provisions, which, 1. The men, of
whom the World was not worthy, satisfied themselves withal. 2. And are as good
as the body which they nourish. 3. And better then we deserve. 4. And more then
we are able to procure of our selves. 5. And are more profitable to us for the
maintaining the health and strength of our bodies. 6. And free us from
dangerous enticements to Luxury and Excess.

Now although God appointed man to feed upon Herbs and Plants, yet he enlarges
his Grant, and allows him to eat of all kinds of Herbs and Fruits, the several
kinds whereof are so various and almost infinite, that they cannot easily be
numbered. Whence,

9. Observe, Gods Allowance to Man of Food, for the sustaining of his life, is
exceeding Large, and of Wonderful variety.
Adam in this first Grant; but much larger to Noah and his posterity when it
was renewed after the Flood, Genesis 9.3. when it took in all sorts of Beasts and
Fishes, which he has given us likewise to make use of for food in fit times,
and in due proportions, and for the end for which they were given; some for
maintaining our lives in health and strength; and others for delight, within
such Limits as are mentioned in the former point. Which he has done, 1. To
manifest his Bounty in the Largeness of his Gift; As it testified Potiphar's
Kindness to Joseph, when he trusted him with all that he had in the house,
Genesis 39.8. 2. To raise up our hearts by the experience of the variety of the
tastes of so many Excellent and Pleasant Creatures, to rejoice in and serve Him
alone, and that with cheerfulness, that gives all things so abundantly to
enjoy.

There is one thing more yet to be taken notice of, that God is pleased to
allow us such Herbs and Fruits for our food, as having seed in them, may be
daily renewed in their kinds, lest our provisions should fail us at the last,
seeing the Creatures daily perish with the using. Whence,

10. Observe, God gives us not our Provisions at once, but by a continual and
daily Supply of those things that we need.
Moses testifies, Deuteronomy. 8.3: As he gives us our provisions, by commanding and
pouring out his Blessings from thence upon the Creatures, by which they are
renewed every day, that we might have a continual supply by them for our daily
use. In the same manner he deals, in supplying that strength and nourishment,
which we receive by feeding on the Creatures, which usually lasts not above a
day, and then must be repaired and renewed again. And this God is pleased to do
upon these grounds: 1. To manifest his Fatherly care and Providence over us,
when he supplies us with all necessaries from day to day, as our necessities
require, that our store is no sooner done, but it is renewed daily; we are no
sooner hungry, but we have food to fill us: As it manifested Gods care of
Elijah, and the Widow that entertained him, that her handful of meal, and a
little oil in a Cruse, were increased as fast as they spent it. 2. To bind us
to continual dependence on him, and service of him, as Parents do their
Children, by feeding them daily, but keeping the stock in their own hands. 3.
To exercise our faith, in depending firmly upon his faithful Promises, which
being supported by his All Sufficiency, and Unchangeable Love toward us,
assure us of a sufficient supply from time to time, in all our wants. 4.
Lastly, necessity in a sort enforces it, seeing if all our provisions for food
should be laid up together at once, it must of necessity prove both more
troublesome, and less comfortable unto us.

The last observable Circumstance in Moses his Relation of this Decree of God
concerning his allowance of Food unto man, is so pronounced, that it includes
withal a promise, that what he grants them, they might not only lawfully use,
but in the use of it should find that it should prove meat unto them, that is,
it should nourish them, and sustain them, without which the Grant of using the
Creatures for food, had done them little pleasure. Whence,

11. Observe, It is only by Gods Decree and Blessing upon the Creatures, that
they have Power and Strength to Nourish and Sustain us.
Moses tells us) we live not so much by bread, as by every Word that proceeds
out of Gods mouth, Deuteronomy. 8.3. that is, by his Blessing upon the bread, which if
he suspend or withdraw, the Creatures can do us little good, Levit. 26.26. Hag.
1.6. The truth is, it must needs be so, because the nourishment of men's bodies
by food is a work beyond the power of the Creature, which cannot give or
maintain in another, that life which it self has not. 2. Because all Creatures
having their Being and Motions from God cannot possibly work any thing farther
then he both Directs and Assists them. 3. And it is fit it should be so, that
Man might depend upon no Creature, but stay his heart upon God alone.

Let all men then, in the use of the Creatures, raise up their hearts above
them, praying unto God for his Blessing upon them, and depending on him for it:
Especially now seeing the Curse of God is fallen upon them for Man's sin, by
which they are made more unserviceable unto us, and less able to do us good
then they were before the Fall. So that unless they be used with thanksgiving,
and sanctified by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. we have no more reason to
expect strength, and nourishment from bread, then from a stone; nay, that which
we take for our food, might turn to be our poison.

VERSE 30.
ANd to every Beast of the Earth] But whence comes it then, that we see diverse
beasts feed not on herbs at all, but diverse both of the Beasts of the field,
and Fowls of the air feed upon the flesh of other Creatures, which they take
for their prey? This certainly must be acknowledged to be the fruit of sin,
which amongst other evils brought in enmity amongst the Creatures; but from the
beginning it was not so. Wherefore we have this in particular expressed amongst
the Consequents of the restoration of all things by Christ, that this enmity
between the Creatures shall be taken away, that none of them shall destroy or
hurt another, but they shall all of them return to their wonted food, which was
appointed them in their Creation, Isa. 11.6, 7. and 65.25.

Wherein there is life] That is, (as it has been expounded) a sensitive Soul.
A clause added, not only under that general name to include all the particulars
of such Creatures as are partakers of such a life, which were mentioned before;
but, it may be perhaps to imply withal, that though they had life in
themselves, yet that it might be known that they live not by themselves, they
should maintain their lives by such provisions of food as God here allows them.

Every green herb] It may be, not all kinds of herbs to every beast and fowl,
seeing that some of them delight to feed on some kinds of herbs, and others
upon others, but God gives all to all; all the Herbs to all the beasts to make
use of, and to feed upon those that should best agree with their Natures and
Constitutions. We find only herbs given to beasts for their food, although it
may be that under that name some fruits of trees may be included, which we see
diverse beasts and fowls feed on to this day; as it is probable they did from
the beginning. Howsoever,

1. Observe, God allows Sufficient, and Plentiful Provision for the
sustaining of the Creatures that he has made.
Psalm. 145.15, 16. feeds the young Lions that seek their meat of God, Psalm.
104.21. and the young Ravens that cry, Psalm. 147.9. This, 1. God, who is
All-sufficient, is able easily to do. 2. And it is fit for him to do it, not
only to show himself a Faithful Creator, but besides, to fill the hearts of
men with the admiration both of his Allsufficiency and Goodness.

1. Let it fill our hearts with the Admiration of his Infinite Bounty, that
from day to day feeds the whole world, as it were, at his own Table, giving
them all their food in due season, Psalm. 145.15. What are the large Provisions
that Solomon made for his Family, in comparison thereof? Moses thought it
impossible to make provision of flesh, for six hundred thousand men, for one
month: How then should we stand amazed at the Consi^eration of Gods infinite
store, by which he has sustained so many thousand millions of Creatures from
the foundation of the world unto this day! Let this be a means to settle our
hearts firmly, in a constant dependence on him at all times, for the supply of
all our wants, who provides so abundantly for the meanest Creature that he has
made.

2. Let no man judge of Gods love toward him, by the enlargement of his hand
unto him in outward blessings, which he poures out so abundantly upon the
meanest of his Creatures, and many times to the worst amongst men, in a larger
proportion then he bestows them upon his own children, filling their bellies
with his hidden treasures, Psalm. 17.14. so that they have more then their heart
could wish, Psalm. 73.7. but that is all the portion that they shall have from
him. The differencing blessings, which he reserves to his Children for their
portion, are Grace and Glory, Psalm. 84.11. to guide them by his Counsel here,
and bring them to Glory hereafter, Psalm. 73.24.

Again, it is worthy our Observation to take special notice of the small
difference, which we find here between the provisions allotted by God to Men
and Beasts: both of them have their food not only from the Earth, but out of
the same Herbs and Fruits that grow out of the Earth. Whence,

2. Observe, Men and Beasts are allowed by God the same provisions of food for
the sustaining of their lives.
Adam, as we see here; and howsoever it pleased God in renewing his Covernant
with Noah after the Flood, to enlarge man's provisions for food, by granting him
the use of the flesh of beasts and birds, and fishes; yet we see, that even
herein, none of those Creatures come far behind us. Beasts and Birds of Prey,
feed upon other Creatures that we account some of them amongst our chiefest
delicates; from them in our feeding we differ only in this, that we prepare our
food in a more orderly way.

Let us then leave our glorying in the provisions of our Tables, which the
beasts themselves enjoy in Common with us, and are partakers with us even in
our Choicest Dainties.

VERSE. 31.
ANd God saw every thing] Overlooked the whole Frame of his Work, as he had
done before every Particular of it, Man only excepted: and why he forbear to
give that testimony of him, that he had given of all the rest, that he also was
good, it is uncertain. Some think, that because the Creation of the Woman had
not been yet mentioned, that therefore God forbear to give his Approbation of
that Work that was but half perfected; whatsoever the reason was, it is
certain, that God made Man good and upright, Eccl. 7.29. And it is sufficient
that he is included in the general Approbation of his whole Work taken together.

Very good] All the work together, was Correspondent, every part suitable to
the rest in a due proportion, and fitted in such order, that they were all
useful for the services to which they are designed.

This general Approbation of all the Works that God had made, and that by God
himself, the best Judge of Goodness and Perfection, being besides a God of
Truth, and therefore an infallible Witness of his own Judgment, manifests the
Infinite Perfection both of the Wisdom, and Power of Him that Created them. So
that we thence may,

Observe, The whole Frame of the Works which God made in the Creation of the
World, is perfectly Good every way.
Mark 8.37. Which we shall not only find true in the works of Creation, but in
the Acts of his Providence also, that they are all perfect, and all his ways
are judgment, as Moses testifies of them, Deuteronomy, 32.4. So that all his works
praise Him, Psalm. 145.10. And indeed herein, is the eminency of the perfection
of Gods Works, and of his Wisdom in creating them, fully manifested, that when
they are all of them laid together, they appear in their times, places, and
uses, to which God has assigned them so beautiful and fit every way, that
nothing can be added to them: nor any thing without blemishing them, taken from
them, Eccl. 3.14.

Let it be our endeavor to imitate God as far as we may: so to walk, that our
works every one of them a part, and our whole way considered together, may all
appear to be good, answerable one to another in Order and Proportion; so that
our whole conversation may be approved as a perfect frame of unblameable
holiness. There are amongst Men, that do some things well, to which their
ordinary and constant carriage is not suitable The difference between the works
of a godly Man and an Hypocrite, appears most in this: An Hypocrites work is
best considered apart, a good Man's works are best and most approveable, when
they are laid together.

Thus have we the History of the Creation of the world, a short record of a
wonderful glorious work, which being laid before us in so sincere and brief a
manner, requires the more serious meditation, and examination of the
particulars therein expressed. The rather, because it gives us a true mirror
both of God Himself appearing in his infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; and
of the Creatures nothing in it self, till God gave it a being; and being now
what it is merely by his gift and goodness. In the right knowledge of these
two main heads, are included the grounds of all true Wisdom. To look back
therefore, and to take a view, of the principal scope, at which the Holy Ghost
aims, in the description of the Creation of the World, we may find therein set
before our eyes.

1. In God the Creator of all things, 1. His Eternity, who if he had not been
before the World, and consequently before all time, which began with the world,
could not have made it. 2. His Power, in Creating all things, 1. Of nothing, 2.
By the Word alone, 3. Many of them, of Vast and almost infinite extent; as the
Heavens, Stars, Earth, Seas, and some other Creatures, of almost incredible
bigness. 3. His All Sufficiency, manifested 1. In Creating such infinite
Variety of so many sundry sorts of Creatures, 2. And in affording them all,
even the basest amongst them, such plentiful provision for their maintenance.
4. His Goodness and Perfection, appearing in his works which taken severally,
or together, were found to be exceeding good in their mutual correspondency,
and uses to which they are assigned. 5. His Faithfulness, who both performed
and made good all that he decreed, and settled all things that he made in such
sort, that they continue to this day according to his Ordinance. 6. His Wisdom
discovered in the excellent order of all his works: and in their fitness for
their several ends and services for which they were appointed. 7, His loving
kindness to Man, above all the works of his hand, whom he Created after the
most exact pattern, even his own Image and likeness, advanced to be the Lord
over all the works that he had made, and furnished with infinite variety of
provisions, both for necessity and delight.
II. In the Creatures made by God, is manifested their vanity and weakness;
which, 1. Were, 1. Nothing till God gave them a Being. 2. A Rude, unformed, and
imperfect Mass, when they first began to Be.
2. Are, 1. Perfect in deed in their kinds and measure, but neither in all
kinds of perfections, which are not to be found in any one Creature; nor in
those they have, but in a weak proportion, infinitely short of those absolute
and boundless perfections, which appear in Him that made them.
2. Not subsisting in themselves, but in God that made them, in whom they have
their Being, and Motions, without whom they must speedily be resolved into
Nothing, as they were nothing at the first. 2. Base, 1. in their Original,
being all of them drawn out of a confused Mass, without any form at all, and
the most of them out of the Earth, and waters, the basest of all Elements. 2.
In the means of their support for the continuance of their being; which are
both Base, like themselves and supplied unto them, from day to day.

So that we may conceive, that in recording and setting before us the history
of the worlds Creation, the Holy Ghost may aim at three things.

1. To settle our hearts in a right judgment of the emptiness, and
consequently of the Insufficiency of all the creatures, that none of us may
rest our selves upon them, which being considered a part from God are Nothing,
and consequently can do nothing; and are therefore, neither to be entertained
with any extraordinary affection; nor sought after with any great care, or
desire; nor much less to be rested on with any firm Confidence.

2. To fill our hearts, with the Apprehension, and Meditation of Gods infinite
Majesty, Glory, Power, Wisdom, All Sufficiency, Goodness, and Truth. 1. That
we may in our hearts advance and lift him up alone, casting down all his works
at his feet; and we may be still kept in a reverend awe and fear of him. 2.
That we may be quickened to all duties of obedience, serving that God, with all
our hearts, and that with cheerfulness, by whom we are, and from whom we have
received, such an advancement to be made after his own Image, and appointed
Lord over all the works of his hands, and do daily receive such a liberal
supply of all needful means, for the comfort of our lives. 3. That we may be
brought to stay our hearts upon God alone, as being both able to provide us all
things, seeing he made them al; and Faithful and True to support us, and do us
good, as a faithful, Creator, and therefore cannot but take care to preserve
all that he has made, lest he should have made any thing in vain.

3. To direct us in the Use both of our selves, and the rest of the Creatures,
what to aim at: which is indeed chiefly the advancing of Gods honor In, and By
them, when we discover those glorious Attributes of his Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, appearing in the Creation of all things, and sustaining them; and,
upon all occasions, speak of them to his praise: But withal, the directing of
our selves, and all the rest of the Creatures, in our power, to the
preservation of Community, which is one of Gods Special Aims, in making all
the Creatures serviceable one to another, and all of them to Man, and in
charging him with the care and oversight of them all, that so they might be the
better carried on to that general End, whereunto God had ordained them. So then
a man aiming only at himself, or using the Creatures only for the service of
himself, without relation to the Community, perverts the whole Course and
Order, which God has set in Nature, than which nothing can be more directly
opposite to Gods Mind and Will, more Injurious to the Creatures, or
unprofitable to our selves, whose good is included in the Common good of all
that God has made.

FINIS.
A COMMENTARY upon the Second CHAPTER OF The First Book of MOSES Called
GENESIS. The Second Book.
WE have seen in the former Chapter, that great Work of the Creation of the
world. In this Chapter we have set before us, the beginning of the
Administration, and Government thereof, and especially of Man, in the state of
his Innocence; Concerning whom the Holy Ghost represents unto us, Gods
Goodness and Care for his

1. Government by Laws, prescribing his Duties, 1. To God, consisting of three
Heads: 1. Faith in God; intimated by the Tree of Life. 2. Obedience; prescribed
under the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. 3. Worship of God; employed in the
Observation of the Sabbath.
2. To the Creatures. 1. In the use of them, which must be according to the
Will of God, and not according to his own pleasure, enforced in his restraint
from eating of the Tree of Knowledge, and in the Law of Marriage. 2. His
careful oversight, and labor for the preservation of them, expressed in Gods
Commandment for the Keeping and Dressing of the Garden of Eden.
2. Support and Sustentation; manifested, 1. In the provision of food fit for
him, both for necessity and delight, by planting the Garden of Eden, and giving
him the free use of all the Fruits therein, one Tree only excepted. 2. In the
Creation of the Woman, to be an help meet for him; comfort for his life, and
help for propagation.



VERSE 1.
THus] Or, And, as that Copulative is indeed, Usually, but not Always rendered.
Howsoever, that Connection points unto the Beginning, Means, Order, Manner, and
Space of Time and Perfection, in which all things were Created, and related in
the former Chapter.

The Heavens and the Earth] The two principal parts of the World, here named,
include all the rest, as the Air and Seas, and all the Creatures wherewith they
are furnished, as in the next words.

All the hosts] That is, all the Visible, and (as some conceive) Invisible
Creatures, which are contained in the Heavens and Earth, the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Fowls, Beasts, and Fishes; termed Hosts, both for their Multitude, and Order,
in which they are placed by God, as an Army set in Array, in a Comely, and
Useful manner. Hence God is oftentimes named, The Lord of Hosts. The Connection
of this Chapter (wherein the Government of the Creatures is represented unto
us) with the former, (which records their Creation) as it were suspending our
thoughts, and carrying them at once, both Backwards, to remember what God had
made; and Forward, to observe how he disposed of what he had made, gives us
just ground from thence to

1. Observe, It must be our Care to Observe, not only what God Works, but
withal how he disposes, and orders that which he has wrought.
John Baptist, they wondered, what God would do with that child, which was so
strangely born, Luke 1.66. And the blessed Virgin, concerning our Savior
Christ, laid up whatsoever he did or spoke, in her heart, to observe what would
be the issue of his Words and Actions, to see what would become of them at the
last, Luke 2.51.

And this we must do, 1. Because the Excellency, and Perfection of every Work,
is in the End whereunto it is directed, and applied.

2. Because the Wisdom of God is most discovered, in the Ordering and Disposing
of his Works, as his Power is most seen in Creating of them: As usually the
Workmans Skill, is more Com^^nded, in the Use of an Instrument, then in the
making and fra^ing of it.

Again, out of the name here given to the Creatures, that they are termed the
Hosts of Heaven and Earth, we may,

2. Observe, The Creatures that God has made, are to be looked on, as an Army
arrayed in an Excellent, and Well Composed Order.
Eccl. 3.11. all of them Ordered and Commanded by God, Psalm. 145.15. the Stars
in their Courses, Judge. 5.20. the Clouds in theirs, Job 37.12. Yea, the very
Sparrows in their motions, Matthew. 10.29. and the Grasshoppers, Joel 2.15. Much
more men, whose steps God orders, Prove. 16.9. Isa. 45.13. So that their way is
not in themselves, nor the directing of the steps in him that walks, Jer.
10.23. All these are so directed by God, that they still hold correspondent
order one to another, and all of them to the End whereunto they are directed,
from which though they swerve, in their own inclinations, or intentions, yet
they are all of them at last brought about to fulfill the thoughts of His heart
that guides them.

1. Let all men carefully search into the Order, mutual Correspondence, and
Scope, whereunto all the Ways of God, in the Administration of the Creatures,
tend: 1. Judging of his Works in and by them; not apart, but laid all
together. 2. Looking to, and waiting for, the End of the Work which he has in
hand, as we are advised to do, Psalm. 27.37. Wherein if we discover not the
Wisdom, Justice, and Mercy of God in all his ways; blame not him whose work is
Perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4. but our selves, who through Ignorance, or inadvertency, do
not understand it. This thorough-searching, into the Acts of Providence, will
keep us from murmuring, and preserve our hearts in a Continual admiration of
his Wisdom, (as the Queen of Sheba was astonished at Solomon's Wisdom, when she
observed the well ordering of his family, 1. King. 10.5.) That we may always
fear before him, and be wise for time to come.

2. Tremble before that God, and Trust in him that has power in his hand, to
command all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and to arm them at his pleasure,
for the defense of those that fear him, and against such as hate him.

The next phrase is not lightly to be passed over, which the Holy Ghost here
uses, affirming that the Heavens and Earth were finished, or rather Perfected,
as the Original will bear it. Whence we may,

3. Observe, God perfecteth and fully finisheth every work that he takes i^
hand.
Deuteronomy. 32.4. not only without Error, but without any Defect. Eccl. 3.14. Not
only his Law, Psalm. 119.96. but all his works toward us, (see his promise to
Jacob, Genesis 28.15.) as David confidently believes, Psalm. 138.8. Thus indeed
they are, all of them taken together, and every one considered apart by it
self. 1. In their Measure, which is proportioned to the end, whereunto they
were appointed. 2. And in their Time, for they are brought to perfection by
degrees, as David professes of the framing of his own body, Psalm 139.16.

1. Let us in imitation of God, work till we bring things to perfection; as
Naomi assures Ruth, that Boaz would do, Ruth. 3.18. Especially in the works,
that more immediately concern Gods Honor, and our own salvation; not
contenting our selves, with laying the foundation, but laboring to go on to
perfection, Heb. 6.1. Adding still one grace to another, 2 Pet. 1.5. and
growing strong in every grace, that we may perfect Holiness, 2 Cor. 7.1. And
abounding in every good work, Heb. 13.21. Least we prove like the foolish
builder, Luke 14.30. or the Ostritch, Job. 39.14.15.

2 Let it be a means to strengthen our hearts, in the assurance of the
perfecting the work, 1. Of Sanctification: God, according to his promises will
not leave purging us, till he have made us without spot or wrinckle, Ephesians.
5.17.20. Of our Salvation, Phil. 1.6. He that suffered for us, till all was
finished, Joh. 19.30. Will not leave till he have brought us into the full
possession of the gloty, which he has purchased for us.

VERSE 2.
THe seventh day] The Hebrew Shevang, (which retaining the Letter, as well as
expressing the sense) we render Seven is derived from a word which signifies
(to be full) as if seven were a full and perfect number, made up by the measure
of time, in which God finished the Creation of the world, and by his resting
after he had ended it, declared the full and perfect accomplishment and
finishing that Glorious work.

God Ended] That is, both finished whatsoever he intended to make; and besides
established, and settled, all that he had made, to continue (as it does to this
day) in that estate, in which he had Created it: and also in that
Correspondency that the Creatures had one with another.

Which he had made] A Phrase added, to distinguish the works of Creation, from
the works of Providence, in which God, both the Father, and the Son work to
this day, John 5.27.

He rested] Not properly; for God being a pure Act must needs be always
working, and can no more cease to work than to be; Only in respect of the
Creation he is said to rest, or cease, or forbear to do any more: Manifesting
thereby, that he had fully perfected, and finished all that he purposed and
decreed to make: This was Gods Rest taken Privitively. If we conceive, that
there is any thing more employed in this phrase, it must be Gods resting in
himself: and in the Contemplation of his own works delighting himself; as the
Rest which he enjoynes Man, upon that day, is not a mere privitive Rest, in
ceasing from our labors; but besides a positive Rest in which we stay our
hearts upon God, rejoicing in his glorious Works, and Mercies toward Mankind.
So, that Rest of God upon the Seventh Day, lays before us the ground of the
Institution of the Sabbath in the words following, as a Day advanced by God
above the rest, by manifesting the perfecting of that glorious Work, of the
worlds Creation.

Thus we see God, although he has power to give what laws he pleases: yet is
pleased to manifest the Equity of that which he commands, that we may
acknowledge his Will to be a rule of Righteousness. Whence,

1. Observe, God who may command What he will, yet is pleased to command
nothing, but that which appears to be equal and Convenient.


Secondly, neither is it more just and equal in respect of God, then it is
profitable and beneficial to Man; 1. By refreshing himself, wearied with the
labors of the six days precedent. 2. For the increase of Piety, and inward
Comfort to the soul, by enjoying an Holy Communion with God, in his Ordinances:
and such are all the rest of Gods Laws, equal and just in all things, Psalm.
119.128. and good unto Men, Deuteronomy. 6.24.

1. Let it move all Men, that have power in their hand, to exercise it
according to the Rules of Equity and justice, and for the good of others, which
must needs procure the respects of Love, and reverence to their persons that
Command, and ready Obedience to their commands with cheerfulness.

2. Let it encourage all men to ready and willing Obedience, to all Gods Laws,
and that for their own good, by considering; 1. That at present they have their
fruit in holiness, exercising themselves in such duties, as are both
honorable and comfortable; 2. And that hereafter, they shall receive a sure
and plentiful reward Romans 6.22. 1 Cor. 15, 58.

Now although God were pleased to found his law upon grounds of Equity, and
Convenience, yet it was more then he was bound unto, to give us an account of
either: notwithstanding we see that he is pleased to acquaint us also, with the
reasonableness, and Equity of the Law that he gives. Whence,

2. Observe, God not only makes his Laws Equal, and Reasonable; but besides,
is pleased to make it appear unto us, that they are So.
Ezech. 18.25. To the same end he is pleased to prefix a preface to his Law, in
delivering ft upon Sinai: that they might consider in their own hearts, how
just and equal it was, that he should have power to command them, whom he had
delivered from so Cruel a Bondage, and slavery. And for particular Laws,
though the world judges them to be bonds, and Coards; yet he makes his
Children to understand, that his Laws are right in all things, Psalm. 119.128.
And his Testimonies very Righteous and faithful, ver. 138.

Reasons, 1. We never truly honor God, till in our judgment we approve and
allow his Law to be just and equal, as Saint Paul does, Romans 6.16. And David
as we have seen already: whereby we set to our Seal, that Gods Will is the rule
of righteousness and holiness,

2. That is the only means to draw men on to ready and Cheerful, and by
consequent, Constant Obedience, when the mind discerning both the Equity, and
Goodness of Gods Laws, prevails with the will to make choice of them, and
draws on the whole heart to delight in them, and the whole Man to follow them,
with the uttermost endeavors: which is a clear testimony to the world of the
price that we set upon those holy Laws; and of our assurance that we have, of
an exceeding great reward in keeping them, Psalm. 19.11.

Let it move all that are Godly, to search into all Gods Laws, begging Wisdom,
and understanding at Gods Hand, for that purpose; and undertaking the work with
fear and reverence: Consenting to and delighting in that which we know, and
adoring the depth of Gods Wisdom, in general: in those things that through our
own Ignorance, we understand not so fully in particular; that we may with our
whole heart yield unto, and walk in all duties of obedience, which it requires,

The phrase in which the Holy Ghost expresses Gods resting from his Works,
must be carefully observed; He rested (says Moses) from all the works that he
had made, or from Creating any more. Whence,

3. Observe, God, to the Worlds end Creates no more, then What he made in the
beginning.
Heb. 4.3. So that since that time he makes; 1. no new Kinds of Creatures, nor
ordinarily ptoduceth the Particulars of any kind by way of Creation, but by
Generation. For, as for the raining down of Mannah, or the assuming of bodies
by Angels, and the like, they were works extraordinary. And howsoever the
propagation of Creatures, be termed Creation in Psalm. 104, 30. as being the
effect of the same power, by which things were at first Created, and therefore
are ascribed unto God, Job 33.4. yet because God is pleased therein, to make
use of Second Causes, both Material, and Efficient; it cannot be properly
termed Creation: whereof there is no more need at present, God having Created
at the first, as much as was needful, for the Ends at which he aimed.

In the same expression, we may yet take farther notice, that the Rest of God
is limited only to his ceasing from the Works of Creation, and not extended to
the Acts of Conservation and Administration, the Holy Ghost by that limitation
implying that he Rested not, or Ceased from Them, but Continues working in Them
still. So that we may,

4. Observe, Though God Cease from the Works of Creation, yet he Cease not
from his Works of Providence, in Sustaining, Conserving, and Governing the
Works which he has made.
Joh. 5.17. supporting all by his Power, Heb. 1.3. and guiding and turning all
things about, by his Counsel, so that they do whatsoever he commands and
appoints, as Elihu speaks, Job 37.12.

1. Let us then wisely observe the Works of God, in the Supporting of all his
Creatures, with the Prophet David, Psalm. 104.27, 30. and 145.15, 16. But
especially in disposing and ordering all things, principally, in the affairs
of men; which brutish men indeed understand not, Psalm. 92.6. but the wise
shall know the Ways of God, Hos. 14.9. that they are Right, and his work every
way perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.4.

2. Let us bring our hearts to a Firm, and Constant dependence on him, for
Supplies in all our Wants, and for Assistance, and Support, in all our
distresses, especially remembering his Promise to his own, I will not leave thee
nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. That our Conversation may be without
Covetousness, and without Care.

VERSE 3.
ANd God blessed] We have seen the ground of the Institution of the Sabbath, to
be unto men a day of Rest from their ordinary labors; why it must be a Seventh
day; and why that Seventh: The Commandment follows. This first phrase of Gods
blessing the Day, may import, 1. The Advancing of that above other days, to be
an Happy, and an Honorable Day, Isa. 58.13. A Day to which no Night is
reckoned, as it is to other days, as being a Type of that Rest which shall be
all Joy and Light, without any mixture of Darkness at all. 2. The Ordaining of
it to be a Day of Blessings, in Spiritual things, wherein God will pour out
Grace into the hearts of his people, in the use of his holy Ordinances.

And Sanctified] Or, separated it, from an Ordinary and Common, to an Holy and
Religious use, for his own immediate service, in the exercise of Duties of
Piety and Religious Worship. For whereas to Sanctify, signifies, 1. To make
Holy, as Ephesians. 5.26. 2. Or to set apart to an holy use, as it is used, Exodus
28.41. 3. To keep holy, or use in an holy manner, as it signifies, Levit. 10.3.
and 11.44. 4. To declare to be holy, Numb. 20.12. In the two last Senses, men
may be said to Sanctify or Hallow things; In the first, it is peculiar to God
alone: In the second (in which it is taken in this place) it is appliable both
to God and Man: God, by his Law and Commandment; and Man, by his free and
voluntary offerings and vows, appointing things to be set apart unto holy
uses, which before were Common.

Because in it] Not so much to propose his own Example, for our imitation (for
God himself might Rest upon such grounds as concern not men) but because Gods
Rest, manifesting the perfecting of the work of the Worlds Creation; that day
whereon he rested, that is, in which the work of Creation was finished and
perfected, was the fittest to be observed in remembrance of that great work: As
now the day, in which our Savior, by his resurrection from the dead,
manifested the accomplishment of the work of our Redemption (a greater work
then that of Creation) is the fittest to be Celebrated in the remembrance of
that more Eminent, and more Glorious Work. For otherwise, in themselves, all
days are equal; neither is one of them more Eminent, or more Observable, then
another. The difference of days arises from the Works done, or Events
happening upon those days. A ground which even Heathen men themselves by the
light of Nature acknowledged, and made use of, in observing their Feastivals.
Whence it is that God (who grounds all his Moral Laws upon Principles, which
right Reason consents unto) gives in this, for the Reason of Instituting that
greatest Feastival, limiting it to, and fixing it upon that day, in which he
had finished the worlds Creation, ended in Six days, and declared to be
perfected by his Resting upon the Seventh. In which number of days, he also
pointed out, as it were, a set period of time, according to the revolution
whereof times might be ever after computed, by Weeks, or Sevens of days. So
that in that time, in which he made and fully finished the World, he set out a
Proportion of time, in which that Holy day should be observed; and by the
perfecting of the World upon the Seventh day, designed the very day, which, in
that revolution of time, should be Consecrated to Himself, and that by the
ground upon which it was to be observed.

It is true, that when this Law was given to Adam, being then in the state of
Innocence, that ground of the Observation of the Day, was appliable to none
other but the Seventh, or Last day of the Week, because Man continuing in that
state, there could not have been supposed a more Eminent Work of God, then the
Worlds Creation. But now since his Fall, the work of the worlds Redemption, by
which it was not only Renewed and Restored, but besides more firmly settled
then before, being more Eminent, and in every respect more Beneficial to man,
then the Creation; the same ground, upon which the Sabbath was by God fixed
upon the Last day of the week, warrants and directs us to translate it to the
First day, where on, by our Saviors Resurrection, that more Glorious Work of
our Redemption was manifested to the world, to be fully perfected. Wherefore
when God renews this Law of the Sabbath upon Mount Sinai, the Condition of Man
being then altered, and a Redeemer promised, and expected, God (although he
thought it not fit to change the Sabbath, unto another day, till that work
should be accomplished, which should occasion the change of it, yet) took
special care to pen the Fourth Commandment, in such expressions, that when
the time of accomplishing that work should come, the day might be changed,
without altering the letter of the Law. Wherefore having occasion, in the
fourth Commandment, to allege the same reason for the Continuation of the
Sabbath, that he gives here, for the Institution of it, and that in the same
form of words which he here uses; yet, in the conclusion inferred upon that
reason, he changes the Particular term Seventh unto that which is more
General, Sabbath, saying, not as here, Therefore the Lord Sanctified the
Seventh Day; but, Therefore the Lord Sanctified the Sabbath Day. Implying, that
the time which he required to be observed, must be one Resting day of Seven,
leaving the Particularity of the day, to be designed by the work upon which the
observation of it was to be grounded; so that both the Jews from that same Law
might have warrant for the observation of the Last day of the Week; and we that
are Christians might have the like warrant for the observing of the First day
of the Week.

Some there are, that conceive these words not to contain in them the Narration
of what God instituted at present, but (by way of Anticipation) a manifestation
of what he Ordained and Appointed to be observed in the Law, afterward
delivered to his people upon Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. As if Moses had said here,
This Rest of God the Seventh day, was the reason why God in the delivering his
Law upon Mount Sinai appointed his People to keep that Seventh day for a day of
an Holy Rest. To whom we answer:

1. What ground is there to be drawn out of any Circumstance of the text that
enforces us to admit such an Anticipation, and without such a ground who dare
suppose it? If we may pervert the Order of the Scriptures, at our pleasure,
without warrant from the Letter of the text it self, no Man shall be able to
draw any binding Argument out of Scripture, to conclude any thing at all.

2. Anticipations in Scripture are most Commonly, if not Always used, that by
representing before hand, somewhat which was done afterward, the whole
narration might be made more clear and perspicuous: or at least, that the
Occasion, or consequents of such other things, as are related, might be
Considered and laid together, that we might the more easily, and distinctly,
observe the Way of God in his Work. Now in this place to mention the occasion
of that which was done more then two thousand years afterward, helps nothing
to the understanding of any thing there related, and consequently there is upon
that ground, no cause of supposing such an Anticipation.

3. Such an Anticipation in this place must needs be acknowledged, to be
utterly superfluous; seeing the very ground of Instituting the rest of the
Sabbath, which is mentioned here, is expressly, and wel-nigh, in the same words,
set down in the very body of the Law, given upon Mount Sinai. Now it cannot be
Imagined, that the Holy Ghost, in an History so succinctly penned, as this is,
would insert any thing unnecessarily and superfluously.

4. Such an Anticipation, in this place, necessarily supposes, that the Book
of Genesis was written after the delivering of the Law upon Mount Sinai: for if
the Law were not given before the Book of Genesis was written, how could this
Anticipation here show the reason of a Law, which was not then in being? Now
that the Book of Genesis was written after the Law was given, is impossible to
be proved; Nay, if conjectures might be admitted, it seems more probable that
Genesis was written, while Moses was yet in Midian before he undertook the
bringing up of Israel out of Egypt; for besides that he was then best at
leisure, that Book must needs be of singular use, to encourage the Children of
Israel to undertake their journey into Canaan; for which, their Forefathers
had forsaken their own native soil, which God had so many ways made over unto
them, wherein they had been sojourners so long a time, and wherein God had so
wonderfully protected and prospered them even to admiration, all of them being
great encouragements, to enter into the possession of so good a Land, so freely
bestowed upon them.

Others there are that conceive that those words contain only a narration of
what God himself did, not what he appointed or ordained Man to do or observe
afterward: and will have the words in the first clause to express what God
did; He rested: and in the later to express how he did it, He Sanctified and
Blessed (his Rest,) or kept it as an Holy Rest.

To whom we answer.

1. How can God be said to Sanctify his Rest in this Sense, seeing his Actions
and Holiness of them cannot be severed, but whatsoever he does is Holy, because
he does it? The actions of Men indeed, and the Holiness of them be two things,
and are many times too far asunder; but God is holy in all his Works, Psalm.
145.17. and in ceasing from his Works: And therefore to say that God Rested,
and that he Sanctified (his Rest,) is to speak Improperly and Superfluously.

2. If that be the sense of the term Sanctified, how shall we interpret the
next word, Blessed? In what sense God by his own Act of Resting, may be said to
Bless the day of his Rest, cannot easily be imagined: neither do we find any
other place of Scripture, wherein that phrase bears such a sense.

3. The letter of the Text, and Series of the Narration, seem to oppose this
sense; wherein, we have related unto us three distinct Actions of God. First,
He made, 2. He Rested; 3. He Blessed and Sanctified the Rest: And those three
are laid down as succeeding one another, at least in Nature, if not in Time.
Yea, and to be in a sort the ground one of another; The full perfecting and
finishing of the Creation, was the ground of Gods Resting; and his Resting was
the Ground, or Occasion at least, of Blessing and Sanctifying the Day of Rest;
or appointing of it to be a day of Holy Rest. So that as, in the words of the
second verse, He rested from all the works which he had made, imply the making
of the works before the Rest; so, in this Verse He Sanctified the Rest, because
he had Rested, must needs imply that the Rest went before the sanctifying of
the Rest, and to be distinct from it.

A third sort there are, that think those words, Sanctified and Blessed, to
imply, Not what God then did; but what he purposed and intended to do
afterward: and parallel, for the strengthening of that conjecture, with these
words, that phrase, Jer. 11.8. where God says, that he sanctified and Ordained
Jeremy to be a Prophet in the womb; which cannot be understood of the Actual
Sanctifying of Jeremy at present; but must be conceived to imply what he meant
to do afterward.

To this we Answer.

1. That Instance out of Jeremy, is not clear nor convincing. For, if by
Sanctifying we mean Infusing of Holiness; why may not the Spirit of God (if he
please) sanctify Jeremy in the womb, as well as it moved John Baptist in the
womb. If we understand Sanctifying for Designing, or setting apart to that
office, why might not God, as well actually by some message to his Parents, or
otherwise, as well appoint Jeremy to be a Prophet in his Mothers womb, as he
designed John Baptist to the Like office before he was conceived?

2. This is a strange Inference, out of that place in Jeremy: the Word
Sanctified must be so taken there, because it can have no other Sense;
therefore it must be taken so here, where it may have another and fairer
construction, and more suitable to the Circumstance of the text in this history.

To come to the Observation, to be gathered out of those words, It is
observable, that the first of all the Laws recorded in Scripture to be given
to Man, provides for the establishing of his own immediate Worship. Whence,

1. Observe, The Worship of God ought to be Man's first and chief care.
Sinai, wherein he takes order in the first Table (which our Savior terms the
great Commandment) for his own immediate worship: which also Holy Men always
endeavored to begin with, in the first place, as Noah after the flood, Genesis
8.10. And Abraham as soon as he came to Canaan, Genesis 12.7, 8.

Reason 1. Gods Honor, is the main end wherefore we, and all things, are,
which is most advanced amongst Men by his Worship.

2. And the performance of those duties of his Worship, Sanctifies all things
unto us, 1 Timothy 4.5. and draws down Gods Blessing upon us, and all that we
have, and above all, increases in us Holiness, unto which we are especially
called.

Let us then be sensible of Gods great goodness, and tender respect of Men,
that is content that Sacrifice shall yield to Mercy, Matthew. 9.13. which is his
own Worship, wherein he is so much honored, and which he sets at so high a
rate, for the providing for our necessities. Only let us take heed of
stretching this indulgence beyond the true bounds. 1. Let not the inward duties
of Piety, give way to any of our most urgent occasions. 2. Neither let the
Outward acts of Worship be omitted; but in cases of urgent necessity. 3. Then,
be rather suspended for the present, then wholly laid aside, if there may be
opportunity to perform them afterward.

It cannot be denied, but that God gave Adam Rules for the whole form of his
Worship; but we find in this Relation of Moses nothing mentioned but the
Sabbath, under which many of the rest may be pointed at. Howsoever, we find
this Law of the Sanctifying of the Sabbath honored so far as to be mentioned
and recorded in the First place, and may thence,

2. Observe, God makes great account of the Sanctifying of his Sabbaths.
Ezech. 20.12.

2. An Especial means of preserving and increasing of Religion, being, as it
were, the Mart-Day for the Soul, wherein we have Commerce in a sort wholly with
God in Spiritual things, tendering unto him, and pouring out before him the
Affections of our Souls in Prayers and Praises; and God pouring out Grace and
Comfort upon our spirits in the use of his holy Ordinances. Whence it is that
God enjoins it so strictly, Commandment 4th. encourages to the observation
thereof by such large promises, Jer. 17.24, 25, and punishes the neglect of it
with such fearful plagues, Jer. 17.27. Neh. 13.18.

God does not only Sanctify the Sabbath, or set it apart to holy uses, but
blesses it withal, that is, ordains it to be unto man a day of blessings.
Whence,

3. Observe, The Sabbath Day Sanctified as it ought, is a Day of Blessings.
Isa. 56.6, 7. Although it is true withal, that the Religious observation of
that holy Rest, as well as other duties, conscionably performed, brings down
more then an ordinary blessing upon men's persons and estates, even in Outward
things, Jer. 17.24, 25.

The Day of Rest is not only Blessed, but Sanctified also, that is, set apart
from Common use to be holy unto the Lord, as that phrase is explained in the
Fourth Commandment. Whence,

4. Observe, The Sabbath is a day of Rest consecrated by God Himself, and set
apart from a Common to an Holy Use,
Exodus 29.33, 34. Numb. 16, 38. And the Sabbath in particular, Isa. 58.13, and
that even the whole day, as it is in other Festivals, Levit. 23.32. As it
clearly appears in the expression used by God in the fourth Commandment, where
distributing the week into seven parts, He appoints six for Labor, and the
Seventh for this Holy Rest, which must therefore necessarily, be such a
proportion, as the other six are, that is a whole day.

Can it then be any less then destruction to devour Holy things, and after the
vows to enquire, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 20.25. By taking a part of this
consecrated time, and employing it to Common Uses? This we do, when we make use
of any part of the Sabbath Day, for Labor in our ordinary Callings, making up
of our accounts, and contriving ways for the managing of our worldly affairs:
and giving directions for the ordering of them; Or, which is worse, for the
satisfying of the flesh in vain Sports (to call them by no worse name) which we
abusively term Recreations, by which the mind is usually more affected, and
distracted, then it is by ordinary Labor, and consequently made more
indisposed to Holy duties; Whereas we are expressly forbidden, on that day, to
do or find our own pleasure, or to speak our own Words, Isa. 58.13.

It will perhaps be answered, that such a Rest was merely Jewish, laid upon
them by God, as a part of their Ceremonial bondage (and therefore not to be
pressed upon us Christians, whom Christ has freed from that yoke) which they
were so precisely to observe, that they were forbidden to dress meat, Exodus
16.23. Or to kindle a fire; Exodus 35, 3. upon that Day.

We answer, we require not the observation of any Rest, imposed on the Jews by
any temporary law, such as were, those restraints from dressing of meat or
kindling of a fire on the Sabbath Day; both which it seems Continued no longer
then their peregrination in the Wilderness, seeing we never read, either of
the observation of it, or blame laid upon them for not observing it afterward.
Seeing we find our Savior Himself present at a great Feast on the Sabbath
Day, Luke 14.1. And that in one of the chief Pharisees Houses, the strictest
observers of the Sabbath, even to Superstition. Now that feast could not be
prepared without a fire; the kindling whereof, if it had been unlawful on that
Day, neither would our Savior have graced the Feast with his presence, nor the
Pharisees, that watched him so narrowly, and quarrelled with him so often, for
supposed Sabbath breaches, have passed it over in silence. No, we require the
observation of no other Rest, then that only which is expressed, in the Fourth
Commandment; namely, the laying aside of all the Labors of our particular
callings in secular things: that we may set a part the whole day of this Holy
Rest, unto God for his immediate Worship and service.

There are indeed many that conceive, that Christians are not bound either by
this Fourth Commandment, or by any other law of the Decalogue, as it was
delivered by Moses: nor any farther then we find it to be, either to be a law
of Nature, or renewed by Christ or his Apostles. And particularly they affirm,
that there must needs be acknowledged something to be Ceremonious and Muta,
ble, in the Fourth Commandment; as namely, the observation of the last day of
the week, I which we our selves acknowledge to be changed, whence they conclude
no binding Argument can be drawn out of that Commandment, to reach us that are
Christians.

We answer, 1. That it is true that God, in the delivery of his Laws to the
Jews, looked upon them in diverse respects. In some things, as the people of
such a Nation, and of such a Time, which he manifested in giving them the
Laws, Judicial and Ceremonial. But in giving the Moral Law, which takes in
the whole Nature of Mankind: he looked on them as the Body of the Church
Representative, to whom therefore he committed not only those ten Laws, but
besidesth, e rest of his Oracles (as the Apostle calls them Romans 3.2.) in trust
for the use and service of the Church, which also he manifested in diverse
particular Circumstances. For there can be no probable reason given why God; 1.
Delivered the Decalogue by the voice and Pen of Christ, (the Head of the whole
Church) whereas he delivered the Judicialls and Ceremonials by by the voice and
Pen of Moses, the peculiar Minister of the Jews. 2. Why, he wrote the Morals
in Tables of stone; whereas He appointed the Ceremonialls to be written in
ordinary Volumes. 3. Why he appointed those Tables to be kept by themselves in
the Ark, within the Sanctum Sanctorum, which was as it were, Christ's own
Closet, whereas The Judicialls and Cerimonialls, were laid up without the Altar
of Incense, the Pot of Mannah, and Aarons Rod in a Room, into which the
Leviticall Priests had ordinary access, unless it were to distinguish those
Laws, which were peculiar to the Jews, from those which concerned the whole
Church in general.

Secondly, to the Argument taken from the fixing of the day of Rest on the last
day of the week, in the Fourth Commandment. We answer; First, that neither in
the Sum, nor Explication, nor Conclusion of the Commandment, we have no
mention, but of a Sabbath or day of Rest; in the Explication we have the
proportion of time appointed for this Rest, which must be one whole day of
seven, in the Reason of the Commandment: there is indeed a rule, that directs
us which shall be the Day, but that is laid down in Indefinite terms, and is
indifferently applyable, to either the first, or last day of the week? for
howsoever the Seventh or last day of the week, be there mentioned, as it is
here; yet it is not to bind us to it as that particular day, but as a day
honored above other days, by manifesting the perfecting of that glorious red
above other days, by manifesting the perfecting of that glorious work of the
Creation of the World. So that the rule delivered from the designing of the
particular day is only this (as we have showed already in a treatise written
of this argument) that the day which God shall by his work advance above
otherda yes, shall be the Day of his Holy Rest: which before Christ came, was
the last day of the week, wherein by his Rest on that day God manifested the
perfecting of the Worlds Creation; but, since Christ, must upon the same
ground, be translated to the first, wherein our Savior by his rising from the
dead on that day, declared the perfecting of the worlds redemption, which was
the more eminent work of the two, and consequently advanced that day above the
former.

Secondly we say, that having delivered all the rest of the Ceremonial Laws,
and compiled them into a volume a part by themselves, distingushing them from
the Moral Laws, by so many Considerable Circumstances, as we have showed
already: we cannot in reason conceive, that God would leave out only this one
of those laws, to be mixed with his Moral and perpetual and Unchangeable
Laws.

As for that Scruple which many stumble at, that it appears, by mentioning in
the Preface to the Law, the deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, and
promising their Continuance in the Land of Canaan, promised in the fifth
Commandment, that God intended the Decalogue only to the Jews; because he
mentions those things which concerned them alone.

We answer: First, that neither of those particulars, in which they instance,
is any branch of any one of those Commandments, but are only promised and
annexed as Inducements to move them to yield obedience to those Laws; Now the
duties may belong unto us, though the Inducements and motives to persuade
thereunto were peculiar unto them.

Secondly those very motives, are indeed expressed in such a form as is
appliable only to them; but the things intended by those expressions, belong
as well unto us as unto them. Their deliverance out of Egypt in the Type
belonged only to them; but the deliverance from our Spiritual bondage
represented thereby, belongs as well to us as to them. And the Land of Canaan,
pointed at in the fifth Commandment, is any Land in the Earth, which God gives
any of his Servants, as the Apostle clearly Interprets and Applies it, Ephesians. 6.2.

There remains yet behind one scruple, which has prevailed with many to doubt,
whether the law of the Sabbath were given to Adam in Paradise, that is, before
his fall: because (say they) being in that condition he neither needed any such
Law, either for the refreshing of his body, or for the quickening of his
spirit, nor could possibly observe it, having no other company but his wife,
which could not make a public Assembly, which the observation of the Sabbath
requires. To whom we answer.

First, that this supposition, that Adam being in Paradise needed no Sabbath,
is ill grounded; for first, the refreshing of the bodies of men and beasts,
though it be a Consequent; yet was never the Ground of the Institution of the
Sabbath. The moderation of our labors belongs to the eighth Commandment that
enjoynes labor. As for the quickening of Adams spirit, why might not he need a
Sabbath, as well as a Sacrament? And although every day were a kind of Sabbath
to Adam, in respect of his easy labor, and his Holy conversing with God, even
in his works about the Creatures, yet there is great difference between
laboring moderately and not at all; And to serve God in ordering the
Creatures, according to his will, and to serve him in the duties of his own
immediate worship. So, every day ought to have been spent by Adam, in an holy
manner, but not as a Sabbath: Besides, though the Sabbath were made for man,
yet it was not made for man alone, but principally for Gods Honor in his
public worship; in which respect Adam as much needed a Sabbath as we do, being
created for Gods Glory as well as we.

Secondly, as Adam needed a Sabbath, so he had means to observe a Sabbath; he
and his wife when there were no more persons in the World made a public
Assembly. There is is a gathering of two or three as well as of a multitude,
Matthew. 18.20. And Christ is present with them as well as with a greater number.
Nay, further a man that is shut out from public meetings may keep a Sabbath
alone. So then there being no impediment why this Commandment for the
observation of the Sabbath might not be given to Adam in Paradise, and Moses
recording it in the first place amongst those laws that were then given him,
we have no ground to doubt, but that Adam had this Law then given unto him;
and, in him, unto all mankind. So that we may,

5. Observe, The law given by God, for the observation of the Sabbath Day, is a
law Universal and Perpetual.
UNiversal it must needs be; 1. Because in Adam it was given to the whole
nature of Man, which was entirely in him at that time when he received it. 2.
And the use as well as the ground of it, reaches indifferently unto all men,
who are alike interessed in all the works that God has wrought, both of
Creation, and Redemption, and alike obliged to honor him for them, and have
like need of those Spiritual comforts, and refreshings which the religious
observation of that brings unto, and supports the soul withal. Upon the same
ground it must needs be perpetual, for if it bind all men, it must of necessity
bind all ages; which also our Savior necessarily implies in his answer to the
Pharisees question about divorce, Matthew. 19.8. wherein he affirms, the divorce
supposed to be permitted by Moses, to be unwarrantable, because it crossed the
Law of Marriage, given to Adam, in Paradise; which Answer must necessarily
suppose this ground, that whatsoever Law was given to Adam in the Beginning
(those Laws that respected his present condition, as his Laboring in Paradise,
and Eating of the Tree of Life, excepted) binds all his posterity in all Ages.
Besides, the placing of this Commandment amongst the precepts of the
Decalogue, which our Savior ratifies in every jot or tittle of them, Matthew.
5.18. further manifests the mind of God, for the continuance of this Law, which
our Savior wills his Disciples to be careful to observe, Matthew. 24.20. even at
the destruction of Jerusalem 40 years after his Ascension, when all other
Mutable and Temporary Laws were taken away.

Nay, although there be this difference between this precept concerning the
Sabbath, and some other laws of the Decalogue, that this does not appear so
evidently to be a Law of Nature, as they do, yet it must necessarily be a law
of Nature in the greatest part. As, that there must be a time for public
Worship, a time of Rest from other Employments, a fit time, a set time, a time
that must return according to some time computed by Weeks, or Months, or
Years. For all these even by the light of Nature Heathen men acknowledged, as
is manifest by their practice in all Ages and Countries. Nay, the Creation and
Redemption of the World being once revealed, even the light of Natural reason,
would have directed men to make choice of those days, in which those great
works were perfected, for the days of observing this holy Rest.

Now it must needs be granted, that seeing the ground of fixing the Sabbath
upon the Last, or First day of the Week, was the marking out and advancing of
those days above others by the most eminent of Gods Works; therefore man's
exercise upon those days must be in the Contemplation of those and the rest of
his works, that our hearts may rejoice in Him who has in them manifested his
Infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and Power. Whence,

6. Observe, Meditation in Gods Works, that our hearts may be raised up to an
holy Rejoicing in Him, is, and ought to be, a Christians chief Exercise, for
the right sanctifying of the Sabbath Day.
Psalm, composed of purpose for the Sabbath, (as appears in the Title of it)
handles no other argument, but the setting out the works of Gods providence, in
governing the world in righteousness. And it is as evident, by the doubling of
the daily Sacrifice upon that day, by Gods Commandment, Numb. 28.9. that the
Will of God was, that men's thoughts should be much exercised in the meditation
of that glorious work of their Redemption, shadowed out under those sacrifices,
and purchased by the Blood of Christ. And indeed, as all Gods works praise him,
so do we, by remembering them and meditating on them, most highly honor and
advance Him, as is evident by the Psalms composed for that purpose, Psalm.
104.107.145. and Rev. 4.11. And for our selves, our hearts are by that means
wonderfully quickened, and enlarged, and filled with love toward him; (see,
Psalm. 18.1. and 116.1.) and brought to an Holy Dependence on him, and
Confidence in him, which is a fruit that is produced by this holy meditation on
Gods works, Psalm. 78.7. Now Gods honor, and the increase of Piety in us, were
the ends of the Institution of this holy Rest. It is true, that this exercise
must be accompanied with those other holy duties, of Prayer and Praises,
Preaching and Hearing of Gods Word, administering the Sacraments, and the like,
as conducing all of them, if they be rightly used, unto the same end.

VERSE 4.
THese are the generations of the Heavens] That is, in this manner they took
their Beginning, From and By God alone, and according to his Will, by the
Mighty Word of his Power.

In the day] That is, in that Time that it pleased God to take up in forming
them, which we know was in Six days, and not in One. But we find the Word,
Day, in Scripture is used commonly to signify Time Indefinitely.

This recapitulation of the works of Creation, wherein they are challenged and
ascribed unto God alone, being prefixed before the Laws that are mentioned
afterward, gives us just occasion to take special notice, of the Right which
God had to dispose of all things, according to his own Will, and to give them
what Laws he pleased, seeing all of them being the works of his own hand, and
therefore his Own by the strongest Title, were consequently to be ordered by
him as he pleased. So that out of this order observed by the Holy Ghost in this
Narration, we may,

1. Observe, He that gives things their Being, may Dispose and Order them as he
will.
Matthew. 20.15. Upon that ground God may order all things as he pleases, (as
indeed he does whatsoever he pleased in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 115.3.) because
all is his Own, and none has given unto him first, nor consequently can claim
any thing of him, Romans 11.35. nor limit him in any respect. God cannot wrong
his own Creatures; no, though he should destroy them, much less when he does
Command or prescribe unto them; as, for the former reason, so, withal because
his Will is Just.

1. Let it cease all our murmurings in Afflictions, Job 1.21. much more in
duties of Obedience. If Saul must obey, because God made him a King, 1 Samuel
15.1. much more must we obey because God made us Creatures, and gave us our
Being. St. Paul, upon this ground, stops every man's mouth, that reasons with,
or answers again unto God, that God may do with his own what he will; much
more, and by a juster right, then the Potter may frame his clay into what
fashion he will.

2. Let no man go about to rule, or prescribe unto others, according to his Own
will, because no man can say that he made them by his Own Power, nor
consequently can justly challenge this unto himself, May I not do with mine own
what I will? Let all Humane Power be bounded by the Will of Him, whose all
things are, and from whom the Authority that men challenge unto themselves is
derived, which also they receive from Him with such limitations as he was
pleased to bound it withal, and no farther.

Moses contents not himself to say, These are the generations of the Heavens,
etc. but thinks fit to add withal, In the day that the Lord God made the
Earth, etc. Whence,

2. Observe, Whenever we mention and remember the Being of the Creatures, we
ought withal to set before us, and remember Him that made them.
David does, Psalm. 8.3. having mentioned the Heavens, he in the next clause
calls them, the work of Gods singers; and having taken a surview of all Gods
works, and the wonderful order in which he has disposed them, he calls them
all Gods manifold works made in Wisdom, Psalm. 104.24.

VERSE. 5.
BEfore it was] And by and by after, Before it grew; that is, when it had yet
no Being, God made it, and gave it that Being which it has.

Nor caused it to rain] He proves that God made the Herbs and Plants, because
before they were, there was no other means by which they might be produced
according to the course of nature, neither the Influence of the Heavens, nor
any humane Culture. Whence,

1. Observe, Every Herb and Plant upon the Earth is Gods Creature.
Observe. 3.

2. Observe, Not only the Mercies of God in General, but every Particular
Blessing must be taken notice of, as coming from God.
Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. both every kind of them, and the Particulars of every
kind, that so he might have a cloud of witnesses to testify for him, and to
affect our hearts the more.

The Argument by which Moses makes it appear, that those Herbs and Plants were
Created by God, because there was no other means by which they might be
produced, warrants us to,

3. Observe, That which is brought to pass without Ordinary Means, must needs
be wrought by the Hand and Power of God Himself.
Nebuchadnetzars stone, which was cut out without hands, Dan. 2.45. was a
Kingdom set up by God Himself, ver. 44: In like manner, those effects which are
wrought beyond the power of the means, must needs be acknowledged to be the
acts of a Divine Power; as when Gideons three hundred destroyed the huge Host
of the Midianites, it argued that the sword of the Lord was there, as well as
the sword of Gideon, Judge. 1.18.

Let us so take knowledge of it, and that with admiration, in all such events
as fall out, either without, or beyond the Power of Ordinary means. When the
Israelites had bread to satisfy them without sowing, it was God that fed them;
as he did Moses when he had strength supplied unto him 40 days without eating
or drinking. So in the very ordinary course of nature, when our life is renewed
and continued by dead things; and strength increased by weak things, things
impossible to nature, we must acknowledge, that he has His hand in those
works, who is above nature.

Note, Moses showing that there fell no Rain on the earth to make the Herbs and
Plants to grow, tells us that God had not caused it to rain upon the Earth, as
if he had said, It had not rained on the Earth. Whence,

4. Observe, There can be no Rain on the Earth, unless Godsend it.
Job 37.12, 13. and prepares it for the earth, Psalm. 147.8. Therefore he
promises it, Deuteronomy. 11.14. and 28.12. and he keeps it back at his pleasure,
Amos 4.7. and then none can give it, Jer. 14.22. whence the Apostle tells us,
that the giving of rain was a witness for God unto men, Act. 14.17. and his
people are justly taxed that they did not take notice of it, and acknowledge
it, Jer. 5.24.

Let us then seek it at his hand, as Elijah did, 1 King. 18.42. and thank him
for it, that we may work his fear into our hearts, Jer. 5.24. who only can give
it; and if he should withhold it, for any long time, might starve the whole
Earth, as he had near done the Land of Israel, 1 King. 18.2, 5.

Moses proves that God made the Plants and Herbs, because the Means by which
they are ordinarily produced and cherished, were wanting, the first and
principal whereof he names to be the Rain. Whence,

5. Observe, It is by Rain from Heaven, that all the Herbs and Plants on the
face of the Earth, do grow and are nourished.
Psalm. 65.10. The Heavens must hear the earth, and the Earth the Corn and Wine,
if any of them prosper, Hos. 2.21.

Let us acknowledge the wonderful Goodness and Mercy of God, that from time to
time provides that means, without which neither men nor beasts could possibly
subsist, and that constantly, and seasonably; so that neither Earing nor
Harvest fail according to his promise, Genesis 8.22. And withal, take notice of
his wonderful Power, that makes the Rain a means of cherishing Life in the
Herbs and Plants, which it self has no Life at all.

Without Rain, or any help by humane culture, God, as Moses relates, created
the Herbs and Plants, howsoever he pleases ordinarily to make use of both for
the propagating and preserving of them. Whence,

6. Observe, Though God be pleased to make Use of Man's Labor, in Producing and
Cherishing the Fruits of the Earth; yet he can increase and preserve them
without it.
Psalm. 104.30. and blesses the springing of the fruits thereof, Psalm. 65.10.

Let no man then burn incense to his own net or yarn, or think highly of his
own wisdom or diligence as the cause, and means, by which his fields of Corn or
Pastures are made fruitful, seeing both our Strength to labor is from God, and
our Wisdom to manage our affairs aright, is from him too, Isa. 28.26. and this
blessing upon our labors is that only that makes them successeful. So that
every way it is he that gives ability to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. riches are his
blessing, Prove. 10.22. without which it is in vain to rise early, and to eat
the bread of sorrow and carfulness, Psalm. 127.2.

Notwithstanding though Moses hereby proves these Herbs and Plants were the
work of Gods hand at the first, because there was no man to till the ground, he
must necessarily imply, that ordinarily there is required man's labor in the
producing and cherishing of the fruits of the Earth, So that we may,

7. Observe, Though the fruitfulness of the Earth come only by Gods blessing,
yet the labor of man is required as the ordinary means to further it.
Deuteronomy. 28.8, 12. Prove. 12.11. Now this labor God has laid upon the generation
of men; Partly to humble us, as appears by that Curse upon Man after his Fall:
and, Partly, to exercise both our Bodies and Minds, and that for the good of
them both, seeing idleness (as experience teaches us) both fills the body
with ill humors, and the Mind with noisome lusts: and lastly, that being daily
busied about the Creatures, we might the better observe the ways of Gods
providence, in providing for, blessing, and supporting them, and working, by
his influence, both In, and By them, in a wonderful manner.

Let then every man apply himself to labor in the place that God has set him
in: 1. In Obedience to Gods Command. 2. Depending still upon Gods blessing,
which only must prosper his Endeavors; lest otherwise sicknesses in his Body,
and noisome lusts in his Soul, and the Curse of God upon his Estate, waste and
consume him, and misery and beggary come upon him like an armed man, Prove.
24.34.

VERSE 6.
ANd there went up a mist] So many read it: and then the sense is, that as God
only made the Creatures, so he only cherished them, neither by man's labor, nor
by Rain the ordinary means by which they now grow and live; but instead thereof
he prepared a Mist, which he made to be sufficient to water the Plants which he
had made. But some there are, who translate it, Neither a Mist; which also the
Original may well bear; And then the sense seems to be more clear, and suitable
to the scope of the Holy Ghost, who to show that the Plants and Herbs were
produced merely by the Power of God, excludes all the Ordinary means by which
according to the Course of Nature they might be cherished, both man's labor,
and the dew of Heaven, whether by rain the more usual and effectual; or so much
as by a mist, the weaker and less usual means of nourishing the Plants.
Howsoever the words be rendered, the scope of Moses appears to be this, by
excluding the help of any Second cause to make it evident, that the Herbs and
Plants were produced and sustained only by the Power of God, that we might
acknowledge the Equity of Gods Command in restraining man from eating of the
sruit interdicted, and might behold his Goodness and Bounty in bestowing on
him the free use of all the rest of the fruits which he had Created; for which,
man had never labored: So that if he denied man any sruit (seeing he had no
right to it) it was just and equal, and if he granted him any; much more if he
gave him all the rest, it was out of favor and superaboundant bounty. Now if
we consider the words (as we do in our Translation) But a Mist. We may.

1. Observe, God wants no variety of means, to effect whatsoever he will.
Elijah, the Ravens shall bring it him every morning and evening; if that
means fail, he has a widow in Zarephath that shall provide for him; if her
proifions fail, an handful of meal in the barrel, and a little oil in the
Cruse shall be sufficient to maintain him, and her, with her whole family till
God send rain on the Earth.

Let no man despair when means seem to fail; he that takes them away can
provide other at his pleasure; if they seem weak and insufficient in
themselves, he can make them sufficient by his Power; If Christ be taken away
from the Earth to ascend unto to his Father, his Spirit shall descend upon the
Apostles, and work more effectually by their Ministry, than it had done by
Himself in the days of his flesh, when he was present with his Church here on
Earth.

Now if we render those words as others do, Neither a Mist. We may,

2. Observe, God can, and many times does, bring things to pass without any
means at all.
Genesis 1. ver. 30. Obs. 7. and ver. 11. Obs. 2.

The end why Moses in this Narration excludes the means by which the Plants
and Herbs are usually produced and cherished, is to make it appear, that
therefore they were brought sorth by God Himself. Whence,

3. Observe, Gods Power in effecting all things is never clearly discovered,
until all means be removed
Gideon, Judge. 7.2.4. For where the means appear, men who are too much
inclined to judge of things by sense, are more easily drawn to ascribe effects
to Means that appear, than unto the Divine Power, that works by them, which is
not seen. Besides, the wisdom of man being (as it is) enmity against God,
there is a wonderful aptness in us, to withold his Truth in unrighteousness,
and to advance the Creature above the Creator; so that God for preserving his
own nonour, finds it needful many times to work without means, (as He did in
that glorious work of our Redemption wherein he admitted no Creature to share
with him in the work, that men might glory only in the Lord, Isa. 63.5.) or, by
such means, as appear to be unable to effect, by their own strength, that work
which is wrought by them.

This Mist Moses tells us rose out of the Earth (as indeed all rain does) and
fell down upon it again to water it, and to refresh the fruits that grew upon
it. Whence,

4. Observe, Every Creature ought in an especial manner to be Useful unto
that from whence it is produced.


Let us then, for shame, return all unto that God, from, and by whom, we and
all things are, lest all the rest of the Creatures arise up in judgment against
us. And let the Observation of that course which God has set in nature be an
especial means to quicken us unto that duty.

VERSE 7.
FOrmed the Man] Or Fashioned, or (as the Prophet David speaks, pointing at our
natural generation, Psalm. 139.15, 16.) wrought curiously: now in relation to
this Forming, it is that God is called our Potter Isa. 64.8.

Of the dust of the ground] Or Clay, as it is termed, Isa. 64.8. But dust
seems to be a name that more significantly expresses both the base Matter of
our bodies, and the Power of him that fashioned them into so excellent a form,
of a matter baser and more unapt to be brought into fashion then clay it self;
not only Earth, but Earth that had no coherence or Consistence, apt to be
scattered by every puff of wind. This name is commonly used to express our
baseness, as Genesis 3.19. and 16.27. Now that clause (of the dust of the ground)
is more significant, then if he had said; Out of the dust of the ground, for
that had only expressed, Of what matter he was made, but this expresses What
he was made, even dust fashioned into the form of a man; so that he is still
Dust as God terms him, Genesis 3.19. and Solomon, Eccl. 12.7.

Breathed] Immediately from himself, or Secretly.

Breath] Or Spirit, because the Soul's residence in the body is manifested by
breathing, which we know never cease till the Soul depart out of the body.
Now some observe that the word here used, which is Neshemah, is never applied,
but to signify either the Spirit of God or the soul of man.

Of life] Or lives, as it is significantly expressed in the Original by the
plural number, to express the several faculties, and Operations of life,
exercised by the soul, in Vegetation, Sense, and Reason, and the rest of the
abilities subordinate thereunto, which are so far diversified in the natures of
them, that although they proceed from one fountain, yet they seem to be as so
many several souls, by the diversity of their operations, and by some have
been conceived to be so indeed.

And man became] that is, this body formed of the dust into the shape of a man,
and the soul breathed into it by God, became one person, and being truly and
really joined togther, the man consisting of them, was a living Soul, that is,
(as soul is often taken in Scripture) a living person.

A living Soul] Living a natural life, exercised in vegetation, Sense, and
Reason. Otherwise in respect of Spiritual life the Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.45.
opposes the first Adam to the second; and a living soul to a quickening spirit,
implying that man received now only a Natural life, but obtaines his
Spiritual life only by Christ.

1. Observe, The Substance of man's body is exceeding base and vile.
Job. 4.19. Comely indeed without, but full of filthiness within: breeding and
casting out corruption every day, maintained by as base means as it self is;
Bread out of the Earth and flesh of such Creatures, as in a few hours would
turn into stinking carrion; and clothed with Skins or Excrements of Beasts
and worms, or Linen out of the Earth as vile as either.

Let no flesh glory in beauty which is Vanity, Prove. 31.30. Or esteem the man
whose breath is in his nostrils, Isa. 2.22. Or delight in making provision for
the flesh; but first long after that estate wherein the Corruptible and Earthly
bodies, shall be made Heavenly and Spiritual, and in the mean time labor to
beautify the hidden man of the heart, which God sets much by, Pet. 3.3, 4.
laboring to adorn it with grace, and to cloth it with Christ's Righteousness.

This dust as base, as it was God wrought curiously into the shape and form of
a Man. Whence.

2. Observe. How base soever the matter of man's body is, yet God has framed it
into a curious and excellent piece of work.
Job. 10.8. But farther, that he Clothed, that is, covered and adorned him
with flesh and skin, after he had fashioned and finished the firm frame of his
body, of bones and sinews; Ver. 11. The Truth is, that of all visible
Creatures there is none that in any sort equals man, in the curious composition
of his body, whether we look upon the Beauty and Majesty of his Person, or take
notice of the Variety, Nature, and Use of his several parts, with their
composition and framing of them together in a wonderful order and
correspondence one to another, which even heathen Men behold with admiration of
the Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of Him that made them.

2. Let it assure us of Gods provident care, for the sustaining and supporting
of a work on which he bestowed so much Art in framing and composing it;
especially since we know him to be a faithful Creator, who neglects nothing
that he has made.

2. Let us honor the Lord even with those bodies of ours, on which he bestowed
so much workmanship possessing our vessels in holiness, and glorying neither
in our strength, nor beauty, but in him alone that made us for his own honor
and service.

Now after God had thus curiously framed man's body, he became not a living soul
until he himself breathed into him the breath of Life. Whence.

3. Observe. The soul of Man by which he lives, comes Immediately from God
Himself.
Solomon tells us that God gave the Soul, Eccle. 12.7. or, made it, as it is
expressed, Jeremy 38.16. And whereas the Body is supported by Means, and the
help of the Creatures: the Soul is supported without means, by the immediate
Hand and Power of God Himself. And coming Immediately from God, carries the
most lively Resemblance of his Image, as we have seen already.

1. Let our souls seek unto him, who gave them, and serve him, as we are
directed, 1 Cor. 6.20. 1. Praising him with all that is within us, Psalm
103.1. 2. Submitting all the Abilities of our souls to be guided by his Spirit,
that we may be led by it and walk in it. 3. And laboring with all our
endeavors to lay hold on Heavenly things, whence we had our Original,
forgetting the things that are here below, Col. 3.1.

2. Lay hold on this as a ground of special Comfort: that which God has given
more immediately, he will certainly most carefully preserve and provide for, as
it appears he has done, by redeeming the soul from hell, and purging it from
sin by the blood of his own Son, and adorning it with the graces of his Spirit,
and reserving it hereafter to enjoy his presence, and there to be satisfied
with his Image.

The manner of Gods uniting the soul unto the body, the Holy Ghost expresses
by the phrase of breathing, which besides that it points at the secret way of
infusing the soul (as Elihu testifies, that the Breath of the Almighty gave him
life, Job. 33.4.) withal may imply the weak band of Conjunction of the soul
unto the body, so often mentioned in Scripture, that our breath is in our
Nostrils. Whence,

4. Observe, The life of Man consisting in the union of the Soul with the body
has but a very weak foundation.
Isa. 20.22. to be blown out at one puff, which when it is gone, they turn to
their dust again, Psalm. 104.29.

Let it move us in the whole course of our lives, to pass the time of our
dwelling here in fear, having always our Lamps burning, and our loins girt,
Luke 12.35. ready to remove hence whenever God shall call us. 2. Ceasing our
immoderate care for outward things, Luke 12.20. Which are in themselves of
short continuance, and from which we may be taken we know not how soon. 3. And
endeavoring to make sure of a state of continuance, a Life that is hid with
Christ in God. 4. Forbearing any dependence upon, or fear of men, as we are
advised, Psalm. 146.3, 4. Who cannot long continue to do us either good or evil.

The body of man, which God had framed of the dust was in it self but a lump of
Earth (...), because though it had the shape of a man, yet it wanted life, but
when God had breathed into it that breath of life, then man became a living
soul, and not before. Whence,

5. Observe, The life of man is only by his Soul.
Elihu speaks of himself, Job. 44.4. Wherefore in many places of Scripture we
find Life and Soul put one for another, as Gen, 19.17. That which we render
life is Soul in the Original; upon the same ground, a Living person is
frequently in Scripture called a soul, because every man lives wholly by his
Soul.

Let every man's Soul be his chiefest care, by which we live at present, and in
which we live Eternally, get it clearsed by Christ's Blood, renewed by his
Spirit, beautified and adorned by his Graces, and assured of enjoying his Glory
unto the hope whereof we are called.

But Beasts we know have souls as well as Men; Yea, and their souls are called
spirits too, Eccl. 3.21. yet beasts are no where termed living souls, as men
are. Partly, because beasts have a life of a lower and baser Condition, as
being wholly drowned in the gross matter of the body, and exercised about that
alone; and partly, because their soul dies together with their body, and goes
downwards as Solomon speaks, Eccl. 3.21. that is, perishes as the body does
which turns to the Earth. Whence,

6. Observe, There is none worthy the name of a Living soul, but he only that
lives by a Reasonable Soul.
Jude 10. Dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5.6. Living indeed a Natural life, but
Spiritually dead, as being cut off from Christ who is the fountain of true
life; yea, twice dead and plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. as being guided and
carried on only by sensual lusts and desires, after the manner of a beast.

Let it then be every man's care and endeavor to live as a man, that is as one
Created after Gods Image, whose soul and the motions thereof ascend upwards,
and not downwards to the things below, Col. 3.2. and therefore unworthy to be
embraced by the Soul which is from above, lest the man dye while he lives, and
that not only for the present, but for ever.

VERSE. 8.
What right God had to dispose both of Man and of all the rest of the
Creatures, as being all of them the Works of his Own Hands, we have seen
already; He that gave them their Being when they were not, and still supports
them now they are, has undoubtedly just right to Order them according to his
own Will.

Now how God Disposed of the Man that he had made, what laws he gives him, and
how far he limits him in the use of the Creatures, the Holy Ghost relates to
the end of the seventeenth Verse of this Chapter; in which we have laid before
us Gods Direction: First, for man's Employment. Secondly, for the Use of those
Creatures which he allows him.

In the Law given to Man for his Employment are expressed, 1. The place where
he was to reside and exercise himself: Paradise, a Garden of Pleasures. 2. The
Employment it self; which was to Dress and Keep it.


In the Description of the Place where the Man was to reside and be employed,
are set before us: 1. The Lord of it, God Himself, who planted it with his Own
Hand. 2. The Nature or Kind of it; it was a Garden. 3. The Situation of it; it
lay Eastward. 4. The Furniture or Store of the Garden. 1. In General; it was
furnished with all sorts of Plants both for Use and Delights. 2. In Particular;
It had in it Two Trees appointed to a Spiritual Use.
5. The Commodious Situation of the Garden, both for Fruitfulness and Delight,
by the benefit of the River that issued out of it. 6. The Assigning over of the
Garden to the Man. 1. Of the Place, for them to dwell in. 2. Of the Fruits, to
feed on.



Planted] Or rather, Had planted, namely, on the Third Day, wherein God had
Created the rest of the Herbs and Plants, he stored this place, which he
intended to appoint the man to dwell in, above the rest of the Earth, and
furnished it in an especial manner above other places with such variety of
Fruits, and in such an Order as Orchards and Gardens are stored and furnished,
which are planted by man's Art, but with such exactness, and abundant
sufficiency of all things as became the Workman that planted it, and was
answerable to the end for which it was prepared, to satisfy man, besides
sufficiency for Necessary use, with all variety for pleasure and delight.

A Garden] Called therefore the Garden of God, Genesis 13.10. Or, Paradise, as the
Greeks call it usually in their Language, which signifies a place of delights
and pleasures: This place is a Type of the Church called, A Garden enclosed,
Cant. 4.12: and a Figure of Heaven, where are Rivers of pleasures, which is
called by that name, Luke 23.43. 2 Cor. 12.4. This Garden was doubtless a
large Circuit of ground, as appears by the greatness of the River that watered
it, and the variety of Fruits of all kinds with which it was furnished. Now
whether this were a Garden enclosed (which is most probable (or how and
wherewith it was fenced out from the rest of the Earth, it is not expressed.

Eastward] From Canaan, as some say; or as others, from the Wilderness, where
they conceive Moses wrote this History; or, in the East part of the World, as a
third sort imagine. And if we interpret it in the East part of Eden, there is
nothing against it in the letter of the Text, and following that interpretation
we have here pointed out to us, not only the country it self; but withal, the
particular part of that Country, in which Paradise was seated. Howsoever the
opinion of those that think that Paradise, took in the Circuit of the whole
world, can neither stand with this description of the Situation thereof, nor
with the relation of Adams expulsion out of it afterward, to dwell in other
parts of the world.

Eden] Is the name of the Country mentioned, Isa. 37.12. Ezch, 27. And
signifies pleasure, both in the Greek and Hebrew tongues; given unto that
Tract of ground, for the fruitfulness and delightsomness thereof, unto which
the Prophet seems to allude, Isa. 51.3.

There he put the man] Or, appointed him to dwell and continue, as in the place
assigned unto him by God for that purpose. Now whether Adam were made, out of
the Garden, (which opinion, seems to be favored by that clause in his
expulsion, that he should go till the ground out of which he was taken) and so
was brought into it afterward, or whether he were made in the Garden; this
phrase (of putting) does not clearly determine, which implies no more but that
God settled, or appointed him to Abide there: whether by continuing where he
was, or by removing him thither from another place, it is not determined by
this expression. This only seems probable, that God gave man a dwelling apart
from the beasts, to intimate unto him the difference that he put between him
and them, and to mind him of that more excellent condition, unto the hope
whereof he was reserved, wherein they should have nothing common with him.

It is not in vain, certainly that the Holy Ghost in so brief an History,
describes with such variety of Circumstances, the pleasantness and rich
furniture of this Garden, which he prepared for man's dwelling. It may be, to
manifest the bounty of God to man every way, that we might the more clearly
discover both the malice of Satan in traducing him to our first Parents, as if
he had envied unto man that happiness unto which he might have advanced him;
And withal their folly and impiety in harkening to his suggestion, against so
many clear evidences to the Contrary. Whatsoever was the Scope of the Spirit of
God herein, we cannot but take notice in the first place, that this
pleasantness and fruitfullnesse of Paradise above any other part of the Earth,
was from God Himself, who is said to plant it and make it so. Whence,

1. Observe. The sruitfulnesse of one part of the Earth above another is from
God alone, and merely and only by his Blessing.
Isaacs ground yield him an hundred fold, Genesis 26.12. An unusual proportion,
and questionless, far greater then the grounds adjoining yielded unto others
at the same time; And the flowing of the Land of Canaan with milk and honey,
was, because God cared for it in an especial manner, Deuteronomy. 11.12. Who by his
blessing makes a barrain Wilderness yield Corn and Wine and fruits of
increase, and by his Curse makes a fruitful Land barrain, Psalm 107.34, 37,
38.

If any man then be seated in a pleasant and fruitful place, if his grounds be
fruitful and yield their increase above other men's; Let him acknowledge it as
a peculiar blessing of God upon him above others; honoring him with the fat of
the Earth, and first of our increase, as giving unto him of his own, 1 Chronicles.
29.14. and engaging him thereby, to continue and multiply his blessings upon us
above measure, Prove. 3.9.10. Lest if we abuse his bounty, to pride, surfeiting
and drunkenness, he turn the fruits of our Land into Briars and Thorns, as he
threatens to do to his own People, for the like evils, Isa. 5.6.

But the planting and furnishing of this Garden of delights had been nothing
unto Adam, unless God had given him the possession of it, and appointed it to
be his habitation. Whence,

2. Observe, Though God have prepared the Earth for man, yet he can have no
Title to any more of it, then God allots out of it, for his habitation.
Psalm. 115.16. in general; but who amongst them shall have this or that
portion of it for his inheritance, God must determine by a particular
assignement; This Moses tells us God did in the first dividing of the Earth,
Deuteronomy. 32.8. This he did afterward in bestowing the Land of Canaan upon his own
People, denying them the Land of Moab and Edom, because he had disposed them
before unto others of their kindred. Yea, that Land though he gave to his
People in general, yet he devides it amongst them in particular, assigning by
lot unto every Tribe their particular portion. And the same power he continues
still to exercise, although by the Ministry of men; bestowing whole countries
where he pleases as his gift, as he did Egypt upon Nebuchadnetzar Ezech.
29.20. although he had won it by the sword. And thus he does in particular, in
disposing of men's particular estates, whether purchased by money, or left as
Inheritance by Parents, which although Solomon call their gift, Prove. 19, 14.
Notwithstanding, that they pass from God through their hands, is evident by
Abraham's distribution of his estate, Genesis 25.5, 6. according to Gods Direction,
Genesis 21.10.12. And howsoever men ordinarily are not directed in passing their
inheritances to their posterity by express command; yet that they are
overruled therein by divine providence, may easily appear to any that will
wisely obobserve the Course of Gods Ways, who many times alters the purposes
and intentions of men, and conveighs the estates and inheritances of men, to
others than these to whom they assigned them, at his pleasure. And this power
it is fit that God should still exercise as well for maintaining of Justice and
equity, which men's greedy desires, that delight to dwell alone on the Earth,
Isa. 5.8. would otherwise overthrow; As besides to preserve amongst men the
acknowledgement of his Sovereignty, and men's dependence on him, as Lord of
their estates.

It ought not to be passed by without special observation that God provides
for man's habitation, the choicest place in the whole Earth, planted by his own
Hand, and stored with all sorts of Fruits both for necessary use and for
delight. Whence we may,

3. Observe, God is pleased to bestow upon men liberally his best and chiefest
blessings.
Jacob, Genesis 27, 28. The chiefest of all lands to his own People, and promises
them the finest and purest of all the Wheat, and Honey out of the Rock if they
will obey him, Psalm. 81.16. and the good of the Land, Isa. 1.19. But above the
rest he inricheth them with all manner of blessings in Heavenly things, Ephesians.
1.3. Withholding from them neither Grace, nor Glory, nor any thing that is
good, Psalm 84.11. Not his Spirit, Luke 11.13. Not his own Son, Romans 8.32. and
hereafter, not the fullness of joys, or rivers of pleasures, which are in his
presence, Psalm. 16.11. And this he does partly to magnify his infinite love
and goodness; as Pharaoh, to show his Love to Joseph, placed his friends in
the best Country in Egypt, even in Goshen, Genesis 47.6. that men may admire and
honor him for his goodness; And partly, to encourage his Servants to Cheerful
obedience by the taste of his bounty, which if they enjoy not always in full
measure, they have none to blame but their own sins, which hinder good things
from them, Jer. 5.25.

Let all Gods Children then rest and stay their hearts upon him and upon his
faithful promises (as having a sure foundation upon his Goodness, Truth, and
All Sufficiency) which include all the blessings of this Life, and of that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Even all things that may do us good, Psalm
84.11. And in Christ are all of them, Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. fulfilled all
of them in their time and proportion; In Spiritual things, in sufficiency of
Grace for this life, and fullness of Glory hereafter, Psalm. 73.24. And in
Temporal things, in such competency, as our places and occasions shall
require, which is all that we are warranted to pray for, under the name of
daily bread, and as much as good men have desired, Genesis 28.20. as being best
for them, Prove. 30.8, 9. and wherewith we are willed to content our selves, 1 Timothy 6.8.

VERSE 9.
OUt of the Ground] That is, our of the ground of that Garden; as other Trees
and Plants spring out of the Earth by the Power of God, as we have seen in the
former Chapter.

Made the Lord to grow] or, as some render it more clearly (had the Lord made
to grow) that is upon the third day, when the rest of the Plants and Trees were
created. And the Lord is specially named in this place to point at, both his
Goodness in bestowing: and his Equity in limiting, according to his Own Will,
the use of that which is every way his own.

Every Tree] Not every particular Tree, but the kinds of all Trees pleasant to
sight: the words implying that there was no kind of tree Pleasant to sight and
good for food, which was not to be found in Paradise; though some, at least, of
diverse of those kinds might perhaps be found in other parts of the Earth.

Pleasant to sight] The smell of the fruits is not here mentioned, but seeing
the purpose of the Holy Ghost, is to commend those fruits every way, and we
find some Fruits commended by their smell, as Cant. 7.8. We may conceive that
also to be understood, as well as the pleasantness of the sight, and taste,
which are expressly named.

Good for food] That is, both pleasant to the taste and wholesome to nourish and
strengthen the body, and so to maintain the life: as we see usually the meats
that are wholesome and nourishing, are for the most part, of a grateful and
pleasing taste.

The Tree of life also] Those two trees which God separated from Common to a
religious or Spiritual use, are expressly said to be produced by God, as the
rest of the plants were: to manifest the Equity of Gods Commandment concerning
them, who seeing he made them, might either give or detain them at his
pleasure, and limit and appoint them to what use he best liked. Now whether
those two trees were of different kinds from the rest, or no, is not curiously
to be examined. This Tree of Life is generally acknowledged to be a Sacrament,
and seal of that Covenant by which God promised him the Continuance of his
Natural life, during his abode here on Earth, which could not have been
supported but by Gods immediate Power: and the bestowing of Eternal life after
he should be removed from hence, to enjoy the fullness of Gods presence for ever
in heaven; which some conceive to be the chief benefit intended to be sealed by
that Sacrament. Now if this Tree had besides a power given it to maintain Adams
body in fullness of strength without decay, it must be acknowledged to have
that power by the use of it, as Gods Ordinance only, not as a Natural
Instrument to work the effect by the very bare use of it, but by the use of it
in faith, apprehending the promise annexed thereunto.

In the midst of the Garden] Although that phrase here used signify no more
in some other places, but within, as Genesis 41.48. We render the same phrase
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, He laid up food in the Cities,
expressing that phrase Indefinitely; which in strict signification should be
rendered In the Midst of the Cities. Notwithstanding seeing in the Hebrew
tongue the Midst is the most proper signification of this Phrase, we may
warrantably render it in the midst, and interpret it as we render it, to
design the particular place in the Garden where this Tree stood. Which we may
conceive to have been purposely placed in the midst of the Garden, that it
might be the more often in Adams view, which should be always in his thoughts,
as it must needs be, when he must so often pass by it either to take his food,
or to busy himself in his appointed employment.

And the Tree of the knowledge of good and Evil] Which Adam being forbidden to
eat of, not for any evil in the Tree or in the Fruit of it; but only because
it was the Will of God to forbid it, his abstinence from it merely upon Gods
prohibition, might signify unto him that the true bounds of good and evil was
only the manifestation of Gods Will, which makes that good and lawful which he
allows, and Evil which he forbids; So that this Tree which was forbidden
amongst all the fruits which were allowed man for his food, was as it were a
mark by which Good might be known from Evil; as one man's land is known from
another by the bounds set between them in the fields where they lie. The
particular place where the Tree stood, is not here mentioned, but when the
Woman, Chap. 3.3. names it, The tree in the midst of the Garden, we must
conceive that those two trees stood not far assunder, as always the Sanctions
of the law in promises and threatenings, are either expressed, or must be
understood to go together.

By these two Trees then, there seems to be represented and figured out unto us
the sum of the Covenant between God and Man, of which the promise on Gods
part, was the bestowing of all blessings upon man, employed in the figure of the
Tree of Life, External, Internal; and Eternal, the life both of Nature and
Grace, and that in the perfection of both; and on man's part the Covenant was
Faith (by which he was to depend on Gods All Sufficiency and Truth) And
Obedience, by which he wholly submitted to the Will of God, to be guided by it
in all his ways. Both these parts of the Covenant, God thought fit to
represent unto man, by those outward and visible signs of the Two Trees.

This full description of Paradise, being the place which God had prepared for
man, and assigned unto him for his dwelling and employment; with such a
particular recounting of the variety of the fruits wherewith he had furnished
it, and which he allowed man for the comfort of his life; gives us occasion to

1. Observe. As God gives us all things freely, so withal he takes special
Notice of all that he bestows upon us.
Jam. 1.5.) Unless it be in case of Unthankfulness and disobedience, either
to wicked men, to aggravate their rebellions, and thereby to justify himself
in his Judgments upon them, as he does unto Saul, 1 Samuel 15.17. Or to his
Children, to affect their hearts the more with the sense of their own failings,
as he does to David, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8. But partly for our sakes, that we may
know, that he, who takes notice of all that he gives us, will withal take
account of us how we employ it; as our Savior represents in the Parable of the
Talents, Matthew. 25.19. that we may possess his blessings with fear and
trembling; And partly for himself that he may rejoice in his own bounty and
goodness Psalm. 104.31. which is not the least part of his happiness.

Let us much more take particular notice, of such blessings as we receive from
Gods hands, laying up in our hearts, and upon all occasions setting before our
eyes the number, weight, and measure of them, as far as we are able to
comprehend them, as the godly do; not only of general and Common mercies, as
Psalm. 8.7, 8. But besides of particular favors, as Psalm. 18. and 116. As well
to the filling of our hearts, with the apprehension of Gods mercy toward us to
raise them up to an holy rejoicing in him, and Dependence upon him; as also to
quicken us to all cheerfulness in duties of obedience, unto which we are tied
by as many obligations, as we have received blessings from him, and for which
we may rest assured of our reward hereafter upon that experience that we have
of Gods bounty in that which we have received already.

Those pleasant trees, wherewith Paradise was so plentifully furnished, God
made to grow not only out of the Earrh, but besides in that particular place,
yea we may add farther, in that very Order and Manner wherein they grew. So
that we may hence,

2. Observe. Every plant on the face of the Earth grows where and in what
Manner and Order God appoints it.
Jonah's head, Jonah, 4.6. which was an extraordinary and miraculous work of
God; but even the trees and herbs, which spring ordinarily out of the Ground,
God makes to grow Where and How he pleases. This must needs be so, seeing it
is only God that gives them their body, and in whom they as well as all things
else consist, whence it is that we see that many of them cannot be made to grow
where man will; but where God has fitted them with a soil and temper of air
agreeable to their natures.

This leads again to the consideration of Gods Providence and Mercy to us, in
those things which nature produces; It is not the Earth, or the Heavens: much
less humane culture, but Gods Blessing by them that makes the grass to grow
in our pastures, the Herbs in our Gardens, and the Trees in our Woods: of which
though all the Earth were full, yet our grounds might be empty without Gods
special blessing.

The Trees and Plants that God furnished Paradise withal were both delightful
every way, both to the eye and taste, and useful too, and good for food; and
the variety of them such, as no kind of desirable fruit was wanting, but was to
be found in Paradise, so that Gods bounty unto man overflowes to admiration.
Whence,

3. Observe, Gods Bounty abounds unto men, not only to the Supplying of their
Necessities but also for their Delight.
Psalm. 104.15. So that he bestows all things abundantly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17.
And this he does partly to set out his All Sufficiency and kindness to man the
more; when it is apprehended so many ways by every sense, whereunto every
different object brings in, as it were, a new evidence and Testimony, of his
overflowing bounty: and partly to exercise our Sobriety and Moderation, which
is not seen, but in variety of delights.

1. Let us then tender unto God, after the measure that we receive from him,
the most acceptable presents of our cheerful services, which that variety and
abundance, which we receive from his hand should provok us unto, Deuteronomy. 28.47.
Serving him with enlarged hearts, and delighting to run the way of his
Commandments, with the Holy Prophet, Psalm. 119.32.

2. It may warrant us the honest and moderate use of Gods blessings, even for
delight: So we use them, 1. Seasonably when God gives us an occasion of
rejoicing, and 2. within bounds of moderation as we are advised, Prove. 23.2.
and 3. directed to those Holy Ends, proposed by God to his own People, Deuteronomy.
26.11. Not so much for the pampering of the flesh, and delighting of the
outward senses, as the enlarging of the Spirit in an Holy rejoicing in God when
we taste his goodness, and sweetness in the variety of his Creatures. Whence,

4. Observe, It is usual with God to mix delight and pleasure, with
usefulness and profit in all his blessings.


Let Gods example be our pattern for imitation both in Prescribing and Doing.
Let governors temper the usefulness of Power and Government, with the
sweetness of Mercy and Compassion: Necessary commands, with loving
Invitations; Exactions of obedience, with comfortable Rewards. Let Masters
sweeten Servants hard Labors, with comfortable food, moderate intermission,
gentle encouragements, and kind acceptance. Let all men season the toiles of
the body about the things of this life with Heavenly meditations, sweet
conferences, and cheerful expectations of the reward set before them. Let there
be in our Spiritual actions a fit temper of Joy with our sorrows, of hope
with our fears, of Comforts with our terrors. In the observation of Occurrents,
mix the remembrance of the Good of times past, with the sense of the Evils
present; and the expectation of the Rest and ease at hand, with the bitterness
of Heaviness by trialls and afflictions, that are upon us at present:
Considering that God Himself has set the one against the other, as the Wise
Man tells, Eccle. 7.14.

The placing of those Trees which were appointed for Spiritual use offer us
many things worthy our Consideration; First, in respect of the persons whom
they were to teach. Secondly, of the place where they stood. Thirdly, of the
Nature of the signs themselves. Fourthly, of their use and signification. The
persons to whom these teaching-signs were given, were our first Parents, now in
the state of their Innocence, endued with fullness of knowledge, and holiness
proportionable to their condition; In this perfect state of theirs, God saw it
fit to quicken and strengthen them by the help of such outward means as these:
Whence,

5. Observe, The best amongst men and most perfect have need of the help of
Outward means to quicken and strengthen them and put them in mind of their
duties.
Pet. 3.18. to mind us of those things which we forget 2 Pet. 1.12. to
admomonish us in our failings, and recover and quicken us in our faintings and
backslidings, Heb. 10.24. and to exhort us upon all occasions, Heb. 3.13.

Let no man neglect any outward means, Public or Private, as being; 1. So
needful to our selves. 2. Commanded by God Himself. 3. Effectual by his
blessing upon the conscionable use of them. Considering that the best of us
know but in part, 1. Cor. 13.9. are subject to so many Temptations, Laden with
a body of sin, Romans 7.24. By which we are continually assaulted, often foiled,
and continually retarded in our course of obedience.

The place where God planted these two Trees which he appointed to this
Spiritual use was not only within, but in the Midst of Paradise, amongst
the rest of the Trees and Plants of that Garden. Whence,

6. Observe, Spiritual and Religious duties ought to be remembered in the
midst of the use of our employments, about the things of this life.
Deuteronomy. 26.11.12. Referring even our eating and drinking to Gods Glory 1 Cor.
10.31. The neglect whereof Job feared in his Children, Job 1.5.2. In our
labors about the things of this life, when we fit in the house; or walk in the
field, Deuteronomy. 6.7. we are to have God both in our thoughts, and in our mouths;
as well to prescribe unto us moderation in the use of those Creatures, which we
make use of for our refreshings, which must be limited by the rules of
Religion, as also to show us the end of all those outward things, which is to
raise up our hearts, to the contemplation of God in all his Creatures, that we
may carry his fear before us in all our ways, and trust in him with all out
hearts, and be encouraged and quicken our selves by the taste of his goodness,
and bounty, to the duties of his service. And hereof it behooves us to be the
more careful; because of our pronenesse by nature, to drown our hearts in the
thoughts of outward and sensual things, and forget him that orders and
disposes them, and works in and by them.

Woe then be to those, that confine their thoughts only to these outward
things, while they are bus^ed about them, shutting out God from their Tables,
where they feast themselves without fear, Jude. 12. forgetting God in their
plenty and abundance, which was Agurs fear, Prove. 30.9. which he justly
recompenceth with sending leanness into their souls, Psalm. 106.15. Leaving
their tables to be a snare unto them, and that which might have been for their
prosperity, a trap, Psalm. 69.22. Casting justly upon them the fury of his wrath
while they are about to fill their bellies Job 20.23. Secondly, to such as
wholly sequester holy meditations from the ordinary employments, in their
outward affairs, confining them to the Church, and the Sabbath; or to the
hours of their weakly, and unconstantly performed devotions, as if our
Particular and General callings, were things distinct and not Subordinate,
whereas a Christians (...), or Negotiation ought to be still in heaven, Phil.
3.20. even while he is busy about the things here below.

Now if we conceive these Trees to have been planted in the midst of the
Garden, which (as has been said) this relation must necessarily imply, we
cannot but conceive, that the reason why they were there placed, was, that they
might be the more often in the view of our first parents, which way soever they
went, either to take their food, or to go about their employment. Whence,

7. Observe, Gods Commandments ought to be still in the view, and before the
face of his Children.
Numb. 15.38, 39. And for the same end, to write the law upon the posts of
their Houses, and on their Gates, Deuteronomy. 6.9. That it might be unto them as a
signer on their hands, and a fronlet between their eyes. Thus the Prophet David
professes that Gods Judgments were always before him, Psalm. 18.22. his
meditation all the day long, Psalm. 119.97. As it is a mark of a wicked man that
His commandments are behind his back, Psalm. 50 27. where he may never see, nor
think of them. This careful observance and casting our eye upon Gods
Commandments; is, first unto us of absolute necessity, as well because they
are our Counselors, to advise with upon all occasions, Psalm 119.24. and our
light to walk by, verse 105. As also because our ways are full of turnings
aside, and therefore we may easily err; yea, and dangerously, unless we have
that to guide us; and besides, our corrupt lusts, are still at hand to pervert
us, which cannot be checked by any other bridle but the Law. Secondly, it much
advances the Honor of the Law, when we so carefully take heed to it; and of
God Himself, when we make his directions our continual care and observation.

Those Trees which God ordained to this Spiritual use, to mind our Parents of
their duty, and to strengthen their Faith, were of the same Nature, if not of
the same kind, with the rest of the Trees of the Garden; as the Sacramental
Elements, with us, appointed by our Saviors Institution are such Water, and
Bread, and such Wine, as we do or may employ to ordinary or common use. Whence,

8. Observe, It is usual with God to teach his Children by things of ordinary
and common use.
Nicodemus, speaks unto him Earthly things, John 3.12. From which in preaching
he takes most of his Similitudes; as from Sowing, Planting, Building,
Clothing, Food, and the like. And this he does; 1. In compassion of our
weakness, stooping low unto us, because we cannot ascend up unto him, nor
easily raise up our earthly minds, to comprehend and behold Spiritual things
in their own nature; unless they be shaddowed unto us by things that are
Earthly, 2. That by resembling those Spiritual things by Earthly; he might
acquaint us with the right use of those things which are subject to sense,
which is to raise up our hearts, to the contemplation of things that are above
sense. 3. That we might have Monitors and Teachers in every place, in every
Object of sense, in every employment that we take in hand. 4. To affect us the
more with Spiritual things, by representing them unto us by the objects of
sense, which are most apt to work upon our affections.

Let us make use then, of those things which are of ordinary use, to raise up
our hearts to heaven by meditations, and by them teach and instruct our
Brethren, as a way most easy, both to the Speaker and Hearer, and most
profitable, and lastly ordained by God Himself, who has not only imprinted
some resembances of Spiritual things, upon those which are Natural, but has
set us this task, to study Spiritual things in the Book of Nature; and to
ascend up to Heaven by these things on Earth. Neither is it any more
disparagement to Gods Wisdom, to be shaddowed out by common and ordinary
things, then it was to our Savior to be clothed with our flesh, the Glory of
both easily shining out through so gross a Veil to all that have eyes to
behold it.

It had been enough for God to give Adam Life; but He is pleased to engage
Himself, by his promise, to continue it unto him, and to confirm his Promise by
his Seal, in this Sacramental Tree of Life; Thus is he pleased to abase
Himself, to be obliged to his own Creature. Whence,

9. Observe, God is contented, not only to do us good, but besides to engage
himself thereunto by his Word, ratified by his own Seal.
and in respect of our weakness, it is Convenient, that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation, Heb. 6.18.

Then must man's unbelief be utterly inexcusable, as being; 1. Causeless, as
having such infallible grounds of assurance, and 2. Joined with much contempt
of God; and Unthankfulness, in sleighting His free offer of Himself and his
Love unto us; and manifesting his Unfeigned desire of our good, and for that end
abasing himself, out of compassion to our weakness so low, as to engage
Himself to his own Creatures. 3. And in effect it implies the denying of his
Truth, when we refuse to give Credit to His Word.

The Tree of Life (as has been intimated) was unto Adam the Seal of Gods
Promise, of the continuance of his Life both Present, and Future, under the
Condition of Obedience to his Will, in taking that for his rule in directing
him, what to choose, and what to forbear. Whence.

10. Observe. Both the continuance of Present, and hope of future Life, as they
are Gods Gift, so they are assured by his Promise.
Dan. 5.23. So that if He take away their Breath they die, Psalm. 104, 19. And
that sometime he engages Himself to continue it by promise in express terms,
Psol. 21.4. 2 Kings 20.6. Luke 2.26. And always to strengthen and support it
unto the time determined in His own Counsel, which he has given us sufficient
warrant to depend upon. But above all, Eternal Life is his Gift, Romans 6.23.
which He has assured unto all that are in Christ, with whom their life is hid
or laid up safely in God, Col. 3.3.

Acknowledge it then unto him alone by Living unto him alone, and seek it at
his Hand; 1. by prayer, Psalm. 30.8, 9. with Hezekiah and Jonah; seeing He is
the length of our days, Deuteronomy. 30.20. And in a Course of Obedience, for God
preserves not the life of the wicked, Job 36.6. who live not out half their
days, Psalm. 55.23.

The Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, a sign unto Adam, that he was to
take the Will of God, as his rule to direct him, what to choose, and what to
forbear, was placed near the Tree of life in the midst of the Garden, as we
shall see, to teach him to lay hold on that Promise of God for the continuing
and perpetuating of his life, only under the Condition of his obedience.
Whence,

11. Observe. All Gods promises, must be Understood and Embraced under the
Condition of the Performance of our Obedience.
Psalm. 37.3. Isa. 1.19. 2 Chronicles. 20.20. and Spiritual, Psalm. 50.23. John 3.18.
1. This brings most honor unto God to bless us, and do us good only in a way
of Righteousness, which is the end of all his Administrations, both of Mercy
and Judgment, that he may be known to be a God that loves Righteousness and
hates Iniquity, Psalm. 92.15. Hos. 14.9. 2. It is the best means to further
holiness in us, by our endeavors to become such that God may do us good and
bless us without any impeachment of His Own Honor.

The name of the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, was (as we have seen)
given it, that Adam being by Gods Allowance permitted to eat freely of all the
rest of the fruits of the Garden and by the same Commandment restrained from
eating of this only, might know that nothing was lawful unto him but what God
allowed, not unlawful or evil, but what He forbad, Whence,

12. Observe, Good and Evil are bounded and limited only by the Will of God.
Heb. 10.19. to do the Will of God; and it is the doing of His Will, that makes
any service of ours properly a good work or acceptable to Him, Heb. 13.21. And
therefore are servants directed, to take this for their rule, even in serving
their Masters, Ephesians. 6.6. And on the same ground we are commanded to make that
our request, that the Will of God may be done by us and other men on Earth, as
the Angels do his Will in Heaven, see Psalm. 103.20. This indeed, and this
alone, is that which makes any service a duty of Obedience, that we perform it
as the Will of God; and because He wills or commands it: for thereby only we
honor Him, both in his Sovereignty, and Holiness when we seal unto both, by
conforming our wills and actions thereunto.

Let us then inquire after that Will of God, as the rule of our practice, as
we are directed, Romans 12.2. which he has laid before us in his word, Deuteronomy.
29.29. And look at nothing else in the course of our practice but the
conforming of our wills and actions thereunto, that we may with comfort, expect
the promises that only belong to the fulfilling of his Will, Heb. 10.36.
working even the works of Righteousness it self upon that and upon no other
ground.

VERSE 10.
A River] Or Rivers, as some understand it after the use of the Hebrew phrase,
which oftentimes puts the Singular for the Plural Number, as Chap. 1. verse
12. By the Tree bearing seed, are understood Trees: yea all Trees yielding
seed; By this River some understand Euphrates, others both it and Tigris, and
some Tigrs alone.

Went out of Eden] It did not arise in Eden, but went either through or by
Eden, and so watered that Garden of Paradise which was in Eden a Country of
Mesopotamia, or, as some will have, a larger Country, compassing both
Mesopotamia and diverse countries adjoining thereunto.

To water the Garden] By running through it, as most will have it: some
conceive, it compassed the Garden round, imagining that Garden to be an Island
lying in the bosom of Tigris or Hiddekel, about ten miles in circuit,
inhabited to this day by Christians, called Gozoria, distant about two miles
from Nineve: but these are only conjectures.

And from thence] Not immediately after it had watered the Garden, but a great
many miles below; for some refer (from thence) not to the Garden, but the
country of Eden through which the River flows.

And from thence it became into four heads] Properly Heads are Fountains, from
which Rivers spring; but a River parting into four branches, as this is
described to do, the beginning of those several channels, into which it
divides, may not unfitly be termed Heads; Especially seeing in the Hebrew
tongue the Word here used signifies indifferently either a Head or a
Beginning.

The description or the Situation of this Garden upon so fair a River, is added
to commend unto us both the pleasure, and fruitfulness of this Garden of
Delights, planted with all variety of fruits at present, and watered with such
a stream as might continue the fruitfulness of that soil for the future.
Whence,

1. Observe, Gods blessings are every way complete and perfect, full and
lasting.
Psalm. 65.9. Which makes glad the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. It may well be so
in respect of the cause, whence these blessings flow, which is Gods Boundless
Love and All Sufficiency; And must be so in respect of the end at which they
aim, which is the manifesting both the one and the other, that men's hearts
might be brought to rejoice and depend upon Him alone.

Let our services in some proportion, be answerable to Gods Blessings, wanting
in their parts nothing of what is required, howsoever they come short in their
degrees; and flowing from, and supplied and continued by an inward spring of
Grace, which may hold us on in a constant course, to keep us always fresh and
flourishing, as a good man is described unto us, Psalm 1.3.

It is recounted amongst the special commendations of this Garden of
pleasures, that it was well watered by a fair River, which is for that purpose
described unto us here at full. Whence.

2. Observe. Springs and Rivers of waters are not amongst the least of Gods
Blessings.
Psalm. 104. It was the commendation of the plain of Jordan, that is was watered
like the Garden of God, Genesis 13.10. Waters were the strength of Egypt and Her
Glory, Nahum. 3. And the honor of Pharaoh, Ezekiel. 29.3. as indeed they are the
Delight, Strength and Profit of any Country where they are. Therefore God
Promises springs and waters, as especial blessings, Isa. 35.6, 7. and amongst
his Curses threatens, as a special judgment, the smiting and drying up of the
waters, Isa. 11.15. Psalm. 107.33.

Let us then take notice of, and acknowledge such Commodities amongst Gods
special blessings, which no man can purchase at any rate, nor want without
great inconvenience; howsoever for the most part they are lightly esteemed,
because they are common.

VERSE 11.
PIson] A fair branch of a River falling into Hiddekel or Tigris at Apamia,
from whence they both join their names as well as their streams, and are called
Pisi-Tigris, or Pasi-Gigris, and fall at last in to the Sea of Persia,

The Land of Havilah] So called from Havilah the son of Cush, and borders upon
Chaldea; This is that Havilah, which by other Authors is called, Susiana. There
is also another Havilah so named from Havilah the Son of Jocktan, which lies in
East India, far distant from this in another quarter of the world.

There is Gold] In Havilah, and in all probability, in former ages, in some
good quantity, as if Moses had said, that Country is famous for Gold, or
abounds in Gold, and the Gold there found is good.

There is Bdellium and the Onyxstone] Whether this Bdellium (to which Mannah is
compared in the color thereof, Numb. 11.7.) be a gum, or a precious stone, or
what else, it skils not much: this seems to be the Holy Ghosts Intention, to
intimate by this description the goodness of the Country, that abounds in
those things which are of great price, and esteem amongst men. Whence we may,

1. Observe, Gold is a Creature of great Price and account with Men.
Tim. 6.10. And the Truth is, whatsoever account men put upon it, the things
necessary for the support of man's Life, must needs be esteemed of more worth
then it; seeing we not only pass it away in exchange for them (as Solomon
tells us, Money serves to all) but besides desire it only for that end, that by
it we may purchase necessaries for the maintaining of our Lives, as Food,
Clothing, and the like.

Let not men then turn that which they esteem at so high a rate to the basest
of all uses, to make it fuel for our filthy lusts; yea and by it to defile our
own hearts, in casting our love upon it, and making it our confidence as most
men do: Considering that the worth of it should lead us to honor Him that
gives it, and Consists in the use of it, which must be in honoring God by it;
and in making use of it to relieve his poor servants, that when we fail they
may receive us into Heavenly places, and with these transitory things may
purchase to our selves an heritage immortal that fades not away.

We find gold and Precious Stones reckoned amongst the riches of Havilah, but
not amongst the Treasures or Delights of Paradise; it is most probable because
there was none there, or at least because the Holy Ghost, thought it not worth
the naming or recounting amongst the riches, which God bestowed upon our first
Parents. Whence,

2. Observe, Gold is none of the Creatures in which our happiness consists.
Hab. 2.6; in the form of it, without life or soul; in the use of it, at the
most not so profitable as many other Creatures, and little more then the
measure or balance of the price, and worth of things of true value;
unprofitable to keep us warm, or to fill our bellies, or to maintain our lives
any way, much more to enrich our souls, and thereby to make us acceptable in
Gods Sight, as the Apostle manifests in opposing the odorning of a meek Spirit,
which God sets much by, against the adorning with Gold, 1 Pet, 3.3, 4.

Let no man complain of the want of that, without which our first Parents were
fully happy, which God many times bestows upon the wicked whom He hates, and
that to their greater judgment and Condemnation; which brings a man neither
Wisdom nor Grace, nor any thing that truly advances one man above another:
which our Savior despised, the Apostles enjoyed not, the wisest amongst the
Heathen esteemed of no value; which shall not be named or known in Heaven
hereafter, or at least shall be of no account there.

VERSE 13, 14.
THe manner of the three other branches of this River, and of the Countries
through which they pass, are set down as well for the greater Credit of the
relation, as for the better understanding of the place where Paradise stood.

Gihon is said to compass Ethiopia, or rather Cush, under which name is
included all that country which lies between Havilah, or Susiana and Egypt
called for the most part Aralia, inhabited at the first by the posterity of
Havilah, whose plantation might be in all likelihood upon the River Gihon,
although his posterity spread afterward farther into the parts of Arabia near
Egypt.

VERSE. 15.
ANd God took the man and put him] That is, set and appointed him to be and
Continue there, by His Command, either Outwardly by his Word, or Inwardly by
the Secret Direction and Motion of his Spirit. For that He took him by the
hand, to lead or carry him thither, as the Angel carried Lot out of Sodom, seems
not so probable and it is not needful; This setting of man in Paradise seems
to imply, that he was made at the first out of the Garden; and brought into it
afterward, which seems the more probable; Partly, that Adam comparing his
Garden with the ground out of which he was made (which he first beheld) he
might observe how much this place of pleasure surpassed the rest of the earth,
and might upon that ground set the higher price upon that blessing which God
had prepared for him: And partly that he might know and acknowledge, that
Garden to be Gods free Gift, and not his own inheritance; seeing he had neither
footing in it, nor Title unto it, until God placed him there. And perhaps
withal, to raise him up unto the expectation of a greater change to follow,
and to intimate that as he was now taken from the soil, out of which he was
made, to be removed into Paradise; So, he should one day be removed from the
Earth, from which he had his Original unto Heaven, a place of all delights,
and pleasures for evermore. The time when man was put into Paradise, seeing the
Holy Ghost has passed it over in silence, it will be lost labor to enquire
after.

To dress it] Or use such husbandry about it by sowing, setting, pruning,
watering, and thereby preserving and increasing the fruitfulness of those
fruits wherewith God had stored that pleasant Garden, that they might be the
more serviceable to man, both for his food and comfort. A very equal law that
man should bestow pains upon that whereof himself was to receive the benefit:
And the only outward employment which at that time, was to be found for him,
or have exercised his posterity after him, if man had not fallen. This dressing
or Husbandry of Paradise by Adam, was far from that toilsome drudgery in which
men are now exercised: eating their bread in the sweat of their brows, a
bondage which was brought upon man by sin. Seeing the Creatures then needed
less attendance then now they do: And Adam was then more able to labor,
without weariness, then now men are, by reason of the manifold infirmities of
their bodies, from which he was free. Besides the weakness of their minds,
which are not now so Inventive, and Judicious to devise the readiest and
easiest way to order their works. This labor of Adams, whatsoever it was, must
be esteemed as a part of his Abasement, although it had this honor mixed
withal, that man was therein (as it were) a fellow worker with God, in the way
of his Providence, for the conservation of his Creatures. Withal, the
employment, as it was full of delight, so it brought with it much profit, as
being a great means to lead the man on, to a more exact Observation of the
works of God in the wonderful variety of the several effects wrought in the
Creatures, according to their different natures, and manifested to him by his
own experience in his attendance upon them and laboring about them: which must
needs both affect his mind with a wonderful delight; and exercise it in a
continual admiration of Gods Wisdom, and quicken it in an Holy rejoicing in his
goodness, and establish it in a firm dependence upon his faithfulness and
Truth.

And keep it] In order and fruitfulness; The word may imply either the
continuance of Adams labor, or the effect of it, or both: He should so dress
the Garden that it might be preserved, and kept every way: The whole in the
beauty, and good order of it for delight; and the several plants in strength
and vigor for fruitfulness, all reserved and kept several from the beasts of
the field, that might otherwise tread down, or hurt those plants wherewith God
had stored this pleasant Garden.

This labor, in which God exercised our first Parents, and which he injoynes
them, as their task implies their duty toward the Creatures: which as God had
put under man's government; so, he appoints him to take care of, for their
preservation; doing about them such services, as might conduce the reunto: so
that we have here laid before us, the foundation of men's particular Callings,
and the scope of them: which are services about the Creatures, for their
preservation, and thereby for supporting of Community: So that, as man in a
sort partakes with God in his Soverainty over them; so he might some way
resemble Him in his Care and Providence, for their good. Wherefore this Law
given to Adam, must be the more heedfully observed, and more carefully searched
into. In which we may,

1. Observe. Every son of Adam is bound to some employment or other in a
particular Calling.
Adam when the whole nature of man was in him, is a Commandment given, not so
much to his person in particular, as generally to all that are partakers of
that nature; and that not for the present, but for ever, as long as man has an
abiding upon earth; All things are full of labor, says the Wise Man, Eccl.
1.5, 6, 7, 8. The Heavens, and Sun, and Moon, and Stars, the Seas, the
Winds. That which is a law to all Creatures, to be exercised, and employed for
their mutual preservation, is much more a duty unto man: unto which God
directs us. 1. By laying a necessity upon all Creatures here below, of
subsisting by mutual support and assistance one of another; men and beasts by
food, plants by Culture, Cattle by care in storing up provision for them, in
Summer, to sustain them in Winter. 2. By disposing and placing the Creatures
so, that without man's labor, they are unserviceable: as Metals, Stones, and
other Mineralls; yea, oftentimes Soil for manurance of grounds, are placed
below, in the bowels of the Earth, where they are unuseful; thorns we see grow
in Thickets, where they cumber the Ground; which by man's labor, being set
abroad, they fence: All kind of materials for Clothing, building, and most for
food, without labor would be utterly unserviceable. Few things are indeed by
nature, either so prepared, or so placed, as they may be fit for use without
Labor. 3. God directs to labor, by making it appear that these things by
labor are made useful, and serviceable, which without it would be of little
use at all: As corn by grinding, and baking, flesh by roasting, or boiling,
become good food: VVoole and flax by dressing, Spinning, and VVeaving, make us
good Clothing: and generally labor brings in wealth, Prove. 10.4. and thereby,
through Gods Blessing, there is profit, Prove. 14.23. Thus the Commandment as
it is General, so it is urged upon men by necessity, that men must either
labor or starve, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Yea and labor the thing that is good, Ephesians.
4.28. Either by Inventing, Directing, or Executing things needful for the
preservation of the Creatures, and particularly for the supporting of Humane
society, both in things Natural and Spiritual; This Ordinance of God
concerning man's labor (as are all the rest of his laws) is both equal and
good.

1. That men might exercise their love to the Creatures, wherein they some
ways resemble God Himself.

2. That they might have some title, in Equity, to the use of the Creatures,
which they preserve by their labor.

3. That by busying themselves about the Creatures, they might the better
observe God in his various works In and By them; that so they might yield him
his due honor, and quicken their hearts to more cheerfulness in his service,
and settle them in a faithful dependence upon him.

4. That their employments about the Creatures, might keep their hearts both
from vain and idle thoughts, and from swelling with the apprehension of their
Lordship and Sovereignty over them.

5. That the Body of man being exercised as well as his Mind, might at present
be the better preserved in health, and hereafter be partaker of Eternal glory,
having been used as an instrument for Gods service.

Let all those lay it to heart, that delight in Idleness, and therein not only
walk inordinately, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11. but besides, corrupt their own minds, destroy
their bodies, trouble their neighbors, and help to ruin society. These are
indeed the Moaths and Caterpillars of the Earth, living upon the sweat of other
men's brows, whose portion is shame and misery, at present, and vengeance from
God hereafter, without repentance.

Now it was God Himself that appointed Adam this employment. Whence,

2. Observe, Men's Callings and Employments are by Gods own Appointment.
Genesis 3. of Magistrates, Numb. 11.16. Romans 13.1. Ministers, Exodus 28.1.
Soldiers, Exodus 17.9. Or by warranted Examples, as feeding of Sheep, and other
Cattle, Merchandise, all sorts of Manufactures, and the like. Or else such as
have been enforced by necessity, which seems to be the ground of many Callings
now in use.

Secondly, the designation of men unto particular callings, is also from God,
either immediately, as Moses, and Aaron, Bezaleel, Aholiab, Gideon, the
Prophets, and Apostles, or by the Ministry of Angels, as Philip was by an
Angel from a Deacon called to be an Evangelist, Act. 8.26. Sampson appointed to
be a Judge, Judge. 13.3. John Baptist to be Christ's Messenger, Luke 1.17. Or
most usually by the election and choice of men, directed therein either by
express commission from God by Word of Mouth, as Moses was to choose Joshuah
to succeed him, Elijah to anoint Elisha, Samuel, Saul and David, and the
Prophet, John: Or by marking out the men by special extraordinary endowments,
as Bezaleel, and Aholiab; or most commonly by that ordinary wisdom and
discretion which God has given Parents, Guardians, and Magistrates, to choose
out fit employments for such as are under their government; so the Elders of
the Church, called by the Apostles, or the Church, with their advice and
assistance, are said to be set over the Church by the Holy Ghost, Act. 20.28.
Good reason it should be so: seeing, 1. We our selves are Gods, and
consequently to be disposed of by him every way. 2. And the work in which we
are employed is his service, Col. 3.24. 3. And the abilities, by which we are
enabled to perform it, are his gifts, Isa. 28.26. 4. And the success in the
work must be by his blessing, Psalm. 127. 5. And the recompense of the service
must be his reward, Ephesians. 6.8. Col. 3.24.

Let every man then in his Calling so carry himself as Gods servant: 1.
Undertaking it by his warrant, either by Public or Private direction, or by
bestowing on us Abilities for the employment, or by presenting Opportunities
outwardly, or moving us Inwardly, by strong, constant, and regular inclinations
thereunto. 2. Walking in it with Fear, Fidelity, and Cheerfulness, Ephesians. 6.6,
7, 8. 3. Guiding himself by the rule of Gods Word directing him, either by
particular precepts, or by general rules. 4. Aiming therein at the right end,
seeking not so much our good, as the good of Community. 5. And abiding therein
till God Himself discharge him, 2 Cor. 7.20. either, 1. By taking away the use
of the calling it self, as of a Soldier in time of peace; or by disenabling
him, either in body, or mind to follow it, as Nebuchadnetzar was forced to
cease ruling, when he was mad. 3. Or by withdrawing his needful maintenance:
they cannot serve at the Altar that cannot live of the Altar. 4. Or by
furnishing the person with Abilities, fitting him with opportunities, or urging
him by just occasions, to undertake some more serviceable employment. This is
truly to abide with God in ones Calling, 1 Cor. 7.24.

But what need was there of Adams labor in Paradise, which was able
sufficiently to maintain and supply him with all things convenient, either for
necessity, or delight without his labor? or what need he labor at all, who
was Lord of the whole world? yet we see God lays this employment upon him, to
dress and keep this Garden. Whence,

3. Observe, Duty, and not Gain to our selves, is, or should be the ground and
scope of the undertaking of all our particular Callings.
Cor. 7.20. as being there in the servants of God, or Christ, Ephesians. 6.7. 2. To
men, serving one another thorough love, laboring not so much what is good to
our selves, as what is good generally to others with our selves, Ephesians. 4.28. not
seeking our Own, but the profit of many, 1 Cor. 10.33. This is a truth founded
upon the Principles of Nature, as appears by the account the world makes of
such men, as labor out of Conscience and Duty, with respect to the Common
good, as appears in the examples of Jehojadah, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. and Mordechai,
Hest. 10.3. and the base esteem that it has of such, as do all things in
relation to their private advantages, and pursue only the ways of their own
gain. It is true, that men May, and Ought to, aim at Competency, for the
maintaining of themselves in their employment, without which it is impossible
for them to do service therein: Nay, when God so blesses their labors that
they find an overplus above their needful expenses, they may lawfully lay up
for themselves, and their posterity after them, as Abraham did for Isaac, and
Isaac for Jacob. But that respect, to the enriching of themselves, or theirs,
should neither be the ground of undertaking, nor the rule of managing any man's
employment, as being contrary to all grounds of Religion, and destructive to
Community; 1. Because it guides all our actions, and excludes all Justice and
Mercy toward our Brethren. 2. It shuts us out of all hope of recompense of
reward from God, whom we serve no longer, then we deny our selves, and serve
one another through Love.

Let every man then be careful to undertake and enter into his particular
Calling, 1. Upon a right ground, as one called thereunto by God, though not
immediately, yet by such means as are warranted by him. 2. And to propose unto
himself therein a right End, not so much the enriching of himself, as the
serving of others through love, and advancing the common good. Considering, 1.
That we are not our Own, but his who has Created, Redeemed, and does
Continually preserve us, who therefore only has power to dispose of us at his
own pleasure, and to whom only we are to yield obedience in doing his Will,
even in the services of men, Ephesians. 6. bringing forth fruit unto him, Romans 7.4.
acknowledging, when we have done all we can, that we are unprofitable servants,
Luke 17.10. 2. Our obligation to our brethren; we are members one of another,
and therefore ought not to have any thing apart unto our selves. 3. The
advantages, 1. Of engaging God to preserve our persons, to bless our labors,
and Reward our endeavors, when we serve him in all that we do. 2. Of
preserving in our own hearts the testimony and comfort of a good conscience,
which bears witness unto us of our sincere endeavors to deny our selves in
seeking the good of others in obedience to Gods will; See Neh. 5.19. 3. Of
engaging other men to seek our good, when they discern that we seek theirs; and
to serve us as they find us ready to serve them through love, 2 Chronicles. 24.16.

The work in which Adam was to be employed, was the dressing and keeping of
that garden out of which he was to receive his food, whereby he not only
preserved the Creatures, but with all received the fruit and benefit of his
labors unto himself. Whence,

4. Observe, Man's labors although they be a means of preserving the Creatures,
yet the benefit of them redounds at last unto themselves.
Ephesians. 4.28. This truth is so evident by Experience, that it needs no farther
confirmation. The Plants and Trees that are preserved and propagated by our
labors, are either our Food or Medicine, or serviceable to us for building: we
cloth our selves with the fleece of those flocks that we store up provision
for, have the benefit of the labor of those Oxen that we feed, and cheer our
hearts with the wine of these vines that we plant: God indeed has been pleased
so to order it, 1. Because he has made the Creatures for our service. 2. That
he might the more encourage us unto those services, whereof our selves are to
receive the fruit.

Let it encourage all men to the undertaking of those Labors, which though
they be some way beneficial to the Creatures, yet are so necessary four our
support, that without the benefit that accrews thereby we could have no means
of subsisting; Making choice of such employments as most condure both to the
Creatures preservation, and to the support of Community thereby; not working
deceitful works, (which is a wicked man's character, Prove. 11.18.) or weaving
Spiders webbs, Isa. 59.6. rather wasting and destroying the Creatures, then
preserving or making them fit for use, wherein we both dishonor God, and hurt
our selves, and become destructive to humane Society.

The place which God appointed man for his Work was that Garden, which he had
stored with all manner of variety of the choicest fruits, and enriched
therewith above any other part of the Earth, where consequently there most
needed, and was most use and benefit of his labor. Whence,

5. Observe, Man's Employment ought especially to be in those places, and Labor
where it is most needed, and may bring most benefit.
JOnah must go to Nineveh a City exceeding populous, Jonah 4.11. and He
encourages Paul to labor at Corinth, upon this ground, because He had much
people there, Act. 18.9. And calls him to Macedonia, because there was need of
his help; and himself most desires to preach the Gospel where Christ had not
been named, Romans 15. And wisdom utters her voice in the Gates and most public
places. Indeed God requires of us much fruit which cannot be had, but where
there is much to work upon.

Let it direct us in the Choice both of our employments and of the places where
we make use of it, Endeavor to exercise our selves in such Employments, as may
bring most profit for advancing Gods Honor and furthering the good of others,
not so much of our selves, as of Community. Consider again, where and wherein
our labors are most needed. The policy of most men is to seat themselves, and
take up such employments where they may reap most profit to themselves and have
least to do. This their way is their folly, Considering that we are ordained to
bring forth much fruit, Joh. 15.2. And that the fruits of our labors increase
our Recompense of reward, 2 Cor. 9.6. that if we sow plentifully, we may reap
plentifully.

In the last place, it will be sit to consier, how far man's labor was to
extend, and what it was to effect in this employment unto which God assigned
him, he was to keep and dress it; The Plants and Trees were Created and placed
there by God Himself, he was to produce no new plant, but only to manure and
Cherish those which God had planted there already. Whence,

6. Observe, The Labor of man Makes nothing at all, but only by his Husbandry
Cherishes and Orders that which is already made.
that they may work one upon another by such abilities as God has given them;
and by that means sets nature on work, and at the most is but (as it were)
Natures Midwife. In the mean time God, 1. Provides all the Materials whereof
we make use in our employments, as the Soil, the Seed, the Rain, and Influence
of the heavens that cherish it; the Timber, the Stones, the Metals, the Wool,
the Flax, and the like. 2. The Abilities by which they have strength to produce
those effects are merely from God. 3. The Understanding and Wisdom, by which
men discern the natures and abilities of the Creatures and their uses, for
which, by well ordering, and disposing of them, they may be made serviceable;
that also is wholly from God, Isa. 28.26. 4. The success, and effect of the
labor which we bestow, is the fruit of his blessing, Genesis 26.12 Psalm. 65.10.
So that it is God alone that does all in All; and man in effect does nothing
but make use of such means, as God both prepares to his hand, and works by, to
produce the desired effect.

Let it then pluck down the pride of all our hearts, who are so apt to rejoice
in the works of our own hands, not as in the fruits of Gods Blessing, but as in
the effects of our own endeavors: and let it check our vain and dangerous
Confidence, which makes us trust in our own wisdom and power, and burn incense
to our own net and yarn, that we may ascribe the success of all our labors
about the things of this life unto God alone, who is indeed pleased to make use
of our heads, and hands in the Conservation of his Creatures; but, 1. Rather to
keep us doing, then because he needs our help. 2. That finding by experience
how little our labors work to the producing of any effect, we might rejoice in
him who works all things by his mighty power and not in our selves. 3. And
thereupon might be taught to depend upon him, and serve him; when we observe
the success of our labors to be the effect of his power, and not of any
ability of ours. 4. To abase and humble us, in busying our selves, about the
service even of those Creatures that he has put under our feet; All which he
has ordained only for a short time, whereas hereafter all men's labors, as
well as all other means, shall cease with the use of those Creatures, which
are supported by them: and God shall be All in All.

VERSE 16.
ANd the Lord God] Himself in Person, the same God that had planted the Garden,
and bestowed it upon the man for his possession and dwelling: so that the Name
of God seems to be mentioned in this place, as well to set before us the
strictness of this restraint, that it was laid upon man by the Authority of
God Himself, which also the woman insists on in her answer to Satan, Gen,
3.39:) As withal to set out the Equity thereof as being laid on him by God,
who having both planted and stored the Garden, and freely bestowed it on him,
had full power and liberty, to give out of that which was every way his own,
what he pleased, and to withhold what he thought good; and consequently
manifested his infinite Bounty and Goodness in bestowing all the rest of the
fruits and denying man only this one

Commanded the man] or, to render it word for word [Commanded upon the man] And
it is noted by some, that when that preposition [(...)] is added to the word
(Tzavab) which is usually rendered (Commanded) It signifies a restraint; as the
same phrase is used, Isa. 5.6. This is out of question, that here the word
(Commanded) must be referred to the latter clause of the next verse following;
for the Command to the Man was not to eat of all the rest of the fruits (which
was rather a Grant or Permission, then a Command) but only to abstain from
that fruit that was forbidden.

The man] The word Adam may include both Sexes in this place, as well as one;
we are sure it does, so, Genesis 5.2. He called their name, Adam speaking both of
the Man and Woman. So that, for ought appears to the contrary, the Commandment
might be, and it is most probable, was delivered by God Himself unto Eve, as
well as to the Man, although it be not certain that it was so.

Of every Tree] That is, of the fruit of every Tree; So that the Grant of those
fruits to the Man is enlarged in two Circumstances. First, that it extended, to
every Tree: And Secondly, to the enjoying of them fully, as we shall see anon.
This large extent of Gods Grant, is the more carefully to be observed, that we
may in the next Chapter, take notice how grossly and palpably God is wronged,
both by the Devils captious inquiry (yea because God has said, Ye shall not
eat of every Tree) and by the Woman's Scant and Malign expression of the Grant
in her Answer to Satan [Of the fruit of the Trees we may eat] Leaving out both
the Circumstances in this place, that commended the largeness of the Gift;
namely, that they were allowed to eat of Every Tree, and to eat Freely.

Thou may freely eat] Or, eating thou may eat; An Hebraisme of special
force, pointing out sometimes the Certainty, sometimes the Continuance,
sometimes the Intention of an action. All which perhaps, or perhaps the two
last, may be intended in this place, God allowing man to eat Daily, and
Plentifully, even to Satiety, of all those pleasant fruits of the Garden.

This large Gift of God to man, is delivered and expressed mavelous aptly, if
we take notice of the Order wherein it is here placed by the Holy Ghost, being
added immediately after the Commandment of dressing the Garden, as an
encouragement to the Man unto that labor, whereof the fruit and benefit should
return unto himself alone; So that the Easiness and Equity of that
Commandment, is manifested in this, that man was to labor for his good; And
it is likewise prefixed before the restraint that follows, to manifest Gods
Bounty and Goodness even therein, that out of such infinite variety of choice
fruits, God withheld from him only one Tree, and that too (as we shall see
hereafter for his good, that by it he might be still admonished to look unto
the Will of God, as the rule of all his actions.

By the like Circumstance God intimates the reasonablnesse of his restraint
from labor on the Sabbath day, because he had allowed Man six days for the
dispatch of his own affairs.

The scope of the Holy Ghost in setting down Gods Grant of all the fruits of
Paradise unto Adam, before he mentions the restraint, or forbidding the eating
of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil that he might the more cheerfully
submit unto Gods Will in denying him but One Tree, when he had so freely, and
fully allowed all the rest may warrant us to

1. Observe. The Sense and Experience of Gods Goodness is the best means to
encourage us to cheerful obedience unto Gods Will.
Egypt, Exodus 20.2. And Moses beats often upon that Argument, to quicken the
People to Gods Service, as Deuteronomy. 6.10. and 11.7, 8. And the Lord severally
threatens his People if they serve him not with Gladness, for the abundance of
all things, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Indeed nothing is so forcible to constrain as love, 2
Cor. 5.14. Which is grounded upon experience of Gods Love unto us, manifested
in his large bounty toward us.

Let it direct every one of us to quicken and strengthen all our hearts by that
motive to every duty; 1. Let us keep by us a Catalogue of Gods Mercies, both
General to his whole Church, and to our selves in Particular. 2. When we find
out hearts dull, and sluggish in the duties of Obedience; let us labor to
quicken them by setting all his favors before us, considering how great things
he has done for us, 1 Samuel 12.24. 3. Upon every fresh Mercy let us renew our
engagements and resolutions to constancy and Cheerfulness in Gods Service, as
we see, David does, Psalm 116. This means not only quickens us when our hearts
be dead, but besides, 2. makes our service more acceptable: For the Lord loves
a cheerful giver. 3. Keeps down the swelling of our hearts when we look upon
all our services as debts for what we have received.

Again, observe in this the order; that God first enjoins the manto labor in
the Garden, and then gives him liberty to eat of the fruits of it, to point out
the way by which he may have the better title to that whereof he should make
use; to labor for it first, and to enjoy it afterward. Whence,

2. Observe, Man's Labor about the things of this life gives him a good title
unto that which he enjoyes.
Genesis 3.19. And promises it as a special blessing upon his own Children: They
shall eat the labors of their own hands, Psalm. 128.2. And the Apostle calls
that only our Own bread for which we labor, denying food to those that live
idle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. as having no title to it at all. There seems indeed some
title in Equity, to allow men a share of that which they have (although as Gods
instruments) produced by their own labor, whence God gives even unto Oxen an
allowance out of that corn which they tread out, 1 Cor. 9.9. And every Master
allows his servant food when he has done his work, Luke 17.8. as well for
recompense of his labor past, as both to encourage and enable him to his work
afterward, which otherwise without such allowance he cannot be able to
continue. See Chap. 1. ver. 29. Observe. 4.5.

Now if we compare and lay together this Commandment to the Man to labor, and
the Grant that he shall enjoy and make use of the fruits about which he
labors, we may further,

3. Observe, All Man's Labor and Service is for his own Good.
Solomon tells, our labor is but for our mouth, Eccl. 6.7. that is, for the
supplying of our own necessities for this present life in food, clothing, etc.
So that either we have the fruits of our labors to our selves in particular;
or if they be directed to a common good, seeing we are all concerned therein,
the benefit returns unto us at the second hand, as the food which the hands
labor for, though it be first received into the belly: yet the strength and
nourishment which is received thereby, is imparted to them as well as to other
members of the body. As for other duties of the services which God require, we
know we have our fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.22.
so that in all things we may truly say with the Church, That we serve him for
our own good, Deuteronomy. 6.24. For as for God, our righteousness profits not him at
all, Job 35.7. as our wickedness hurts him not. So that we may truly say, as
our Savior directs us, Luke 17.10. that, When we have done all that is
required of us, we are Unprofitable servants, to God at least, though we may
some way profit men.

Let this encourage us to all duties of service unto God and Man. The merciful
man does good to his own soul, Prove. 11.17. 1. By exercising it in virtuous and
holy motions and actions at present, and thereby increasing and strengthening
the habits of Grace. 2. By getting interest thereby in a sure reward when the
time of refreshing shall come, by Gods gracious promise; so we make not that,
but the honor of God the scope of all our holy endeavors, as we are required,
Matthew. 5.16. See Christ's promise, Joh. 12.26.

To consider Gods dealing with Adam somewhat more particularly: God, intending
to deny unto Adam the use of one of the Trees of the Garden, before hand grants
him the free use of all the rest, that by the consideration of what he enjoyed,
he might the more willingly be contented to bear the want of that which was
withheld from him. Whence,

4. Observe, The best way to quiet our hearts in observing what we want, is to
set before our eyes what we do enjoy.
Elkanah goes about to satisfy his Wife Hannah being troubled for want of
children, by setting before her the love of himself who was her husband. And
David's heart distempered by the consideration of wicked men's prosperity which
he wanted, was never quieted, till he considered that God held him by his right
hand, guiding him at present by his Counsel, that he might afterward bring him
to glory, Psalm. 73.14, 23.

Let us carefully make use of this means to allay the distempers of our hearts,
raised often in us by the Art and Malice of Satan, by setting before us what we
want. If we grudge at resting the Sabbath day, remember the six days which are
allowed us for our labors; Set before our eyes the liberty of using lawful
delights against the restraint from vain pleasures; the enjoying of Grace
against the want of Wealth; Honor from God against the scorns of men; Inward
peace against Outward troubles; the enjoying of many friends left us, against
the loss of some taken from us. Thus Countermining Satan, who finds no other
means both to disquiet our hearts by murmuring and discontent, and to wrong
God, but by concealing and hiding from our eyes the blessings which we have
received; and by fixing them upon, and enlarging, our wants. In this case it
will be needful for us not only to fix our eyes upon the mercies themselves
which we have received, but to enlarge them by the consideration of Gods free
bounty; in bestowing both that which we had no right unto of our selves, and
that, without any desert of ours at all.

The Grant it self is to be considered in the next place, laid before us,
enlarged every way both in the variety of the several kinds of the choice
fruits which were given; and in the free liberty to enjoy them Fully and
Continually, employed in that phrase, Eating thou may eat. Whence,

5. Observe, The provisions which God allows us, even for this present life,
are manifold, and of wonderful variety.


Let the consideration hereof cease our murmurings, quench our unsatiable
desires, and warrant our sober and seasonable use of, and rejoicing in, our
store and abundance: But withal, kindle in our hearts a longing desire after
that One thing which is both Necessary and Sufficient, even God Himself,
communicated unto us in his Son Jesus Christ, who alone is unto us a Full and
All-sufficient Treasury, seeing the very variety of these outward things argue
their Insufficiency and Imperfection.

The second Circumstance by which this Grant of the fruits of Paradise is
enlarged, is, that God gave not the man only the Taste of them; but withal,
the Full and Constant fruition of them; to take of them what he pleased either
for Necessity or Delight within the bounds of Sobriety, without any other
limitation or restraint at all. Whence,

6. Observe, Whatsoever God bestows upon us, he bestows Freely and Fully.
Tim. 6.17. Commanding us to open our mouths wide that we may fill them,
Psalm 81.10. Satisfying the desire of every living thing, Psalm 145.
Multiplying his Blessing like the Widows oil, 2 King. 4. which never ceased
till there were no more Vessels to receive it; And as he gives largely, so He
desires that we should satisfy our souls with his Goodness, Jer. 30.14.25.
Freely using his Blessings within the bounds of Moderation; but above all
things, his Desire is that we take of the waters of the Well of Life freely,
without money; and drink, and eat, and delight their souls in fatness, Isa.
55.2. That we may rejoice in the Lord always, and again rejoice, Phil. 4.4.
And this God does Partly because the bounty of his Goodness may be seen the
more, the more we taste it so many various and diverse ways.

Let our acknowledgments in our duties unto God, be some way answerable unto
his gifts unto us, Free and Full every way, that they may be accepted of him,
who loves a Cheerful Giver; the rather, because we render unto him, 1. Of his
Own, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.2. Our giving unto him is but Sowing, and that unto our
selves, whereof we receive the increase, and that proportionable to our Seed, 2
Cor. 9.6.

VERSE 17.
BUt] That is, notwithstanding this free liberty which I have given unto you,
to take and enjoy the rest of the fruits of the Garden, you shall not meddle
with this Tree.

Not eat thereof] Not for any Evil in the fruit it self, which might in it self
be as fit for food as the other fruits, as it appears, Chap. 3.6. Otherwise it
could be no trial of Adams Obedience, to forbear that whereof he could make no
use. Now in this relation of Gods Restraint laid upon Adam, we find no more
forbidden, but the Eating of the fruit of that Tree; though the woman in
repeating it, mentions Touching as well as Eating, Genesis 3.3. Whether that
Clause were added by God, though it be omitted by Moses here, or whether the
Woman conceived it to be employed although it were not expressed, as conceiving
it unfit for them to handle that which they might not Eat, it is not much
material. This is evident, that by this abstinence from the Tree, Adam was to
acknowledge Gods Absolute Power over the Creatures, who had therefore free
liberty to grant, or withhold what he pleased; And withal he was to manifest
his Subjection unto God, to be guided wholly by his Will, by abstaining from
all that God denied him, merely because it was his pleasure. And for this cause
God singles out a Tree, as Beautiful to the Eye, as Delightful in Taste, and
good for Food, as any of the rest; And forbids the man to eat of it, to show
that it was no difference in the fruits: but merely in the Will of God, which
made the eating of the rest lawful, and of this One only, Unlawful, as we
shall see more fully hereafter, in the next Chapter.

For in the day] Or very Moment of time, for the very Act of sin involves the
sinner in the Punishmentt though sometimes the Execution of it may be differred
for a while, and yet this Judgment here mentioned seized upon our First Parents
in the very act of sinning; for we find that Folly, Fear, and Shame, besides
the corrupting of their hearts within (included amongst other Evils in this
name of Death) took hold on them in the very moment when they tasted the
forbidden fruit.

Thou shall surely die] Dying thou shall die (says the Original) as before,
Eating thou shall eat, pointing at the Certainty, Continuance, and Extent of
that death, which should seize upon man in case of transgressing: under that
name of Death, Including all kind of Evils, Outward and Inward, on the Soul and
Body, Temporal and Eternal, Plagues of all sorts on the Outward man; and the
means of inflicting them: as Locusts are called a death, Exodus 10.7. and Saint
Paul calls his outward Afflictions and Miseries, Deaths, 2 Cor. 11.23. and
Infirmities of the body; tending unto, and ending in the dissolution of Nature
by separating the Soul from the Body. But especially weakness and corruption
of the Soul in all the parts thereof, Blindness in the Understanding,
Rebellion and Perverseness in the Will, Bondage and slavery in the Affections;
Distemper and Distraction in the thoughts, by the fighting of contraries within
us; Horror of Conscience by the Apprehension of Gods unsupportable and
unavoidable Wrath; and lastly, Eternal Separation from the presence of the
Lord, 2 These. 1.9.8. and Delivering over of the Body and Soul to everlasting
torments, called the Second death, Rev. 20.6.14. We have then in this verse set
before us, a law given to Adam with the Sanction annexed thereunto; in both
which are diverse considerable circumstances to be taken notice of: as namely,
in the Law. 1. The person that gives it. 2. The Restraint laid upon man
thereby. 3. The matter wherein. 4. The measure how far it reaches. Out of the
former of those considered in relation to the person, to whom the Law is given,
even to Adam himself in the state of his Innocence, and the perfection of his
nature,

1. Observe, The most righteous amongst the Sons of men, Must and Needs to live
under a Law.
Tim. 2.9. Notwithstanding unto such a person a law is needful; 1. For
direction, for man is unfit to choose his own way, being through his ignorance
so apt to mistake evil for good: neither is any able to find out what is truly
good but God alone, who is Goodness it self; and His Will the Rule of
goodness which none can find out, or reveal but himself, 1 Cor. 2.11.2. It is
needful that by conforming to the Law given us by God, we may testify our
Obedience and Subjection unto him; withal acknowledging and witnessing to the
world, that we account his Will in all things to be most just, which we take
unto our selves as the rule of our actions.

Let all men, even the most godly, not only labor to Understand the Law of
God; but besides, have it still before them in the whole course of their
practice, hiding it in their hearts, Psalm. 119.11. Advising with it as their
Counsel, verse 24. setting it before their eyes, Psalm. 18.20. And carrying it
with them as a light to direct all their steps, Psalm. 119.105. And that much
more in this our state of Corruption; wherein 1. By reason of our Blindness
and Ignorance, we have the greater need of a guide. And 2. being by nature so
prone to Rebellion, have need of a Bridle. 3. And being in a great part
destitute of Gods Fear, need such a means to keep our hearts in awe, by setting
before our selves the Authority of him that commands us in his Law. 4. Besides,
finding our manifold failings in coming short of the Righteousness prescribed
in the Law, may be abased in our selves, and be drawn to lay hold upon Christ.

Having Considered the Law in relation to the person to whom it was given: we
are to look in the next place upon the Law it self, by which man was restrained
from eating of that Fruit: wherein although Gods Purpose was to teach him as
well as to instruct him; yet why for that purpose he fixed the restraint upon
this Tree rather then upon any other Tree in the Garden, there can be no other
reason given, but that it was the Will of God to have it so. Whence,

2. Observe. The Will of God is that only, which man is to look upon and take
for his Rule to guide Himself by, in all his ways.
Deuteronomy, 29.29. Hence it is that we have no reason annexed to any Commandment
(the Fourth excepted) but a bare precept to command some things, and to forbid
others; in so much that Obedience, is termed the doing of Gods Will, Matthew.
7.21. Mark. 3.35. Good reason it should be so; 1. That by that means we may
acknowledge Gods absolute Soverainty when all things are done upon no other
ground, but because God will have it so. 2. Because nothing is infallibly good
or holy but his Will, as Himself is Good and Righteous, and there is no
Iniquity in him, Deuteronomy. 32.4. seeing nothing is fit to be the Rule of other
things, but that, which is in it self Certain and Unchangeable.

Let it teach us in all our Purposes, and Actions, to do, and undertake all
things upon this only ground, because God Wills or Commands them, as we must
Believe all, because Gods says or affirms it. To do things as the Heathens
did, who knew not God, either because they are Just, may witness our
Righteousness; or because they are profitable to others, may manifest our
Love: But our Obedience is never seen till we do them as the Will of God,
because he commands them upon this ground amongst others; All those actions of
Heathen Men, which we so highly commend and admire, must needs be abominable in
the Sight of God; and rejected by Him because they were neither done in
Obedience to his Will, nor in relation to his Honor and Glory. This respect
unto Gods Will, 1. makes all our actions Holiness, as being done in
conformity to Gods Holiness. 2. Manifests the denial of our selves in all
that we do when we wholly lay down our own wills and take up Gods VVil or Rule.
3. And interests us in all his Promises and Rewards, Heb. 10.36. When we have
served Him in all that we have done and not our selves. So that this is our
Wisdom and our Righteousness, when we do all things as he has Commanded us,
as God teaches his People to acknowledge, Deuteronomy. 6.25.

Besides the laying of this restraint upon God had a farther Scope, namely by
forbidding the eating this fruit in the midst of the Garden, to leave with
man a visible remembrance of that duty of Obedience which God required; whereof
this forbidden fruit was a sign unto him, so placed that whithersoever he went
either about his business, or to take his food he might have it still in his
Eye. Thus God not only gives us a Law, but withal provides us means to keep
it still fresh in our memories. Whence,

3. Observe, God is pleased not only to give a Law to direct us, but to furnish
us with all needful means to further us in the performance of the Duties
required therein.
Moses to write his other Ordinances, that they might be kept in memory to all
posterity, and Ordained Levites amongst his people, and sometimes Prophets
extraordinarily to hold it out unto them. For the confirmation of our Faith, he
has not only given us his Great and precious promises, as they are called, 2
Pet. 1.4. but confirmed them with an Oath, and does in a sort represent them
daily in a visible manner unto us in the Sacraments; so that he may testify
against us, as he does against his own people; what can he do unto us which he
has not done, Isa. 5.4? And this he does, partly, to manifest the sincerity of
his affection toward us, in desiring our Salvation; and partly, to justify
himself in the Condemnation of those that refuse so great salvation so many
ways tendered unto them, and so obstinately refused.

Let us then make use of such helps and means as God is pleased to offer unto
us, as being assured that he really intends what he so many ways labors to
draw us to embrace; and, 2. as having need of such helps to support us; and, 3.
being liable to the greater Condemnation, by despising and rejecting them.

The next observable Circumstance laid before us in recording this restraint
laid upon Adam, is the subject matter which God withholds from him. Wherein we
are to take notice, 1. That it is an Outward Object subject to sense. 2. That
it was a thing of inconsiderable value in comparison of that which was freely
granted. 3. That it was placed in the midst of the Garden, that it might be
often in Adams eye.

The Observation, which the first of these Circumstances might afford us, has
been handled already, (Ver. 9. Observe. 6.) Out of the Second,

4 Observe, The Matters in which God delights to try our Obedience, are many
times in themselves of no great importance.
Deuteronomy. 22.7. To sees the Kid in the Mothers milk, Exodus 23.19. To plough with
an Ox and an Ass, Deuteronomy. 22.10. To sow the field with mingled seed, Levit.
19.19. And this he may be conceived to do, 1. To manifest our Total subjection
unto Him, when we are limited even in the smallest things. 2. To show us that
it is only Obedience, and Conformity to his Will that God respects, and not the
Matter or Substance of the thing it self in which he requires it. 3. To make
our yoke the more easy, that we might be the more encouraged to obedience; as
Naaman's servants move him to wash himself in Jordan, as the Prophet commanded
him, because it was an easy thing, even a small matter that was required of
him, 2 King. 5.13.

Who then are they that esteem observances in matters of small moment,
niceness and preciseness? and would persuade us, that the smalnesse of the
matter makes a sin venial? whereas God punishes the gathering of sticks only,
on the Sabbath day, with death, Numb. 15.35. as he did afterward only for
touching the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.7. and shall (as our Savior tells us) judge men
hereafter for every idle word, Matthew. 12.36.

This Tree, of the fruit whereof Man was forbidden to eat, was seated in the
midst of Paradise, and consequently in the midst of all those pleasant
fruits which God had given man free liberty to make use of, not only for
necessity, but for delight besides: Whence we may take occasion to,

5. Observe, Our Abundance, and Delights, and Pleasures must be used in fear
and within the Limits of Obedience.
Solomon advises, Prove. 23.2. And it is a mark of sensual men, that they feast
without fear, Jude 12. So that there must be a limited measure in the freest
use of Gods blessings, and limited time; both of them proportioned according to
the Laws, 1. Of Nature, that we feed for hunger, and to strengthen the body,
and not for drunkenness and surfeiting, Eccl. 10.17. 2. Of Moral respects of
Sobriety, Modesty, and Correspondency to our present condition (every man may
not wear costly apparel, but such as are in Kings Courts, Luke 7.25.) And to
the necessities of other men: Dives must not feast every day, and let Lazarus
starve at his Gate. 3. According to the Rules of Religion, God takes it
heinously at his Peoples hand, when they fall to slaying of Sheep, and Oxen in
a time when He calls to mourning and fasting, Isa. 22.12.13. And the Apostle
gives a Caveat to forbear even the Lawful use of marriage at such time, as we
should give our selves to fasting and prayer.

We have hitherto considered the law which forbad the eating of the fruit of
that Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; The Sanction follows, which is the
Intermination of a most fearful curse, which necessarily implies the
heinousness of the sin in disobeying Gods Commandment. Whence,

6. Observe. Disobedience is a fearful sin in Gods account.
Samuel equalled to Witchcraft the most hateful of all sins, 1. Sam. 15.23.
for which Saul was cast out of his Kingdom, which God Himself threatens with
Destruction, Isa. 1.20. not only Temporal but Eternal, 1 Pet. 3.19.20. And
that especially, because it is directed against the Majesty of God Himself,
whose Authority is slighted and despised, when his Laws and Commandments are
disobeyed. And Secondly, it opens a gap to all manner of looseness and
disorder; Nature knows to stay when it has once passed the bounds of
Obedience, no more then a violent stream does, when it has once broken over
those Banks that before kept it in.

Let us then esteem and value all sins according to that Circumstance; the more
Disobedience there is in any act of ours, the more sin; Therefore sin is out of
measure sinful when it is, 1. Against knowledge, Jam. 4.17. John 9.41. 2.
Against Warnings, Persuasions, Judgments, Experience of Mercy, or against any
means of Grace; See John 15.22.24. 2 Chronicles. 36.15. 3. Or Voluntary without
Solicitation, or urging by the violence of any Temptation, as when men set
themselves in a way that is not good, Psalm. 36.4. and imagine mischief upon
their beds, Mich. 2.1. Lastly, when the law it self is rejected and cast aside,
Jer. 44.16. and accounted as a strange thing, Hos. 8.12. and cast behind a man's
back, Psalm. 50.17.

But why is such an heavy curse threatened to Adam in this state of his
Innocence, having especially had such late and large experiments of Gods Bounty
toward him? It cannot be doubted that God had special respect unto the
Mutability of his Nature; and therefore knew that he needed this bridle, which
also by experience appeared to be too weak to restrain those inordinate lusts,
which were quickly stirred up in him by Satan's Suggestions, so that out of this
help that God thought fit to provide for him; We may,

7. Observe. The Terrors of the Law are useful and needful, even unto the
best amongst the sons of men.
Adam in this state of perfection, much more must it be useful to all men, now;
seeing besides all temptations from without, we have within us such a fountain
of Corruption, breathing out continually Inordinate lusts, that need the
strongest bridle to keep them in and suppress them; Besides, those terrors
are now unto us of special use, to sweeten the Remembrance of our Redemption
by Christ, from the Curse and condemning sentence of the Law, and to strengthen
us against those manifold temptations which from without assault us more
free-quently, and prevalently then they did our First Parents. Wherefore we
find the Spirit of God making use of those Terrors not only in General (as
in the Proposal of the Law to his own People) but more particularly to affect
the hearts of the best men; as Moses Himself trembled, as well as the rest, at
the giving of the Law, Heb. 12.21. Yea even godly men themselves have made use
of them of their own accord, for the keeping of their hearts in an awful
Reverence. of God to hold them on in a Course of Obedience, as Job did, Job
31.14, 15. and David Psalm 119.120.

Hitherto we have considered this Curse in relation to the Sin against which,
and the Person against whom it is denounced. We are farther to take notice of
the Kind, Measure, and Certainty thereof (all employed in that phrase, Dying
thou shall die) together with the speedy, Execution [thereof in the very day
wherein they should eat thereof] And first, in that God threatens death unto
the man in case of his rebellion; We may,

8. Observe, Death and Destruction are in Gods Hand, to inflict them where He
pleases.
Deuteronomy. 32.39. And therefore his Children ascribe it unto him, 1 Samuel 2.6. and
unto Christ, Rev. 1.18. Even Bodily or Temporal death (which may indeed be
inflicted by men who can kill the body, Matthew. 10.28. But therein they are but
Gods Executioners, Rev. 6.4. and are the Sword in his his Hand, Psalm. 17.13.)
Much more are Hell and Eternal death in his Hand alone, Math. 10.28. whereof
men are not so much as Instruments, either in the Sentence, or in the Execution
thereof. It must necessarily be so, seeing otherwise the giving of Life could
not be entirely in Gods Hand, if a Creature at his pleasure might take away
that, which he Himself has bestowed; And Secondly, it is fit that God alone
should have the disposing of the greatest of all judgments, as well that it
might be measured out to all in Righteousness, as that God might be feared
alone.

The consideration hereof, cannot but revive the heart of Gods Servants, hated
and persecuted by men of the world, when they know their life and breath is in
Gods Hand, which therefore none can take away, but by his Will and Decree; And
therefore, 1. not while God has any use of their service here. 2. Not if they
be of the Number of Christ's Redeemed Ones, for whom he has conquered Death,
and taken away the sting of it, 1 Cor. 15.55.57. and delivered them from the
power of it.

Under this name of death are included all manner of Evils, Outward and Inward,
Temporal and Eternal, both Death it self, and whatsoever tends thereunto: So
that we have hence warrant to,

9. Observe, All kinds of Evils and Miseries, Present or Future, Outward or
Inward, are the Wages of Sin.
Romans 5.12. whereof it is the wages, Romans 6.23. Wherefore we find all Outward
miseries threatened against men for disobedience, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. And the
plagues of the soul, as Ignorance, Inordinate Lusts, a Reprobate mind, are
justly reckoned up amongst the Judgments upon men for sin, Romans 1.28, 29. much
more, is it sin alone that brings Eterual death. For unbelief men are
condemned, Joh. 3.36. and for hatred and malice men abide in death, 1 John
3.14. and for sin are adjudged to the everlasting flames of Hell fire, Matthew.
25.41. Rev. 21.8.

Let men then when they feel the smart of any evil, either Inward or Outward,
complain of nothing but sin, as the fountain from which they spring, Lam. 3.39.
Ascribing their destruction to themselves, or any evils that lies upon them at
present: see Hos. 13.9. And therefore, 1. Let them remove and take away their
sins if they desire ease, abstaining from that as from the gates of Hell. 2.
Especially when they fear any Judgment hanging over them, let them labor to
prevent it by taking away the sin that brings it 3. In the mean time admiring
and magnifying the riches of Gods mercy in our Redemption by Christ, by whom
both our sins in which we were all once dead, (and by which we draw death upon
our selves every day) are taken away, and with them Hell and Eternal Death; and
those Evils that remain upon us at present are sanctified, so that they work
together for our good.

This phrase, Dying you shall dye, does not only import the Extent, but withal
the Certainty of that Death, which the doubling of that word (usual in the
Hebrew Language) does very often imply. Whence we may further,

10. Observe, Gods Judgments are Certain, and Infallible, as well as his
Promises of Mercy.
Numb. 14.23, 35. 3. His unresistable power, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Secondly, directed to
the same End which God ayms at in all his ways and works, the filling of the
Earth with his glory, Numb. 14.21. advanced in the Acts of his Justice, as well
as of his Mercy. Howsoever men bewitch themselves with a groundless hope of
Impunity in their sinful courses, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Whereby as they take from God
the honor of his Justice, Holiness, and Truth; so they necessarily overthrow
all the grounds of their dependence upon Gods Promises, the Certainty whereof
is built upon the same grounds, which assure the Infallibility of his
Judgments, and withal opens a gap to all Impiety.

The last considerable Circumstance in the Judgment here threatened, is the
speedy Execution thereof, as being limited to the very day wherein they should
transgress. Whence,

11. Observe, Vengeance and Judgment follow sin at the Heels.
Cain, Genesis 4.7. Indeed the Guilt of sin by which men are made liable to the
Punishment, is incurred by the very act of sinning. Although God be pleased
oftentimes to suspend the Execution, either, 1. For his own sake, to manifest
his Patience and Long-suffering; and withal, the Justice of his Wrath upon
those that abuse it to the hardening of their own hearts, Romans 2.4, 5. Rev.
2.22, 23. 2. Or for the Sinners sake, to bring him, if it be possible, to
repentance, Romans 2.4. as God bearing with St. Paul in his bloody persecutions,
won him at the last. Or, 3. for the Churches sake, to make use of the sinners
service in the mean time for the good of his people. Or some way or other, for
some fitter opportunity, or some special occasion, as we spare the Execution of
women with child till they be delivered. Notwithstanding vengeance overtakes
men sometimes in the very act of sinning, as it did the Sodomites, Zimri and
Cosby, Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Gehazi, Ananias, and Sapphirah, and the like
in their several sins.

Let men tremble at Sin as at a Serpent, conceiving that when they lay hold on
sin, they take hold of death it self, and embrace the flames of Hell fire. 1.
Fly from it, and from all Means and Instruments, Occasions, and Opportunities
that lead unto sin. 2. Repent of it speedily, and cast it out as we would do
fire out of our bosom; and sleep not in the bonds of iniquity all night, lest
it break out suddenly upon us like an hidden fire, and Consume us and all that
we have.

VERSE 18.
WE have taken a surview of the Laws given to man for the worship and service
of God, and for his employment. The means of Propagating mankind, and the Law
that God gives man concerning it, we have set down unto us in the rest of this
Chapter: wherein (as in the relation of the planting of Paradise) we have an
addition to the works of the Sixth day, as we had there to the works of the
Third day, the chief whereof were set down in the former Chapter. In recounting
the works of the Sixth day, Moses had related the Creation of the man, and
adds, that he created man in both Sexes; how this was done, the Holy Ghost
records at large in this place: Wherein he sets before us,

1. The Cause or Occasion of Creating the Woman, which was the Inconvenience of
Adam's Solitariness, and the Unfitness of his Society with any other of the
Creatures.

2. Gods observing of it, and Resolution thereupon to make him such an help as
might be every way meet for him.

3. We have recorded the Preparation to the Work, 1. By casting Adam into a
deep sleep. 2. By taking out of Adam's side one of his ribs, of which the Woman
was to be made.

4. We have the Creation of the Woman, of that rib.

5. The marriage of the Man and Woman presented unto him by God himself, and
accepted by him, as we shall see anon.

6. The Duties of the married Couple one to another.

7. The state and Condition in which both of them were, Naked, and yet not
ashamed.

ANd the Lord God said] Or, Had said, as some render it; for it cannot be
denied, but the Woman was Created the Sixth day; although the Manner, Matter,
and Occasion of her Creation be related here out of order, the better to show
the ground of their Matrimonial Conjunction, and of the Law that was given them
thereupon. Now whether God said this in Himself, (and then saying is no more
but foreseeing, and acknowledging) or whether he said unto Adam, either
Vocally, or by Mental representation, it is uncertain. This is out of question,
that God in his Wisdom so resaw it first, and made Adam by surveying all the
Creatures to see and acknowledge it afterward.

It is not good] That is, Not convenient, in respect of his present condition
in this life, either for his own comfort, or for his employment in which he was
to be exercised; but above all, impossible in respect of Posterity, which could
not be propagated by the Man alone. And this is the Good which he seems
principally to aim at, as only enforcing the necessity of Creating another Sex.
For otherwise man might have had as much comfort in Society, and help and
assistance in his employment by the creating another Man, only he could have no
Issue but by a Woman.

That the Man should be alone] Without the Help and Comfort of another Sex.
Which must be understood, 1. In respect of his present condition in this Life.
For in Heaven they shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage, Matthew. 22.30.
2. Upon the supposal of Gods decree that men should be increased by way of
Natural Generation. Otherwise God, if he had so pleased, might have multiplied
men by Creation, as he did the Angels.

I will make him] Not We, as he had said before in the Creation of the Man; Of
which difference in the manner of Gods speaking, it is a vain Curiosity to
enquire a reason; as also, Whether those words be spoken Positively by way of
Resolution; or Deliberatively, by way of Consultation, in that manner in which
he is represented speaking, in the history of the Creation of the man, in the
former Chapter, it is not necessary for us to know.

An help] Every way, for the comfort of Society, for assistance in governing
the Family, for increasing of Piety; and more especially, for propagation for
the increase and continuance of posterity. Such a one she was not only intended
to be by God, but was found to be by experience while she continued in the
Condition in which God Created her. Although by Satan's malice and policy she
being beguiled, instead of an help became a snare unto him.

Meet for him] As before him; (says the Original) a phrase pointing at either
the Answerablenesse of the Woman to the Man both in Shape and Nature, in Body
and Mind, as the Image in a Looking-glass answers in all properties the face
that stands before it: Or at her Office and Duty of service which she was by
God deputed unto, to be still in his presence, and to minister unto him, as the
phrase, to stand before the Lord, implies, to minister unto him, Deuteronomy. 10.8.
And in that sense we find this phrase often used, 1 Samuel 16.22. 1 King. 1.2.
and in other places. It is probable that both may be employed in this
Significant phrase, which Adam cunningly changes, when in the next Chapter he
charge God to his face to have given him a Deceiver instead of an Helper.

When God had made Man after his own Image, he first provides him unasked a
comfortable place to dwell in, a Garden of pleasures; now He considers that he
wants a Mate to converse withal, and to do him service: this God saw and
considered, and provides for accordingly. Whence,

1. Observe, God Knows and considers all our Wants, and out of his own
Goodness makes Provision to supply them.
Jacob's Family, and sends. Joseph beforehand to provide for him, Psalm. 105.16,
17. He considered what Noah would want, and gave order beforehand for the
preparing of an Ark to preserve him and his Family in the Flood, Genesis 6. Thus
he provides an hostess for Elijah at Zarephath against the time that the brook
Cherith should be dried up. Thus he cares for every soul, 1 Pet. 5.7. not only
for Canaan, Deuteronomy. 11.12. not only when we present our wants before him in our
prayers, but considers them before we ask, Matthew. 6.32. So that he prevents us
with his blessings, Psalm. 21.3. providing for us, not only before we ask, but
before we know what we need. And this. 1. He must do, or else we shuold often
perish. 2. And it is fit he should do so, to magnify his free mercies.

Let Gods dealing with us move us to deal in like manner with our brethren,
considering the poor and needy, Psalm. 41.1. after the example of the Disciples
of Antioch, Act. 11.29. Not staying till our Alms be wrested from us by
importunity; but taking care one of another as members of the same body.
Especially considering one another wants in spiritual things, of which men
themselves are most insensible: Considering one another to provoke to love and
good works, Heb. 10.24. Thus the Spouse cares for her little Sister the Church
of the Gentiles, Cant. 8.8.

Let the Consideration hereof lead us and raise up our hearts to the admiration
of Gods unspeakable goodness, especially in taking care for our souls, giving
his own Son to redeem us when we were lost, calling us when we sought not after
him, Isa. 65.1. seeking us out when we are gone astray, Psalm. 119.176.
preventing and strengthening us with his grace, when Satan buffets us, 2 Cor.
12.9. and the like. So that we may with astonishment cry out, What is Man?
Psalm. 8.4. and staying our hearts on his Faithfulness and Truth, 1 Pet. 5.7.
who loves us more tenderly then we can do our selves; provides for us more
carefully then our own Parents do, or can do, Psalm. 27.10. may reflect upon our
selves, and consider what we shall render, Psalm. 116.

Nothing was now wanting to Adam to make his happiness in this present
condition absolutely complete but a Wife. He was made after Gods Image,
perfectly righteous and holy, Lord over all the Creatures, heir of the world,
seated in Paradise: Only he wants a fit Companion to converse comfortably
withal; and we see God cease not till he have supplied him in that want
also. Whence,

2. Observe, Gods Providence and abundant Goodness fails us not, till it has
supplied us with all that we need that is fit for us.
such as fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good, Psalm. 34.10. He
withholds no good thing from those that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. The
experience whereof made David so confident, Psalm. 23.1. This he performs
chiefly in spiritual things, wherein we are Sanctified wholly, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
purged till we be made without spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.27. And this he does,
first out of his All Sufficiency and Infinite Love, which both enables him to
do what he will, and moves him to supply us in what we need; and withal, out
of respect to his own honor, which is infinitely advanced, when he manifests
Himself to be, as He is, a Fountain of All Sufficiency and Goodness, in
satisfying the desire of every living thing.

Let us answer him, according to our proportion, in our services, not ceasing
to do his Will as long any thing remains to be done that concerns us, and is in
our power, laboring to be in our selves perfect and entire, lacking nothing,
Jam. 1.4. and to walk so, that we may Perfect holiness unto God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
having respect to all his Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. as he has to all our
necessities.

Let it quiet all our hearts in the consideration of our present condition,
when our inordinate lusts provoke us sometimes to causeless complaints and
murmurings upon supposed, but mistaken grounds. Whereas, 1. Either we have that
which we conceive we want, as Hagar wept for want of water when she saw not the
Well which was fast by her, Genesis 21.19. Or, 2. that which we want, would do us
hurt and no good if we had it, as the Israelites found by experience, when they
murmured for want of flesh, Numb. 11.33. But much more when they would needs
have a a King, which by the Just Judgment of God upon them became a Tyrant, as
Samuel foretold them, he would, 1 Samuel 8.11.

God saw it was not good for the man to be Alone, although it be Gods
Happiness that He is alone. So that we may upon sufficient warrant

2. Observe, A Solitary life is an Uncomfortable, and an Unprofitable life.
Solomon, Eccl. 4.10. 1. In respect of himself because he is left without
Comfort or help, which he must often want, and without it cannot subsist. 2. In
respect of others he is made unserviceable and unprofitable every way. A man
indeed is like a member in the body, which can neither be preserved it self,
nor be any way serviceable to the rest of the members, unless it remain in the
body.

From whence then came the affecting, and admiring of a Monastical Life, which
crosses, 1. The very Law of Nature, by which men are inclined to Society; And
2. and Gods Ordinance, who has appointed us, 1. to cause our light to shine
before men, that they might glorify him Matthew. 5.16. And to serve one another
through love, Gal. 5.13. So that a Solitary life, 1, deprives God of his
honor; 2. Men, and the Church especially, both of that increase of an holy
seed, which they might have of the fruit of their bodies, of the comfort of
their fellowship, the service of Love which they owe, and of the examples of
their godly lives: 3. Themselves in present, of many sweet comforts and
needful helps; and hereafter of the increase of their Reward, enlarged
according to the proportion of their present improving of their Talents, in
advancing Gods Honor, and seeking and procuring the Good of his Children.

Man had the company of all the beasts of the field, and Fowls of the Air, and
yet the Holy Ghost says [The man was alone] because he had none like himself,
that he might converse withal, as a Man; that is, in the exercise of Speech
and Reason; the Birds in this respect were no way fit companions for him; but
of that hereafter.

God then, in his Wisdom, seeing that it was not good for the man to be alone,
resolves of himself, to Create him an help meet for him, which as we shall see
he performs accordingly, Whence,

4. Observe, God takes not notice of our wants, as an Idle Spectator; but, as a
Faithful Helper, puts forth his hand to help us in what we need.
Psalm. 12.5. He also deals with his Church, Isa. 63.5. Thus he looks on
Hannahs affliction, and gives her a Son: saw the affliction of Israel, and sent
them a Savior, Exodus 3.7.8. Indeed this is the end of his seeing, and
observing, that he may do and execute, as occasion shall require in dispensing
either Mercy, or Judgment, beholding Mischief to requite it with his hand,
Psalm. 10.14. And hereunto both his own Compassion stirs him up, and his power
enables him, and the respect to his own Honor (never advanced but in real
effects) carries him forwards.

Let it encourage us to depend on Him. If God know our condition, behold our
Wants, take notice of our Pressures, He can as soon deny Himself, as deny to
help us, and relieve us; Let us only wait on him in the way of his Judgments,
and attend his appointed time: when he makes Inquisition for blood, He
remembers the poor, Psalm 9.12. and in the Day of Salvation will succor us.

Let us do likewise; Observe, take Pity, and Relieve. 1. Otherwise our
Brethren have no benefit by us, if we express our compassion in words only,
and not in deeds, Jam. 2.16. but prove like clouds and wind without rain, Prove.
25.14. 2. We make our own thoughts or words evidences against our selves, when
we know what our Brother needs and help him not, and provoke God to neglect us
as we neglect him: See, what he threameth in such a case, Prove. 24.11, 12.

The manner and occasion of Gods Resolution to provide man a meet help is
worthy our observation; The consideration of man's need of a woman, is the only
ground upon which he resolves to make one. Whence,

5. Observe. God makes nothing but for some necessary use, and unto some
profitable End.
Prove. 16.4. The Usefulness, and Serviceablenesse of the most of them we have
taken notice of in the former Chapter, the like we shall find in the rest; See
Isa. 45.18. Whereof we have a Model in our own bodies; wherein there is nothing
superfluous, but serves for some use or other, whereof nothing could be
wanting, without some maim or Deformity: So shall we find it in this great Body
of the world, all things will appear useful in their places, and kinds.

Let it move us before we undertake any thing, to enquire before hand what Need
there is of it, or to what Use it may serve. It is observed by Solomon, to be a
sore vanity amongst men, that they enquire not before hand, what need there is
of that labor and toil, which they take in hand, and what the use or end of it
may be, Eccl. 4.8. What need so much excess in Eating and Drinking, to the
oppressing and not the strengthening of nature? what need so much expense both
of time, and money, in costly clothing, Sumptuous buildings, rich furniture?
What need so much labor in lading our selves with thick clay? So much caring
for the things of this Life, as if God took no care of us at all? Or such large
provisions, for so short a time of our abode here? Of enriching our minds with
knowledge, strengthening our hearts with Faith, adorning our selves with
Meekness, and every other Grace, and showing forth the fruits of Holiness in
our lives, of purging out our corruptions, and getting interest in Christ, and
laying up for our selves Treasure in Heaven; There is need, and there will be
use, of those things, when there shall be no use of the things of this present
life, nor of our labors about them. Now there can be nothing more unbeseeming
a man, a rational creature, than to do things upon no ground, or to no end,

Now if we apply this General consideration to this particular case, that God
would not make Adam a wife, till he found that he needed a Wife, and could not
comfortably subsist without a Wife; We may thence in General,

6. Observe, A Wife is not good, till it be not good to be without a Wife.
David was advised to take a young Concubine into his Bed, for his healths
sake, 1 King 1.2. And marriage is found to be very needful, to many persons
for their health; 2. Or, for the subduing of unquiet thoughts, 1 Cor. 7.9. 3.
Or, for the better governing of the Family, to which the Wife is, or should be
a great help, Prove. 14.1. (See 2 Timothy 5.14.) 4. Or for the public good of the
Church, or State; as it sometimes falls out in public persons, as Kings, or
other Magistrates, and oftentimes Ministers of the Gospel, who being eased of
the care of the Family by their Wives, are the more free to attend the Churches
Service. In any of those cases, we may take Marriage to be a Call from God,
from whom every man must be warranted to undertake any particular state and
Condition of life, if he desire to abide in it with comfort, and in expectation
of Gods Blessing upon him therein.

Now if we observe the Inference, that God therefore makes a Wife for Adam,
because it was not good for him to be without a Wife; it necessarily implies,
That he should find that Good in a Wife, which he wanted without her. So that
we may thence,

7. Observe, A man May, and it is Gods Will that he Should, be the better for
his Wife.
Prove. 31.12. She builds up the house, Prove. 14.1. She profits him in his
estate, so that he will need no spoil, Prove. 31.11. She eases him of a good
part of the burden of his cares, in looking to the ways of her Family, Prove.
31.27. She advises him by her counsel, as Sarah does Abraham, Genesis 21.10. and
Rebeccah Isaac, Genesis 27.46. She comforts him in his sorrows, upon better
grounds, and with a better heart, then Jezabel does Ahab, 1 King. 21.5. She
helps to foresee, and prevent any danger that threatens him; as Abigail both
Foresees, and Prevents the destruction of her Husband Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.18, 33.
She furthers him in Piety, by seasonable Encouragements, reverend Admonitions,
joining with him in hearty Prayers, holy Conferences, and the like; so that Man
and Wife converse one with another, as heirs together of the grace of life, 1
Pet. 3.7.

1. Woe be to those foolish Wives, that pluck down the house which they should
build, Prove. 14.1. proving moaths in their Husbands Estates, by their
Idleness, and Wastefulnesse; and thorns in their sides, vexing those whom they
should comfort, with their continnal dropping, Prove. 19.13. Perverting those
whom they should advise, as Solomon's strange wives did him, and Jezabel Ahab,
1 King. 21.7. and Corrupting the children and family whom they should Instruct.
And the like woe to all such as wax worse and worse by their Matches, more
Earthly minded, more Idle, Profane, more Lustful, etc. abusing that Sacred
Ordinance of God (as they do all things else) unto their own destruction.

2. Let every man labor to be the better for his Wife; and to that end, 1. Let
him labor to be good in the sight of God. 2. Let him look well to his Choice,
that he may take a godly Wife, and a Wife fit both for his Condition, and
Disposition. 3. Let him dwell with his Wife, as a man of Knowledge, governing
her with all meekness, instructing her, and bearing with her infirmities, 1
Pet. 3.7.

God having concluded, that it was not good for the man to be alone, resolves
to make him an help meet for him; so that He Himself undertakes the work. None
indeed could provide for Adam a meet help but God alone. Whence,

8. Observe, It is only God Himself that must supply us with that which we
stand in need of.
Psalm. 146.7. and pour water upon him that is thirsty, Isa. 44.3. much more
must he make the barren a mother of children, Psalm. 113.9. A good Wife is his
favor, Prove. 19.14. He must build the house, Psalm. 127.1. and give ability to
get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18. Most of all, it is He that must furnish us with all
spiritual treasures, Ephesians. 1.3. yea, with Grace and Glory, Psalm. 84.11. Although
he makes use of the Ministry of men for the most part, and of other second
means to conveigh them unto us; as Houses and Lands by inheritance from the
Parents, Prove. 19.14; Faith and Spiritual Life by the Ministry of the Gospel
usually, although be can and does bestow all those immediately when he pleases.

Let our prayers be directed to him for any thing that we want, and our praises
returned to him alone when we are supplied; and let our hearts stay upon Him
alone who only is able to help us, and will not fail to do it in the time of
our need.

Adam we see never moves God to bestow a Wife; neither does any solicit him
in his behalf. Only God in his Wisdom finds it to be needful, and fit for him;
and He, out of His Free Love and Bounty provides for him, unasked, and unsought
unto. Whence we may,

9. Observe, Nothing moves God to take compassion on us, to supply us in what
we need, but his own Bounty and Goodness.
Isa. 63.7. his mere Love and Pity, verse. 9. And therefore the Church, in her
distress, flies unto nothing but the sounding of his bowels, and his mercies,
Isa. 63.15. or to his Truth, Psalm. 89.49. Or to the Respect to his own glory,
Josh. 7.9. which alone is sufficient to move him, Ezekiel. 36.22. The truth is,
God can neither Owe any thing to his own Creature, neither can he be engaged by
any desert, Job 35.7. seeing when we have done all, we are unprofitable
servants; neither can it be for Gods honor, that his Bounty should not be
every way free, and merely from Himself, out of his own abundant goodness.

Let it quiet all our hearts, when the sense of our own unworthiness seems to
cut off our hope and expectation of any favor from God toward us. Consider
what could move him to make us at first, when we were not; to give us the
Sovereignty over all his Creatures, the possession of the whole world; nay, to
give us his own Son Jesus Christ, when we were Weak, Ungodly, and Enemies, Romans
5. The same free mercy, which moved him to set his heart upon us at the first,
will move him to continue his Goodness to us still, because his Compassions
and Truth fail not, Lam. 3.22. Nothing can separate us from him, but our own
departing from him by Unbelief, and despising the Salvation freely offered unto
us.

The Title given unto the Woman by God in this place, is not to be passed by,
without observation, God calls her an Helper. Whence,

10. Observe, A Wife is but an Helper to her Husband.
Cor. 11.9. and that too, Inferior unto him, both in dignity, and usually in
abilities. So that she is truly and worthily called the weaker vessel, 1 Pet.
3.7.

Let both married persons know their places, the woman contenting her self with
that place, in which God has set her, ^d for which He has furnished her with
abilities proportionable without affecting, or endeavoring to aspire to the
higher place of Government, which God has denied unto her. And let the man so
use his place of ruling and governing, that he may look on his Wife as his
helper: so ordering the affairs of the family, that she may have employment
for those abilities that God has given her; and yet not laying the weight of
his affairs upon her shoulders, remembering that though she be an Helper, yet
she is but an helper; so that he must undertake the greatest employment, in the
government of the Family.

The help that God resolves to Create for the man, was a meet help, one every
way fiited for the office of Assistance, for which God intended her. Whence,

11. Observe, A Wife cannot be a good Wife, unless she be a Meet and a Fit
Wife.
Sam. 23. 2. In Estate, 3. Education. 4. Especially, in the temper of her
Disposition. 5. But above all the rest, in Religion; Seeing there can be no
fellowship of Righteousness with Unrighteousness, nor of Light with
Darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14. Least of all beween married persons. Inequality indeed,
either in Blood, or Estate, may occasion either Scorn or Presumption, either on
the one side or the other; unanswerablenesse in Education, hinders Fitness for
Employment, Unsuitablenesse in Disposition, may cause many jarres, and
unquietness, in commerce one with the the other. But above all, difference in
Religion, utterly cuts off all manner of Holy Communion; in Prayers, in
Comforts, in Counsels, for mutual Edification, and Endangers the corrupting of
the person thus unequally yoaked, as appears in the examples of the Old World,
of Solomon, of the Children of Israel, after their return from the Babylonish
Captivity, Neh. 13.23. For which cause, God so precisely forbad such matches,
to his own People, Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4.

VERSE 19.
ANd out of the ground the Lord God formed] Or rather, Had formed, as we have
seen already. It was said before, ver. 7. that man was made out of the Ground:
and verse 9. that God made the Trees of Paradise to grow out of the Ground: So
that there may be perhaps some Emphasis in this Word, the rather because it
has [He] prefixed, which is many times Emphatical. As if the Holy Ghost
pointing at the common Original both of men and beasts, would imply, that
though the same hand formed them both, and that, of the same matter: yet man
and the Beasts were so unsuitable in Nature, that amongst all the Beasts, there
could not be found one that was fit to be man's companion. But howsoever this
repetition, may be taken in for a supply, unto the 20th verse of the former
Chapter, and discovers unto us, that the Fowls also were made out of the Earth,
a Circumstance altogether omitted in that pace.

And brought them to Adan] How, it is not expressed; the phrase implies no more
but this, that they all presented themselves before Adam, as their Lord; and
that by Gods special appointment (as it were) to do him Homage. And this was
done questionless before Eves Creation, as well that she might acknowledge
that the Sovereignty, over the Creatures was in the Man, seeing he only gave
them their names; as that the man, by the survey of the Creatures, might take
notice of their unfitness to be his Companions, and consequently the necessity
of Creating the Woman, before God undertook the work, might appear to Adam
himself.

To see what he would call them] By that means, in a sort, to take possession
of his Lordship over them, for imposition of names, implies a kind of
Sovereignty. Thus Pharaoh when he admitted Joseph into his service, gave him a
name; and when Pharaoh-Necho set up a new King in Jerusalem, he gave him a new
Name, 2 Chronicles. 36.4. to manifest that he was to acknowledge him to be his Lord;
And names amongst the Hebrews were usually given by the Father, who was the
Master of the Family: and howsoever the Mother was permitted to do it
sometimes; yet, that the power belonged of right to the Father, appears by
Jacobs changing of the name Ben-oni (which his Mother had given) into Benjamin,
Genesis 35.18. And by the appeal of friends to Zachary the Father, in the
controversy about John Baptist's Name, Luke. 1.62. Withal, God gave Adam
thereby occasion to make trial of that wisdom, which he had given him, in
finding out fit Names agreeable to the Creatures Natures, which required a
great measure of wisdom.

And whatsoever Adam called them, etc.] This clause, we may probably conceive
to be added, to manifest both the Power, and Wisdom of Adam, in giving the
Creatures their names, when that which he did was ratified as unalterable, as
being given by him that had power to do it; and had done it with such wisdom,
that there was no cause to alter any name that he had given any of them.
Certainly the fitting of all the Creatures with names suitable to their
natures, and that upon the first view of them, evidently discovered the
fullness and perfection of Adams Wisdom, in understanding all that it concerned
him to know. As for the language which Adam used, whether it were Hebrew or
some other tongue more perfect then it, which is now lost; it cannot be
certainly concluded though it be most probably guossed, that it was Hebrew,
which is the most Ancient, and most Significant of all Languages now in use.

God (as we have heard already) had considered man's present condition, and
found in his Wisdom, that Adam wanted and needed a fit companion, to make his
life every way comfortable to him; and that to do this, there was a necessity
of making a new Creature. This God knew and saw, in his infinite Wisdom; but
this was not yet so manifest to Adam. Wherefore, that the necessity of Creating
the Woman, might appear to the man also, as it was manifest unto God, He
causes him to take a view of all the Creatures, that when amongst them he
should find no fit companion for Himself, he might both discern the necessity
of creating the woman, and withal, the goodness of God in Creating so meet an
help in her, as all the world besides could not afford him. Withal, this
Circumstance seems to be of special use, to clear God, of thrusting in the
woman upon Adam, unnecessarily, as a snare to entrap him; when it appeared so
evidently, that it was mere Necessity that moved God to create, and, in
compassion unto man, to provide him such an help and companion for him as he
could neither be without, nor find amongst all the Creatures.

In that God, before he Created the Woman, would first show Adam the necessity
of such an help, that when he enjoyed her, he might take notice of, and be the
more sensible of Gods goodness, and mercy toward him in providing so fit an
help for him: Thence,

1. Observe, Gods Mercies Are, or Should be, precious unto us when we can
neither be without them, nor have them from any other but from Himself.
Isa. 63.5. Ezekiel. 16.4, 5. Thus he specially magnifies his mercies in Christ;
That when we were without strength, Christ dyed for the ungodly, Romans 5.6. and
did for us that which the Law could not do through the weakness of the flesh,
Romans 8.3. Offering himself to pacify his Fathers wrath when Sacrifices and
burnt-offerings could do no good, Psalm. 40.6, 7. For this cause he brings men
sometimes into Extremities, and lets them prove the Unprofitablenesse of other
means, that they may by Experience know that they find help of him only in a
time of need. Thus he brought his people low by the Ammonites, so that they had
no power to resist them, nor protection against them from their Idols before he
succors them, Judge. 10.9, 13. See Dout. 32.36, 37. and makes his Children,
Hunger and Thirst (that is, feel the want of) righteousness before he satisfy
them, Matthew. 5.6. Which he does not only in respect to his own honor which is
much advanced, when our help is found in him alone; but besides, in relation to
us, that we may be stirred up to seek more seriously after, and to cleave more
firmly unto him, who alone is both Able and Ready to help us in a time of need.

That the necessity of Creating a woman to be Adam's helper might be the more
clearly discovered unto him, he brings before him the Creatures, that out of
his own judgment himself might conclude how unfit any of them were to be his
companions or helpers. Whence,

2. Observe, We must know the unserviceablenesse of other things, that we may
know and approve the profitablenesse of that which is truly Good.
Solomon, that when they have found by their own experience, that which he
found^, that All things are Vanity and vexation of spirit; that all that
remains unto us, after we have wearied our selves in the ways of sin, when we
have cast up our accounts, is nothing else but shame, Romans 6.21. they may cry
out in the bitterness of their souls, I have perverted Righteousness, and it
has not profited me, Job 33.17. and having followed the pleasures, and honors
of the world, and finding in them nothing to stay the heart upon, may make
their hearts despair of all their labors, that are taken under the Sun, with
Solomon, Eccl. 2.20. and may cry out with the Prophet, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? We are indeed allowed to prove all things, that we may lay
hold on that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

It is said, that God brought all the Creatures, (by what means it is not
expressed) but by his appointment they presented themselves before Adam, that
he might advisedly view and consider them. Whence,

3. Observe, God can Order and Dispose of the Creatares to do what, and to be
where he appoints them.
Philip to go toward the South, in the way from Jerusalem to Gaza, Act. 8.26.
and Aaron to meet Moses, Exodus 4.27. or by a secret work upon their hearts, as
he brought Sisera and his Army, to Kishon, Judge. 4.7. Or by inviting them, by
Occasions, as Abigails meeting with David, is acknowledged to be the Work of
God, 1 Samuel 25.32. as Saul is moved to come to Samuel by his servants advise,
to enquire after his Fathers Asses, at the very time appointed by God, 1 Samuel
9.15.16. But directs even the unreasonable Creatures: As the Quails to fall
round about the children of Isreal's Camp; The Ravens to feed Elisah: Two
she-bears to destroy two and forty of the scossing Children: And the Lion to
meet the Prophet that transgressed Gods Commandment, in his way homewards, and
to slay him. Yea, the very Sparrowes lighting upon the ground is directed by
his Will. Neither can it be otherwise, seeing in him all things move and have
their being, Act. 17.28. and consequently must of necessity have the rule of
all their motions by his Will.

Let us then take notice of the Divine Providence, in the motion of every
Creature, which may discover unto us sometimes Gods Mercy, sometimes his
Judgments, and may sometimes direct us what to do. And must needs always keep
our hearts possessed with his fear, and move us to walk more boldly in all our
ways, upon assurance, that since the Creatures cannot move without Gods
direction, they shall not move to do us hurt according to Gods promise, Isa.
65.25.

All those beasts God brings before Adam, that he might give them names; and
God having put that power into his hand, he might lawfully do it, as we see he
did. Whence,

4. Observe, Man may lawfully use that Power over the Creatures which God
Himself has put into his hand.
Joseph might use the power which Pharaoh gave him over his Subjects, Genesis
41.45. much more may men make use of that power which God has given them,
seeing he has in his hand power over all his own works; which therefore he may
bestow where he pleases, and is pleased to bestow on men for the farther
magnifying of his goodness and favor toward them. Only seeing it is a Power
which we have, not by our own right, but by deputation from him, in whom it is
founded originally, our care must be to use it within the bounds limited by Him
who gave it, not vainly for ostentation, but Soberly and Moderately, and to the
ends for which it is given, which must not be so much for the advancing of our
selves, as for the good of the Creature.

But why did not God give the Creatures their names himself, seeing that power
was Originally founded in him, and seeing He best understood the Nature of
every Creature, and consequently could best fit them with names suitable
thereunto? The Reason we have partly seen: And may hence,

5. Observe, God is pleased to honor men so far, as to employ them in many
things which of right belong unto, and might be done by Himself alone.
Psalm. 104.30. that is, by which all Creatures are propagated in their kinds,
yet he is pleased to make use both of men and beasts, as his Instruments, in
their propagation. And whereas he only governs the World in Righteousness, yet
he makes use of men in the Government thereof, whom he sets upon his Throne,
Graces with his Titles, and arms with his Scepter: as although it is he alone
that is the Shepherd of Israel, Psalm. 80.1. yet he sets up David his servant to
feed Israel his Inheritance, Psalm. 78.71. yea, in things spiritual, although
all are taught of God, Isa. 54.13. yet he committed the dispensation of his
Word to the Tribe of Levi, and his Ministers that succeed them, to teach Jacob
his Judgments, and Israel his Law, Deuteronomy. 33.10. Insomuch that he gives them the
title of Fathers; unto such as are begotten anew by the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15.
although the work of Regeneration be the Effect only of his own Spirit. And
this he does, 1. To encourage men to his service in honoring them so far as to
make them his follow-workers. 2. To unite men the more in love, one to another.
3. To increase their reward hereafter, by the faithful employment of their
Talents, for the advantage of their Master from whom they received them, Matthew.
25.21, 23.

VERSE 20.
ANd Adam gave names] An evident Argument of Incomparable Wisdom in him, who
understood their natures at the first view, better then we do now by all our
observation, after so large experience, and was able at an instant to find out
fit names for them; whereas the finding out of apt names and terms in Languages
requires much Judgment and Learning. This Wisdom, seeing it was not gotten by
use, and experience, must necessarily be infused immediately by God Himself.

To the Fowl of the Air, and to every beast] And to them only. For neither
could the Fishes of the Sea be brought to him, without a miracle; neither was
it to any purpose for Adam to seek for a companion for himself amongst them,
which could not live with him in the same Element.

But for Adam was not an Help found] Neither in Gods Judgment, nor in his Own,
who the more he considered, and knew of the nature of the Creatures, the more
unfit he found them for his Society, for which he easily found, that God had
never Created them. It is true, that they were and might be useful to him some
other way, as they are now unto us many ways, according to the several
abilities which God has given them. But for Propagation (which could not be
but by another Sex of the same Nature with Man) or for continual, and
comfortable commerce, they were utterly unfit, so that there wanted another
helper to Man then was to be found amongst any of those Creatures that God had
yet made.

In that none of those Creatures, which God had made for other Ends, was fit to
be an Helper, and Companion for Adam, we may,

1. Observe, No Creature Can or Ought to be applied to any other use, then that
for which it was first Created and Ordained by God.
Eccl. 1.15. That whatsoever God has made, might be for ever; so that nothing
might be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, Eccl. 3.14. And thus it must
needs be, 1. Because he has made all his works in Wisdom, Psalm. 104.24. and to
alter them from what they were first appointed, were to make them worse. 2.
That Gods Sovereignty may be acknowledged, when the Rule and Law which he has
given the Creature remains unalterable, when all things continue according to
his Ordinance, Psalm. 119.91. that all flesh may fear before him. 3. For
avoiding Confusion, which must necessarily follow, by men's altering and
changing of all things according to their own pleasure, which alters every
moment.

Who are they then that alter the Natural use of the Creature into that which
is against nature, as the Apostle instanceth in one particular, Romans 1.26?
seeking Stability in Uncertain things; Inward content in Outward things, which
were never ordained to fill the heart, Eccl. 5.10. Good in Evil, and the like.
Whereby, 1. They endeavor to Cross the Law that God has set in Nature. 2.
Abuse both the Creatures, and the Power that he has given man over them. 3.
And failing in their end at length, show themselves fools, in striving against
the stream.

More particularly, to take the words Positively as they are laid before us.
That none amongst the Beasts or Fowls could be found to be a fit companion for
Man; We may,

2. Observe. Beasts are not fit, nor can be made Comfortable companions for men.


They must then needs degenerate from the Nature of men, that take no delight,
but amongst their Sheep and Oxen, set their hearts upon them, and make them
their chiefest care. Or at best sort themselves with none but men of Sensual
and Brutish minds, no whit fitter for a Christians Commerce, then the very
Bruit Beasts themselves.

VERSE 21.
ANd the Lord God] To fix our eyes more fully on God, as the Author of this
great mercy in the Creation of the Woman to be man's helper, The Holy Ghost
entitles him to every Circumstance observable in the forming of her. God sends
the Sleep, he takes out the Rib, He closes up the flesh in the place of it; He
forms the Woman, He brings her to the man. So that there is none to be seen in
that work, from the beginning to the end, but God alone. Now although all sleep
be from God, yet the Holy Ghost in this place notes unto us extraordinary
sleep, which God cast upon Adam for this occasion, by his Own Hand.

Caused to fall] How, it is not expressed, nor curiously to be enquired in to,
only it must be acknowledged (which is employed in the relation) that it was
not Weariness by labor, nor Repletion by food, which brought this sleep upon
him, at this time; And therefore must be accounted as an extraordinary Act of
God, as are all the rest that follow afterward.

A deep sleep] For so the Word in the Original signifies, which bound up all
his senses; such a sleep as fell upon Abraham, Genesis 15.12. Whether it were a
Trance or Ecstasy, as some conceive it to have been, is more then can be
gathered out of the Text. Such a sleep it was questionless, that took from
Adam the Observation of all that was done, till the work was ended; Some
conceive that he was cast into this sleep, to take from him the sense of the
pain, which the taking out of his Rib must needs put him to, as they conceive
(as if God, that took it out, could not take it out without pain): Others that
the work might appear to be wholly Gods; seeing the man was asleep, while it
was done, and that the Providence and Love of God toward him, might the more
evidently appear, in providing this help for him while he slept; And lastly,
some most probably conceive, that Gods Intention was in this, as in the rest of
his works, to hide the Operation from man's eyes, that he might rather see What
was done, then How it was done, which is the course that he takes in all the
acts of his Providence unto this day.

And he took one of his Ribbs] In this, and in the Circumstance following (of
closing up of the flesh instead thereof, and framing the woman) the Spirit of
God expressing only that they were Gods Acts, but forbearing to describe How
they were done; in a sort commands us rather to believe, then to search
curiously into them. But why a Rib? Some conceive, for the Situation that it
has in the body; as first, that it was taken neither from the head nor foot,
to manifest that the place of the Wife was to be neither above, nor to be far
below, her Husband. Secondly, that it was taken from a place near the heart, to
point at the entire and hearty affection, wherewith the man was to embrace his
Wife. Thirdly, because those parts of the body, are covered with the Arms,
some conceive that it noted both the shadowing, and protection of the Wife by
the Husband; All are but conjectures and so to be taken, and yet may minister
unto us hints of profitable meditation; But besides it may be profitably
conceived, that God made choice of a Rib, because it might be best spared,
without any notable maime, or deformity to the body. The Rib by some is taken
entirely for the whole Rib, both the Bone and the Flesh belonging thereunto,
because Adam afterward acknowledges her to be not only Bone of his Bone, but
Flesh of his Flesh likewise; And a bone he took, not so much to point at the
stiffness and untractablenesse of Women, as some imagine; as at their strength
and Firmness in help and Assistance.

And closed up the flesh] So that it seems, after that, Adam wanted one of his
Ribs, unless we follow their opinion, who being loath to acknowledge any
defect in Adams body, suppose that God in the beginning Created in Adam one Rib
Supernumerary, which he took away, when he made the Woman: a groundless and
vain Conjecture. It seems more probable, that whereas God might, as easily have
filled up the place with another Bone, as he did with flesh; He did purposely
leave Adam, that lively remembrance of the want of a Rib, as a Character in his
breast, as well to keep still fresh in his mind, the remembrance of so great a
Mercy from God in Creating him such an help, as also to set always before him,
the duty of embracing his Wife, with hearty affections, that was part of his
own flesh and Bone, taken from a place so near unto his heart.

After God had made Adam to observe the necessity of Creating the woman, he
takes the work it self in hand, and first by way of preparation thereunto,
casts Adam into a deep sleep, and then takes out of Adams breast, the matter of
which he forms the Woman, This deep Sleep God cast Adam into. Whence,

1. Observe, Even sleep, and quiet rest, are given by God Himself, and
therefore are to be acknowledged as his Blessings.
Psalm. 77.4. As he did that Great Kings, when he would give him occasion to
remember Mordecay's good Service, Hest. 6.2. And it is he that bestows sleep
on his Beloved, Psalm. 127.2. As on the contrary He sends a spirit of deep
sleep, upon his adversaries, when he pleases, Isa. 29.10.

Let men then acknowledge, and reckon up sleep amongst Gods Blessings, as an
especial means of quickening and refreshing their spirits; and thereby both
of supporting men lives, and strengthening them for their employments:
especially when it is sweet and comfortable, as Jer. 31.26. And not troubled
with affrighting dreams, as Job 7.14. which God gives or denies at his
Pleasure; by Natural means indeed, but those both sent, and made effectual
by Himself.

God we see makes Adam to find the need of an help, before he goes about to
make one; And when he had made her, opens his eyes to behold, and take notice
of her fitness for him, but how she is made he must not see: all the while the
work is in hand, he must be in a deeper sleep; Thus God deals usually in all
his works. So that we may from hence,

2. Observe, Though God be pleased to manifest his works to men, that they may
behold them; yet the manner how they are wrought, is usually hidden from their
eyes.
Necessary to be discovered to us, nor possible to be discovered by us, in this
body of the flesh wherein we discover both God, and his Ways only in part, 1
Cor 13.12. It is sufficient that we shall know all things whereof our nature is
Capable hereafter, when we shall know as we are known; And see God Himself as
Heis, 1 John 3.2. See Observe. 7. on the second Verse of the First Chapter.

Whether this, amongst the rest, were intended by God to cast Adam into a
sleep while he made the Woman, that He might take notice of Gods Care and
Providence over him, while he slept, it is not certain; but that it was so, it
is evident. Whence,

3. Observe, God takes care of us, and provides for us, even while we sleep,
and think not on our own affairs.
David slept the Lord sustained him, Psalm 3.5. The Heavens Cast their
influence upon the Earth, the Herbs and Plants grow, the Corn which we sow
takes root by night, while we sleep, as well as while we wake in the day, Mark.
4.27. Thus his eyes are still upon our Labors, caring for us from the
Beginning to the end of the Year, Deuteronomy. 11.12. While the Mother sleeps the
Child is fashioned, and grows in her Womb, our meat is digested in our
stomachs while we talk, labor, or follow our employments; Yea he makes our
reins to teach us every night, Psalm 16.7. Instructing us sometimes in
dreams and visions; as He did Jacob, Joseph his Son, Paraoh, Nebuchadnezzar
Pilates Wife, and diverse others; And this as 1. He can do because he neither
slumbers nor sleeps, Psalm, 121.3.4. So, secondly, he does 1. To manifest his
faithful Care over us, that our hearts may rest upon him, 2. and to convince us
that the means by which we are supported, are not from our selves, when we
have no hand in those works which are done, not only without our help, but
without our knowledge.

The Man himself, with diverse other Creatures, God framed out of the Earth, the
matter of the Woman's Body, he takes from the Man; the reason whereof we shall
enquire into hereafter. In the mean time, from hence we may,

4. Observe, God delights to vary his ways in all his Operations.
Psalm 104.23. And so is the matter on which he works, Gross Earth, Fluid
Waters, Thin Vapors, or the like; and that Matter is sometimes Rude and
unprepared, sometimes fitted for the effect to be produced, as Seeds to produce
Herbs, and Plants; And so are his ways of working sometime by means, sometimes
without: Sometimes by means agreeable, other whiles by contraries. All this he
does to Manifest, 1. his infinite Wisdom, Psalm. 104.24. 2. His Almighty Power,
appearing in this, that he ties himself to no means, nor manner of working,
but brings to pass any thing, by what way he pleases; So that the effect
appears not to depend upon any means, but only upon the power of him that
works All in All. 3. That he may entice us by such variety, to search into
his ways as His Works are sought out by those that have pleasure therein,
Psalm 111.2.

1. Advance and Magnify God in comparng men with him, their folly with his
Wisdom, their weakness with his Power; men must have such Materials, such
Preparations, such Instruments; or else they can work nothing, whereas God
works any thing, out of any Material, by any Instrument; Nay, without any, and
that of Himself without the assistance of any Creature at all.

2. Despair not at any time, nor in any case: Do Materials fail? Is there never
a Rib in Adams side, no dry bones in the field? No stones to raise up Children
to Abraham? If there be none of these, where was the matter of which God made
the World? The like we may say of Means and Helps, nothing can fail us, but
our own hearts, to rest upon Gods Power, and Faithfulness, waiting for him in
the way of his Judgments, Isa. 26.8.

The Reason why God took Adams Rib to make of it the Woman's Body, may be
conceived to be, either to knit them the nearer together in one band of Love,
as being the same flesh, which no man ever hated, Ephesians. 5.29. Or by the Woman's
Original, to point at the straightness of the Marriage Band, that the Man and
Wife should become one, as they were One at the first, Matthew. 19.5. To both
which uses Adam applies this Consideration afterward, verse 24. Or to manifest
the Woman's Dependence upon, and Subjection unto her Husband, which the Apostle
infers upon this very ground, that she was taken out of the Man, 1 Cor. 11.8.
Or besides all these, both to knit all men together in mutual Love, as
springing every way from one blood, Act. 17.26. And withal to lead them to the
Consideration of that One God, the Father of All, from whom all things have
their Original. Out of all those profitable Considerations, which this
Circumstance yields unto us; We may,

5. Observe, Gods Ways and Works are Ordinarily full of holy Instructions.
DAy unto day utters speech, and night unto night teaches knowledge, Psalm.
19.2. The Ants provident diligence, Prove. 6.6. The Storks observation of the
seasons of the year, Jer. 8.7. The Ox and Asses acknowledgment of their Owners
that feed them; nay, the very growing of the Lillies, springing of the Corn,
from the seed that dies, and what not? afford us Instructions, Reproofs, and
grounds of Consolation. It must needs be so, seeing they are the effects of
Gods Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, and therefore cannot but manifest unto us,
those glorious Attributes of his, and thereby teach us to Fear, Love, and Trust
in Him. 2. And are by God Himself in a special manner directed unto that end,
Eccl. 3.14. Psalm. 92.15.

The place whence this Ribb was taken, is supposed to point at the place, which
the Wife was to have under her Husband. Whence,

6. Observe, The Wife must be neither her Husbands Lord nor Vassal.
Ephesians. 5.22. and therefore to respect him with Reverence, ver. 33. and yet
beloved of him as his own flesh, ver. 28. and governed by him with great
moderation, and respect to her as the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3.7. made partaker
of his Counsels, in things of mutual Concernment, as a friend; of his Estate
above a Child; of his Love, as his own flesh, advanced to rule and exercise
Authority under him at home, and to Honor and Respect abroad, preserved as the
apple of his eye; and Comforted, Strengthened, and Encouraged as the Companion
of his Labors, and partaker of all his hopes; subjected to him in her Outward
Condition, but highly advanced in his heart, as a member of Christ, and Heir
together with him of the Grace of Life.

The Matter of which the Woman was made, being a Bone of Adam's Body, and
consequently the firmest Material that could be taken from him, warrants us
farther to,

7. Observe, A Wife Is, or Should be, a strong Helper to her Husband.
Prove. 31. Such as were those holy Matrons, Sarah, Rebeccah, Bathshebah, and
others. Great reason she should be so, seeing she is the second Pillar that
supports the family, one in whom the Husbands heart may safely trust, Prove.
31.11. for her advice, in ordering his affairs, overseeing the ways of his
household, instructing the Children, directing the servants at home, comforting
him in all distresses, assisting in all Temptations. She that shall perform all
these duties, needs to be furnished with proportionable abilities, both of
Nature, and Grace, and strongly supported by the assistance of Gods Spirit.

It seems God made choice of a rib, as being fittest to be spared, without any
considerable Maim, or Deformity to the rest of the body, that so he might do
him much good, with little harm or loss. Whence,

8. Observe, God requires nothing of us, nor does any thing unto us, that may
hurt us, or undo us.
Prove. 3.9. (so his care of easing the poor, Levit. 12.8.); no more of our
Labors then may well stand with our health, our Thrift, and the liberty and
freedom of our minds for heavenly Meditations, and Religious Exercises; no more
abstinence from unprofitable delights, than may stand with the health of our
bodies, and conduce to the well ordering of our minds, and the preservation of
the Creatures; nay, he lays no more upon us in Temptations and Trials, than we
are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. and than he recompenseth with a proportionable
measure of Consolation, 2 Cor. 1.5. than serves to hold us on in a right way,
Psalm. 119.67. at present, and to advance our reward at the last day, 2 Cor.
4.17. Neither can it be otherwise, seeing God, 1. Seeks no gain by us, but
would have us gain by him, Deuteronomy. 5.29. 2. Cannot wrong us through ignorance,
for he knows our frame, and remembers that we are dust, Psalm. 103.14. and
knows beforehand how to deliver us in any Temptation, 2 Pet. 2.9. 3. Neither
is he enforced to lay heavy burdens on some, to spare others: for he that is
All-sufficient, can provide for the good of Community, with the good of every
particular member thereof.

Let nothing be grievous unto us that God either Commands, or lays upon us;
Remembering, 1. That he may do with his own what he will. 2. And yet hates
nothing which he has made. 3. And Can, and will not fail to restore unto us
abundantly, whatsoever we seem to lose, either in Doing, or Suffering by his
appointment, that he may be no man's debtor.

It is added, that God closed up the flesh instead of the Rib that he had taken
away; as indeed it was needful, both to hide the deformity, and to preserve the
Inward parts. Whence,

9. Observe, God takes nothing from us, but he takes care to recompense it unto
us, some way or other.
Prove. 3.9, 10. Mal. 3.10. Or for the necessary relief of his children, Prove.
19.17. or takes it from us, when we suffer for his Name, Matthew. 19.29. or bear
his yoke: as is manifest in Job's example. And this Experience will show us (if
we wisely consider Gods ways) that whatsoever loss we make, by him, or for
him, shall be either recompensed in the same kind, as in Job's case, or in
something of greater advantage unto us; as the loss of Wealth, with increase
of Grace: and that either in present, Mark 10.30. or after a while, Eccl. 11.1.
Or at the farthest, at the last day. And hereof we may rest assured, both
because Gods All Sufficiency enableth him thereunto, as also because his
abundant love moves him thereunto, and the respect to his own honor, who is
neither Unrighteous to forget our labor of Love, Heb. 6.10. nor can endure to
be any man's debtor, Romans 11.35. or to dishearten any man thereby, in his
service.

But it was but flesh wherewith God filled up the breach, that he had made in
Adams breast, to leave that lively remembrance with him, both of his Wifes
nearness unto him, and of his duty unto her. Whence,

10. Observe, It is usual with God to leave with us near and lively
Remembrances both of his Mercies to us, and of our Duties.
Abraham, left the Sabbath to be a public Monument both of his Mercies, and
of our Duty. Thus he heales the corruption of our Nature, but so, that by the
dwelling of sin in us, we may be sensible from what we are delivered, be the
more thankful for Christ, Romans 7.24, 25. and made the more watchful in all our
ways. And this he does out of a kind of necessity, to help our weakness, who
of our selves are so apt to cast behind our backs the remembrance of his
Mercies, and of our own Duties.

VERSE 22.
THe Ribb which the Lord God had taken] So that he brought not any other matter
to it, to make up the Woman's body out of it and other materials added to it;
but that very Ribb that he made into a Woman. The manner let no man enquire
into, which is secret: But of Gods power to be able to make so large a body, of
so small a substance, who can doubt, that acknowledges that God made the World
of nothing?

Made he a Woman] Or, according to the Original, Built he into a Woman: A
phrase pointing at the Art in framing of her body, and at the perfection of the
Work. For an house, as we know, is composed by Art, in a proportion fit for the
use to which it is designed. Whether this phrase have relation also to the man,
who was but, as it were, One side of the house, till the woman was made, and
joined to him, or (which is more probable) points only at the perfect frame of
the Woman's body, being as an house well built, and in due proportion, we need
not dispute. We know the Scripture often resembles man's body to an house, Job
4.19. 2 Cor. 5.1.

And brought her unto the man] Not as he brought the beasts before him, to be
surveyed; but, after he had related unto Him whence she was taken, to give her
unto him as his unseparable companion to dwell with him, and be his Helper.
Whether this were performed with some visible representation of Gods presence,
(as some conceive it to be done by Christ Himself, taking on him the Form of a
man, as he did sometimes after the Fall) or any other way, and with what
Ceremony, since the Holy Ghost has not expressed it, we must not enquire. This
only we must acknowledge, that this bringing of the Woman to the Man, implies
the full bestowing of her upon him, that they should live together as Man and
Wife, by Gods appointment.

So then, in this description of the Woman's Creation, we have laid before us
all the Causes of that work: The Efficient, God. The Material, A Ribb taken
from the Man. The Formal, to be made a Woman. And the Final, that she might be
a Wife and Helper to the Man. Of the VVomans Soul we hear nothing in this
place. Moses had said enough before, in the Creation of the Man, leaving us to
conceive, that since there is nothing more mentioned concerning the woman's
soul, than we had heard before in the inspiring of Adams, that she also had her
soul inspired in the like manner. This new wonder of multiplying one Bone into
so many, of making so many parts and members of One, and of enlarging one small
Ribb, into the full measure of a Woman's body fully grown, ministers much matter
of Philosophical Disputes, to men that forget, that the Holy Ghost presents
unto them a work above nature, and therefore not to be examined by Natural
reason, and by expressing what was done without; the Manner how, leads them to
Admiration, rather than into a Curious inquisition, of that which we cannot
understand. Only it gives us occasion from hence to,

1. Observe, God can change any thing into what Form he pleases.
Observe. 4.

This phrase of Building here used, pointing at the Exactness and perfection
of the work of the Art used in framing it, may warrant us to,

2. Observe, God is Exact and Perfect in all the Works that he undertakes.
Deuteronomy. 32.4. in a Respective Perfection to the proportion of the work it self,
and to the End whereat it aims. See Chap. 1. Ver. 4. Observe. 3. and Chap. 2.
Ver. 1. Observe. 3.

God built the Ribb into a Woman, the Text says expressly: That he therein used
the Ministry of Angels (as some have imagined) is a groundless fantasy; so
that we may warrantably,

3. Observe. Women, as well as men, are Gods own Workmanship.
Matthew. 19.4. made one woman, Mal. 2.15. this unquestionable Truth needs no
proof at all.

Let it be the Comfort of that Sex, That which is Gods work shall be his Care.
His Son Christ has honored them in taking flesh of a Woman and not of a Man.
God Himself has honored them so far sometimes, as to put the government of
the State into their Hands, Judge. 4.4. To make use of them, extraordinarily,
for the revealing of his Will, by way of Prophecy to his Church. But above all,
both redeemed them, as well as men by the Blood of his Own Son, Sanctified them
by his Spirit; And made them heirs together with Men of the Grace of Life, 1
Pet. 3.7. The more to blame are they that so far undervalew them that they
Judge them unworthy of the knowledge of his Truth (...); And by consequence of
Life and Salvation; whereas in Christ there is neither Male nor Female, as the
Apostle tells us, Gal. 3.28.

It is worthy our Observing, that God having abundance of Spirit (as the
Prophet speaks, Mal. 2.15.) and there being more cause, of giving Adam many
Wives, for the speedy Peopling of the Earth, than there could be to any of his
Posterity, yet in the beginning would make Adam but one Wife; Whence,

4. Observe, God has allowell but one Wife to one Man.
Adam thereupon, that those two should be one flesh, as they had been One, our
Savior alleges, Matthew. 19.4. Proposes as a Law binding all Adams
Posterity, and therefore not to be dispensed with, by Moses, much more does it
make void all arguments taken up from the acts, though of the Patriarchs
themselves, whose Polygamies are rather not reproved, then allowed; much less
set before us for Precedents for imitation, but may be justly conceived to be
recorded amongst their blemishes: the success whereof turned, either to their
vexation, as the Contentions between Leab and Rachel did to Jacob; or became
their snares, as Solomon's many Wives did unto him; or were a Judgment and
Plague unto them, as David's Concubines, when they were defiled by his Son
Absalom. Indeed single matches are the best means of preserving love between
the married Persons, and their Posterity, Chastity, Order and Government in the
Family: all which cannot but be much hazarded if not quite overthrown by
Polygamie, as is manifest both by Reason, and Experience.

God had now made the Woman, and that too, to be an help to the man; but all
this while, Adam had no interest in her, till God had brought Her to Him, and
bestowed Her on Him, as his Wife; Whence,

5. Observe. Though all things be made for Man, yet he can have no interest in
any thing Until God Himself bestow it on him.


Let every man then be careful to get a Grant from God, of all that he has,
of the Land that he possesses of the House that he dwells in, of the Clothes
that he wears, of the Food that he eats; First, that he may enjoy it by a Just
Civil Title, by Honest Labor, Lawful Purchase, or Just Inheritance. Secondly,
Let him withal gain a Religious Title; getting an interest therein, by Gods
Promise, which is limited, 1. to all that are in Christ, who is Lord not only
of the World, but of his Church too, of which we are Members. 3. Let us get
all that we make use of daily out of Gods Hand, begging it by prayer, and
walking before him in an holy Course of Obedience, using the Creatures for no
other end but to enable us thereunto.

Gods bringing the Woman to Adam, and bestowing her upon him, to be his Wife,
and thereby declaring himself to be the Author of that Marriage; Warrants us
to,

6. Observe, Every Child of God must desire to receive his Wife from Gods Hand.
Prove. 19.14. Not only because he is the Common Parent, and therefore ought to
have the greatest hand in bestowing his own Children; but besides it is he that
must give the Portion, which is not so much the Dowry given by the Parents
(although that also be little worth, unless his blessing be added to it) as
the Abilities, by which the married persons are made fit helpers one to
another; Yea, it is he that must build the House by blessing their Labors, and
giving them the fruits of their bodies. Lastly, because the Children that are
born to their Parents must be his, the end of marriage being, that He, and not
only the Parents, might have an holy Seed, Mal. 2.15.

Let every good man then Labor to seek his Wife at Gods Hand; 1. By making
choice of such a Derson, as is of his Family, with whom he may converse as an
Heir with him of the Grace of Life. 2. Laboring to gain her by warrantable
Ways, Prayer, Advice, and Mediation of Godly Friends, Holy Conferences, and
Godly propositions, not by carnal allurements, deceitfulness, enticements, or
violent importunities. 3. And aiming at a right end therein, rather our
Increase in piety, and the Propagation of an Holy Seed, than the advancing our
selves in our outward estates: Remembering 1. that God only (who looks not as
Man on the outward appearance, but sees the heart) is only able to direct us
in our choice. 2. That it lays upon us a strong engagement, to make an holy
use of marriage, when we thus lay the foundation of it in his Fear. 3. That it
sweetens all the crosses, which we may meet with, in a married life; being
assured, that if they fall upon us by his Hand, they shall by him be so
sanctified unto us, that they as all things else, shall work together to our
good.

VERSE 23.
ANd Adam said] Rejoicing in this fit help which God had prepared for him, both
Approving Gods Work every way and Consenting to the Tender that God made unto
him, of taking the Woman for his Wife. These are the first words of Adam which
are recorded in Scripture, as it may seem, not only to signify Adams consent
to the match, without which it could have been no marriage; but besides to set
before us, both the regular Motions of his mind, in the state of his Innocence
consenting to, and approving all the ways of God in all things, and yielding
ready obedience to his Will, till Satan perverting his heart, drew him into a
discontented humor, to murmur against that God, in whose Mercy and Goodness,
he here rejoices; And to complain particularly of the Woman, as a snare laid
for him by God, which he here embraces as an helper prepared for him, and
bestowed on him by God out of his favor and Love.

This is Now] Or, as the Hebrew has it, At this once; So that Adam seems to
rejoice in two respects, the One that he had now met with that comfort, of a
Mate fit for his Society, which he had sought amongst the rest of the Creatures
in vain, and then [Now] implies as much as [At last] The other, that it was
suddenly offered unto him besides his expectation; or [At Once] as that word
also signifies.

Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh] This questionless Adam knew by
special revelation from God, who acquainted him with as much of this work of
his (as he had likewise done with the rest of his works) that it might be a
means of working his heart to a cheerful consent, to that which God had
tendered to him, and to a loving embracing of his Wife, which God had provided
for him,

These words of Adam, do not only point at the Woman's Original, that she was
taken out of Adam's body; but farther manifest, how Adam esteemed her, and,
accounting her as part of himself, accordingly embraced her in his affection,
which is the band of Matrimonial conjunction, as is more fully expressed in
the Law of Marriage, Ver. 24. So that the words imply a full consent of Adam to
the March tendered unto him by God.

She shall be called Ishah] Of Ish; which signifies a man, so that it is (if
our Language would bear it) Or, She-man.
Manness. Some Observe, that since Adam derives not this name from [Adam] the
name given by God to himself, from the red Earth, of which he was made, and is
in common speech, often used to signify a man of low degree: But from [Ish]
which usually signifies a man of Spirit or Courage (as having assinity with the
word [Esh] which signifies [Fire] or a Noble man; by this name seems to imply,
that the Woman should be a Noble and strong Helper unto him, full of Life and
Spirit: Or, that in giving this name he aims at the difference of her
Original, and his own. He was Adam, because he was taken immediately out of the
Earth; and she was (...), as not taken out of the Earth, but out of [Ish] the
body of man already framed.

Now in that Adam rejoy ceth in, and takes notice in a way of thankfulness, of
this favor of God toward him, in Creating such an Helper, as long as his
heart stood upright; we may take him for a precedent for Imitation; And may,

1. Observe, Gods Blessings ought to be Entertained and Embraced by us, with an
holy Rejoicing, and Thankfulness.
Deuteronomy. 26.11. and David prays for Blessings for that very End, Psalm. 14.7.
that his people might rejoice. This Sarah practices; Genesis 21.6. Leah, Genesis
29.35. and Hannah, 1 Samuel 2.1. when God blessed them in giving them Children;
but especially the Blessed Virgin, when God honored her so far, as to make her
the Mother of Christ.

This Rejoicing must be, 1. In God, and not in our selves; not so much that it
is well with us, as that Gods Honor, in his Mercy and Truth, is manifested,
and advanced thereby.

2. And performed with fear and trembling, Psalm. 2.11. and infinite abasement
of our selves before him, upon the apprehension of our own unworthiness, of so
great favors, after David's example, 2 Samuel 7.18.

And, 3. may be publicly testified, when Gods favors are Eminent and
Public, and especially when the Church is any way concerned in them: whence
David, being a Public person, promises a public thanksgiving in the
Congregation, for those Mercies, which though they lighted on him, yet
redounded to the benefit of his people also.

God indeed was pleased to hide from Adams eyes, the manner of the Woman's
Creation; but when the work is ended, lets him understand as much as might
inform him of his Duties, both of Thanksgiving unto God, and of Love unto his
Wife, and giving due respects unto her. Whence,

2. Observe, We may, and shall know as much of Gods Ways and Works, at
concerns us, for the directing, and quickening of us unto our Duties.
AS, 1. That they are the works of his own hand, Psalm. 64.9. 2. And those
wrought in Righteousness, Mercy, and Truth. 3. And for his own glory, Prove.
16.4. and for our good, unto which all things work together, Romans 8.28. that
men may Fear, and Trust in him, Psalm. 64.10. Thus far will God make his ways
known unto us; As he acquaints Abraham with that fearful Judgment, which he
intended to bring upon Sodom, because he would make good use of it to his
family, Genesis 18.18, 19. and thus far it is our duty to enquire and to search
into them, Psalm. 111.2. so it be done within the bounds of Sobriety, and with a
desire and endeavor to advance Gods Honor the more, by that knowledge of
them, which he shall reveal unto us.

When Adam embraces the woman as Bone of his Bone, etc. he does not only point
backwards at her Original, but withal expresses his acceptance of her, as God
offered her, to be one flesh with him in Marriage, by which consent of his the
Marriage was concluded. Whence,

3. Observe, It is Consent that must make the Marriage between Man and Wife.
Jacob was permitted to marry whom he pleased, so it were of his Mothers
kindred: Or more Particular, to marry such a person, which were sit rather to
be a direction by way of advise, then a peremptory command. Thus Hagar took a
wife for Ismael, Genesis 21.21. Judah for Er, Genesis 38.6. and Naomi advises Ruth
in her Match, Ruth 3.1, 2. And this is most seasonably performed, before the
parties affections are engaged, lest afterward they be forced either to
consent to the match already made, or to suffer a worse inconvenience. 2. The
Consent must be specially between the persons to be contracted, as in Rebeccahs
case, whose Parents would not force her beyond her own liking, Genesis 24.57. This
Consent must be every way free, neither stolen by fraud, and false
informations; nor purchased by rewards, and expectations of outward
advancements, or other carnal allurement; not forced by Terror, or
Importunity; but grounded upon an Evident manifestation of the Piety, and
Fitness of the persons approved, by those whose counsels they ought to
embrace. And upon the observation of Gods providence directing the Choice,
which was the main Argument that swayed in the match of Isaac with Rebeccah.
Upon both these Allams Consent seems to be grounded, in this place, that the
Woman was provided for him by God, and was the only fit Match that was to be
found for him, amongst the Creatures.

The Imposition of the Woman's name must be especially observed; where we may
conceive Two things are pointed at: First, her Original, that she was taken out
of Man, which is expressly mentioned. Secondly, what she was in Nature, even Man
every way, distinguished only in Sex, which may be probably employed in that
name Ishah. God when he had Created Adam, gave him a name, to put him in mind
of his buse Original; here Adam gives his Wife a name, to mind her both Whence
she was, and Whatshe was. Whence,

4. Observe, Even the best amongst men need to be minded both of their Duty,
and Condition every way.
Jews are Commanded to write upon the posts of their houses, and to remember by
beholding the fringes of their garments: Such helps the Pride, Rebellion, and
Infirmity of our nature necessarily requires; which, when all means are used,
is hardly brought to a Constant remembrance, and feeling observation, both of
our own Condition and Duty. See Ver. 21. of this Chap. Observe. 10.

VERSE 24.
THerefore] Some conceive, that this particle carries us back unto all that is
related before the woman's Creation, as well as to the making of her out of
Adam's side; as if this were the mind of the Holy Ghost; Therefore, that is,
because God saw, (that Adams life could not be comfortable to him, without a
fit helper; and because Adam, upon the furvey of the Creatures, found no fit
Companion for Himself; and lastly, because God had made the woman out of her
Husbands body, etc. But most Interpreters conceive, that this [Therefore] looks
back only to the last Circumstance and ground of the Law of Marriage, upon the
manner of Gods creating the woman out of Adam's body in this sense: Because
they were One, therefore they shall be One. Indeed this Inference seems to hold
strongly in Adam and Eve, because they had indeed been one flesh; but has no
force to conclude the Law unto Adam's posterity, whose Wives spring out of
another stock, taking flesh, not of them, but of their own parents. It seems
more strongly to infer, That a man and his Parents must be One, because they
were One. What if we suppose then, that this (therefore) refers to that which
is not Evidently expressed, but must notwithstanding be necessarily understood?
Namely, that therefore they shall be One because God had appointed it to be so,
which is employed in Gods bringing the Woman to Adam, to be his Wife; upon which
our Savior grounds the strength of the Law of Marriage, that because God had
joined them together no man should put them asunder, Matthew. 19.5.6. This is the
main ground indeed, upon which Adam imbraceth her, not only in respect of her
Original, but of Gods Decree, that she should be his Wife, which be imbraceth
as a rule to himself, and proclaims as a Law to his Posterity for succeeding
times.

Shall a man leave] That is, be divided from, in Habitation, and daily
conversation, and in Care and Labors for his Service and Estate; But not in
Love, and Dutiful affection, or in such services or assistance, as upon
intervenient and emergent Occasions, his Parents might require at his hand,
which as well Married as Single Persons, even by the Law of Nature, are to
perform unto them for ever.

His Fathen and Mother] Who in respect of Nature are nearest unto him, and of
whom he came, and whom he ought otherwise by Gods own Ordinance to serve; much
more all others, though nearer to him in Consanguinity than his Wife.

And shall cleave] This phrase both the Septuagint, and after them our Savior,
Matthew. 10.7. express by a term that signifies to Glue together, which is the
firmest means that men can use, to join things together. This is done by the
Ordinance and Law of God, sodering the two married persons into One; and
enjoynes not only a firm and constant adherence of the man to his Wife in
affection (upon which in all well ordered minds it so far prevails, upon the
ground of this Ordinance, that one feels his heart Leaning unto and Rejoicing
in his Own Wife, and that merely because she is his Wife: So that with that
kind of love he can affect no other, though more desirable in respect of her
Person, or Parts, and Usefulness for service) but withal imports
Cohabitation, Mutual service, and firm Association in all cares, and
endeavors for the advancing of the Common good of themselves and the Family,
and Particularly Matrimonial Conjunction for Propagation.

Unto his Wife] Unto his Ishah, says the Holy Ghost, retaining the same Name,
which Adam gave unto the Woman before, as best expressing the Relation of a
Wife to an Husband, from whom she differs only in Sex, And unto her Alone, as
the Law of Marriage requires, Hos. 3.3. So that all Polygamy is here forbidden,
as well as all Adultery in the former phrase.

And they shall be One flesh] Into one flesh (says the Original)
Significantly) not only in account, as Legally a Man and his Wife are reputed
as one person; nor only one flesh by Matrimonial Conjunction (to which the
Apostleapplies this phrase, 1 Cor. 6.16.) Nor only one flesh in their issue,
in which the substance of both Parents concurs to make up the same body of the
Child. But much mere one flesh by a nearer and more unseparable union, which
(during the dives of the married persons) is as impossible to be dissolved as
(...) the flesh from the body, or one member from another, whereby being so
nearly joined together, they should be animated and governed so by one Spirit,
as if they were members of the same body, laboring indeed in diverse
employments, but by the same direction with the same affection, and with
reverence to the same end. So that this phrase does not only enclude Die^^rce,
(as the two former do Polygam^ and Adultery;) but besides, all dividing in
Affection or any other way.

It is questioned, whether those words, which contain the Law of Marriage be
the. Words of God or of Moses, or of Adam. They that take them ^o be uttered by
God, ground themselves upon our Saviors Affirmation, Matthew. 1^.1. That God
spoke them, it cannot be denied: but whether he spoke them Himself, or
delivered them by the Pen of Moses, or uttered them by the voice of Adam (which
see ^s most probable) the difference is not great; For, howsoever, we may,

1. Observe, Marriage of Man and Woman it an Ordinance of God Himself.
Prove. 2.17. By which he is said to join the marnied persons together, Matthew.
19.6. Of which Conjunction especially the Apostle speaks, when he warnes every
Man to walk as God has called him, 1 Cor. 7.17. Neither in reason can it be
otherwise; Seeing 1. we are Gods and not our own; And therefore none of us
having power over his own person, can be disposed of otherwise then he directs,
1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 2. We bring forth Children unto God, Mal. 2.15. Which He
therefore calls his Own, Ezech. 16.21. as born unto him, ver. 20. yea, the
fruit of the womb is his reward, Psalm. 127.3. And therefore in all reason it is
fit he should bestow that which he only gives. Lastly, it is most fit, that as
he Created Man at first, so he only should give direction for the Propagation
of Mankind afterward, in all times succeeding, by his Law, as he propagates
all other Creatures by a Law planted in their natures.

Let all men esteem honorably of Marriage, for the Author, Heb. 13.4. Enter
into it Roverendly, use it Holily, and hold that Covenant inviolably, each
party walking with God in the place wherein he has set them, the Husband
ruling in Gods Fear, and by his Authority; and the refore according to his
Will: and the Wife obeying and fearing the Lord in her Husbands person: And
both depending on and expesting his Blessing, who will not fail to sanctify
and bless unto us what Himself (...) dained.

That he may cleave unto his Wife, the Husband is not only permitted, but
Directed to leave his Parents; for the Holy Ghost seith not, a man May, but a
man Shall leave his Father and Mother, which words imply a (...) or direction.
So that we may hence.

2. Observe, Married Person^ ^^^st be wholly and entirely one to another.
Hos. 3.3. which extends unto all Conjugal duties only. One may love other
friends, but only his Wise with a Conjugall. Love and Affection, Rejoicing in
her alone, Prove. 5.18, 19. dwelling with her, as an inseparable companion,
advising and jointly laboring with her for Upholding and Governing of the
Family, 1 Cor. 7.3. and the like, in those the married persons must be wholly
one to another. But so, that they also, as well as others, must still hold
themselves obliged to those General Duties of Love, due Reverence, and Service,
unto all other persons, according to their several Relations.

Let this mind us of our Spiritual condition, and obligation thereby, unto
Christ our husband, to be entirely to him, and to none other; to which use both
the Prophets and Apostles apply this Law of Marriage in sundry places,
shadowing out our Spiritual, and consequently more Inward, and Nearer Union
between Christ and us, under this holy Ordinance, especially St. Paul, Ephesians.
5.32.

Forsalcing of Father and Mother, is not that which is required in it self, but
in relation to a man's adhering and cleaving to his Wise, which is the main
duty required. Whence,

3. Observe, Married persons are not only to restrain themselves from all
others, but besides to adhere and cleave firmly one to another.
dwelling, 1 Pet. 3.7. Delighting and rejoicing in one another in an holy and
hearty manner, Prove. 5.18, 19. Trusting mutually one in another, Prove. 31.11.
and close cleaving together in all their endeavors and cares for the building
up of the house in the Education of the children, governing the Servants, and
ordering of the Affairs of the Family to the best advantage for their mutual
comfort.

VERSE 25.
ANd they were both naked] Without any covering on their bodies, whereof they
had no need, either to hide any uncomely part, (seeing the Image of God
appearing even in the bodies of our first Parents in some measure, graced and
beautified every part of them) or to keep off the injury of the VVeather,
wherewith, by reason of the firmness of their Constitutions, and the perfect
temper of the air, they could not be annoyed; seeing the distempers of Heat and
Cold, etc. occasioned both by the weakness of our bodies, and by the
indisposition of the Air, are (as many other evils which we suffer by the
Creature) the Confequents and Effects of Sin.

And were not ashamed] As they had no cause, when as yet they had not sinned,
or found any inordinate motions stirring in their minds. For, Shame arising
from a fear of blame, or disreputation for some uncomely thing discovered in
him that is ashamed, whereof he is conscious, there could be no shame unto a
man but by some inordinate motion of the thoughts within, seeing God made
nothing uncomely in it self, or in the use of it, and therefore could not be
uncomely but by abuse. So then, those parts of the body whereof we are now
ashamed, become shameful, if not by the remembrance of sin, which we are
defiled withal in our propagation from our Parents, yet certainly by the fear
of sinful thoughts, or inordinate motions apt to be stirred up by the
beholding of those objects: from which our first Parents in this state of
Innocence were free. It was therefore no defect in Adam and Eve (seeing
shamefastness is not properly any virtue, but only a Commendable passion; nor
that neither, but where there is just cause of shame) so that by consequent the
want of shame in Adam and Eve manifests their Perfection, that they had in them
nothing shameful, and not any defect at all.

This Circumstance we may conceive to be added by the Holy Ghost, partly, to
discover more fully the Perfect and Blessed estate of our first Parents, who
were so comely, that they needed no ornament, being glorious by that beauty
which God had put upon them, and so strong by the perfect constitution of their
bodies, that they needed no defense: And partly, to make it evident by what
means their Glory was turned into shame, and their Strength into Weakness,
namely, by their Rebellion against God through the Suggestion and subtlety of
Satan. Whence;

1. Observe, Nakedness of man's body was Glorious and Safe, until Sin ma^^ it
Shameful and Dangerous.
GLorious, because it presented unto us the Bounty wherewith God had adorned
man, which a garment hides from our eyes, and instead thereof sets before us
the borrowed Ornaments of Art taken from the Creatures: and Safe by the perfect
temper of their bodies, not easily capable of any annoyance, and by the
Propitiousnesse of the Creatures, which Cherished but did not Hurt them.
Therefore when man shall be restored to his full perfection, Nakedness shall
be an Ornament to him, and the shadow of the Almighty his defense.

They were not Ashamed, and thereby Witnessed their Own Glory and Perfection
both Outward and Inward, having neither any Outward deformity in their Bodies,
nor any Inordinate motion in their Minds that might cause them to blush. So
that though they had in their view those parts from which we turn away, and at
the sight whereof usually inordinate lusts kindle in our hearts; yet it wrought
no such effect in their hearts, nor had any appearance of deformity to them at
all. Whence,

2. Observe, Inordinate Motions to evil thoughts arise not so much from Outward
Objects or Occasions, as from the Corruption of the heart within.
IT may be that some others, as well as Achan, faw the Wedge of Gold, and the
Babylonish garment, but he only took them, because he coveted them. St. James
tells us, that it is not God (nor consequently any thing Created by Him) but
our Own Lusts within, that draw us away, and entice us, Jam. 1.14. And the
Prophet tells Idolaters, it is a deceived heart that turns them aside, Isa.
44.20. And our Savior discovers the Spring of all those Lusts that defile a
man, to a rise out of his own heart, Mark 7.21. To speak properly, Outward
Objects are rather the Fuel that nourishes them, then the fire that kindles
them.

Let no man then complain, that when he is drawn away, he is tempted of God,
but lay the blame upon his Own heart, when either Objects or any other
Allurements draw him into any sin, which could work no effect that way, (as
appears in the Temptations of our Savior Christ) unless they found some
matter within to work upon them, so that they may well be the Midwife, but can
never be the Parent of any sin.

To look back and consider the Scope of the Holy Ghost in this Relation of Man's
Condition in his state of Innocence, we shall find therein described unto us,

1. The large provision which God made for him, and freely bestowed upon him,
for the needful support and comfort of his Life every way.

2. The Rules and Laws which God gave him for the right ordering of his ways,
in all services, both toward himself, and to wards the Creatures which he had
put under his feet.

The end of both we may conceive to be, to discover unto us Gods Abundant
Goodness, and Perfect Righteousness, and Holiness, that we might learn to
Love, Fear, and depend upon Him alone. Now concerning Gods bounty to Man, the
Spirit of God so represents it, that we cannot but behold it with wonderful
admiration, set out at full in three respects, that it was, 1. Free every way.
2. Large above measure. 3. Sufficient to supply all man's necessities.

1. That His bounty was Free, as proceeding merely out of his own Abundant
Goodness, is evident in two things. First, that the Provisions that God
ordained, not only for all the rest of the Creatures that were to do him
service, but for himself especially, even that Garden of pleasures, which he
assigned him for the place of his dwelling, were prepared before man had any
being at all. Secondly, that they were bestowed without any kind of
solicitation, or request: Even the woman which God created to be his helper,
and the Comfort of his life, God foresaw in his wisdom that man had need of;
and out of his mere love resolved to provide for him, before man himself found
his own want of her, much more before he could bethink himself how he might
procure that which he needed so much.

2. The Largeness of Gods bounty is set out, in the Pleasantness of the Garden
provided and given man for his habitation; In the infinite variety of all sorts
of Fruits wherewith it was stored, both for Necessity and Delight, all of them
planted by Gods own hand. And in allowing man the free use of them all,
excepting only One Tree, reserved by God as an acknowledgment of his
Sovereignty, and as a Remembrance to man of his duty; In the Investiture of man
into his Sovereignty over all the Creatures designed unto him in the former
Chapter; And lastly, in Creating and bestowing the Woman upon him in marriage,
a greater help unto him and comfort for his life, then all the creatures
besides could have been.

3. The Sufficiency of the Provision, which God made for Man, appears in this,
that he had all his wants supplied. He wanted no possessions, for the Earth was
his Inheritance: No servants, for the work which he had to do, was little more
then to pluck and eat his own food from the Trees, and to oversee and keep in
order the Garden ready planted to his hand: No food, for all those delicate
fruits were ready prepared, and allowed him for his diet. Houses and Apparel
there was no need of, when there was no deformity that needed covering, no
Injury by the weather from which he needed to be defended. Only there wanted a
Wife, both for Propagation, and Society, and that also God provides for him,
and that such a one, as he acknowledges to be every way meet for him, and
accordingly rejoices in her: So that God ceased not, till he had furnished man
every way, with all that his Heart could wish, or his needful Occasions
required.

Now for the Laws and Rules which God gave man to guide himself by in this
state of Innocence: we must take notice, that such of them as are merely
branches of the law of Nature, are here omitted. We call them properly Laws
of Nature, which being Rules discovered by the consideration of the Nature of
the Creatures are easily found out by the strength of right Reason: As if there
be a God, Reason teaches that he must be worshipped; and if he be a Spirit,
that he must be worshipped in Spirit and Truth. If we have our Being and
Education from our Parents, that they must be honored and served. If Words
must be manifestations unto others of our Thoughts, that then they must be
answerable unto them, so that we must speak what we think, even the truth from
our hearts, and the like. These being written in all men's hearts by Nature,
that is manifest to all men by Natural reason, are not mentioned in this brief
history, as being sufficiently known without relation. The Laws here recorded
are only such as were added to the Law of Nature by Institution, which the
rule of Equity does not necessarily enforce of it self, without Gods command to
have it thus or otherwise. As though it were of the Law of Nature, that if God
must be worshipped, that there must be a set time, and a time of rest from
other employments appointed for that worship; yet what portion of time this
should be, and on what day it should be fixed, as that it should be one day in
Seven, and the last of seven; no man could by Natural Reason conclude, till God
commanded that it should be so. That man should take care of the Creatures, and
endeavor to preserve them, especially being appointed for his service, reason
would prescribe; but that Adam should take charge of Paradise to keep and
dress it, was merely by Gods Institution, and Command, who might as well have
disposed of him in some other place, as there, if he had so pleased. That Gods
Will should be man's Rule, and that his Obedience and Faith should be professed
and showed forth to others, is a branch of the Law of Nature; but that Adam
should manifest his Faith in God, by eating of the tree of Life, and his
subjection to his Will, by abstaining from the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil, was only by Gods own appointment, having no other ground but the
motion of his own will. That Man and Woman should be joined together for
propagation, and that too in Marriage, may be conceived to be of the Law of
Nature: But that a man should be bound to one Wife, and that for term of Life,
although Natural Reason must needs acknowledge it to be most convenient; yet,
because it is not necessary, God might have ordered it otherwise, if he had
been so pleased.

Whatsoever the Reason may be conceived to be, why the Holy Ghost mentions only
these Positive Laws, whereas he passes over in silence the Laws of Nature, it
must needs be acknowledged that these Laws, which being only Positive, have no
other foundation but the mere Will of God, are notwithstanding so Equal, and
Good every way, that being once made known, natural reason it self cannot but
approve them; and consequently the Righteousness, Holiness, and Goodness of
God appears more clearly in them, than in those Laws that being branches of
the Law of Nature are in a sort more Necessary; seeing nothing discovers the
man more evidently, then those things wherein he is most free to do, or approve
what he will. And indeed it may be probably conceived, that the Holy Ghost had
this scope, to manifest the Righteousness of God in giving these Laws,
because they are so recorded, that the Equity of them is withal manifested by
some Circumstance or other, inserted into the Relation. The Equity of
appointing the Sabbath unto the last day of the week, appears in manifesting,
that That day, being honored above the rest, by putting an end to, and
declaring the perfecting of the Works of Creation, was the fittest day to be
observed in remembrance of so glorious a work. And the Law of appointing man to
labor in Paradise, is manifested to be equal, by this, that God gave him the
use of all the fruits in Paradise, so that he did but labor for himself. That
the Interdiction of the Tree of Knowledge might appear to be equal, it is
recorded withal, that God gave Man all the rest of the fruits to make use of,
freely. The same is as clearly manifested, in setting down at large the Law of
Marriage.

2. The Holiness of these Laws appears as well as their Equity. The Sabbath,
Sacrament of the Tree of Life, and restraint from the Eating of the Tree of
knowledge of Good and Evil, tending only to the furthering of Faith, and
Obedience, and the raising up of men's hearts to an holy delight in God, and
enjoying an holy Communion with him. Man's labor, tending to the exercising of
Love and Mercy toward the Creatures, and Marriage to further mutual
edification in Piety, and Godliness, and the propagation of an holy seed, as
it is plainly expressed, Mal. 2.15.

3. The Goodness of these Laws to Man is as Evident as all the rest. What can
be imagined more Comfortable to man, then the refreshing both of his Body and
Mind, by ceasing from his labor, and enjoying an holy Communion with God in
his Ordinances, in the Religious observation of the Sabbath day? more Necessary
and Useful to the supporting of his heart by Faith, by the help of that
Sacramental Tree of Life? and minding him of his Duty of Obedience by the
Interdicted fruit, whereby he might continually be stirred up to those holy
Duties, by Outward Sensible Objects, set always before him, even in his
ordinary and daily employments? What more profitable to him then to labor for
his own food? What more Comfortable and Necessary to him then Marriage,
affording so many fit helps unto him for the Support and Comfort of his Life?

In General, We cannot otherwise conceive, but that the recording of all Gods
Laws given to man, as well as all his Works both of Creation, and
Administration of the Creatures, aim at the main end wherefore all things were
made, and man especially endued with Wisdom and Understanding, that he might
take notice of, and be a witness of the All Sufficiency, and Eminent
Perfections of God, and the Baseness and Emptiness of the Creatures, yea,
even of Man himself the most Excellent of all his Visible Works.

We may therefore observe in this Record of Moses, of the Laws given to Man,
not only both the Goodness, Equity, and Holiness of God, together with his
Absolute Sovereignty, and Authority, in prescribing, and giving Rules to man
merely according to his own Will, bestowing on him, and detaining from him what
he pleased, and appointing him to be where he appointed, and to do what he
Commanded; but withal, the whole Relation lays before us the Vanity,
Subjection, and Emptiness of all the Creatures, and man especially; that God
might be honored alone, and all things else abased before Him.

Wherefore we must observe, That as all other Creatures, so Man himself was
nothing at the first, and after that a piece of base dead earth, till God
breathed the breath of Life into him; which he is directed to acknowledge, in
the remembrance of his Creation, in observing the Sabbath, and Eating of the
Tree of Life, testifying his dependence on God for his life both present and
future. 2. His Subjection unto Gods Will, by which he was wholly to be guided,
was manifested in his Abstinence from the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
merely upon Gods Command; implying, that he had no power to order his own
ways, no not in the smallest things, wherein he was to guide himself only by
that rule which God laid before him. 3. His Weakness and Vanity was in a
lively manner represented to him, in making use even of the basest Creatures
for the supporting of his Life, which he had also by Gods allowance; And in his
finding of the uncomfortablenesse of his life, by the want of a fit Companion,
till God Created the Woman, and gave her unto him; so that he had nothing of
his own but what was freely bestowed on him by God Himself. So that the
advancing of Gods Honor, and Self-denial, we may discover to be the main end
of giving man these laws, as well as they are of all the rest of Gods Works.

Now seeing man was confined unto this present world but only for a time, as
being at present in some sort shut out from the immediate fruition of God, who
communicated himself unto him most by the Creatures, and by second means, so
that man, in his most perfect Condition in this world, remained in a state of
Baseness, in comparison of that Glory which he was to enjoy at full, after the
end of this time of his pilgrimage; We may observe, both in the course of Gods
providence, and especially in the Laws which he gave the man, that God so
ordered all things, that man might be sensible of his present mean condition,
represented to him so many ways, and thereby have his thoughts raised up to
the Expectation and Longing after that more glorious estate, which was to come,
sealed unto him in the Sacrament of the Tree of Life, and shadowed out in some
sort in the enjoying of God in his Ordinances, and sequestring himself from the
world, in the observation of the holy rest of the Sabbath.

In effect, the Scope of this and the former Chapter are in a manner all one;
as we may easily observe by that which has been spoken already, namely, the
Advancement of God alone, with the Abasement of all the Creatures before him:
which God has appointed to be our chief study in this Life, as it shall be our
greatest happiness to discover and rejoice in it fully, in the Life to come.

FINIS.
CHAP. III.
THe Holy Ghost having in the precedent Chapter described unto us the state of
man in his Innocence, in the History in this Chapter following, lays before us
his Fall, with the Causes, Order, Manner and Consequents thereof; wherein his
maine scope is so manifest to the world; That God made man upright, but that he
sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7.29. that is, to clear God of having any
hand in man's sin, and of the misery which came upon him thereby; discovering
the cause of both to be Satan's malice, and man's own folly, and consequently
acquitting God of all the evil that came upon man, saving the execution of his
justice upon him, according to his deserts, and that too tempered with infinite
mercy, as we shall see. To make this evident, we have the whole History laid
before us, with all the circumstances thereof.

1. The Instruments and Agents in this sad Tragedy, the Serpent employed to
beguile the Woman, and the Woman to deceive the Man.

2. The persons tempted, the first Man and Woman, with the order; First, the
Woman, and by her the Man.

3. The baits, both inward and outward, with the Art used in tempering and
presenting them.

4. The success, steps and degrees of the temptation, and the effects that it
took in drawing our first Parents to Apostasy.

5. The Consequents of their Fall, with the execution of Gods Justice on all
the Delinquents, according to the quality of their offenses.

The precise point of time of the acting of this tragedy, the Holy Ghost having
passed over in silence, is not easily found out by conjecture. Only seeing our
Savior tells us, John 8 44. That Satan was a Murderer from the beginning; and
we know by woeful experience his diligence and activity in mischief, we may
assure our selves, that he was dealing with our first Parents betimes; partly,
that he might take the advantage to shake them, before the habits of Grace were
by exercise settled and confirmed in them; and partly, that by poisoning the
fountain of mankind, before any streams issued from it, he might the more
easily and certainly corrupt the whole mass of the nature of man. The place
where this assault was given, though it be not expressly set down;
notwithstanding seeing we find the wowan allured by the view of the fruit
forbidden, and to fall to the eating of it, as soon as she had consented to the
sin, we may upon good ground conclude, that the place was not only Paradise,
but the very midst of Paradise, where it is most likely the Tree of the
knowledge of good and evil stood not far from the Tree of Life. The devil (as
it may be guessed) forbearing to press the temptation, till it might be
strengthened by the view of that pleasant fruit, to the eating whereof he
intended to allure our first Parents. The rather, because all his hope of
prevailing stood in the suddenness of the assault, by which the woman being
surprised unawares, and at an instant, overlaid with all the Art and Power
which Satan could use, before she could recollect her self, might be overtaken
and conquered, unto which how much the view of that pleasant object conduced,
appears by the ensuing Narration.

Verse 1. Now] or, But, as some others render it; for although that particle
(Va) very frequently signifies And; yet in this place it seems rather to be,
if not an Adversitive, yet at least a Discretive, then a Conjunctive particle,
(as it is also taken in the first verse of the former Chapter,) As if Moses had
said, Thus we see how God had every way manifested his Goodness and Bounty
toward man, not ceasing to heap upon him blessings upon blessings, till he had
made him perfectly happy: And thus man continued in a blessed condition, till
he was perverted by Satan, to his own destruction: But how he fell away from
God, to the utter ruin of himself and his posterity, unless the Lord, out of
his abundant mercy and compassion had restored him again, will appear in the
ensuing Narration. Thus when the Holy Ghost had represented God, acting his
part, in Holiness, Mercy and Truth, he brings in the Devil on the Stage,
walking contrary to God, in a course of malice, subtilty and falsehood, to
overthrow and pervert the order of all that God had made.

The Serpent] The Hebrew name, (coming from a word which signifies to observe
subtly or wittily) might be applied indifferently, either to the beast it
self, or to Satan that spoke by it: But the comparing of the Serpent with
other beasts of the field in this place, and the kind of the curse which was
laid upon him afterward, discover him to be a true Serpent indeed; of which
creature why the Devil made choice above the rest we shall see anon. For the
present, it may justly be enquired, why Moses names only the Serpent, and makes
no mention of the Devil at all, who was the principal Agent, and made use of
the Serpent only as the Instrument in this design. The reason hereof we may
guess to be twofold.

First, because there had been hitherto no mention made of the Creation of
those invisible spirits, or of their Fall, (the intention of Moses being (as it
seems) to relate only the History of the Visible World) the name of the Devil
is not mentioned here, because nothing had been spoken of him before: and the
rather, because though he be not named, yet he must necessarily be supposed to
be the Author of this whole Discourse, between the Serpent and the Woman, which
could not possibly be framed by an irrational creature. And seeing Satan is
called in other places, (as namely, Rev. 12.15. and 20.2.) by the name of a
Serpent, we may in this place, under that name Serpent, understand both the
Beast and the Devil, who used him as his Instrument, seeing both are called in
Scripture by the same name.

Secondly, Moses his intention being principally to clear God of having any
hand in Adams sin, thinks it fittest to lay before us only the visible
passages of the temptation, as namely what was uttered, and by whom, (as being
most manifest in themselves, and consequently the strongest evidences for the
clearing of that truth) leaving the secret passages, which could not so easily
be discovered by sense, to our guess; as the invisible Author of the
temptation, the motions of the woman's heart against God, and the several
thoughts which affected her mind, which, being not subject to outward
observation, might be easily affirmed, but hardly proved.

More subtile] The Serpents subtilty is mentioned elsewhere, both in Scripture,
and in other Authors, which some conceive might have been greater before Adams
fall, then now it is, supposing that besides the general decay which came upon
all creatures thereby, God might justly take away, or at least impair the
natural abilities of this creature above the rest, being employed by Satan for
man's destruction. But suppose the Serpents subtilty to be never so great, yet
seeing it could not be a reasoning or discoursing subtilty, which way could
Satan make use of that for the persuading of a reasonable creature? If there
were any Author of such an opinion, or if the word in the Original did any way
favor it, a man might probably guess, that the Serpents subtilty here
mentioned, was only his aptness to slide and convey himself closely into
Paradise, unespied of Adam or his wife, till a fit opportunity presented it
self to give the onset; for we call them subtle men, who walk secretly and
unseen in all their ways. But that we leave unto the Readers consideration,
rather proposing this as a guess, then prescribing it to be embraced as a
certain truth.

And he said] That is, Satan by him (if under the name, Serpent, we understand
both the Agent and the Instrument) seeing it is out of question, that the Devil
framed both the voice and the discourse, as God did afterward when he spoke to
Balaam by his Ass. Notwithstanding the voice is ascribed to the Serpent,
because no other Author of it appeared to the woman. But why does the Devil
make use of a creatures voice, when he might have suggested all that the
Serpent speaks without a voice, (as he did to David, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. and does
ordinarily to Gods children, as well as to wicked men) and by that means has
been less discovered? Whatsoever Satan's policy was therein, we may probably
conceive, that God purposely overruled him in his way, to the end, that the
whole course of the temptation being carried on openly, and made subject to
sense, it might be made manifest to the world, that this suggestion came
neither from God, nor from any evil disposition of mind that God created in
man, but only from the malice and subtilty of Satan, who having fallen away
from God himself, desired to draw in man to be a party with him in his
rebellion; partly, out of envy against God, and partly, out of malice to man.
Withal it cannot be denied, but that the weakness of so contemptible an
instrument, must needs discover man's infirmity, who was mastered by so base an
enemy, and withal aggravate his sin, in obeying the voice, and believing the
word, of one of the meanest of his own vassals, against the peremptory Command,
and faithful Promise of his own Lord.

To the woman] Alone, as it is most probable, that he might the more easily
prevail against her, whereas two might have withstood him, Eccl. 4.12. And to
the woman rather then to the man, as conceiving her to be the weaker vessel.
Now if besides, we should imagine (as some do) that this Interdiction of the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, was delivered by God himself only to
Adam, and by him to the woman, then had Satan yet another advantage against the
woman, in gainsaying that which she had received only upon her husbands
report, and not immediately from Gods own mouth. But it seems more probable,
that the Interdiction was delivered unto them both by God himself.

Yea] Or, is it true indeed; or, is it possible? so that it may be a speech,
either of doubting, or of indignation, or of admiration, tempting the woman to
question, either the truth, or at least, the equity of that Interdiction.
Withal, that expression seems to have relation to some precedent Conference
that had passed between the Serpent and Woman, not mentioned in this History,
wherein Moses contenting himself only with the discovery of the point of that
fiery dart, which wounded our first Parents to death, omits both the entrance
into, and other passages that passed between the Woman and the Serpent before
the temptation.

Has God said] It is not without some special aim, that Satan questions,
whether this Interdiction were given by God or no. Seeming to imply from the
very Name of God, either the improbability, that God, so good and kind in
himself, as having planted this pleasant Garden of purpose for man, and
bestowed it freely on him, should deny him the use of any fruit therein: Or (if
it were true that he had so done) the indignity, that God should deal so
unkindly with man, as to plant trees of purpose to anger him, that he might
have that continually in his eye, which he might not enjoy: yea, and so far to
envy man's good, as to deny him the use of the fruit, which only had the virtue
to make him truly happy, and which he might as easily have given him as he had
made it: And beyond this, to deal so deceitfully with him, as to make show of
giving him much when in the mean time he had denied him that fruit, by which
only he might receive that true good which was proper to a man to make him
wise, as he tells him afterward, and that also wittingly, as well knowing the
great virtue of that fruit to that end.

Ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden] Every, is a word of ambiguous
signification, and may indifferently denote, either One, or Some, or All the
trees, so that we may understand them thus, Is any tree forbidden you? Or thus,
are there some trees denied unto you? Or thus, is every, that is, are all trees
of the Garden withheld from you? Thus begins Satan to treat warily and
cunningly with the Woman, discovering neither his malice against God, nor his
mischievous intention to man, at the first, but keeps himself aloof off. In the
first place, not so much affirming as enquiring; and next, proposing the terms
of this enquiry so ambiguously, that if he were challenged for dealing
maliciously with God, in questioning why he had forbidden man the eating of
some or of all the trees, whereas he had forbidden but one, he might answer;
that by every tree he meant no more, but any one tree, and yet the expression
might be such, as might point either at more, or at all, that thereby Satan
might further his end the better, in amplifying the restraint as much as might
be, as if God had withheld much, or in effect All, from man, that so the woman's
spirit might rise the more against it, as if that which God had granted were
inconsiderable, in comparison of that which was withheld.

Verse 2. And the woman said] That she feared not the Serpent we need not
wonder, seeing there was at that present no enmity amongst the creatures, and
therefore there could be no cause of fear, where was no appearance of danger.
But seeing the woman knew, that the Serpent could not be the Author, either of
the voice or discourse, how is it that she suspects not some fraud? for that
this could not be the voice of God must needs be evident unto her, because the
whole scope and frame of the discourse discovers the contrary. The Serpents
voice she must needs conclude it could not be, because she being created
perfect in wisdom like her husband, must needs understand, at least so much of
the creatures, as to know that beasts of themselves were not capable of speech
or reason If she guessed it to be Satan, and knew him to be an enemy; why does
she hazard her self upon a manifest danger, to entertain conference with one
that hated her? If she knew nothing of him or his disposition, how is it that
she opens her self so freely to a person unknown? The woman certainly
discovers some unadvisednesse, in entertaining conference with the Serpent, in
matters of so great importance, in so familiar a manner.

We eat of the Trees] The woman seems to be shaken, and to give ground at the
first encounter, as we may probably guess; Partly, by Satan's bold reply to
this answer of hers, wherein he charge God with falsehood in express terms,
which, in all likelihood he durst not have done, if the woman's own words had
not given him some encouragement thereunto, considering how warily he speaks of
God in his first question. Besides, we may discover it yet more apparently, in
the very form of the answer it self in these particulars.

First, when she mentions Gods grant unto them to eat of the trees of the
Garden, there she passes over Gods Name, as if she had no great mind to take
notice of his liberality, in bestowing on her so large a gift. But when she
mentions the restraint, there she remembers his name expressly, as if she meant
to take no more notice of God in his mercies, but only to quarrel at his
restraint and interdiction.

Secondly, when she recounts the grant of eating the rest of the fruits, she
speaks of it coldly, and without affection. For whereas God gave man liberty to
eat of all the trees of the Garden, and that freely and fully (as the
expression in the Original (Eating thou may eat) implies) she leaves out
both those clauses, and in a very sparing manner, only affirms, that they did
eat of the trees, and adds no more. But when she comes to mention the
restraint, that she lays down in the strictest terms that she can think on,
which supposes some rising of her spirit against it, if it be true, that men's
expressions are any indications of the affections within, for that the Holy
Ghost relates things partially, it were blasphemy to imagine. Wherefore, seeing
she sleights the grant, and sets out the restraint in so full a manner in her
words; we have reason to conclude, that she so thought both of the one and the
other in her heart, as she represents them in her speeches, having a low esteem
of Gods large liberality, in the grant of eating of all the trees, and grudging
at the interdiction from eating of that one. Besides we find, that upon Satan's
reply to this answer, the woman turns wholly away unto the creature, which she
could not do, unless she had first departed from God; which we may probably
conceive is described, or at the least intimated in this verse.

Which is in the midst of the Garden] By this answer it is evident, that this
phrase (in the midst) cannot be taken largely; for (within) as it is in some
other places of Scripture, (as namely, Genesis 41.48. that we render (in the
Cities) is in the Original (in the midst) of the Cities) but more properly and
distinctly, for the particular place in which that tree stood, seeing the woman
by this expression distinguishes it from the rest of the trees of the Garden.
This Midst here mentioned, we must understand within a certain latitude,
because the Tree of life is said in the former Chapter, verse 9. to be planted
in the midst of the Garden, near unto which it seems this tree was placed, and
was it which the woman meant in this place, because that only was the tree of
which she was forbidden to eat.

God has said] Whether she answers the Devil to that particular that he points
at in his question, whether she was sure that it was God that had forbidden the
eating of that tree (so that it is as if she had said, yea, it is God himself
that has forbidden, not only the eating, but the very touching of that fruit)
or whether she is moved to name God, not so much in satisfaction to Satan's
question, as out of a distaste of his strict interdiction, it is not much
material; Questionless, when she expressly mentions his name in the
restraint, and passes by it in the grant of all the rest of the trees in the
Garden, she cannot but be conceived to discover some unkind thought of God, of
whom she seems to take no notice at all in so free and large a grant, which if
she had valued as she ought, she might, and in justice ought to have cleared
God in this interdiction, acknowledging both the equity of God in interdicting
the use of one tree, when he had so freely granted them all the rest, and her
ready and willing submission thereunto, especially seeing also the whole Garden
was of Gods own planting, and therefore it was free for him to grant or
withhold what he pleased.

Neither shall ye touch it] Of this clause we find no mention in the relation
of the interdiction, recorded in the former Chapter, whether that clause was
left out by God in the delivery of that Law, or by Moses in recording of it, it
is uncertain. Howsoever, we may probably conceive, that if that clause was not
expressed in giving the Law, yet the woman might conceive it to be implied: But
admit she did, it was more then she needed to have added, in her answer to the
devils question, who enquires only of the restraint from eating, and not from
touching or handling; so that she may justly be conceived, in this voluntary
expressing of more then was demanded, to discover some discontent and
propension, to grudge and complain of Gods hard dealing with her and her
husband.

Lest ye die] Some add peradventure, and it is true, that that particle Pen,
in the Original signifies sometimes only the likelihood or possibility of an
uncertain Consequent. Take it how you will, it appears plainly, that the woman,
expressing the curse in a phrase so much different, and so much weaker then
that wherein God had delivered it, gives great cause of suspicion, that she
entertained not that sharp threatening of so heavy a judgment, with that fear
and trembling of heart that she ought, seeing she could not but speak of it, as
her heart was inwardly affected by it, and consequently discovers the
wavering of her heart, in not firmly believing that certain truth of Gods
judgment threatened in case of her transgression, of which she speaks so
slightly and doubtfully; whereby she gives encouragement to Satan in his reply,
to deny that flatly and peremptorily, which she believes so weakly; as being
assured by one assault more, wholly to overthrow that which began to totter
already.

Verse 4. And the Serpent said] Watching more diligently to catch something
from the woman's mouth, then ever Benhadads Messengers did from Ahabs, 1 Kings
20.33. And perceiving that the woman began now to stagger and give ground, he
renews his assault with the more violence, as we shall see by and by.

Ye shall not surely die] The forcible form of speech used by God which the
woman had omitted, Satan takes up, perhaps not without some derision; as if he
had said, yea, I know you are threatened death; certain death, yea, death in
the highest degree, if you will be such fools as to believe God. It must needs
then be granted, that Satan relating the curse more exactly according to the
form wherein it was delivered, then the woman had done, knew it well enough
beforehand, as being questionless present when God denounced it at first:
whereat we need not wonder, seeing we know how diligently he watches God in
all his ways, and his children in all his dispensations toward them, as
appears in the History of Job; which if Eve had well observed, she might have
had just cause to suspect Satan's dealing with her in enquiring of her, that
which he knew before hand as well as her self. And withal, it manifestly
discovers Satan's impudency in contradicting that, which he knew God had uttered
with his own mouth, and that to the woman her self, who had heard it as well
as he. But he well knew that he could now speak no more then the woman was
ready to believe. And besides, he takes the more liberty to deny that which God
had affirmed, because no man had hitherto by trial had experience of the
contrary by the execution of that curse which God had threatened: And therefore
seeing there was no means to convince him of falsehood, he takes the more
boldness to gain say that upon his word, which God had affirmed only upon his
Word: Hoping that his Nay might prevail as much with so favorable a hearer,
as Gods Yea could do, when there was no means to determine the point in
difference, but the credit of the persons that affirmed and denied.

Verse 5. But God does know] Whatsoever he speaks or affirms to the contrary.
This circumstance the devil urges with great probability (if the tree were
believed to have any such virtue) that God who made the tree could not be
ignorant of the nature of his own work; and enforces with great advantage for
the furthering of his main end, to take off man's heart from God, if it were
assented unto as true, for then God must be charged with two fearful evils. The
first of envy to man, to whom he so severely interdicted that which he knew to
be so beneficial unto him. The second, of notorious falsehood diverse ways.
First, in affirming that which he knew to be untrue. Next, in doing it in the
delivery of his Law, whereas Laws, above all things, ought to be Oracles of
Truth. Lastly, in casting this interdiction as a cloak over his envy to man,
pretending to be tender of his safety in forewarning him of a danger, when
indeed he used it (as he makes the woman believe,) as a scar-crow to deter
him from seeking his own good. These horrible blasphemies against God,
involved in this manner of Satan's contradicting his truth, we ought to observe
the more heedfully, that we may accordingly proportion and value the
heinousness of the sin of our first Parents, in assenting unto and believing
them, that we may the more justify God in the judgments inflicted on them.

That in that day] Alluding again to Gods threatening, that in the day wherein
they should eat of the fruit forbidden, they should die the death, and therein
not only contradicting God in every circumstance, but besides, as God by
threatening the speedy execution of the curse, deterrs man more effectually
from acting the sin; so Satan more strongly allures him to attempt it, by
promising a speedy reward. Besides, by this means he endeavors to gain some
credit to his words, because it would quickly be tried, whether he spoke truth
or no, and therefore it might seem incredible, that he would lie in that
wherein he might so speedily and certainly be disproved.

Your eyes shall be opened] An ambiguous speech, (as are all the rest of Satan's
Oracles) which proved true by lamentable experience (although in a far other
sense, then that wherein the devil desired to have it understood) which moves
the Holy Ghost to express the event afterward in the same phrase, affirming
that their eyes were opened indeed, but it was only to behold their own shame
and misery. Now in this expression, besides the representing of the benefit,
which the eating of this fruit would bring them, Satan charge God by the way,
that he had all this while kept man hood-winked, and thereby ignorant of those
things which he might, and which it concerned him to know. In the mean time,
Satan does that indeed, wherewith he charge God falsely and maliciously,
dazeling the eyes of our first Parents so much, with the brightness of that
glorious condition unto which he promises to advance them, that they oversaw
and took no notice of that large measure of wisdom and knowledge, wherewith
God had already enriched their minds in all things that it concerned them to
know, and thereby so blinded them in this action, that they understood not what
they went about till they were utterly undone, like the Syrians whom Elisha
led, that knew not whither they went, till they found themselves in the midst
of Samaria, 2 Kings 6.20.

And ye shall be as Gods] Or Princes, or Angels, as the same word sometimes
signifies. Thus having represented unto them the benefit that they should
receive by rebelling against God, he now enlarges it by laying before them a
pattern of their happiness, wherein they should equal even God himself, and
by this enflames their hearts and distempers them. It may be withal, that he
conveighs into the woman's mind some ground of hope of attaining to this
glorious condition, seeing they saw a pattern of it in God himself, and
therefore might hope that it was possible to be enjoyed. It is out of question,
that he casts into her thoughts of discontent against God, by representing
their condition so far below that which it might have been (as he persuades the
woman to believe) joined with much unthankfulness for that which she had
received already at Gods hand (the creating of him after Gods own Image,
sovereignty over the rest of the creatures, the planting and free bestowing of
that pleasant Garden, with all the fruits thereof, and the inheritance of the
whole world) with a desire to rise higher, that she might be a match unto God
himself.

Knowing good and evil] Whether he alludes to the name given to that tree,
given by God himself, it is not certain; if he do, it is to strengthen what he
had before affirmed, that God knew well enough the virtue of that tree, as
appears in the very name which he had given it; The Promise it self which Satan
makes is frivolous, if it be duly weighed. Good they knew already, and what
could they gain by the knowledge of evil, wherewith they had naught to do?

We have then here laid before us in brief, that temptation by which Satan
foiled, and without Gods infinite mercy had for ever ruined our first Parents,
with their posterity, as will appear in the sequel, and it is by Moses only
briefly pointed at, and not displayed at large, and is therefore by us to be
scanned and searched into the more exactly: Partly, because it nearly concerns
us to know the means, by which all those evils, under which all mankind
labors unto this day, came first into the world, especially, seeing those
Engines, wherewith Satan assaulted our first Parents, are the patterns
according to which all the rest are forged, wherewith he fights against us
continually, even to this day: And partly, because we may be assured that this
temptation was the Devils masterpiece, wherein it concerned him to make use of
the depth of his policies, as having to encounter an adversary; First, made
perfect in wisdom and holiness, and withal filled with Gods love, kindled and
confirmed by so many fresh experiments of his superabundant favors and
mercies, and now walking in a course of perfect obedience. Secondly, Satan was
to encounter him merely with his own strength assisted neither by lusts within;
nor by any allurements, or other instruments without. Thirdly, he had to deal
in a matter of great difficulty, namely, to set man against that God that had
made him, and had compassed him with infinite variety of blessings, but never
provoked him by the least discourtesie. Nay, against that God upon whom his
happiness still depended, and who was able easily to destroy him, by the same
power by which he had created him, or make him as miserable as he had made him
happy. Fourthly, he was to attempt a matter of infinite consequence, upon the
good or ill success whereof depended the happiness or utter destruction of
all mankind, the weakening of Gods Kingdom, and the advancing and enlarging
of the Kingdom of Satan. And lastly, he was to adventure upon an enterprise,
to be carried through at this present assault, or not at all. For if Adam had
stood the first brunt, and by use and experience been settled and confirmed in
that state of Innocence and Holiness, wherein he then stood, having once
discovered Satan's nature and scope, he had afterward, in all probability been
attempted in vain. It will therefore be of good use, to take in sunder this
dangerous engine, and to consider the several parts of which it is composed,
and the Art wherewith it is framed, and to that end to take notice of,

1. The drift and scope which Satan chiefly aimed at in this assault. 2. The
cunning managing and applying of the means subordinate to that end.
Of Satan's end and scope in this temptation.
It cannot be questioned, but that Satan, being according to his name, an Hater
both of God and man, aimed both at Gods dishonor, and at man's overthrow, in
this attempt of his, and well understanding that man's adherence unto God was
the means both of his glorifying God (whose alsufficient goodness he sealed
unto by faith, and whose absolute Sovereignty, Righteousness and Holiness he
testified by his obedience to his Will) and of making himself happy by drawing
from God All-sufficient, supplies of good both inward and outward, temporal and
eternal. I say, it cannot be doubted, but that Satan's main endeavor was to
take off and sever man's heart from God, and cutting in sunder those two bands
of faith and obedience by which he adhered unto God, to draw him away to
infidelity and rebellion against his own Lord and Master.

In subordination to this end, the devils first task was to undermine, and
overthrow the very foundations upon which faith and obedience are built, which
are these two. First, a persuasion of Gods All Sufficiency and love to man,
both of them manifested by experience, in a great part, and farther made up in
his gracious and faithful Promises. Secondly, the impression of the fear and
terror of Gods wrath and indignation, grounded upon the apprehension of his
Holiness and Power, testified sufficiently by his threatenings against the
transgressors of his Law: Therefore we shall find, that in this temptation
Satan lays his first battery against the persuasion of Gods goodness and
kindness to man, which he endeavors to discredit, and make man doubt of, by
all the ways and means he can.

The next attempt of Satan, is to take off from man the impression of Gods
fear, wrought upon his heart by the denunciation of that fearful curse,
threatened in case of the transgression of Gods Commandment: To lessen and take
off the terror whereof, Satan opposes and contradicts the truth of that Word,
on the faithfulness whereof the terror of that curse depended, that so man
might have no cause to cleave unto that God, that meant him no good, nor was
likely to do him any harm.

To set man loose from God was but one part of Satan's aim, but because, though
he might fall off from God in a discontented humor; yet upon better advice,
experience might show him, that it would be needful to close with God again,
therefore to make an utter and perpetual divorce between God and man, the devil
makes use here of the same policy, that he put afterward into Jeroboams head,
for the securing of the Kingdom of the ten tribes to himself and his
posterity, which was to keep them from going up to Jerusalem, according to Gods
Ordinance, (which might in time unite them to the Kingdom of Judah again) and
for that end to set up two calves in Dan and Bethel, so Satan in this place
sets before man other gods to cleave unto, that when he was once loose from
God, he might never entertain thoughts of returning to him again. For which
cause he proposes unto him; First, for his scope, the seeking of his own good,
in stead of advancing Gods honor. Secondly, dependence upon the creature, as
the means of procuring that good unto himself, which he sought after, instead
of resting and depending upon God alone, as the only fountain of all his
happiness.

Now because the lessening of Gods credit with man, (by which both the opinion
of his goodness, and the terror of his wrath might be weakened) was so
necessary for the compassing of Satan's end, that except that were done, all his
labor had been lost, in endeavoring to take off man's heart from cleaving unto
God: And because the effects of Gods kindness and love to man, were so evident
that they could not be denied, therefore there was no way left to Satan, but to
cast jealousies into man's mind of Gods intentions, in all that he had done for
him: and because there was no other way to hinder man's believing of that, which
God had so expressly and directly threatened, but flatly to contradict and deny
that God meant what he spoke, seeing the jealousies of Gods intentions, both in
his blessings bestowed, and in his judgment threatened, (must needs have all
their force from the credit of him that presented them) we shall therefore
find, that Satan makes use of all his Art to win credit to himself, in all
his treaties with the woman, which if he could once effect, he saw an easy way
to weaken the credit of God so far with man, that he should make no great
Account thenceforth, either of his blessings, or of the threatening of his
judgments.

Of the means by which Satan endeavored to move Eve, to question and doubt of
Gods love and kindness to man, manifested in so many real blessings bestowed
on him.
The first policy of Satan in this particular, was in making choice of that
special blessing of Paradise, so lately bestowed, as yielding unto him the
fairest color of cavil against it. For against the Creation of man after Gods
image, the forming of the woman, and bestowing her on him for his help, and
giving unto them both the Lordship over all the creatures, there could lie no
color of exception at all, because there was in none of those any reservation
or restraint laid upon man. Only in Paradise there was the fruit of one tree
reserved, from the eating whereof man was restrained, this was a fit occasion
of raising a ground of jealousy, what might be the cause of that restraint,
and what God might intend thereby.

Secondly, Satan discovers the depth of his policy, in managing this cavil,
raised against God upon this occasion to his best advantage. For, whereas it
was so evident, that God had both planted Paradise, and bestowed it on man, and
that the Garden was pleasantly seated, and richly furnished with all variety of
the choicest fruits, that none of those particulars could be denied; these
things being so manifest in themselves, the devil never questions, and yet when
he could not deny so great a blessing, he labors to abase the worth and
estimation of it in two respects.

First, he insists upon the restraint, that God had bestowed this gift with a
limitation, whereas true bounty is most commended in this, that it is every way
free and entire, this is an exception that carries with it some show of truth,
as we shall see hereafter.

Secondly, beyond this, Satan abaseth this gift by way of comparison,
pretending (most maliciously and falsely) that although God made show of giving
much, yet in true estimation, all that he had given was of small value, in
comparison of that which he had withheld. For, when he persuades the woman to
eat of that fruit, although forbidden, for the singular virtue which it had to
open the eyes, he must necessarily imply, that no other tree in the Garden had
this virtue, but that a lone. Otherwise, the woman might have replied, that
other fruits might have the same virtue, and consequently, that she had no
reason to hazard her self upon Gods displeasure by breaking his Commandment,
when she might have the same benefit without any such danger another way; so
that we must necessarily suppose, that when Satan affirms that this tree had
that virtue, and that therefore she must not be deterred from eating of it, by
Gods interdiction, that he implies, that this tree which they were forbidden to
eat had a virtue, that no other tree in Paradise had besides. And further,
expressing what that virtue was, namely, that it would make one wise, and
furnish him with such excellent knowledge, as would advance him near to the
state of a God, he does in effect imply, that the rest of the trees of the
Garden, whereof God has given man liberty to take, were but of vulgar and
common use, little better then the food which he had allowed unto beasts, fit
to sustain only the body, the baser part of man, but this tree had a virtue,
not only to sustain, but to enrich and adorn the soul, the more excellent part
of man, and that also in the most eminent faculty thereof, by which he excelled
all other creatures, Wisdom and Understanding. Other fruits might sustein men
in the condition in which now they were, but this would raise them above the
condition of a man, and make them in a sort matches with God himself.
Wherefore seeing this tree was of such inestimable worth, and the rest of the
fruits only of vulgar and baser use, Satan leaves it to the woman to infer
thereupon, that Gods seeming bounty to man was of little worth, if his gifts
were compared with that which he might have bestowed on him, if he had been so
kind to man, as he pretended and made show to be. Now Satan in supposing this
tree to have in it such an inestimable value, had this advantage, that in that
which he affirmed, it was impossible for him to be disproved, if he were not
believed, seeing there had never been any experiment made of it hitherto, as
indeed there could not be, without breach of Gods Commandment, which Satan
labored to draw man unto.

Satan's third means, by which he labors to raise jealousies against God in
the woman's mind, was in questioning his affection and intentions toward the
man and woman, which he insinuates to Eve, she had just cause to doubt of, nay
further, that she had great reason to suspect, that they were not sincere and
upright toward her, what show soever was made to the contrary. Not only
because God had given her only things of no great worth, in true estimation,
but had detained from her that which was of true worth indeed, whereas true
love imparts things of the greatest and highest value; but besides, in diverse
other respects.

First, that God had not only withheld that fruit from man for the present, but
under a fearful penalty debarred him the use of it for ever; now it was not
probable, that if the fruit of that tree had not been of greater worth then the
rest of the fruits of the Garden, that God would have threatened such a fearful
judgment for transgressing in a trifle.

Secondly, the virtue of this fruit was known unto God well enough, seeing he
had made it, and therefore must needs know what virtue himself had given it.
Consequently, it argued an ill affection and envious disposition toward man,
to withhold from him a fruit that might have been so beneficial unto him,
wittingly, and therefore of set purpose.

Thirdly, this envy in God of man's good and happiness, was manifested so much
the more in this, that if God had allowed man the eating of that fruit, which
he had interdicted, himself had lost nothing by it; for although man had been
advanced to an higher condition, yet God should have held his place, and
continued a God still. Now for one to hinder another good, in that wherein
himself should sustain no prejudice, must needs argue an evil and envious
disposition in that person.

Lastly, Satan alleging that the fruit of this tree, and this only had power
to open the eyes, and to make one wise, implies, that man being forbidden the
use of it, was to be led on, and pass his days in ^gnorance and blindness, in
a base condition unworthy of a man, who might (unless Gods interdiction had
hindered it) have been little less then a God. In raising those jealousies in
man's mind against God, grounded upon his secret intentions, Satan had great
advantage, it being impossible that he should be disproved, (seeing intentions
are secret, and not easily discovered) and therefore was not without hope to be
believed.

Of the cunning insinuations, by which Satan endeavors to win credit and a
good opinion of himself with the woman.
To breed in the woman's mind a good opinion of himself, that these suggestions
might make the deeper impression upon her heart, the devil so manageth his
whole discourse with her, that she might conceive and be persuaded, that all
the advice which he gives her, proceeded merely out of his love and good
affection toward her and her husband, whereof he seems to give some taste
diverse ways.

First, by tendering his advice freely and unrequested, which might seem to
proceed out of more then an ordinary care and desire of man's good.

Secondly, by expressing himself in such terms in the first question which he
proposes that may seem to proceed from some kind of indignation within at
this restraint which God had laid upon man, as if he were much affected
inwardly to see so excellent a creature kept under, and held in ignorance, as
it were, in a kind of bondage, and (to man) the worst kind of bondage, and
detained in a mean and low estate, being restrained from the only means that
might advance him higher, and that merely to satisfy Gods Will, who should
lose nothing thereby.

Thirdly, he seems to command his love to man by making show of much
forwardness, by directing him to the best means, for the attaining to his own
happiness by raising himself unto an higher condition, to become a match even
unto God himself. Thus in laying our baits we usually make show of providing
for those creatures, which we intend to ensnare and devour. Nay, he makes show
of seeking man's good, even in that which God had denied him, so that he
pretends to the woman to be a greater furtherer of man's happiness then God
himself.

Secondly, lest the woman might doubt whether the Serpents pretended love were
sincere and hearty, to make it appear, that this affection of his was real and
cordial, (as it concerned him to do, if he meant to have his Counsel followed,
seeing no man usually receives advice, or is persuaded by any person, of whose
sincerity and true affection toward him he has any cause to doubt) Satan
first traduceth God himself, for dealing unfaithfully with man, and beguiling
him by a false show of liberality, when in the mean time he withheld from him
the only means which might make him truly happy, under a severe interdiction,
and threatening the penalty of death if he meddled with it. Now commonly, either
men are indeed, or at least desire to be thought free from those evils, which
they charge upon other men. Again, we do not manifest the sincerity of our
affection toward others, in any thing more then in our careful endeavors to
prevent other men's impostures, who seek to beguile others, by discovering unto
them the snares that are laid for them, or injuries that are done unto them,
which good office the devil comes to perform unto the woman in this place.

Secondly, to make yet the fairer show of the sincerity of his affection to
man, the devil proposes such a good unto the woman, as seems merely to have
relation to her only, without any manner of respect unto himself, who gives
the advice, for what advantage might the woman probably conceive that Satan
might make unto himself, if the woman should be as God?

Thirdly, to approve his sincerity yet the more in this particular, he charge
God in effect with the contrary practice. For to say, that God interdicted to
man the eating of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, because it would
make him as God, is in effect to say, that he withheld this tree from man for
his own advantage, namely, that he might excel alone, and that none might share
with him in his honor. So then, if God manifested his insincerity to man in
denying and withholding from him that which might do him most good, then does
Satan approve the sincerity and uprightness of his heart toward man, in
showing him the way to attain that happiness, without any respect at all to
his own advantage.

The third thing by which Satan labors to win credit to himself, is, by
endeavoring to gain the reputation of wisdom, an ability absolutely necessary
to any person that takes upon him to give advice to another: the opinion
whereof prevails much with him that is advised, to give ear unto the counsel
that is given him. Now it is no marvel, if Satan made show of wisdom and much
knowledge, if we consider what a large measure of understanding is yet left in
those damned spirits, even since their fall, though it be exceedingly empaired
thereby. Now it could not but breed in the woman a great opinion of Satan's
wisdom, and extraordinary knowledge, when she hears him speak of things
altogether unknown to her, as namely of evil, of which she had never heard
before, but much more when he comes to set out that hidden virtue of the tree,
and that strange property which he affirmed it had to make one wise like a God:
But above all this, when he seems to dive so subtlely and deeply into Gods
secret counsels, and to discover so strangely his very thoughts and intentions,
and to lay open all his secret drifts and policies, which Solomon affirms to
be a mark of a man of great wisdom and prudence, Prove. 20.5.

Of Satan's third practice, his endeavoring to take away from the woman the
terror of the Curse threatened by God if she brake his Commandment.
By abasing and lessening of the value of the gift which God had bestowed upon
man, in planting for him, and bestowing freely on him that Garden of delights,
and thereby weakening the opinion that she had conceived of Gods love, so
largely expressed in that great gift, it cannot be questioned but Satan had
well nigh loosed the strongest band, by which her heart was knit unto God.
There remained yet behind another cord, which might withhold her from a total
Apostasy from him, namely, the terror of that fearful curse, which God had
threatened to lay upon man, if he should transgress his Commandment, which the
devil finding no means to loose and untie, makes no more ado, but cuts it
quite in sunder. That God himself had denounced this curse, was so evident,
that it could not be denied, Eve herself (as it is most probable) or at least
her husband had heard it from his own mouth of the sense of the words there
could be as little question, they were so plainly and perspicuously delivered,
that they admitted no doubtful construction. As impossible it was to question
Gods Power to execute and inflict that curse which he had denounced: It must
needs be granted, that he who had given life could much more easily take it
away at his pleasure: wherefore there was no other way left unto Satan, but to
affirm boldly, that God never intended to execute what he had threatened, but
that he gave that terrible threatening only in policy for another end of his
own. Now to make this seem the more probable to the woman, Satan lays before
her these two grounds, which the woman might probably conceive to be manifest
truths.

First, he confidently affirms, that God very well knew that the fruit of that
tree had no power to work any such effect, as to kill those that should eat
it. Nay, on the contrary, that he knew (as well he might, seeing he that made
the tree could not be ignorant of the virtue which he had given it) that this
tree and the fruit thereof had a far other operation, that in stead of
killing and destroying, it had a wonderful virtue, to do good to such as should
eat of it, yea, to bring them the greatest good of which man was capable, even
wisdom and understanding, such as might make them matches to God himself.

Secondly, he suggests, that although God knew this, yet it was no marvel
though he concealed it, and to that end threatened them with death, if they
adventured to taste of the fruit of that tree; as well knowing, that if man by
eating thereof attained to such a measure of wisdom, he would become in a sort
Gods equal, who should thereby lose that honor in which he so much gloried of
excelling alone. Thus he tells Eve in effect, that God did but delude them with
a feigned terror, and that also merely in policy, out of an ambitious desire
to preserve his own glory of excelling alone, for which end it was that he kept
under all his creatures, as it were, in a kind of bondage and base subjection.

These two strange assertions the devil lays down with great confidence, being
such as although they were not easy to be contradicted upon any manifest
evidence, yet were impossible to be proved by any convincing argument.
Wherefore (after his usual custom) putting on a bold face, he supports them
merely by his own confident Assertion, affirming not only that it was true
which he had informed, but that God himself knew it to be true, laying his own
credit to pawn for the justifying of what he had spoken, and offering it to be
tried by experience, and that out of hand. One day, he tells the woman, would
evidently by proof make good all that he had affirmed. By these weak
suggestions, having no ground to support them but only the credit of a liars
word, Satan having now engaged the woman's affections, easily removes from her
heart the fear of Gods just indignation, which the apprehension of that
terrible curse, threatened by the Lord himself with his own mouth, had settled
in her heart before.

Of Satan's fourth practice to fasten man's heart to dependence upon the
creature, after he had drawn it away from God.
That it concerned Satan, if he intended to hold on man in a resolved Apostasy
from God, to fasten him to a dependence upon the creature, that he might have
no cause to look back unto God any more, has in part been intimated
heretofore: That truth is founded upon this an unquestionable maxim, that no
creature (nor consequently man) has sufficiency in and of it self, and
consequently being naturally carried on by a constant desire after its own
good, cannot possibly be at rest, till it meet with some means from which it
may receive a supply of that which it wants in it self. Man therefore being a
reasonable creature, (and consequently, by the benefit of his understanding,
sensible of his inability to subsist of himself) by a principle which God has
planted in nature, must of necessity put forth his desires after something out
of himself to lean unto, from which he may have his wants supplied, and when he
has found it to adhere unto, and depend upon it. Now then Satan, having
already persuaded the woman that God did but delude her, and meant her no good,
and therefore was not any further to be depended on, especially for that good
which she now wanted, and which was most proper to her nature, the knowledge of
good and evil, the means of attaining whereof he had interdicted her, under a
fearful curse. In the next place, takes upon him to discover to the woman
another, and that a more easy and certain means of furnishing her self with
that which God held and kept from her, and thereby raising her self to a more
excellent condition then that which God had bestowed upon her. This (says he)
the fruit of that tree which you are forbidden to touch (as you say) will
furnish you withal.

Thus Satan deals with Eve, as subtle men use to do when they intend to break
off a treaty of marriage; they set another match on foot rather: as those that
endeavor to draw away a man's heart from his own wife, they entangle him in the
love of a strange woman. Withal, Satan well knew, that man's dependence upon
God, necessarily drew on these two things.

First, an absolute subjection to his Will in all things.

Secondly, the referring and carrying on of all things to his glory. Here
again, Satan takes hold of another advantage. To be guided wholly by the Will
of another, and to lay aside his own will and desires, and to refer all to the
honor and glory of another, might seem to be an heavy yoke, and such as in all
probability man would be very willing to shake off, if he might: wherefore
Satan offers unto man to take his own will for his rule to guide himself, and
to make his own good the end and scope of all his actions. If this were
hearkened unto, as it was very probable it would, then was man's Apostasy from
God unto the creature (as it is described to be) total and absolute to himself
(being a creature) as his own end, and to other creatures as the means on
which he might depend to supply him in what he needed.

Satan's first task, namely, to take off man's heart from subjecting it self,
and all the desires thereof to the Will of God, and aiming at, and carrying on
all his actions and endeavors to his glory (supposing his heart to be already
fallen off from God, and any dependence on him) seems to be an easy work.
Indeed if the motion had been to propose unto him another Lord, it would have
sounded very harshly. As good or better continue his service under his old
Master, then subject himself and stoop to a new. But to be subject to no Lord
at all, and to be every way absolute of himself and free altogether, was an
offer, not only fair and plausible, but at the first view seems to carry with
it some show of justice and equity. For supposing God to be removed out of the
way, then was man the most eminent of all visible creatures, and consequently,
fit to govern himself according to his own will, and to be the scope of his own
endeavors in seeking his own good. Besides, that natural self-love which God
had planted in all men's hearts, by which he is stirred up to use all means for
the attaining to his own chiefest good, and is not only allowable, but a duty
too, if it be done within due bounds and limitations taken from our
subordination to God, and respect to community, when those respects unto God
were removed, must necessarily carry on man to a total and absolute
self-seeking, without any limitation or further respect at all. Now that this
was Satan's policy, to move man to take it on him to be his own Lord, appears
evidently, partly by his advice to eat of that tree though it were forbidden,
which was in effect to guide himself by his own Appetite, and not by his
Makers Will, and partly, by the inducement upon which he endeavors to persuade
him to embrace that counsel, because it would make him a God; as if his own
advancement were the main end to which he should bend all his endeavors. And
how easily he prevailed upon our first Parents by this policy, the lamentable
event which immediately followed, sufficiently discovered, the advice being
embraced and assented unto as soon as it was tendered, and well nigh as soon
put in execution as it was embraced.

Satan having prevailed upon our first Parents by this suggestion, had now
gained what he desired. For first, God was (as much as lay in the creature) put
out of his Sovereignty over the chief work of his hands.

Secondly, Satan himself in effect possessed that Sovereignty of which God was
deprived. For we shall find, that howsoever the devil tenders unto Adam the
title of becoming his own lord, yet in effect it was himself that bore all the
sway, whose counsel and advice wholly ruled man from thence forward, who was
now overruled by such vile lusts, as Satan stirred up, and raised, and
continually cherished in his heart, as to this day, we know wicked men in
giving up themselves to their own lusts, are said to walk after him, Ephesians. 2.2.
to do his lusts or his will, John 8.44. and so to be carried, and held, and led
captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

The devil then having prevailed upon man, so far as to renounce his obedience
to God, and to set up his own will to be his rule to guide him; In the next
place, (because man had no ground to expect any good from that God whom he
refused to serve) finds out, and proposes unto him another means of
subsisting and obtaining what he desired without God, by the help of the
creature; Assuring the woman that the fruit of that forbidden tree would
furnish her with as great a measure of wisdom as she could desire, even
sufficient to make her a match to God himself, which was far greater then that
which was already given her by God. That forbidden fruit Satan pitcheth upon
above all other baits, for diverse reasons.

First, it is most probable that Eve had tasted of diverse of the fruits of the
Garden, in which she had found no extraordinary virtue, but only that they were
pleasant to the taste, and good for food. This fruit had never yet been tasted,
and therefore might have in it such a secret virtue as Satan had discovered to
the woman, for ought she knew to the contrary, having never tried it.

Again, that it was a fruit of more then ordinary worth it seemed very
probable, because it was so precisely interdicted, and that under so fearful a
curse, which was no less then death, yea, all kinds of death; now it might
seem improbable that God would destroy man, the most excellent of all his
creatures for a trifle, consequently, that fruit might be presumed to have some
extraordinary worth in it, seeing the eating thereof deserved so great a
penalty.

Thirdly, Satan might conceive, that the very interdiction of that fruit might
quicken the woman's desire after it, if for no other reason, yet because it was
forbidden.

Lastly, the fruit was at hand, and a fruit desirable for the goodness for
food, and pleasantness to the eye, and if the woman could once be brought to
taste of it, he was sure enough that it must necessarily bring utter
destruction on her self and her posterity, which was all his aim.

A consideration of Satan's great Art, and deep policy in managing this
temptation.
The first slight of Satan in this temptation, was in the choice of a fit
opportunity to assault the woman to his best advantage.

First, he sets upon her before use and practice had confirmed and settled her
heart in the fear and love of God.

Secondly, he takes her alone (as it seems most probable) severed at that time
from her husband, who otherwise by his counsel, might have advised her and
strengthened her against the temptation.

Thirdly, in deferring the assault until the woman came within the view of the
fruit forbidden, that by the means of that pleasant outward object, her
affections might be moved being at hand, that so he might both strengthen the
temptation the more, and press it on with greater violence, having the help of
her outward senses delighted with the view of such an alluring object to blind
her eyes, and thereby pervert her judgment; and withal, that the fruit being
so near, that she might presently put forth her hand and take it, and so might
in an instant be drawn to act what she had consented unto, that so there might
be no place left for further deliberation, upon which many times men alter
their resolution.

A second policy of Satan may be discovered, in his wary proceeding in this
temptation, wherein he comes on by degrees to his intended purpose.

First, assaying the woman's constancy by a question of enquiry, before he spoke
any thing positively and affirmatively. And this question too he proposes,
partly, by way of admiration, as wondering that God should do such a thing as
to lay a restraint upon man in the midst of his pleasures in the place of his
continual abode, considering that he had been so free unto him in all the rest
of his gifts, partly, by way of doubting: as if he had said, Is it true indeed?
Are you sure of it: What, that it is God that has said so? What, concerning
the Trees of the Garden, that you shall not eat of them being ordained for
meat? Lastly, by way of indignation, if it should be so in this manner: Is it
possible,

First, that God should plant a Garden for you, and deny you to eat the fruits
of it.

Secondly, that God should set them full in your eye, to vex you the more by
beholding daily that which you may not taste or meddle withal?

Thirdly, if the fruit forbidden you be no better then other fruits, that God
should stick with you for trifles? If this fruit be of any rare virtue above
the rest, that he should grant you the worst, and deny you the best? These
several glaunces the devil may be conceived to cast out in this general and
captious question, conveighing therein so many several baits to attempt the
woman's mind, that she might taste either the one or the other, and be ensnared
on which soever she fastened.

A third dangerous slight of Satan, was the concealing of the scope and end at
which he aimed, which was to draw man into rebellion against God, whereof at
the first he gives not the least intimation.

For in his first question, he seems only to enquire of the truth of the
pretended interdiction, advising the woman to consider whether she were not
mistaken, at least, in some circumstance or other.

Secondly, when he saw the woman's mind to be affected with some kind of
discontent against God, he foments it rather by secret insinuations, which
might reflect upon God at the second hand, then by plain and direct
calumniations.

Thirdly, in his advice he seems not so much to dissuade them from God, as to
persuade them to seek their own good, proposing to them only the means of
advancing their own estate, without touching upon God any way in outward
appearance. For man's advancement could not be conceived at the first view to be
any detraction from God, who should retain his own honor, though man should
come a step nearer to him by attaining the knowledge of good and evil.

Satan's fourth strain of wit was in the choice of that bait, by which be drew
the woman to the breach of Gods Commandment, namely, the hope of gaining
knowledge, which the heart of the prudent gets, Prove. 18.15. as well
understanding, that it is not good that the heart be without knowledge, Prove.
19.2. so that a thing so agreeable to man's nature in the improving of that
ability by which he excelled all other creatures, and draws nearest unto God
in, could not but move the woman's affections exceedingly, especially
considering that great measure of knowledge which she enjoyed in the state of
her innocence, which could not choose but quicken her with an earnest desire to
increase it further, as indeed it was her duty to endeavor to abound therein,
or at least to confirm that knowledge which she had by use and experience. We
may likewise conceive that our first Parents had some knowledge of that future
estate, unto which they were to be advanced, when they should no more behold
God in the dim glass of the creatures, as now they did, but should see him
face to face, and know him as they were known. All these considerations laid
together might prevail much with the woman, to make use of the means proposed
by Satan to increase her knowledge,

In the fifth place, it was Satan's special care to represent unto the woman,
this means of gaining the knowledge of good and evil in the most alluring way
that he could possibly devise. For whereas there are three things especially
that encourage men to the use and effectual pursuing of any means that may
further them to the attaining of a desired end proposed unto them;

First, that they are easily procured.

Secondly, that they are delight some in the use of them.

Thirdly, that they are of great efficacy, and speedy in operation: Of all
these Satan makes show in persuading the woman to the eating of this forbidden
fruit for the gaining of the knowledge of good and evil.

For first, what could be more easy then to pluck from a tree that stood full
in her way?

Next, what could be more delightful then to eat of a fruit so grateful to the
taste, and beautiful to the eye, as that fruit appeared to be to the woman, as
we shall see anon?

Lastly, there could be nothing more speedy or effectual in operation then this
fruit, which should produce the desired effect the same day that it was taken,
as Satan makes the woman believe. All these allurements the devil lays before
her, and how he prevails by them we shall see.

Satan's sixth policy in beguiling the woman, was in the choice of the kind of
the sin to which he tempts her; which if it had appeared to be some sin against
the Law of Nature, such are blasphemy against God, lying etc. Satan might have
found it an hard task, to carry her against the principles of nature, so
firmly planted in her heart: wherefore he makes choice of such a Law, as was
no Law of Nature, but merely positive, prescribed only by Gods Will, to tempt
her to the breach of that Law, which nothing but pure obedience to God will
bound her to observe. As for the Act it self,

First, it was a matter of no value in which she should offend, being only the
eating of the fruit of one of the Trees of the Garden. A consideration which
occasions so much slighting of sin in many profane hearts to this day.

Secondly, the scope of the action seemed to be only man's good, without any
wronging of God at all (who might be conceived to lose nothing by man's gain,)
or the creature which was ordained to be eaten.

Thirdly, it was an offense unto which they were not carried by any rebellious
inclination of their own hearts, but unto which they were directed, by the
advice and counsel of one that pretended, and they were persuaded was their
friend, which also both the man and the woman allege in their own defense
afterward, when God charge them with this sin.

Lastly, if the devils suggestion had been true (that God knew that the fruit
of that tree had such a virtue that it would open their eyes) it might seem to
them to be an action unto which God himself invited them, howsoever he had in
express terms forbidden it. For why should he give such a virtue to that tree
to make one wise to know good and evil, if it might not be used to that end?
and by whom, if not by man, who was only capable of such knowledge?

Seventhly, in the choice of his arguments to move and persuade the woman to
eat of this forbidden fruit, Satan makes use of the depth of his cunning and
policy, which we may easily discover in three particulars.

First, in grounding all his arguments upon such foundations, as being not
manifest and apparent in themselves, might the more safely be supposed, because
they could not by any clear evidence be disproved.

Secondly, in producing arguments grounded upon some color of truth, but those
grossly mistaken and misapplied.

Thirdly, in pressing all arguments that might make for the furthering of his
motion, and concealing all that might make against it.

First, then he urges two arguments grounded upon mere suppositions, of such
things as being secret in themselves, and not mani^^^ted by any outward effect,
were therefore impossible to be disproved, which suppositions he also fortifies
with such fair probabilities, as might make them carry at least some show of
truth.

As first, he supposes that the fruit forbidden had a secret virtue, to make
one wise, like a God, to know good and evil: who could disprove this, seeing
none had ever tried it? That it might hae such a virtue

First, the name given it by God himself, might seem to imply, for why was it
called the tree of knowledge of good and evil, if it had not some virtue to
give that knowledge?

Secondly, the interdiction of the eating of that fruit, under so grievous a
penalty seems to imply as much, else why should God forbid man the use of that
fruit, when he granted him all the rest of the fruits of the Garden, if there
were not some virtue in this, that the other fruits had not? or, how could it
stand with Gods justice to lay so heavy a penalty for the eating of this fruit,
if it were of vulgar and common use?

Lastly, God may perhaps be conceived in policy to conceal the virtue of this
fruit from man, lest he despising the interdiction, eating of the fruit
forbidden, and thereby becoming wise as God, he might share with him in his
honor, and so God might lose the glory of excelling alone.

Satan's second argument of this kind, is grounded upon the suppofition of Gods
secret ill affection toward man, which if Satan suggested, who could disprove
it? for who could discover the secrets of his heart, which can be known to none
but himself alone? That God was enviously affected toward man, there seemed to
be these probabilities.

First, he had planted a Garden for man, and denied him some of the fruits of
it.

Secondly, that fruit which he had denied him, was only of true worth and
value, and fit for an understanding creature, whereas that which God had given
him was of little worth, only food for the body, which he had allowed to the
very beasts.

Thirdly, he implies that God must do this wittingly, seeing he that had made
the tree, could not be ignorant of the virtue which himself had given it.

Fourthly, he supposes, that God could have no other end in interdicting unto
man the use of this fruit, but only to keep him under in a state of vassalage,
destitute of that knowledge of which he was capable, that himself might excel
alone. With these plausible suppositions the devil strengthens his arguments to
draw man on into rebellion against his Lord.

In the next place, Satan grounds his argument upon such things as carry with
them some show of truth, but those he wrests and misapplies cunningly and
deceitfully, to fit them to his own purpose.

As first, he suggests, or at least would have it supposed, that limitations
and restraints are a kind of bondage. This position has in it some truth, if
it be duly limited in every respect.

First, in relation to the persons. Restraints upon free men, that have just
title to liberty are slaveries: but applied to men in respect of God, whose
creatures they are, it is most false, for no creature can be free from
subjection to him that made him.

Secondly, that position must be limited in respect of things from which we are
restrained: restraints from necessary or profitable things impose a kind of
bondage; but restraints from hurtful or needless things (such as this tree
was) are rather profitable directions, then any abridgement of lawful liberty.

Again, it is unreasonable that man, who was created an understanding creature,
capable of knowledge, should be kept in blindness and ignorance: this has
some truth in it, if we confine it only to things fit to be known; but to be
ignorant of unnecessary things is an ease, to be ignorant of hurtful things is
safety.

Thirdly, it is lawful for any man to seek his own good: It is true, if we
restrain it to a good proportion, able to ones state and condition, (that is
really good to him) and besides, if it may be obtained by lawful means. But
this good which Satan persuades Eve to seek after, was neither fit for Adams
present condition, nor to be obtained by any other means then by breaking of
Gods Commandment.

Fourthly, one ought not to hinder another good for his own advantage (as
Satan charge God to deal with man in this particular case,) is a true rule
between the creature, who owes to another this duty of seeking one another
good. But it is utterly false if it be applied to God, who having (as
warrantably he might,) made all things for himself, might justly limit the
good of all that he had made by due respects unto his own glory.

Lastly, it is not lawful to seek to excel alone: it is true, applied to the
creature; but extended unto God, is false and prodigiously blasphemous; who if
he should cease to excel alone, must cease to be a God.

Thirdly, Satan's last slight in urging his arguments, is, in producing all that
might move the woman to embrace his motion, and concealing all that might make
against it. For if the loving kindness of God to man, manifested among all
the creatures, in forming only man after his own Image and likeness, so as he
had done no other visible creature, in making him lord over all the rest of his
creatures, which he put under his feet, in giving him possession of the whole
world, in planting this Garden of delights merely for his sake, and bestowing
freely upon him all the fruits thereof to make use of at his pleasure,
reserving only that one tree, and after all this to make man's happiness
complete every way, in creating such a necessary and comfortable help as the
woman was, and bestowing her upon him: All these, and the rest of Gods favors,
so lately and freely conferred upon man without any solicitation, merely out of
Gods infinite and unconceivable goodness, had been either remembered by Satan,
or considered by the ^oman, and cast into the balance against Satan's
groundless suppose ^^alousies, of Gods ill affection toward man, that maine
temptation, by which Eves heart was perverted and turned away from God, had
taken no effect at all, and Satan had been abhorred and hated, as he deserved,
as a malicious slanderer.

Eighthly, Satan's notable cunning and subtilty appears yet further, in working
upon, and stirring up the woman's affections within, which he does, partly, by
putting her into a passion of discontent, which must of necessity cast a mist
before the understanding, and blind the eye of reason, and thereby disable it
to judge of things aright: And partly, by setting her at gaze upon that
pleasant visible object of the forbidden fruit, which working upon the outward
senses, might awaken the affections within, and by both those means might
raise them up to such a violent distemper, that reason should be able to rule
them no longer, but the affections now holding the raines, might carry the
woman whither they list. Thus the devil wholly perverts that natural course,
which God in the beginning had set in the soul of man, according to which the
faculties thereof exercised all their operations in the state of man's
innocence, which was, that the understanding being first duly informed, should
give a rule to the Will and affections, upon advised deliberation and
judgment: which order, if the woman had observed at this time, and referred
the motion of Satan to the free and unpartial judgment of the mind,
questionless Satan had lost all his labor, and the falsehood and fraud of his
suggestions had been discovered.

But above all the rest of Satan's policies, there is none matchable to the
last, in pressing the woman to a speedy resolution, without farther
deliberation, and to the speedy execution and putting in practice that counsel
which he had given her, which is the nearest way to thrust in men headlong into
mischief. Now that the woman took no time for advice, appears by the Narration
in the History penned by Moses, wherein it is manifest that supposed virtue of
this forbidden fruit is no sooner discovered, but the fruit it self presented
to her view, is both desired and eaten before she departs from the place, to
bring her husband tidings of this new discovery of the means of their further
happiness. That it was Satan's policy to press the woman to a speedy
resolution and execution of what she resolved on, no man can doubt, who knows
and considers his subtle policy and industry in contriving and acting
mischief: And shall withal observe, how much a sudden resolution must needs
further his design, the success whereof nothing could assure but a sudden
surprise. But besides, in that he informs and persuades the woman, that man
should become a God that very day that he tasted of the forbidden fruit, he
intimates what he aimed at, which could be nothing else but to involve the
woman in this act of rebellion speedily, that she might as speedily become a
God, seeing we know that hopes of speedy success are the most forcible motives
to draw men to speedy undertakings.

Thus h^^e we in a good part endeavored to display the Method and Art of Satan
in this dangerous temptation, by which our first Parents in Paradise were
foiled: the due consideration whereof may be of special use, to teach us the
Art of discovering those wiles by which Satan attempts us daily in the same
manner: which we shall the more carefully look into, if we lay withal before us
the lamentable consequents of this shameful fall and shall also consider, that
if Satan prevailed against them, furnished with so much wisdom and holiness,
he has a far greater advantage against us, that are so much weakened in both
those abilities. The success of this temptation, with the lamentable
Consequents that followed it, with the miraculous means by which man was
recovered after this fall, which, without Gods infinite mercy had wholly ruined
him, and his posterity after him, we are now to take up these particulars, as
they are laid down unto us by Moses in the Narration ensuing.

But first, it will not be amiss to take notice what the consideration in
general of the several circumstances of this assault, described in the five
verses which we have already expounded, may teach for our Instruction.

Verse 1.
Out of the consideration of the time of this temptation, which though it be
not expressly set down, yet must be questionless shortly after the placing of
our first Parents in Paradise, we may

1. OBSERVE It is the usual custom of Satan to attempt men before they be
confirmed; and settled in a course of godliness.
Judea, and the parts adjoining by sharp persecutions as soon as they were
planted, Acts 8.3. He stands before the woman to devour her child, as soon as
it was to be borne. Rev. 12.4. troubles the Churches of Galati^, Corinth, etc.
in their very insancy, with dangerous errors, schisms and corrupt doctrine,
as most of Saint Paul's Epistles, wherein he complains of those evils,
testifying to the world. And unto this practice he is moved

1. By his envy both at man's happiness and Gods glory, neither of which he can
endure, not for a moment, if he may find means to hinder either of them.

2. By the opportunity of effecting his intended mischief more easily and
certainly (as new planted trees are more easily plucked up at the first, before
they have taken root, and be thereby thoroughly fastened) which his own
vigilance, and industrious disposition to work mischief will not suffer him to
omit.

Let all persons, newly converted, prepare for such trials, and let all their
friends watch over them carefully, as mothers do after their new born children,
after Paul's example, 1 These. 2.7. and direction, Acts 20.35. 1 These. 5.14,
according to the pattern of Christ, Isa. 40.11. considering the dangerous
assaults wherewith they are to encounter, and the inability of those weak ones,
even to subsist of themselves, much less to withstand the policies and power
of Satan.

But the consideration of this circumstance of time, wherein our first Parents
were thus seduced, offers unto us further the observation of Satan's malice, in
setting thus upon man, and practicing his destruction, before he had been any
way provoked by him, yea, before he had ought to do with him, nay, perhaps
before man so much as knew that there was a devil. Whence

2. OBSERVE Satan conirives mischief, even against such as never provoked him.
Herod his minister, attempting to destroy him almost as soon as he was borne,
and when he had yet done neither good nor evil. Thus he incensed Cain against
his own brother Abel, and that so far as to take away his life, and that upon
no other ground, but because he was a goodman, 1 John 3.12. and sets David's
enemies against him, even when he sued unto them for peace, Psalm. 120.7. nay,
when he did them good, Psalm. 35.12. and prayed for them with fasting, ver. 13.

Hope not for peace with wicked men (who being Satan's seed, must needs resemble
his nature, as our Savior testifies they do, John 8.44.) seeing a good man's
peace with them, is

1. Impossible, because of the contrariety between good and evil men every way.
As,

1. In their very disposition a good and wicked man are an abomination one to
another, Prove. 29.27.

2. And are employed in the service of contrary Masters, Christ and Belial, 2
Cor. 6.15.

3. They follow, and are guided by contrary Rules, the Law of sin, (as the
Apostle terms it, Romans 7.23.) and the Law of Righteousness, as Gods Law is
termed, Psalm. 119.172.

4. And are carried in all their ways and actions to contrary ends: whence it
necessarily follows that they must continually cross one another in all the
course of their conversation.

2. If the peace of the godly with wicked men were possible, yet it must needs
be every way unprofitable, seeing they have nothing common between them, in
which they might have commerce together, or be helpful one to another, the one
aiming only at earthly, the other especially at heavenly things.

3. Such peace must of necessity prove dangerous to the godly, seeing
experience shows us how easily wicked men's words or conversation (as the word
in the Original may not improperly be rendered, 1 Cor. 15.33.) or at the least
our commerce with wicked men must be troublesome and full of unquietness, when
a wicked man's ungodly conversation must needs be a grief and continual vexation
to a good man's spirit, as the wicked lives of the Sodomites were to Lots, 2
Pet. 2.8. Indeed as much as in us lies, we are commanded to have peace with all
men, Romans 12.18. But for an unprofitable outward peace with such men. So as,

1. To swerve from the course of a godly life, or to neglect such services or
duties as we owe unto God or his Church, which we can hardly perform as we
ought being in their company, as the Psalmist implies, when he commands wicked
men to depart from him, that he might keep Gods Commandments, Psalm. 119.115.

2. Or to cool and slack our zeal for Gods glory.

3. Or much more to conform to any of their wicked practices (which are the
only terms on which ordinarily he may have and continue peace with them) being
contrary to the mind and Law of God, these are things that lie not in our
power. Thus far only we may go, but no further.

1. To forbear provoking them without just cause.

2. To endeavor to win them by outward courtesies, rendering unto them good
for their evil, as we are directed, Romans 12.21. and by Christ himself, Mat. 5.

3. To embrace peace when they offer it upon warrantable terms, and to seek it
too by lawful means. Notwithstanding, in enjoying this peace with them, we must
take heed of admitting them into our inward familiarity, as we are forewarned,
Prove. 22.24. which David found to be dangerous, Psalm. 55.13, 14.

2. Let us not walk with them securely, but always suspect, and therefore arm
our selves against all their dangerous practices, with the wisdom of Serpents,
and innocence of Doves, Mat. 10.16.

The place of this temptation, although it be not mentioned by Moses, must
necessarily be concluded to be Paradise, in which also we may probably
conceive, that the woman at this time, when Satan assaulted her was profitably
employed, in surveighing the fruits of this pleasant Garden, their new Lordship
so lately bestowed, and that as well to enquire into Gods works, as to affect
her heart the more with the particular view and taste of Gods goodness to her
and her husband. Whence,

3. OBSERVE No place nor employment can free us from Satan's assaults.
Elies sons to filthiness in the Tabernacle, and to theft in ministering holy
things, 1 Samuel 2.22. And he afterward draws King Uzziah to trespass upon the
Priests office in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. As he endeavors to draw our
blessed Savior to tempt God in the very Temple, Mat. 4. so likewise in
religious duties. In hearing he distracts and diverts men's thoughts, thrusting
in suggestions of covetousness, Ezech. 33.31. voluptuousness, or the like,
draws men sometimes to vain babbling, sometimes to proud boasting in prayer,
Luke 18.11, 12. corrupts men with covetousness, fraudulent dealing, and
injustice in bargaining to partiality and respect of persons, in the
administration of justice, no marvel if he tempt us to excel in meats and
drinks in our holy reastings. And this he does upon a double ground.

1. Out of a delight which he has especially, in profaning and defiling holy
things.

2. Because he finds men most secure, when either the place or employment
promises them safety.

The Time and Place of the assault of Satan upon the woman, Moses had not
expressly mentioned. The rest of the circumstances we have laid down before us
in express terms. And first, we meet with the instrument, of which the devil
made choice for this employment, the Serpent; and why of him rather then of any
other beast, we shall see hereafter: but why does he make use of any beast at
all? It is conceived, that although he contrived the plot, yet he acts by this
beast, that himself might not be discovered. Whence,

4. OBSERVE. Though Satan be the Author and Perswader to every sinful motion,
yet he l^ves not to be seen in it.
David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. entered into Judas, Luke 22.3. was a
lying spirit in the mouth of Zedekiah, though he knew not which way he entered
into him, 1 Kings 22.23, 24. But often times he makes use of some outward
instruments by which he conveighs his counsels, sometimes taking on him the
shape of unreasonable creatures, as he always does in dealing with Witches and
Conjurers, and as we see he dealt with Eve in this place, although more usually
he makes use of men to beguile men by, as he did in tempting Ahab by Jezabel
his wife, 1 Kings 21.25. and by his false Prophets, 1 Kings 22.22. Now thus
Satan deals with men.

1. Because the motions being evil and hateful in themselves, may mo^e safely,
or at least with more advantage be suggested then owned, for he that does evil
shunt the light, John 3.20.

2. The devil himself being feared and hated of all men, the discovering of
himself in any ill motion were the next way to warn men to take heed both of
him and his counsels, and so to cross his own end.

1. Let us learn in every inordinate motion to suspect Satan, though we see
him not, whom we may easily find out by the footsteps of his evil ways, even
then when we cannot discover his person; being we may rest assured, that he is
either the Parent, Midwife, or at least the Nurse of every finful motion. Now
to believe that we consult with Satan, in hearkening to the inordinate motions
of the lusts of our own hearts, or to the suggestions sometimes of our dearest
friends, and that when we entertain them and embrace them, we harbor a brat of
Satan's in our bosoms, will be a great means to make us fear and tremble at
any motion unto sin.

2. Let us be jealous of all such persons as labor to keep themselves close in
all their ways, and not to appear in those counsels that they suggest unto us
by secret ways, after the manner of Satan. These we have reason to suspect to
be works of darkness, seeing none hate the light but those that do evil, who
labor to hide those things, which being discovered might turn unto their
shame.

Now that which the Holy Ghost especially takes notice of in this Serpent is,
that it was more subtle then any beast of the field, implying, that therefore
Satan made choice of this rather then of any other beast, for his fitness for
this employment. Whence in general,

5. OBSERVE. Satan usually makes choice of those Instruments; which he finds
fittest for the compassing of his own wicked ends.


But to consider the Serpents subtilty more particularly: Satan being to
beguile and deceive the woman, he finds the Serpents subtilty to be of special
use unto him for that end; whence we may

6. OBSERVE Cunning and subtle persons are dangerous instruments to deceive,
and thereby to do mischief.
Jonadab, to show Amnon the way to defile his own Sister, 2 Samuel 13. Achitophel
to further Absaloms treason against his own father, 2 Samuel 15. and 16.23. Such
were the Scribes and Pharisees, our Saviors enemies, and murderers at last,
whom he every where taxes for their pride, covetousness, and subtle
dissimulation: with whom we may join Elymas the Sorcerer, full of all
subtilty, whom the devil made use of, to turn away the peoples hearts from
receiving Paul's Ministry. But what are those to Satan himself, that sets them
all on work, called the old Serpent, more subtle, and consequently more
dangerously mischievous then all his Agents? Now this comes to pass, Partly,
because they having their hearts swelling with pride, upon the conceit of their
own parts, being abandoned by God in his justice, are the more easily seized on
by Satan, and possessed and carried according to his will. And secondly,
because such persons are the fittest to cast a mist before other men's eyes, and
thereby to conveigh mischievous purposes into their hearts unespied, so that
they are entangled in a snare before they are aware.

1. Let men of eminent natural parts use and possess them in fear and
humility, not trusting in their own wisdom, as Solomon advises, Prove. 3.5.
lest it pervert them, Isa. 47.10. but remembering that they have nothing but
what they have received, 1 Cor. 4.7. and therefore no cause of glorying: and
next, what they have received is given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. of the
use whereof God himself will take an account, Mat. 25.19. that so with all
humility submitting themselves to the Government of the Spirit, they may
thereby be dire^ed to employ what they have received, for the honor of God,
and for the service of his Church, for the use whereof they were given, and
whereunto they may be very profitable if they be sanctified.

2. Let no man be overmuch swayed or carried away by the eminency of men's
parts, which the world looks at too much, John 7.48. (unless they be
sanctified and mixed with much humility) seeing the greatest abilities are
unable of themselves to search into the mysteries of God, 2 Cor. 2.14. 2. And
those that excel in them are seldom chosen by him to further his work, 1 Cor.
1.26, 27. nay, are oftentimes for the pride of those that possess them, by
Gods just judgment made unserviceable, and turned into folly, Isa. 29.14. that
God may get himself honor in confounding them in that wherein they chiefly
glory and magnify themselves.

We have already taken notice of the instrument used by Satan in this
temptation, which was the Serpent. We are in the next place to consider the
persons tempted by him, which were our first Parents, to be looked upon,

1. As holy and perfectly righteous.

2. As endowed with wisdom and knowledge proportionable thereunto.

3. Directed by righteous and holy Laws, which God himself had given them.

4. And engaged by such heaps of mercies, as the Lord had lately poured out
upon them without measure. Those persons standing on such a firm condition,
Satan both attempts and foiles. Whence,

7. OBSERVE No advantage can assure a child of God from the assaults and
temptations of Satan.
Mark 1.24. Jesus Christ himself, though he had nothing in him, John 14.30. and
therefore could not but be assured to lose his labor.

2. Not their late experiments of Gods mercies or judgments. Thus he attempts
and prevails against Noah; so miraculously saved by God after the flood, and
in like manner he foiles Lot immediately after the destruction of Sodom, by
that fearful judgment of fire, out of which he had been so graciously
preserved. No marvel then though he drew the stiff-necked Israelites into so
many act; of rebellion, after and in the midst of so many signs and
temptations, and great miracles which their eyes had seen, Deuteronomy. 29.3, 4.

3. Not their special eminency in any grace, he fails not to shake the faith
of Abraham, Genesis 12.12, 13. and 20.2. for which he was so much renowned, that
the Apostle gives him the title of faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. In like manner
he draws Moses, (commended for his faith, Heb. 11.) to unbelief, Numb. 20.12.

4. Not their victories in many spiritual combats, wherein many times the
godly have the better at the last, although they may sometimes give ground at
the first onset, as is evident in the temptation of Job, in which his faith
triumphed gloriously, Job. 19.25. nay, in his conflicts with our blessed
Savior, although he was most shamefully foiled, yet he gives him not over, but
departs from him only for a season, Luke 4.13. The reasons hereof are,

1. In Satan, 1. In malice, which so enrageth ^^m, that it makes him desperate
in all his undertakings. 2. The possibility which he conceives he has, of
hindering and disquieting even the best of Gods servants, which makes their
services less cheerful, abates much of their hope in God, and may lessen the
comforts even of such as are upheld by the Power of God unto salvation.

2. In God, who has an overruling hand in all Satan's actions.

1. Who by this means makes his servants more watchful over their ways, more
fervent in prayer, and more sensible of, and thankful for their deliverances,
and which at length increases their reward, when in those conflicts they hold
fast their faith, their love and firm adherence unto God, from whom they
cannot be plucked away by all Satan's power and policy.

2. And gets honor to himself, when his servants in his power wrestle with
Satan, and overcome at last, and in spite of all his endeavors to the
contrary, are kept by the Power of God to salvation.

First, let the best learn at all times, and in all their ways to walk warily
before God in fear and trembling, considering

1. The Power, Malice, Cunning and Diligence of our Adversary the Devil.

2. His manifold Assistants, our lusts within, and the world and wicked men
without.

3. Our own weakness, unable to stand against Principalities and Powers.

4. And the danger of our falling, if we be foiled, dishonor to God and his
children, shame to our selves, and wounds to our souls. Let him therefore that
stands take heed lest he falls, 1 Cor. 10.12. but stand in the Power of God,
not in his own strength, Ephesians. 6.14. armed with his armor, watching and praying.

Secondly, let us show as much love and zeal for the recovery of such as are
taken captive by Satan, according to his will, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy
2.26. as he does malice in seducing and bringing them into bondage, considering
there is possibility of recovering the most obdurate sinner by the Power of
Christ, though it be beyond the power of man; seeing to God nothing is
impossible. Not the engraffing in again of the Jews, Romans 11.23. Not the
raising of children to Abraham out of the stones, Mat. 3.9. as he has made it
appear in saving the Thief upon the Cross, in converting St. Paul, when he
was a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, etc. 1 Timothy 1.15. 2. The greatness of their
reward that convert many to righteousness, Dan. 12.13. 3. The acceptance of
their service if God deny the success of their endeavors, in laboring to win
them, Isa. 49.4, 5.

Satan's design was to beguile both the man and the woman, but thinks not fit
to deal with them both together, and therefore he sets upon the woman, being
then divided from her husband, as it is evident by the whole Series of the
Narration. And with the woman he begins; As first, being the weaker vessel; And
secondly, created after the man, and therefore not altogether so long, nor
perhaps in every respect so well acquainted with all Gods ways and works as
her husband was. Unto which some add, out of an uncertain and not very
probable conjecture, that the woman had not received the Commandment
immediately from God, but mediately from the mouth of her husband, to whom
alone it was delivered by Gods own mouth, and therefore might more easily be
drawn to doubt of that which she had received at the second hand. Howsoever, we
may hence

8 OBSERVE Our weakness is Satan's advantage.
Tim. 3.6. as Amalek surprised the weak and feeble of the children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 25.18. and those which are weak he assaults where they are weakest; as we
usually lay our batteries against forts where they are weakest, and ill manned,
and that too when they are weakest, that he drew Lot to commit incest with his
two daughters when he was drunken, Genesis 19.33. and sets upon our Savior, to
tempt him to turn the stones into bread when ^e was hungry, Mat. 4.2, 3. And
when he finds men transported with anger, overwhelmed with grief, or
distempered by any other passion, those are his opportunities to draw men into
any sin. The reason whereof is,

1. The baseness of his disposition, contrary every way to the goodness and
compassion of God. That which moves God to uphold and strengthen, even the
compassion he has of men's weakness, is Satan's encouragement to work mischief
and destroy. And as Gods strength is perfect in weakness to maintain and
uphold, so is his raging malice perfected and poured out upon weakness, to cast
down to the ground.

And 2. Out of the conscience of his own weakness, which makes him fly when
men stand upon their guard, and make head against him, Jam. 4.7.

Let us watch over and take care of such as are weak, every one of us
considering our own infirmities, Gal. 6.1. and having received strength from
God, for the same purpose, as our Savior exhorts Peter, Luke 22.32. See 2 Cor.
1.4. And let us have an eye to the weakest parts of our own souls, to those
infirmities which Nature or custom has made familiar unto us, strengthening
our selves against them especially, avoiding all distempering passions, which
wonderfully weaken the soul, standing always upon our guard, and having on us
the whole Armor of God, lest Satan finding us naked take the greater courage
to assault us suddenly and ensnare usere we be aware.

Most Interpreters conceive upon probable ground, that Satan assaulted the
woman alone, being at that time (upon what occasion, it is not worth the while
to enquire) severed from her husband, as appears by the whole Series of Moses
his Narration, seeing no mention is made of the man at all, in this debate of
hers with Satan, wherein the woman being first seduced by him, and having eaten
of the fruit forbidden, becomes his instrument to tempt and draw her husband
into the same sin: so that it manifestly appears, that Satan takes the woman's
solitariness for his advantage. Whence we may

9. OBSERVE Solitariness is many times a snare.
David's entangling himself with lust after Bath-sheba when he was alone;)
whence it was, that our Savior, to give Satan all the advantage that might be,
that thereby he might make his victory over him the more glorious, went out to
encounter with him in the solitary wilderness. 2. Solitariness gives the
greater opportunity to commit sin unespied of men; an advantage upon which
Joseph's Mi^ stresse attempts him to commit adultery with her, Genesis 39.11, 12.
3. It deprives men of help, by advice and counsel to withstand the temptation.
So, Eccl. 4.10, 12. 4. Man was ordained for society, and fitted with abilities
for that purpose, and as he is most serviceable that way, so is he most safe,
as being secured by Gods protection in that way and employment, to which the
Lord has assigned him.

Let every one avoid solitariness as much as he may.

1. Rule, our emploiment requires it, as Joseph's did when he entered into his
Masters house alone, Genesis 39.11.

2. Or to get opportunity for the performance of religious duties, for which
our Savior often withdrew himself from company, as he also advises us to do
upon like occasion, Mat. 6.6. as likewise does the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.5.

3. Or for avoiding wicked men's society, for which cause the Prophet wishes
himself in the wilderness, Psalm. 55.7.

The Time, Place, Instrument of the temptation, and the persons tempted, we
have considered already. The baits where of Satan makes special choice, with
his Art in tempering, preparing and presenting them, are to be taken special
notice of, and to be handled in the next place. Now therein, that which was
first in Satan's intention, the end at which he aims must necessarily be first
examined, that we may discover his policy in preparing and ordering all things
in subordination thereunto. Now the last end at which he aimed, by the whole
method and order of the temptation, is sufficiently discovered to be the
turning away of man's heart from God by infidelity and rebellion, to his own
utter destruction, and to Gods high dishonor. So that we may thence

10. OBSERVE. Satan's main end is man's destruction, by turning away his heart
from God.
We depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12.

And secondly, by drawing him to disobedience, which is a necessary consequent
thereof; for who will serve that God, from whom he neither expects any good,
nor fears any hurt, which is the ground of wicked men's resolved Apostasy. Job
22.17* The better to work men's hearts to these resolutions, Satan

1. Holds men in ignorance, the Nurse of infidelity, Romans 10.14. for those
wicked wretches, that resolve neither to serve God nor depend on him, are those
that refuse to have any knowledge of God or of his ways, Job. 21.14. Now none
can trust in God but those that know him, Psalm. 9.10. And as ignorance is the
Nurse of infidelity, so it is of disobedience; and all manner of abominable
transgressions, as the Prophet makes this to be the cause of lying, murder,
and because there was no knowledge of God in the land, Hos. 4.1. And the
Apostle joins both together, 2 These. 1.8.

2. Satan keeps them in a senseless condition, that they make no use, either
of the Word, or of the manifold acts of Providence, though wrought before their
eyes, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Jer. 25.4. Isa. 42.25. but forget or cast them behind their
backs, as the children of Israel did, Psalm. 78.7, 8, 11. or impute them to
other causes, 1 Samuel 6.9. concluding in their hearts that God has forsaken the
earth, Ezech. 8.12. No marvel then if Satan with all might and policy labor to
work, and to fasten in the hearts of men those two Master sins, as being
indeed the fountain from which all other evils spring, and by which he works
all the mischief to God and man that his heart can possibly devise.

First, God is infinitely dishonored, seeing it is by faith that men give
glory to God, as sealing thereby to his All Sufficiency, Power, Faithfulness
and Truth, and by obedience acknowledge his Authority, Wisdom, Holiness and
Justice. As for man, by this apostatising from God the fountain of all his
happiness, the fountain of living waters, as he terms himself, Jer. 2.13.

Secondly, and thereby leaving his heart loose to close with the world, and to
serve every base lust, as one that falls off from his wife, is fit to close
with every harlot, Prove. 5.20.

Thirdly, and in the mean time bringing himself under the heavy indignation of
God, which shall come upon him to the uttermost.

Let it then be our chiefest care to keep our hearts close unto God.

1. Choosing him alone, (and that upon the infallible grounds of his
All Sufficiency, Faithfulness and Mercy) as our lot and portion with holy
David, Psalm. 16.1, 5.

2. Resting and relying on him with all our heart, after the example of the
same Prophet, Psalm. 23. and his Counsel, Psalm. 62.5.

3. Seeking to him upon all occasions, Psalm 62.8. Philip. 4.6.

4. Walking in his sight in an holy course of obedience, as Henoch did, Genesis
15.24. as always having before our eyes him that is invisible, with Moses,
Heb. 11.27.

5. Referring ourselves and all our actions to his glory, 1 Cor. 6.20. and
10.31.

6. And abhorring, checking and striving, against all wavering and staggering
of our hearts, in looking toward any thing in heaven or earth, save God alone,
with the Prophet David, Psalm. 73.22. Unto which firm adherence unto him, we
are infinitely furthered by the knowledge of his Sovereignty, Power, Holiness.
And by a feeling observation of his ways, both in mercy and judgment.

That the destruction of man, and the dishonouring of God, was Satan's maine
aim in this temptation, is clearly manifested in the whole Series of this
Narration. But in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird, says the
wise man, Prove. 1.17. Wherefore Satan, according to his custom, cunningly
covers this snare, laid for man's destruction, with a fair pretext of love to
man, expressed in a kind of zealous indignation at Gods ill dealing with him,
and in making show of an earnest desire to advance man to an higher degree of
happiness, and in directing him the way how to obtain it. Whence

11 OBSERVE It is usual with Satan and his Instruments, to pretend the good of
those whom they intend wholly to destroy.
Prove. 1.13, 16, 19. and drownes men in perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. In like manner,
the devil makes show by a lewd woman to fill men with pleasures, by satisfying
them with fleshly lusts, Prove. 7.18, 19. when in the mean time he leads them as
an Ox to the slaughter, till a dart strike through their liver, ver. 22, 23.
Thus he dealt with our Savior, in tendering him all the Kingdoms of the
world, but under a condition to fall down and worship him, and thereby to
honor him as a God, Mat. 4.9. The reason,

1. Satan has no other prevailing way to beguile, but by making show of
seeking our good; which men by an instinct, planted in their nature by God
himself, are so strongly carried after, that they easily embrace any means
which they conceive leads thereunto.

2. By this means Satan endeavors at least to share with God in the honor of
his loving kindness to man, an honor, as due unto him alone, so purchased
unto himself by the dearest and greatest price, even by the blood of his own
Son. This honor (one of the chiefest flowers of his Crown) the devil labors
to rob him of in a great part, by pretending to seek man's good and happiness,
as much, nay, much more then God himself, as he deals with Eve in this place.

Let no man be so simple as to believe every word with the fool, Prove. 14.15.
But examine carefully and seriously, those pleasing offers tendered unto us by
Satan or his Agents, of wealth, honor, pleasures, etc. And therein consider

First, the person or instrument by whom the tender is made, or the advice
given: if it proceed from wicked men whom we know to be guided by Satan, how
can we expect that those which hate and abhor us, (as all wicked do such as
are godly, Prove. 29.) should advise us to, or really intend unto us any thing
for our good? Besides, how should we hope to receive good from those, that seek
no true good for themselves?

Secondly, let us seriously consider, whether those things that they propose
unto us be really good or no; Honors, Wealth, Pleasure (we know) more often
burden and ensnare the soul, then ease and relieve it, sure they never make
the heart better, leave us sometimes in the midst, always at the end of our
days.

Thirdly, observe under what condition they tender these things unto us,
wherewith they allure us, whether we be not tempted to seek them in some
sinful way. As wealth by robbery, or some other course of injustice, as Prove.
1.11, 12, 13. to fill our selves with pleasures by defiling our own bodies, as
Prove. 7.18. by which means we make an ill bargain, by winning the world and
the pleasures of sin, with the loss of our own souls. See Mat. 16.26.

Fourthly, consider well, whether the offers be only verbal or real. Satan
offered our Savior all the Kingdoms of the world, whereof he had not one to
bestow. He offers Eve here increase of wisdom and knowledge, which might
advance her to the honor of a God, but she finds nothing at last, in the
event, but ignorance and shame.

Fifthly, consider whether the good tendered unto us be truly and really good,
or only in show and outward appearance, whether it be inward or outward,
temporary or eternal, such as honor a man in the sight of God, or only in the
opinion of the world; for such indeed are Honors, Riches, Pleasures, only
shadows of good, deceiving the hearts of all those that rely on them, and
leaving them fools at the latter end, Jer. 17.11.

But it is worthy our observation, that Satan in this great show of love, that
he makes unto man, dares not discover at first any ill intention against God,
wherein he uses great policy,

1. That he might not be suspected to tender this offer unto man, rather out of
envy and hatred against God, then out of any true desire of man's good.

2. Lest man, having his heart at present wholly filled with the love of God,
the largeness of whose bounty toward him had been manifested in so many late
experiments, might have detested any motion of offering the least injury to God
to whom he was so deeply engaged. Upon these grounds Satan at first contents
himself only with casting out, by way of insinuation, some secret grounds of
discontent, and that too by way of question and enquiry, till he might see how
those would be first digested, that if they made any impression upon the woman's
heart, he might go further and more roundly to work, as he should see occasion.
Whence

12. OBSERVE Satan and his Agents in tempting men to sin, are very wary in
discovering their full intentions at first, till they see how they will be
entertained.
Abimelech dares not at the first discover the bloody design, which he had
entertained in his heart against his own brethren, till he had first assured
unto himself the hearts of the people of Sichem, Judge. 9.2. In like manner
dealt Absalom in his treason against his father, which he covered over with a
show of courteous behavior, and zeal for justice, 2 Samuel 15.2. and the
pretense of performing his vow, ver. 8. and never shows himself in open
rebellion, till he was sure of the peoples hearts, and saw that the treason
grew strong. The reason whereof is,

First, because sin in it self has so ugly a shape, that if it should appear
at first in the full proportion thereof, it must needs raise fears and
terrors in the hearts of any that are not desperately minded, so that they who
hope to prevail with men, to draw them to evil, must discover it by degrees,
that it being by the modest beginnings thereof entertained with some liking, by
degrees the heart may be insensibly brought on to close with it at the last.

Secondly, if by the discovery of the foulness of sin, the heart of man should
be once possessed with the detestation of it, and of the Agents that solicit
him thereunto: It would be impossible, that either the motion it self, or the
person that presents it, should find any acceptance for time to come.

Let all men then beware of the deceitfulness of sin, as the Apostle terms
it, Heb. 3.13. and be always jealous, and suspect more in it then appears at
the first view, and to that end look not only upon the modest countenance of
evil, which first shows it self, but let us take a full view of the whole
body thereof, the Beginnings, Progress, and at last the full Growth of that
foul Monster, never indeed sufficiently discovered unto us, but in Gods Word,
which calls Anger and Hatred, Murder, Lust, Adultery, etc. Look not on the
first steps of superstition in names, gestures and the like, but upon the foul
body of idolat^y, which we see they have, and still will bring in after them.
Mirth seems modest till it turns to madness, wicked men seem to walk fairly
and civilly with us for a while; but if we grow inwardly acquainted with them,
and walk in their way; they lead us at last into hell.

Withal we must take notice, that Satan's wariness hinders not the effectual
prosecution of that which he intends; For even in this first insinuation,
though in the form of an enquiry, yet he conveighs withal such grounds of
discontent, and distaste of Gods dealing with man into the woman's heart, and
makes such an impression in it thereby, that she shall not easily shake off, as
we shall see in the sequel. Whence

13. OBSERVE Discretion and wariness in men's actions, ought not to hinder the
effectual prosecution of that which they intend.
Moses, when he was so wary in undertaking the charge of bringing up Gods
people out of Egypt, that at last he refused to engage himself in that service
at all, though God called him unto it, Exodus 4.14. Jacob was so wary in
departing from Laban, that he would not break away openly, but having Gods
command to return into his country, he makes a shift to steal away privily,
Genesis 31.3, 17. Discretion may temper zeal; as Physicians correct ingredients
in their medicines, that they may work within compass, as fire burns within
the chimney, but it must not quench it.

We have intimated Satan's policy in concealing, and forbearing to mention any
thing that might manifest Gods bounty and kindness to man, that the woman
might fix her eye only upon that fruit in Paradise, which was denied unto her.
Whence

14. OBSERVE. The forgetting of Gods mercies, is a great means to take off a
man's heart from cleaving to him.
Psalm. 78.10, 11. Lusting, Psalm, 106.13, 14. Idolatry, ver. 20, 21. and flat
Apostasy, Hos. 2.5, 8. wherefore, God gives a special charge to prevent
Apostasy, by remembering his mercies, Deuteronomy. 8.11, 14. It cannot indeed be
denied, that mercies received are the clearest and strongest evidences to
discover unto us Gods All Sufficiency, Love and Goodness, upon the assurance
whereof our affiance in him, and readiness to his service do especially depend.

Let every man carefully,

1. Observe all the experiments of Gods mercies to his people in general, and
more particularly toward his own soul.

2. And lay them up in mind carefully for time to come. whereof we have
precedents from holy men of God, Moses, Deborah, David, etc. who composed
songs, some upon particular, others upon general mercies received, for the
preserving of the memory of them, as indeed he has made his wonderful works to
be remembered, Psalm. 11.4. 3. Call them to mind upon all occasions, and enlarge
them in every circumstance, for the increasing of our thankfulness, upon new
and fresh experiments, for the strengthening of our faith, aggravating our
sins, quickening our deadness, and encouraging us in our duties of Gods
service, as still feeling in our hearts a fresh taste of Gods goodness, that
our souls may still rejoice in him, as we are directed, Phil. 4.4. Out of the
same policy, by which Satan labors to turn away the woman's eyes, from
looking back upon the mercies which she had received in so large a measure, he
endeavors to fix them upon this pleasant fruit, which was denied her,
pointing at Gods restraint thereof, with a note either of admiration or
indignation, that God should deny man the use of so excellent a fruit. Whence
we may

15 OBSERVE It is a dangerous snare to a man to have his eyes too much fixed
upon his wants.


1. To humble us. Or,

2. To quicken us to prayer, or to the use of lawful means to supply us in
what we need, is not only warrantable, but is our duty also: not to have them
always before our eyes, and them alone, without observing what we enjoy, may
easily

1. Beget in us unthankfulness and murmuring against God, as it did often in
the children of Israel, especially, Numb. 11.1, 4, 5.

2. Envy toward others, as in Rachel against her Sister Leah, Genesis 30.1.

3. Disquietnesse and unsetlednesse in our ways, as it fell out in David,
Psalm. 73.3, 14.

4. Yea, sometimes the adventuring upon unwarrantable courses, to provide for
the supply of those wants that pinch us. See Prove. 30.9.

Let us then in observing our wants, whether in things temporal or spiritual,
withal take special notice of what we have, as Elkanah advises his wife
Hannah, when she was troubled for want of a child, to remember that she had
the love of her husband, 1 Samuel 1.8.

2. And how unworthy we are of any thing at all, even the least mercy with
Jacob, Genesis 32.10. and David, 2 Samuel 7.18. Seeing

1. We have nothing of our selves, but what God of his bounty bestows.

2. Neither was he any way bound to bestow on us what we have.

3. Which also we have not honored God withal, or employed as we ought, if we
were called to account for it.

4. Consider how many there are which want what we enjoy.

5. And that God who has in himself All Sufficiency, and who knows both what
we want, and what is fittest for us, is engaged by his general Providence, as a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. but more especially by his relation to us as a
Father, Isa. 63.16. Mat. 7.11. and beyond all this by his faithful Promise,
Heb. 13.6. to give every good thing to such as fear him, Psalm. 34.9 10. and
walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.

That the immediate end which Satan aimed at, in passing over in silence all
Gods favors to man, and in endeavoring to fix the woman's eyes upon this
restraint and interdiction of the fruit forbidden, was to cast her into a
discontented humor, at this limitation and abridgement of her liberty (as he
would have her conceive) and thereupon to provoke her to take and eat what she
pleased, especially in a Garden planted on purpose for her use, the very frame
of the temptation it self sufficiently discovers. So that we may here discover
whence this impatience (which all men are more or less subject unto) at
restraint arises; and may

16. OBSERVE. The nature of man, by the Art and Policy of Satan, is apt to be
carried against all restraint and subjection.
Romans 8.7. so that they are now impatient of any yoke, Psalm. 2.4. as resolving
to be their own lords, Psalm. 12 4. but much more of Gods yoke, which they
peremptorily refuse to take or submit unto, Jer. 44.17. Now that, in stirring
up men to this rebellion against God, Satan has an especial hand, it cannot be
questioned by any that takes notice of the main end, which he drives at in all
his designs, Gods dishonor and man's destruction. For,

First, what greater dishonor can be done unto God, then to have his
Sovereignty disclaimed by man, the most excellent of all his visible creatures?

Secondly, the rejecting of Gods yoke, which only guides in a right way, leaves
us under the bondage of our own lusts, and of Satan who rules us by them, and
leads us captive at his will. So that it is evident, that the turning away of
the foolish slayes them, Prove. 1.32.

Let it be then our chiefest care, both to take on, and put our selves under
Christ's yoke, without which it is impossible to be his disciples, Mat. 11.29.
Not only contenting our selves with that lot and condition which God has
assigned, 1 Timothy 6.8. but wholly giving up our selves, and resigning our own
wills, to be guided by God in all things, after our Saviors example, Luke
22.42. Considering

1. Gods absolute Sovereignty, by which he has right to do with his own what
he will, Mat. 20.15. Not only in disposing them at his pleasure, to which Ely
submits himself, 1 Samuel 3.18. and David, 2 Samuel 15.26. but besides, in giving
rules and directions for all their ways, unto which even Christ himself
conformes his Will, Psalm. 40.8.

2. Taking notice of his righteousness and holiness, which makes all his
laws just and equal in all things, Psalm. 119 128.

3. Acknowledging withal his love, who prescribes and commands us nothing but
for our own good, Deuteronomy. 6.24. that we may have at present our fruit in
holiness, and at last the end everlasting life, yea, that he may with his
honor perform and make good unto us all that he has promised, as he speaks
of Abraham's obedience, Genesis 18.19.

4. And having so much experience of the errors of our own ways, which seem
good many times in our own eyes, when the issues of them are death, Prove. 14.12.

And lastly, of Gods wisdom, who better understands what is best and fittest
for us then we our selves can do.

Satan's policy in proposing this question to the woman, in such ambiguous and
doubtful terms may not be passed over, that phrase every tree (as has been
before intimated) being indifferently appliable, to signify either any one or
more of the tree of the Garden. For if in stead of every tree he had said any
one tree, he had in a sort pointed at, and thereby given the woman occasion, to
take notice of Gods bounty, who had given man the free use of all the rest of
the trees of the Garden, save that alone. Wherefore he chooses rather to
express himself in that ambiguous phrase, lest the easiness of the restraint
might be apprehended by the woman, which because it was but from one tree,
might be the better borne. Wherefore seeing Satan lays his snare for the woman
in this ambiguous expression, we may thence

17 OBSERVE Ambiguous and doubtful expressions may be, and many times are
dangerous snares.


1. Betraying an ill mind and affection in him that proposes them, seeing men
that think well and sincerely, have no cause to cover their intentions with the
darkness of doubtful terms.

2. And being dangerous means to lead men into error, if they be not wisely
and heedfully observed.

It discovers whose children they are, that not only use but maintain that
dangerous doctrine of equivocation. A Monster hatched by the father of lies,
which never durst abide the light, until this last and worst age of the world,
neither is it any way countenanced by any of those pretended examples out of
Scripture, wherein the words in true construction are neither false nor
doubtful, but only short of the Questionists meaning, to conceal that from him
which it concerned him not to know.

VERSE II.
THe woman, without any advised deliberation in her self, or so much as
consulting with her husband, or consideration of the party that proposed the
question, or of the nature of the question proposed, or of the scope at which
it aimed, gives a present answer, not only to that which was demanded, but to
more then the question required, and thereby opening her mind so freely unto
Satan, gives him the greater advantage and encouragement, to set upon her with
a fresh and more violent assault, as we shall see. This error of hers in
opening her self so rashly, to one that she knew not, gives warrant to

1 OBSERVE It is dangerous to lay open our selves freely to persons unknown, or
such of whom we have no assurance.
SOlomon notes it to be a great folly to utter all a man's mind, and a point of
wisdom to keep it in till afterward, Prove. 29.11. Peter endangered himself
very far, by conversing with strangers in the Highpriests Hall, Mat. 26.69,
70. Nay, David himself (we see) ensnared himself, by opening himself, though to
a familiar acquaintance, yet to one whose heart he had not thoroughly sounded,
Psalm. 55.13. And Gedaliah, by trusting Ishmael too far, ruined both himself and
his followers, Jer. 41.1.

This was Eves first oversight: a second, and no less is, that she is
contented to have a manifest truth questioned, though delivered by Gods own
mouth, namely, his interdiction of tasting the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, which the event discovered to be a great folly in her, and may warrant us
to

2 OBSERVE It is a dangerous thing to question or debate evident and known
truths.


1. The dictates of Nature, written by the finger of God in all men's hearts,
as, that there is a God, Romans 1.19, 20. that he judges the world, Psalm. 58.11.
and that in righteousness, which is a principle that Jeremy will not dispute,
Jer. 12.1. and that consequently it shall be well with the good, and ill with
the wicked at last, Eccl. 12.13. as being truths, which every man's conscience
within his own breast gives testimony unto.

2. Such truths as are delivered by God himself, either recorded in his Word,
(as the Creation of the world, and that great mystery of man's Redemption by
Jesus Christ, etc.) or made known unto us by any special message from God, as
Zachary is both blamed and punished, for disputing against the message sent
from God by the Angel, Luke 1.20. much more did that Prince deservedly perish,
by the just decree of God, that denied the truth of Elishahs Prophecy, 2 Kings
7.2. Only believing and acknowledging the truths themselves, we may be
warranted to enquire more thoroughly into the Manner, Means, Order, and other
circumstances of those things, which we fully assent unto and believe, (as
Jeremy does, Jer. 12.1. and the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.34. and the Prophets
searched into what, and what time the coming of Christ should be, whereof they
prophesied, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.) thereby to inform our selves of those secrets
more fully, as well to quicken our affections, which are most effectually
moved, by the full discovery of things in particular, and to strengthen our
faith the more thereby, as also to enable us, by the full understanding of the
truths which we embrace, to satisfy others, and to maintain them against, and
stop the mouths of such as oppose and contradict the truth. And by this
assenting unto the truths of God, without questioning or admitting them into
debate,

1. We seal unto his truth, John 3.33. and give him the honor of a God, to be
believed upon his own testimony; whereas we believe not men upon their word,
without some further evidence.

2. And by the same means we provide for our own safety, who having our minds
full of ignorance, and by their corrupt disposition, more inclinable to embrace
lies rather then truth, might be endangered by admitting known truth to debate,
to be mislead by the mists of humane reasonings, into error, to the
endangering or overthrowing of our faith.

These were Eves gross oversights, in entertaining conference with Satan, a
person unknown, and that about such a manifest and evident truth. In the
substance of her answer, and the form of it she fails many ways. And first
in this, that (if she consented not unto) yet she entertaines such a dangerous
suggestion, as the devils question implies, with so much coldness of spirit,
which she ought to have opposed, with a zealous detestation, and vehement
indignation. This error of hers may give just occasion to

3 OBSERVE Blasphemous and foul suggestions ought not to be heard, without
indignation and detestation.
Job answers his wives damnable counsel, to curse God and die, Job 2.10. And
our Savior Christ, Peter's carnal advice to favor himself, and not to yield
himself to death, Mat. 16.23. as he had done before Satan's cursed motion, to
fall down and worship him, Mat. 4.10. In like manner does St. Paul those
blasphemous exceptions, Romans 3 4, 6. And thus we ought to do

1. To manifest our zeal for Gods honor and for his truth.

2. By it we secure our selves from a farther assault, which we easily invite,
when we bear such blasphemies, with too much softness of spirit and patience.

3. And harden our own hearts against such wicked suggestions, by abhorring the
very mention of them.

4. And oftentimes terrify the suggesters themselves, or at least put them to
shame.

The second failing of Eve in her answer is, that when she mentions that large
grant of God, in bestowing on them the free use of all the trees in the Garden,
she does not so much as mention Gods Name, that had bestowed that large favor
so freely, not without manifest injury to him, who ought to be known and
proclaimed to be the Author of his own gift, as having bestowed them especially
for that end. Whence,

4 OBSERVE When Gods mercies are mentioned, we must withal be careful to
remember his Name that bestows them.
Isa. 63.7. Psalm. 68.19, 20. but even in ordinary conferences, after Jacobs
example, Genesis 33.5. and that of Moses, Exodus 18.8, 9. And this we must do

1. That by entituling God unto, and prefixing his own Name before his works of
mercy, wherewith men's hearts are most affected, he may be highly advanced above
all things, and held out and proclaimed to the world, as the fountain of all
goodness, when all the good things which we enjoy, and in which we rejoice,
are still laid down at his foot. See, Rev. 4.10, 11. whereby, withal the heart
is filled with his love, and with an holy rejoicing in him with thankfulness,
and encouraged by such enlargements to all cheerfulness in his service, with
the Prophet, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. which are the main ends that God aims at, in
lading us with his blessings.

2. There is an evil disposition in men's hearts, to forget God in his mercies,
Deuteronomy. 32.18. Psalm. 106.21. and to ascribe them to themselves with
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.30. Hab. 1.16. or if not, to their idols, Hos. 2.5. yet
at least to some second causes or means, by which those blessings which they
enjoy are conveyed unto them, never looking up to the fountain from whence
they flow: so that there cannot be too much care used to set God before men, in
all the dispensations of his mercies, since they are so apt of themselves to
forget him.

The woman's last failing in this first part of her answer, is manifested in the
manner of her expression, which she uses when she mentions Gods grant, of the
free use of the fruits of the Garden, of which she speaks in so bare and cold a
manner, that she clearly discovers at how low a rate she valued it in her
heart. For whereas God in his grant expressly mentions every tree of the Garden,
of which he gives them liberty to eat freely, as we render that significant
phrase in the Hebrew, (eating thou shall eat) she minceth it in her relation
to Satan, affirming barely and coldly that they did eat of the trees of the
Garden, concealing those two circumstances that set out the largeness of the
gift. This failing of hers gives occasion to

5. OBSERVE Gods mercies ought not when they are spoken of, to be represented
in cold and weak expressions.
David does, Psalm. 103.3, 4. sometimes calling upon, and stirring up others to
do the like, Psalm. 145.7. sometimes expressing and setting out the blessings
themselves, with all the variety of words and phrases that they can devise, as
we may see in Moses his Song, Exodus 15. and Deborahs, Judges 5. otherwhiles by
occasion of remembering one mercy, gathering together heaps of other mercies of
like kind, as Hannah does in her prayer, 1 Samuel 2.1. and the blessed Virgin in
her thanksgiving, Luke 1.46. At other times discovering the fountain whence
those blessings flow, Gods free Mercy, great Goodness, etc. Psalm. 145.7. and
to enlarge the mercies the more, setting out the unworthiness of them that
receive them, as David does, 2 Samuel 7.18. and Saint Paul, 1 Timothy, 1.13. And this
they do

1. Because, they having their hearts enlarged in the apprehension of them
inwardly, cannot but speak as they think of them.

2. It is our duty to advance the Lord by all the means we can, that his Name
alone may be excellent, Psalm. 148.13. and great, Mal. 1.11. now nothing
advances his Name more then his mercies, which therefore must be set out as the
mercies of God, high, and without comparison.

3. When all is done, and we have made use of all our Art and abilities, to set
out Gods mercies in the largest manner that we can devise, all our words come
infinitely short of the full extent of those things which we desire to
represent.

4. In the mean time, while we strive to set out things in the fullest measure,
we warm our own hearts, and quicken our affections the more, and fill our
hearts with the greater admiration of those things, which exceed all our
expressions.

VERSE III.
THe woman in this verse, which contains the second part of her answer to
Satan's question, coming to speak of the interdiction of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil of which she was demanded, it is worth our
observation to take special notice how she rises in her phrases and
expressions, which we shall find far different from the style which she had
used, in setting out the grant of the use of the rest of the fruits of the
Garden; of the former she speaks in a scant and weak manner, of the
interdiction she speaks fully and strongly, as will appear in the particulars.

For first, in this she mentions Gods Name expressly, which she had wholly
omitted in speaking of the grant.

Next, whereas she in her relation of the grant, leaves out two special terms
which God had used in giving it, herein speaking of the interdiction, he
expresses at least all, or perhaps more then God had spoken, at least more
then Moses had related him to have spoken, and questionless more then Satan
had demanded So that by these different manners of expression, she plainly
discovers the thoughts of her heart within, that she made no great account of
Gods mercy in the grant, but the restraint and interdiction she took very
tenderly. Whence

1 OBSERVE Men's words and speeches are usually proportioned, according to the
measure of the affections of the heart.
that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak, Mat. 12.34. when
Elihu is full of matter, and his belly like wine wanting vent, Job 32.18, 19.
observe how large and full of life his expressions are in the chapters
following. If the heart within be full, the tongue must needs be the pen of a
ready Writer, Psalm. 45.1. Neither can it be otherwise,

First, because words being ordained to be the means of representing the
thoughts of the heart within, it is agreeable to all reason, that they should
express them in their full proportion, as the glass does the face.

Secondly, because although the understanding be, or at least should, hold the
raines of the tongue, yet the affections add the spurs unto it, as indeed
they do many times give the measure to our actions themselves, as we run
according to our fear, sight according to our anger, and wake according to our
hope and desire, and so in many other of our actions.

Let us then judge of the temper, both of our own and other men's hearts and
inward dispositions by our expressions, although indeed it be more certainly
manifested by our actions. A spiritual man speaks of the things of the world as
he uses them, necessarily and sparingly. Of spiritual things, as of God, of
Christ, of Grace and Glory, feelingly and fully. See Ephesians 1.3. on the other
side, a carnal man's conference of Heaven and heavenly things, is rare, dry and
empty; but of worldly things, voluntary, frequent and large, much like
Nebuchadnezzars vaunt, Dan 4.30. In like manner, we may judge of the ebbes and
floods of our inward affections, by the abounding or scanting, and by the
strength or weakness of our expressions, as we do sometimes of the ebbes and
floods of the sea, by the high rising or low falling of the rivers which run
into it. And if it happen otherwise, as it does sometimes, it is by reason of
some natural imperfection. It may so happen, and does sometimes, that one may
have a large heart, and a narrow mouth, as Moses excuses himself, that he was
no man of words, he means, not a man of ready speech, Exodus 4.10. sometimes it
falls out, that by some outward occasion, a man is forced to keep in that which
his tongue would otherwise be ready to utter, as David could, and was desirous
to have spoken, but refrained a while, and held his peace even from good, for
the presence of wicked men, Psalm. 39.2. Thus sometimes the ebbes and floods of
the sea are restrained by the violence of the wind.

In one thing the woman does well, whatsoever her meaning was, or whatsoever
moved her the reunto, that she mentions the Sanction together with the
interdiction (whereof only the devil had enquired) expressing not only what God
had forbidden, but withal under how severe a penalty he had forbidden it, and
may give us occasion to

2. OBSERVE When we remember any Law of God, we ought withal to set before us
the Sanction an nexed thereunto.
Lev. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. And we know, that not only the Law was appointed to be
published in the ears of all the people, after their coming into the Land of
Canaan, but the Sanctions both of blessings and curses were to be denounced
withal, Deuteronomy. 28.12, 13. This course that God takes in the delivery of the Law,
both directs Ministers in preaching and applying it, to follow that example,
and private persons in their meditations, and examination of their ways and
actions, not to sever those things which God himself has joined together. And
that,

1. For Gods honor, that all our obedience may be tendered to him both in faith
and fear, wherein we acknowledge both his infinite goodness, in rewarding
even those duties that we owe unto him as his servants, and his holiness and
justice, in executing justice upon such as wickedly transgress.

2. For our own necessity, whose dead hearts need such effectual means to
quicken us. Thus we see God every where stirs up his own people to obedience,
by the promises of large rewards, as the Apostle does likewise stir us up, to
be abundant always in the Work of the Lord, because we know our labor is not
in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. On the other side Job makes use of the
terror of Gods wrath, to restrain himself from evil, Job 31.23. as likewise
does the Prophet David, Psalm. 119.120.

The next thing observable in this part of the woman's answer is, that she
prefixeth the Name of God, both to the interdiction, and to the judgment
threatened, which though she seem to do with some repining, or rising of her
heart against the strictness of Gods dealing with her, notwithstanding
howsoever she may make an ill use of it, yet she does no more then she ought to
have done, and may give us occasion to,

3 OBSERVE When we lay the Law of God before us, we must withal fix our
thoughts upon him that gives it.
The Lord has spoken, or, The Word of the Lord. And indeed, the remembering of
Gods Name upon such occasions, is of singular use sundry ways.

1. Together with Gods Name, is represented unto us his Authority, and withal
both his Wisdom and Goodness, which will be an effectual means to stay and
silence all carnal reasonings, which otherwise will very hardly be answered,
considering how hard a matter it is, for the wisdom of the flesh to submit to
the Law, Romans 8.7. But against God himself, who dare dispute with the Apostle,
Romans 9.20.

2. By the same means we are quickened to obedience with cheerfulness, when
we consider that they are the Commandments of that God, who gave us our being
and in whom we subsist, to whom we owe our selves, and all we have, and from
whom we expect glory and immortality, and eternal life. See David's answer to
his scoffing wife, 2 Samuel 6.21.

3. Only this looking upon God in all his Commandments, makes our services
duties of obedience, when they are performed at the Command, and in submission
to the Will of him whose we are, whereby we acknowledge both his Authority, and
besides his Will to be the rule of Righteousness.

Lastly, it wonderfully stirs us up to watchfulness, diligence, and sincerity
in all our carriage, when we behold the Presence, Majesty and Holiness of him
to whom we perform our duties, serving him with reverence and fear, and with
a single heart, as being the God who sees in secret, and whose eyes are purer
then to behold evil.

But all circumstances duly weighed, and the whole frame of the woman's answer
duly considered, it seems more then probable, that her prefixing of Gods Name
to this interdiction, proceeds merely from an humor of discontent, and the
rising of her spirit against the restraint, from eating the fruit of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, and by consequent against God himself, who
had laid this restraint upon her. So easy a matter it was for Satan to work
her heart, even in this state of innocence, to impatience and discontent at any
restraint at all, how much more easily does he set our heart against it, in
this state of corruption? So that we may from hence

4 OBSERVE It is an hard matter to bring man's heart to submit unto, and bear
with patience and cheerfulness any yoke of restraint.
Belial (as the Scripture terms them) who refuse to bear any yoke, but break
all bands, and cast away the cords from them, Psalm. 2.3. but even in those that
pretend to submit to the Law, and yet when it crosses their humor cast it
aside, as did Johanan and his companions, Jer. 43.4, 5. or at least submit to
it with murmuring like Zipporah, Exodus 4.25. Nay, the best and dearest of Gods
servants, though they have really and cordially taken upon them Christ's yoke,
so far, that they consent to the Law that it is good and holy, Romans 7.16. and
righteous in all things, Psalm. 119.128. and delight in it, Romans 7.22. Psalm.
119.24. and engage themselves in their purposes and resolutions to observe it
constantly in all things, Psalm. 119.106. yet they find a law in their members,
that is, strong lusts in their fleshly part, rebelling and rising up against
that Law, that their mind approves and submits unto, Romans 7.23. and striving
to shake off that yoke, that they may be at liberty. And this comes to pass,
because the best are but renewed in part, and have sin dwelling in them still,
although it reign not in them, so that they are partly carnal still: and
therefore there is still something in them, that neither is, nor can be subject
to Gods Law, Romans 8.7. but grows more rebellious by restraint, Romans 7.8, 9. as
waters swell the higher by the dam, that stops their course. This condition of
his children, the Lord himself has thus disposed in wisdom,

1. That we might be the more sensible of our deliverance, from the bondage of
this sin, when we find the neighborhood of it so troublesome unto us.

2. That we might cleave close unto Christ, drawing still from him a fresh
supply of the Spirit of Power, for the mastering of our corruptions.

3. That the Power of his Spirit may the more appear, in mastering and
prevailing upon those lusts, that make head continually against it.

4. To commend the obedience of his children, in submitting to his Law, even
when their natural inclination bends against it; against which when they strive
with all their power, that they may submit unto Gods Law, they do thereby
manifest their love unto it, and delight in it.

1. Let every man then labor the more carefully, to subdue and mortify this
fleshly and carnal part, which yet remains within us, which continually stirs
us up to rebellion against God, wherein although it prevail not fully, yet it
both takes off that cheerfulness of Spirit, wherewith God requires to be
served, Deuteronomy. 28.47. and in which he delights, 2 Cor. 9.7. and abates that joy
in duties of obedience, which we might find, Prove. 21.15. and that enlargement
of spirit, which should provoke us to run the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm.
119.32. That this body of death (as the Apostle terms it, Romans 7.24.) being in
some measure subdued, every thought within us may be brought under to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Whether that clause (neither shall ye touch it) were expressed by God himself,
in the interdiction (although omitted by Moses in the relation of it) or
whether the woman adds it of her own, as conceiving it to be necessarily
implied in the prohibition, to eat of that fruit, it is not much material, only
we may thence,

5 OBSERVE Whosoever will not be entangled by allurements to sin, must not
come near them.
Psalm. 1.1. nor come near their paths, as Solomon advises, Prove. 4.14, 15.
nor near the door of a lewd woman's house, Prove. 5.8. much less to be where she
is, which Joseph so carefully avoided, Genesis 39.10. we are forbidden to touch
any unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. or to name fornication or uncleanness, Ephesians.
5.3. Job will not so much as look upon a maid, that he might not think on her,
Job 31.1. and we are commanded to hate the very garment spotted with the flesh,
Jude 23. And this we must do,

1. Out of the conscience of the weakness of our corrupt nature, which as
easily takes fire by the least allurement to sin, as gunpowder does by any
spark that falls into it, or rather of it self draws toward it, as iron does
toward an adamant: now we know that he that will not be burnt, must carry no
coals in his bosom, Prove 6.27.

2. That we may manifest our perfect detestation of evil, which every man, that
will approve himself to be a lover of God must hate, Psalm. 97.10. so that by
withdrawing from allurements to sin, we not only manifest our own holiness,
but besides by our example, we are a means to teach others, not to draw near
unto that, which they observe us so carefully to avoid and fly from.

It is upon good ground conceived generally, that the woman, in this answer of
hers to Satan, gives him great advantage and encouragement, by the last words
thereof, wherein she expresses the curse threatened against the transgressors
of this Commandment in so slight a manner, as if it were either uncertain, or
at least inconsiderable; this is evident, that her relation comes far short
of that strong and powerful expression, wherein God had delivered it unto her:
And withal, by relating the interdiction in the strictest terms she could
devise, and the curse in so slight and weak an expression, she gives great
cause of suspicion, that as she distasted the strictness of the command, on
the one side, so she had no great fear of the curse on the other side, of
which the devil makes great advantage, as we shall see in the sequel: so that
comparing this her sleighting of the curse, with her breach of the Commandment,
which immediately followed, we may

6 OBSERVE The sleighting of the curse of the Law, makes way to the
transgression of the Law.
Deuteronomy. 29.19. and if one scoff at Christ's coming unto judgment, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
to execute vengeance on those that deny subjection, Luke 19.27. he will easily
resolve to walk after his own lusts. Indeed, how can it fall out otherwise?
seeing although the cords of love, both to God and to his Law, be the strongest
bands to keep the godly within their bounds, yet the curse and terror of wrath
and vengeance, is the strongest bridle to hold in such as are merely carnal,
who are therefore compared to horse and mule, Psalm. 32.9. which when they have
once cast off the bridle, they run on headlong to all excess of riot.

Again, whosoever has cast off the fear of Gods wrath, has laid aside, in
effect, all grounds of respect toward him, as having in a sort denied his
Providence, Holiness, Truth, Justice and Power, and consequently broken in
sunder all the bands, which might hold him on in any course of obedience.

VERSE 4.
BY this answer of the woman, Satan had now sufficiently discovered the temper
of her spirit. He finds her heart impatient of her restraint, and ready to
repine against God that had laid it on her, and thereupon the pronenesse of her
will and affections, to break out into actual rebellion, if the terror of the
curse, threatened in case of transgression of the Commandment, could be wholly
removed, which also held but by a weak thread, as we have seen, The woman,
having discovered in her answer, her sleighting of it, either as uncertain or
unconsiderable. Wherefore he thinks it best to dally with her no longer, but
comes up close to her, and putting on a bold face,

First, he peremptorily denies the terror of the curse, as if that were only
laid before her as a scar-crow, seeing God well knew that no such evil would
follow the eating of that fruit, as he had threatened.

Secondly, with like impudence and confidence, in stead of that curse he
assures the woman of a singular benefit, which the eating of the fruit of that
tree would bring her, the knowledge of good and evil; for the truth whereof he
appeals to God himself, who, as he affirms, knew well enough, that this tree
had such an extraordinary virtue. This dangerous assault the woman drew on by
her weak and cold answer. Whence

1 OBSERVE A little yielding to Satan in his temptations, invites and
encourages him to a stronger and more violent assault.
David, to dr^w him to commit adultery with Bathsheba, he will not leave till
he have brought him to murder her husband. If Herod will be won to imprison
John Baptist, he shall not stick at last to cut off his head, Mark 6.17, 27.
and if Peter go so far as to deny his Master, he shall at last forswear him
too, Mat. 26.74.

The first reason hereof may be taken from Satan's diligence and vigilancie, to
make the best of, and pursue to the utter most all advantages, (like Benhadads
messengers, 1 Kings 20.33.) as waters, where the bank begins to yield, lie upon
it with the greater weight, especially if we join with his diligence his
malice, which sets him on, and is never satisfied, till he have brought men to
destruction, 1 Pet. 5.8.

Secondly, it is just with God to punish men's haltings, and want of zeal, with
more dangerous errors and backslidings.

Let us then be careful to resist Satan strongly in his first encounters, as we
are advised. 1 Pet. 5.9. with resolute denials, and vehement detestations of
every sinful motion, that it get not the least footing in our hearts, which it
does when it finds allowance, or (which is some degree of allowance) cold
resistance. This resolute opposing of sinful motions,

1. Keeps our hearts free from all defilement by sin.

2. Moves God to strengthen us with a greater measure of grace, as he did Saint
Paul, 2 Cor. 12 9.

3. And daunts the devil, and makes him fly from us, when he is readily
opposed and resisted, Jam 4.7.

Now comparing Satan's wariness in his first encounter with the woman, wherein
he seems somewhat modest, as proposing things only by way of enquiry, but
affirming nothing positively, especially forbearing to charge God at all,
unless it were by a secret insinuation, with this bold and shameless charge
of dissembling and dealing falsely with man, against his own knowledge, we may
take notice of the deceitfulness of sin, and

2 OBSERVE Even those which seem modest in sin at the first, grow bold and
shameless in it at the last.
ABsalom, in the beginning of his treasonable practices, makes no show of any
thing but courtesy, and zeal for justice, but when he had won the hearts of
the people, he grows shameless, and breaks out into open rebellion, and
incestuously defiles his fathers Concubines: and wicked men being past sense
and shame, give themselves over to all lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4.19. glorying at
last in their own shame, Phil. 3.19. and acting things not comely, Romans 1.28.
not fit to be named by modest men, Ephesians. 5.12. The reason whereof is,

1. Because use and custom makes sin so familiar unto men, that it takes away,
first the sense, and then the shame that follows it, which as they feel not in
themselves, so they fear it not from others.

2. By this means God brings all evils to light, that the committers of them
may be abhorred of all men, and his justice may be the more clearly manifested
in their deserved punishment.

But we cannot but with admiration take special notice of Satan's impudency, who
presumes to give God the lie, and flatly to contradict so evident a truth, so
lately and expressly delivered from his own mouth, and that also, as it is
most probable in the woman's own hearing. Whence

3 OBSERVE There is no truth of God so clear and manifest, which Satan and his
Agents dare not to contradict.
Job 21.15. as they do in like manner his Providence, Job 22.13, 14. and his
Justice; Ezech. 18. nay, even God Himself, Psalm. 53.1. The less are we to
marvel, if they question and deny the firmest grounds of faith, seeing they are
things not seen, as they have done in all Ages, as Christ's Deity, Humanity, the
value of his satisfactions, the Deity of the Holy Ghost, the Immortality of the
soul, the Resurrection of the body, and the like. And no marvel,

1. Seeing Satan is both a liar, and the father of lies, John 8.44. so that by
his own nature he must needs be opposite to the truth.

A d 2. Besides, it concerns him above all things to contradict fundamental
truths, upon which Gods honor and man's salvation most depend, both which
Satan labors to overthrow with all his power.

3. And lastly, he well understands by experience, the corruption of man's
nature, which inclines him to embrace darkness rather then light, to believe
lies rather then to love the truth, which gives him great hope of prevailing,
even in suggesting the foulest untruthes to such favorable hearers.

The end at which Satan aimed, in contradicting this intermination of death to
be inflicted upon man, if he should presume to eat of the forbidden fruit, was
to embolden the woman to rebellion, by freeing her from the terror of Gods
wrath, which might be a means, by the fear of the danger, to withhold her
from committing the sin. But the observation to be drawn from thence we have
handled already.

That which we are to take notice of in the next place is, that Satan in
speaking of this intermination, takes up the phrase it self in which God had
delivered it, Gen 2.17. which the woman in her answer had altered, and
expressed it in more gentle and uncertain terms, which questionless he did,
not to help the woman's memory, nor much less to tax her for faultering in her
answer: But rather, that when he had laid the curse before her in the strictest
terms, he might elude it, in a way of scorn, telling the woman in effect,
that this terrible threatening was no other then a mere scar-crow, whereas God
knew well enough that no such effect would follow, as he had threatened. Whence

4. OBSERVE Satan and his Agents never make use of Gods Word, but for mischief:
Isa. 5.19. 1 Cor. 15.32. or tempt others to sin, as we see Satan makes use
even of the Word it self, to persuade our Savior to tempt God, Mat. 4.6. Or
else to contradict it, as those proud men do Jeremies answer from God, Jer.
43.2. or to lull men asleep in carnal security, which was the custom of the
false prophets, Jer. 23.17. by which means they strengthened the hands of evil
doers, that none returned from his wickedness, ver. 14. Neither indeed can it
be otherwise,

1. Because they being themselves defiled, even their very consciences, they
must necessarily defile all that they handle, Tit. 1.15.

2. Because they hate the Word it self, and therefore cannot either think or
speak of it, unless it be to abuse or discredit it some way or other. See,
Prove. 1.29.

3. And lastly, because Satan that guides them, delights in nothing more then
to pollute the most holy things of God, and to fight against him with his own
weapons.

Let us then be always jealous and wary of the taking up of Gods Name or Word,
by wicked men in their speeches and conferences, always fearing some evil
practice in hand. Seeing we know them to be haters, both of the Word it self,
and of God that gave it, and of all the truths therein delivered, and besides
of all godly men; and therefore in all their words or actions, can neither aim
at Gods honor, nor intend any good unto us, but must, even in using Gods Word,
endeavor, either by it to uphold some dangerous errors and heresies, to the
corrupting of the sound doctrine contained in the Word, or to countenance
wicked men's own corrupt practices, and to disgrace other men's sincerity, and
thereby to encourage their companions by making their hearts glad, and
dishearten the godly by making their hearts sad, as the false prophets were
wont to do, Ezech. 13.22.

VERSE 5.
SAtan had charged God in the former verse, which dealing deceitfully with the
man and woman, in threatening them with a grievous curse, if they tasted the
fruit for bidden, which he well knew should never come upon them. In this verse
he goes a step farther, and charge God with envy toward man, affirming that
he, in forbidding the eating of that fruit, kept man from the means of making
him wise, and enabling him to discern between good and evil, that so himself
might excel alone. And this as well as the former, the woman must give credit
unto, upon his own word; and confident affirmation, Whence

1. OBSERVE. Satan in all his Promises, gives men no ground to build upon, but
his own bare word.
Luke 4.6, 7. You must take wicked men's word for it, that laying wait for
innocent blood, is the way to make one rich, and to fill his house with spoil,
Prove. 5.13. so must Ahab take the false prophets word, that he should prosper
in his attempt upon Ramoth-Gilead, 1 Kings 22. on the other side, God, when he
speaks, produces his strong reasons drawn from experience, Isa. 41.20, 21.
sufficiently testified to men's own heart, who are witnesses with him, as
himself speaks, Isa. 43.9, 10. In like manner, his servants, that speak unto
us in his Name, bring forth evident and demonstrative proofs for all that they
desire us to believe, either out of Scriptures, the Oracles of truth, or out of
strong evidences made good by right reason, or by trial of experience, as
Elijah puts the determination of the question, whether God or Baal were the
true God, upon an answer from heaven by fire, 1 Kings 18.24. It is true, that
God himself does affirm things upon his own Word alone, and justly may, seeing
his Word is the Standard of Truth, and therefore the only ground of faith: but
this is a peculiar privilege to him alone, incommunicable to any creature, not
to men who are all liars, Rem 3.4. Much less to Satan, who is the father of
lies, John 8.44. Indeed Satan sometimes imitates God in this way, and offers
also, and makes show, to confirm by experiments what he suggests, as that
proud men are happy because they prosper, Mal. 3.15. by which means he
prevails much upon wicked men, to harden their hearts, Eccl. 8.11. Jer. 44.17,
18. yea, and sometimes shakes the faith of the godly themselves, as he did
David's, Psalm. 73.2, 3, 13. But therein he plays the notable Sophister,

1. In representing wicked men's prosperity so, as if it were the reward of
their wickedness, whereas, it is either the blessing of God upon their
provident care and industry, in managing their affairs according to his own
decree, Prove. 10.4. and 14.23. or for the manifesting of his Goodness to all,
Mat. 5.45. and his Justice in their condemnation who abuse his mercies, and
provoke him by their sins, when he does them good; or for the fatting of them
against the day of slaughter, Jer. 12.3. and raising them up on high unto
eminent places, their casting down into sudden and horrible destruction may be
the more observed, Psalm. 73.18.

2. He deceives men, by making the world believe that to be their happiness,
which is indeed their plague, as Solomon had found it in his own experience,
Eccl. 5.13. neither indeed can it be otherwise,

1. Because all Satan's words are falsehood, which therefore can have no reality
upon which they are founded; for if they had, they were not falsehood.

Besides, the devil has no power to effect any thing of himself, and
consequently in all his promises can give us nothing but words, as being not
able to make good any thing of all that he undertakes, as the event and issue
makes it evident at the end.

Are not they then grossly besotted that believe every word? which Solomon
tells us is the character of a fool, Prove. 14.15. and that of Satan too, who
is a liar from the beginning, as our Savior tells us, John 8.44. and yet those
false suggestions of his, are the principles by which the wise men of the world
guide themselves, believing

1. That riches are a strong city, Prove. 18.11. that they abide for ever, Psalm.
49.11. that they bring with them all sufficiency, so that one may securely rest
upon them, as the fool thought, Luke 12.19. and may be purchased by ways of
injustice and violence, Prove. 1.13. grounds that have no other foundation but
the opinion of the world, blinded by Satan, 2 Cor. 4.4. but contradicted by the
Word of God, and by all experience.

2. These groundless opinions, and others (if it may be) more false then they,
as that God has forsaken the earth, that a man shall have peace, though he
walk in all the abominations of his heart, that there is no profit in Gods
service, and the like, men notwithstanding so fairly rest upon, that they are
swayed by them in the whole course of their practice.

3. In the mean time they slight those infallible grounds of truth, which the
God of truth has laid down unto us in his Word, and which all experience has
made good unto us. And is not he a wise man that guides himself by the wisdom
of the world?

Satan, if we mark it well, manifests great policy, in choosing out the ground
upon which he raises up jealousy in the woman's heart against God. That
Paradise was a Garden of great pleasure and delight, excellently furnished with
all variety of the choicest fruits, planted by God Himself, and freely given
and bestowed on man out of his mere bounty: These things were so clear and
evident, that they could not be contradicted or questioned, and thereso^e
Statan takes it to be his wifest course not to meddle with them at all. But the
intention of God in this bounty of his, was a secret thing, not manifest in it
self, and therefore might the more safely be questioned. Wherefore he uses
all the Art he can to cast a jealousy into the woman's mind, that in this
great show of liberality God intended her no true good. So that we may hence

2 OBSERVE It is Satan's custom and policy, to cast suspicions of evil ends,
on that which he cannot blame or discredit otherwise.
David's wisdom, valor, and good service to the State, were so manifest, that
they could not be denied; he breeds a jealous opinion in the heart of Saul,
that David had an intention to make use of the honor and reputation which he
had gotten by these means to step into his throne, and thrust him out of his
Kingdom. When no man could blame Ahimelechs supplying of David with such
provisions as he wanted, being both the Kings servant and as he conceived,
employed then in the Kings service; Doeg, an instrument of Satan's, suggests
that he was confederate with David in all his treasonable practices. In like
manner dealt the Scribes and Pharisees with our Savior Christ: for when they
had nothing to blame, either in his life or doctrine, they cast a jealousy
into Pilates head, that he practiced rebellion against Caesar. The like
aspersions they cast upon the Christians in the primitive times, that they were
enemies to, and rebellious against all Authority, falsifiers of Testaments,
incestuous, and secret practicers of all abominations. In the like manner he
has dealt with the Church of God in all ages, and does unto this day. The
reasons whereof may be

1. Because evil intentions are, in true estimation, the greatest of all evils,
wherewith men can be charged.

2. Because nothing can be laid unto men's charge (especially where their lives
and actions are without offense) with so much advantage, be cause things that
appear not in themselves, may with as much probability be affirmed as they can
be denied.

1. Let us then acknowledge Gods infinite goodness, that finds means to
justify his servants, and to maintain their credit against such dangerous
practices of Satan and his instruments against them, as no wisdom of man can
prevent: notwithstanding all which he brings forth their innocence as the
light, and their righteousness as the noonday, as he promises to do, Psalm.
37.6.

2. Let all good men walk wisely toward those which are without, Col. 4.5.
cutting off all advantages from those that seek occasion, after the Apostles
example, 2 Cor. 11.12. abstaining from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22.
walking circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15. taking the Prophet David for example, who
honored Abners funeral with his own presence (which was more then perhaps
otherwise he would have done) that no man might suspect him to have had any
hand with Joab in contriving Abners death, 2 Samuel 3.36, 37.

3. Believe not rashly such jealousies as are oftentimes entertained of men,
even in good actions, as being taken up, and cast upon men, either by those,

1. Who do therein discover their uncharitable minds, (for charity thinks not
evil, 1 Cor. 15.57.)

2. And are therein but the instruments of Satan, whose work it is to discredit
the godly, seeing he cannot by their lives and actions, which witness their
holiness, yet by raising jealousies of the unsoundnesse of their hearts, as he
endeavored to cast such an aspersion upon holy Job, Job 1.9. and 2.4.

Now, if we observe it well, we shall find those same evils justly charged
upon Satan, of which he endeavors to tax God himself. He charge God with
deluding man, in terrifying him with a fearful curse, which should never come:
in the mean time he deludes him in good earnest, in promising a great good,
which he knew should prove clean contrary. He charge God with envying man's
happiness, when it was he himself, that out of envy labored to seduce him, to
his utter ruin and destruction, as we shall see anon. Whence

3. OBSERVE It is usual with Satan and his Agents, to charge upon other men
those evils falsely, whereof themselves are truly guilty.
like crimes, which may happen upon diverse grounds,

1. Those that have false and evil hearts of their own, are apt to suspect that
to be in other men, which they find to be in themselves.

2. By casting suspicions upon other men, they hope in some measure to clear
themselves, as if they might in all probability be free from those evils, which
they tax in other men: or at least they hope to gain thus much, that their own
evils may seem the less heinous, when other men appear to be little better
then they.

Let none of us then be much moved at those aspersions that are cast upon godly
men, although with much confidence and boldness, as hypocrisy, pride,
covetousness, contempt, and opposing of Authority, which upon due examination
will be found to reign in those, who lay that to the charge of Gods children
whom we know they hate, and therefore no marvel if they endeavor to disgrace
as much as they may.

Satan's endeavor was to move the woman to taste of the fruit forbidden, that
she might be advanced thereby to a better condition, endued with a greater
measure of knowledge, enabling her to know good and evil, and raised up to
little less then the honor of a God. Those glorious offers tend to no other
end, but to move her to discontent at her present condition, as being far below
that which it might have been, which must needs at last reflect upon God
Himself, who withheld from them that better estate, unto which they might have
been advanced. To move the woman to seek after a better condition, he presents
her those suggestions that might move her to discontent at her present estate.
Whence we may

4. OBSERVE Discontent at our present condition is a dangerous temptation of
Satan.
Tim. 6.8. Heb. 13.5. and unto the practice of all godly men: see the Apostles
example, Phil. 4.11. and is the daughter of pride and self-love, which makes us
think our selves worthy of much more then we have, and is the Parent

1. Of anthankfulnesse to God for what we have received, which proceeds from an
undervaluing of those blessings which we enjoy.

2. Of unquietness in our own hearts, when our desires are not satisfied, as
Ahab had no rest in himself, when he could not get Naboths vineyard, 1 Kings
21.3, 4.

3. Of envy at and contention with our neighbors, who possess that which we
desire to enjoy, and are consequently looked on by us with an evil eye, as
standing in our way to the obtaining of that which we aim at.

4. Of unconscionable dealing, and taking up ways of dishonest gain, that we
may purchase that by any means, without which we think our selves not
sufficiently supplied, according to our worth.

Let then all that are godly, the more carefully labor to establish their
hearts in a settled content, in that condition in which God has placed them,
which must be done

1. By approving it in their judgment, as every way best and fittest for them,
and for Gods honor and glory.

2. By bringing in and limiting our desires thereby so far, that we wish it not
to be other then it is.

3. By bringing our affections to delight and rejoice in it, as in that lot
which God himself has laid out unto us, and that upon these considerations.

1. That whatsoever we enjoy, is more then we have any title unto by nature,
who came into the world naked, a consideration which Job quiets his heart
withal, when he was at once stripped of all that he had, Job 1.21.

2. That we are unworthy of what we enjoy, (as Jacob acknowledges himself
less then the least of Gods mercies, Genesis 32.10.) so that whatsoever we enjoy,
we have out of favor and free grace.

3. That what we have, we have no ability to manage as we ought, nor can give a
perfect account of it, if God should deal strictly with us.

4. That God who has allotted us our estates, is infinitely wise, and
therefore better knows what is fittest for us then we our selves, and no less
kind and loving, nay, much more then we are to our selves, and therefore will
not fail to give us any thing that may be truly good unto us, as having given
us his own Son, with whom he cannot but give us all things, Romans 8.32.

5. That the life of man consists not in abundance, as our Savior tells us,
Luke 12.15. but in a secret supply of our wants by Gods blessing, who makes a
little that a righteous man has, better then the riches of the ungodly, Psalm.
37.16.

6. That when we have what we would desire, yet we must depend upon God for our
allowance out of it every day, as all men rich and poor are directed to do by
our Savior, to beg of him their portion for every day.

Now this contentedness must reach even to our spiritual as well as to our
temporal estate; wherein our want of grace, sense of our inward corruptions,
continual conflicts with Satan, and foiles by him many times, though they may
and ought to quicken us to prayer and watchfulnels, and make us humble and vile
in our own eyes, yet ought not to disquiet our hearts so far, as to provoke us
to impatiency and murmuring at our present condition, or to kindle our desires
to long after such a change of it, as is not warranted. Rather our unquietness
at our own corruptions, should beget in us only an holy indignation against our
selves, for our errors and failings, with a desire of that future condition,
wherein we shall put off this body of death, (yet with patience waiting till
the time of our appointed changing, Job 14.14) but no manner of impatience
against our present condition, or repining against God, who has so ordered it,
both for his own glory, and for our good at the last.

When Satan tells the woman, that by eating the forbidden fruit her eyes should
be opened, he necessarily implies, that for the present, both she and her
husband were blind in effect; so that these are the two grounds upon which he
endeavors to move the woman to discontent at her present condition.

The first, that she was under restraint, and not left at liberty, to take what
she pleased.

The second, that she was held in blindness and ignorance, wherewith Satan
would have her conceive she had great cause to be troubled, as she had reason
to be, if the suggestion had been true. So that we may thence

5 OBSERVE Blindness and Ignorance is a great misery.
IT is not good (says Solomon) that the soul should be without knowledge,
Prove. 19.2. The Apostle goes farther, and in express terms tells us, that
ignorance alienates us from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. and reckons it up
amongst the spiritual plagues, which the Lord in his justice laid upon those
that dishonored him, and glorified him not as God, the darkening of their
sottish hearts, Romans 1.21. and is the means by which Satan (whose work it is
to blind men, 2 Cor. 4.4) prevails so far upon men, as he leads them at his
will into all lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4.19. and indeed into all other sins, when
their eyes being blinded, they know not whither they go, 1 John 2.11. More
particularly, the evils of this fearful plague are

1. The abasing of a man unto the condition of a beast, from which he differs,
and is advanced above him only in his understanding. Thus David for want of a
right judgment and understanding of Gods ways terms himself a beast, Psalm.
73.22. as be does likewise all men else, Psalm. 49 20. as Agur likewise terms
himself brutish upon the same ground, Prove. 30.2.

2. Ignorance makes a man unuseful and unserviceable every way, in all his
undertakings; for only a wise man's eyes are in his head, but a fool walks in
darkness, Eccl. 2.14. which we know hinders all manner of emploiments, as
appears in the darkness of Egypt, which fixed them to their places from whence
they could not remove, till the darkness was over, E^od. 10.23.

3. Ignorance leaves a man without comfort, for it is the light that is sweet,
that is comfortable, Eccl. 11.7. and the light of the eyes rejoices the heart,
Prove, 15.30. consequently, darkness and ignorance must needs leave the heart
without comfort, whence the Scripture expresses, one being in a sad condition
by being in darkness without light. Isa. 50.10. Now that only the Scripture
esteems to be knowledge, which is the knowledge of God, Prove. 30.2. and that in
the face of Jesus Christ, John 17.3. and of the things that are freely given us
of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. revealed by the Word, and taught by the Spirit.

Satan contents not himself with working the heart of the woman to a
discontented humor against her present condition, but gives a step farther and
persuades her that God knew how to help it, but would not, that by this means
she might conceive, that Gods heart stood not well affected toward her, and
that he wished her no good, whatsoever show he made to the contrary.

First, because he might have allowed this means of gaining knowledge (which
he had so strictly forbidden them,) without any prejudice to himself at all.

Secondly, that he had denied it them out of an evil disposition, namely, that
he might excel and be God alone: wherein he most blasphemously charge God
with injustice, in taking order to maintain his own right, and providing for
his own honor, before the advancing of his creatures, (of which,
notwithstanding according to their place and condition, he takes care in all
his ways.) Now although it be true, that this is most unjustly applied unto
God, though it were an evil in a creature: Yet seeing this is the color by
which Satan blindes the woman's eyes, that God was unjust in this act of his,
because it is granted that it is unjust in one creatures dealing with another
upon that ground which Satan here supposes, and all men grant; We may

6. OBSERVE, It is great injustice in any man, to keep under, and hinder others
for his own advantage.
Isa. 5.8. to keep in corn, that we may have plenty when others want, Prove.
11.26. to hoard up coin, and lade our selves with thick clay, (as the Prophet
terms it, Hab. 2.6. that we may be rich alone, when others are kept low and
poor. But much more to keep away the Key of knowledge, with the Scribes and
Pharisees, and their Apes the popish Prelates, that we may be esteemed wise
alone, and the generality of men may be kept in blindness and ignorance. The
reason whereof is, because God, (who by right of Creation, being Lord of all
things, has power to dispose them and order them according to his own will)
has appointed the preservation of community, to be the common end whereunto
all creatures should tend, and whereunto all their sufficiency should be
referred. So that, to speak properly, no man has any thing for himself alone.
Not his wealth, which is (as our Savior calls it) another man's, Luke 16.12.
even any man's that needs, who has an interest in it, whom therefore the wise
man calls the owner thereof, Prove. 3.27. nor his graces much less, which are
given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and consequently, a man reserving any
thing (which he has received only as a Steward, to employ and bestow it on
others, as God directs him) to himself, merely for his own advantage, without
employing it for a common good, he unjustly keeps back from others that
whereunto God himself has given them a title, which is stronger then all the
civil titles in the world. Yet is this that which the whole world aims at in
all their labors and endeavors, and drives at with all their wisdom and
policy, to do well unto themselves alone, whatsoever becomes of other men,
wherein they are approved and applauded too by all men, Psalm. 49.18.

When Satan persuades the woman to eat of this fruit, though forbidden, and
that under so heavy a curse, he must withal necessarily imply, that no other
tree in the Garden, but that alone, had this virtue to make one wise, and that
therefore they should not fear to adventure the eating of it (although it were
forbidden) for so great a benefit. For if any other tree, whereof they might
freely eat, had the same virtue, it had been a vain thing to persuade her to
run so dangerous an hazard, to gain that by eating the fruit forbidden, which
they might as easily obtain without any danger at all, by eating of some other
fruit, which was not forbidden. This then is the main scope at which Satan
drives.

First, to persuade the woman, that no tree in the Garden had this singular
virtue, by making man wise, to advance him near to the state of a God, but this
alone.

Secondly, and leaves her thereupon to infer, that God did but delude them with
a false show of liberality, because he gave them only fruits of ordinary and
vulgar use, but withheld from them this tree, which had this eminent virtue, to
make man wise like unto God. So that we have here occasion to

7 OBSERVE, It is false liberality to withhold things that are of true value,
and to bestow that which is of little worth.
Israel take against Moses, that he fed them with nothing but Manna, but had
not given them any of the varieties of Egypt, Numb. 11.4, 5, 6. nor had given
them a land flowing with milk and honey, or possessed them of fields and
vineyards. Numb. 16.14. God justly taxes his people, Mal. 1.14. that when they
had males in their flocks, they sacrificed unto him corrupt or base things. And
as justly taxes Saul, for passing under the Anathema, the vile and refuse of
the cattle of the Amalekites, and reserving the best of the sheep and the oxen,
and of the fatlings, 1 Samuel 15.9. The reason is, that true liberality is the
fruit of love, which is grounded upon the estimation of that which we love, and
expressed in bestowing upon the person whom we love, gifts answerable to the
price and value that we set upon him. Thus Abraham in disposing of his estate,
gave some portions to the sons of his Concubines, but the choice and maine of
his estate he left unto his son Isaac, which was his darling, Genesis 25.5, 6.
Now then, where we bestow things of little worth, we show little love, and
consequently, those things which we so bestow, cannot be esteemed true
liberality.

Let us, upon this ground, admire the infinite and incomprehensible love of God
unto man, upon whom he has bestowed his own beloved Son, his choicest Jewel,
his Delight daily, Prove. 8.30. and that from all eternity. Thus the Holy Ghost
every where sets out this unvaluable Love of God, as John 3.16. and 1 John 4.9.
the more, that we have thereby assurance, that he cannot but with him give us
all things, Romans 8.32. even every thing that is good, which he has promised to
all that love him, Psalm 84.11. The consideration of this wonderful expression
of Gods love to man, as it cannot but amaze and astonish us, so it ought to
quicken us to a serious enquiry, and searching into that wonderful mystery,
that we may in some measure comprehend with all Saints, that love that passes
knowledge, endeavoring to measure it out in all the dimensions thereof, Ephesians.
3.18, 19. that our mouths may be filled with his praises, and our hearts with
his love, considering what we may render unto him again, with the Prophet
David, Psalm. 116.12. and resolving to stick at nothing, wherein we may testify
our thankfulness for such manifestations of his love unto us, the first of our
increase, Prove. 3 9. the male of our flock, the flower of our age, the
beginning of our strength, Eccl. 12.1. all our abilities, even the strongest
affections of our souls, Deuteronomy. 10.12. as being all of them

1. His own, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.

2. And the best of them unworthy of the greatness of his Majesty, Mic. 6.6, 7.

3. Altogether unproportionable to that which we have received.

4. Yet to be recompensed with a plentiful reward, measured unto us, beyond all
that we can conceive, when the day of refreshing shall come.

Satan's endeavor in the first place (as we have seen) was to take off man's
heart from God; his next policy is to faster it to the creature.

First, to himself, by advising him to propose unto himself his own good, as
his only scope, without any respect unto Gods honor at all.

Secondly, he moves the woman to seek to the creature, as the means to procure
unto her that which she desired, namely, to eat of this fruit forbidden, as
having in it a secret virtue to make her wise, even like unto God Himself. The
forcible arguments by which he persuades thereunto, we shall examine anon. For
the present, let us take notice of Satan's Art, by which he labors to settle
man's heart in a resolved Apostasy from God, unto which he makes way, by fixing
it wholly upon the creature, without any respect unto God at all. Whence

8 OBSERVE. Man's leaning to the creature must necessarily utterly divide his
heart from God.
NO man (says our Savior) can serve two Masters; but if he lean to the one,
he must despise the other, Mat. 6.24. whence it is, that the Apostle makes,
trusting in God, and trusting in riches diversely opposite one to the other, and
by consequent incompatible, 1 Timothy 6.17. the like opposition the Prophet makes,
between trusting in God, and relying on man, Jer. 17.5. or on ones wisdom,
Prove. 3.5. If Demas once embrace this present world, farewell the Apostles, yea,
and Christ himself, 2 Timothy 4.10. The reason is, God must be depended on alone,
as he is God alone, and none with him: he must have the whole heart, and all
the affections of it, Luke 10.27. so that there is nothing left to be imparted
to any creature, unless it be in subordination to him. Our cleaving to God is
represented by marriage, Jer. 3.14. wherein, if the woman cleave to another man
the marriage band is wholly dissolved. And God we know is a jealous God, and
therefore utterly impatient of any Corrival: if we forsake him, he will
certainly forsake us.

Let every one of us then beware of declining in our hearts after the favor of
men, wealth, honors, pleasures, and the like: looking upon that sin, not as it
is favorably judged of by the world, but as we find it represented unto us in
the Word: the Apostle tells us, that in cleaving to pleasures, we set them
above God himself in our hearts, 2 Timothy 3.4. St. James tells us, our friendship
or closing with the world is enmity against God, James 4.4. and our Savior
tells us, that man that loves riches, is as hard to be recovered, as it is to
pass a Camel through the eye of a needle, Mat. 19.24. Let us therefore in this
sin consider

1. The indignity, both in respect of God, whom we abase below his own
creatures: See Jer. 2.12, 13. and in relation to ourselves, when we stoop to
those things, which are either far below us, or at the best but equal to us.

2. The folly, in forsaking the fountain of living waters, and digging
Cisternes that hold no water, which makes them prove fools in the event, Jer.
17.11, 13.

3 The danger of provoking Gods jealousy, which no man is able to endure.

2. Let all men, that desire to cleave unto God in sincerity and truth, begin
first with the denial of themselves, and of the world, as our Savior directs
all that will be his followers, Mat. 16.24. They that will put the ship under
sail, must first weigh their Anchors. Now we deny our selves and the world,

1. In our judgments, when we set all things, even those that men so highly
esteem in the world, at a low rate in our hearts, as they are indeed.

2. When our cares about them are slight and few, as those that seek after
greater and higher things.

3. When our affections toward them are cold and weak, as our joys, sorrows,
fears, and the like, when we have brought our hearts so far, that our hearts
are emptied of the love, both of the world and our selves, then are we fit to
close with God, and not before.

To draw the woman to the embracing of the creature, Satan moves her first,
with that which was likely to affect her most, to have respect to nothing but
her self, and her own advancement, and to make use of the means, by which she
might in knowledge become equal unto God himself. Whence

9 OBSERVE. Self-love and seeking is one of Satan's most dangerous snares.
Tim. 3.2. enquiring after nothing else, but who will show them any good, Psalm.
4.6. referring all unto themselves with the King of Babylon, Dan. 4.30. Is not
this great Babylon which I have built, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty, blessing themselves, and approving others in that way.
Psalm. 49.18. But in the Church of God this evil prevails so strongly, that
Saint Paul complains, that even in his time all men sought their own, and no
man, save Timothy, sought the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2.21. The reason
whereof is, that there is by God himself planted in the hearts of all men, the
love of themselves, which in subordination to God is warrantable, but the
affection it self being natural, and moving strongly, is hardly, by the power
of grace, which is but weak, kept within due bounds, that is, in subordination
to God, and in a due respect to community.

Again, upon the same ground, when this inordinate self has once seized on a
man's heart, it is hardly mastered, as being grounded upon self-conceit, or an
high opinion of ones self, which easily prevails upon the will, by which he
makes choice of all things in relation to himself, so that both the affection,
and all the endeavors are carried on accordingly, to self-rejoycing and
self-seeking.

Secondly, as this evil disposition easily seizes upon us, and possesses us
strongly, so is it of all others most injurious.

1. To God against whom we lift up our selves, advancing our selves above him,
in seeking our selves more then his honor, for which we were created, and
preferring our own lusts, before his righteous and holy Will.

2. To men, whom we must neglect in all offices and services of love, when we
seek only our selves, and our own advantages.

3. But most of all to our selves, who neglecting both our duty to him, when we
respect our selves more then his honor, and toward our brethren, must
therefore lose all our reward, which is promised only to such as serve God
according to his will, and one another thorough love.

Let every man then, both abhor in his heart, and bend himself against so
dangerous an evil, the daughter of infidelity, mother of covetousness,
ambition, contention, and a thousand like evils, and therefore by the just
judgment of God, accompanied with these fearful plagues.

1. The subjecting and abasing of our selves to the creatures, for the
attaining of our ends, whereas God has put them under our feet.

2. The troubling and vexing of our minds with continual unquietness, caused
necessarily, by seeking and laboring for that, unto which we can never attain.

3. The tempting of us to diverse ways of dishonest gain, contentions,
envyings, uncharitableness for the attaining of our desired ends, seeing the
ways of Justice, Mercy and Truth can no way help us to gain that which we aim
at. There is indeed Self considered in relation to God and community, which one
may love, (otherwise our Savior would never have laid our love to our selves
before us, as a pattern of love to our neighbors,) namely, one may love
himself

1. As Gods creature.

2. As created after his Image.

3. As an instrument of his glory.

4. As a servant to community, for the good of others: so far one may not
only love himself, but seek himself too upon these grounds, and in relation to
these ends. But self taken without relation to God and community, is a mere
fantasy, to be abhorred as an idol of our own brains. This self-love is
founded upon pride and self conceit, or an opinion (though groundless) of ones
own worth, whether for Wisdom, Goodness, or any inward or outward eminency;
And is manifested in leaning to ones own will and wisdom, setting out his own
worth, rejoicing in himself and his own good, in directing all his endeavors
to the attaining of his own ends, and in his zeal against all that oppose him
in that course. Therefore this foul evil must be opposed by self-denial, (as
incompatible with true Piety, which it quenches where it reigns, and
blemisheth where it dwells) consisting

1. In a low esteem of ones self.

2. In the laying aside ones own wisdom and will.

3. In rejoicing in God alone, looking only at him as the fountain of
whatsoever we are or have.

4. In bending all our endeavors to advance his glory, and to serve one
another through love, as we are commanded, 1 Cor. 10.31. Gal 5.13.

To have moved the woman to seek after some base and sensual delight and
pleasure, or to have tempted her with profit (especially being lord of the
whole earth,) had been a vain thing, those base earthly things her heavenly
mind had never stooped unto: wherefore Satan finds out for her, and presents
unto her a bait fit for her, as being agreeable to her temper, the increase of
her knowledge, which might equal her even with God himself, thus we usually
take fowls and fishes, by such baits, as they naturally most delight in.
Whence

10 OBSERVE Satan usually lays his snares for men in those things wherein
they naturally take most delight.
Jezabel to corrupt Ahab, 1 Kings 21.25. of Parents to corrupt their children,
Jer. 44.17. The reason is,

First, because by this means he prevails upon men much more easily, as
having an help within our own breasts, to let in those temptations wherewith he
assailes us.

And secondly, because such snares, when they have entangled us, hold us of all
others most strongly, as indeed love is strong as death, Cantic. 8.6.

Let men then be always fearful of some snare or other, in things of ordinary
use, if our hearts delight in them; as of houses, apparel, meats, and drinks,
friends, goods, nay, of knowledge and grace it self, and performances of the
best duties, lest they lift up our hearts, 1 Cor. 8.1. making us to think
highly of ourselves, and to despise others, or make us grow secure and
careless, neglecting the use of those means that might establish us in a
right way. Let us take care to enjoy such things, the more they delight us,
with the more fear and trembling, watching diligently over our own hearts,
lest by the corrupt inclination of them, and the policy of Satan, they become
snares unto us, to entangle us before we be aware, as being least suspected,
because they are beloved.

If we come to consider this bait more particularly, we find it to be
knowledge, which Satan persuades the woman to labor to increase, by eating the
fruit forbidden. Now knowledge (we know) is the ornament of man's soul, unto
which as Nature has fitted man only, of all visible creatures, so duty binds
him to increase it what he may, Prove. 16.16. and 4.7. Thus Satan lays a snare
for her, in that which was her duty. Whence

11 OBSERVE Satan tempts us to sin, not only in our pleasures and delights, but
even in our duties too.


1. Because we are in such ways most secure, and therefore most easily
ensnared.

2. Satan desires most to corrupt our best endeavors, for the greater
dishonor to God and Religion.

3. Because there be many easy and dangerous errors in circumstances of duty,
even where the substance of the action is warrantable in it self.

Let it then be our care, as to walk in ways warrantable in themselves, so to
go forwards therein with great circumspection and wariness, begging Gods
assistance to order our steps in his Word, Psalm. 119.133. that is, in the ways
prescribed in his Word, walking in the Spirit, that we may not fulfill the lusts
of the flesh, Gal. 5.16.

2. Guiding our selves in every circumstance by the rule of that Word, in the
time, in the manner, in the measure, and in the end of every action, that we
may do not only What God has commanded us, but As he has commanded us, Deuteronomy.
6.25. for the failing wherein God made a breach upon Uzzah, even in that good
action of bringing the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. Thus the Word ought to be our
Counselor in every particular, Psalm. 119.24. and as a Lantern in our hands
to guide our steps, verse 105.

3. There needs, for this purpose, the thinking on our ways beforehand, with
the Prophet, Psalm. 119.59. and the examination of them afterward, that we may
beg ^^rdon for our errors, as Hezekiah does for the people that had not
cleansed themselves before the eating of the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30.18. and may
look more carefully to our ways for time to come.

It will not be amiss, to consider what kind of knowledge it is, which Satan
persuades the woman to seek after, the knowledge of good and evil; Good they
knew already, at least as far as was needful for them to know; with evil they
had nothing to do, nor consequently any cause, much less any warrant to seek
after the knowledge of that which they could make no use of when they had
attained it. So that we may thence

12 OBSERVE The searching after the knowledge of unnecessary things, is one of
Satan's snares, and unprofitable to us.
Daniel, Dan. 12.9, 13. as likewise, our Savior Himself denies to discover the
time of the day of Judgment, unto his Disciples, Mark 13.32. and the time of
the restoring of the Kingdom of Israel to his Apostles, Acts 1.7. (as a thing
unlawful to enquire after) or what should become of Saint John, to Saint Peter,
John 21.21, 22. as being a thing that concerned not him to know. The reasons
may be,

1. Because the searching into things not revealed, must of necessity be joined
with some unthankfulness for the knowledge of things that are revealed.

2. We know, knowledge of it self pusses up, where it is not sanctified, 1
Cor. 8.1. and we have no reason to expect that God should bless what he has
not granted; no more knowledge unlawfully gotten, then stolen goods: seeing
all blessings are annexed to acts of obedience, in those things which God has
warranted and commanded.

Let us then learn to be wise to sobriety, (as the words, Romans 12.3. may not
improperly be rendered,) contenting our selves with the knowledge

1. Of such things as God has revealed in his Word, which belong to us, Deuteronomy.
29.29.

2. Which are most proper and useful to us, as our Savior intimates in his
answer to Saint Peter, John 21.21, 22. Thus Solomon begs of God understanding,
to judge the people over which God had set him, 1 Kings 3.9. a Petition which
God highly approves, and grants in a large proportion.

3. As are profitable to edification both of our selves and others. See Ephesians.
4.29. these the Apostle calls wholesome words, 1 Timothy 6.3. as for the searching
after the knowledge of future events, which God has sealed up in his own
breast, and oppositions of Sciences, 1 Timothy 6.20. they must needs occasion

1. Unprofitable expense of time.

2. Needless distraction of our thoughts.

3. The neglect of searching into things more useful and needful for our selves
and others.

4. And tends to ungodliness; the nourishing of pride, contention, and the
like, and are the very baits and snares of Satan.

If we consider the Promise which Satan tenders to the woman, to allure her to
rebellion, we may easily discover how vain and unprofitable that had been
which he here offers unto her, if she had or could have gained it; and from
this particular may take notice of the rest of his offers, And

13 OBSERVE, The Promises of Satan, or his Agents, are of such things as are
either evil, or unprofitable.
Jezabel to King Ahab, to give him Naboths vineyard, 1 Kings 21.7. which proved
to be the ruin of himself and his family. Like unto this are the promises of
those wicked wretches, to such as they desire to seduce, to fill their houses
with spoil, by laying wait for innocent blood, Prove. 1.13. and of the same
nature is the promise of the whore to the young man, whom she tempts to
lewdness, to give him his fill of love, Prove. 7.18. she should have said, of
filthy lust. Those things thus tendered and promised, are either evil in their
own nature, as that of the whore and the drunkards, Isa. 56.12. of the devils
to witches, to help them to destroy and do mischief. Or at least they bring
evil after them, as riches reserved to men greedy of gain for their hurt,
Eccl. 5.13. nourishing pride, security, voluptuousness, carnal confidence, and
the like, besides the piercing of the heart thorough with many sorrows, 1 Timothy
6.10. neither indeed is it possible, that it should be otherwise: for who can
hope for good things from evil men, or profitable things from such as are
unprofitable, both to themselves, and others?

Let no man then suffer himself to be beguiled and led away by such fair
promises, of the favor of great men, increase of wealth, enjoying of variety
of pleasures, and the like, (which the men of the wo^ so much look after)
tendered unto us by wicked men, and that usually in a way of sin: But every
man advisedly consider

1. The nature of the things themselves that are offered unto us, which we
shall find to be such, as can neither make us good, nor much less happy.

2. What they promise in them, which is only the having, not the enjoying, much
less the holy use of them, without which they can do us no good.

3. Under what condition they are offered unto us, which we shall find usually
to be the committing of some sin, or the neglecting of some good duty or
other.

4. Take notice with what affection they tender them unto us: questionless
those that love us not, cannot promise or bestow any thing on us, out of any
true desire of our good, but either to serve their own turns, or to draw us,
if it may be, to the same wicked practices, which they themselves delight in.

5. Let us seriously consider what the issue and event must needs be at the
last, when we have wearied our selves in vain, to become fools at the latter
end, Jer. 17.12. complaining when it will be too late to help it, Prove. 5.11.
Let us therefore hearken unto God, whose promises are

1. All of them Yea and Amen,

2. Of things truly, and in themselves, Grace, and Glory, and every good thing,
Psalm. 84.11.

3. Tendered unto us out of true love, that he may do us good at the latter end,
Deuteronomy. 8.16.

4. And that under the condition of serving him for our own good, Deuteronomy. 6.24.
having at present our fruit in holiness, and hereafter the end everlasting
life, Romans 6.22. so that our soul shall bless the Lord that has given us
counsel, Psalm. 16.7. whence experience shall show us, that it is good to draw
near unto God, Psalm. 73.28.

To move Eve the more effectually, Satan sets before her the high degree of
honor, unto which that knowledge which might be gained by eating this
forbidden fruit, would advance her, that she should be as God. So that we may
here take notice, whereunto Satan labors to draw the minds of wicked men, and
may

14 OBSERVE. The special end that Satan persuades wicked men to aim at, is,
that they may be as Gods.
Babel, Isa. 14.13, 14. or of Antichrist his Antitype, 2 These. 2.4. but is the
desire of every wicked man, to have or do that which is peculiar to God
himself.

1. To excel alone, and to get themselves a name, that may be admired and
spoken of by all men, not only the builders of Babel, Genesis 11.4. and Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.18. but generally all proud men, as they are described unto us, Psalm.
49.11.

2. To be independent, and to have sufficiency in their own hand, as that fool
thought himself to have, Luke 12.19. which is the desire of all covetous
persons.

3. To be commanded by none, but to be their own lords, Psalm. 12.4. to follow
only their own counsel, and be guided by their own wills, Jer. 44.16.

4. To give account to none but themselves, with those rebellious Jews, that
desire to have the Holy One of Israel cease from them, Isa. 30.11. and Amaziah,
who will not be called to account by the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 25.16.

5. To refer all to themselves, and to their own glory, with proud
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.30. and to do well to themselves, Psalm. 49, 18.

The consideration hereof may discover unto us the heinousness of such sins,
as most men usually too slightly pass over, which in wicked men are so
gross, that they appear to the whole world, as the aiming at their own glory
and praise, the applying of all their endeavors to advance themselves above
others, in their estates and possessions, in their houses, food, clothing, that
they may be admired above others, and excel alone; their refusing to be
directed or reproved, when they step awry, manifesting that they desire to have
none other law, but their own wills and counsels. These are so palpable
affectations of a state and condition above a man, and usurpations of divine
privileges, that they can neither be denied nor excused. Now for the godly,
though they desire and endeavor to keep down this swelling of the heart, yet
they may easily discover in themselves the striving of their natural
corruption, to prick them forwards to such inordinate desires, for which they
have also great cause to humble themselves, and that the more, because they
have known so much of God, and of their own vileness, and so well understand
the end unto which they were created, that they should so far forget their own
condition, and not consider the impossibility of attaining to what they desire,
or the impiety of desiring it if they could, as to desire to share any way with
God in his honor, who is not honored as a God, unless all things be thrown
down at his feet, Isa. 2.11. till he alone be magnified, and his directions and
will submitted unto and obeyed: this is, or ought to be a matter of great
mourning unto every godly soul.

Now Satan is not content to stir up the woman's spirit to endeavor to advance
her self so high, as to be a match even with God himself, unless withal he
advance the basest creatures to take up Gods room in her heart, which he does,
when he moves the woman to expect that from the fruit of this tree, which
belongs to God aloen to bestow, even the virtue of giving wisdom and
understanding, which God has reserved in his own power, who only knows the
place thereof, as Job tells us, Job 28.20. Whence we may

15 OBSERVE. It is Satan's policy to draw men to depend upon the creature, for
that which only God can give.
Balak to depend on that false Prophet Balaam, for blessing and cursing, Numb.
22.6. and usually men to expect rain from the heavens, which none can give but
God alone, Jerem. 14.22. Nourishment, and thereby life from food, which is
maintained only by every Word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, Mat. 4.3, 4.
Safety and sufficiency from wealth and riches, Prove. 18.11. The reason is,

1. That he may thereby dishonor God, in robbing him of the honor of being
All sufficient, and bestow it upon the creature.

2. That he may abase man, by bringing him to depend upon those things which
God has put under his feet, and deceive him withal, in drawing him to seek
water from broken Cisternes, that hold none, Jer. 2.13.

Let all that are wise take notice of the least motion of their hearts, that
tends that way, abhorring the very least inclination of our affections that
way, as a dangerous evil.

1. Dishonorable both to God and our selves.

2. Uncomfortable, when our hearts cannot be assured of that which we depend
upon, as having no firm ground to support our hopes.

3. Unprofitable when men gain nothing by such a kind of dependence, more
then they do by a dream of a great feast, who find themselves empty and hungry
when they are awake.

4. Most dangerous, by drawing us from the service of God, to the service of
the creature, upon which we have our dependence. This notwithstanding is an
evil sickness, that seizes on the greatest part of the world, who are carnal,
as appears by their labor and care about the creatures, security and
contentment which they desire to take in enjoying them, fear and mourning in
the loss of them, as if they had lost their gods, and much more by their
neglect of God and his service, as if their happiness consisted not in him at
all.

It is worthy our observation, that when Satan tempts the woman to seek her own
advancement, in that very temptation he moves her withal, to make use of the
creature for the attaining of that end, to eat of the forbidden fruit, that
she might become as God, so that we may easily discern how nearly these two
foul evils are linked together, so that the one necessarily draws on the
other; And may

15 OBSERVE. Self-seeking and dependence on the creature, are evils that be
inseparable.
Tim. 3.2. Now this comes to pass,

1. By necessity, because man as well as all other creatures, wanting
sufficiency in himself, for self-subsistence, having now in a sort departed
from God, and thereby lost his dependence upon him, has nothing else left him,
but the creature to fly unto for his support.

2. Because God by his just judgment cannot bring upon man a fitter plague to
avenge the dishonor done to him, by lifting up our selves against him, then by
abasing us to submit to things below our selves.

Let us learn the right way of curing our hearts of that shameful,
uncomfortable, unprofitable, impious sin of dependence upon the creatures, by
laboring to cast out of our hearts this inordinate self-love, which is the
root of that evil, the very mother and nurse of covetousness, men-serving, and
the like. Upon this ground it is, that our Savior, Mat. 16.24. makes
selfe-denial the first condition required of one that will be a follower of
him, as being that which withal takes us off from all dependence upon the
creature, and thereby leaves us free to close with Christ.

It is of great use unto us, to take notice a little farther, how this way
which Satan proposes to the woman for her advancement crosses it self.
Forsooth, she must out of hand be made a God, and which way shall this be
brought to pass? she must for the attaining of this honor stoop unto, and
depend upon a poor creature far below her self, so that the means of her
advancement must be to bring herself infinitely lower then she was, and of a
Lord (as God had made her) over the creatures, to become a kind of slave unto
them. Whence

17 OBSERVE. Satan's preferments are in true estimation abasements and base
slaveries.
Pet. 2.19. He promises Christ to bestow on him all the Kingdoms of the
world; but it is under the condition that he must first worship him, and
thereby stoop unto the basest of all his vassals, Mat. 4.9. Thus he deals with
us continually, alluring us to be independent upon God, and to wait on him no
longer, and in the mean time endeavoring to bring us to place our dependence
upon the meanest of his creatures. So likewise in the duties of our service, he
persuades us to cast off the yoke of Gods Law and subjection to his will, and
in the mean time provokes us to the service of our own base lusts, so that we
take on us instead of one God, as many lords as we have vile and inordinate
affections in our own hearts, and (which is worst of all) himself too, after
whom we walk in sulfilling them, and are led captive by him according to his
will, 2 Timothy 2.26. exercising us in baser services, and exacting them with
greater rigor, and rewarding with nothing at the last, but with shame and
sorrow at present, and everlasting destruction hereafter.

Satan well knew that if the woman had taken some longer time to commune,
either with her own heart, or with her husband; there would have been
discovered so many strong evidences for the justifying of God, in his exceeding
large bounty to the man and woman, by the undeniable experiments of those real
favors which they had received from him, that the scandalous and blasphemous
imputation of Gods ill affection to them, would soon have vanished, as a mist
before the Sun. Wherefore, we shall find, that Satan labors all that he can
to thrust forward the woman to a speedy resolution, and execution thereupon, to
fall presently to the eating of the forbidden fruit, that she might instantly
be advanced to the honor of God. How destructive that proved unto her, will
appear in the event that followed. So that we may hence

18 OBSERVE Hasty resolutions prove commonly dangerous in the issue.
Prove. 11.14. and he that hastes with his foot sins, chap. 19.2. and,
without counsel, as ill ways are usually resolved on, so that which is
purposed is overthrown, Prove. 15.22. The reason is

1. Because in the oughts of our heart natural motions, which are full of
error, come first to hand; upon which if we settle our resolutions, we must
needs be mistaken, and err dangerously ere we be aware.

2. Because our understanding, being weak in it self, is not able at once to
take in, and lay before it all things, upon which a well-grounded judgment
should be settled; so that we need some time, to search out and lay together all
those circumstances and evidences, which must guide us in all that we take in
hand.

Now to draw on the woman to this speedy resolution, Satan sets before her eyes
the speedy and present effect of that fruit, that it had such a virtue as to
open their eyes, that very day that they should eat of it. Whence

19 OBSERVE The nearer things are to be enjoyed, the more strongly the heart is
affected toward them.
Prove. 13.12.) as on the other side, judgment deferred makes the heart secure
and fearlesse, Eccl. 8.11. Mat. 24.48. on the contrary side, present judgment
fills the heart with terror, as we see in the judgment on Dathan and Abiram,
did the children of Israel, though otherwise a senseless people, Numb. 16.34.
as likewise when the desire comes, it is a tree of life, the means of reviving
the soul: whence our Savior, to affect the spirit of the poor thief upon the
cross, tells him that he should be with him in Paradise that very day, Luke
23.43. The reason is, the affections of the heart are most strongly moved by
sense, which apprehends only things that are present: whence it must needs
follow, that the nearer things are unto us in our apprehension, the more
strongly the heart must be moved by them.

If then we desire to have our hearts moved, either by mercies or judgments,
let us labor to bring them as near as we can. Thus God represents unto Cain
sin (he means the punishment of sin) as lying at the door, Genesis 4.7. To
morrow the Lord will be angry if we sin to day, say the messengers sent from
the children of Israel to the Reubenites and the Gadites, Josh. 22.18, and
Ahijah to Jeroboams wife, tells her, that the judgment upon Jeroboams house is
coming even now, 1 Kings 14.14. so in mercies, Abraham's rejoicing at Christ's
day, was, that he saw it, (that is, apprehended it) as present, John 8.56. To
this purpose

1. Let us be careful to fix our eyes upon the present examples of mercies or
judgments upon our selves or others, especially upon those which are inward
and spiritual, laying hold of eternal life, upon the sense of Gods present
favors, as the Prophet David seems to do, Psalm. 73.24. and beholding and
trembling at the very face of hell in present judgments.

2. Labor to work those experiments upon our hearts, till they awaken faith,
by which only those things which are to come are made present, Heb. 11.1. so
that they affect men with joy, as if they were possessed already, 1 Pet. 1.8.
and with like fear on the other side.

3. Let us often recount with our selves the shortness of this present life.
Meditation may and will show a man's life unto him but a span long, and may make
a thousand years seem unto him, as God accounts them, but as one day.

VERSE 6.
ANd when the woman saw] That is, when she partly beheld with her eyes, and was
as fully persuaded in her heart, as if she had seen it. For, although the
outward beauty of the fruit might be seen with the eye, yet the goodness of it
for food (which nothing could discover but the taste) and much more the virtue
of it, to make one wise, were things not to be seen with the eye: so that
seeing in this place, must necessarily withal include believing.

That the tree] That is, the fruit of the tree, for that only could be eaten)
Was good for food] and therefore (as she might be persuaded) more apt to
preserve life then to bring death, as God had threatened. Now that the fruit of
this tree was good for food, she might easily be induced to believe, because
she had by experience found it so in other fruits of the Garden, that those
which delighted the eye, were likewise grateful to the taste: and
questionless, in this the woman was not deceived, for the fruit doubtless had
no evil in the nature of it, only the use of it was made evil unto man by Gods
interdiction.

And that it was pleasant to the eyes] Which perhaps she had not taken notice
of before, as not thinking it fit, to look upon that with observation which she
might not touch, or if perhaps she had looked upon it, she beheld it not with
the same affection before that now she did, which made it now more delightful
in her eyes then it had been before. This seems to be the woman's first outward
act, in this sin of hers, the gazing upon this fruit with delight.

And a tree to be desired] The woman's desire after this fruit, is not mentioned
by Moses, till he come to speak of getting knowledge, to intimate, that
although the beauty of the fruit in her eye, and the usefulness of it for
food, might somewhat affect her, yet that which set her heart on fire with the
desire after it, was especially and chiefly the hope of getting the knowledge
of good and evil.

To make one wise] or prudent, as some translate it, although (as it seems,)
not so properly nor agreeably to the sense of the Holy Ghost, seeing the wisdom
here spoken of must be the same, which had before been mentioned by Satan, and
consists rather in contemplation then in practice, and therefore must be
conceived to be rather Sapience then Prudence, or at least must include them
both.

She took of the fruit thereof] Which before she had acknowledged she might not
touch. Now in this kind of expression the Holy Ghost discovers unto us the
Rule by which the woman now guided her self, namely, by the lusts of her own
heart, and no longer by the Commandment and Will of God. It was now no
impediment to her to eat of the fruit of that tree, because God had forbidden
it; it was a sufficient warrant to her to take and eat it, because she desired
it. Withal, we have here pointed out unto us the several steps and degrees, by
which the woman went on, till she came up to the height of her sin; she saw,
she desired, she took and eat, and at the last gave unto her husband that he
might eat.

And gave also to her husband] Having questionless found the fruit as grateful
to her taste as she expected, but not as Satan, with an intention to beguile
him, but out of love to make him partaker with her, of this newfound means of
her happiness. Thus Satan blinded her eyes, and God left her to her self, to
be insensible of the evil which she had brought upon her self, till she had
been led on by Satan to do as much mischief as she might, and drawn her
husband into the same condition with her.

With her] That is, to eat with her, or as she had done: For otherwise he must
needs be with her, in the same place, when she gave him of the fruit to eat.
Now whether she went after him to find him out, or whether he came to her of
himself, and when, and whether before she had eaten of the fruit, or after
(which is most probable) it is uncertain, and not much material to be known.

And he did eate] By his wives persuasion, as well as by her offer of the
fruit, and by her example for ver. 17. God censures him for hearkening to the
voice of his wife. By what words or arguments she prevailed with him it is not
expressed, it is most probable, that she related unto him all that which she
had heard from Satan before, which the Holy Ghost thinks not needful to repeat
again, as affecting brevity, and having this only scope, to manifest, that God
had no finger in Adams sin, but that the woman was tempted and deceived by
Satan, and the man by the woman. Thus were the two fountains, out of which all
mankind issued, both poisoned and corrupted, and consequently of necessity, by
them, their whole posterity after them; seeing there can be nothing clean,
drawn out of that which is unclean.

We have then in this verse set before our eyes the success and effect of
Satan's temptation.

First, the woman's affections are distempered and corrupted by her outward
senses; and both by them and by Satan's suggestions, her Mind and Judgment are
perverted, till she breaks out at last into the actual transgression of Gods
Commandment, and draws her husband after her.

Secondly, it is probable that the woman might have seen this tree before,
without any inordinate affection toward the fruit thereof: it may be that it
was not then so pleasant in her eyes, as it now appears unto her, after Satan
had by his suggestions distempered her heart, and kindled her affections to an
inordinate desire after it, and then it seems very beautiful in her eyes. Whence

1 OBSERVE. Things usually appear unto us, as we stand affected toward them in
our hearts.


Let it be then the care and labor of every man, to get those carnal and
sensual affections, wherewith all our hearts naturally are possessed, subdued
and mortified, our selves renewed in the spirit of our minds, and our hearts
changed from this carnal and earthly disposition, to a spiritual and heavenly
frame, lest they remaining carnal and earthly still, represent things unto us,
not according to truth, but according to their own temper, as a distempered
taste does the relish of our meats, and so beguile us by corrupting our
judgments, which must necessarily lead us into dangerous errors, making
evidences of heavenly truths small, and sensual objects great. And let all men
be careful to take heed of judging of any thing, when their minds are
distempered with any passion, or giving much heed unto such men's judgments,
who manifest themselves to be engaged in their affections beforehand.

By that which we have already considered in the prevailing of Satan by this
temptation, it appears, that we cannot lay the blame of drawing the woman to
this sin, upon the fruit of this tree, which she had in all probability beheld
before this, without sin, but it was the impression made upon her heart by
Satan's suggestions, which made that fruit a snare unto her now, which was none
before. Whence

2 OBSERVE, Sin proceeds not from the outward object, but from the corruption
of the heart within.
Mark 7.21. and it is not the beholding of a woman, but the lusting after her
in ones heart that makes it adultery, Mat. 5.18. And St. James tells us, that
God tempts no man, but every man is drawn away by his own lust, Jam. 1.13, 14.

First, God tempts no man, neither by suggestion of evil, that he raises up in
any man's heart, nor by any thing that he has made: now if God should have put
any evil into the creature, which he had made; he might have been said in some
sort to have tempted us to evil: but every creature of God is good; wherefore
he affirms that the cause of evil is within us, and not without us; the
creature being in the nature of it as apt to be applied to good as to evil, to
which it cannot be turned but by the evil disposition of our own hearts within
us, and the motions that arise from thence. The evil then was neither in the
wedge of gold, nor in the Babylonish garment which Achan saw, but in his
coveting of them; nor is it in the wine that gives a red color in the Cup, but
in the drunkards inordinate appetite, Prove. 23.31. No, wicked persons draw from
alluring objects, motions and solicitations to sin, with an intent to corrupt
and draw others to evil, (as the devil from the glory of the Kingdoms of the
world, drew his temptation wherewith he endeavored to allure our blessed
Savior to fall down and worship him) yet neither the creature it self, nor
the temptation or motion presented with it, causes any sin in us, unless
they meet with some corruption in our hearts, to embrace and entertain them;
Seeing the nature of sin consists in a voluntary motion of the mind against
the Law of God, whichcan proceed from no other cause, but only from the motion
of the mind of him that sins.

We have laid before us the first step of the woman's sin, in the outward act,
that she saw the fruit of the tree that it was pleasant, that is, that she
looked upon it with delight and desire: she saw it perhaps before, but that was
only in a natural way, to discern that object before her eye: she looks now
upon it in a sinful way, fixing her eye upon it with a more serious observation
of the pleasantness of it, which so affected her heart, that she takes the
boldness to pluck and eat it. So she begins her sin in gazing upon, and
perfects it in taking and eating Whence

3 OBSERVE, It is dangerous to a man to fix his senses upon enticing objects.
Prove. 23.31. therefore the wise man expresses inordinate desire of riches, by
that phrase of setting our eyes upon them, Prove. 23.5. Indeed the very looking
upon the wedge of gold drew Achan to covet it, Josh. 7.21. and men are taken
with the eyelids of a whore when they gaze in her face, Prove. 6.25. as the
looking upon Bathsheba when she washed her self ensnared David, 2 Samuel 11.2.
for which cause it was, that Job, when he would not think upon a maid, makes a
covenant with his eyes to prevent it, Job 31.1.

Let it be then the care of every good man to watch diligently and continually
over his outward senses; let him turn away his ear from hearkening to a
naughty tongue, Prove. 17.4. his eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm. 119.37. that
is, his senses from dwelling unnecessarily upon alluring objects. And to do
that, it will be our wisdom to fix them upon such things as are useful and
profitable, remembering the use for which God has given them unto us, which is
partly natural, to inform us of things profitable, or hurtful to the outward
man; and partly and especially spiritual, to set before us those objects, that
by the due meditation of them, may raise up our minds to heavenly thoughts,
observing both their perfections, that we may raise up our hearts, to the
admiration of the more eminent perfection of him that gave them; and withal
their defects, by which they come infinitely short of that All Sufficiency,
upon which our dependence must be grounded. Consider therefore in the objects
which we meet withal,

1. That they are of a nature appliable to good or evil, as they are diversely
entertained and used, and may be as well snares as helps unto us.

2. That our senses being naturally corrupt: as many senses as we have, so many
windows we carry about us to let in sin; and as many outward objects as are
presented to us, so many sparks may fall into out hearts in this state of
corruption, to set the whole frame of our nature on fire, unless we look
warily to our selves. Wherefore

1. Avoid the entertaining of unnecessary objects, where we may avoid them.

2. If they be presented to us, look not on their outward appearance, but on
the dangers into which they may bring us, that a Whore is a deep ditch, Prove.
23.27. Wine a mocker, Prove. 20.1.

3. Pray for the assistance of the Spirit, as to keep the door of our lips,
Psalm. 141.3. so to take the reins of all our senses, yea, of the affections of
our souls, that walking in the spirit, we may not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh, Gal. 5.16.

But what may we conceive to be the reason, why the woman gives so much credit
to Satan's information, that the tree was good for food, and to be desired to
get knowledge upon Satan's bare word, without any experiment made, or any other
proof at all to justify what he affirms, when she gives so little credit to
that, which she had heard from Gods own mouth, that the eating of that tree
would certainly bring death? Questionless, she shows in this error of hers
the disposition of man's nature in general, and gives occasion to

4 OBSERVE, Men by nature are more apt to give credit unto lies, then unto the
Truth of God.
Adam in this his state of perfection, standing then in the Truth, and having
the help of a Mind furnished with all divine knowledge, and questionless
affected also with the love of it, which might easily have preserved him in the
truth, was notwithstanding so suddenly carried away, to believe so foul a lie,
and that merely upon Satan's sugestion and information, against Gods express
word delivered by his own mouth; we have great reason to be jealous of our
selves, being naturally blinded with error, having our understanding full of
darkness, Ephesians. 4.18. and our wills wholly averse from Truth, and taking
pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessal 2.10. seeing

1. The Truth of God contains many heavenly and deep mysteries hard to be
understood, much more to be believed, seeing they are foolishness to a natural
man, 1 Cor. 2.14.

2. Seeing we have by nature an hatred against the Wisdom and Counsel of God,
because it crosses our carnal affections, and condemns all our ways and
works, John 3.20.

Let no man then suffer his judgment to be swayed by the opinion of the world,
in any matter that concerns the grounds of Truth, delivered in the Word;
seeing the world is guided by the wisdom of the flesh, which is enmity against
God, Romans 8.7. And therefore no marvel though it oppose his Truth, which brings
down the strong holds, and high imaginations of the natural man, to bring under
every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. and refuse to give
credit to those that speak it, as the Jews dealt with our Savior, John 8.45.
because the world lying in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. which the truth of God
reproves, John 16.8. cannot but hate that which disgraceth and opposes it.

Now if we observe it well, that which made the woman so apt to give credit
unto Satan's suggestions was, that her heart was beforehand taken with some
desire after the knowledge, which the eating of that fruit would certainly
bring; as Satan had informed her, and she was desirous to believe. Whence

5 OBSERVE Men are easily drawn to believe, and hope any thing of that which
they affect and desire.
LOve (as the Apostle tells us) hopes and believes all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. and
we know, that as our affection is toward the person that speaks unto us, so we
give credit to his words, much more to a friend then to a stranger. Thus we are
apt to hope well of our children, because we love them well: much more are we
apt to promise ourselves good of our own counsels, which we love better then
our children. It must needs be so, seeing love being grounded upon a persuasion
of some worth in that which we love, we are easily drawn by the experience of
that which we know to be in it, to hope for, and expect that which we know not,
although it does not yet appear. And whatsoever we desire to have, because we
desire withal that it may be good, we hope it will be so.

By this one mark, it will evidently appear, that the generality of men, are
greater lovers of Wealth, of Men, of Honors, of Pleasures, then of God
Himself, or his Son Christ, because it is evident they expect and promise
themselves more good by them, then by God and all his Promises, following them
more earnestly, rejoicing in the fruition of them more cordially, preserving
them more carefully, and resting on them more securely, then on Gods Promises
of Grace and Glory, of this life, and of that which is to come, which (as their
own ways convince them to their faces) they esteem little better then mere
delusions. Yea, it is manifest that they have no desire toward any way or work
of Godliness, of which they promise themselves no good by them, Job. 21.15.
but disgrace, poverty, danger, loss of profit and pleasure, besides much
unquietness of mind. Nay, by the same mark, the greatest part of men appear,
to be greater lovers and better friends to wicked men, of whom they never
speak, nor patiently endure to hear any evil, then they are unto the godly, of
whom themselves are always willing to believe any ill report, that can be
raised upon them.

The woman had before her eyes this pleasant fruit, but she had withal an
Interdiction from God not to meddle with it, under the fearful curse of dying
the death, if she tasted of it; but her inordinate appetite, stirred up by
sense, we see, prevails with her above the terror of the curse, though
denounced by God himself. Whence

6 OBSERVE, The terrors of wrath to come cannot prev^^^ against strong and
violent affections to things that are present.
Prove. 23.34, 35. much less can the fear of future evils work on our hearts.
The Prophet complains, that the peoples violent affection to rebellious
courses, thrust them forwards as an horse rusheth into the battle, Jer. 8.6.
(of whom the Lord himself testifies, that he mocketh at fear, and turns not
back from the sword, Job 39.22.) opposing their confirmed resolutions to evil,
against any shame or fear that stood in their way, Jer. 2.25, 26. Like Zimri
and Cozbi, that scorned the presence and tears of the Congregation, and the
apprehension of the future danger to fulfill their filthy lusts, Numb. 25.6.
nay, even the whole multitude of that rebellious people, a little before, were
not deterred by the fearful judgment executed in their sight on Corah, Dathan
and Abiram, from renewing their rebellion against Moses and Aaron, the very
next day, Numb. 16.4. The reason whereof is

1. Because such things as are present (such as the pleasures of sin are)
being apprehended by sense, work more strongly upon the affections, then things
absent can do, because they want that help of sense to conveigh them to the
minds, which the affections are most moved by. For as hope deferred makes the
heart sick, because the thing desired is absent, Prove. 13.12. so on the other
side, when the judgment is deferred, and is not present, the heart is not
affected with the fear of it, but hardened in men to mischief, Eccl. 8.11.

2. Because affections, (which things present raise up in us,) blind our
judgments so far, that the evils threatened, because they are not present, are
not believed, so that men persuade themselves they will not come, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Isa. 28.15. and for that reason the fear of them restrains not men from evil,
because unto such persons they are esteemed as if they were not at all.

Let all men by this try their affections, either to good, or evil. If our
affections to that which is good be strong, Much water will not quench love,
Cantic. 8.6, 7. as appears in the example of holy David, whom though the proud
derided, Psalm 19.51. Princes spoke against him, ver. 23. the hands of the
wicked robbed him, ver. 61. the proud dug pits for him, ver. 85. the wicked
waited to destroy, ver. 95. yet all quenched not his love to Gods Law, ver, 97.
nor his endeavors not to decline from his testimonies, ver. 157. Out of the
same affection the Apostles were not deterred from preaching, by all the
menaces of the counsel, and stripes that they laid upon them, Acts 4.20, 21.
Thus Daniel continues his duty of making his request unto God, despising the
Lions Den, Dan. 6.10. as the three children had done the flames of fire, Dan.
3.17. On the other side, to faint in the day of adversity, argues small
strength. Prove. 24.10. or to take offense and be disheartened when tribulations
arise, Mat. 13.21. or men's displeasure threatens us, as they do, John 13.42. or
much more, when feigned terrors keep us off from our duty, Prove. 26.13.

That which prevailed so far with the woman, or at least by which her mind,
already distempered by Satan's suggestions, was so far inflamed, that it carried
her on violently into this actual rebellion, was the delight somnesse of the
fruit to her outward senses; she saw that the tree was pleasant to the eye, and
good for food, and took and did eat: the great mischief that followed
thereupon, may then warrant us to

7 OBSERVE, Outward sense is an ill and a dangerous guide.
AChans eye was it that drew him to take of the accursed thing, and David's eye
drew him to adultery, and Solomon tells us, that the drunkards pleasing his eye
with the color of the wine in the cup, may draw him to drunkenness, Prove.
23.31. to the beholding of strange women, and the heart to the uttering of
perverse things, ver. 33. Upon this ground it is, that the Apostle calls
wisdom according to sense, divellish wisdom: and the lust of the eye, St. John
tells us, is of the world, 1 John 2.16. That it must be so, it stands with good
reason.

1. Sense was never given men for a Judge or Counselor to determine and
direct, but only for an informer.

2. Sense can show us nothing but the outward forms of such things as it
represents, upon which we shall never be able to lay the ground of a right
judgment: wherefore judgment according to appearance; is opposed to Gods true
and infallible judgment, 1 Samuel 16.7. wherefore the receiving of things merely
from sense, cannot but mislead us in all that we so apprehend, awakening and
stirring up affections that distemper the mind, and blind the eyes of the
understanding. And yet is this judgment by sense the wisdom that guides all
the world, or at the least the greatest part of it, as we see by experience.

It is added, that the woman saw that the tree was good for food, that is, that
she was persuaded and believed it to be so, and that upon that opinion, she did
take and eat the forbidden fruit: so that which deceived the woman, was the
false opinion that she entertained of the goodness of the fruit. Whence

8. OBSERVE. A man cannot naturally desire any thing, but under a show and
appearance of good.
Psalm. 4.6. Who will show as any good? and as their endeavor is to do well
unto themselves, so they applaud only those that do so, Psalm. 49.18. Nay, the
enquiry of all those, which have been renowned for their wisdom amongst men,
has been especially to find out what is man's chiefest good. And their error
has been, not in choosing evil as evil, but in mistaking evil for good. Yea,
although some have been so far blinded by Satan, as to become instruments of
their own destruction (which appears manifestly to be evil) notwithstanding,
even therein they may be conceived to choose that at least which is less evil,
esteeming a speedy death, to be better then a miserable and uncomfortable life.
This firm adherence of the heart of man to that which is good (from which it
cannot be drawn, unless it be by mistaking, without the destruction of nature
it self) God has planted in all men's hearts, not only that it might be a
means of their own preservation, which all creatures bend unto, some by a
natural, others by a sensitive, and Man by a rational inclination, but besides,
for an higher end; that Man choosing God above all things to depend on, and his
will to submit unto, and to place all his happiness in him, might thereby give
a clear testimony, and set to his seal, that he esteems God as the chiefest
good, because his heart which carries him on with a restless desire to seek
that above all things, and desires no more when they do enjoy him with the
Prophet, Psalm. 73.25. and 116.7.

Hence then appears, not only the folly of men of this world, who so greedily
seek after Wealth, Honors, Pleasures, and the favor of men, as if all their
happiness lay in them; but more, their sacrilegious impiety in robbing God of
his due honor, to bestow it not only on the creature, whom they advance above
the Creator, Romans 1.25. when they seek their chief good in that rather then in
him; besides on our own base lusts, by which we guide our selves, rather then
by the Will of God, as if there were more good to be found in them then in God
Himself: so that the A postle justly censures them, to be lovers of pleasures
more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.4 which must needs be acknowledged to be
true, when we seek after them more earnestly and constantly, and rejoice and
satisfy our selves with them more cordially and contentedly then we do with
the favor and love of God: this taking away from God the chiefest flower of
his Crown (which is to be good alone, Mat. 19.17.) to adorn with it the basest
creatures, is an abomination not to be expiated, but with the pouring out of
the wrath of God to the uttermost, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.16.
especially when they do not only call evil good, and good evil; upon whom the
Prophet pronounces that fearful woe, Isa. 5.20. but seal to it too by their
deeds and actions.

Thus then the woman moved by Satan's fair and large promises, seconded with
the strong outward allurement of a fruit so pleasant to the eye, conceiving
that she could not be but a great gainer, by so rich a purchase, without any
more ado takes the fruit and eats it. But how grossly she was mistaken therein,
the fearful event of the ruin of her self and her husband, in the issue
sufficiently declares. So that comparing the success of this action, with the
hopes upon which it was undertaken upon Satan's word, We may

9 OBSERVE, Man is an ill chooser of his own good.
ADam we see, even in this state of Innocence, though endowed with so much
wisdom, yet as we shall see anon, chooses death instead of life. And Solomon
the wisest of all Princes either before or after him, is feign, after his long
enquiry and travel in seeking after man's chiefest good, Eccl. 2.3. when he
looked advisedly back upon all his labors, and the fruits of them, to
acknowledge that they were vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccl. 2.11, 17. and
this he found, not to be his own error alone, but that generally the ways
that seem right to a man, are found at last in the issues of them to be ways
of death, Prove. 14.12. The reason whereof is;

First, man's ignorance by nature is such, that he knows nothing as he ought,
not God the chiefest good, of whom we may acknowledge with Bildad, that it is a
little portion that is heard of him, Job. 26.14. and that of those that know
him best, 1 Cor. 13.12. but of the generality of men we may say with Zophar,
that man is borne like a wild ass^es colt, Job 11.12. and therefore no marvel,
if those that know him not, desire him not, seeing it is the knowledge of
things that move us either to desire them, or to depend upon them. See Psalm.
9.10. As ignorant are we of the inward nature of the creature, which makes us
so easy to be beguiled by the outward appearance, least of all do we know the
issue and event of things, a secret which God reserved in his breast, Isa.
41.22, 23.

The second reason is the corruption, and froward perverseness of our wills,
moved by our natural lusts, which incline to evil rather then good, to
darkness rather then light, and consequently both to think well of them, and
to make after and embrace them.

Let no man then lean to his own wisdom, in a matter of so great importance, as
is the choice of his own happiness, which even heathen men themselves have
discovered by their own experience, to be insufficient for the choosing of that
which is truly good, as it must needs be, seeing it is enmity against God. Romans
8.7. who only is good, and therefore averse from embracing and choosing him,
out of whom there is nothing but misery and destruction. Let every man then
that desires true happiness, abandon his own understanding, and take advice
from God, as the wise man directs us, Prove. 3.5, 6. who gives true wisdom,
Prove. 2.6 gave David that counsel to choose such a lot unto himself as
satisfied his soul, Psalm. 16.7. and shows us what is good. Mic. 6.8. and has
promised to teach such as fear him, the way that they shall choose, Psalm.
25.12. to guide them by his counsel, and bring them to glory, Psalm. 73.24. not
only directing them the way, but causing them to walk in it, and keeping them
by his power to salvation. Only men must become fools, that they may be wise,
as the Apostle directs, 1 Cor. 3.18.

If we consider the grounds which Eve builds upon, when she takes and eats
this forbidden fruit, we shall find that she is grossly mistaken in them both.

First, this was no good Conclusion, that she draws out of the pleasant show
that the fruit had to the eye, that because it appeared to be good, therefore
it was good.

Secondly, much less would it follow, that because it was good, therefore she
might take and eat, having been forbidden to do so by God himself. For we have
no warrant to make the attaining of our own good, the ground either of our own
choice, or of our endeavors. The Will and Warrant of God, whose all things
are, is our rule to direct us what to take or leave, so that only that is good
to us, which he allows us, and we must have an eye both to Gods honor, and
the good of others, without due respect whereunto it is unlawful to desire any
particular good unto our selves. These errors of the woman may give occasion to

10 OBSERVE. It is agrosse evil to choose, not what is granted us, but what we
like especially, out of respect to our selves in particular.
Deuteronomy. 12.8, 11. therefore Joseph refuses to yield to his Mistress, because
that his Master, though he trusted him with all his affairs, yet had denied
her unto him, as being his wife, Genesis 39.9. And the Priests upon that ground
withstood King Vzziah, when he would have offered incence in the Temple,
because it was not permitted to him, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. as little warrant have we
to seek such things as are good, only to our selves, without respect either to
Gods honor, or to the good of others, seeing to do well to ones self, is a
character of a carnal man, Psalm. 49.18. The reason of both is evident. For

First, men being creatures, and therefore having their total dependence on God
that made them, cannot or ought not in reason to be limited by their own will,
but must in all things be ordered by the Will of him, on whom they totally
depend, it being absolutely necessary, that he that gave their being should
give them the measure and rule of their desires.

Secondly, God created not men for themselves, but for his own honor, Prove.
16.4. which is much advanced, when men acknowledge his Sovereignty, Wisdom and
Goodness, by consenting and choosing to be, and do what he appoints them, and
by subjecting their own good unto his glory and honor, and to the good of his
servants.

Let it be our rule, in seeking any thing that pleases our fantasy, to
enquire before we fix our desires upon it, whether it be of those things that
are permitted unto us by God, or no; as namely to be rich, to be advanced above
others, to be in place of emploiment, to search into some kinds of knowledge,
to enjoy some kinds of pleasures and delights; for if we be not permitted to
ask any thing, but according to Gods Will, 1 John 5.14. Surely we are not
permitted to desire it, much less to seek or endeavor to obtain it.

Secondly, let us in like manner enquire, what advantage may come by that which
we desire unto our brethren the Church of God, and what honor God may receive
thereby, and in the last place what true good it may bring unto our selves:
seeing we know that it is our duty in things that we take in hand, to seek Gods
glory above all things, and next to that the good of our brethren, 1 Cor.
10.31, 33. As being

1. Obliged thereunto by our subordination to God, 1 Cor. 6.20.

2. And the best means to assure our prospering in what we undertake, when by
submitting to Gods Will, and seeking his glory, we engage him to further our
endeavors, as he promised Joshuah, Josh. 1.8.

3. And assuring us of a full recompense of reward hereafter, Hebr. 10.36.

The degrees and steps by which lust bred in the woman's heart, brought her on
to the act of rebellion, are worth our noting; First, she saw, then she took,
and lastly, she did eat of the forbidden fruit. Whence

11 OBSERVE, Last, once conceived will at last bring forth actual sin, in
full perfection.
JAm. 1.16. Thus Achan, when by seeing the wedge of gold he was moved to covet
it, takes it away and hides it, Josh. 7 21. But the sons of God, taken with the
beauty of the daughters of the sons of men marry them, Genesis 6.2. So it fell out
in Hamors defiling of Dinah, Genesis 34.2. and thus it happens always, unless
God overruled it, as he did in preserving Sarahs honor in Abimelechs house,
Genesis 20.6. either by subduing the lust by the power of his Spirit, which fights
against the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.17. or at least by restraining it, as he
did in Laban, Genesis 3.29. or crossing it by advice and counsel, as he did David's
intention of killing Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.33, 34. or by denying and taking away
opportunities to act it, as he hindered Herod's purpose of killing Christ, by the
wise men's returning another way, and by Joseph's flight with the child into
Egypt, or by interposing of some cross impediments in the way, as he prevented
Saul's taking of David by an inroad of Philistines, which drew him another way,
1 Samuel 23.27, 28. Reason,

First, it cannot be otherwise, because inward desires and affections, are the
ground of all outward actions and performances, as Solomon tells us, Prove.
4.23. which therefore must needs follow, unless there be some impediment cast
in the way, especially in this corruption of man's nature, wherein they bear all
the sway.

Secondly, God is pleased it shall be so, that men may be made known by their
actions, as a tree is known by his fruit.

Let us then tremble at the first moving of our inordinate lusts, as anger,
fleshly lusts, covetousness and the like.

1. As being in themselves pollutions, that defile a man's heart, Mark 7.21, 22,
23.

2. And by consequence make us abominable in the sight of God, who beholds
the motions of the heart, and judges of men according to them.

3. And subjects unto Satan, who reigns in us, and carries us by them at his
pleasure, Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 4.

4. And will bring shame upon us at the last, by thrusting us forwards into the
open acts of Adultery, Murder, Theft, and the like without Gods grace
preventing us, seeing we have no more power of our selves, when those lusts
have once seized upon our hearts, from breaking out into the open acts of sin,
then he that has lost his footing on the top of some high tower, to stay
himself in his fall, before he comes to the ground.

2. Acknowledge Gods infinite goodness and mercy toward us in particular, in
preserving us from many gross and scandalous sins.

1. Whereof we find the seed and root moving in our hearts every day.

2. And which are continually nourished and strengthened by that fountain of
corruption, which is within us, from whence they spring And

3. Are continually fomented and blown up by Satan, till they break into a
violent flame, which consequently cannot be quenched by any power of ours, nor
by any other means, but by the Spirit, which God denies not to his own, both
to preserve them from the reproach of men, for the credit of Religion, and the
honor of his own Name, and by which he sometimes overrules wicked men,
restraining them from the practice of some evil, for the preservation of Order,
and for the peace of his Church.

We have made it appearalready, that it was not the least part of Satan's
policy, when he had won the woman's consent, to hasten her on to the actual
performance of that evil, to which he had tempted her, and must be esteemed not
the least of the woman's oversights, that without taking time to advise with her
own heart, or consult with her husband, about such a strange motion proposed
unto her, she runs on headlong to the acting of that evil, which without Gods
mercy had for ever ruined her, and her posterity: but the observation which
that circumstance yields, we have already handled out of the verse going
before: That which falls next under our consideration is the woman's voluntary
act, in taking and eating the forbidden fruit. Satan indeed had tempted her to
the sin; but she sinned not actually, but in her own voluntary act. Whence

12 OBSERVE, It is not in the power of Satan himself, to draw any man to sin,
without his own consent.
Prove. 7.21, 22. Whence it is, that Solomon gives us advice, that if sinners
tempt us, we should not consent unto them, Prove. 1.10. and then we shall do
well enough. Whence also it is, that our Savior, in his combat with Satan,
denying his consent to Satan's motions, remained holy and blameless. The
reasonis;

First, because the very essence of sin consists in the consent. For all that
Satan or his instruments act in temptations, is without the soul, whether it
be by the representation of objects to the outward senses, or at the most to
the inward fantasy; for neither of these corrupt either the judgment, or
will, or affections, there must be something within, which must receive and
close with that which is represented unto it, before it can be a sin. For
where the heart consents not at all, (as it falls out in such actions as are
either altogether forced, or merely contingent, wherein neither the judgment,
nor will, nor affections concur) there men are wholly freed from any blame of
sin, both by God and man. Nay, even when the affections are either suddenly
surprised, without deliberation, or violently carried (with some reluctation of
the will) inordinately to any sin, yet where the precedent resolutions are
against it, and subsequent repentance disavowes it, and by consequent both the
one and the other manifest, that our advised judgment and will opposed it,
there the sin is not imputed to condemnation, nor accounted the sin of the
person, but rather of the corruption in the person, as St. Paul speaks of
himself, Romans 7.20. that the acts were not his but the acts of the sin that
dwelt in him. Whence St. John affirms, that he that is born of God, sins
not, and adds this reason, that the seed of God abides in him, 1 John 3.9.
that is, it is not accounted his sin, because his heart as far as it is
renewed, consents not to it. So it is not the representation of evil motions
outwardly, but only the embracing them with the heart that makes the sin, and
only the advised and deliberate entertaining thereof that makes the damning
sin.

Secondly, if it were otherwise no man could be free from sin a moment, but
Satan would have power to draw men into all kinds of sin, at his pleasure, and
thereby into inevitable destruction at the last, yea, even the dearest of Gods
servants.

Let no man, when he sins, blame any but his own corrupt heart, as the Apostle
advises us, Jam. 1.14. and the Prophet David does Psalm. 51.4, 5. looking at
nothing but the sin which was bred in him, even with his first conception, and
Psalm. 73.22. he blames nothing but his own ignorance and bruitishnesse for the
distempered thoughts that troubled, and were likely to have perverted him. This
is the way

1. To justify God in the executing of his justice against sinners, when they
therein receive only the fruit of their own ways, and are filled with their
own inventions, Prove. 1.31.

Secondly, it is the best means of furthering both our repentance and
reformation, when we know every man the plague of his own heart, as Solomon
terms it, 1 Kings 8.38. and finding the fountain of evil to be in our own
breast, are more easily directed, and effectually stirred up to endeavor the
mortifying of our own corruptions. The woman had no sooner tasted this
forbidden fruit, but finding it (as it is most probable) as good in the trial,
as she had read of it, as she believed it to be by the outward show, she
presently tenders it to her husband, and draws him to be Partaker with her in
the sin. Whence

13 OBSERVE. They that sin themselves, are commonly seducers of others to sin.
Eve) deceiving others as themselves are deceived, being persuaded, that they
lead them on in a right way, when they lead them into error. Or perhaps out of
self-love, desiring to countenance their own evils, and to justify them by
other men's concurrence with them, in the same way. Or being set on by Satan, to
pervert men maliciously to the increasing of their own sin and judgment, and
by drawing in others with themselves into sinful courses, to win him more
subjects for the enlarging of his Kingdom. Thus the leaven is not only sour
in it self, but withal soures all that is mixed with it; and one person
infected with some contagious disease, infects all that come near unto him.

Let every man both fear and shun sin, as one would avoid and fly from the
plague, or other contagious diseases, being not only destructive to his own
soul that commits it, but besides, exceeding dangerous, both to his nearest
friends and to all his neighbors that are round about him. And upon the same
ground let us keep far off from persons infected with sin, as not only vile in
themselves, as they are termed, Psalm 15.4. but besides, dangerous to others,
Prove. 22.24, 25. or at least troublesome, either by hindering our free exercise
in holy duties (which moved David to chase them away, Psalm. 119.115.) or at
least vexing us with their unclean conversation, as the Sodomites vexed Lot, 2
Pet. 2.8.

2. Let this practice of wicked men quicken the spirits of the godly, with an
holy zeal, to be much more earnest and active, in endeavoring to draw on men
to Religion, and thereby to further the enlarging of Christ's Kingdom, by
winning men by our holy examples, and by instructions, admonitions,
exhortations, as we are directed to do, Col. 3.16. 1 These. 5.11. Heb 3.13. And
that

1. In love to Christ, whose honor we advance by enlarging his Kingdom.

2. In love to our brethren, for the furthering of the salvation of their
souls.

3. And for the furthering of our own account, who by winning many to
righteousness shall shine as the stars, Dan. 12.3. or if they be not won, we
shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, Isa. 49.5.

But whom does the woman beguile? even her own husband, to whom she was given
for an helper. The nearness of the relation between them, gives us occasion to

14 OBSERVE One that is fallen into sin, is many times most dangerous to his
nearest friends.
Ahabs family perished with himself by Gods just judgment, for his and his
wives abominations, 1 Kings 21.22, 23, 24. But besides by becoming active
instruments of evil to them, either by seducing them, as Jonadab did his friend
Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.5. and Achitophel furthered Absalom in his treasonable
practices, and counseled him to lie with his fathers Concubines, 2 Samuel 16.21.
and Jezabel stirred up her husband Ahab to work wickedness, 1 Kings 21.25. or
by working him some mischief or other, if he consent not. See, Mat. 10.36. as
David complains, that it was his guide, his equal, his acquaintance, that did
him the wrong of which he complains, Psalm. 55.13. The reason is,

1. Because men are most apt to communicate, either that which is really good
or evil, which seems good to them, to such as they love; for love is
communicative.

2. Because they are most powerful to prevail with friends, as symbolizing
with them, either in nature or disposition (as we know diseases spread most
easily in the same blood) or at least their persuasions are most powerful with
those with whom they deal, when they are conceived to be tendered unto them in
love and sincerity.

3. And by daily commerce, by reason of inward acquaintance, they have most
opportunity to compass their ends, as an infected person, most easily spreads
the infection, to those with whom he continually converseth.

Now if we consider withal, that this woman that tempts and seduceth her
husband, was created and appointed by God to be an help unto him, we may in
this example take notice how far the best things, being abused by our folly,
may be turned to our hurt; and those things that were intended to us for our
help, may be the means of our ruin: but this observation will more clearly be
grounded upon Adams excuse unto God of himself, that he was drawn away by his
wives enticement, ver. 12. of this chapter. For the present, we may take notice
that she had no ill intent toward her husband, but presents him with this
fruit, merely in love; and conceiving that she had met with a good purchase,
she desires to make her husband partaker with her of her gain. Whence

15 OBSERVE It is the property of true love to communicate to others whatsoever
it self embraces as good.
Psalm. 84.11. John 3.16. Moses being assured of the possession of Canaan,
invites his wives friends to be partakers with him of his hopes, Numb. 10.29.
In like manner, David having found God so gracious to himself in particular,
calls his friends together, to show them the way how they might get a share in
that happiness that himself enjoyed, Psalm. 34.11. This truth all experience
makes good, in the dealing of Parents with their children; Husbands with their
wives, and the like, which although it appear not always in outward things,
wherein self-love prevails with us so far as to cause us to forbear to
communicate too much of the things of this life, lest we should want our
selves; yet it constantly holds in spiritual things, wherein our imparting to
others, rather adds unto us, then takes from us what we communicate to other
men.

Let every man by this mark, try his judgment of the worth and value of
heavenly things, even by his earnest desire to bring his wife, children and
family into the fruition of that happiness whereof himself is partaker, after
Abraham's example, Genesis 18.19. yea, his neighbors and acquaintance, with the
woman of Samaria, John 4.29. much more his intimate familiars, with Philip,
John 1.45.

God in this encounter leaves both the man and woman to themselves; and we see
how easily the woman by Satan's suggestion, and the man by a word of her mouth,
are withdrawn from their obedience to God, and carried headlong into open
rebellion. Whence

16 OBSERVE The strongest man is not able to stand against Satan, if God leave
him to himself.


1. In his Nature; what can flesh and blood do against a Spirit?

2. In his Abilities; he surmounts Solomon himself in knowledge.

3. In his experience; we are but of yesterday, in comparison of him. In his
diligence, his eyes never sleep, neither does he take rest night or day, in
watching to do us mischief.

4. Besides, he has within us a strong party of our own lusts, that fight for
him against us.

5. He has without us the world, with the allurements thereof.

And lastly, he has as many instruments to make use of to corrupt us, as there
be wicked men in the world.

Let every man then take the Apostles counsel, Ephesians 6.13.

1. Take to us all the Armor of God.

2. Let men be sure to walk in a right way, in which God has promised us his
Protection. Psalm 91.11.

3. Let them watch continually, and stand upon their guard.

4. Let them stand strong in faith, and in the Power of Gods might.

5. And pray continually unto him that is able to save them.

VERSE 7.
ANd the eyes] Not so much of the Body as of the Mind, for which cause it is
added, not that they saw, but that they knew that they were naked, which though
it might be discerned by the eye of the body, yet the shame that accompanied it
could appear to nothing, but the eye of the mind.

Of them both] Not Adams only, but Eves too, whose eyes Satan had blinded so
long, that she observed nothing, no, not after she had eaten her self, till
she had seduced her husband too, and then when they were both in the
transgression, and the temptation had taken full effect, her eyes were opened
too as well as her husbands.

Were opened] Both by God, who having suffered Satan to blind them thus long,
at length in mercy discovered unto them, and gave them hearts to take notice of
the miserable and sad condition into which Satan had brought them, that they
might be humbled, and seek to God for pardon. And by Satan, who though he had
blinded them all the way in which he led them, yet now he had brought them
whither he desired, sticks not to show them where they were, (as Elisha dealt
with the Syrian army which he led into Samaria, 2 Kings 6.20.) but it was only
to increase their grief and misery, by beholding the great evil which they had
brought upon themselves. This opening of their eyes might consist in two things.

First, in fixing their eyes upon their nakedness, which it may be they might
not else have observed.

Secondly, in representing the shame that now accompanied it, that they might
the more fully discover the change of their condition, and have their hearts
the more feelingly affected with it.

And they knew that they were naked] And deformed in their nakedness, whereof,
(as it may be gathered by their hiding of themselves) they were ashamed: Not
because there was any change in the parts of their bodies, but only in the use
of them, which before being instruments to righteousness, and comely by the
right ordering of them to the end for which they were created, were now
uncomely by their inordinate disposition to sin, as the affections of the soul
within were likewise become filthy and shameful, by the like inordinate
inclination of them to evil.

And they sewed fig-leaves] Whether because they were nearest at hand, or by
reason of their largeness fittest for that use, it is not easy to guess.
Only the making use of these leaves to cover their bodies, gives us no
sufficient ground to conclude, that therefore the tree, the fruit whereof they
had eaten against Gods interdiction, was a figtree. For if it had been so now
when their eyes were opened, that they saw both their misery and the cause of
it, they would in all probability have abhorred the tree, by which they had
sinned, above all others, and consequently have made choice of any other thing
for the covering of their bodies, rather then of the leaves of that tree. Now
how they fastened those leaves together, it is to no purpose to enquire,
questionless without a needle and thread, it was not impossible to devise some
means, both to join them together, and to fasten them to their bodies, as we
see they did.

And made them aprons] Or coverings to tie about their loins, for the covering
of their secret parts. But why those alone, seeing all the body was deformed,
especially the Ears, Eyes, Mouth and Hands, as being really defiled by the
contagion of sin, whereof they were special instruments? it is most likely,
because the beholding of those parts more easily suggests unto our minds
motions to uncleanness. Although withal we may conceive, that because sin, the
cause of shame is more especially propagated by those parts, (as David implies
in that expression, Psalm. 51.7.) it pleased God to make a deeper impression of
shame, which sin brings with it upon those parts then upon any of the rest.

Hitherto Moses has described unto us man's fall, with the Means, Order, and
several steps thereof. The Consequents thereof are laid before us in the next
place, and they are

First, the misery that came upon him thereby, discerned in part, though not
fully, by himself, with the remedy which he uses, but in vain, to help it.

Secondly, we have their sin, by which they fell, discovered by God in the
examination of the offenders, and the punishment inflicted on them.

In describing our first Parents discovery of the misery into which they had
fallen, we have set before us

First, the opening of their eyes, with the time when, which was not till they
had both eaten of the forbidden fruit.

Secondly, what they discovered thereupon, which was rather their shame then
their sin, which was the cause of it.

Thirdly, what means they used to cover their shame, (but none to take away
their sin,) the girding of themselves with aprons of fig leaves. From the
time, considered in relation to the woman, that she saw her nakedness, when
she had drawn her husband into the same sin with her self; but discovered
it not before. We have occasion to

1 OBSERVE, Man can discern nothing but What and When, and how far God is
pleased to discover it unto him.
Sodomites could not see Lots door, although just before them, when God had
smitten them with blindness, Genesis 19.11. Neither could Hagar see the Well of
water, till God had opened her eyes, Genesis 21.19. Nor the Syrian army the way
which they went, till God opened their eyes when they were in Samaria, 2 Kings
8.20. Nor the disciples, Christ, with whom they were familiarly acquainted,
Luke 24.31. Much more is it true of the eyes of the mind. David could not
discern the sinfulness of that act of numbering the people, although Joab
warned him of it, till his heart smote him for it, after it was done, 2 Samuel
24.3, 10. nor Absalom, nor Rehoboam, the good counsel that was given them, when
God took away their hearts, 1 Kings 12.15. 2 Samuel 17.14. The reason is,

1. It must needs be so, because God being the fountain of all light, that
illightens every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. It cannot possibly
shine into man's heart, but according to his will.

2. There is great reason it should be so, as well that God by this means
might more easily govern the world according to his own will, as also that we
having no light in our selves but what we know, may be the more abased in our
selves, the more thankful to God that is the light of our eyes, and the more
careful to make use of it to his glory that bestows it, seeing he may deprive
us of it when he pleases.

Let no man then lean to his own, or to any other man's wisdom, whereof we can
have no such assurance but that it may deceive us, especially when either we or
they seek it not at Gods hand, nor depend upon him for it, nor employ it for
the service of himself or of his Church, in which man provokes God even in
justice to turn our wisdom into folly, as he threatens to deal with Pharaohs
wise men, Isa. 19.14. and made it good upon Achitophel.

There is yet in this circumstance of the time, When their eyes were opened,
one thing more, worth our consideration, that their eyes were never opened to
see in what condition they were, till it was too late to help it: whereas, if
they had advisedly thought upon the danger beforehand, and observed Satan's
policy by which he drew them into it; they had refuted his counsel, and
prevented the danger. Whence

2. OBSERVE. It is a great folly in men, not to foresee evil before it be too
late to help it.
Prove. 15.11, 12. Which was Esaus case when he had sold his birthright; which
drew on the loss of the blessing, which he sought and bewailed the loss of
with tears, when it was too late, Heb. 12.16, 17. Wise men beforehand see a
plague, and prevent it, Prove. 22.3. and hearken for time to come, Isa 42.23.
and indeed for this special end was wisdom given, that men having their eyes in
their head, (as Solomon speaks, Eccl. 2.14) they might foresee both good and
evil to come, that they might lay hold on the one, while it may be had, and
avoid and prevent the other before it comes. As for after-wisdom, it is of no
use but to increase our misery, by looking back upon our misery when it is too
late to help it.

Let us then, like wise men, carry our eyes still in our head, looking forwards
to the issue and event of all things, lest we beled on like an Ox to the
slaughter, as Solomon speaks Prove. 7.22, 23. not embracing and following the
directions of the world, which walks in darkness; but taking heed to the light
and counsels of Gods Word, which only discovers unto us truly the issues of
men's ways and courses, Psalm. 37.37, 38. and 73.17. not only in the events that
befall men by the hand of God in the course of his provident dispensations; but
in the dangers unto which the ways themselves lead men, Prove. 2.18, 19. and
6.23.26, 33. Let us make use of this foresight in laying hold of eternal life,
and that betime, while it is to day; lest we be shut out with the foolish
Virgins, Mat. 25.11, 12. and lie mourning in vain in hell, whence there is no
Redemption, Luke 16.24.

It is very probable, that not only God had his hand in opening their eyes, but
Satan too; who having blinded them till they were in the snare, now opens them
to see their own miserable and shameful condition into which they were fallen,
that their hearts by the sense thereof being wounded and afflicted might
increase their misery. Whence

3 OBSERVE Satan never discovers any thing unto us, but to do mischief.
Mat. 4.8. Thus he discovers the means of affecting what our inordinate lusts
move us unto, to encourage us to sin, as by Jonadab he showed Amnon the means
how he might satisfy his lust upon his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.5. and by
Jezabel to Ahab the means of getting Naboths vineyard, 1 Kings 21.7. and if he
shows the foulness of sin, after it is acted, it is to drive men, if possibly
he can, into despair, when the case is desperate; thus he dealt with Judas
after he had prevailed with him to betray his Master: he let him see indeed the
foulness of that sin, but it was that he might go out and hang himself, Mat.
27.4.

Let no man then hearken to him or any of his Agents, who are neither skilful
nor diligent in any thing, but in deceiving and seducing, 2 Timothy 3.13. labor
in nothing but to make men like themselves, ten fold more the children of hell
then they were before, Mat 23.15. and to this end abuse not only their carnal
reason, but even Gods sacred Word, to lead men into heresies in doctrine, or
errors in practice to their destruction at the last, 2 Pet. 3.16. Let all men
turn away from such enemies to the salvation of their souls, attending only
to the Word of truth, which shines unto us as a light shining in a dark place,
2 Pet. 1.19. and to the Spirit, which shows us out of it all the counsels of
God, which are profitable for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be thoroughly furnished to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17. that we
through comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4.

Now whether God or Satan, or both, opened their eyes, this is certain, that
though they wanted eyes beforehand to see the misery into which they were
falling, yet after they were fallen into it, they had eyes to discover when it
was come upon them, into what miserable condition they were brought, and to be
sensible of it too. Whence

4. OBSERVE. Even those which discover not beforehand the evils, which the
errors of their ways lead them into, yet they shall see in the end, and feel
too the misery into which they bring them.
Judas after he had betrayed his Master, Mat. 27.4. by the judgment of the
conscience, within the very thoughts of the heart within them, giving evidence
against them, Romans 2.15. Sometimes the sense of the smart of some judgment
that God lays upon them makes them sensible of the evil of their sin, as it
did Cain, Genesis 4.14. and the man enticed to uncleanness by lewd women, Prove.
5.14. which howsoever some senseless men feel not at present, Prove. 23.35.
much less the sin that causes it, Prove. 30.20. yet God oftentimes in this
life awakens their consciences, and smites them with terrors, with those, Rev.
6.16. or at least astonisheth them by them hereafter, as our Savior represents
it to us in the Parable of Dives, Luke 16.24. Now thus God deals with wicked
men, as well to increase their plagues, as to manifest his righteousness, in
giving them the fruits of their own ways, as they do acknowledge, Ps. 58.11.
And with his own children (as appears in the examples of David, 2 Samuel 24.10.
and of Peter, Mat. 26.75.

1. To bring them to repentance for their failings past.

2. To make them more watchful for time to come.

3. To give them a fuller and quicker taste of Gods mercy, in their
reconciliation by Jesus Christ, in pardoning their sins, and delivering them
from the wrath to come.

That whereof Adam and Eve were most sensible, after their eyes were opened,
was their nakedness; now by that they were indeed exposed to the injury of the
weather, which must necessarily breed them much annoyance. But with that they
seem not to be so much affected at present, because they provide no present
remedy against it. But that which was fuller in their eye, was their deformity
by their nakedness, which they were ashamed to look upon, and therefore desire
to hide it from their own eyes, by girding about themselves aprons of
fig leaves. Now if we consider that they were the glory of all the visible
creatures which God had made, as being in a more especial manner created after
Gods Image, we may here easily observe what a fearful change sin brings upon
all that are defiled with it. Whence

5 OBSERVE. Sin is able to make the most excellent and glorious of all Gods
creatures vile and shameful.
Lucifer, created by God a most glorious Angel of light, a most ugly and
hateful fiend, which made Antiochus, surnamed the glorious, a vile person as
the Angel terms him, Dan. 11.21. as all wicked men are likewise called, Psalm.
15.4. very beasts, Psalm. 49.20. nay, the most filthy of all beasts, even swine
wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. The reason is,

1. It defaceth the Image of God in them, which especially consists in
righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. which sin perverts, Job 33.27.

2. It separates a man from God (as all sin does, Isa 59.2) who is our glory,
Isa. 60.19. and 28.5.

3. It disorders all the faculties of the soul, and parts of the body, and
consequently all the motions and actions that flow from them, and subjects us
to our own base lusts and vile affections, to do things that are not comely,
Romans 1.24, 26, 28.

Let all men then esteem sin as the basest, vilest, and most abominable of all
things, and that not only drunkenness, adultery and the like, which make men
base in the eyes of men, but more, those fouler sins of infidelity, pride,
covetousness, which in true estimation, and (...) Gods eye, are more foul and
abominable then any of the rest, not fit to be named amongst Christians, Ephesians.
5.3. much more to be acted by them, things that men are ashamed to own, which
men do in the dark, or at least when they have done, cover with darkness. Now
men may be truly said to be ashamed of sin, when for it they loath and think
basely of themselves, as David does, Psalm. 73.12. when we blush at the sight
and the sense of them before God and man, esteem basely of all those that are
defiled with them, which is one of the characters of a godly man, Psalm. 15.4.
abstaining not only from their ways as from filthiness, but from all inward
society with them. See Psalm. 101.5, 7. and 1^9.115. esteeming only the
righteous more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. and there fore only
worthy to be his companion, with the Prophet David, Psalm. 119.63.

Now if we observe what means they use to cover their shame, it will evidently
appear, that they look no farther then the nakedness of their bodies, for
which only they provide a covering, but never take notice of their sin which
was the cause of it, and of a greater deformity in their souls then that which
they observed in their bodies, which they see not at all till God farther open
their eyes. Whence

6 OBSERVE, Men are more apt to be sensible of, and to be more affected with
the outward evils that sin brings upon them, then with the sin that causes
them.
Cain complains of the danger that might come upon him, being put out of Gods
Protection, but never complains of his sin in spilling his brothers blood. The
people of Israel were sensible of the loss of their corn and wine, but were
so unsensible of their sin that brought that evil upon them, that they
continued their rebellion against God, Hos. 7.14. and in the evils which sin
brings upon them they are rather affected, with outward then with inward
plagues. As Saul more fears disgrace before the people, then he does to be
cast out of Gods favor, 1 Samuel 15.30. The reason is evident, for men being
generally sensual, even the best among them in some part, it must of necessity
follow, that they must be first and most effectually moved by the objects of
sense: now both sin and the inward plagues are of a spiritual nature, and
consequently not discernable by outward sense.

By this mark then let every man try and judge of the frame of his own spirit,
whether it be carnal and earthly, or spiritual and heavenly, by what he most
takes notice of, whether some judgment for sin, or the sin it self, and in the
judgment what he finds affects his heart most, whether some outward trouble
or loss, or whether the sense of Gods displeasure, whence it arises,
manifested in the withholding of his grace, or the inward comforts, and the
like. For according to the temper and frame of the heart, so are our desires,
and hopes, and fears, and joys, and sorrows, either carnal and earthly, or
spiritual and heavenly.

The man and woman being sensible of the nakedness of their bodies, and of
their shame thereby, use the best means they can to cover it, and for that
devise to make themselves garments of fig leaves, the best materials that came
to hand at present: so thereby they discover the first and chief use of
garments. Whence we may

7 OBSERVE Garments are but the Covers of our shame.
Cor. 12.23. and to hide the shame of them from men's eyes, Exodus 28.42. And by
this example we see that this was the first cause of inventing them, although
it be true, that since they serve for diverse other uses.

1. For necessity, to keep off the injury and annoyance of the weather, Job
31.19, 20. Prove. 31.21.

2. For Distinction 1. Of Sexes, Deuteronomy. 22.5. 2. Of Offices, Exodus 28.2. 3. Of
Estates and Degrees, 2 Samuel 13.18. Mat. 11.8. 4. And may be too of Nations.


3. For the discovering of our affections upon different occasions, either of
joy, Eccl. 9.8. as in marriages, Mat. 22.11. Psalm. 45.13, 14. or of sorrow, as
in Widowhood, Genesis 38.14. or in times of fasting. Psalm. 69.11. or any other
Humiliation, Exodus 33.4, 5. Although these ends seem to be pointed at, either
in the matter, or in the form of our garments; but the covering and hiding of
our bodies by them appears to be occasioned and taken up upon the sense of the
shame of our nakedness, and of our weakness, by which we are subject to the
annoyance of the weather.

Let no man be so shameless as to abuse this apparel, which is the badge of
his weakness and baseness, to a foolish and vain-glorying, which we do, when
we deck our selves with costly clothing, to commend our selves to the eye and
observation of other men. But consider

1. That the first occasion, of the use of clothing, was to cover our shame.

2. That the materials of it are things much baser then our selves, in just
estimation.

3. The apparel at the least does but grace the body, but adornes not the soul
at all, which is the only part wherein man is truly honorable.

4. And the outward person they commend also, only to men of vain minds, but
to no wise or sober man.

5. And withal, do more discover the vanity of our minds, then they cover the
shame of our bodies.

Now although shame were the immediate occasion of clothing the body, yet sin
was the cause, both of it, and besides of that weakness of body that did
accompany it. Whence

8 OBSERVE. Most of our necessities are brought upon us by sin.


Let the observation of the multiplicity of our wants in outward things, and of
endless labors and drudgery in the affairs of this life, by occasion
thereof, be a means to put us in mind of sin, which brought those evils upon
us, groaning not so under the burden of our manifold wants, or of the labors
that we are necessarily to undergo, for the supplying of them, as of sin it
self, which is the cause of all.

Well, the man and woman now see their nakedness, take notice then in the next
place what means they seek out to cover it. They have presently recourse to
the next tree that has the broadest leaves, which they pluck and fasten
together, to make themselves aprons. God is not in all their thoughts, but when
they had left him to embrace the creature, to it they fly for help upon every
occasion. Whence

9 OBSERVE. When men are once fallen off from God, their nature thereby
corrupted, carries them strongly forwards to seek help from the creature.
Asa, when his heart falls off from God, as appears, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. flies to
Benhadad to help him against Baasha, ver. 2, 3. and in his sickness to
Physicians rather then to the Lord, ver. 12. Thus carnal men put confidence in
chariots and horses, Psalm. 20.7. in King Jareb, Hos. 5.13. and generally in
wealth and riches, Prove. 10.15. when any danger threatens them. The reason
whereof is evident.

1. They are wholly carnal and sensual in their dispositions, and therefore
easily carried after sensual and carnal things.

2. They cannot but be enemies to God, from whom they are driven away by the
guiltiness of their own consciences, as having no cause to depend on him whose
yoke they have cast off, and therefore have ground to expect no help from him,
to whom they resolve to do no service.

3. And they are by the just judgment of God delivered over to abase
themselves to vile things far below themselves, because they have not
advanced God, nor glorified him as God, as they ought.

Let us the more carefully observe our own ways, and the inclinations of our
own hearts, that we may the better judge how they stand affected toward God.
For if we find an aptness in them, to close with the creatures upon all
occasions flying to them in our fears waxing confident in our helps, which we
have from them, and full of cares when we are in danger to lose them, and of
grief, when we are deprived of them, these are arguments, if not of our
departing from God, yet of much weakness in our dependence on him. Wherefore
let us

1. Bewail our faultering with God, and dishonouring him, by leaning to
beggarly, base and unprofitable dependencies.

2. Endeavor to bring our hearts to close more fully with him in faithful
services, firm dependence on his All sufficiency and faithful Promises,
addressing our selves to him in all our wants or dangers, in frequent and
fervent prayers, thanksgivings upon all occasions, and rejoicing in his
goodness, faithfulness and truth.

Now if we consider there were no persons in the world, but Adam and Eve, and
withal that they were man and wife, and consequently had less cause of shame
in beholding one another nakedness, it may he wondered why they make such
hardship to hide their shame from one another eye. But we have cause to wonder
much more, that they have no apprehension of the Presence of that God, to whom
lay open not only the nakedness of their bodies, (even when they were covered
with those aprons of fig leaves) but withal the sinfulness, and thereby the
shame of their souls, which they never labor to hide at all, wherein the
grossness of their folly appears, in laboring to hide the less shame from
men, and leaving open the far greater shame unto the eyes of God. Whence

10 OBSERVE Sin besots men, and makes them fools.
Psalm. 92.6. Natural bruit beasts made to be taken, 2 Pet. 2.12. walking in
darkness, Eccl. 2.14. whose wisdom and foolishness, in Gods (that is, in
true) account, 1 Cor. 3.19. It must of necessity be so,

1. Seeing such men are separated from God, who is only the fountain of true
wisdom, and have cast away his Word, which is the Oracle of true wisdom, Jer.
8.9. And

2. Seeing God in the course of his justice then takes away that wisdom which
they have, when they use it not to glorify God therewith as they ought. See
Romans 1.22, 28. only he leaves them wisdom to manage natural things, for the
furthering of the common good, or to do mischief to themselves by being wise to
do evil, Jer. 4.22. to further and increase their own just judgment and
condemnation. Let no man walk in the counsel of sinners, nor follow the advice
of such blind guides, blind in themselves, and blinded by Satan, 2 Cor. 4.4.
though admired by men for their wisdom, as Achitophel was, seeing they guide
themselves by no light, but their own carnal wisdom; by no rule, but their own
perverse will, to no end; but the satisfying of their own inordinate and base
lusts, nor look farther then just before them, 2 Pet. 1.9. can give no good
account of their actions, Eccles. 4.8. and become fools at last, as indeed
their own way discovers their folly in the whole course of it, Psalm. 49.13. to
all that are wise.

Another mark of the folly of our first Parents appears, in their laboring
only to cover their nakedness, but they bring no means to remove it, which
folly of theirs they further manifest afterward, in their excuses for their
sin, when God lays it to their charge in their examination. Whence

11 OBSERVE. All the care that men take, is usually rather to hide their sin,
then to take it away.
Prove. 28.13. after David's example, Psalm. 32.5. and by a thorough reformation;
but that the greatest part of men are loath to come unto, contenting themselves
with the hiding of their sins from the eyes of men, as Saul deals with Samuel,
1 Samuel 15.13, 15. and Gehazi in like manner with Elisha, and Ananias with St.
Peter, Acts 5.2, 8. Now this comes to pass, either by reason of their love and
affection to sin, Job 20.12, 13. which makes them willing to retain it still,
if they can avoid the shame of it, as Abraham was unwilling to put away Ishmael
whom he loved, Genesis 21.11. Or by the love of their own credit, which they
conceive would be much empaired, if they should condemn their own actions,
either by confessing or reforming them. Or by reason of their ignorance in
which Satan so far blindes them, that they cannot discover the right way that
leads to their recovery out of his snares.

In the last place, if we compare this event which followed with Satan's
Promise, which was to make them equal to God Himself, by showing them the way
how they might enlarge their knowledge, whereas on the contrary they find
shame in stead of honor, and folly in stead of the increase of wisdom, the
opening of their eyes to nothing but to the discovery of their own shame and
misery. We by this pattern discover the vanity of all the Promises, and

12 OBSERVE. All Satan's fair Promises, prove in the event nothing else but
lies and mere delusions.
Balaam that followed the wages of unrighteousness, lost his expected
preferment and reward; and Absalom and Achitophel, in stead of their expected
Kingdom and Advancement found their death; and Jeroboam, in stead of his
expected hope of establishing his posterity in the Kingdom by his wicked
policy, found it the means of bringing it to utter ruin, 1 Kings 13.34. Or if
the expected event follow, it falls out to the ruin of those that desire it,
as the gaining of Naboths vineyard proved the ruin of Ahab and his family, 1
Kings 21.19. as the gaining of goods by unlawful means takes away the life of
the Owner thereof, Prove. 1.19. and the gaining of the world proves to be the
loss of ones soul, Mark 8.36. See, Ver. 5. Observe. 13.

VERSE 8.
ANd they heard the voice of Jehovah] Whether this first voice upon which Adam
and Eve fled, were an Articular voice or no, its uncertain. It might be some
noise of a whirlewinde, such as that was, out of which God spoke to Job, chap.
38.1. Or perhaps some thunder, which is called Gods voice. Psalm. 29.3. or some
other fearful sound, as the same word signifies more generally, Ezech. 1 24.
Howsoever it was framed, or whatsoever it was, it was such as not only came
from God supernaturally, but such as Adam and his wife knew to come from God,
as appears by the sequel.

Walking] It may be construed, either God walking, or the voice walking. If we
understand it of Gods walking, we must conceive God appearing in some bodily
shape (as indeed many think that God, or rather Christ appeared unto Adam in a
bodily shape, when he gave him his Laws and brought him his Wife, but without
any warrant out of Scripture, or necessity of any enforcing reason) seeing he
is represented with a bodily motion: or else, we must imagine that Adam
together with the voice, was by God made to hear a sound, as of one walking:
but if we join walking with voice, and so read it, The voice walking; it is a
figurative speech, expressing the coming on of the voice, or drawing and
sounding louder in Adams ears, as if it, or the person from whom the voice
came did draw nearer, as the voice of the Trumpet Went on, (as it is in the
Original) that is, increased or waxed louder, (as we render it according to the
sense) Exodus 19.19. as if God went forwards, and drew nearer toward the people
that sounded the trumpet. If we construe this phrase of the voices walking in
this manner, then questionless, the Holy Ghost by the voice cannot understand
the inward voice of the conscience, (although it cannot be doubted but they
heard that voice too, and that very loud in their ears,) which could not but
very improperly be said to walk or come on, but rather some audible voice,
sounding outwardly in the ear, in what manner, or by what means framed, is
not expressed.

In the wind of the day] Some by the wind of the day understand the
afternoon, when they suppose that in the Garden, being seated in a hot
country, there blew some fresh gale of wind to cool the heat of the air,
and they conceive man's fall and expulsion out of Paradise, to have been either
without any, or with little intermission between them. Others are of opinion,
that there passed one night over our first Parents in their sin, and that Gods
appearance was the next morning, (when usually in those hot countries there
blows such a wind as is here mentioned) supposing that God gave unto the
offenders purposely this pause, between the sin and the judgment, which passed
upon them for it, to try whether they would recollect themselves, and consider
what they had done. And after their hearts had been affected with the passing
over of a troublesome and uncomfortable night (which usually presents unto us
more sad and serious thoughts) took the opportunity to treat with them the next
morning. To guess precisely at the time when these things were done, is
neither easy nor necessary, seeing the Spirit of God passed it over in
silence: questionless the judgment was not long behind the sin. And there
must necessarily be allowed some reasonable space between the one and the
other, wherein the Delinquents after conference what to do, and resolution
taken to make them coverings for their bodies, might put in execution what they
had resolved upon, all which could not be done in a moment. Withal, it seems
probable, that although God suffered them not to rest long quiet in their
sin, yet that he gave them some time to see what they would do, and finding
their thoughts about their own condition, and the providing of a remedy for it
to vanish into smoke, their eyes being fixed wholly upon the fruitless
consideration of their outward misery, without taking notice of the sin which
brought it on them, or the pollution of their souls thereby far more shameful
then that which they observed in their bodies, he calls them to account, and
points out unto them their sin of rebellion, and misery that came upon them
thereby, both in the examination and judgment thereupon. That it might appear
that their repentance was Gods only work (being they were far from it, till God
awakened and touched their hearts,) as well as the Promise of life was merely
from his free grace, the one wrought in them, and the other bestowed on them,
without their desire, and much more without their desert, as appears by the
ensuing Narration. If place might be given to conjectures, we might probably
guess, that the Creation being ended the sixth day, the Law was given on the
seventh, in which also the woman (as the duty of that day required) surveighing
the fruits of the Garden was seduced by Satan and fell: and that this judgment
passed upon her and her husband the eighth day, or first of the second week,
when also Christ was promised, and his Conquest over Satan which was perfected
by his Resurrection from the dead, which was upon the eighth day, or first day
of the week. But these are only conjectures.

And Adam and his wife hid themselves] Finding their fig leaves too slight a
covering to hide them from Gods all-seeing eye, they betake themselves to
another refuge, shifting out of the way, (as they fondly imagine) that they
might not give an account for that which they could not justify.

From the face of Jehovah] From him whose presence they rejoiced and took so
much comfort in before, the same God becomes now a terror to them. A fearful
consequent of sin. The like terror at the Presence of God we find in Satan,
Mat. 8.29. and in all wicked men, Rev. 6.16. But see their folly, for whither
could they fly from his presence, Psalm. 139.7. which fills all places?

Amongst the trees] Still they run to the creature. But alas, how could those
trees hide them from the Presence, even of men? much less could they hide them
from the face of Jehovah. Behold now the fulfilling of Satan's promise, and so
the wisdom that they had gotten by following his counsel.

In this branch of the History we have set before our eyes concerning our first
Parents their Examination by God himself manifesting his presence sundry ways.
Summons, Indictment, and Conviction of them severally, by which is at length
discovered the first Author of their Apostasy and Rebellion. The censure and
judgment after their conviction.


In this whole Process God is further cleared of having any hand at all in the
sin of our first Parents.

1. By the Confession of the Delinquents, discovering at last, though
unwillingly, (which adds much to the credit of their testimony) the Author of
this cursed motion.

2. By the punishment inflicted by God upon his own creatures, to whom he had
manifested so much love before, and whom in compassion at present he preserves
from utter ruin. And therefore in not sparing them for their offense, he
discovers his perfect hatred of sin, whereof therefore he cannot be conceived
to be either the Worker or Perswader.

Man had sinned against God, but (as we see) never comes near him to
acknowledge his sin, nay flies from him, till God finds him out and hales him,
as it were, by force out of his lurking hole to appear before him. Whence

1 OBSERVE, If men will not draw near unto God, yet he will find them out in
their sins, and bring them into judgment before him.
Cains murder of his brother Abel, Achans sacrilege, David's secret
contrivance of Urijahs death, Ahabs murder of innocent Naboth, Saul's
covetousness in saving the best of the Amalekites cattle, Gebazies bribery,
Ananias and Sapphiraes fraud. This as he can do, in whose sight all things are
naked, Heh, 4.13. and no sin is hid from him, Psalm. 89.5. So he does it

1. To manifest his Providence, that it may be known that he observes men's
ways and considers them, Psalm. 33.13, 14. lest it should be thought that he
has forsaken the earth, Ezech. 9.9. or at least regards not what men do, as
they speak, Psalm. 94.7.

2. That by this means he may manifest his justice, when he renders to all
according to their deeds, that so all flesh may tremble before him, when they
know that their works are discovered and observed, and shall be censured.

Let all those that have sinned, come and prepare to meet their God, Amos 4 12.
who can neither be blinded, nor escaped, nor resisted, that they may take hold
of his strength to make peace with him; Considering

1. That it is more credit to come in voluntarily, then to be drawn in by
force.

2. A readier way to obtain pardon, as Benhadads Lords found by experience, 1
King. 20.32. and David much more in submitting unto God. Psalm, 32.5.

3. If we come not in voluntarily, God will bring us in by force, which will be
worse for us every way.

Now if in this enquiry of God after Adam we look at the end he aimed at, which
was by convincing the offenders, and laying their sin before them, to bring
them in to sue for pardon, and to embrace the Covenant of peace, which he out
of his free bounty tenders unto them in the close of this Conference; We may

2 OBSERVE. God who has all the wrong when he is provokod by our sins, is the
first that seeks to make peace with us.
Isa. 1.16, 17, 18, Jer. 3.12, 13, 14. Hos. 14.1, 2. Now this God performs
sundry ways.

1. He all ures us by his mercies, as he promised to deal with his people, Hos.
2.14, 15.

2. By the inward and secret persuasions of his Spirit, in giving them hearts
to return, Zech. 12.12.

3. By the effectual ministry of the Gospel, wherein he does not only offer
unto us, but persuade and beseech us to embrace those terms of peace, which he
offers, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.20. The reason is,

1. Necessity, seeing we cannot turn our hearts unto him, unless he draws
us, John 6.44. which moves the Church to pray, Turn us, and we shall be
turned, Jer. 31.18.

2. The fitness of this way, to advance the free mercy of God the more, that
all men's boasting may be taken away, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. and that he that rejoices,
may rejoice in God alone, 1 Cor. 1.31. who as he loves us first, so he seeks us
first, Isa. 61.1. and recovers us often when we go astray: whence the Prophet
begs that favor from him, Psalm. 119.176. A mercy sufficient to astonish us, if
we consider,

1. The infinite distance between God and his creature, which he abaseth
himself to look upon, Psalm. 113.5, 6.

2. The little that he has of any man or his service, Job 35.7.

3. The unconceiveable dishonor by which we have provoked him in going a
whoring from him, Jer. 2.12.

4. The infinite price, by which he has purchased our peace. 1 John 4.9.

5. The manifold effectual means, by which he labors to bring us back to
himself.

Let this manner of Gods dealing with us, be an effectual means to move us to
deal in the same manner with our brethren.

1. Willingly accept (though we have been never so far provoked) peace with
such as sue for it, and seek it at our hands, Luke 17.4.

2. Seek peace, follow after it, although it be not offered.

1. Rendering to them who have wronged us, good for evil, Romans 12.14. and
praying for them that persecute us, Mat. 5.44.

2. Making them offers of peace, Psalm. 120.7. yet with such Christian wisdom,
that we neither encourage them to do us further wrong, by showing any weakness
of spirit; nor give them occasion of justifying themselves in that which they
have done already.

The voice, by which God gave Adam and Eve notice of his Presence, whether it
were a Thunder, or some Whirlwinde, or what else, was questionless a voice
full of terror, or representing in some measure the Power and Majesty of him
with whom they had to do. This is indeed Gods usual way, to possess the hearts
of men with reverence and fear, before he begins to deal with them. So that we
may hence

3 OBSERVE, God when he deals with men, delights to be hearkened unto with
reverence and fear.
Exodus 19.16. Thus he amazeth Elijah by a strong wind, an earthquake and fire,
before he speaks with him, 1 Kings 19.11, 12. In like manner he speaks to Job
out of a whirlwinde, Job 38.1. and amazeth and smites Paul to the ground before
he reasons with him. And this he does, partly for preserving of his own honor,
that he may be apprehended to be as he is, full of Majesty; and partly, that he
may by this beat down the hearts of his servants, that the words which he
speaks may take the deeper impression in them.

Let it move all men when they come into Gods Presence, either to hear his Word
publicly, or to read it in private, especially when we draw near unto him, to
pour out our souls before him in Prayer, or in examining our hearts before
him in our Closets, to set him up before, and to fill our hearts with the
apprehension of his Majesty, Power and Holiness, as we are advised, Eccl. 5.1,
2. that our hearts may be brought to tremble at his Word, Isa. 66.2. and may
stand in awe, even when we commune with him in our hearts, as the Psalmist
directs, Psalm. 4.4.

God might as well have appeared in flames of fire, as have given notice of his
presence by this voice; so that their spirits within them might have been
wholly swallowed up, and their hearts have died within them, as Nabals did, but
he tempers the terror of his Majesty so far, that they might tremble and be
humbled, but not affrighted or distracted: out of which dealing with Adam and
Eve, here we may

4 OBSERVE, God in representing his Majesty to men so deals with them, that he
may humble, but not confound them.
Deuteronomy. 5.28. and in hearkening to treat with them by Moses. Thus he dealt in
reasoning with Job, chap. 42.6. and with the children of Israel in treating
with them, after they had provoked him by asking a King, 1 Samuel 12.18. and this
course he holds, not only with his own children, whom he desires only to
instruct and reclaim, that he might not destroy them, but sometimes even with
wicked men, as appears in Cains example, Genesis 4. that he might manifest his
patience and long-suffering toward them, that the world may justify him in
the way of his judgments. Although at other times he overwhelmes them with
terrors, as he did Judas, and shall deal with all the rest of the wicked at
the last day.

Let all men acknowledge the riches of Gods mercy,

1. In dispensing his Word by the Ministry of men (and not of Angels whose
presence might affright us,) and that too in such a manner, that whereas it is
in it self like an hammer, Jer. 23.29. mighty in operation through God,
sharper then any two edged sword, 2 Cor. 10.5. able, if it were set on by the
strength of his hand, to break the heart in pieces; yet is so tempered in the
dispensation thereof, by men like unto our selves, and therefore sensible by
experience of humane infirmities, that it only pricks the heart, as Acts 2.27.
but cuts it not in pieces.

2. In the terrors of conscience, which being in themselves unsupportable,
Prove. 18.14. yet are so moderated unto us, that though we be perplexed, we are
not in despair, 2 Cor. 4.8. burned but yet not consumed, like Moses his bush,
Exodus 2.2. walking safely in the midst of the flames of fire with the three
children, Dan. 3.25.

3. In afflictions which God lays on us in such a measure proportioned to our
strength, 1 Cor. 10.13. that they only purge us, but do not destroy us, Isa.
27.8, 9.

The place where God arraignes our first Parents, and calls them to account for
their sin, is Paradise, that Garden of delights, which God himself had
planted and bestowed on our first Parents for their pleasure. Whence

5 OBSERVE, God many times calls men to account, and proceeds in judgment
against them in the midst of their delights.
Job 20.23. as he did upon the murmurers, even while the meat was yet between
their teeth, Psalm. 78.30, 31. and on wicked Belshazzar in the midst of his
great feast, when they were drinking their wine, when God wrote the judgment
that he had passed on him on the wall before him, Dan. 5.5, 26, 27. But
sometimes even with his own children, whom he troubles now and then in the
midst of their prosperity, as he did David, Psalm. 30.6, 7. whether by casting
troublesome thoughts inwardly into their minds: Thus Job was not in safety nor
at rest in his greatest peace, Job 3.26. Sometimes laying his hand upon them in
their estates or bodies, as he dealt with Job afterward. And this he may
justly do, because we usually offend most in our delights, when we let our
hearts loose, and keep not so strait a watch over them as we ought, an evil
which Job feared his children would fall into in their feasting, Job 1.5. And
thus it is fit for him to do in mercy toward his own children, who by this
means are kept the more in awe, when they see they walk now here securely (but
in a course of holy obedience) which is the means by stirring us up to
watchfulness to prevent many of those evils that delights and pleasures might
otherwise lead us into.

Let all men then carefully observe and judge themselves both at all times, and
in all places, especially in the midst of their honors, wealth and pleasures,
walking always therein with fear; Remembering,

1. That in our delights we have most snares to entangle us, and baits to
deceive us; and therefore have the more need, both to look to our selves
beforehand, and to examine and call our selves often and strictly to account,
as God directs his own people to do, Deuteronomy. 8.12, 13.

2. Then, above all times our hearts are most easy to be assaulted, when the
thoughts, being so much fixed upon these objects of outward senses, there must
of necessity be less observance and heed-taking to the motions of the heart
within.

3. That those delights may bring us in danger of, but cannot secure us from
Gods judgments, which nothing can prevent, but the judging of our selves, 1
Cor. 11.31.

The time when God calls the offenders to account, is not precisely expressed,
but only in general signified to be in the wind of the day, noting either the
morning or the evening, whether of the two it is uncertain; as also what day it
was, whether the same day wherein they had sinned, or some other day following.
Only it is generally agreed, that the judgment was not long behind the sin, so
that we may probably conceive it was not deferred beyond the next day at the
farthest. And yet withal, in Gods proceeding unto judgment, there appears to
have been such a pause between the sin and the censure, that the offenders had
sufficient time to bethink themselves what they had done, seeing they had so
much leisure, as to devise and provide means to cover their nakedness. So
that in calling them to account, he gives them so much time as might be
sufficient to examine their own act; and yet not so much as might harden their
hearts, to make them secure in their sin. Whence

6 OBSERVE, It is very needful to observe a fit season, in dealing with
offenders after they have sinned.
Lev. 19.17. yet will it be needful sometimes to give some respite ere we deal
with him, waiting

1. Till the passion be over, and the mind transported thereby, be come to it
self again, as Abigail would not deal with her husband Nabal, in his
drunkenness, till he was sober again, 1 Samuel 25.37. as men forbear to give
Physic in an Ague till the fit be over.

2. Till God invite us by some opportunity, which may much facilitate the work
that we go about, as when God inwardly awakens the sinners conscience, as it
seems, David's heart smote him for numbering the people, before God sent the
Prophet to him, 2 Samuel 24.10.) or outwardly, by afflictions which he sends,
softens their hearts, and makes them more ready to embrace counsel, as when
Judges are overthrown in stony places, words will be sweet, Psalm. 141.6.
otherwise, delays in dealing with men in fouler sins are dangerous, where
deferring to deal with the sinner,

1. May harden the heart, as Eccl. 8.11.

2. Or gives way to the full accomplishment of the sin, which might be
prevented by speedy admonition: and so God dealt with King Abimelech, as soon as
he had taken Sarah into his house before he had come near her, to prevent his
adultery, Genesis 20.3.

3. Or when one man's sin is taken into example, and others are drawn into the
like evil. Thus God takes a speedy course for the cutting off such as were
joined unto Pehor, because it was a spreading sin, Numb. 25.15. Thus we stop
the breaking out of a fire, or the breaking of a flood in the beginning, for
the preventing of a greater mischief.

How God appears and draws near to Adam, to call him to account for his sin
we have seen: how Adam carries himself toward him, we are now to consider. The
nearer God comes to him, the farther he flies out of his presence, which
doubtless before had been his comfort. Whence

7 OBSERVE. The Presence of God is terrible to a sinner.
Mat. 8.9. to all wicked men, Rev. 6.16. who therefore desire his departing
from them, Job 21.14. even in his Ordinances, as those wicked Jews desire the
holy One of Israel may cease from them, Isa. 30.11. yea, even the godly
sometimes tremble at his Presence, out of the conscience of sin, as Manoah did,
who thought he should die, because he had seen the Lord, Judge. 13.22. and Jacob
fears when God appears unto him in a vision, Genesis 28.17. and Peter, when
Christ by a miracle manifests himself to be a God, Luke 5.8. which in Gods
children happens by the apprehension of their vileness and sinfulness, never
so fully manifested unto them, as by the sight of Gods Majesty, Job 42.5, 6.
and holiness, Isa. 6.5. and in wicked men, by consideration of his Power and
Justice: from whom therefore upon the conscience of their own sinful courses,
they expect nothing but wrath and vengeance, Mat. 8.29.

Behold then the miserable condition into which sin has brought us, which
has changed our greatest desire, Psalm. 42.2. and joy, Psalm. 16.11. and
content, Psalm. 17.15. into the greatest terror, especially unto the wicked,
who neither can fly from Gods Presence, Psalm. 139.7. nor endure his revenging
hand. Surely those that many times cannot stand before the horror of their own
consciences, nor look upon the faces of Gods Ambassadors, or endure to hear
their voice, with what terror and trembling of heart shall they behold the
face of Christ Himself, and hear his voice, when he shall come in flaming fire
to render vengeance to all that obey not the Gospel, and pronounce against them
that fearful and irrevocable sentence, Go ye cursed, etc?

2. Behold the comfort of a good conscience, wherein we may behold the face of
God with comfort and confidence, 1 John 3.21. but not in our selves, but in the
Name of Jesus Christ, who has by his mediation established with us a Covenant
of peace between God and us, Romans 5.1. and purchased unto us access with
boldness to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. so that we cannot only rejoice at
present in Gods Presence with us in his Ordinances, but withal love and long
for his appearance, when he shall come in his glory, 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 22.20.

But let us consider farther, how these poor amazed creatures, being now fallen
off from God, labor to shift for themselves, and to hide from the Presence of
God. They discover the nakedness of their bodies, and their shame thereby, for
that they provide a covering of fig leaves. God begins to show himself: for all
their covering they dare not come into his sight; they find a shift for that
too, and run behind the trees to hide themselves: what would all this profit
them to the taking away of their sin, and recovering of their former
happiness, which was that which they should have labored for, but was not at
all in their thoughts? We may then hence

8 OBSERVE, When men are once fallen away from God, they are left to miserable
and unprofitable shifts.
Isa. 28.15, To an arm of flesh, Jer. 17.5. which proves like a broken reed,
and pierces the hand of him that leanes on it. To make riches their high wall,
Prove. 18.11. which avail not in the day of wrath. To strong holds, which, like
ripe figs, fall into the mouth of the eater, Nahum 3.12. which when they have
stayed themselves on all their life; at the latter end, they are discovered to
be fools, Jer. 17.11. and shall not see when good comes, ver. 6. and may be
compared to a man, who being halfedrowned, graspeth after the woods in the
bottom of the water, which help him only to hasten his destruction.

Reason 1. It cannot be otherwise, when men are once gone away from God, in
whom only is true comfort and safety, and his Name a strong tower, which they
that run unto are safe, and from whom is the efficacy of all means, which
without him can do neither good nor evil.

2. God in his just judgment, when men honor him, not as God, deprives them
of that wisdom.

Let it be the wisdom of all those that desire their own good, to cleave fast
unto God, and to cast away the unprofitable dependancies upon the creature,
which

1 In it self taken apart from God, in whom all things subsist, is mere vanity.

2. Is of use only in this present life.

3. And here useful only to the outward man, but can neither secure the
conscience, nor make the heart better, nor much less reach to eternity.

4. If it could protect us from men, it cannot prevail against the Power of God.

1. If they could do, that cannot interest us in his favor, which only is our
life and happiness.

It is observable, that Adam flies from God, who came only to show him his
sin, and to offer him the means of recovering his favor and happiness by
Jesus Christ, as is manifested in the sequel. Whence

9 OBSERVE, Men are naturally apt to fly from the means of their own good.
Jer. 2.13. Gods Ordinances and ways, Job 21.14. ordained by God unto men for
their good, Deuteronomy. 6.24 which if one do, he shall live in them, Lev. 18.15.
leaving the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness, Prove. 2
13. nay, to forsake God himself: Israel would none of him, though he offered
himself unto him upon the best terms, Psalm. 81.11. seeking Egypt rather then
Canaan, bondage rather then liberty. Thus all men by nature love darkness
rather then light, John 3 19. fly from all communion with God, with Christ,
from his Word, his Ministers, whom for telling the truth, they account their
bitter enemies, Gal. 4.16. and this is not only the perverseness of some who
persist to the last in the ways of their own ruin, but even of such as God
afterward prevails withal, to hearken to his own counsel and recovers out of
Satan's snares. The Prodigal son not only goes from his father at first, but
will rather adhere to a Citizen, a stranger to him, yea, and live by swines
meat, then return back to his own father, and yet pinched by extreme
necessity, returns and is reconciled unto him at last. The reason is,

1. Men's ignorance of spiritual things, wherein their true good consists; when
Christ came into the world, the world knew him not, John 1.10. and no marvel,
for they, having only the use of natural, that is, carnal reason, must need
mistake spiritual things, which because they cannot comprehend, they account
them foolishness, 1 Cor. 2.14.

2. The wisdom of the flesh being enmity against God, as many as are of the
flesh must needs hate him, and therefore cannot submit unto him.

3. The ways of attaining true good, are by denial, of ones self, and all the
lusts of the flesh, which is impossible for any man to do, remaining in his
natural condition.

If any man then desire to be directed aright in a way, to seek his own good,
let him not take his own wisdom into counsel, nor follow the direction of any
that are guided by no better light then that of nature, which being enmity
against God, cannot but carry us away from him, who is our happiness and
safety, to take hold of broken reeds that pierce our hands, when we rest upon
them; but let us open our ears to the counsels of wisdom, and pray for a new
heart, that may be guided by Gods Spirit, which both shows unto a man the way
of his own, and persuades him to embrace it so, that he shall not depart from
it as he has promised, Jer. 32.40.

How the woman slighted the curse, which God had denounced upon the eating of
the forbidden fruit, and for all that, adventures boldly to break the
Commandment, we have seen. Now God comes to call them to account for what they
had done, we see what terror seizes both upon her and her husband. Whence

10 OBSERVE, The terrors of God shall first or last shake the hearts of all
those that do most slight his judgments.
Pharaoh, Exodus 8.8, 28. and 9.27, 28. and 10.16, 17. of Zidkijah, 1 Kings
22.25. Belshazzar, Dan. 5.6. Pashur, Jer. 20.3, 4. and shall be much more
clearly and generally manifested at the last day, by that dreadful horror that
shall seize upon all the wicked, Rev. 6.16. Indeed, unless God should in this
manner deal with the wicked of the world, he should

1. Suffer his Honor to be trampled under foot, and his Authority and Power
despised.

2. Harden the hearts of wicked men in mischief, Eccl. 8 11.

3. There is no fitter judgment, nor more proportionable to the sin, then to
punish security and contempt with fear and terror.

The conscience of Delinquents could not but testify their guilt; and now they
no sooner hear a voice, but they conceive presently that God is come to call
them to account, and to take vengeance on them, whereupon they labor to shift
out of sight, and to hide themselves among the trees. Whence

11 OBSERVE A guilty conscience is filled with terrors upon every occasion.
Cains case, who stood in fear of every one that he met, lest he should kill
him, Genesis 4.14. and amongst the plagues threatened against wicked men, this is
not the least, that their life should hang before them, and they should fear
day and night, Deuteronomy. 28.66. even where no fear is, Psalm. 53.5. where none
pursues, Prove. 28.1. As the devil no sooner saw Christ, but he thought he was
come to torment him, Mat. 8.29. No marvel that the sound of fear should be in
his ears, Job 15.21. when the matter and cause of fear is in his heart and
conscience, even the desert of vengeance for sin, which accompanies him
wheresoever he goes.

The fear that seized upon Adam and Eve, upon the apprehension of Gods
Presence, having filled their hearts, presently drives him to his heels, he
fears God and flies from him. Whence

12 OBSERVE. Whatsoever we truly fear, we cannot but endeavor to fly from
and avoid.
Prove. 22.3. as Josiah did, when hearing the plagues denounced in the Law,
against such sins as he found amongst his own people, and fearing the wrath of
God hanging over his head, takes counsel about, and enquires diligently after
the means of escaping the vengeance which follows it, 2 Chronicles. 34.19.21, 31.
Thus nature teaches us to fly from Serpents, wild beasts, or weapons of
destruction. And so does grace teach us to fly from sin that slays the
soul, and from the wrath and vengeance to come. And that merely out of the
desire planted in nature, of preserving it self, by seeking after and embracing
those things that preserve it, and shunning those that are hurtful to it.

Let men try their fear of Gods wrath, by taking hold of his strength, that
they may make peace with him, Isa. 27.5. seeing they can neither escape, nor
resist, nor endure it, and their fear of sin by flying from it, and from all
allurements and provocations thereunto, as Joseph fled from his adulterous
Mistress, Genesis 39.12. in such fear, that for haste he left his cloak behind
him. It is that indeed which the wise man advises us unto, not to come near
the house of a lewd woman, Prove. 5.8. Now by this mark it will evidently
appear, that there is no fear of God before wicked men's eyes, neither of
sin, nor of the wrath to come, seeing they pass on carelessly, and so at last
are deservedly punished, Prove. 27.12.

But to what purpose was it to seek an hiding place from that God, from whose
Presence no man can fly, Psalm. 139.7. seeing he is present every where, and
all things are naked in his sight, Heb. 4.13. even the very hearts of men; nay
hell and destruction it self, Prove. 15.11? It appears by this, how far our
first Parents had lost, if not the knowledge, yet at least the right
consideration of him, seeing they deal with him as with a mortal man, in
running away from him, and hiding himself from his Presence, as one would fly
and hide from a man. Whence

13 OBSERVE. There is a wonderful pronenesse in the hearts of men, to conceive
of God as they do of a mortal man.
Psalm. 50.21. In his Providence, that he cannot see through the dark clouds,
Job 22.13. In his Power, that he cannot deliver out of man's hand, Dan. 3.15. In
his Truth, that he alters and changes his mind like a man, as Balak implies,
Numb. 23.13, 19. In his Holiness, that he regards not evil, Psalm. 94.7. nor
forgets it, as men do commonly those things that they respect not, Psalm. 10.11.
and no marvel, if men, who are themselves sensual and carnal, judge of all
things sensually and carnally. Nay more, being by their corrupt nature e^emies
to God, and his honor, it is no wonder, if they willingly and purposely
endeavor to abase him, to the scantlet of a creature.

Hence then we may easily discover the Atheism and Profaneness of men's hearts
in general, when we may judge what men think and conceive of God in their
hearts, by their carriage toward him, who neither depend upon his promises,
nor tremble at his threatenings, nor express their thankfulness unto him for
his mercies, which they would not neglect to perform to a mortal man. Nay,
when we draw near him with our lips, when our hearts are far from him, lying
unto him to his face, and the like; what do we else, but by our deeds proclaim,
that we conceive him to be like a man, that judges by the outward appearance,
and can look no farther?

VERSE 9.
CAlled to Adam] It may be at first to him alone, at least, we find, that he
deals not with Eve at all, until her husband had appeached her. And the reason
why he begins first with Adam, seems to be that, by beginning with the last
Actor in the transgression, he might the better out of the Delinquents own
mouths discover, and set before us the whole order of the sin, and all the
Actors therein, what every one did, and by whose solicitation. The voice
wherein he spoke, was questionless Articulate, in which he called Adam by his
name, as he likewise did others at other times, Genesis 22.1. 1 Samuel 3.10.

Where art thou?] Not that God was ignorant where he was, and therefore he may
he conceived to demand, not so much where he was, as what drove him thither;
that so, if it might be, himself might be brought to acknowledge the sin, which
occasioned his shifting and hiding away from Gods Presence, which had
doubtless been before his joy and comfort, till he had by this transgression
of his Commandment provoked his wrath against him. The former voice made Adam
fly and tremble: wherefore God comes a little closer to him, and sets before
him, both his fact in particular, and his punishment, in this examination.
Whence

1 OBSERVE, Terrors may prepare a man's heart, but it is only the Word of God
that informs and subdues it.
Job 33.19, 22. must needs be much afflicted in spirit, as well as in his body;
but that works nothing upon him to purpose, till the messenger come to him,
one of a thousand, and show the man his uprightness, ver. 23. and so bring him
to the confession of his sin, ver. 27. Paul was smitten down to the ground by
the light that shone round about him, and wonderfully amazed him, which
prepared him to be willing to receive advice, Acts 9.4, 6. but it was the Word
of Christ, by the mouth of Ananias, which directed him what to do. The like we
find in the Jailer, Acts 16.27, 32. for man, being an understanding creature,
cannot be any other way wrought upon, but by informing the understanding.
Terrors may indeed show some danger near, but the cause of it, and means of
escaping it, cannot be discovered unto us any other way, then by the Word of
God, which he has made his Power, not only to salvation, Romans 1.16. but to
Conversion too, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Let all men then in any troubles of mind, occasioned, (whether by any outward
distresses, or by inward terrors) have recourse to the Word, out of it
searching into the causes of Gods wrath, the duties which it requires of us for
our reformation, the means of our reconciliation, the hopes and encouragements
which we have from thence, if we seek it in sincerity, remembering

1. That this is Gods Ordinance, wherein he has both discovered his will unto
us, and annexed unto it the power of his Spirit, to subdue every thought in us
to the obedience of Jesus Christ.

2. That it is the only means to bring unto God his due honor, by bearing
witness to his truth in his Promises, and to his righteousness in his Laws,
and to his Authority in submitting to his directions.

When the Lord goes about by examination to bring Adam to a free confession of
his sin, he calls him by his name, that his heart might be affected the more,
when he understood thereby, that the business in hand concerned himself in
particular. Whence

2 OBSERVE, The way to get our hearts affected with what we hear, is to
apprehend our selves to be spoken unto in particular.
Nathan tells David, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12.7. Or in the public Ministry
of the Word, when men are pointed out by their degrees, or particular callings,
as the Prophets oftentimes direct their speeches to the Princes, the Priests,
the Prophets, John Baptist in his Sermons addresseth himself to the publicanes
and soldiers, and our Savior more plainly singles out the Scribes and
Pharisees, in such cases any man of that calling should conceive himself to be
meant in particular. So likewise when the evils of the present tiems are
described, in a particular manner, he that comes in the while should take
himself to be meant, and the secrets of his heart to be discovered, 1 Cor.
14.25. So likewise, when any duty is laid before him, and the way wherein he
should walk is pointed out, when he turns aside to the right or left hand, to
use the Prophets expression, Isa. 30.21. every man ought to think himself
charged in particular, as if he were named. And as this is the duty of every
hearer, so should it be the care of every Minister of the Gospel, in dispensing
the Word, so to divide to his hearers their several portions, that every one
may take unto himself that which properly belongs unto him, that his conscience
may be so awakened, that the judgment passed upon his person or estate may be
discerned by him, as directed to himself in particular, as if he had been
mentioned by name. Thus it must be

1. Because self-love is so rooted in us, that we slight, and make little
account of those things, in which our selves have not a peculiar interest.

2. Because it much advances Gods honor, 1 Cor. 14.25. when by such
particular discoveries and directions it is made manifest unto us, that God
oversees all our ways, and takes care of our estates in particular, which
cannot but work in us both fear, and care, and confidence.

Thus then we see, that Adams flight, and endeavor to hide himself from Gods
presence availes him little. God sees, and finds him out where he is, and
calls him by name out of his lurking hole, and brings him before him. Whence

3 OBSERVE. Those that endeavor to fly from God, yet can by no means shift
themselves out of his Presence.
David testifies, Psalm. 139.7. they can neither hide their persons, nor any of
their works, though they do them in the dark, as is manifest, in the examples
of Cain, Achan, Gehazi, Ananias and others, which that men may know that God
sees at present, he sometimes discovers even to men, Ezech. 8.12. as in the
examples beforementioned, but without doubt shall discover openly hereafter,
when every man's work shall be made manifest, 1 Cor. 3.13. and every secret
thing, Eccl. 12.14. so that they that are otherwise cannot be hid, 1 Timothy 5.25.
It must needs be so

1. Because Gods Presence fills all places, nay, he is In, and Thorough all,
Ephesians. 4.6. So that all things are naked in his sight, Hebr. 4.13.

2. It concerns the Judge of the world to do right; which he cannot do,
unless all things be manifest to him, that he may render to every man
according to his deeds, that he may be justified when he is judged.

Let it then be every man's care and wisdom to take hold of Gods strength, to
make peace with him, as himself advises us, Isa. 27.5. seeing he cannot be

1. Resisted, Isa. 27.4.

2. Nor escaped, Jer. 25.35.

3. Nor entreated, 1 Samuel 2.25.

4, Nor endured, Isa. 33.14. Who though he seem to pass over men's ways
without observation for the present, yet shall one day set men's sins in order
before them, Psalm. 50.21. and bring to light the hidden things of darkness, 1
Cor. 4.5 so that a man endeavoring to fly from him, loses his labor,
increases his sin, hinders his peace, and flies from his own happiness.

The special thing that God aims at in this question, when he asks him, Where
art thou, (as has been showed) is not to enquire of him that which he saw, but
to draw from him something that Adam desired to conceal, which was the cause
that moved him to be there, that he might by that means, when he had sinned,
draw him to a free acknowledgement and confession of his sin, that so he might
clear God, and condemn himself. Whence

4 OBSERVE, God loves a free and voluntary acknowledgment of sin from his
children, when they have trespassed against him.
Prove. 28.13. and cannot but perform it in righteousness, 1 John 1.9. and
does to his children, 2 Samuel 12 13. which David acknowledges with great
thankfulness, Psalm. 32.5. a pattern of such an acknowledgment we have, Psalm.
51.4. The reason is

1. Because it brings God most honor, when we clear him, and take the blame
unto our selves. See Josh. 7.19. whereby every mouth is stopped, and his ways
acknowledged, and his judgments to be just, in visiting men's transgressions
upon them; and his mercies infinite, in sparing men upon their repentance.

2. It most justifies our selves, when we condemn our own ways and actions, 2
Cor. 7.11. and are grieved in our own hearts, and ashamed of our folly, in the
errors of our ways.

Let us then make it our daily practice, as we sin daily, to sue out our pardon
by a free and full acknowledgement of sin before him, whom we have offended, as
the means

1. To free us from the judgment of God, 1 Cor. 11.31.

2. To increase our watchfulness for time to come.

3. To improve our love to God in Christ, by his often pardoning of our sins.

4. To quicken us the more to cheerful obedience, when we know we serve a God
that has so much compassion of us, as is at large expressed, Psalm. 103.9, 10,
13. Besides this daily exercise, when afflictions, distress of conscience,
deadness of heart, insensible backslidings, much more the falling into any
gross or scandalous sin, or any other like occasion shall require, or
without any such occasion, that we may affect our hearts the more feelingly,
with the apprehension of the riches of Gods mercy, in the free pardon of
millions of sins, that we may keep our hearts humble, that we may the better
discover our Progress or Regresse in the ways of Godliness, the more solemn
humiliation of the soul, upon a serious survey of the course of our ways,
with a feeling acknowledgement of a multitude of sins past, is of special use,
and is usually seconded with some special experience of Gods mercy toward us,
one way or other; wherefore the Lord himself appointed the yearly observation
of such a day, amongst his own people, and that under a grievous penalty, Lev.
23.27. which Law though it bind not us in the letter, yet may fitly direct us
to the performance of something answerable to that duty, to which they were so
strictly bound.

That the sin of Adam was of an exceeding high nature, and of a most dangerous
consequence, all men must needs acknowledge, notwithstanding we see God is
contented, not only to reason the case with him, but besides, to reason with
him with much moderation, without any bitterness at all. Whence

5 OBSERVE, God is full of mildness and gentleness in his dealing with
offenders, even in their greatest transgressions.
Jonah in his great discontent, without cause, Jonah 4.4, 9. with St. Paul, for
persecuting him in his members, Acts 9.4. and St. Peter, when he had foresworne
him, upon whom he only cast his eye, Luke 22.61. or whether he deal with them
by the hand of his Ministers, by whom he entreats us to be reconciled, 2 Cor.
5.20. instructing men with meekness, 2 Timothy 2.25. with all long-suffering and
doctrine. Unless by reason of the deadness and perverseness of peoples
hearts, there be an impossibility of prevailing upon men, or awakening their
consciences by milder courses, which necessarily enforces him to take a
rounder and sharper course of which we have diverse precedents in the Prophets
Sermons, and an express command, Tit. 1.13. if it be for no other end, yet
that others may fear, 1 Timothy 5.20. And this God does upon a double ground:

1. To clear himself, that the whole world may acknowledge, that he afflicts
not willingly, Lam. 3.33.

2. Because the sin it self is burdensome and bitter enough to a tender
conscience, so that there needs no mixture with it of gall and wormwood.

Let us make Gods dealing with men, our precedent in dealing with our brethren,
namely by plain and clear, Lev. 19.17. yet withal, by mild and gentle
reasonings, when they have trespassed against God, or against us, without
bitterness, considering our selves, Gal. 6.1. unless the condition of the
person with whom we deal, the good of others, or respect unto Gods hono^^,
force us to a rounder course, whereunto when we are compelled, yet it will be
our wisdom, even then, to mix with our sharpness much grief and compassion,
fear and humility, lest our brother be too much despised in our eyes, or (which
is worse) lest our own hearts swell and be lifted up within us.

We have already intimated, that Gods enquiry is not so much where Adam was,
whom he saw well enough, as what brought him thither, which may point at two
things.

1. In what condition he was, full of fear and shame, which made him fly for
shelter behind the trees, to hide him from Gods Presence, which before had
been his comfort and confidence.

2. What it was that brought this fear and shame upon him, which points
directly at the sin, that was the cause of both, as God afterward tells him in
express terms. So that here are represented unto Adam two weighty
considerations, necessarily fore-running serious repentance.

1. What condition and state he was in.

2. By what means he was brought into that condition. Whence

6 OBSERVE, The knowledge and consideration of ones ill condition, is an
effectual means, to bring him on to true repentance.
Job 33.27. that he had gained nothing by perverting righteousness, which
moves him to seek unto God by prayer. The Prodigal never thinks of returning to
his father, till he finds himself ready to starve, Luke 15.17. neither does
the Church resolve upon returning to her husband, till she finds her self in
an ill condition without him, Hos. 2.7. This indeed makes repentance constant
and serious, when without God, we find nothing before us but destruction, if
either we cleave not to him at present, or turn from him afterward. This
indeed brings true honor to God, when we acknowledge our selves happy in him,
and miserable without him. And secondly, this makes his mercy sweet, when we
have tasted, and remember our miserable condition without it.

Let every man that desires to adhere firmly unto God, prepare his heart
thereunto in the first place, by considering his condition, wherein he is by
nature, a man, that being without God, is left utterly without hope, Ephesians. 2.12.
a child of wrath, left under the dominion of Satan, ver. 2, 3. enthralled
wholly to his own base lusts, to fulfill the desires thereof.

2. If he find his heart at any time staggering, and ready to fall off from
God, let him consider the failing of his former comforts, that refreshed and
sustained his spirit, the deadness of his heart, and unfruitfulnesse of his
conversation, whereby there is left unto him nothing but shame, and
unquietness of his thoughts continually, when they warrcone against another,
and want the Spirit of Christ to subdue and keep them in order. Let him often
and seriously consider the great odds between his present and his former
comfortable condition, when he walked faithfully with his God, and kept close
to him, that his heart may yearn after him, and that his mercies may be the
sweeter unto him, when they return again.

The second thing, upon which God labors to fix Adams thoughts, by this
question, was the consideration of the means, by which he had brought himself
into this miserable condition. Whence

7 OBSERVE. All those that desire to get out of their misery, must seriously
consider with themselves, what was the means that brought them into it.
Joshuah, what the particular sin was, which moved him to withhold his
assistance from his people whereby their enemies prevailed against them, and by
removing thereof, shows him how he should recover Gods favor again, and get the
victory, Josh, 7.11. and the Prophet shows the Princes, that it was their
falling away from God, which caused him to fall from them, and to leave them in
the hand of Shisha, which so far wrought upon them that they humbled themselves
under his hand, and thereby prevented their utter ruin, 2 Chronicles 12.5, 7. and
the sick man finds, that his perverting of righteousness, had brought him
into that sad condition, before he seeks to God for favor, Job 33.27, 28. The
reason

1. There can be no means of removing evil, but by taking away the cause of
it, neither is there any means to take that away till it be known.

2. Besides, God can no way gain so much honor, as when men, by searching out
the cause of the evils that befall them, find and acknowledge, that their
destruction is from themselves, Hos. 13.9. He nee it is that the Lord
oftentimes makes the judgment whien he inflicts to point it out, either by the
kind of the judgment, or by some circumstance of the Time, Place, Instrument,
or the like, by the observation whereof the evil it self that brought that
judgment on us, may be made manifest, especially if we take with us for the
discovery thereof, the light of Gods Word.

VERSE 10
I Heard thy voice in the Garden] In both Adams answers, we may by his
shifting, easily discover his unwillingnesse to confess any more, then needs
he must, which is a great evidence, that what he speaks is truth, not only
because it is against himself, but besides, because he shows his
unwillingnesse to acknowledge any more then he is pressed unto, and convinced
of to his face^ In this first clause of his answer, he acknowledges his fear
to be the cause of his flight; but when he alleges the voice of God to be the
cause of his fear, he by implication charge God himself, as if the terror
of his voice, which he could not endure, had driven him away.

And I was afraid] The fear of reverence had not been blame worthy, but
commendable, but that would not have driven him to his beeles; and yet this is
the fear he seems to allege in his defense, when he adds in the next
clause, that his nakedness made him fear, when he heard Gods voice. But yet
he answers not the question fully, alleging that the hearing of Gods voice
made him to fear and fly, but why the voice of God, which he heard without
fear before, made him fear now (which was the chief thing enquired after) he
gives no reason at all.

Because I was naked] Which was not altogether true, for he had some covering
(though it were but of fig leaves) to hide his nakedness. In the mean time he
seems to justify himself, when he pretends, that it was only modesty, and not
the conscience of any evil, or fear of punishment, that made him to hide out
of the way. Nay, further then that, he implies at least, that if there were any
thing blameworthy in his flight, the fault was Gods, who had made him naked,
and consequently unfit to be looked upon, and not his. So that in this answer
he lays the blame upon God, though covertly, which in his next answer he does
plainly and in express terms.

And I hid my selfe] Why, had not God made him naked, and was he now ashamed to
look upon his own workmanship? Again, was he not naked before, when God put him
into the possession of the Garden, and when he brought all the creatures before
him, that he might give them names, and when he took a rib out of his side, and
framed the woman of it, and brought her to him. Why was he now more ashamed of
his nakedness then he was then? But Adams excuses will not abide the truth.
Something he says, but his answers like his fig leaves are no fit covering,
neither the one for the nakedness of his body, nor the other for his sin.

This is Adams first answer upon his examination, wherein he seems wholly to
clear and excuse himself from any evil in his flight, and hiding himself,
affirming in effect, that if he were afraid, it was God that put him into that
fear.

Secondly, he alleges, that it was only modesty, and not the conscience of
any sin that caused him to hide himself out of Gods Presence, In both implying,
that if any thing were to be blamed in his flight, and hiding, it must be
charged not so much upon him, as upon God himself, who had both terrified him
with his voice, and had made him such a creature as was not fit to appear in
his sight. This seems more probable to be Adams meaning in this answer, (when
he alleges his nakedness, as an excuse for his hiding out of the way) then
to conceive, that he points at the nakedness of his soul, of which it seems
he had very little feeling hitherto, seeing that, in his last answer, wherein
God comes closer to him, in charging him home with the very fact, which he
labored to conceal, to excuse himself, he forbears not to charge God with
giving him a snare to entrap him, in stead of a wife to be a meet help for him.
We may therefore probably conceive, that he, who in his last answer, when his
sin, in matter of fact, is so fully charged upon him, stands so stiffely upon
his justification, was far enough at present from acknowledging the
^akednesse of his soul, whereof hitherto he seems to have no sense at all.

Adam, we see, when God calls him, must come out of his lurking hole, where he
had hid himself, and not only appear before the Presence of God, but when he
questions him, must make answer, whether he will or no to that which God
demands of him. Whence

1 OBSERVE All men must appear before God, and answer all that they are charged
withal, when he comes to judgment.
Cor. 5.10. all Nations, Mat. 25.31. those that are swallowed up by the sea,
which must give up her dead, or are buried in their graves, Rev. 20.13. and
such as shall be then found living, 1 These. 4.17. and all must be judged, and
every man must give an account of himself unto God, Romans 14.12.

1. That God by his power can enforce and draw all men before him, and to
confess him too, Romans 14.11. no man can deny.

2. Besides, it is fit that God should do it, for the clearing of his Justice,
both in rewarding his own, and punishing the wicked and ungodly, when every
man's work is manifest, and it appears, that every man receives according to his
deeds, Romans 2.8. of this truth there can be no clearer evidence, then the
observation of that judgment which passes upon every man in the private
Consistory of his own Conscience, from which none can fly, nor silence his own
thoughts, bearing witness for him, or against him, no, not those which have no
knowledge of God or his Law, Romans 2.15.

Now though Adam must appear when God calls him, and must give an answer to the
question proposed unto him, yet in his answer we see, he discovers a desire to
conceal all that he can, at least as long as he can. Whence

2 OBSERVE. All men by nature are apt to color and conceal all that they can,
and that even from God himself.
Cain, Gehazi, Saul, Ananias, yea, the whole body of Gods people, Psalm. 78.36.
even when he trusted them, Isa 63.8, 10. but even godly men are sometimes apt
to slip into the same evil, as Sarah does. Genesis 18.15. at least when the fact
cannot be denied, yet to conceal any circumstances of the evil committed, or to
color it over with some fair excuses. That which made Moses so unwilling to
accept the employment, unto which God called him, was certainly the fear of
his own life, upon which he had fled out of Egypt before, as appears by this,
that the Lord, for his encouragement, after he had accepted the charge, to
bring up Israel out of Egypt, assures him that they were all dead that had
sought his life, Exodus: 4.9. This Moses conceales, and pretends other excuses,
as we see. The reason is,

1. Because all men desire to justify themselves, and are by nature liars,
Romans 3.4. and therefore easily fall into that evil, to which their nature
inclines them.

2. The want of the full apprehension of Gods Providence, Truth and Majesty,
emboldens them to take this liberty to halt even with God himself.

Let no man then trust his own heart, in the censure of his own sins, as being
a partial Judge in his own case, and therefore apt to deceive him.

1. Through want of the observation of diverse circumstances in his actions,
whereof notwithstanding God takes special notice.

2. Through his partial affection toward himself which cannot but easily
pervert and blind his judgment, in those things that concern himself.

Adam had first highly offended in breaking Gods Commandment: now to color
that evil he falls into a second, the concealing and hiding of his sin, and for
the clearing of himself, the casting of an imputation upon God, or at least
implying as much, as if he had been the occasion of his sin. Whence

3 OBSERVE, One sin commonly draws on another.
Sarah had laughed at Gods Promise of giving her a child, she presently
colors it with a gross lie, Genesis 18.15. When David had committed adultery
with Urijahs wife, he labors to cloak it over with a fouler sin, the
contriving of her husbands death. Now these are the infirmities of good men; no
marvel then if wicked men add drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19. and draw
iniquity with cart-ropes, Isa. 5.18. Reason.

1. Any sin committed weakens the heart, and consequently leaves it the more
unable to withstand a second assault: As a Castle is the more easily taken,
when the breach is once made.

2. And sins are usually fastened one to another, like the linkes of a chain;
so that he who takes hold of one of them, necessarily draws on all the rest.
As when Jeroboam had set up Altars in Dan and Bethel, expressly against Gods
Command; he was in a sort enforced to take in other Priests then God had
allowed.

3. And God in justice may punish one sin with another, and to that end both
withdraw his restraining grace from wicked men, that being delivered over to
the lust of their own hearts, they may run on to all excess of riot, that they
may fill up the measure of their sin, that Gods wrath may come upon them to the
uttermost, and many times for a while withholds the power of his sanctifying
grace from his own children.

1. That they beholding the progress of sin to be so dangerous, may abhor it
the more thoroughly for time to come, and avoid it the more carefully.

2. That they may be the more sensible of Gods mercy, in recovering them out of
so dangerous a quick-sand of evil, into which otherwise, when they were once
entered, they must of necessity have sunk in farther and farther, to their own
utter destruction at the last.

Adam acknowledges, that it was the voice of God that made him hide himself,
although he conceals the true ground of that terror, which was indeed the
guiltiness of his own conscience within. Whence

4 OBSERVE, Gods Word is terrible to a guilty conscience.
Cain, Genesis 4.13, 14. and to St. Paul, Acts 9.6. Not only when it is delivered
immediately by himself, as when he delivered the Law upon Mount Sinai to the
children of Israel, Exodus 20.18, 19. and sent the handwriting to Belshazzar,
Dan. 5.6. but when it is delivered by the mouth of his Ministers, as Elijahs
message from God affrighted Ahab, 1 Kings 21.27. and Paul's Sermon made Felix
tremble, Acts 24.25. and Saint Peter's Sermon pricked the hearts of three
thousand hearers at once, Acts 2.37. and a Sermon makes an unbeliever, that
comes in casually, fall down on his face, 1 Cor. 14.25. and howsoever this
effect be not wrought always upon wicked men, of dead and unsensible hearts,
who sometimes scoff at the Word which they hear, Jsa. 28.14, 15. and
otherwhiles oppose and desperately reject it, Jer. 44.16. nor always in the
godly, (though they usually do, and always should tremble at the Word, Isa.
66.2.) who too often hear it with dead hearts, when God withholds from them
the power of his Spirit, through which only it is mighty. Notwithstanding, at
the last day the Power of it shall appear at full, when it shall pierce the
hearts of the most desperate with unsupportable terrors. The reason,

1. The very letter of the Word represents unto us, both Gods Authority, Power
and Holiness, and withal, our own sinfulness, which cannot but affect our
hearts with terrors and astonishment, 1 Cor. 14.25.

2. It comes accompanied with the Power of the Spirit, by which in Gods
children it is mighty to cast down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. for their
conversion, or farther reformation, and to the wicked, it is the execution upon
them of the judgment that is written. Psalm. 149.8, 9. and is as chains and
fetters, binding them over to the great and general Assize of the last day.

Let it move all that are godly to hear that Word with fear and trembling,
which God expects and delights in, Isa. 66.2. (as having a sense of their own
guiltiness in themselves, though by Christ it be taken away) submitting where
it commands, stooping where it reproves, 2 Chronicles. 12.6. and trembling where
it threatens. And withal, admiring the goodness of God to us, who makes that
Word, which is so terrible to the wicked, unto his children the rejoicing of
their hearts, Psalm. 119.111, 162. the desire and longing of their souls, ver.
131. the quickening of their spirits, ver. 50. especially when they consider
that there is in them the same guiltiness by sin, which is in the wicked,
though it be not imputed, which only melts and humbles them, when it
overwhelmes others with terrors.

Adam could not deny his flight, for God took him in the manner; but yet we
see, he conceales what he can, and hides the cause of his flight, which is the
special thing after which God enquires. Whence

5 OBSERVE, It is an hard matter, to bring men to confess any more, then is
evident in it self.
Saul may, in this case, be unto us in stead of many. First he justifies
himself, that he had fulfilled the Commandment of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15, 13. when
he is therein convinced of a lie, by the bleating of the sheep, and lowing of
the oxen, ver. 14. then he excuses himself, that they had indeed brought away
a few cattle, which were reserved only for a sacrifice, ver. 15. when that was
manifested to be a lie too, and that it was done only out of a greedy humor,
to enrich himself only with the spoil, ver. 19. then he pretends, that if that
were a fault, it was not to be charged upon him, but upon the people, that
would needs have it so, ver. 21. so hardly is he brought, at last, with much
ado (till Samuel told him in plain terms that if all were true that he
pretended for his own excuse, yet God abhorred it) to acknowledge it to be a
sin, ver. 24.

In considering Adams answer unto God it is observable, that Adam confesses
indeed both his hiding from Gods Presence, and his nakedness; but his sin,
which was the true cause, both of his flight, and of the shame of his
nakedness, that he mentions and conceales not at all. Whence

6. OBSERVE, Men may be brought more easily to acknowledge any thing then their
sin.
Saul mentioned before, who although he could not deny the fact, yet by all
means labors to justify his innocence by his own good intentions, and by his
yielding by compulsion to the violence of the people: the whore, when she had
committed adultery, yet by no means will be known of it, but wipes her mouth,
and stands to it, that she has committed none iniquity, Prove. 30.20. neither
had the people (if they might be believed,) despised Gods Name, Mal. 1.6, 7.
nor robbed him of his tithes and offerings. There can be no other reason
hereof, then the conscience of the baseness and filthiness of sin, which,
though men will not avoid, yet for their credits sake they are afraid to own.

Let this endeavor, even of the vilest amongst men, in hiding and covering
their sin, show us more clearly the foulness and hatefulness of it, which is
such, that those that love and delight in it most, yet dare not justify, as
appears by their endeavors to hide it every way, as is manifest,

1. By their acting in the dark, Job 24.15, 16.

2. Covering it over with the fair veil of some virtue near unto it, as
covetousness with the name of thrift and good husbandry.

3. Sometimes denying.

4. Blanching it over with ignorance, good intentions, and the like: all
arguments that they condemn the sin, which who can approve when the best
friends of it disclaim it, and labor to cover it from the eyes of the world.

Let all that are godly, labor to bring their hearts to that which nature so
much abhors, that is, in all sinful actions, to find out especially the
sinfulness of them in themselves, and our sinfulness in acting them.

First, to bring our hearts to acknowledge, that sin is out of measure sinful
in it self, and we hereby,

1. As having the spring of it in our own hearts, as David does, Psalm. 51.4.

2. The motions of it being carried on by our own affections, which lust
against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17.

3. The injury to God thereby unvaluable, wherein we despise his Authority,
Holiness and Righteousness, and forget his mercies and blessings, Deuteronomy. 32.6.

4. The folly of it more then brutish, Jer. 2.12, 13.

5. The scandal of it infinitely dishonorable to God and Religion.

Secondly, our selves being defiled thereby, let us

1. Cover our faces with shame.

2. Fly unto the blood of Christ, that it may wash from all our filthiness.

This confession of Adam, that it was the fear of Gods Presence, which made
him fly and hide himself out of the way, might, if it had been improved, have
wrought further upon his heart, and have caused him to bethink himself, how he
might make his peace with that God whom he feared. But we see it works no such
effect in him. Whence

7 OBSERVE, No means can work any farther then they are acted and carried on by
God himself.
Egypt, when he delivered his people thence, wrought nothing to purpose upon
their hearts, Psalm. 78.11, 17, 32. because God wrought not with them, Deuteronomy.
29.4. though sometimes they drew them to a formal, but not a true and hearty
submission, Psalm. 78 36. no more did Christ's miracles upon the Jews, John
37.38. for the same cause. So happens it in the dispensation of the Word; all
the powerful effects of it, in casting down strong holds, are thorough God, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. therefore we find that in some it works nothing at all, in
others some show of fruit which is never brought to perfection, in a few it
has an effectual and powerful work, Mat. 13. It must needs be so, seeing all
the quickening power is in the Spirit, John 6.63. without which neither Paul
nor Apollos are any thing, 1 Cor. 9.7. 2. And it is fit it should be so, that
when all the efficacy is from God, the honor and praise for all that is
wrought, might be returned to him alone, 1 Cor. 1.31.

Let every man acknowledge God, in the efficacy of all means that we use, even
in outward things. In our labors, in our food, and the like, especially in the
means of grace, the Word and Sacraments, depending upon him, and asking at his
hand the efficacy of all that we do, and ascribing the praise of all that we
obtain by the use of any means unto him alone. Observing how unequally the
same means work at the same time, or several persons, and at several times on
the same persons.

VERSE 11.
WHo has told that thou wast naked?] A convincing reply; as if he had said,
How durst thou see thy nakedness now, which thou did not see before? or
rather, how art thou ashamed now of that, whereof thou wast not ashamed before:
whence proceeds this change? either in thy self, or in the apprehension of
thine own condition? Thus God takes advantage of Adams own words, and out of
his own mouth convinces him, that his nakedness was not the cause of his
hiding from Gods Presence, but something else, which he had hitherto concealed,
which God discovers and lays plainly before him in the words immediately
following.

Have thou eaten of the tree?] It became not the Majesty of God to trifle with
him any longer: wherefore, without any further enquiry, God points out his sin
to him in express terms, and in effect tells him, that it was his sin in
breaking the Commandment which he gave him, which caused both his shame, and
fear of his Presence, and his flight thereupon. The manner of Gods expression
is by way of enquiry, and implies as much as if he had said, Is it true indeed,
or is it possible? that it might make the deeper impression on Adams heart.

Whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eate] How durst thou do that
which was so precisely and expressly forbidden? If the fruit it self were of
small value, how durst thou transgress thy Makers Commandment for a trifle?
Thus God here at once both points at that in which the sin principally
consisted, which was disobedience, in transgressing the Law given him, and
aggravates it by that circumstance, that it was he himself that had forbidden
it, so it was the breach of the Commandment of his own Lord. God might have
charged Adam with Infidelity, Pride Unthankfulness, and the like. But he,
having only this scope before him, to bring Adam to the sense of his own
guiltiness, contents himself to charge him only with the outward act of sin,
which could not with any color be denied.

It is worth our observation, to consider, that God, out of tender compassion
to Adam, that he might not lie under an everlasting curse, coming now of
purpose to convince him of his sin, and to offer him terms of reconciliation,
notwithstanding, finding him still to add sin unto sin, and (as if it had been
a light thing in his eyes, that he had denied Gods truth, contemned his curse,
and broken his Commandment) to blanch over so foul a fact with such frivolous
excuses, deluding God (as it were) to his face: and more then that by
implication to lay the blame of his flight upon God himself, patiently bears
with all those provocations, replying unto him in mild and gentle terms,
without any bitterness at all, holding on still his resolution to do him good
at last, when he might justly at that instant have thrown him into hell. Whence

1 OBSERVE. Man's frowardness cannot overcome Gods Love and Patience.
Adam manifested in his censure, but more fully in the Promise of giving his
Son Christ promised, ver. 15. may more fitly be handled in that place. For
the present, we may take notice, that God out of Adams own words takes
advantage, to convince him of dissembling with him in this excuse. Whence

2 OBSERVE. God can eastly, without any other evidence, convince men by
themselves.
Luke 19.22. produce evidences against them out of their own thoughts, and
pronounce sentence against them out of their own consciences, Romans 2.15. and
make men's own tongues to fall upon them, Psalm. 64.8. He can indeed make use of
us, and of all that is in us for his own glory, as having power to do with us
what he will, seeing in him we move and have our being, Acts 17. and it makes
much for his honor in the manifesting of his justice, when he makes us
witnesses against our selves.

We see how clearly and fully God discovers Adams fact, as easily he might do,
being as far privy to all that was done, as the Actors themselves were, so that
his excuse and endeavor thereby to hide his sin from Gods eyes, served him to
little purpose. Whence

3 OBSERVE, God sees us even when we see not him, and takes notice of all our
ways, and observes them.
Job 33.9, 10. but he sees our ways, and numbers our steps, Job 31.4. seeing
his eyes are in every place beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15.3. and
considering all their works, Psalm. 53.15. nay, discovering their very thoughts
afar off, Psalm. 139.2. as Christ often answers the very thoughts of the Scribes
and Pharisees, Mat. 19.4. and 12.25. much more could he see Sarah laugh behind
the tent-door, Genesis 18.13, and Elisha, by his Spirit, be present, when Gehazi
took the bribe of Naaman, 2 Kings 5.26, The reason of this truth. See Obs. 3.
on ver. 9.

Let all men walk as in Gods Presence, always beholding him that is invisible,
Heb. 11.27. as sitting in his Throne of Majesty and Power, and observing the
ways of men with those eyes, which are purer then to behold evil. This is
indeed the only way,

1. To give unto God the honor due to his glorious attributes.

2. To keep our hearts low, that we may walk humbly with our God, as we are
required, Mic. 6.8.

3. To make us watchful in all our ways, that we may do nothing that may
provoke the eyes of his glory. See Exodus 23.21.

4. To encourage us in well-doing, when we know we walk in the sight of our
Master, who both approves us, and will reward us, when our ways please him,
Psalm. 18.24. and takes notice of a cup of cold water bestowed in his Name, upon
any of his children, Mat. 10.42. or the least faithful service, performed by a
servant to his Master, Ephesians. 6.6. and will defend and stand by us while we do
him service, Exodus 23.22, 23. as he promised to defend his childrens dwellings,
while all the males went to Jerusalem to worship, as he had commanded, Exodus
34.24.

Adam had acknowledged his shame and his fear: this satisfies not God, he must
bring him to see his sin and acknowledge it, and that too as it is a sin,
wherefore God especially insists upon that, and lays before him his rebellion
in breaking his Commandment. Whence

4 OBSERVE, God accepts of no confession, till men see and acknowledge the sin
of their actions, and that too as it is sin.
Lev. 26.40. that they have perverted righteousness, Job 33.27. such an
acknowledgement David makes, when Nathan deals with him, 2 Samuel 12.13. Psalm.
51.4. and God accepts it, and pardons him. And such an acknowledgement the Lord
prescribes unto his own people, and encourages them thereunto, by promising
them pardon, Hos. 14.2. The reason is,

1. Because without such a confession, God has neither the honor of his
justice, in punishing sin, (wherefore Joshuah requires Achan to confess his
sin, that he might give glory to God, Josh. 7.19. as David does, Psalm. 51.4.)
nor of his mercy in pardoning it. For by men's acknowledging of their
guiltiness, men are known to eat the fruit of their own ways, when they are
chastened by God. See Nchem. 9.33. and to be pardoned out of free mercy and
grace, when their transgressions are passed by, upon men's humbling themselves
before him, though the trespass be committed against himself, which makes the
sin heinous above measure. Hence it is, that the Lord takes it to be his great
honor, that he blots out our transgressions, merely for his own sake, Isa.
43.25.

2. We cannot otherwise be in any state of security after we have sinned, but
by suing out our pardon; which if he should grant, without our condemning and
abhorring of our own evil ways, it would neither further our own reformation,
nor justify God in pardoning such sins, as we have neither acknowledged, nor
grieved for at all.

God had before, in the examination of Adam kept aloof off, but that we see
wrought not upon his heart to any purpose; he will acknowledge no more then he
finds God is able to charge him with in particular: wherefore God is forced to
lay his act before him in express terms, and to make it appear to be an act
of rebellion. Whence

5 OBSERVE, Men must be dealt withal in plain terms, before they will be
brought to acknowledge, and be made sensible of their sins.
Cain know, that he had spilt the blood of his own brother, Genesis 4.10. and by
the mouth of Nathan tells David, that he had contrived Urijahs death, and slain
him by the sword of the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12.9. Hence it is, that God
gives special charge to his Ministers, to lift up their voices like trumpets,
and to show, (that is, to set out to the life) before the house of Jacob their
sins, Isa. 58.1. In that manner deast John Baptist with Herod, and in plain
terms taxes him of incest, in having his brothers wife, Mark 6.18. and our
Savior himself sets openly before the Scribes and Pharisees, their pride,
hypocrisy, covetousness, seducing of the people, and the like, Mat. 23. and
Luke 11. And thus must men be dealt withal,

1. Because the heart is never affected with sin, till it be represented unto
them in full proportion, but it may appear shameful and odious.

2. Because all men being by nature lovers of themselves, do all that they may
to maintain their own innocence, and therefore endeavor what they can to hide
sin from their own eyes, as well as from other men, as being unwilling to look
upon their own shame.

God might justly have charged Adam with pride, infidelity, unthankfulness;
but those, being secret evils, would not easily have been acknowledged,
therefore God makes choice of that manifest act, of eating the fruit forbidden,
and lays that to his charge which could not be denied. Whence

6 OBSERVE, Whosoever will convince a man of sin, must charge him
particulaerly, with the very act in which he has sinned.
Nathan points at David's particular act, when he names the sword of the
children of Ammon, wherewith Urijah was slain. And Elisha sets before Gehazi,
not only the bare act of receiving a bribe of Naaman, but the whole manner of
it, how he ran after the man, and how he turned back from his chariot to meet
him, 2 Kings 5.26. And so does Samuel mention to Saul, the bleating of the
sheep, and lowing of the oxen, which he had reserved of the spoil of the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.14. and indeed such is the shamelessness of most, that
unless they be convinced by some outward act, which is subject to sense,
nothing moves them, because things that are not manifest to sense, may as
easily be believed as they are objected, and then because they stop the mouth
of the reprover, who cannot prove by any act what they deny, they withal stop
the mouth of their own conscience, and traduce the accuser as a slanderer. And
this is the manner of all obedurate sinners. Although those persons that are
godly, having more tender hearts, exercised in searching out their own
corruptions, are easily smitten by the pointing out a sin afar off.

God knew well enough all the passages in this rebellious act, and who, and how
far every one was an Actor therein; Adam was seduced by Eve, as she had been
beguiled by Satan, but after that he enquires not, as suiting not with his
purpose, which was to make Adam sensible of his own act, it mattered not by
whose solicitation he was drawn into it; And demands of him only, whether he
had not eaten of the fruit, as being that alone which he would have Adans take
notice of, whereby he directs us what to take notice of in sinful actions.
Whence

7 OBSERVE, In sinful acts our hearts ought only to be sixed upon our own
actions, and not upon other men's solicitations and provocations thereunto.
James in our sins, wills us to look no farther, then the lusts and corrupt
inclinations of our own hearts, which drew us thereunto, Jam. 1.14. as David,
in remembering his adultery and murder, Psalm, 51.5. mentions nothing but his
own acts, and the corruption of his own heart which drew him thereunto. And
that this should be our chiefest care, is agreeable to all reason,

1. Because of the pronenesse of our own hearts, to shift off the evil of our
actions from our selves, if possibly we can.

2, And while we do this, we harden our own hearts, and make them insensible of
our sins, which affect us not, when we think the evil proceeds not from our
selves, but charge it upon other men that provoke us.

3. Other men's provocations cannot excuse us, seeing it is the consent of our
own hearts, and nothing else that makes it a sin.

Now God in charging Adam with this sin, aggravates it by this circumstance,
that it was a direct transgression of Gods Commandment, wherein indeed the
nature of sin consists. Whence

8 OBSERVE, The breach of Gods Commandment, is that which makes any act of ours
a sin.
John indeed makes that to be the description of sin, that is, the
transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. and St. James tells us, that if a man
commit no adultery; yet if he kill, he is a sinner, because he is a
transgressour of the Law, Jam. 2.11. and that is it wherewith Samuel charge
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.19. that he had not obeyed the voice of the Lord, but gone
directly against his Commandment, which disobedience of his he equals to the
sin of witchcraft, ver. 23. wherefore when Saul is at last by Samuels reproof
brought to acknowledge and confess his sin, he has this expression, that he
had sinned, because he had transgressed the Commandment of the Lord, ver. 24.
we find therefore, that this was it, for which God especially took so sharp
vengeance on his own people, that they hearkened not to Gods Commandment,
Nehem. 9.16, 29. on the contrary, that is accepted for our tighteousnesse, if
we conform our selves in all things to the Law and Commandments that God has
given us, Deuteronomy. 6.25. Reason

1. Disobedience is not only an injury to God, but an injury to him in the
highest degree, wherein his Authority is rejected, his Wisdom slighted, his
Holiness despised, and his Providence, and Power, and Justice, both in
rewarding and punishing not regarded.

2. Disobedience knows no bounds, no more then waters do, that have broken down
their banks. A man that once treads under foot Gods Law, casts away withal all
regard of duty both to God and man.

VERSE 12.
ANd the man said] It is a wonder that this direct charge upon him by God
himself, for so foul a fact, had not smitten him dumb with the man in the
parable, that had thrust in himself amongst the guests, without a wedding
garment, Mat. 22.12. but Adam seems not yet to be so far affected with the
Majesty of God that charged him, or with the foulness of the sin, whe^ewith he
was charged, or with the dreadfulnesse of the judgment, which hung over his
head, according to the curse threatened for the breach of this Commandment, as
appears evidently by his reply.

The woman] When God, by this direct charge, had made it evident, that he knew
all that was done, it was a vain thing for him to stand out in the denial of a
fact which was so manifest. Wherefore the man falls to excuse that which he
could not deny; Not respecting therein his own wife, but laying all, or the
greatest part of the blame of the sin upon her: not caring who bare the blame,
so he might remove it, if not wholly, yet at least in some degree from himself.

Whom thou gavest] See whither a rebellious spirit may carry a man. It is not
enough to Adam to appeach his wife, unless he charge God himself, making him,
if not the Author, yet at least the occasion of the sin, not only blaming the
woman for enticing him to sin, but withal, in some sort God himself, that had
bestowed her on him, under a color to be an help meet for him, but (as the
event had manifested it) to be a snare unto him, as Saul gave Michal to David,
1 Samuel 18.21, See now how far Adam differs from himself: that which he
rejoiced in as a special favor bestowed on him by God in the former chapter,
here he quarrels at, as a means of his ruin. Thus a man's foolishness
perverts his way, and then his heart frets against the Lord, Prove. 19.3.

To be with me] The word in the Originnl (Gnimmadi) used in this place, is by
some observed to be of greater force, then the word (Gnimmi) which is of the
same signification (as indeed it must be, if we derive it from (Gnamad) which
signifies to stand fast by,) so that (Gnimmadi) implies in this place, not only
(to be with me) but more then that, (to stand and be close by me.) Howsoever we
may observe, that the expression of Adam, differs from the phrase which God
uses in the former chapter, God intended to create a woman that might be
before him, or stand in his Presence to assist him, and as it were to minister
unto him, but that phrase did not so well sort with Adams excuse. For if the
woman were given to Adam, only to be before him, or to minister unto him, then
did Adam amiss to take his direction from her, that was appointed to be only
his minister, and therefore fit to take, and not to give direction. It is
probable therefore, that Adam purposely changes the expression, and in stead
of saying (to be before me) with a little alteration expresses it in those
terms (to be with me) implying, that she being appointed to be his inseparable
companion, he could not avoid her, nor do less then hearken to her advice and
persuasion, being so near a companion, and, as it were, his bosom friend.

She gave me] Questionless with persuasions to eat it too, wherefore God
afterward (as we shall see) in his censure, taxes him for hearkening to his
wives voice. But what authority had she to give, or Adam warrant to receive at
her hand, that which was forbidden unto them both? or what manner of excuse is
this, to cast his wives persuasion into the balance, against Gods express
interdiction? besides, this answer is not to the purpose; God asks him whether
he had not eaten of the fruit; he answers, that he had eaten indeed, but it was
by his wives persuasion, which God knew as well as he, but enquires not after
at present.

And I did eat] A cold expression, manifesting neither any horror or grief, or
shame, at so foul a fact, and yet sufficient to justify God, in his
proceeding in judgment against him, grounded upon this confession of his own,
which he therefore repeats when he gives judgment upon him afterward, in
these words, Because thou have hearkened to the voice, etc.

This answer of Adams, discovers in him still a desire, rather to cover his
sin, then to humble himself for it before God, in a free and ingenuous
acknowledgement, wherein he might have confessed in plain terms, that not so
much his wives solicitation, as his own ambitious desire to become a God,
(which his wife no sooner suggested, but he embraced) drew him to contemn Gods
Commandment, despise his threatenings, and to forget his mercies, and so to
eat of the forbidden fruit. So that when we find Adam still unwilling to
close with God, to confess his sin, we have no cause to conceive, that he
would speak any thing partially on Gods behalf, from which he is so far, that
we see he forbears not to charge God himself (though falsely,) upon the least
color of advantage. So then, if Adam and Eve, as yet standing out against God,
even in this examination of theirs, do notwithstanding clear him in these two
points.

First, that they were not made sinful, but became so only by Satan's enticement.

Secondly, that God had no hand in drawing them into this sin. Seeing

First, Eve who was first in the sin, has nothing to charge God withal.

Secondly, that Adam himself, who spared not to charge him as far as he could,
with the least color, could fasten no more upon him, but this only, that he
gave some occasion to Adams sin, by bestowing the woman on him, (wherein how
far he wrongs God, who intended the woman to be an help to him, the whole
Series of the History of the woman's Creation, and his own acknowledgement of
Gods favor, in bestowing that help upon him, do evidently discover, it must
necessarily be concluded (which is the maine scope of this whole History,) that
sin, and all the judgments that followed, proceeded from man himself, and
from Satan who seduced him; And consequently that God was

1. Just in punishing the man according to his deserts.

2. And infinitely rich in mercy, in restoring him after his fall, out of his
compassion and free grace.

Well, let Adam do what he can to conceal and excuse his sin, yet, when God
lays it down to his charge, he must be forced to acknowledge it before him.
Whence

1 OBSERVE. No man can bear out sin before God, howsoever he may for a while
outface it before men.
CAin (though he seems to deny it at the first) yet is mute, and cannot open
his mouth, when God charge him with his brothers blood. Nay, when God
charge them home with it, though by the voice of a man, Saul cannot deny his
rebellion, Ahab his oppression and murder, Gehazi and Ananias their
covetousness. Neither can any man answer his own conscience, when it charge
him in Gods behalf, as appears in the examples of Joseph's brethren, Genesis
42.21. and Judas, Mat. 27.4. and very often in the free and voluntary
acknowledgements of many persons, in the times of their distress, or upon
their deathbeds, publishing then to the ears of the world those things which
all their life-long they have concealed from all men, and hidden in darkness.

What do men gain then, that please themselves with hope of secrecy in sin?
which if it be foul and scandalous, is not often hidden from the eyes of men,
but, if it be, is naked in the sight of God, who discovers the secrets of all
hearts, and shall manifest and judge them at the last day, when every mouth
shall be stopped, and God shall convince men, not by the testimony of other
men, but by the evidence of their own conscience, then fully illightened, when
all their sins shall be set in order before them. Wherefore let no man satisfy
himself in any other way of hiding his sins, then that which covers it from the
eyes of God, and moves him to cast it behind his back, (as Hezekiah speaks,
Isa. 38.17.) which is the blood of Christ, Blessed is the man whose sins are so
covered, Psalm. 32.1.

Adams fact being charged upon him by God himself, there was now no place for
denial. Wherefore in the next place, he falls to excuse that which he cannot
deny, laying the greatest part of the blame of that act upon his wife, who by
her enticement had drawn him into the sin, that by this means, though he
could not clear himself from the sin, yet he might extenuate it so far, that he
might not be found guilty in the highest degree. Whence

2 OBSERVE. When men's sins are so manifest that they cannot deny them, they
will yet labor by excuses, to extenuate them what they may.
Saul, first his sacrificing by necessity, 1 Samuel 13.11. and afterward his
breach of Gods Commandment. First, by his good meaning, and then by the peoples
overruling of him, 1 Samuel 15.15, 21. But even holy Aaron too, his making of
the calfe, alleging in his excuse the peoples violence and compulsion, Exodus
32.22. and this men's usual custom to mince their sins, by pretenses, either of
strong provocations of fear, importunity, necessity and the like; Or of sudden
surprise, ignorance, good intentions of their sincerity and uprightness in
other actions, unto which they are carried, is caused

1. By pride, which makes them to be tender of their own credit, and to
endeavor to preserve it what they may.

2. And partly, by Satan's policy, who by this means hinders our reformation
and true repentance, and by consequent Gods honor.

Let every godly man then labor to avoid an evil

1. To which nature so strongly inclines us.

2. Which necessarily draws on unthankfulness, by bringing us to a low esteem
of Gods favor and mercy, by which it is pardoned.

3. Hearteneth and encourages others unto that evil which they see so much
slighted by us.

4. And at last returns upon us greater shame, both from God and men, as
experience shows us.

But behold Adams love to his wife, whom before he acknowledges to be flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone: now to acquit himself, he discharges upon her
the burden of his sin, and that without excusing her at all, as beguiled by
the policy of Satan; but where the blame lights he cares not, so it rest not
upon himself. See here a true effect of self-love; And

3 OBSERVE, A man, in this state of corruption, respects none but himself, and
cares not on whom he lays the burden, so he may ease himself.
Jer. 9.4. and speak against his own mothers son, Psalm. 50.20. as being
altogether without natural affection, Romans 1.31. 2 Timothy 3.3. accounting this
the greatest wisdom, to do well to ones self, Psalm. 49.18. The reason hereof
is, that every man in his natural condition, is a self-lover, that is, a lover
of himself only, without respect, either to God or community, both which
therefore he must needs neglect for his own private interest. And howsoever,
some natural men seem to neglect themselves in some cases, out of respect to
their friends, or for the furthering of some common good; yet if we well weigh
things, we shall find

1. That when they seem to neglect themselves one way, they endeavor to make
it up another, either neglecting a smaller advantage for a greater gain, or
with some small loss, purchasing either safety or honor, or something else
unto themselves.

2. They seldom hold on in that way of seeking another good, any longer, then
may suit with their more principal ends.

3. And yet in going so far, for the most part, they are either overruled by a
strong hand of God, who makes use, even of their self-respects, beyond their
ends, for the preservation of community.

Let no man then that is wise, place his affiance on such persons who close
with them so, as they have still the greatest respect to their own advantage,
either to suck some profit out of him, or to support their credit by him, as
Jebu did by entertaining Jonadab, or to strengthen their party, and to further
some ends of their own, as Absalom dealt with the two hundred that followed out
of Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 15.11. But

1. Cleave unto God a faithful Creator, as he is termed, 1 Pet. 4.19.

2. Amongst men, leave unto his children, who having laid the foundation of
Religion in self-denial, can, and do oftentimes lay aside selfrespects, for
Gods honor, and for their brethrens good, when need requires it.

Now though Adam showed little love to his wife, in laying the blame of his sin
upon her, which he had not been guilty of, if himself had not agreed and
consented to her solicitation, yet that the charge upon her was just, that her
husband sinned by her enticement cannot be denied. Whence

4 OBSERVE, Seducers are justly chargeable, with all the sins committed by
those that are seduced by them.
Jer. 23.13, 15. and that so far, that they are affirmed to strengthen their
hands, that none did return from his wickedness, ver. 14. And wicked Jeroboam,
that set up the calves, in Dan, and Bethel, and invited the people to the
worship of them, has this brand upon him, that he made Israel to sin.
Wherefore these seducers, are not only chargeable with the sins, but with the
blood of all that perish by their means, yea even those, that forewarne them
not of the judgments which the wicked ways wherein they walk will bring upon
them, Ezech. 33.8. Good reason it should be so, seeing the seducers heart
desires, and his affections concur, in the acting of that sin, to which he
persuades another man, although he put not forth his own hand to the effecting
of it, but perform that by the hand of another man, as the slaying of Urijah,
is justly called David's act, although it were executed by the hand of the
children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 12.9. Now we know it is the consent that makes the
act of sin (yea ever there, where men proceed not to the act, the very lusting
after a woman, makes one an adulterer, in our Saviors judgment, though he go
no farther, Mat. 5.28) so that an enticer of another to sin, is guilty, not
only of the sinful motion of his own heart, in resolving upon the evil; but
besides, of that evil which he begets consent unto, allows, and desires may
take effect in another; that acts the sin by his provocation and allurement.

Beware then of that dangerous employment, to become a Solicitor, or Factor in
sin, and tremble at the very motion of it, and avoid carefully the society of
such agents,

1. Who carry the mark and character of Satan, who is styled by the name of the
temper, and is the father of all that walk in that way of seducing.

2. Show themselves much more dangerous enemies to mankind then murderers,
who destroy only the body, whereas these lay wait for the soul, Prove. 22.25.

3. Proclaim war against God, whom they fight against, not only by their own
sins, but much more, by making a party against him, by drawing as many as
they can procure, to be companions with them in their evils.

4. And therefore are above others, children of wrath, reserved unto them by
the just judgment of God, in a double proportion, according to the measure of
their sins, acted by themselves, and furthered in other men, by their
procurement. Let this Item be laid near to heart by all Magistrates,
Ministers, Parents, Masters, whose Laws, Directions, Counsels and Examples, if
they walk in ill ways, have a strange influence into their inferiors, to draw
them unto wicked practices, whereunto they are by nature it self too strongly
inclinable.

It was too much that Adam endeavors to post off the sin from himself, and
casts the blame of it upon his wife: but see how far an heart once perverted,
may lead a man; he falls in the next place upon God himself, whom he makes, if
not a part yet at least an occasion of his sin. Whence

5 OBSERVE, It is usual with men, when themselves have committed the sin, to
lay the blame of it in part even upon God himself.
Jonah in effect charge God with his disobedience, in flying to Tarshish, as
if he had sent him upon a message, that would disgrace both himself, and him
that sent him, Jonah 4.2. As that idle servant pleads his Masters hardness, in
excuse of his idleness and unfaithfulness, Mat. 25.24. Thu^ do all they, that
for their ignorance, plead want of parts of nature. For their thefts or
oppression, necessity by the weakness of their estates greatness of their
charge, or the like. For the neglect of spiritual duties, multiplicity of
secular employments; for their disobedience the strictness of Gods Law, as
impossible to be kept. Hence it is that Saint James, well knowing this common
disease, wills us to take heed of charging God with our temptations to evil,
seeing we are drawn on thereunto by our own concupiscence, Jam. 1.13. Now that
which moves us to deal so injuriously with God himself is

1. A desire to justify our selves, which we can never do more fully, then by
casting the blame of the sin, for which we should be censured, upon God
himself, who should judge and punish it, as Thamar stops Judahs mouth, when he
sentenced her to be burned, for her adultery, by charging him to be both the
occasion, and the Actor of that sin, Genesis 38.26.

2. There is in all men by nature, an heart ill affected toward God, (the
wisdom whereof is enmity against him, Romans 8.7.) which makes us willing to pick
any quarrel against him, and to dishonor him, upon the least pretense.

3. It is Satan's policy,

1. To wrong God by making him the Author of evil, and unjust in punishing that
in men, whereof the blame lies in part upon himself.

2. To take off men's hearts from all endeavors, and means of repentance, by
this color of justifying themselves in their sins.

We cannot but take special notice, in what manner Adam speaks of his wife in
this place, whom he imbraceth, and acknowledges as a singular blessing,
bestowed on him by God in the former Chapter, and here does little less then
reproachfully cast it in Gods teeth, that instead of an helper, he had given
her unto him for a snare, to beguile and entrap him, as his words in this place
do imply. Whence

6. OBSERVE, It is an usual practice, with many men, to cast Gods blessings in
his teeth with discontent.
ZIpporah, the wife of Moses, calls circumcision a Sacrament of blood, Exodus
4.25. See how the Isarelites quarrel at Moses, whom God had sent to be their
deliverer, as one that was the occasion of increasing their bondage, Exodus
5.21. and how often do they wish themselves in Egypt again; when they were
upon their voyage to Canaan, murmur at Moses, Exodus 14.11. and 16.3. and 17.3.
Esteem Manna, their food, light bread, and loath it, Numb. 11.6? Thus is it
usual with men to murmur, sometimes at the execution of Justice, the dispensing
of the word, at the increase of people, cheapnesse of provisions, fruitfulness
of their own wives, and the like. This comes to pass,

1. Because, many times, common blessings suit not with men's private ends, and
desires, so that we judge many things, which are blessings in themselves, to be
crosses unto us.

2. Because our unthankful hearts, being not satisfied in all that they
inordinately desire, scorn that which they have as a trifle, because it
answers not to the full of what is desired.

Let not men think much of it, if they be dealt withal, as God himself is, and
have their kindness by unthankful men, cast in their teeth, nay, many times be
ill spoken of for doing good to others: Seeing

1. The servant is not above his Master.

2. Thanks from men are not, or at least ought not to be the recompense which
we ought to expect for doing good to others, but the acceptance of our service
by God, who the less reward we have from men, the more he enlarges his own
hand toward us, if we continue constant in well doing, in obedience to his
will, expecting approbation from God, and not from men.

Adam indeed sinned in the highest degree, in blaming God as the occasion of
his sin wherewith he was charged; yet it is true, that the woman, whom God gave
him to be his helper, became a snare unto him, by entising him to sin; but that
was through his own folly, who suffered himself to be seduced by her. Whence

7 OBSERVE, Men may easily by their own folly, turn the means ordained by God
for their good, into snares for their destruction.
Tim. 6.10. Prove. 11.28. Friends, and especially wives, are great comforts, and
helps, many ways: but if we make them our Oracles, they may and often do
beguile us, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Gods sacred word the greatest of all helps, and outward
blessings, the power of God to salvation, and the savor of life unto all that
receive it as they ought, may prove the savor of death, if it be not mixed
with faith, but received into a corrupt heart; as meat taken into a foul
stomach may turn into ill humors, and so become our poison. Much more is this
true, of Peace, Plenty, Strength, nay of Wisdom it self, and other abilities
of the mind. And that

1. Because many of these things (though good in themselves) yet are of such a
nature, that the good, or evil of them is found only in the use of them, and
therefore as they are used by us, so they prove unto us, either good or evil.

2. And it is fit, that it should be so, that God in his Justice, should turn
good into evil, to such as are not good before him; as he draws good out of
evil it self, unto all those that love him, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.28.

Let it warn every one of us, to use all the helps and blessings which we
receive from God, with fear and trembling.

1. Purging our own hearts carefully, for to those which are defiled nothing is
pure, Tit. 1.15.

2. Sanctifying unto our selves the blessings themselves, by the word and
prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5.

3. Using all things, according to the rule laid down to us in the word, and
referring them to the end for which he gives them, his own glory, and the
furthering of our Sanctification, that he may bless us in those things, the
fruit whereof returns unto himself at last.

If we scan Adams answer a little more thoroughly, we may easily discover, what
was his great oversight, by which his wives temptation prevailed so much with
him, and took such effect at last (which also God himself points at in the
judgment, which afterward he passethupon him,) namely, that he hearkened to
his wives voice, that is, that he yielded to her motion, without examining the
ground, or warrant of it, which was nothing but her bare word and persuasion,
whereas he ought to have considered,

First, what right she had to bestow on him that fruit which God had forbidden
both to him and her.

Next what power she had, to free him from that curse, which God had threatened
to lay upon them if they did eat that fruit which was forbidden them. Whence

8 OBSERVE, It is very dangerous to embrace any motion presented unto us,
without examining the warrant and ground of it.
JOseph pleads that to his Mistress, in bar of that adulterous motion, that she
makes unto him, that he had no warrant to meddle with her, neither from God nor
man, Genesis 39.9. Our Savior Christ repels Satan's fiery darts with the same
shield, that he had no warrant to turn the stones into bread, Mat. 4.4. nor to
cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, ver. 7. In the same manner
the Apostles answer the Rulers, when they silence them, that they did that for
which they had no warrant, to forbid them that, which God had commanded them,
Acts 4.19. But they are noted for fools that believe every word, Prove. 14.15.
as he that was no sooner tempted by a lewd woman to filthiness, but she
presently consents to her, Prove. 7.22. and Amnon that embraced Jonadabs wicked
counsel, as soon as he heard it, 2 Samuel 13.6. And Joash that inclined to the
first motion of his Princes to fall away to idolatry, 2 Chronicles. 24.17. Nay,
Jehoshaphat himself who consented to join with Ahab, and to help him against
the Syrians, found by the event the fruits of their folly, in embracing motions
tendered to them, without examining the grounds of them. And good reason it
should be so,

1. Because this is Gods peculiar prerogative, to be believed and obeyed upon
his Word; which when we yield unto men, we invest them with his honor, and
make them in a sort our gods.

2. Men are subject to dangerous errors, not only through ignorance, which
makes them unable to discern between good and evil, but besides through
inordinate lusts and desires, which cast a mist before the understanding, and
pervert the Judgment, so that in harkening to men's directions, we follow
blind guides: and then no marvel though we fall with them into the ditch, to
our own destruction, Mat. 15.14.

How Adam, the farther he goes, the more he sins, and how every motion of his
heart, every word and action adds to his transgression, til God reclaims him,
and the observation which might thence be drawn (That when men are once
perverted in their ways, the farther they go, the more they sin, till God
change their hearts) has been for the most part handled already upon ver. 2.
Observe. 2. and 6. compared together.

VERSE 13.
AND the Lord said to the woman] How is it that he leaves the man, before he
had drawn him to a more and full acknowledgement of his sin? He acknowledges
the fact indeed, but ecxcuseth it withal, and there remain many weighty
circumstances, by which the sin was much aggravated, which are passed over in
silence, neither acknowledged by Adam, nor enquired after by God himself. But
we must consider, that God had time and means sufficient to perform that work
upon Adams conscience, afterward in private. At present his maine scope is to
make it appear, that he had no hand in drawing the man into this sin, by
drawing the delinquents both to the confession of the fact, and a discovery of
the first mover thereunto, and the unwillingnesse of the delinquents
acknowledgement (who though they speak no more then is drawn from them, yet
utter enough to clear God of having hand in the sin) makes much for the
credit of their testimony on Gods behalf, as we have seen already. From Adam
God turns next to the woman, that she might likewise be convinced of her fact,
by her own confession, and thereby both justify the equity of the judgment
pronounced against her afterward, and besides be drawn to appeach the Serpent,
as the first Solicitor, and enticer to the sin, which was the principal thing
that God labored to discover for the present.

What is this which thou have done?] by transgressing thy self, and seducing
thy husband. The question is propounded and demanded with some kind of
admiration, as if God had said, How? is it possible that thou should be so
desperately wicked and sottish, as not only to ruin thy self, but to be the
destruction of thy husband also, for whose help and comfort thou wast created?
The wisdom of God, in this examination of the man and woman, is not unworthy
our observation. The maine thing which God sought after, was the author and
first mover to this sin: But of this, he mentions not a word to the man before,
or to the woman now, lest he might seem by his question to direct them what to
answer. But God who knew the evidence of truth, and the desire of justifying
themselves, must needs draw from the delinquents as much as he expected, leaves
it to flow from themselves freely without any enquiry at all, that it might the
more evidently appear to spring merely from a fountain of truth.

The Serpent beguiled me] But that on her part, was no fit answer to the
question proposed (howsoever it serve fully to the end that God aimed at) or at
least the main thing that she should have acknowledged, is omitted, or coldly
satisfied in her answer; for God demands not of her, who put that motion into
her heart, but how she could be so wicked, as to commit so foul a sin, in
slighting his Authority, denying his truth, forgetting his mercies, contemning
his power, and wronging her husband, and consequently destroying him for whose
help and comfort she was ordained. God calls on her to set all those things
before her eyes, and to consider what she had done; she on the other side
passing by that weighty consideration proposed by God, falls, as her husband
had done before, to excuse and lessen the sin what she can, pretending that it
was no voluntary act, proceeding from any evil disposition of her own heart,
but she was enveigled by the cunning and policy of the Serpent, who under fair
colors, and pretenses beguiled her. Now if God had replied unto her, and
demanded what those fair colors and pretenses were, which thus drew away her
heart, her own answer must needs have stopped her mouth for ever: For she knew
that her heart filled with Gods love, should have been wholly carried after the
advancement of his glory. Now the Devil never so much as lays before her any
such thing, if he had, the woman's error had been the more pardonable, if her
end had been right, and she had only been misguided in the way that led
thereunto, whereas she closes with Satan in taking up a false end, and seeking
her own advancement in stead of Gods glory, wherein she was wilfully perverted
by the consent of her own heart.

And I did eat] Thus then we have a full confession of the fact, by both the
delinquents, and by the woman the discovery of the plotter, and contriver of
all the mischief, that all the world may justify God in the righteousness of
his judgments, in the punishment of the offenders, who by seeking new tricks,
or inventions (as the wise man calls them) to advance them beyond their
conditions, were justly filled with their own inventions, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm 106.39.

Thus we see God will not give over the examination, till he have discovered
the whole plot of this foul sin and every agent in it, first Adam, then his
wife, and at last the Devil the deceiver and seducer of them both. Whence

1 OBSERVE. No actor in any sin can escape Gods discovery.
Jonadab to Amnon, Achitophel to Absalom, Jezabel to Ahab. Not the Actors and
Executioners, as the Elders of Israel, and by their procurement the two sons
of Belial employed by Jezabel in the murder of Naboth. Not the abettors and
assistants, as Joab and Abiathar in Adonijahs treason. Not the very frame or
contrivance of the sin, or means to color it. As David's murder of Urijah to
color his adultery with his wife, and his cunning conveighance with Joab, to
conceal his murder, which he not only discovered himself, but has left upon
record to posterity.

1. It cannot be denied or questioned, but that he is able to search into the
deepest secrets, seeing all things are naked in his sight, Heb. 4.13.

2. It concerns him to do it, that the Judge of all the world may appear and
be known to do right, to which purpose he must necessarily have a distinct
knowledge, both of the offenders, and of the quality and measure of their
offenses, that every ones judgment may be proportioned in number, weight, and
measure according to their deeds.

Let no man then embolden himself to have his hand in any sin, in hope to
hide his counsel deep from the Lord, and his works in the dark, Isa. 29.15. It
is true, that men's eyes discover many times nothing but the outward acts of
sin, or the Agents that work, yea even they many times are hidden from man's
eyes, but God that searches the heart and knows the thoughts of it afar of,
Psalm. 139.2. takes notice of every motion of the heart by which the sin was
begotten, of every secret word by which it was whispered into the Actors ears,
of every affection of the spectators who behold it with delight. He knew what
the King of Syria spoke in his secret chamber, 2 King. 6.12. He understood the
very secret thoughts of Herod's heart, which it is probable he never uttered to
his nearest friends concerning the murdering of Christ, Mat. 2.13. much more
was he able to discover the King of Isreal's commission for the taking of
Elisha, 2 King. 6.32. and forty men's secret conspiracy to kill Paul. Those
secrets if he discover not to the world at present openly, yet he both knows,
and can, and often does prevent them: so that no man has cause to hearten
himself in hope of success in wicked counsels, or fear to be surprised by them.

We have already intimated, that God, who might have manifested every thought
of Adams heart, and left upon record every circumstance of the sin committed
by him, notwithstanding contents himself to bring to light only so much thereof
as might manifest the delinquents desert of that punishment, that he afterward
lays upon them, with such a mixture of mercy withal, as exceeds belief, as we
shall see anon, that he might be justified in all his ways, and admired in his
free grace. Whence

2 OBSERVE, Men's sins must and shall be so far manifested as may conduce to
the advancing of Gods glory.
Joshuah exhorts Achan to confess his sin, that he might give glory to God,
Josh. 7.19. and David freely acknowledges his sin, that God might be
justified, Psalm. 51.4. And Saint Paul witnesses, the Law convinces all men of
sin, in such sort, that the whole world may be guilty before God, and that
his righteousness may be made manifest for the remission of sins, Romans 3.19,
23, 25. And good reason, seeing

1. It is the principal end wherefore we, and all things are, that our selves
and all our actions, and all events that befall us, of good or evil, in all Gods
dispensations toward us, may be referred to the manifesting of Gods glory, who
therefore permits with patience the vessels of wrath, ordained to destruction,
for the magnifying of his Justice, in their deserved punishment at the last,
and graciously pardons his chosen ones, that he may set out the riches of his
free mercy and grace, Romans 9.22, 23. which end of his we ought to further in
all our actions, and take notice of in all our observations.

2. That is the chief good that can come out of this evil, when the wrath of
man, and all the rest of his sins turn to Gods praise, and a duty that we are
obliged to perform unto God, to repair his honor by a free acknowledgement,
and confession of sin, which we have, as much as lies in us, empaired by the
acting of it.

Let it be our care,

1. To take heed of dishonouring God by committing of any sin.

2. If by humane infirmity we fall into any sin, by which the name of God may
be blasphemed, or the honor of it empaired, let us endeavor to take off the
dishonor done to him, by laying all the shame upon our selves.

1. In our private confessions before him, acknowledging his holiness, and the
righteousness of his laws, and our wickedness in transgressing them, after
the examples, Ezra. 9.6.15. Neh. 9.33. Dan. 9.8. and that merely out of the
rebellious disposition of our own hearts.

First, without any provocation on his part.

Secondly, after so many and so large experiments of his mercies.

Thirdly, to the defiling of our own souls, evil example to our brethren, and
as much as lies in us to the dishonouring of that name by which we are called.

Fourthly, for which we might perish for ever by Gods justice, and cannot be
pardoned, but out of his free mercy and grace.

2. Upon occasion of any scandal given by us, acknowledging as much before men,
either openly in the face of the Congregation, or more privately before our
brethren, as the nature and quality of the fact, or the offense given thereby,
shall require, thereby clearing God, justifying his Law, and acknowledging his
righteousness, if we smart by his hand according to our deserts.

In Gods questioning with Eve there is wonderful force in the expression that
he uses, as if there wanted words to express the foulness of the fact: What
is this that thou have done? as if he had said, can thou conceive the
foulness, the danger, and consequently the folly and wickedness of this
abominable fact: thus he speaks to make the deeper impression of the sin upon
her heart. Whence

3 OBSERVE, A good man's heart ought to be deeply and tenderly affected with the
sense of his own sin.
Jer. 3.25. and expressed outwardly by smiting on the thigh, Jer. 31.19.
casting down the countenance with the Publicane, Luke 18.13. bitter mourning,
Zach. 12.10. with Peter, Luke 22.62. proceeding from the very breaking of the
heart within, Psalm. 51.8. the contrary disposition is justly taxed, Jer. 8.6.
as discovering a dead and senseless heart within. Such a manner of the
affecting of the heart by the sense of sin,

1. Brings much honor to God.

2. Proclaims our own innocence, 2 Cor. 7.11.

3. Moves God to compassion toward us, Joel 2.17.

4. Furthers our reformation.

5. And makes us more watchful over our ways for time to come, that we fall
not again into that sin which has so much afflicted our souls, and which we
have looked on with so much shame and detestation. To this end has God erected
a Consistory in every man's breast, his own conscience which is the Candle of
the Lord, searching the inward parts of the belly, Prove. 20.27. which discovers
the sin, with all the aggravating circumstances thereof, in full proportion, if
we do not smother it.

But why does not God speak as affectionately to Adam, as he does unto Eve? The
cause must needs be this, She was not only first in the transgression, but
besides, she was employed by Satan to be an instrument, to beguile and seduce
her own husband. Whence

4 OBSERVE, The seducing, especially of ones nearest friends, is a foul, and
should be an heartbreaking sin.
Deuteronomy. 13.8, 9. and therefore the judgments of God threatened against the
seducing prophets, are fearful, Jer. 23. Ezekiel. 13. and for that, above all
other sins, the false prophet is cast into the lake burning with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 19.20. See verse 12. Obs. 4.

The phrase in which the woman expresses her self, when she excuses her
self, that she was seduced by Satan, may not be passed by: she says, when
Satan allured her to the committing of this sin, that he beguiled her, as
indeed he did. Whence

5 OBSERVE, Sin, and the enticements thereunto, are dangerous deceits, and so
will prove to be at the last.
Paul tells us, that sin deceived him, Romans 7.11. wherefore he calls it the
deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13. and so are inordinate lusts termed deceitful
lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. and the allurements that draw us thereunto, are justly called
deceits, as riches are termed deceitful riches, Mark 4.19, dainty fare
deceitful meat, Prove. 23.3. wine a mocker, the beauty of women deceitful, Prove.
31.30. no marvel then, if wicked men be called deceivers, and their work a
deceitful work, Prove. 11.18. Now this deceit of sin is twofold.

First, in proposing evil under the Name of good calling light darkness, and
darkness light, Isa. 5.20. or at least the shadows of good, instead of that
which is really and truly good, like the passing of gilded brass for perfect
gold.

Secondly, in proposing unto us a reward in an evil way, which we shall never
find. See Prove. 1.13, 18. as they are justly accounted deceivers, who promise
men largely, that which they never make good in performance.

VERSE 14.
HItherto the Holy Ghost has set before us the examination and confession of
the offenders, with their several excuses, and the vanity of them. There
follows in the next place, their censures proportioned indeed unequally, as
the offense committed was in diverse respects unequal, pronounced by God
himself, with infinite patience and moderation upon them all, in order, as they
acted in the sin, upon the Serpent first, next upon the woman, and lastly upon
the man.

And the Lord God said] After he had examined and convicted the malefactors, he
proceeds to sentence, that he might not only be just, but appear to be so;
which is the reason, why he pronounces the sentence by word of mouth, that,
when those things should be really inflicted, which he here threatens, they
might appear to be the act of God, punishing sin in justice, by inflicting upon
the offenders those evils, which should come upon them afterward, according to
that which is here pronounced, whereby they are clearly manifested to be the
acts of God, and being proportioned to the sin, might appear to be acts of his
justice, otherwise it had been as easy for God, to have laid the curse upon
them by effects, without threatening it beforehand. But his desire is, that
they might not only smart for their sin, but might be instructed too, and
taught by their smart, which is one end of the punishments laid upon man, and
an especial effect of Gods great mercy, tempered with his justice, when the
punishment it self is thus intended for the good of the sinner.

Unto the Serpent] But why to the Serpent, being an unreasonable creature, and
consequently unable to understand what was spoken, and therefore could receive
no instruction by words?

First, we must conceive, that the sentence here pronounced, lights not only on
the Serpent, but on the devil also, who set him on work; yea, the latter part
of it principally on him, as the cause of the sin, (as is intimated in those
words, Because thou have done this) and that it reaches both the devil and the
beast. The words then were understood by Satan, though not by the beast, and
may be conceived to be directed to him under the Serpents name.

Secondly, the words, though spoken to the Serpent, were chiefly intended for
the instruction of the man and woman; as our Saviors words directed to the
fig tree, were intended to his disciples, in whose presence he spoke to the
tree, Mat. 21.19. and indeed the latter part of this censure, with which is
intermixed the promise of the Messiah, cannot be otherwise taken, but as a
comfort intended only to the man and the woman.

Because thou hast] Thou Serpent as the Instrument, and thou Satan as the
principal Agent, who did employ him in this action.

Done this] Namely all that has been mentioned before, belied God, deceived
the woman, and by her the man, and drewan them both into rebellion against
their Creator, and thereby into utter ruin both of themselves and their
posterity. Thus God is pleased to manifest his justice, in expressing the
cause, before he pronounces the sentence. But why does not God examine the
devil, as well as the man and the woman, before he punish him?

First, God had already his end; he was now come to the headspring of the sin,
which was the chief thing which he sought after, or at least intended to
discover.

Beside, it was a vain thing to expect a true confession from the father of
lies.

Lastly, God out of favor endeavors the recovery of the man and woman out of
their sin, by a free confession, and sight, and sense of their sin; but he
intends no such mercy to Satan, who was already sentenced to everlasting
destruction.

Thou art cursed] The words imply more then the decree, that the Serpent should
be cursed, and import a present execution of that decree, that the curse should
seize upon it at that very instant. To curse sometimes signifies to speak evil
of another, or to wish evil to him; in this sense we are forbidden to curse the
ruler of the people, Exodus 22.28. that is, to speak evil of him, or to wish
evil to him. And even in this sense the Serpent is cursed by man, and spoken of
with detestation and despite, and wished to destruction by all men. But cursing
out of Gods mouth implies more then that, an inflicting of all manner of evil
upon any person, as Deuteronomy. 28.20. the Lord threatens for their rebellion to
bring upon this people cursing and vexation, in all that they put their hand
unto. So that curse of our Savior on the figtree, Mark 11.21. was the present
drying up and withering of the tree. This curse was indeed inflicted on the
true Serpent really, as far as it was capable of it, as appears by the
particulars following, neither can be applied to Satan properly, although it be
true, that he above all other creatures, is accursed both by God and man.

Above all cattel] That is, above all tame beasts, for so the word (Behemah) in
the Original, being opposed unto (Chaiath) as it is in this place, properly
signifies, as it does also in other places of Scripture, where it stands in
like opposition, although where there is no such opposition, it signifies any
beast indifferently. Evident it is, that no creeping thing is comprehended
under that name, whence some conclude, that because the Serpent, both here and
in the first verse of this chapter, is compared with foure-footed beasts,
therefore the Serpent, before this curse, went upon four feet, as other beasts
do. But this argument is of small force, seeing God might, both here and there,
compare the Serpent with creatures of any other kind, to enlarge the
comparison, there, that it was more subtle, here that it should be more
miserable then any other beast whatsoever, tame or wild.

And above every heast of the field] That is, above every wild beast: thus by
a sufficient distribution of beasts into their kinds, wild and tame, the
Serpent is pronounced, not only more cursed then any of them were in their
Creation, but then now they are, even by man's fall the whole creature is made
subject to vanity. This curse therefore laid upon the Serpent, is not only a
branch of the general curse, which sin has brought upon all the creatures, but
a peculiar curse upon this creature above them all.

Upon thy belly shall thou go] All creeping things go upon the belly, as Moses
implies, Lev. 11.42. where he makes going upon the belly, the difference
between creeping things, and those that go upon their feet: the Septuagint here
render it, belly and breast, to express the Original (Gechon) more fully,
which properly signifies, the belly of a Serpent, whose belly and breast seem
to be all one. But seeing going upon the belly is here laid upon the Serpent as
a curse; It gives occasion of dispute, whether the Serpent went upon the belly
before it was cursed, or nay. A question neither very easy, nor necessary to
determine. Only, it seems not probable, that God by the curse altered the
shape, or parts of any creatures body, but only the perfect and healthy temper,
the strength, regular use, and perhaps, (as in man) the comeliness of the
parts. So that the conjecture of some seems to be very bold and groundless,
that imagine the Serpent to have been created with feet at the first, which
they conceive to be taken away by the curse. Again, neither is it probable,
that the curse should bring upon the Serpent no change at all, although it
brought not this change, and therefore that the curse brought no alteration
upon the Serpent, in her going at all: It is most probable, that when he cursed
the Serpent above all other creatures, he left some discernable mark of that
curse upon it above the rest. But it is replied, that there needed no
alteration at all to make it a curse; seeing man's nakedness by sin became
shameful, which was not so before, without any alteration of the body: and the
labor is now a curse, which before the fall was not so. To which it may be
easily answered.

First, that in the shame of nakedness there is a change, although not in the
parts of the body, (save that even man's body it self, has not a presence so
graceful and full of majesty, since the fall, as he was before) yet in the
affections of the mind, in which only shame consists.

Secondly, in man's labor, which now becomes part of his curse, and was not so
before, there is an evident and very great change, as we shall see hereafter.
The curse might cause a change in the Serpents going, not by altering the kind
of her going, from stepping to creeping, but by appointing it another part of
the body to go upon, then that which it went upon before. For the emphasis
seems to be in Belly, not in Go, which Moses expresses here by the word
Telech, which is of general signification, and extends to any kind of moving
forwards, whether by stepping, creeping, swimming, or any other kind of
motion. Now if God had given the Serpent a kind of motion, different from that
which it had before, it may be probably conceived, that Moses would have
expressed it by such a word as might signify that difference. This therefore
seems to be the most likely conjecture, that before the curse the Serpent
moved forwards upon the hinder part of her body, with the breast, and belly,
and head erected, whereas now it creeps on the whole length of the body, which
conjecture may be strengthened by these arguments.

First, we see that Serpents at this day, upon occasion, (as when they assault
a man or the like) for a time, raise up themselves upon the hinder part of
their body, so that the former part of it stands upright, why may we not
conceive then, that before their strength was weakened by this curse, they
might do that always which now they can do for a shift.

Secondly, if we allow the Serpent such a manner of creeping, with the former
part of the body erect, we may more plainly see the reason, why Satan made
choice of the Serpent in tempting the man, for the subtilty of it, which might
consist somewhat in altering and changing her going. When she was to conveigh
her self into the Garden unespied, she could apply her body close to the
ground; when she was to speak to the woman, she could raise her self upright,
and so confer with her, as it were, mouth to mouth.

Thirdly, we may in this curse discover the equity of Gods judgment upon the
Serpent. For if the Serpent could apply her self to do mischief unespied, good
reason she should be accursed to go in that manner ever after, so that this
curse might point directly at the sin, for which it was inflicted. Now these
at the best are but conjectures.

And dust shall thou eate] But experience teaches, that Serpents feed also
upon, and devour other small vermin; which the Prophet Esaias seems also to
imply, when speaking of that peace that should be in the restoration of the
Church, between all creatures, he names the Serpent amongst the rest, affirming
that it should live by dust, as the lion should do by straw, implying, that
they both live by preying upon other creatures at present, which then they
should forbear. Some therefore by eating dust conceive, that God means living
hardly, as Serpents do, which, in the winter season, living most in their
holes, get little food to sustain themselves. But that is the condition of
other beasts as well as of Serpents: it seems therefore, that this feeding upon
the dust, is opposed to the former manner of the Serpents feeding upon herbs
and fruits, after the manner of other beasts; for, if before the curse she went
with the former part of her body erect, as we have showed already, then might
she be easily able to reach many sorts of herbs and fruits, though growing
above the ground, as other beasts do, whereas now creeping with her very mouth
upon the earth, she must necessarily take her food out of the dust, and so lick
in some dust withal: so that though the dust be not all her food, yet she
taking all her food out of the dust, and licking in the dust with it, may not
improperly be said to eat dust.

All the dayes] Both thou, and all thy kind hereafter, to the worlds end. But
what had the Serpent deserved, being an unreasonable creature, and consequently
incapable of any purpose or intention to do evil? why is the beast punished for
Satan's fault, who made use of the Serpent only as his instrument, to do
mischief? To that it is easily answered, that the derestation and hatefulness
of sin is so great, that it is fit to be manifested upon whatsoever is defiled
with it. Thus we break in pieces the sword, dagge, or other instrument of a
Princes death, dam up a Well in which any man has been drowned. And God
himself will require a man's life at the hands of every beast, Genesis 9.5. and
therefore in his own Law, appoints an Ox that goares any man to death, to be
stoned, Exodus 21.28.

This part of the curse (if we take the words according to the letter) we see
most properly belongs to the beast, whereof Satan made use, for the acting of
this mischief. Some there are notwithstanding, that conceive, that under the
curse upon the Serpent, is shadowed out the curse laid by God upon Satan, who
being created to look upwards, for his Apostasy, was by Gods just judgment
thrown down to the earth, and abased even below the dust, and instead of
delighting himself in God, was carried by the inordinate motion of his spirit,
to exercise himself, and to take delight in base and sensual things, more vile
then dust it self, which was appointed to be the Serpents food. But this curse
upon Satan cannot be conceived to be inflicted in this place, because it was
laid upon him by God, before he was an actor in this sin, Only in this, that
God will not vouchsafe to reason the case with Satan, before he lays his
judgment upon him.

1. OBSERVE, God many times will not so much as reason the case, with such as
he destinates to destruction.
EPhraim is joined to idols, let him alone, Hos. 4.17. and Ezekiels tongue must
cleave to the roof of his mouth, that he may not reprove, and the Prophets must
not prophecy, that men may take shame, Mic. 2.6. when God has once decreed a
peoples destruction. Thus he dealt with the heathen, that had no face of a
Church amongst them, he suffered them to walk in their own ways, Acts 14.16.
only he might, and did sometimes call them to account, before their own
consciences, Romans 2.15. as well to keep them within some bounds of civility,
for peace, and orders sake, as to give them a taste in present, of that gnawing
worm that dies not, by which they shall be everlastingly tormented hereafter.
And well may God deal thus with men, seeing he is no man's debtor, neither can
gain any thing by administering Physic to dead men, such as are alienated from
the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. As for his own people, whom he has taken into
Covenant with him, he brings his judgments amongst them to light every
morning, though many times the unjust know no shame, Zeph. 3.5. as well to win
such as may be reclaimed, as also to stop men's mouths, that no man might cavil
at Gods justice, when the obstinacy of men is made manifest, in refusing the
mercy offered unto them. Thus he deals indeed with his people, till the case
grow desperate and past remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. and then usually he silenceth
his Ministers without, and men's consciences within, that they may fill up the
measure of their iniquity, that the wrath of God may come upon them to the
uttermost, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.16.

Let us account it amongst Gods favors, when he will debate with us by his
Word, challenge us for our sins, as he did David by Nathan; nay, if he terrify
us by threatening his judgments and wrath, as he does Jehoshaphat by Jehu, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. yea, and awaken us too by his chastisements, Jer. 31.18, 19. or
raise up our own hearts to smite us, 2 Samuel 24.10. but tremble at such a
condition when God lets us alone, and will have no more to do with us, which is
an evidence of his deepest displeasure, and let no man desire such a judgment
unto himself as the wicked do, Isa. 30.14. that the Holy One of Israel may
cease from them.

The Delinquents are brought in in order, and every one, as they are found more
or less guilty, so receive a censure proportionable, even the Serpent it
self, which is but the instrument which Satan used in this temptation. Whence

2 OBSERVE, Whosoever has an hand in any sin, shall be sure to have a share in
the punishment.
Romans 2.9. whether living under the Law, or without the Law, ver. 12. either at
present in the speedy execution of vengeance, as the searchers that brought up
an ill report upon the Land of Canaan, died presently before the Lord, Numb.
14.37. or in the day of recompense, where in not one of the murmuring
Congregation escaped the stroke of Gods hand, Numb. 26.65. as God had before
given sentence on them, Numb. 14.29. or at the farthest, they are sure to be
called to account at the great day, when God shall come to execute vengeance
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly, and that of all their ungodly
deeds, and of all their hard speeches, Jude 15. when every secret thing shall
be brought to judgment, Eccles. 12.14. Reason.

1. God is able, both to convince and punish; and nothing can be hid from his
pure eye, or escape his revenging hand.

2. The respect to his own honor, necessarily moves him to declare himself to
be just, in rendering to every man according to his deeds, and according to his
works, Psalm. 62.12.

We have already taken notice, that the Serpent was only an instrument in this
sin, carried on and acted by Satan, according to his will; and yet he
receives his judgment as well as the rest. Whence

3 OBSERVE, Every instrument in the acting of sin, and whatsoever is defiled
thereby, is liable to Gods curse.
Moses, Exodus 32.20. Manassehs image of the grove by Josiah, 2 Kings 23.6. yea,
the brazen Serpent, though erected by Gods own appointment, was broken in
pieces by Hezekiah, being abused to idolatry, 2 Kings 18.4. And this may not
only be done in justice, seeing sin pollutes whatsoever touches it; but is fit
to be done in terror, as well to manifest Gods holiness, in his zeal against
sin, as to make men tremble at so dangerous an evil as sin is, that brings
destruction to all that comes near it, that all men might fear to abuse
wealth, food, houses, apparel, wives, children, servants, friends, etc. as
instruments to sin, lest the curse of God light both upon them and upon our
selves.

It has been intimated, that although this curse be inflicted upon the
Serpent, yet withal it was in an especial manner intended for the instruction of
the man and woman, in whose presence it was denounced against him, that they
might the more feelingly apprehend the evil of their own sin, which they had
voluntarily committed, when they beheld so fearful a curse brought upon an
involuntary agent in the same transgression. Whence

4 OBSERVE. One man's punishment ought to be other men's instruction.
Deuteronomy. 13.14. or laid on by Gods immediate hand, Zeph. 3.5, 6. Thus God makes
Abraham acquainted with that fearful judgment, which he was to execute upon
Sodom, that himself and his family might take instruction by it, Genesis 18.18,
19. And upon the same ground are diverse of Gods judgments recorded to
posterity, Psalm. 78.6, 7. 1 Cor. 10.6. And it stands with good reason that we
should make this use of other men's punishment, seeing God is no respecter of
persons, but must measure all with the same line, as proceeding always by the
same rule of Justice, assisted by the same power, carried on by the same zeal
and holiness of his nature, and having still before his eyes the end, even the
manifesting of his own glory. Besides it is a great honor to God, when he thus
brings good out of the evil of other men's smart, as he does light out of
darkness, that both his power and mercy may be the more admired; when he makes
other men's poison our medicine, and their wounds our healing.

God both in this judgment which he denounces against the Serpent, and that
which follows, ver. 17. against Adam, first expresses the cause, and passes
the censure, and that to manifest the equity of his proceeding, and in a sort
to testify to the world, that though the punishment be his Act, yet it is man's
desert, and consequently brought upon him by himself, as the fruit of his own
sin. Whence

5 OBSERVE, God lays his judgment upon no creature but upon just desert.
Pet. 2.5. concemned Sodom and Gomorrah with an overthrow for their filthy
conversation, 2 Pet. 2.6, 7. carried away his people into captivity, because
their sins were increased, Jer. 30.15. as themselves acknowledge, Lam. 1.8,
and all the world bare witness, Deuteronomy. 29.24, 25. much more is it true in his
own children, Psalm. 89.32. Lam. 3.39. Reason.

1. His nature; fury is not in him, Isaiah 27.4. but longsuffering and abundant
goodness, Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 103.8, 13.

2. Respect to his own honor, infinitely advanced by manifesting his Justice,
mercy, faithfulness, and truth, which appears when he dispenses all his
administrations according to men's deserts.

3. Neither could he otherwise encourage men to his service, but by accepting
and rewarding them in well-doing, and punishing only their errors, and that too
with so much moderation that it tends only to their good, and not to their
destruction.

Let it move us both to justify God in his Judgments, with the Princes, 2 Chronicles. 12. Psalm. 51.4. acknowledging him to be righteous and our selves sinful
above measure, Dan. 9.7, 8, 9. And withal to set him before us for our pattern,
hating nothing in men but sin, Considering,

1. That otherwise we owe love to all men.

2. That we manifest not holiness more in any thing, then when we put
difference between man and man, only according to their good or evil
disposition, or deserts.

In laying the censure upon the Serpent, God first pronounces a curse upon him
in general, and afterward expresses the evils in particular which that curse
includes, and delivering this judgment in this order and manner gives us
occasion thence to

6 OBSERVE, Gods curse upon any creature is the fountain of all plagues and
miseries.
Cain, first lays his curse upon him, and then sets before him the evils which
flow from thence, Genesis 4.11. Balak desires nothing of Balaam but to pronounce
Gods curse upon the children of Israel, and then hopes to prevail against
them, Numb. 22.6. And Joshuah wishing all mischief to the builder of Jericho,
pronounces against him a curse from the Lord, Josh. 6.26. and a curse and a
blessing are put for all manner of good and evil, Deuteronomy. 11.26 Whence it is that
wicked men to whom as the portion of their cup belong snares, fire, brimstone
and horrible tempest, Psalm. 11.6. are called the people of Gods curse, Isa.
34.5. and children of the curse, 2 Pet. 2.14. It must be so of necessity,
seeing the curse of God is the manifestation of his wrath who creates all evil,
Isa 45.7.

Let it raise up all our hearts to abhor sin, and behold the heinousness
thereof, which has brought this curse upon us; and to behold the infinite
riches of Christ's love unto man, who became a curse for us, that he might
redeem us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. An incredible abasement to him
who is God blessed for ever, and an incredible happiness unto us, especially
seeing by him the curse is not only taken away, but is besides turned into a
blessing.

Satan chooses the Serpent to be his instrument to deceive the woman, for his
subtilty, in sliding closely into the Garden; and God for that lays on him
that punishment, that he should always go upon his belly: he was his
instrument to tempt the woman in eating, and is adjudged to eat dust all his
days, see the punishment points at the sin, which is usual in Gods
judgments. Whence

7 OBSERVE. It is usual with God in his judgments so to order them that they
may point at the sin for which they are inflicted.
Adonibezeks thumbs of his hands and feet, because he had dealt so with others:
whence he in his Law gives direction to give eye for eye, and tooth for tooth,
Exodus 21.24, 25. or by some circumstance or other he points at the sin which he
punishes. Jehoram must be cast into Naboths vineyard, to point at his Fathers
sin in killing Naboth to get possession of that vineyard, 2 King 9.25, 26.
sometimes the instrument or the time, or the manner, or some other like
circumstance shows what the sin is that brings the judgment.

Thus God deals with men,

1. To justify himself, that by such lively characters, his righteousness in
all his ways may be read by him that runs.

2. To further men's repentance, by pointing out unto them the sin that brings
the judgment upon them.

The curse that God lays upon the Serpent he expresses and amplifieth by way
of comparison, that it should light and abide upon the Serpent above any beast
of the field. So that the Serpent became viler then any other creature by
becoming an instrument of sin. Whence

8 OBSERVE, It is only sin that makes one more vile then another.
Coniah, though a Prince, a despised broken vessel, Jer. 22.28. and deprives
his father Jehojakim of the common honor that belongs to the meanest man, so
that he is cast out to be buried with the burial of an Ass, ver. 19. That
makes any that is defiled with it a vile person, Psalm. 15.4. yea, though he
were a Prince (as Antiochus, surnamed the glorious, is called a vile person,
Dan. 11.21.) and his memory rottenness, Prove. 10.7. It makes whole nations an
hissing, and an astonishment, Jer. 25.9. the tail, and not the head, Deuteronomy.
28.14. as on the other side, righteousness advances one man above another,
Prove. 12.26. and wisdom promotes to honor, Prove. 4.8. All which abasements,
and honors, which sin and godliness bring to men in this life, are but mere
shadows of that more eminent difference, which shall be put between them
hereafter, when they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, Dan. 12.3.

The particulars of the Serpents curse are two,

First, that she shall go upon her belly.

Secondly, that her food shall be the dust of the earth: so that her abasement
is, that she is wholly fastened unto the earth. Whence

9 OBSERVE. It is a shameful abasement to be glewed to the earth.
Joh 4.19. in bodies of clay, termed earthly Tabernacles, 2 Cor. 5.1. under
which we groan, as under an heavy burden, ver. 4. waiting to be freed from
it, Romans 8.23. that those earthly bodies may be changed into heavenly, 1 Cor.
15.44. But our greatest abasement is in stooping to the earth in our
affections, bringing down our minds to embrace earthly things, which is our
shame, Phil. 3.19. taking unto us earthly and sensual wisdom (as it is termed,
Jam. 3.15.) for our guide: whence it is, that we are so seriously exhorted, to
raise up our affections to heavenly things, to fix them on them, Col. 3.2.
having our negotiation (or conversation as we render it) in heaven, Phil. 3.20.
even in our earthly employments, when we do them with heavenly minds, as
duties of obedience to God, in them serving the Lord Christ, Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7.
and referring all to his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. and in these services seeking
after glory, and honor, and immortality hereafter.

VERSE 15.
HItherto of Gods curse upon the Serpent, which was Satan's instrument in
deceiving the woman. The curse upon himself, who was the chief agent, follows
in this verse, which some conceive to have relation to the Serpent too, but
upon no sufficient ground, if the words be thoroughly scanned. For howsoever it
be true, that there is an enmity between men and Serpents; yet that is no
other, then is found between him and other hurtful creatures, who hate men, or
at least hurt them, more then Serpents do neither are serpents more apt to hurt
men, then they are to hurt other creatures. Again (for the next clause) it is
true, that Serpents usually bite the heel, and that men may, and do sometimes,
tread on their heads. But it is most evident, that God in denouncing this
curse, aims not at the hurt which men and Serpents either do unto, or receive
one from the other. Because this combat is not said to fall out between the
Serpent and all men in general, but between him, and the woman's seed, by which
(as we shall see hereafter) is meant both Christ, and the holy seed, such as
are members of him. So that in this expression, the Lord representing
especially the combat between Christ and Satan, thinks fit to borrow a
metaphor from the fight between men and Serpents; Shadowing out Satan under the
name of the Serpent, and the combat between Christ and him, under the
fimilitude of the Serpents fight.

And I will put enmity] That is, deadly and irreconcilable hatred: which God
is said to put between them, partly by decreeing, and permitting the hatred of
Satan, and his instruments against the godly; and partly by infusing into the
hearts of the holy seed, a perfect detestation and hatred of Satan, and all his
followers. Thus because familiarity between Satan and the woman, had given him
advantage to seduce and deceive her to her own destruction; God to prevent that
mischief for time to come, so stirs up the spirit both of her and her seed
against him hereafter, that she should hate him as unfeignedly as he hated her,
so that she should henceforth avoid him, and hearken no more unto his counsel.
This work God takes into his own hand, as is implied in those words (I will
put, etc.) that from thenceforth man's estate might stand firm, when it should
not be in his power to do what he would, as it was before, seeing when he had
power in his own hand, either to stand or fall, he was quickly, and easily
overthrown. But God should reserve the power in his own hand to settle him in
such a condition, that man should not be able to alter if he would.

Between thee and the woman] We have here three paires of combatants, matched
in opposition one against the other.

The first the Serpent, against the woman.

The second, the Serpents seed, against the seed of the woman:

The third pair are the Captains on both sides, Christ and Satan: Whereof the
first begin, the second continue, and the third end the quarrel. The beginning
is in hatred and enmity: the continuance in fighting and wounding, and the end
in the final conquest of Satan, who began the quarrel. Now the putting of this
enmity between man and Satan, is both a part of Gods curse upon him, and withal
not the least, but the greatest portion of the blessing, promised to man. Of
Satan's curse that he should be always kicking against the pricks, hating and
persecuting the woman's seed, without cause, to his own destruction at the last.
And of man's blessing, whose safety and duty, is to hate Satan with a perfect
hatred; whereby, though he be not wholly freed from, yet he is the less
endangered by his snares, especially seeing he resists, in a sort, by Gods
power, and not by his own; for so much seems to be implied in that phrase (I
will put enmity.) As if God had said, It shall be no longer in man's choice to
accord with Satan, or to hate him; but I will so guide and overruled his heart,
by my spirit, that he shall persist constantly in this hatred, and war
against him, till that enemy be trodden under his feet. Thus God seeing how soon
man had wasted that stock of grace, that he had put into his hand, resolves to
provide better for him in time to come, and to keep his heart and will in his
own hand, guiding it by his own Spirit that he might not hazard his estate any
more, nor be cheated of it by Satan any more, as he had been. So that in man's
restitution, after his fall, his state was indeed impaired in respect of the
perfection of it, in this present life; for he must be bruised in the heel, by
diverse temptations and slips into sin thereby, but is much bettered in respect
of the firmness of it, as God implies in that promise, Jer. 32.40. It may be
demanded, why the woman only is mentioned in taking up this enmity against
Satan, whereas the promise belongs as well, and equally to the man. But it
seems to be done upon a double ground.

First, that the promise might be the firmer: for if Satan could not prevail
against the woman, being the weaker vessel, it was very unlikely that he should
prevail against the man, which was the stronger. It may be withal that God
mentions the woman, because she was the first in the transgression, and besides
the seducer of her own husband; Now if God would pardon the woman, much more
might the man assure himself of the recovery of his favor, whose sin admitted
the more excuse, because he was drawn in by the example, and allurement of his
wife.

Another ground upon which God mentions the woman, and not the man, may be upon
two other respects, either because she most needed comfort, that had most cause
to be humbled; Or rather because the seed mentioned afterward, which was to
continue the war, and at last to obtain the conquest over Satan, must
specially be meant of Christ, who was made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. and not
immediately of man: wherefore because he was more properly the seed of the
woman then of the man, it was more fit to call him her seed, then the seed of
the man.

And between thy seed] Seed signifies properly that in any creature, by which
the kind thereof is propagated: here, and in many other places of Scripture,
it signifies persons begotten and propagated of that seed. So that the woman's
seed are her children, the men and women that were to come, and be begotten of
her body. Now though Satan, to speak properly, can have no such seed, that is,
can have none that come of him, by natural generation, of which spirits are
altogether incapable; yet because the rest of the devils are of the same nature
with their Prince, and all wicked men, that are corrupted by him, are of the
same disposition, bear his image, and resemble him, as children usually do
their parents; therefore all wicked men, and the rest of the devils are called
his seed: by this name wicked men are called, 1 John 3.10. seeing they are of
him (as our Savior speaks John 8.44.) not by natural, but by spiritual
generation, that is, by receiving such false principles as Satan infuseth into
their hearts, by which they become like him in affection, and disposition, and
serve him as a child does a parent, Mal. 1.6.

And her seed] Not all that are so by natural generation, but such as are her
seed, according to the spirit, as well as according to the flesh. And they
only are called her seed, because the rest degenerating, are no better then
bastards, and the seed of Satan. By this seed of the woman then, we are to
understand the whole body of the Church, whereof Christ is the head, who is
principally intended in this name, as appears by the next clause, when it is
said (It shall bruise.) in the singular number, meaning principally Christ
(whose work it is properly to subdue Satan) and together with him, and by his
power, all such as being renewed after his image, are by the spirit ingraffed
into his body. That Christ should be called the woman's seed, we need not
wonder, seeing he took the substance of his flesh of her body, and was made
immediately only of a woman, and not of a man.

It shall bruise thy head] That is, that seed of the woman: he means Christ
principally, who also shall do it by his own power, although it be true that by
the power of Christ the godly overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2.13. Rev. 12.11.
But to speak truly, the whole body of the Church whereof Christ is head, may be
said to do that which is done by Christ, if we look on the Church, as united
into one body with Christ; as the acts of any member of the body, are ascribed
to the person; as that which is done by the hand of any man is said to be done
by the men. As for the word (Shuph) here used in the original, which we render,
Bruise, we find it besides this place no where in Scripture, save only Job
9.17. here we have it twice, but in the first place it imports only wounding,
seeing it lights only on the heel which is far from any vital part; in the
later clause it implies crushing to pieces as lighting upon the head, which is
the fountain of life, by the crushing whereof must needs follow the total and
final destroying of Satan, and all his might.

And thou shall bruise his heele] The heel we know is the lowest, and basest
part of the body, the wounds whereof endanger not the life at all. By Christ's
heel then may be meant both the humane nature of Christ, which is the lower
and baser part of his person, in which Satan bruised him, when after many
outward troubles, in the days of his flesh, he brought him by his wicked
instruments, at length, to the death of the cross: And withal we may take in
all the faithful, which are members of Christ, who are diverse ways bruised by
Satan, and Christ in them (who in their afflictions are said to fill up the
sufferings of Christ, Col. 1.24.) sometimes by persecutions, and outward
afflictions, sometimes by inward temptations, whereby though Satan can not
prevail against that life of grace, by which they live spiritually, (seeing
that life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. notwithstanding he diverse ways
wounds and afflicts their fowls, by alluring and prevailing, to draw them by
his wiles into diverse sins, which causes in them afterward much unquietness
and affliction of spirit.

That in this curse pronounced by God against Satan, is involved the gracious
Promise of the restitution, not only of our first Parents, whom the devil had
thus beguiled, but of their holy seed also, is evident, and is so far
acknowledged, that those words are taken to be the first Catechism of the
Patriarchs, containing the principal grounds of Religion, which were afterward
more fully opened by the Prophets. This Promise, in the first clause of it
seems to be directed to our first Parents especially, in which God assures
them, and threatens Satan, that this folle of theirs should prove no thorough
conquest. But though Satan seemed to have prevailed with them, to take part
with him against God, yet God would so far open their eyes, and prevail upon
their hearts, that they should cast off his yoke, hate him, and fight against
him, and by the Power of Christ their Head subdue, and conquer him at the last.
The Promise of the recovery of mankind out of Satan's bondage, and from under
Gods curse; contains in it these principal heads, all of them expressed or
implied in those few words, being so many grounds of our faith.

1. That Gods Promise of grace is every way free, not solicited by Adam, and
much less deserved, as being made unto him now, when he had offended God in
the highest degree, and stood in enmity against him, and therefore must needs
proceed from Gods free Will.

2. That it is certain and infallible, as depending, not upon man's will, but
upon Gods, who speaks not doubtfully or conditionally, but positively and
peremptorily, that he will do it himself.

3. That it shall be constant and unchangeable the inward hatred and outward
wars between Satan and the holy seed, shall not cease, till they end at last
in Satan's total and final ruin.

4. That it shall not extend to all the seed of the woman, according to the
flesh, but to some that are chosen out of her seed. For some of them shall
join with Satan against their own brethren.

5. The effect of this gracious promise, shall be the sanctifying of their
hearts, whom God will save, manifested in the hatred of Satan, and all his
ways; which though they had formerly embraced, yet now they should abhor.

6. This work of Sanctification shall not be wrought upon them, as a Statuary
fashions a stone into an image; but God shall make use of their wills and
affections, to stir them up, and to set them against Satan, as this word
(Enmity) necessarily implies.

7. Those affections shall not be smothered and concealed in the inward motions
of the heart, but shall outwardly manifest themselves in serious endeavors,
for the opposing of Satan and his power, as the war here mentioned, and
intimated by the wounds on both sides, necessarily supposes.

8. The work of Sanctification, though it shall be infallible and unchangeable,
yet shall be imperfect, as is implied in the bruises, which the godly shall
receive by Satan's hand, not only by outward afflictions, but by inward
temptations, which shall wound their souls, by drawing them into diverse sins,
all implied in that phrase of bruising the heel.

9. Those wounds which they receive at Satan's hands shall not be deadly, nor
quench the life of grace, which the devil shall not be able to destroy, as is
intimated in that part of the body which shall be wounded, which is the heel,
far enough from any vital part.

10. The Author of this work of sanctification shall not be themselves, but God
by his Spirit. For it is he that shall put enmity into their hearts, against
Satan and his seed, as the words import.

11. This work of Sanctification by the Spirit, shall be established by their
union with Christ their Head, with whom they shall be joined into one body, as
is implied, when Christ and his members are termed one seed.

12. By virtue of this union the holy seed shall have an interest in, and a
title to all that Christ works. For so, in effect, Christ's victory over Satan
is called their victory, when it is said, the seed of the woman shall bruise
the Serpents head, that is, Christ and his members shall do it.

13. For the making way to this union and communion between Christ and his
members, he shall take on him the very nature of man, so that he shall truly
and properly be called the seed of the woman.

14. Notwithstanding, he shall not be her seed by the ordinary way of natural
generation, but he shall be made immediately only of a woman, not by the help
of man, for which cause he is called here the seed of the woman, and not of the
man.

15. In this flesh of his, Christ shall fight with Satan, who after diverse
combats, shall prevail so far upon this son of the woman, as to bring him
by his instruments to the death of the Cross, which is the bruising of the
heel here mentioned, as far as concerns Christ's own person.

16. This suffering of Christ in his flesh shall not wound him to death; for it
shall be only a bruise in the heel, which is far from any vital part.

17. This combat between the two Commanders, Christ and Satan, and their
armies, in the issue and conclusion thereof, shall end in a total and final
overthrowing of Satan, and breaking in pieces of all his power, termed in this
place the crushing of his head.

This ample Promise, concerning the restoring of our first Parents, and withal
of all their posterity after them, we see is pronounced against Satan, as a
part of his curse, God telling him that this should be his judgment, that
those persons, whom he had beguiled by fair pretenses, and drawn into
rebellion against God, should be delivered out of his snares. Whence

1 OBSERVE, Man's salvation is Satan's grief and vexation.
Rev. 12.17. as he must needs be, considering his inward malice and envy
against God and man, which carries him on violently to use all means, to
dishonor the one, and destroy the other, going about like a roaring lion
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. so that the defeating of the effects
of his malice against God, and of his dangerous attempts against his people,
must be his greatest vexation, especially when he finds withal by experience,
that his wrath turns to Gods praise, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 76.10. and
to the good of his children, Romans 8.28.

Let all the godly labor the more seriously to make their election sure, 2
Pet. 1.10. watching carefully, and using all diligence for that purpose, 1 Pet.
5.8. assuring our selves, that as many devils as there are in hell, and as many
wicked (which are Satan's seed and instruments,) as we converse withal here on
earth, so many open enemies, or dangerous seducers we have about us, lying in
our way (like the Amalekites in the children of Isreal's way to Canaan,)
discouraging our hearts, opposing our endeavors, ensnaring our souls, and
laboring to cut off the means, or at least to make them useful to us, that
might further us in our passage to heaven, whom therefore it behooves us to
suspect to avoid, and to fight against with all our power, as being utter
enemies, not only to our estates and lives, but especially to the salvation of
our souls.

It cannot be denied, that the wrath of God was moved against Satan in the
highest degree, considering how many ways he had wronged him, in deceiving our
first Parents. So that he comes at this very instant to lay an heavy curse upon
him, and yet at the same moment he is moved with compassion toward the man and
woman that were beguiled by him, so that with the same breath he pronounces a
curse upon the one, and a blessing upon the other, as the words here expressly
mention. Whence

2 OBSERVE, Gods indignation is never so much kindled against the wicked, that
he forgets his mercy toward his own.
Noah found grace in his sight, and God thought upon, and took care for him
both before the flood, Genesis 6.8. and after, Genesis 8.1. The like provision he
made for Lot, in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, Genesis 19.29. 2 Pet. 2.6.
the same respect he showed toward the godly people in Judea, Jer. 24.5, 6.
when he overthrew the state of that land, and utterly destroyed the rest,
Ezech. 9.4, 6. This shall be most clearly manifested at the last day, when at
that very instant wherein the wicked shall be cast into hell, his own children
shall be put into possession of their Kingdom, Mat. 25.34, 41. For God is not
like a man, subject to passions, which transport him oftentimes beyond himself.
Nay, the same Holiness of his Nature, that moves him unto wrath and
indignation against the wicked, stirs him up to compassion toward the godly,
as it is fit it should, that the Judge of all the world may still do right in
all things.

What our Parents had deserved at Gods hand, we have seen already: and now we
see, they do not so much as once open their lips, to sue unto God for mercy and
reconciliation; before they speak, or in probability, think of their own good,
much more before they deserve it, God, out of his own goodness, both devises
and proposes unto them means of their recovery, out of this sad condition
into which they had brought themselves. Whence

3 OBSERVE, Gods mercy toward man, in the means of his salvation, proceeds
merely from himself, and is free every way.
Tit. 3.4, 5. out of which only it was, that he sent into the world his Son
Christ, that embracing him by faith, men might have eternal life, John 3.16. 1
John 4.10. and that when we were both sinners and enemies, Romans 5.8. our
Justification is likewise out of his free grace, Romans 3.24. and our effectual
calling, seeing he seeks after us, and not we after him, Isa. 65.1. and this
love of his, he dispenses merely, according to his own Will, Romans 9.18. Reason

1. It can be no otherwise: for seeing the being of the creature depends merely
upon Gods Will, the condition of its being must of necessity depend upon the
same Will. But especially since man's fall, what could there be in man, to move
God any ways toward him unless it were to destroy him?

2. Indeed, as there is none that can give unto him first, Romans 11.35. or if he
could, can give him any thing that can profit him, Job 35.7. so its most equal
that it should be so, that the glory of Gods goodness might be entire unto
himself alone, when he bestows it on those that cannot claim or deserve it, 1 Timothy 1.16. Ephesians. 2.7. that every mouth might be stopped, and all boasting taken
away from men, ver. 9. when they have nothing of themselves, but what they have
received, 1 Cor. 4.7. and have received nothing of desert, but what was
bestowed on them out of free grace.

The first beginning of man's recovery, as God here promises, shall be the
renewing and sanctifying of their hearts, for so much must necessarily be
implied by this enmity, that God puts into man's heart against Satan. For as the
corrupting of man's heart was by closing with Satan, hearkening to his
suggestions, and embracing his counsels and directions, by which his heart was
wholly taken off from God; so the purging and sanctifying of his heart must
begin in abhorring Satan, and all his counsels and principles, which being once
wrought in him, he was prepared to close with God again. Whence

4 OBSERVE, God sanctifies all those whom he saves.
FOr by faith we are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. and faith purifies the heart, Acts 15.9.
This indeed is Gods Will, even our sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. intended by
Christ, when he gave himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. that through
sanctification he might bring it to glory, (as he there speaks,) and by God
himself who has chosen us to be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. and to salvation, thorough the
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. Reason

1. We can otherwise have no communion with God, who will be sanctified in all
that come near him, Lev. 10.3.

2. Neither can we without it be partakers of Gods glory, which especially
consists in holiness, Exodus 15.11.

3. Neither could it any way stand with Gods honor, to delight in any, but
such as are holy as he is holy.

It is indeed a great comfort to all that are godly, who groan under the
burden of those pollutions and defilements, which yet cleave unto them, Romans
7.24. that God will purge them more and more, till he have made them without
spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. and withal an effectual motive, to quicken our
endeavors in fighting against our lusts, and laboring to mortify our
corruptions, wherein we know we shall get the Conquest at last by the Power of
the Spirit of Christ.

This work of sanctification is pointed at, only in one branch or effect of it,
the hatred of Satan and his seed, that is, all such as bear his image, under
which must necessarily be included, the rejecting of all his counsels and
principles, by which the woman had been formerly beguiled, and drawn into
rebellion against God. Whence

5 OBSERVE, It is a mark and effect of true sanctification, to hate both Satan
himself, and all that bear his image.


1. Most men abhor not to bear his image, being conformed unto him in
infidelity, sensual delights, carnal and covetous desires, pride, selflove,
lying, malice, and the like.

2. They delight in, and usually entertain familiarity with his children.

3. They embrace his principles, are guided by his counsels, and do his will
and works, as our Savior taxes the Jews, John 8.44.

4. They contend and strive for the establishing of his Kingdom in ignorance
and licentiousness, hating and contending against the means and persons that
oppose it. Wherefore it needs be a work above nature, to bring the heart of a
man, by nature seasoned with his principles, to a true and right hatred both of
Satan and his ways, manifested in abhorring his image.

1. In our selves, Original sin with the lusts of it, which the Prophet David
acknowledges with shame, Psalm. 51.4. Paul groans under as abody of death,
Romans 7.24. and they that are Christ's have crucified, Gal. 5.24. hating
especially pride, Prove. 8.13. infidelity, Heb. 3.12. a rebellious spirit, Psalm.
101.4.

2. In all other persons in whom we discover the image of Satan, who walk after
him as all men do, while they remain in their natural condition, Ephesians. 2.2. even
as many as walk in unrighteousness, 1 John 3.10. in the lust of concupiscence,
1 These. 4.5. in the works of the flesh, described, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. who are
indeed haters of God, Romans 1.30. and therefore worthily hated of all that are
godly, Psalm. 139.21.

3. In abhorring all his ways, every false way, Psalm. 119.128. vain thoughts,
ver. 113. lying, ver. 163.

4. We manifest our hatred of Satan, in fighting against him and his
instruments, and the power of his Kingdom, after holy David's example, Psalm.
101. laboring to bring other men out of his snare, 2 Timothy 2.26.

5. In waxing zealous for God and his honor, contending for his truth, Jude 3.
for establishing of his ordinances, Psalm. 69.9. grieving for men's breaches of
his Law, Psalm. 119, 139, 1^8. and delighting in the society of the godly, ver.
63. These indeed are the fruits of the Spirit, and are the undoubted marks of
an heart, that is truly, although not perfectly and fully sanctified.

The Serpent was, at the most, but Satan's instrument, in deceiving the woman,
the whole plot and suggestions by which she was beguiled, were the acts of
Satan. Yet some conceive, that this enmity reaches to the Serpent too, as well
as to Satan, whose opinion if we embrace we may thence

6 OBSERVE, Whosoever truly abhors sin, must needs withal hate the very
instruments of evil.
garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. As

1. Being in it self made abominable, being once defiled with sin.

2. And dangerous to us, as a means to draw us into that evil which we abhor.

Satan having so far prevailed with the woman, as to draw her into rebellion
against God, by embrating his counsel, against Gods express Command, one might
probably have conceived, that this had been a likely means to continue and
increase her familiarity with Satan, who had not only begun acquaintance with
her, but having weakened her, by this means had the more power to prevail
with her afterward. But God decrees they should now be greater enemies, then
they had ever been friends, and that questionless upon that very occasion,
wherein they had by woeful experience discovered the ill success of hearkening
to his counsel. Whence

7 OBSERVE, Godly men, the more they are acquainted with sin and sinners, the
more they should and do abhor them.
Paul complains so much of that body of death, Romans 7.23. because he had
experience of the powerful working of it, in perverting his heart; and exhorts
the Romans, to yield up their members instruments to righteousness, because
they had trial of sin, and found no fruit in it but shame, Romans 6.21. and upon
the same grounds disswades men, every where from sinful courses, because they
had experience of them, see Ephesians. 5.7, 8. Col. 3.7, 8. and that was it that
wrought upon the heart of that poor afflicted soul, Job 33.27. that the
perverting of righteousness had not profited him. Whence St. Pet^r judges
their case desperate, who having had experience of sin, were now escaped out of
it, and yet return to it again, as a dog to his vomit, 2 Pet 2.20.22. and no
marvel, seeing sin, being in it self found by experience to be shameful and
unfruitful. If that experience (which is the Mistress, even of fools
themselves) do not manifest unto men their error in embracing it; they are
either wholly besotted, with that wretch, which was unsensible of his own
smart, Prove. 23, 35. or love death, Prove. 8.36 and their own destruction, which
is against the principles of Nature it self.

Let every man then carefully observe, what impression the experience of sin
leaves upon his heart. If it be zeal, indignation, revenge, grief, and the
like, 2 Cor. 7.11. 2 Samuel 24.10. fear, watchfulness, and resolution against
it for time to come, Job 40.4, 5. so that with Solomon, we find nothing in it
but vanity and vexation of spirit, and thereupon hate all our labor therein,
Eccl. 2.18. then is there certainly a spirit within, that lusts against the
flesh. If after the sin we remain senseless, fearlesse, careless, there is
certainly some dangerous spiritual disease upon us, which taking away the sense
of good and evil, discovers it self to have seized upon, and much weakened the
fountain of life it self. But if we come once to this height, that acquaintance
with sin breeds glorying in it, Phil. 3.19. delight and joy in it, Job 20.12.
hunger and thirst after it, so that we resolve, that to morrow shall be as to
day, and much more abundant, Isa. 56.12. the case is desperate, without Gods
infinite mercy.

Thus God promises to recover man out of Satan's snare, and that by infusing
into his heart an holy hatred and detestation of Satan and of all his
instrments, and ways, and counsels: and this he promises shall be his own
work, for he speaks it, I will put enmity, etc. Whence

8 OBSERVE, Sanctification is the work of Gods Spirit.
These. 2.13. unto which both sanctification and justification are ascribed, 1
Cor. 6.11. and upon the same ground it is called the Spirit of holiness or
sanctification, Rom 1.4. which proceeds from God, and therefore this work is
ascribed also unto him, 1 These. 5.23. from whom it passes thorough Christ, as
the conduit, (whence he is also said to sanctify his Church, Ephesians. 5.26.) by
the Spirit as the working cause, and by the Word as the instrument, John 17.17.
the power whereof is notwithstanding wholly from God, 2 Corinthians. 10.5. Reason,

1. It can proceed from no other cause, seeing man's heart in it self, being
wholly corrupted, it is impossible to draw a clean thing out of that which is
unclean, Job 14.4. and therefore if it receive any holiness, it must be
infused by him that is the fountain of holiness.

2. And it is fit it should be so, that all the honor of every mercy, as well
our sanctification, as our justification, might be ascribed to God alone, that
he that glories might glory in the Lord, 1 Corinthians. 1.31.

Now Gods promise being absolute, that he will do it, it must needs be granted,
that the work shall infallibly be accomplished, according to his word, for his
thoughts must stand throughout all ages, Psalm. 33.11. and who has resisted his
will? Romans 9.19. Whence

9 OBSERVE, The work of grace and Sanctification wrought in the heart of man is
unresistible.
Romans 9.16. who works in us both to will, and to do according to his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13. and not according to ours. So much is implied in those
phrases, of writing the Law in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. of taking away the stony
heart, and giving an heart of flesh, Ezech. 11.19. of begetting anew, 1 Pet.
1.3. of creating, Ephesians. 2.19. and the like: all which manifest a work wrought
upon man, and not by him, and therefore having no dependence upon his will at
all. Neither,

1. Is it fit it should be otherwise, lest Gods will should be overruled by
the will of man, and Gods purpose of saving such as he has chosen to himself,
from all eternity, should be frustrate.

2. If the work of man's conversion be duly weighed, it cannot be otherwise,
seeing in the first act thereof, nature being more corrupted, must needs stand
in opposition against God, and so must continue to do till God change it; the
Apostle testifying that the wisdom of the flesh (that is of a Natural man) is
enmity against God, and neither is, nor can be (while he so continues) subject
to his Law, Romans 8.7.

Notwithstanding, in this promise, wherein God undertakes to carry on man in an
irreconcilable enmity against Satan, he implies that he will not carry him on
therein by violence and inforcement, but intends to make use both of his will
and affections in this opposition. For enmity consists in a voluntary and
strong motion of the mind of a man, against that which he hates, wherein both
the will and affections are exercised. Whence

10. OBSERVE, The work of man's sanctification is not forced upon him, although
it cannot be resisted.
Phil. 2.13. so that there is at once both Gods drawing, and our running, Cant.
1.4. Wherefore the Prophet expresses it by taking away the heart of stone, and
giving an heart of flesh, Ezech. 11.19. There is in a renewed man an heart
still, by which he consents unto, and endeavors to perform that which is good,
as the Apostle speaks of himself, Romans 7. only God gives him that will, by
performing two things.

First, by taking away that heart of stone, which is in man by nature, which is
so hardened by that sin that cleaves unto it, that it is utterly incapable of
any counsel, or means that might be used to draw it to that which is good, by
which it can no more be swayed, then a black-mores skin can be made white by
washing, Jerem. 13.23.

Secondly, when God has freed the heart of that obstinacy in sin, and
untractablenesse thereby to any good, and has destroyed in it that enmity
against God, which hinders it from submitting to his Law, yet the heart could
not of it self close with, and embrace any thing that is good, if God did not
give a new heart of flesh; that is, infuse into the heart an inclination, and
tractablenesse to his will (which the Prophet prays for, Psalm. 119.36.) by
which it is enabled to consent unto God, and to the motions of his Spirit, to
follow after to know him, Hos. 6.3. and to take up words and return to him,
Hos. 14.2. The truth is, God could otherwise have no honor by a sinners
conversion, if the heart should stand out still against him, and not incline to
approve, choose, and delight in his ways above all things. To serve and obey
by force, is slavery and not subjection, and proclaims God to be a tyrant,
rather then a Lord; wherefore he loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. and to be
loved, and served with all the heart, and with all the soul, Deuteronomy. 10.12. with
joyfulnesse and gladness of heart, Deuteronomy. 28 47.

The whole tenor of this promise of God made to man in this place, of the
estate into which he should be restored by his free grace, discovers a double
difference between it, and the estate in which he was first created.

1. In respect of the present imperfection.

2. Of the immutability of this renewed state into which he was now restored.
Of the former we shall speak anon; As for the later, it is intimated in this
promise two ways,

First, in the means by which he shall be continued in the state of grace which
is here promised, which shall be the power of God. As if God had said, it shall
not be with man hereafter as it has been heretofore. Then man having power in
his own hand to stand or fall, lost it quickly; hereafter the power shall be in
my hand, and Satan shall not so far prevail upon man, as to win him to consent
unto him, and to fall away from God again; but there shall be a perpetual
enmity between man and Satan.

Secondly, this is farther manifested in the event, wherein Satan having used
the uttermost of his power, should yet never be able to wound the head of the
woman's seed, either Christ or any of his members, to destroy either the one, or
the other. Whence

11 OBSERVE, The state of man into which he is now restored, and established by
grace, is unchangeable.
Jer. 31.32. his life being now hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. and not left
any longer in his own keeping. That it might be so, it pleased God to give his
children unto Christ, out of whose hand no man can take them, by any power,
Joh. 10.29. neither can, or will he lose any that is given him, Joh. 6.39.
having united them as members to his own body, and that by the firmest band,
even his own Spirit, so that they are now kept by his power to salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5. This indeed is,

First a great honor to God, when according to his unchangeable nature, whom
he loves, he loves unto the end, Joh. 13.1. so that his gifts and calling are
without repentance, Romans 11.29.

And secondly, a ground of strong consolation to the godly, who knowing whom
they have believed, and being well assured, that both he is able to keep that
which is committed to him to the last day, 2 Timothy 1.12. and withal, that he
abides faithful, and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. are thereby strongly
encouraged unto all duties of obedience, knowing that their labor is not in
vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. seeing they are assured they shall persist
unto the end, and having done the will of God, shall receive the promise, Heb.
10.36.

The purpose of God, as we have seen, was to keep the holy seed hereafter, from
falling away from God: now to this end he takes order, that there shall be a
perpetual enmity between man and Satan, and all Satan's seed, and instruments;
that Gods children may be no more allured, and entangled in their sins. So that
we may here discover the malice of the wicked against the godly; when, and
whence it arises; by whom it is appointed and directed; and to what end, all
circumstances worthy our serious consideration. We see then that when sin
came into the world, then came in malice too. Whence

12 OBSERVE, Hatred and enmity is both it self a sin, and withal the fruit of
sin.
Isa. 11.6, 7. and all with man, ver. 8. and one man with another, ver. 13. See
Job 5.23. It is sin that makes us enemies to God, Romans 8.7. and 1.30. and him
an enemy to man, Psalm. 11.5. that makes the wicked hate the godly unjustly, and
them justly hated of the godly, Prove. 29.27. It cannot be otherwise, seeing God
himself is love, and consequently could not but infuse love into all his
creatures, which dwell in love, as long as they dwell in God, 1 John 4.16. So
that hatred could be nothing else but sin, by which the creature departed from
God, and the fruit of sin.

The greater shame is there to those, who having themselves begotten this
bastard, lay it at the door of Religion, and the Professors thereof, as they
have done in all ages. Paul and Silas are charged to be the troublers of the
City, Act. 16.20. and Paul a mover of sedition, Act. 24.5. The same slander was
taken up and fastened upon the Churches in the Primitive times, as all
Histories record: the less cause have we to mervaile, that it should be charged
upon us in our days; how unjustly it will appear,

1. If we examine the principles of religion, and the rules which the Doctrine
thereof prescribes, all of them tending to love, meekness, patience in wrongs,
readiness to forgive, nay to render good for evil.

2. By observing the carriage of all that embrace religion, in sincerity, both
toward one another, and toward all men. It is true indeed, that hatred, and
division usually accompanies Religion, Mat. 24.9, 10. But that we shall always
find to be raised, not by those that embrace it, but by such as oppose it: as
there is trouble in robbing an house, but it is caused by thieves that break in
and steal, not by the true man, that maintains the possession of his own
goods. Not the Apostles and their followers, but their wicked enemies were they
that caused all the stir, in all places where they come, Act. 13.45, 50. and
14.2, 4, 5, 19. and 17.5. and 18.12. and 19.23, 24. There are indeed three
things that evidently manifest that hatred and envy are the fruits of sin,
although they be the companions of Religion.

1. That we find them reigning most, amongst such as never knew Religion.

2. That when the godly are parties in any contention, they are usually therein
the patients, and not the agents.

3. That if there happen any differences amongst the godly (as it happens
sometimes) they are occasioned, either by such as embrace religion in outward
profession, and not indeed, or by the remainder of those bitter roots of pride,
and self-love; which are not wholly rooted out of the hearts of Gods dearest
servants.

When sin began, then enmity began, but from whom did it first spring? Satan
out of mere malice and envy lays snares for the woman, to entrap her, who had
never provoked him, nor had ought to do with him; so that he, being the hater
and enemy both of God and man, was the first from whom all hatred and envy
sprang. Whence

13 OBSERVE, Satan is the first author of all envy and malice, especially
against Gods children.
John 8.44. and they that hate and persecute the godly, do his deeds, ver. 41.
and fulfill his will, ver. 44. and are of him, 1 John 3.12. The very
consideration whereof should be a sufficient motive, to make such persons vile
and odious in all men's eyes, agents of Satan, employed by him for their
destruction, which must be the effect of hatred and malice at the last; and
should withal appale the hearts of all those, in whom those sins reign, who
therein bear the image of Satan, are acted by his Spirit, and serve him in
fulfilling his will, and therefore cannot expect any other, then to receive his
reward, and to be made partakers of his plagues.

This enmity and malice of Satan against man was from himself, which occasions
on the other side the enmity of men against him, whereof God professes himself
the Author. Partly by his decree, by which he appoints that it shall be so,
(and that also reaches to Satan's malice against man, which though God infuse
not into him, yet he orders and moderates, not according to Satan's will, but
according to his own) and partly by the effectual working of his own spirit, in
the hearts of the godly, which moves them with a just hatred against Satan, and
all his instruments, as being both their own, and Gods enemies. Whence

14 OBSERVE, The malice and hatred between the godly and Satan, and his
instruments, is by Gods appointment and decree.
Pharaohs heart, to follow after his people, Ex. 14.8, 17. Nay, he turned the
hearts of the Egyptians to hate his people, Psalm. 105.25. He stirred up enemies
against Solomon, 1 King. 11.14, 23. And this he does, by ministering objects
outwardly, by which that malice, which was before in their hearts, is
quickened, and awaked, and besides by directing that malice of theirs in that
way that best pleases him, for his own glory. Much more is it true that God
determines all the effects of wicked men's malice against his children, not only
when he employs them in a course of Justice, to chastise his people for their
sins: As he sent Nebuchadnezzar to a dissembling Nation, to scourge it, as his
rod, so that the staff in their hand was his indignation, Is. 10.5. But even
then, when they are unjustly moved, out of malice, to hate and persecute the
godly, their ways and actions, are directed by God, to execute what he
appoints, as the Jews did in crucifying our blessed Savior, Act. 4.28. It
must needs be so, seeing the counsel of God must stand in all ages, Psalm.
33.11. and therefore they cannot hate, where God wills they shall love; much
less can they out of malice effect any thing otherwise then God has appointed.

Let all that are godly bear the malicious practices of men against them.

1. As being determined by God,

2. And so moderated that the wrath of man shall praise him, Psalm. 76.10. and
the remainder of it so restrained, that it shall work to the good of those that
love him, Romans 8.28. being the means of continuing strangeness between them
and wicked men, lest by familiarity with them, they might learn their ways,
Prove. 22.25. and be entangled in their snares.

It is not to be passed by, that the Lord in establishing this enmity between
the woman and Satan, especially has this for his aim, that the woman might
for time to come, be the better secured from that danger, which she had fallen
into, by her familiarity with Satan, who by that means had ensnared and
seduced her, which he should not have opportunity to do hereafter, when there
should be such enmity between them. Whence

15 OBSERVE, God directs and turns the malice of Satan, and his instruments
against the godly, to their good at the last.


2. That enmity cutting off all familiarity with wicked men, deprives them of
the opportunity of corrupting the godly by their examples, and alluring
inticements.

3. The more they are hatred and persecuted by wicked men, the more is their
reward increased hereafter, Mat. 5.12.

4. And Gods providence is the more clearly manifested, in preserving, and
protecting those poor sheep amongst so many ravening wolves.

5. And their sincerity the more appears, when they continue constant with
God, serving him in an holy course of obedience, notwithstanding men's
opposition against them, as David implies, Psalm. 119.51, 85, 161.

Lastly, it is an occasion of uniting the hearts of the godly, in a firmer bond
of love, one toward another, and of cleaving more close unto God, when they
find themselves compassed about with so many enemies in the world.

This promise (howsoever intended to both) yet is directed (as we see) rather
to the woman, then to the man, seeing she only is spoken to by name. The reason
whereof we may conceive to be (as has been intimated already) either to apply
the comfort the more unto her, who had most cause to be dejected, as being
deepest in the transgression; Or that the promise might be the more firm,
being made to the woman, the weaker vessel of the two; against whom if Satan
could not prevail, there was little hope of prevailing against the man, which
was the stronger. And if God were pleased to show so much favor to the woman,
who had most offended, much more might the man hope to find favor in his
eyes, whose offense was less, at least in some degree. Whence

16 OBSERVE, God usually supplies most comfort to those that most need it.
Psalm. 147.3. and sends Christ more especially unto such persons, Esaias 61.1.
that as the sufferings of Christ abound in his children, so the consolations
might abound by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. Thus Christ Jesus himself, after his
resurrection appeared first to his mother, to Mary Magdalen, and to Saint Peter
the persons that were most dejected in Spirit, either by the grief of Christ's
death, or for their own sins. And this he does, not only out of necessity, lest
otherwise the bruised reed might be broken; but out of his delight, to take
compassion upon such as are distressed; and lastly, because comfort must needs
do most good, where men are best prepared to receive it.

Now considering, that God makes this promise to the woman, the weaker person
of the two, that she should stand out in a stiff and perpetual enmity against
Satan, so that she should not be mastered by him,

17 OBSERVE. God is able, and will strengthen the weakest of his servants,
against Satan and all his Power.
Cor. 12.9.) And it is his glory to give power to the faint, and them that have
no might, Isa. 40.29. as,

1. Easily he may, having all power in his own hand, and therefore is at
liberty to bestow it where he pleases. So he can take away strength and power
from those to whom he has given it, and bestow it upon those that want it. And

2. It is fit he should do so, for the advancing of his own glory, that the
weak may rejoice in the Lord their strength, Psalm. 81.1. and 144.1. And the
strong man may be confounded before him, when the Lord is above him, even in
that wherein he glories, as Jethro speaks, Exodus 18.11.

Yea, but the woman had her hand deepest in the transgression, as who had, not
only by her example, but by her persuasions drawn her husband into this foul
act of rebellion against God, and yet the Lord is pleased to extend this great
favor unto her, and that in the first place. Whence

18. OBSERVE, The greatness of a man's sin is no bar unto Gods mercy.
David's adultery, seconded with the foul murder of Urijah, Peter's denial, and
forswearing of his Master, Paul's persecuting and blaspheming, 1 Timothy 1.13. and
promises pardon to every sin and blasphemy, unless it be against the holy
Ghost, Mat. 12.31. And this he does,

1. Because both his mercy and Christ's satisfaction infinitely exceed the
proportion of any sin, Romans 5.20.

2. That the riches of Gods mercy, and free grace, might the more be magnified,
when such multitudes of heinous sins are pardoned, which is that at which God
chiefly aims.

This is Gods large promise to the woman, but this is not all, the Lord is
pleased to extend the same mercy to her issue too, and tells her, that her seed
shall tread in her steps, and stand out in defiance, and continue this enmity
against Satan and all his seed. Whence

19 OBSERVE, Gods mercies are not only freely bestowed on the godly, but are
extended to their posterity after them.
Abraham, which included his posterity too, Genesis 17.7. In renewing it with Noah
Genes. 9.9. In entailing the Kingdom upon David's posterity, Psalm. 89.29. thus
he deals with all his people, Deuteronomy 30.6. whom he takes into Covenant with him,
and their posterity after them; yea, we see the sanctions of the Law, both in
mercy and judgment, take in the posterity too, Exodus 20.5, 6. And it stands
with great reason, That seeing the good, or evil condition of the children, is
a blessing, or curse to the parents, God should thus discover to the world both
his Mercy and Justice, not only on the persons of those that please him, or
walk contrary to him, but on their posterity after them, that his different
dispensations might be both the more observable at present, and the better
remembered to posterity, when the examples of both are made known by this
means, to succeeding ages.

Let all men seek the good and advancement of their children, by interessing
themselves in the Covenant with God, and continuing faithful therein, that God
may be also the God of their seed after them, as he engages himself to be,
under the condition expressed to David, Psalm. 89.30. if they also walk in
obedience before God. Otherwise, God cuts off the revolting issue of the best
Parents, as appears in the examples of Cain, Cham, Ishmael, Esau, and diverse
others, so that Parents, that desire their posterity may enjoy this large
privilege, to be included in the Covenant, must perform that which God
commends in Abraham, Genesis 18.19. to command their children to walk in the way
of the Lord; by the benefit of this Covenant they have a fountain of all
happiness, and that for eternity.

Let our mercies be like unto Gods, extended not only to the faithful, but to
their posterity after them; as David's was to Jonathans issue, 2 Samuel 9.1. and
let us make account of our own, and other men's issue, according to their
interest, left them by their Parents in Gods Covenant, desiring to match and
join in friendship, with the good children of godly Parents, as heirs of the
blessing, avoiding all inward society with the wicked seed of ungodly Parents,
as inheritors of their curse.

The woman's seed we ^e, is not all of the same nature or condition; for we have
here a division between seed and seed: part is called the woman's seed, and
another part the seed of the Serpent, though both the one and the other
descended of the woman, according to the flesh, although distinguished both in
disposition (for the one part hates the other) and in name; for the one part,
as we see, is termed the seed of the woman, and the other the seed of the
Serpent, and this promise of sanctification belongs only to that seed, which
is called the woman's seed, which only shall persist in the hatred of Satan, and
of his ways. Whence

20 OBSERVE, The Promises of mercy and grace belong only to the holy seed.
Abraham's seed alone, Genesis 17.7. but besides to Isaac, his seed by Sarah, ver.
19. for Ishmael his son by the bond woman, must not inherit with Isaac, Genesis
21.10. nay, not to all Isaacs seed neither; profane Esau must be cut off, and
only Jacob loved, and the other hated, Romans 9.13. only the seed of Israel must
be Gods peculiar treasure, though the earth be his, Exodus 19.5. and known (that
is, acknowledged and owned) by him, of all the families of the earth, Amos 3.2.
yea, only the godly of that people, are accounted for the true seed, such as
were Jews inwardly; the rest, the name of a Jew, and the outward circumcision
profits not at all, Romans 2.25. In one word, the Promise of grace and glory,
belongs unto those that God has given to his Son Christ, and to them only,
John 17.2, 9. so that he is the Savior only of his own body; Ephesians. 5.23.

Now in that only those, which join with the woman in this holy enmity against
Satan, are here termed the woman's seed, and the rest that join with Satan are
termed his seed,

21. OBSERVE Only godly children are worthy to be called and accounted children.
Isaac alone shall Abraham's seed be called, Genesis 21.12. and he only is truly a
Jew, which is one inwardly, circumcised in the heart as well as in the flesh,
Romans 2.29. and the children, not of the flesh, but of the Promise, are they
that are to be accounted for seed, Romans 9.8. the rest are children of the
forcerers, and of the adulterer, and the whore Isa. 57.3. as, on the other
side, they that are no children by natural descent, become children by walking
in the steps of the faith of Abraham, Romans 4.12. good reason they should never
be accounted for the seed of a godly Parent,

1. That have in them nothing of the Parents best part, the Image of Christ,
after which he is renewed in holiness.

2. Nor with whom Parents can have any ^^ward communion, or any true comfort in
them, or profitable service by them here, nor can at all enjoy them hereafter;
when the one shall be a Citizen in Heaven, and the other a Firebrand in hell.
So that a good man must not reckon his children by their number, but by their
grace and holiness. Those amongst them that are wicked, are none of his.

The rest of the woman's seed according to the flesh (for the image of Satan,
which they bear, and wherein they resemble him, as a child does the Parents)
are termed his seed, for the resemblance that they carry of his nature. For
under the seed of the Serpent, that is, of Satan, in this place are
comprehended not only all the devils, (who though they come not of Lucifer, the
Prince of devils, by natural propagation, yet resemble him in their
disposition, and may not improperly be termed his seed) but besides, all such
wicked men, as are drawn in by him, to take part with him against God, in
hating and persecuting his servants, and in submitting them selves to serve
him, and to be guided in all things by him to do and fulfill his Will. Whence

22. OBSERVE, Wicked men be the devils children in true account.
John 8.44. and the Apostle, 1 John 3.10. terms all wicked men. And St. Paul
gives that name to Elymas, in particular, Acts 13.10. so indeed they may be
judged to be,

1. Because Satan's seed abides in them, that is, those false principles which
Satan has infused into them, and wherewith he strongly possesses their
hearts, which the Apostle calls strong holds and high imaginations, 2 Cor.
10.4. according to which they resemble his nature, as children do the
disposition of their Parents.

2. Because they willingly serve him, as a son either does, or ought to do his
father, Mal. 3.17. walking according to him, Ephesians. 2.2. doing his works, and
fulfilling his will and lusts, by which mark our Savior proves the Jews that
persecuted him to be Satan's children, John 8.44. so that the condition of such
persons, must needs be extremely both base and miserable: which as it may
justly move all wise men, both to hate and avoid them, as so many young devils;
so it ought to turn our envying at them (to which we are too prone) into
mourning and lamenting for them, as so many miserable wretches, who instead of
the Image of God, have upon them the image of Satan, which abaseth them below
the basest of all creatures.

Between this bastard seed, and the true seed of the woman, God has decreed
perpetual enmity, which neither can nor shall be ended, but in the final
destruction of Satan and his cursed feed, who shall not leave to hate, fight
against the godly, till they leave to be. Whence

23. OBSERVE. There is and shall be irreconcilable hatred and enmity, between
the godly and the wicked men of the world.
Prove. 27.27. See ver. 1. Obs. 2. in the Use.

24. OBSERVE. Enmity and malice against godly men, is an evident mark of a
child of the devil.
John 8.40. and Saint John, 1 John 3.10. tells us, that this manifests men to
be the children of Satan, because they love not their brethren, as Cain loved
not Abel, but hated and slew him upon no other quarrel, but for goodness, ver.
12. as David's enemies hated him for the same cause, Psalm. 38.20. Indeed when
they make the goodness of those whom they hate, the ground of their hatred,
they express the image of Satan in them to the life. I grant, they pretend to
hate no man for good or goodness, but for some evil, which they pretend they
find to be in them (so the Jews excuse themselves to our Savior Christ, John
10.33.) But when they neither hate, nor avoid, nor abhor in themselves or
other men, that hypocrisy, pride, covetousness, censorious spirits, for which
they pretend to hate the godly, besides other fouler and grosser sins, even
against the light of Nature, which either themselves live in, or else they
tolerate in their friends, they do clearly convince themselves, that the
pretended causes of their hatred, are but cloakes of their malice, which is
truly raised in them, by the contrariety of their nature to that which is good,
which because they abhor, they hate all those in whom they find it.

We have hitherto taken notice of the enmity that God put between Satan and the
woman, and between his seed, and the seed of the woman. This inward enmity
breaks out at last into open wars, wherein Christ (who is specially pointed
at in the seed of the woman) shows himself on the behalf of his children, and
undertakes the quarrel, and for them subdues Satan, and breaks and crusheth in
pieces all his power, yet not without some wounds received by the hand of
Satan, both in his own person, and in the faithful, who are his seed, and
members of his body. This indeed happened to our Savior in his own person, in
the days of his flesh, when he took on him our nature, and became the seed of
the woman, as he was indeed, and is so termed by God himself in this place.
Whence

25. OBSERVE, Christ is truly the woman's seed.
John 1.14. Mediately, through many descents, of the seed of David, Romans 1.3.
but immediately, made only of a woman, Gal. 4.4. not the natural way of
generation, after the manner of other men, but by the Power of the Holy Ghost
over-shadowing the blessed Virgin, but in all other things, sin only
excepted, made like unto his brethren, (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.17.) and
thus far it pleased him to abase himself.

1. That thereby being made under the Law, (which was given to the whole nature
of man) he might in our nature fulfill it for us Gal. 4.5.

2. That he might in the same nature suffer, and make satisfaction for our
sins, which as God he could not do, becoming a curse for us, Gal. 3.13.

3. That he might take (that is, that we might be assured that he does take)
compassion of our infirmities, whereof he had experience in his own person,
Heb. 2.17, 18.

4. That he might join us unto God, by taking on him a middle Person, and
becoming both God and man.

5. That in our nature he might conquer Satan, death and hell, and take
possession of Heaven for us, as himself affirms he would do, John 14.2, 3.

Christ now, becoming the seed of the woman, by taking the substance of his
flesh from her body, and therewithal, uniting all the faithful with him, into
one body, whereof he is the Head, undertakes the war against Satan, wherein, as
in all wars it happens, there are wounds on both sides, those of Christ and his
members without danger, as lighting only on the heel; but Satan's, mortal. Let
us then consider them, first as they light upon Christ in his own Person, and
then as they light upon his members. And

26 OBSERVE, Christ, in the days of his flesh was, in his own Person, wounded
and bruised by Satan, and his instruments.
John 8.41, 44. but is more especially manifested, by Satan's actual possessing
of Judas, who, as we know, contrived the plot, and had the greatest hand in the
acting of the means, by which our Savior was brought at last to his death,
John 13.27. Luke 22.3.

Let none of Gods children, either hope to escape persecutions, seeing the
servant is not greater then his Master, Mat. 10.25. or be much troubled at them.

1. Having Christ himself, and so many holy persons, of whom the world is not
worthy, our companions in them.

2. Seeing they are sanctified in Christ's person.

3. And our selves are by them made conformable to him, which is the head,
Phil. 3.10. according to Gods own decree, Romans 8.29.

4. Who can easily, and will certainly cause all such persecutions to work
together to our good, Romans 8.28. making use of them to purge out our sins at
present, Isa. 29.9. to make us more pliable to Gods Will, and careful of
performing our duty, Psalm. 119.67, 71. more frequent and fervent in prayer, and
the like.

5. And in them gives us more experience of his love, 2 Cor. 1.5. and comfort
in the midst of them, Romans 5.3. besides the increasing of our reward hereafter.

This bruising of Christ's heel, we see, is also a part of Gods decree, for
when God says it shall be so, we cannot deny but he decreed it. Whence

27 OBSERVE, Christ suffered nothing in his person, but what God himself had
before determined and decreed.
Peter tells us in express terms, that all that he suffered from Judas his
betraying of him, till he was crucified, was determined by the counsel and
foreknowledge of God, Acts 2.23. and 4.27, 28. much more were the agonies of
his soul, wherein he wrestled with the wrath of God, determined by God, seeing
he laid them on him by his own hand. For it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and
to put him to grief, (says the Prophet) Isa. 53.^0.

1. Neither indeed was it possible, for any evil to befall him, but that which
God had not determined to bring upon him, seeing there is no evil in the city
which he has not done, Amos 5.6.

2. Neither have we any other ground of strong consolation to our selves, in
Christ's sufferings, but from hence, that as he willingly poured out his soul
to make it an offering for sin, Isa. 53.10. so he did it by the will and
counsel of his Father, who therefore cannot but accept that ransom which
himself had appointed.

But this wound of Christ's was only in his heel, which therefore touched not
his life, seeing it came not near to any vital part, so that Christ, though he
was bruised in that conflict, yet was not overcome or destroyed by Satan, but
survived, and his life remained whole in him still. Whence

28 OBSERVE, Though Satan by Gods permission wounded our Savior Christ, yet he
could not conquer or destroy him.
Psalm. 16.10. (for then we had been yet in our sins, 1 Cor. 15.17. and so the
counsel and purpose of God concerning man's redemption, which was the only thing
intended in the sufferings of Christ, had been wholly frustrated.) Nor was it
possible that Christ should be held under by death, Acts 2.24. seeing he was
able by the Power of his Godhead, to take up his life again as easily, as he
willingly laid it down, as himself affirms, John 10.18.

But this bruising of Christ's Head, implies not only the sufferings of Christ,
in his humane Nature, in his own Person, but withal the afflictions of his
members, which are also called the afflictions of Christ, Col. 1.24. so that we
see throughout this whole Promise, Christ and his members are spoken of as one.
It is One seed, betwixt which and Satan God will put this enmity, that is,
Christ, and all that are Christ's, and the bruising of Christ's heel, is the
afflicting of him, and of his children. Whence

29 OBSERVE, Christ, and all that are members of his body are one.
Ephesians. 2.20, 21. one vine, John 15.5. one body, 1 Cor. 12.27. in so much, that
the Church is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. The reasons may be,

1. God, who is One, delights in unity, which he therefore aims at in his
Church, Job 17.22, 23.) as being nearest to perfection.

2. By this means he can most easily communicate unto them all things, both
his graces, Ephesians 4.15.16. and merits, both of his sufferings and righteousness.

3. And can likewise most easily rule and govern it, as the whole body, we see,
is easily guided by the Head.

First, let it comfort all Christ's members,

1. In their advancement to be made members of Christ, and thereby sons of God.

2. In respect of their security, Ephesians. 5.23. Zach. 2.8.

3. In their assurance of supply, in all manner of blessings, both spiritual
and temporal, and that for eternity.

Secondly, let it fill the hearts of all those that persecute Christ in his
members, with fear and trembling, wherewith Christ terrifies Paul from heaven,
Acts 9.4, 5. wherein they discover

1. Their impiety, that take up arms against Christ himself.

2. Their folly, as being assured to be foiled, and utterly ruined at the last.

Thirdly, let it move us to be zealous for Christ our Husband, nay, our Head,
as Elijah was for God, 1 Kings 19.10. and David, Psalm. 119.139.

1. For his honor, Psalm. 69.9.

2. For his children, 2 Cor. 11.29.

3. For his truth, Jude 3. sensible of any evil done unto any of these, see
Psalm. 119.158. and rejoicing in their advancement.

Fourthly, let us that draw so near unto Christ, walk worthy of him in all holy
conversation,

1. Because he will be sanctified in all that come near him, Levit: 10.3.

2. Because the scandals of our sins reflect upon him, Romans 2.24.

It has been noted, that the bruising of Christ's heel, implies the sufferings
of Christ in his members, as well as in his own Person, and both of them by
Gods decree. Whence

30. OBSERVE The members of Christ, may, and shall suffer by the malice of
Satan and of his instruments.
Mat. 24.9. and Rev. 2.10. and all experience makes it good, Hebrews 11.36,
37. Reasons

1. Satan's power, Ephesians. 6.12. when God lets loose the reins to him, as is
manifest in Jobs sufferings, Job 1. and 2. joined with malice and sedulity, 1
Pet. 5.8.

2. Gods Will and Decree, and that

First, for his own honor diverse ways.

1. To manifest his childrens sincerity and faithfulness in cleaving to him,
trusting in him, Job 13.15. and serving him cheerfully, Acts 20.24.
notwithstanding all the afflictions that befall them.

2. To declare his own Power, in supporting and preserving his servants in the
midst of their trials, like the three children in the fiery furnace.

Secondly, he causes those afflictions to turn to the good of his children.

1. To keep their hearts low, 2 Cor. 12.7.

2. To make us thereby more watchful over our ways.

3. To increase our reward hereafter.

Let not us then be discouraged by our sufferings, as David was to his great
hazard, Psalm. 73.13. much less be so offended by them, as to forsake our way,
with those resembled by the stony ground, Mat. 13.21. seeing we have therein

1. Christ for our companion.

2. The afflictions themselves sanctified in his Person.

3. Ordered by the counsel of God for our good, Romans 8.28.

4. And recompensed at length with a far more excellent weight of glory, 2
Cor. 4.17.

Secondly, expect and prepare for trials, seeing we know they are,

1. Certain, 2 Timothy 3.12. as being decreed by God himself.

2. In themselves unpleasant to flesh and blood, Heb. 12.11.

3. And dangerous, if we are discouraged by them. The best preparation against
it is

1. To make sure of Christ, and in him of eternal life.

2. In all things keep a good conscience, 1 Pet. 3.16. that we may have no
other burden upon us, but the affliction it self.

3. Stand loose from the world, see 2 Timothy 2.3, 4.

4. Join in society and fellowship with the godly, Ps. 119.63. who may both
advise and encourage us.

But that which may be unto us instead of all comforts, in these combats of
ours with Satan and his instruments, is this, that Jesus Christ himself is
engaged in the cause, and undertakes the quarrel in our behalf. The seed of the
woman, that is, Christ, not only enters into the combat against Satan, but
prevails in it, and in the issue breaks the Serpents head, that is, wounds
him, and that mortally and irrecoverably. Whence

31 OBSERVE, Christ himself in his own Person, is he that takes up the quarrel
of his Church, against Satan and all his Agents.
Rev. 12.7. He is that strong man that enters into his house, and spoils him,
Mat. 12.29. it is he that undertakes all his instruments, the mighty men of the
world, and treads them down, Psalm. 110.6. Reason

1. There is none else that can undertake so great an adversory to prevail
against him, see, Isa. 59.16, 17, 18.

2. Neither is it fit that any, but he that is the head of the Church, should
be the Savior of his body, that when he alone is all things unto us, the
honor of all might return unto him alone, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. Besides, it
wonderfully establishes our hearts, when we know we are under the wings of a
Protector, not only mighty to save, Isa. 63.1. but ready to save and serve the
members of his own body, upon which grounds our Savior wills us to be without
fear, John 16.33. And lastly, it cannot but encourage us to adhere firmly to
him alone, as the children of Israel resolve to do unto God upon the same
ground, Josh. 24.17, 18.

Let it raise up, and support all the hearts of the godly, in a full assurance
of a certain and glorious conquest, over Satan and all his malignant
instruments at the last, in all their conflicts, Romans 8.37. seeing they have a
Protector, that in himself is mighty to save, Isa. 69.1. and that has received
from his father all fullness of Power in heaven and earth, Mat. 28.18. and that
for that purpose, that he might save his body the Church.

2. Let us undertake Christ's quarrel, as he undertakes ours, and engage our
selves for him, as he does for us, after the example of the Prophet David,
Psalm. 139.21, 22. especially Magistrates, See Psalm. 94.16. and 101.8. and every
man in his place contending for the common faith, Jude 3. standing up and
showing our selves on the behalf of his children, against all those that wrong
and persecute them.

In the next place, it will be fit to take notice of the kind of the wounds,
which they that are the woman's seed receive at Satan's hand, and they are like
the wounds that light upon our Savior in his own person, wounds in the heel;
painful, but not mortal, as coming near no vital part. Whence

32 OBSERVE, The wounds which the members of Christ receive by the hand of
Satan and his instruments, may be painful, but shall not be mortal.
Prove. 24.16. their enemies may afflict them, but shall never prevail against
them, no, though they take away their life, Luke 21.16, 18. because they cannot
be hurt of the second death, Revel. 2.11. Reason,

1. God who has set bounds unto the sea which it cannot pass, Job 38.11. can,
and does restrain the remainder of the wrath and rage of wicked men, Psalm.
76.10. yea, of Satan himself, as we see in Jobs example, Job 1.12. and 2.6.

2. And has given Christ a special charge to keep all those safe that God has
given him, John 6.39. and 10.28. and has also furnished him with sufficient
power for that purpose.

3. God should otherwise fail of his maine end, the honor that he has by his
Saints, whom he has chosen for himself, and taken near unto him, that they
might behold his glory, John 17.24. and continually sing his praise.

4. And besides, he must needs suffer in his honor another way, when he should
be conceived to be either unfaithful in not protecting his own servants; or
weak, as unable to secure those that depend upon him.

5. And upon those grounds men must needs be discouraged in giving up
themselves to his service, or to go on therein with cheerfulness and
confidence, which God requires, when they could have no assurance of safety in
his ways.

Let all those that are Christ's, labor to establish their hearts with such a
firm confidence in Gods protection for the securing of their estates, that
they may despise all the rage, power, and policies, yea all the effects of the
malice of Satan, or any of his instruments in those troubles and afflictions
wherewith they exercise the godly, as the three children despised the menaces
of the King of Babylon, Dan. 3.16, 17. and Saint Paul the prisons and bonds
that he knew he was to undergo, which moved him not at all, Act. 20.24. as
there is no cause why they should, seeing we know

1. That such things cannot hurt us.

2. But shall turn to our good, Romans 8 28. as David found by experience, Psalm.
119.71. and shall increase our reward hereafter, 2 Cor. 4.17.

3. And are but the effects, not so much of men's wrath or malice, as of Gods
truth and faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. And let this comfort support our hearts,
not only in our outward afflictions, but in inward temptations, and buffettings
of Satan which are more dangerous, where by though he foil us sometimes, yet
we know Christ has prayed for us that our faith shall not fail, Luke 22.32.
but we shall be kept by the power of God to salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

But that which above all the rest we should fix our eye upon in this combat
between the woman and her seed, and the Serpent and his seed, is the issue and
event of it, both the one and the other shall be bruised and wounded, but
differently. For the woman's seed shall be wounded only in the heel, far from
the fountain of life, and therefore without danger; but the wounds of Satan and
his seed shall light upon their head, which is the fountain of life and power:
from whence

33 OBSERVE, The combat between Christ, and Satan and his Instruments, shall
end at last in the Total and Final subduing of them, and breaking in pieces all
their power.
Romans 16.20. and Christ himself shall wound the heads over many Countries,
Psalm. 110.5, 6. This truth indeed will be most fully and clearly manifested to
all men, in that great day, when Satan himself, with his chief instruments,
shall be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. 20.10. but in the mean
time is evident enough to all that have eyes to see, in those conquests which
the godly obtain at present, as especially in spiritual combats, when they
hold fast their faith in the midst of the strongest assaults, as Job does,
Chap, 19.25. and even in outward afflictions, under which they are exercised,
in which they are more then conquerors, Romans 8.35. Reason,

1. He has no power in himself, more then any other creature, which
consequently may be taken away at Gods pleasure, and is limited by him in the
mean time, so that God may prevail over him when he will.

2. Satan is Gods enemy, Mat. 13.28, 39. and so are all his followers: now it
is Gods honor, that all his enemies should fall before him, Jer. 51.47, 48.
Rev. 19.22.

3. Neither is there any other means of establishing a full and perfect peace
in the Church of God, then by subduing those that trouble it.

Let the godly then raise up their spirits by fixing their eyes, not too much
upon the sharp conflicts which they endure at present, but upon the glorious
conquest which they shall obtain at last, when Satan shall be trodden down
under their feet, which is assured,

1. By Gods promise, Rev. 14.8. which is Yea, and Amen.

2. By the respect which he must needs have to his own honor, (infinitely
advanced by triumphing gloriously over all the powers of darkness, and dashing
his enemies in pieces, Exodus 15.6.) of which he is tender above all things;
Ezekiel. 36.22, 23.

3. And by his holiness, by which he hates all that work iniquity.

4. By his power which enables him to tread down all strength under his feet.

5. And by all experience, See Psalm. 106.45, 46.

The last thing to be taken notice of in Gods promise, is his expression, in
speaking of the woman's seed, which he still mentions as One; it shall be at
enmity with Satan, it shall be bruised, and it shall break Satan's head, that
is, the whole body which is comprised under that name of seeds, Christ himself,
with all his members; who have all of them as well an interest in this victory,
as they have had their share in the combat. Whence

34 OBSERVE, Christ's victory over Satan, though it be by, yet is not for
himself alone, but for all his members, who also subdue Satan in, and through
him.
Rev. 12.11. even to have overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2.13, 14. whom
therefore Christ will shortly tread under their feet, Romans 16.20. It is true in
general, that Christ as Mediator, has done nothing apart for himself, wherein
all his members have not an interest with him. Reason,

1. Christ needed no such combat with Satan, and victory over him, for any
thing that concerned himself; seeing he had in the beginning, cast him down
into hell, where he holds him still in chains of darkness, Luke 8.28. 2 Pet.
2.4.

2. The near relation which he has unto the Church, binds him to be the
Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23.

3. Unless his children had been delivered out of the hands of their enemies,
they could never either serve him in holiness, which is the end of their
redemption, Luke 1.74, 75. nor praise him and rejoice in him cordially, as they
ought to do, see Rev. 2.10.

A great encouragement to the godly, even to all the holy seed, to fight
resolutely against Satan and all his instruments, against our own corrupt lusts
within this body of death, (as the Apostle terms it,) Romans 7.24, 25. by the
power of the Spirit Gal. 5.24. and temptations and trials from without,
(cleaving still fast unto Christ, Romans 8.35.) over all which we are sure to
obtain a glorious conquest at the last, and having fought manfully under
Christ's banner, to receive the Crown of life, as is often promised, Rev. 2.11,
17. and 3.5, 12.

VERSE 16.
UNto the woman he said] She being the first in the transgression, is first in
the censure, as she had justly deserved.

I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and conception] That is, thy sorrow in
conceiving and breeding of children. Sorrow is pain, and weakness of body,
which makes the heart sad and heavy; and that such kind of pains and
weakness, and indisposition of body in women, does usually accompany the
conceiving and breeding of children, all experience shows: now though that
arise from a cause in nature, yet it is ordered and appointed by God himself,
in a course of Justice.

In sorrow shall thou bring forth children] That is, with bitter and sharp
pains, which most women generally suffer in their travail, many times to the
endangering, yea, as we see sometimes, to the loss of their lives: this is a
farther increase of the judgment; to sickness in conceiving, are added strong
pains in travail.

And thy desire shall be to thy husband] The same phrase the Lord uses to
express Abels subjection to his brother Cain, Genesis 4.7. which implies not only
subjection to him, in obeying his commands, but reaches farther, to the
bringing under unto him, the very desires of her heart, to be regulated by him,
so far that it should not be lawful for her to will, or desire what she her
self liked, but only what her husband should approve and allow. A just law
unto her, who having given way to her own inordinate fantasy, and appetite,
stirred up in her by the suggestions of Satan, had undone at once both her self
and husband. And yet a rule given her for her own good and safety, who having
by experience found how ill she was able to moderate her own desires, must
needs be the more secured, by having a Moderator set over her, by whose
wisdom, such inordinate motions of her mind, might at least be so far kept
in order, that they should not break out into outward Acts. Now it must needs
be, that the man being of the two, of the more noble sex, and the woman being
created both for him, and out of him, he must from the beginning have
preeminence above the woman; but that may seem to be at the first, rather a
priority in order, then a superiority in authority. And both of them being
endued with perfect understanding, and with wills and affections rightly
ordered every way, their government (if they had continued in that condition)
might, in all probability, have been carried on rather by consent, then by
prescription, when they should both of them desire and approve the same things,
in which case injunctions had been needless.

In examining this sentence, which God passes upon the woman first, and upon
the man afterward, it is worthy our observation, that in them both we find a
mixture of mercy, tempered with judgment. The woman shall endure pains, and
sorrow in conceiving, and in bringing forth children, but that necessarily
supposes, that she shall have children, and a posterity, and leave an issue
behind her, whereas in the extremity of Justice, she might, at that very
present, have been cut off from the earth, according to the curse threatened;
In the day when thou catest thereof, thou shall die the death. And as for the
man, his labor (which at first was unto him a recreation and delight) shall
now be hard and painful; but withal there is a promise enterlaced, that the
sweat of his face shall yield him bread, that is, means for the sustaining of
his life. And that we may more clearly discover the way of God herein, we must
in a special manner observe, that this sentence is pronounced against them
both, after the promise of Christ made unto them in the verse praecedent; in
whom God offered to our first Parents peace and reconciliation, although he lay
upon them these quick remembrances, both of their own sin, and of Gods just
displeasure against them for it. Whence

1 OBSERVE, All the afflictions of Christ's members are dispensed unto them
under the Covenant of Grace.
David, Psalm. 89.28. and after that chastens him in his posterity, when they
provoke him, and yet makes good his Covenant still, ver. 31, 32, 34. His
children must have afflictions in the world, Joh. 16.33. He receives us for
sons, and yet chastens us, Heb. 12.6. pardons David's sin, and yet lays his
hand upon his child, 2 Samuel 12. Whence the Prophet David acknowledges, that
he had afflicted him in faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. that is, both in sincere
love, and according to his Promise and Covenant which he had made with him.
Reasons may be,

1. All his dispensations toward the members of Christ, are by virtue of that
Covenant, by which he administers all things to them, having committed all
judgment to the son, Joh. 5.22.

2. Neither is the chastisement of his children any hinderance to that
Covenant, by which God has engaged himself to withold no good thing from us,
Psalm. 84.11. seeing they also work together to their good, Romans 8.28. as David
found by experience, Psalm. 119.71.

3. Otherwise God should lose his end, in chastening his own for their good,
seeing the good of all proceeds from the sanctifying of all in Christ, who is
like the tree that sweetened the bitter waters, Exodus 15.25.

4. God is no changeling, His mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon
those that fear him, Psalm. 103.17. neither does he as men, sometimes love, and
sometimes hate, but loves unto the end, those whom he loves, John 13.1. Always
taking pleasure in those that fear him, Psalm. 147.11. even when he is
displeased with their sins, Esaias 57.17, 18.

1. A singular consolation to the godly, when not only those afflictions, which
fall upon them by the will of God, are sanctified unto them in Christ, but
besides the Covenant of peace remains firm unto them. So that no evil shall
offend them, or interrupt their peace, Psalm 119.165. nor separate them from
the love of Christ, Romans 8.31.

2. Let no man judge of his estate by the afflictions that befall him in this
life, by which no man can guess, whether he be worthy of love or hatred, Eccl.
9.1. It was David's error, that he judged of his own condition, by his
chastisements, that lighted on him every morning, Psalm. 73.14. which besides
the present unquietness of his spirit, which much afflicted him, ver. 21. had
well nigh disheartened him in his course, verse. 13. Indeed the judging of our
estates upon such false grounds,

1. Cannot but at present deprive us of our comfort, in the assurance of Gods
love, and hinder our rejoicing in him.

2. Discourage us in our duties of his service.

3. Shake our faith.

4. And take away the fruits of our afflictions, reformation for time to come;
see Psalm 119.67. and experience of his love and faithfulness at present, Romans
5.3.

1. Let us then in the midst of our afflictions hold fast the grounds of our
hope, as Job does, in the midst of those sharp trials, wherewith God
exercised him, Job 19.25. and the Church of God, Lam. 3.21, 24.

2. Let us withal search our ways, Lam. 3.40. remembering that afflictions,
although they be not laid upon any of Gods children as a judgment for sin, yet
they are chastisements for sin, and are intended to us for reformation, Isa.
27.9. Seeing Gods displeasure is not against our persons, which he chastises
in love, Psalm. 119.75. but against our sins only, for which when we are
humbled; and break them off by repentance, we shall find the experience of
Gods relenting toward us, and readiness to abound in mercies, as in times
past, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

The sentence that was decreed by God against our Parents, was as the words
import, present death, Death in that day wherein they should eat of the fruit
forbidden. The extremity of this sentence (God now looking upon them in Christ)
is pleased to remit. Notwithstanding, he thinks fit to leave with them such
remembrances, both of their sin, and of his dislike of it, as might put them in
mind of it all the days of their lives. Whence

2 OBSERVE, Though God have, thorough Christ remitted to his children the
sentence of Death, yet he has not freed them from the afflictions of this life.
David complains of, Psalm. 38.5, 7. or in the soul and spirit, in much grief
and unquietness of mind, with which the godly are sometimes afflicted, Psalm.
77.2, 3. and that so far, that both their flesh and their heart may fail them,
Psalm. 73.26.

2. From without by Satan, and his instruments, which are great vexations,
Psalm. 143.4, 5. As our Savior himself tells us, that we shall have
tribulations in the world, Job 16.33. Reasons,

1. God has so much respect to his own honor, advanced,

First, by discovering the sincerity of his servants hearts, who might be
conceived to serve God, rather for hire then for love, as Satan casts it in
Gods teeth, Job 1.9, 10. but when they trust in him, and serve him cheerfully,
even when he slays them, Job 13.15. declare to the world, that they cleave unto
him for himself, and not for his rewards.

2. In his Justice, who spares not his own children, when they sin against him
(as himself declares, Psalm. 89.30.) as oftentimes they do, 1 Kings 8.46.

Thirdly, in his truth and faithfulness, when he preserves his own in the
midst of their trials (holds them still by their right hand, Psalm. 73.23.) as
he did the three children in the flames offire, Dan. 3.28.

2. It is for his childrens good many ways,

1. To humble them, Ier. 31.18, 19.

2. To reform them, as it did David, Psalm. 119.67. and ought to do us, Lam.
3.40.

3. To keep us close to God, as it did the same Prophet David, Ps. 73.28.

4. By making us weary of the world, in which we can enjoy no quietness; to
make us long for heaven, where all tears shall be wiped away from our eyes,
and there shall be no more sorrow nor pain, Rev. 21.4. but fullness of joy,
and rivers of pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.12.

1. It justly taxes all those that murmur, and are ready to blaspheme God, for
their plagues, Rev. 16.11. as all wicked men do. Or are offended at the
condition of a Christian, when tribulations and persecutions arise, as they are
that have no root in themselves, Mat. 13.21. or are discouraged in the course
of their profession, as the Prophet David was, Psalm. 73.13, 14. Or lastly, such
as judge men forsaken, or neglected by God, when they find them, even the
godly themselves, involved in the same calamities, with the rest of the world,
as they judged of David's case, Psalm. 71.11. and as the Barbarians judged of
Paul, Act. 28.4.

2. And ought to quiet the spirits of all that are godly, if they will consider,

1. Not so much what they suffer in their present afflictions, as from what
they are delivered, and have justly deserved.

2. And that the burden of afflictions, which seems so heavy, is in true
estimation both light and momentany, as the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 4.17.

3. And whatsoever they are, they are no effects of Gods hatred, but of his
love; and not exacted upon us as a debt for sin, which Christ has satisfied to
the full, but laid on us as chastisements for our good.

Now if we look on the manner of Gods dispensing these afflictions, which he
lays upon the offenders, in this sentence which he pronounces upon them, we
shall discover in them (as has already been observed) a mixture of mercy with
their judgment, a composition of bitter and sweet; The woman shall have joy
and comfort in her issue, but sharp pains and sorrow both in conceiving, and
bringing forth her children. And the man shall have the fruit of his labors,
for the sustaining of his life; but withal he shall buy it dearly, with the
sweat of his face, by much labor and weariness. Whence

3. OBSERVE. All the afflictions that God lays upon his children in this life,
have mixed with their bitterness some sweetness of mercy.
Psalm. 119.75.

Secondly, in the measure, Isa. 27.8. that he does not stir up all his wrath
against us, Psalm. 78.38.

Thirdly, in the issue, that even the afflictions themselves work to their
good, as David found by experience, and God has promised they shall do, Romans
8.28. Reason,

1. The satisfaction of Christ, who has taken upon him all the debt of our
sins, (which is pure wrath) and has paid that to the uttermost. So that the
dispensation of the chastisements, wherewith God is pleased to exercise his
children, must needs be out of Gods mercy, and not out of his Justice.

2. Otherwise Christ had redeemed his children in vain, if God should now
after he is reconciled fully unto us, and has pardoned all our sins, and
accepted a ransom, pour out his wrath upon us again, and thereby destroy us,
depriving us of the benefit of our Covenant, and himself of his own glory.

1. Let it support all our spirits, in the midst of our sharpest trials, as
it does the Churches, Lam. 3.28, 29, 31, 32. and raise them to a patient
waiting upon God, that seems for the present to hide his face from us, as the
Prophet resolves, Isa. 8.17. and the Psalmist does, Psalm. 130.3, 4, 5. in the
way of his judgments, Isa. 26.8. whose very wrath, having in it a mixture of
mercy and compassion, Jerem. 31.20. gives ground of assurance, that he will not
chide continually; Psalm. 103.9.10. seeing he has not dealt with us after our
sins, and does but wait, that he may be gracious unto us, Isa. 30.18.

2. Let us in all our afflictions, take notice of, and labor to search out,
that mercy that he mixeth with his judgments.

First, that the measure of them is neither proportioned to our sins, as Ezra
acknowledged Ezra 9.13. nor to the examples of the judgments poured out upon
the wicked; Isa. 27.7.

Secondly, neither do they work in us murmuring, and repining against God, but
humbleness of mind, shame of our selves, complaints of our sins, Mic 7.9. and
not of Gods justice, with Gain, Genesis 4.13. softness of spirit, and
tractablenesse to him, love of him, and desire to be at peace with him, Isa.
27.5.

Now, as in this sentence of God there is a mixture of mercy, to allay the
bitterness of the afflictions, so there is withal bitterness in the
affliction it self, sufficient to make the man and woman sensible of the smart
of Gods hand, as sharp pains and sorrows in conceiving and bringing forth
children, and hard labor to the man, in getting his bread, with the sweat of
his brows. Whence

4. OBSERVE, As there is some mixture of mercy, with the bitterness of the
afflictions of this life, so is there a mixture of bitterness with the
blessings of this life.
SOlomon found nothing of all that he had labored in, but vanity, and vexation
of spirit, Eccl. 2.11. and saw in enjoying wealth, sorrow, and wrath with
sickness, Eccl 5.17. labor in getting; for when the wise man tells us, that
in all labor there is profit, Prove. 14.23. he must necessarily imply that in
all profit there is labor: And care and fear in keeping, by reason of the
mutability of all outward things, (which Solomon elegantly expresses, by
comparing them to birds that have wings, Prove. 23.5.) besides the shortness of
their continuance, Prove. 27.24. Luke 12.20. sorrow in conceiving and bringing
forth children, trouble in breeding and bringing them up, fear of them what
way they will take after they are bred: yea, even in spiritual things we have
always a mixture of joy and sorrow, confidence and fear. Reason

1. Because in us, with that good, which by grace is wrought in us, there is a
mixture of evil, which corrupts the sweetness of that good, which we might
enjoy in any blessing, as it happens in a body, wherein the taste is corrupted,
by ill humors; it mixeth some bitterness with the food which we take in,
though of it self it have a pleasant relish.

2. In this condition it is best for us that it should be so.

1. To make us sensible of sin, which has brought vanity upon us, and upon all
the creatures, Romans 8.20.

2. To weane us from this present world, and to provoke us to long after the
restitution, both of our selves, and the rest of the creatures, into a state of
perfection, see Romans 8.21.23.

3. It is sufficient, that after the enjoying of this state of imperfection,
for a short space, we shall be settled in a state of full perfection for all
eternity.

Let us use even the blessings of this life with fear, getting them sanctified
unto us, by the Word and Prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. and let us take off our hearts
from delighting in them, but labor to draw near unto God, who is the strength
of our heart, when all outward means shall fail us, and our portion for ever,
Psalm. 73.28.

The last clause in the woman's censure is, that she shall be subject to her
husband. Whence

5. OBSERVE It is the wives duty to be subject to the will and direction of her
husband.
Ephesians. 5.24. that is, every thing that is not limited by the rule of the Law of
God, but left to be ordered by Christian Prudence, which are things in their
own nature indifferent, so Sarah followed Abraham out of her own country to
Canaan, Genesis 12.5. obeyed his command, in making provision for the Angels, Gen
18.6. as for that particular direction of God to him, to hearken to her, Genesis
21.12. it extends no farther then such cases, wherein the wife advises what
God himself directs. Otherwise, when she counsels him to take his maid into
his bed, though God were pleased to wink at it, yet it bred her some trouble,
Genesis 16.2, 5. no marvel, if Jezabels overruling of her husband Ahab, in the
matter of Naboths vineyard, sped much worse, and proved the ruin both of her
and her husband, and the whole family, 1 Kings 21.7, 22, 23, 25. Reason

1. There must be order in every society, without which there follows division,
and thereupon confusion, Mark 3.25. Now the fittest to govern in the family is
the husband, as being of the two the more worthy person, every way, seeing the
man was first created, and that after the image of God, the woman after the
image of the man, 1 Cor. 11.7.

2. And the woman created for the man, not the man for the woman, ver. 9. and
of his substance, being framed of a rib taken out of his body, ver. 8.

3. The woman was first in the transgression, and seduced her husband, 1 Timothy
2.14.

4. And the man usually is, and always ought to be endued with the best
abilities for Government.

Let all wives learn to know and content themselves with the places wherein God
has set them.

1. As being prescribed by God himself, who has power to dispose of his own
creatures, and who is obeyed in the person of the husband. See Ephesians. 5.22. as he
is by a servant in the person of the Master, Ephesians. 6.7.

2. As easiest for the woman, seeing it is easier to obey, then to prescribe
and direct.

3. And is found in the event to be more safe; as Zipporah, by obeying her
husband in circumcising her child, saved his life, Exodus 4.24, 26.

4. And is but in matters of less moment, seeing in the grace of life, they
are both equal, 1 Pet. 3.7. and alike subject to God in his commands, so that
in matters of duty she obeys only the command of God, and not of man.

5. And this subjection is but for a short time, which makes any thing easy to
be borne.

6. And if it be conscionably performed, is recompensed with a reward
hereafter, as is servants obedience to their Masters, Ephesians 6.8.

The expression, in which God lays down the rule of this subjection, is not to
be passed by. Thy desire, says he, shall be to thy husband: which requires not
only an outward conformity to the husbands commands, but besides, an inward
subjection of the heart to his Will. Whence

6 OBSERVE. The subjection of the wife to the husband must be, not only in
outward obedience to his commands; but besides, in the inward affection of the
heart.
Ephesians. 5.33. and to yield subjection to him as to the Lord, Ephesians. 5, 22, 24.
which consists in laying aside her own wisdom, to receive directions from his
mouth, as God requires his people to obey him, in doing, not that which is
right in their own eyes, but what he shall command, Deuteronomy. 12.8. and in
renouncing her own will, as Peter did when he let down his net, upon Christ's
command, which otherwise he had no mind to do, Luke 5.5. Reasons

1. It is a duty to be performed to God, who will be served, not only with the
outward man, but with the heart, Col. 3.22, 23.

2. Else the subjection must needs be burdensome, and the services done
therein, like that of Zipporah, in circumcising her child, Exodus 4.25.

Let wives labor to submit to their husbands, not only out of necessity; but
with all cheerfulness conscionably, as they are exhorted, 1 Pet. 3.1. to which
end,

1. Let them abound in love toward their husbands, which makes all services
easy, Genesis 29.20. and cordial, Psalm. 119.167.

2. Let them learn self-denial, which makes one fit to serve another, with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.33.

3. Let them fix their eyes upon God, who has set them over them in his
stead, as the Apostle exhorts servants to do, Ephesians. 6.5, 6.

4. Look not at things present, but at the estate to come, when they shall,
both husband and wife, without any subordination, be both heirs together of the
grace of life.

VERSE 17.
ANd unto Adam he said] The last censure is upon the man; the last in the
transgression, and the least guilty of all the offenders, as being seduced by
his wife; but seeing his hand was in the sin, good reason be should also have
his share in the punishment.

Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife] And not respected my
Commandment, who had expressly forbidden thee the eating of that fruit, and
therein preferred her counsel before my direction. Now what persuasions his
wife used when she gave that fruit, is not expressed: probably they were such
as Satan had suggested unto her.

Cursed is the ground for thy sake] The earth in general, in which Adam was now
to live, being to be cast out of Paradise: this curse upon the earth, was the
weakening of the fructifying power thereof (as it is afterward expressed) and
that for his sake, that is, both for his sin, which made him unworthy of any
blessing by any creature, and for his punishment, who was to be sustained by
the fruits which the earth was to bring forth.

In sorrow shall thou eat of it] That is, an hard labor, causing weariness
and grief thereby. We see still a mixture of mercy with the judgment, a curse
with a promise annexed to it. His labor should be hard, but yet it should
produce him means for the susteining of his life; he should eat by his labor.

All the days of thy life] To put thee in mind continually of thy sin, and my
justice: yet even in this clause there is some comfort, that those labors and
sorrows thereby shall determine with this ^ort life.

The first circumstance to be taken notice of in this censure, is the Author of
this curse, upon the earth: it proceeds, as we see, from the Decree of God
himself. Whence

1 OBSERVE, The curse, as well as the blessing upon all creatures, proceeds
from the Will and Decree of God alone.
Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26. he makes barren lands fruitful, and fruitful lands barren,
Psalm. 107.33, 34. Bozrah shall be a desolation if God swear it, Jer. 49.13.
Nay, according to his will, both the bodies and souls of men, are either
barren or fruitful, Numb. 5.27. Isa. 29.14. Reason,

1. It can be no otherwise, seeing in him all things consist, Col. 1.17. and
have their being, Act. 17.28.

2. And it is fit it should be so, that all men might fear before him, Jerem.
5.24. depend on him. Jer. 14.22. and praise him alone, Psalm. 107.32, 33, 34.

3. And it is every way best for us, who know that God judges righteously,
Psalm. 67.4. and that those that fear him shall want no good thing. Psalm. 84.1.

First, let us learn, when we want any needful blessing, or fear any curse
upon the earth or other creatures, upon our own persons, our bodies, or souls;
to look up unto him, who works all things according to the counsel of his own
will. And

1. Walk uprightly before him, which interests us in all his blessings, Psalm.
84.11.

2. Pray to him upon all occasions, Phil. 4.6.

Secondly, if we enjoy any good by any creature, if our grounds be fruitful,
our flocks, our wives; if we our selves be fruitful in holiness; let us
acknowledge all to him with thankfulness, that bestows all out of his own
bounty.

This curse of God upon the earth, is for Adams sake, that is, both for his
sin, and for his punishment; so that we see, not only from whom, but for what
the curse comes upon the creatures. Whence

2 OBSERVE, It is our own sin that brings the curse of God upon all that we
enjoy.
Psalm. 107.24. Lev. 26. D^ut. 28. and by sin only we keep off good things from
us, Jer. 5.25. Reason

1. Gods mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. and his hand in it self
is not shortened, Isa. 59.1. neither is there any thing that he hates but sin,
or for sin, Psalm. 5.4, 5.

2. And it is fit that God should so show his detestation of sin, by
manifesting his wrath every way, against such as provoke him thereby, as he did
in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and upon his own land: see Deuteronomy.
29.23, 25.

3. Those things which wicked men enjoy, are usually defiled by them, being
made instruments to the fulfilling of their lusts, and consequently are fit to
be partakers of the plague, as they are defiled with the sin.

Let it work our hearts to the detestation and abhorring of sin, with which
we see God to be so highly displeased, even God the faithful Creator, 1 Pet.
4.14. that ha^eth nothing that he has made, but as out of his overflowing
bounty he created all things, and delighted in them, when he had made them,
Genesis 1.31. so he cherishes them still, who consequently must needs be provoked
in a very high degree, when he turns to hate his own works, and to curse what
he ^ath blessed, as he dealt with the whole old world, Genesis 6.6, 7. and with
his own people, Jer. 11.17. and out of that detestation of sin, let it be our
care and endeavor, to break off all sinful courses, to avoid any famillarity
with those that are defiled in them, yea, to hate the very garment spotted with
the flesh: and if we have any delight in the fruitfulness of our grounds,
increase of our flocks, towardliness of our children, and desire the
prospering of any thing that we have; let us be careful to remove sin far from
our dwellings, lest it bring in such a curse upon all that we have, as is
described Zech. 5.4.

The curse that God lays, is upon the whole earth, that vast body, that man
can hardly measure, much less can command; upon this whole earth God
exercises his Authority. Whence

3 OBSERVE, The greatest of all creatures are under Gods command.
Psalm. 119.91. the sea, Prove. 8.29. Job. 38.10, 11. how much more the greatest
amongst the sons of men, even Kings themselves whom he commands, Psalm. 105.15.
yea, rules their very hearts, Prove. 21.1. Reason

1. They are all creatures, Jer. 14.22. even the work of his hand, Job 34.19.

2. He could not otherwise be an absolute Lord over all, Psalm. 103.19. if any
creature were out of his command.

Let no man fear any creature, Psalm. 46.2, 3. Isa. 51.12, 13. but God alone,
Jer. 5.22. and trust in him alone, Psalm. 146.3, 6. and obey his voice, whom the
winds and sea obey.

This curse which God here lays upon the earth, as it was occasioned by Adams
sin, so it was not the least part of his punishment; for whose relief and
comfort that fruitfulness was bestowed on the earth, at the first, by Gods
blessing upon it. Whence

4. OBSERVE. The curse of God upon the creatures is a part of man's punishment.
Lev. 26.18, 19, 20. all Pharaohs house is smitten for Pharaohs sake, Genesis
12.17. The plagues upon the waters of Egypt, destroying of the corn, vines and
other fruits, murrain amongst their cattle, and death of all their firstborn,
we know, were the plagues that God brought on Pharaoh and his people, for
hardening their hearts against him. The reasons

1. We have interest in them, so that their destruction is our loss.

2. Our subsistence is by them; so that to lose them, is to lose the means, by
which our lives should be supported.

Let such chastisements as light upon us in the fruits of the earth, the
murrain amongst our cattle, the destroying of our houses by fire, or any other
way, be a means to awaken our hearts, and to humble us under Gods hand, lest
he come nearer to us, and seize upon our persons.

The expression whereof the Lord makes use, in laying this curse upon Adam, is
not to be passed by without observation, In sorrow (says he) shall thou cate
of it, that is, in hard labor, which causes wearisome, painfulnesse, and
grief thereby, which make the life bitter. Whence

5 OBSERVE, Man's life in this world, is a life of pain and sorrow.
Solomon found it by his own experience, Eccl. 2.17. and observed it in others,
ver. 23. not only by our immoderate cares about the things of this life, which
cause some to eat in darkness all their days with much sorrow, Eccl. 5.17.
called therefore the bread of sorrows, Psalm. 127.2. but besides, by our
painful labors about them, as Jacob professes of the days of his life, that
they had been few and evil, Gen 47.9. unto which we may add many troubles from
without, with which men are diversely encumbered, Psalm. 71.20. and that not only
some, but men in general, Psalm. 90.10. Reason

1. To make us the more sensible of sin by our daily tasting the bitter
fruits of it.

2. To move to an holy delight, and earnest seeking after things that are
spiritual, the ways whereof are pleasant, and the paths peace, Prove. 3.17.
Psalm. 119.165.

Let no man be in love with this present condition, so far as to be unwilling
to change it, when God shall call him thereunto, but nourish in his heart, a
longing desire after heaven, with the Apostle and all the godly, Romans 8.23. 2
Cor. 5.2.

1. Waiting always with patience, till his change come, Job 14.14. with holy
Job, unless he be a person implied in some special service for the Church: in
which case, though Saint Paul desired to be dissolved, that he might be with
Christ; yet he moderated his longing, Phil. 1.23.

2. Only in the mean time, while God is pleased to continue us here, let it be
our care to improve our time to the best advantage, both to the Church of God
for the service thereof, and for the furthering of our own account against the
last day; that when we depart hence, we may have our hearts reviving, with
Saint Paul's comfortable expectation, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. and our Savior Christ's,
John 17.4, 5.

3. In the mean time, we may in a great measure temper the bitterness of our
present condition, with the sweetness of our communion with God, as David
does, Psalm. 73.23, 28.

In the next place, take notice of the term of the continuance of this curse,
that God here lays upon Adam: we see it endures and lies upon him for term of
his life. Whence

6 OBSERVE, The short pleasure of sin, draws after it a long, and lasting
punishment.
Isa. 66.24. Mat. 25.41, 46. and plagues of long continuance in this life, Jer.
23.40. reaching oftentimes to posterity, for many generations, as did that
curse which God pronounces against Amalek, Exodus 17.16. Such lasting
chastisements light sometimes upon the godly themselves, as upon David, 2 Samuel
12.10. Reason,

1. That God, who lives for ever, to plague those that hate him, as well as to
reward those that love him, is able to lay such punishments, it is evident.

2. And that he may do it, in a course of justice, is as clear, seeing sin
against an infinite Majesty, deserves no less then an infinite, that is, an
everlasting punishment.

3. And it is fit the punishment it self should be lasting, lest it should be
forgotten, Psalm. 59.11. and consequently become fruitless both unto our selves
and others.

Let us seriously consider this, when we are tempted to any act of sin.

1. That the pleasure in those actions is indeed no true, but only a seeming
pleasure, delightful indeed unto the sensual part for the present, but in the
end it bites like a Serpent, as Solomon speaks of wine, Prove. 23.32, and women,
Prove. 6.33.

2. And brings after it an everlasting reproach, Jer. 23.40.

3. And leaves no fruit behind it, Romans 6.21. Let men therefore be wise in the
beginning, lest they mourn at the later end, when there is no remedy.

That for which Adam must sweat and take so much pains, when all is done, is
but to get himself bread, and provisions for his life, out of the earth. Whence
we may remember what has been formerly observed, that

7 OBSERVE, Man's food is out of the earth.
Psalm. 104.14, 15. and as is our food, so is our clothing and houses, Job
4.19. Reason,

1. Such provisions are fittest to support our earthly Tabernacles.

2. God has ordered it so, to humble us, that we might be every way put in
mind how vile we are, which we are loath to acknowledge.

Let us then learn to abase our selves, having so many lively representations
of our own vileness, and not wax proud of our dainty fare, rich clothing,
sumptuous dwelling, which is but to glory in our shame, as we are too apt to
do, Phil. 3.19. which is both folly and impiety.

VERSE 18.
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee] And other
unprofitable and hurtful weeds, instead of useful and profitable food, which
Job accounts an heavy curse, Job 31.40. He means, that of it self the earth
should bring forth only such fruits, as experience shows us those grounds do
that are unmanured, Prove. 24.30. which the Lord threatens should be the
condition of his own land, when it should be emptied of inhabitants, Esaias 7.23,
25. So that if the earth yield any good and profitable food; man must get it by
hard labor. A punishment answerable to his sin; that as he had brought forth
unto God rebellion, instead of the fruits of obedience, and holiness, so the
earth should yield him thorns and thistles instead of food.

And thou shall eat the herb of the field] Not of Paradise from whence he was
to be cast out. The same grant which God had given man before, Genesis 1.29. being
forfeited by Adams rebellion, is here renewed by promise, as it is likewise to
Noah, after the flood, with some farther enlargement, Genesis 9.3.

1. OBSERVE, Thorns and thistles, and all unprofitable weeds, are the effect
of Gods curse upon man for sin.
Job wishes it might come on him as a curse, if he had walked wickedly, Job
31.40. It is the judgment which God threatens to bring upon his vineyard, by
which he shadows out the state of his people, Isa. 5.6. and in express terms,
upon the very land on which his rebellious people dwelt, Isa 7.23. Reason

1. Seeing all creatures are his servants, as David calls them, Psalm. 119.91.
he can bring them up, and plant them where he pleases, who does whatsoever he
will in heaven and earth, Psalm. 135.6.

2. Neither can God in respect to his own honor, do less injustice, then to
withhold his blessing from the creatures, that should be for our service, as we
withold from him, our service of obedience, which we owe him by our Covenant.

Now if we compare this curse, which God lays upon the earth for Adams sake,
with the sin for which he inflicts it; we have a fair ground from thence to

2 OBSERVE, As we are more or less serviceable unto God, so we may expect that
the creature shall be more or less serviceable unto us.
Deuteronomy. 28. Lev. 26. if we lay the blessings, and curses there promised and
denounced, to the duties and sins there commanded, and forbidden; See Psalm.
81.13, 16. Reason

1. Gods blessing upon the creatures, is that only by which they are made
useful unto us; now God in justice can do no less, then recompense all men
according to their deeds, Isa. 59.17, 18. Psalm. 62.12. and that not only in
that great day of judgment; but even at present, and in outward things: that
men may see and acknowledge it, as Psalm. 58.11.

2. Neither is there a means more effectual to prevail with men in general,
to walk in a course of obedience, then when they find all the creatures
against them in a course of rebellion.

Let it be one; though not the chief, of our motives to look carefully to our
ways, if we hope to have any comfort in any thing that we enjoy, or success
in any thing we take in hand. It is a motive by which Eliphaz persuades Job to
make his peace with God, that the creatures should be at peace with him, Job
5.23, 24. It is true, that the love of Christ should constrain a godly man and
his authority over his own creatures, especially his redeemed; yea, and his own
Covenant should compel him to walk in obedience, notwithstanding even the best
need encouragements, by experience, and that even in outward things, to hold on
in that course, which they find so profitable to them every way.

It is observable, that although Adam by his rebellion had forfeited that grant
of God, in which he bestowed on him the herb of the field for his food, yet he
is pleased here to renew it unto him, although with some abatement. Whence

3 OBSERVE, God makes good his promises, by which he has engaged himself unto
us, though we fail in our Covenant by which we are engaged unto him.
Psalm. 78.37, 38. and 89.32, 33, 34. 2 Timothy 2.13. Reason

1. Gods promises are founded upon his own goodness, and truth which cannot
fail, Psalm. 119.89, 90, 160.

2. God knew beforehand what we are, even before he engaged himself unto us;
See Psalm. 103.13, 14.

3. And if he should take advantage of every forfeiture; he must necessarily
undo his children, who trespass daily against him.

4. And has therefore given his son Christ to take away our sins; if we hold
fast the Covenant, and do not wickedly depart from it though we fail many
ways, 1 John 2.1, 2.

1. Let this kind dealing of God with us, be an encouragement unto us, to go
on cheerfully in his service, being so good a master, nay more kind then a
tender father, Psalm. 103.13. Isa 49.15. (howsoever wicked men blasphemously
traduce and slander him, Mat. 25.24.) and whose service we find so easy, 1
John 5.3. Honorable and fruitful every way, See Romans 6.21, 22. both at
present, and hereafter; howsoever wicked men, who are haters of God, would
persuade the world, that there is nothing to be gained by it, Job 21.15.

2. And let us deal with our brethren as God deals with us. 1. Look upon
their errors and failings with compassion, as the Lord looks upon ours, as
Christ represents it in that parable, Mat. 18.23. and thereupon continue our
love toward them, and care of their good, if they fail in their duties toward
us.

Notwithstanding if we compare this renewed grant, with that first grant, which
God makes unto Adam, Genesis 1.29. we shall find that although the same be
granted in substance, yet it is with a great abatement, in the extent of it.
There he grants him all herbs and fruits upon the face of the earth, within
which, Paradise must be necessarily included; here he grants only the herb of
the field, he means without Paradise, out of which Paradise is excluded, from
whence he was now to be cast out; Now although Paradise was but a small spot of
ground, in comparison of the world, yet weighing the variety and choicenesse of
the fruits thereof, the loss was very great, in comparison of that which was
now left unto him. Whence

4 OBSERVE, Though God when he pardons our sin, restores us his blessings
which we forfeited thereby, yet we enjoy them with some diminution and
abatement.
Adam enjoyed before his fall: which freed him from sicknesses and infirmities.
We are restored to the dominion of the creatures, but those subject to vanity,
Romans 8.20. neither so fully submitting, nor so useful and serviceable unto us,
as they were in their first Creation. In the inward man it appears much more
evidently; we are indeed renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that
created us, Col. 3.10. but that is in part only, 1 Cor. 13.12. whence Agur
complains of himself, that he was even brutish, Prove. 30.2. And our new man
is created after God in righteousness and holiness; but so imperfect, and
with such a mixture of corruption, that Saint Paul complains, that he carried
about him a body of death, Romans 7.24. so that we have all of us just cause to
acknowledge that we are all as an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6. Reason,

1. It was needful to have every way some continual remembrance of sin, that we
might be the more abased in our selves, and more sensible of Gods mercy, both
in supporting us in our weakness, and pardoning us in our failings.

2. It is besides for Gods honor, that there should remain some monument both
of his justice and mercy.

Let it then move every one of us, to make use of the sicknesses, and
distempers of the body; of the unserviceablenesse of the creatures, much more
of the stirring of lusts within us, rebelling against the law of our minds,
and leading us captive unto sin, yea, of the blindness and ignorance of our
hearts, to bring our selves to greater detestation of sin, a more careful watch
over our own hearts, that we may avoid or suppress all motions thereunto, a
greater abasement and humbling of ourselvs in the sight of God, that we may
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and lastly may be stirred up
to a more earnest longing after heaven, where sin being removed from us, we
shall enjoy all things in their full perfection.

VERSE 19.
IN the sweat of thy face] With hard labor which causes both sweat and
weariness, whereas his work in Paradise was easy and pleasant. This
painfulnesse in labor must needs be a consequent of Gods curse upon the earth,
which thereby becoming more barren in it self, required the more labor to make
it fruitful. So that the earth which of it self should be apt to bring forth
nothing but briars and thorns, with hard labor should yield him bread; this
clause has in it both a precept and a promise.

Till thou return to the ground] A phrase that both expresses the continuance
of his labor which should not end but with his life: and withal pronounces
the sentence of death upon him, and the corruption of his body after death.
This sentence although pronounced against the man alone, yet comprehends the
woman too, who was to be mortal as well as he; as the former injunction of
painful labor is indifferently extended unto both, the one and the other, and
all their posterity, as all experience makes it evident.

For out of it thou wast taken] Thus God manifests his justice in the censure,
which reduces man to no worse condition then he was in at first. So righteous
is God in all his judgments, and so careful to show us the equity of them. Now
the woman was not framed out of the dust of the earth immediately; yet seeing
the man was made of dust, it must needs follow, that the woman who was taken
out of him, could be made of no better substance, and therefore may be truly
said to be taken out of the dust as well as the man.

For dust thou art] As Psalm. 103.14. Eccles. 12.7. And such are all the sons
of Adam, though clothed with skin and flesh, and senced with bones and sinews.
This indeed is the matter of all men's bodies, whatsoever form God is pleased
to grace them withal.

And unto dust shall thou return.] Flesh and bones, and all as experience
shows, and so to continue till God raise us at the last day, to cloth us with
glory and immortality.

To begin with the first Clause, man's labor in the sweat of his face. We may

1 OBSERVE. Man's employment in this life, is in wearisom and painful labors.
Eccl. 1.8. But man's task especially is to labor with his hand, Ephesians. 4.28. 1
These. 4.11. which if he do not, by the Apostles censure, 2 These. 3.10, 12. he
must not eat. (It is true, that some callings, as Ministers and Magistrates
employ the mind most, and not so much the body; but those employments (as all
experience teaches) are of all the rest most wearisome and painful.) Reason,

1. The curse that is laid upon the earth for sin, by which without hard
labor it yields no fruits for the sustaining of man's life.

2. The Lord has so appointed it for man's good.

1. To humble him by leaving him that remembrance of sin.

2. To make him long for heaven, Romans 8.22, 23.

3. To preserve the body in health, See Eccl. 5.12. and to keep the mind in
frame, 2 These. 2.11. which unless it be exercised in useful and profitable
things, is filled with vain and evil thoughts.

First, this reproves all idle sloathful persons, living without callings, or
idle in their callings, or in unprofitable callings. Who are all moaths,

1. In the State, Prove. 18.9.

2. To themselves in their own estates, Prove. 20.4.

3. Enemies to their bodies and their minds; both which, idleness corrupts and
weakens.

Secondly, and should stir us up to diligence in such employments as we are
called unto.

1. In obedience to Gods command.

2. And as therein serving God, and not men, Ephesians. 6.7.

3. And being profitable, Prove. 14.23. to our selves, Prove. 10.4. and others,
Prove. 21.5.

4. And thereby procuring us a just title to what we possess, 2 These. 3.12.
Only,

1. Labor that which is good, Ephesians. 4.28.

2. And with a desire to be profitable to community, Psalm. 112.5, 9. 1 Timothy
6.18.

3. In a way of justice, 1 These. 4.6.

4. Depending on God for his blessing on our labors, which only makes them
prosperous, Psalm. 127.2.

Thirdly, long for heaven, where we shall cease from all our labors, Rev.
14.1^.

Now if we observe this commandment, we may take notice of a promise annexed or
implied at least; Adam must sweat, but thereby he shall have bread to eat. So
that we may thence in general

2 OBSERVE, There is profit in all the duties which God enjoins us.
Mat. 5.16. (though to speak properly, God is not profited by our services, Job
35.7.) and good to men, Job 35.8. But specially to our selves, Deuteronomy. 6.24. and
10.13. who have by our labors sufficiency, and in exercising our selves in
other duties, our fruit in holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.22.
yea, even in giving and exercising duties of mercy, there is profit as well to
our selves as to others, Isaiah 32.8. Proverbs 11.24, 25. Reasons,

1. God who is in himself all-sufficient, and perfectly blessed, neither needs,
nor can be profited by any creature.

2. Neither is it for his honor, that his service should be unprofitable, as
wicked men unjustly slander him, Job 21.15.

3. Neither could his servants have otherwise any encouragement to go on in his
service with cheerfulness, which God requires, Deuteronomy. 28.47. and delights in, 2
Cor. 9.7.

First, it manifests the folly of wicked men joined with fearful impiety, who
complain of Gods government, Mat. 25.24. as hard and rigorous; esteem his
laws, bands and coards, Psalm. 2.3. and reject them with the Capernaits, Joh.
6.60. And in the mean time subject themselves to the yoke of Satan, who seeks
their destruction, whose ways yield them no fruit but shame, Romans 6.21. and
profit them not at all, Job 33.27. as themselves will be forced to acknowledge,
when it will be too late to help it.

Secondly, make choice of Gods Commandments with David, Psalm. 119.30. and that,

1. Upon good grounds, Psalm. 119.96. and 128.

2. And with a firm resolution to keep them, Psalm. 119.106.

1. As more easy, Mat. 11.30. to a renewed heart.

2. More honorable, Prove. 12.26. both in respect of the Commander, and of the
Commandment.

3. And more profitable both at present and hereafter, Romans 6.22.

4. And more full of peace and comfort, Psalm. 119.165. The means to bring our
hearts (which by nature cannot submit unto Gods yoke, Romans 8.7.) to make choice
of, and cleave to his Commandments, are,

1. To beg at Gods hands both wisdom to understand his Law, Psalm. 119.18. and a
renewed heart to incline to it, ver 36.

2. To compare the ways of sin with the ways of righteousness, both in the
present practice, and in the issue of both at last.

Thirdly, let all that are godly serve the Lord in all duties commanded by him
with cheerfulness; it should be joy to the just to do judgment, Prove. 21.15.
Gods Commandments should be sweeter to our taste then honey, Psalm. 119.103. our
delights, ver. 143. our joy, v. 62. This cheerfulness our hearts may be
wrought unto,

1. By the love of God which makes all services easy, Gen 29.20.

2. And of the Law it self for the purity of it, Psalm. 119.140. the
righteousness and saithfulnesse of it, v. 138. the wonderful perfection and
admirable effects of it. Psalm. 19.7, 8.

3. For the reward set before us hereafter, and peace which our obedience to
the Law brings at present; See Psalm. 73.24. and 119.165. This cheerfulness of
spirit is necessary,

1. To sweeten, and make us despise those incombrances which we meet in our
ways.

2. To encourage others.

3. To bring honor to God.

But it is observable, that in this Commandment though the labor enjoined be
hard and painful, yet it shall not want effect: though it be purchased with the
sweat of his brows, yet his labor shall produce him bread to sustain his
life. Whence

3. OBSERVE. Whatsoever we undertake in obedience to Gods Commandment, shall
not want effect.
Prove. 14.23. He that sows plentifully shall reap plentifully, 2 Cor. 9.6.
which is not only true in respect of the future reward promised, 1 Cor. 15.58.
but besides in respect of men's present labors, that they shall not want
success, unless God be pleased to deny his blessing, to humble men for their
sins, as Hag. 1.6. otherwise the promise holds, and is made good to all that in
their labors serve God in sincerity, Ps. 128. 2. Isa. 65.23. Unles God see it
fit sometimes to with hold his blessing on them for some greater good to us, or
honor to himself. Reasons,

1. That God is able to give success, and by his blessing to prosper men's
endeavors, no man can deny.

2. That it concerns him in point of honor to prosper that which he commands,
is as clear as theformer.

3. It is needful to be so, lest other wise men should be discouraged in his
service, if they should labor therein without bringing any thing to effect.

Let it encourage all men in the services which God Commands, wherein they are
sure not to labor in vain, but either to effect what they undertake,

2. Or to attain something that shall be better for them.

3. And to have the reward of their endeavors from God, Isa. 49.5. so they
undertake things,

1. In obedience to Gods Command.

2. To a right end, for his glory, and the good of others.

3. And depend upon Gods blessing, and not on their ownlabours for success.

After the injunction of painful labor, follows the duration of it, for term
of his life, containing withal the sentence of God, concerning man's dissolution
by death, with the equity thereof. In this sentence, take notice

1. Of the moderation thereof, in respect of the curse threatened.

2. Of the mitigation thereof.

1. In the time, Adam shall die, though not that day.

2. In the kind of death, it shall be temporal, but not eternal, though both
were included in the Sanction. Whence

4 OBSERVE, Gods Sanctions are certain, as well of judgment as of mercy.
Genesis 4.12. Eccl. 8.12, 13. but unto the godly too, 2 Samuel 12.14, 18. but with
this difference.

1. That their judgments are only outward and temporary, whereas wicked men's
judgments are spiritual and eternal.

2. And those judgments are laid on them, not as a part of their debt for sin,
which Christ has satisfied to the full.

3. And are sanctified to them, so that they work together to their good. Reason

1. Both the threats of judgment, as well as the Promises of mercy are founded
on the same grounds of Gods Truth, and Immutability, and Power.

2. And have the same scope, the honoring of God in the manifestation, as well
of his justice as of his mercy, giving to every man according to his deeds: see
Psalm. 58.11. Isa. 59.18, 19.

1. Learn to tremble at Gods judgments, Ps. 119.120. as well as to hope in
his mercy: yea, even the godly, who though they are freed from the everlasting
curse, by the death of Christ, yet are liable to such chastisements, Psalm.
89.31, 32. as may make their hearts ache, Psalm. 143.4.

2. Let it appale the hearts of all wicked men, that notwithstanding all Gods
threatenings, go on desperately in their sins, Deuteronomy. 29.19. who as they
dishonor God in the highest degree, either denying his Power, Holiness and
Providence, Psalm. 94.7. and his truth, or imagining him to be like unto
themselves, Psalm. 50.21. so they bring upon themselves the wrath of God to the
uttermost, to their everlasting destruction, Deuteronomy. 29.20. Psalm. 50.21.

If we consider this sentence of Gods decreeing man's dissolution, and the
turning of his body into dust; in particular we may

5. OBSERVE, Though God has freed his children from eternal death, yet he has
left them, as well as others, under the sentence of temporal death.
Romans 5.12. Heb. 9.27. from which though Henoch was exempted, Heb. 11.5. and
Elijah, 2 Kings 2.11. as shall be such as are found living, when Christ shall
come to judgment, 1 Cor. 15.51. 1 These. 4.17. yet upon the rest, as well godly
as wicked, this sentence takes hold, as all experience shows. Reason

1. That by it they might be put in mind of sin that brought death upon them,
Romans 5.12.

2. They have no harm by death, which is at present but a sleep, wherein they
rest from their labors, Isa. 57.2. and which severs them not from Christ, 1
These. 4.14. through whom it is sanctified to them, see 1 Cor. 15.55. and is
made an entrance into life, Rev. 14.13. and hurts not the body, which shall be
raised up in glory, 1 Corinthians. 15.42, 43.

Prepare for it, as being 1. Most certain, Eccl 9.5.

2. And yet uncertain in the time and means of it, Luke 12.20.

3. And whereof men are naturally regardlesse, being bewitched by the world,
Psalm. 49.11.

4. And yet being of all other things that which most nearly concerns us. To
this end,

1. Make sure of Christ; whom if we have, to die is gain, Philip. 1.21.

2. Be always doing good, see Luke 12.40, 42, 43. knowing there is no work nor
device in the grave, whither we go, Eccl. 9.10.

3. Stand loose from the world, that it may not trouble us to go out of the
world.

4. Let us have our conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. and lay up our treasure
there, Mat. 6.20. whither by death we are translated.

The Lord contents not himself to mind Adam, that he was taken out of the
dust; but tells him that he is dust, and shall be resolved into dust. Whence

6 OBSERVE, Men's bodies are bast every way; both in their original, in their
present condition, and in their dissolution.
Eccl. 3.20. earthly, of the earth, 1 Cor. 5.47. in their present condition, no
better then dust, Psalm. 103.14. Eccl. 12.7. their food, out of the earth. Psalm.
104.14. their clothing no better, and their dwelling houses of clay, Job 4.19.
In their dissolution, turned into dust, Psalm. 104.29. where one may say to
corruption, thou art my father; to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister,
Job 17.14. Reason,

1. To humble us, Genesis 18.27.

2. To magnify Gods mercy, in abasing himself to look on such vile wretches,
see Psalm. 113.6, 7, 8. to give his Son for them, to advance dust and ashes to
such a glorious condition, as the Apostle describes, Cor. 15.42, 43, 49.

3. To move us to long for heaven, see 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.

First, It reproves all that glory in Beauty, or Ability, or bestow all their
care and labor in making provisions for the body, by costly clothing, delicate
feeding, sumptuous building; and in the mean time leave the soul empty and
naked, discovering therein

1. Their earthly minds, Phil. 3.19.

2. And gross folly, Psalm. 49.13.

3. Joined with some impiety, in glorying in that wherein God especially
labors to abase them.

Secondly, let it move us to cease from our cares, of providing for these
earthly tabernacles, and to bestow our labors for the supplying and adorning
of the soul, As

1. More immediately given by God.

2. Carrying the most lively character of his Image.

3. More capable in it self of true beauty.

4. Yet most deformed by sin.

5. Consequently requing most care and labor, to repair and restore it unto
that condition, in which it was created. To which purpose, endeavor to enrich
that with knowledge, Psalm. 1.9. adorn it with humility, 1 Pet. 3.4. establish
it in faith, Heb. 13.9.

Now in that God, who threatened death to our first Parents, in the day wherein
they should eat of the forbidden fruit, yet suspends the execution thereof
till a longer time; though the weakness and infirmities of nature, which
before their fall they were not subject unto, seized on them at present: we may
from thence

7 OBSERVE, The disposing of man's life is in Gods hand.
Deuteronomy 32.39. David acknowledges, Psalm. 3.15. Daniel testifies to Belshazzar,
Dan. 5.23. and is clearly manifested by all experience, Psalm. 104.29. so that
it is not in the power of men to cut it off at their pleasure, 1 Kings 19. Dan.
3.27. and 6.22. though God use them to that end sometimes, as his executioners,
Psalm. 17.13, 14. Reason,

1. He gives it, Psalm. 104.30. Job 33.4. no reason then that any creature
should make his gift void.

2. And he can preserve it, see Isa. 54.16.

3. To have power of life and death, belongs to the highest Authority, which is
founded in God alone, see John 19.10, 11. that all men might fear before him.

First, let it arm us against the threats and violence of wicked men, who

1. Cannot shorten our life one day, see Luke 13.32.

2. Nor till we have served our time, Acts 13.36. and finished our course, 2 Timothy 4.7.

3. And then shall but make us the sooner possessours of our reward.

Secondly, depend upon God for our lives.

1. Seek them at Gods hand with Hezekiah, Isa. 38 3. with David, Psalm. 102.24.
and Jonah, and depend not on means with Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.11, 12.

2. Bless him for them, Isa. 38.20.

3. And serve him with them, living to him, and not to our selves, 2 Cor. 5.15.

The decree of God for man's dissolution is clearly expressed; the time when
this shall be, God keeps in his own breast, that is not expressed at all. Whence

8 OBSERVE, Though death be certain to all men, yet the time of death is
uncertain.
Luk 12 19. as appears, not only by extraordinary judgments, that fell upon
Dathan, Uzzah, Ananias, etc. but in the ordinary course of Providence. Reason

1. That men might not be hardened in sin, as usually they are when judgment
is deferred, Eccl. 8.11. but walk in fear, as being not assured of life for one
moment of an hour.

2. To be assured of the term of life would not profit us any way, either to
prevent death, which is certainly determined, or to further repentance, which
that blasphemous thief upon the Cross found no place for, though he saw death
before him, Luke 23.39. It is true, notwithstanding, that God extraordinarily
may reveal unto men beforehand, the time of their death or removal from hence,
as in Aarons and Moses case, Numb. 20.26. Deuteronomy. 32.49. and Elijahs, 2 Kings.
2.3, 5. and Hezekiahs, 2 Kings 20.6. but that is not usual.

Let it move all to stand loose from the world, in which they have no assurance
to continue one moment, to have our lamps always burning with the five wise
Virgins, Mat. 25.7. to make sure of Christ and Heaven, to be always
well-doing, that our Master may find us so, whenever he comes, Mat. 24.46,
47. for fear of the danger threatened, ver. 50, 51.

But it is worth our observing, that God together with the sentence, which he
pronounces against man withal, manifests the equity of it, that he does man no
wrong, since he leaves him in no worse condition then he was at first,
resolving him into dust that was but dust. Whence

9 OBSERVE, The judgments of God are just and equal, all of them in all things.
Moses professes, Deuteronomy. 32.4. and Job acknowledges, Job 1.21. and 2.10. and
David, Psalm. 119.75, 128. though many times we see not how, see Jer. 12.1.
which notwithstanding, God reveals unto his servants, as he did to Abraham in
the destruction of Sodom, Genesis 18.32. Reason

1. He cannot wrong his own creatures, no more then the Potter can the clay,
nay, much less.

2. His Nature will not suffer him to do otherwise; he that is God must
necessarily do good, Psalm. 119.68. out of the Lords mouth proceeds not good and
evil? Lam. 3.38.

3. Nor the respect to his own honor, magnified as well in his justice, Psalm.
64.8, 9. as in his mercy and truth.

4. It would otherwise discourage his own servants, see Mat. 25.24, 25. as the
opinion of Gods favoring of the wicked, and afflicting his own servants, had
almost discouraged David, Psalm. 73.13, 14.

Let it cease our murmurings against Gods administrations, toward our selves
or others, to which our corrupt nature easily inclines, Psalm. 73.3. against
which the Psalmist gives a special Caveat, Psalm. 37.1. and justifies God in all
his ways in which he is righteous, Psalm. 145.17. To this purpose

1. Let us lay that before us, as a principle unquestionable, with the Prophet,
Jer. 12.1.

2. That we may see, and so bear witness to that justice of God,

1. Confider, that God may charge the best of his servants with folly, see
Psalm. 130.3. and 143.2.

2. To satisfy us concerning the seeming prosperity of the wicked: Consider

1. What they enjoy, 1. Only outward things, neither grace nor glory, which are
the godlies portion, Psalm. 84.11.

2. And those unto their own hurt, Eccl. 5.13. so that a little that a
righteous man has, is better then the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16.

3. That also oftentimes to their destruction at the last, Prove. 1.32. for
which purpose God advances them, Psalm. 73.18. whereas good men's afflictions
turn to their good, Psalm. 119.67, 71.

4. Judge nothing of men's condition, till we see the end, Psalm. 37.37.

VERSE 20.
ANd Adam called his wives name Eve] Chavah in the Original, that is, living.
Imposing of names is a token of authority, as we have observed in Adams giving
names to the creatures; but in this name given to his wife, he seems besides
to manifest his faith in the Promise of the Messiah, by which he was delivered
from death, and in whom he and his posterity should live for ever. Thus God
notwithstanding the heavy curse denounced against Adam for his rebellion, yet
leaves him a promise to support him, and gives him an heart to embrace and stay
himself upon it. Whence

1 OBSERVE, God leaves not his children without means to support them in their
worst condition.
Jacobs case, Genesis 32.5, 11.28. in afflictions felt, as, Psalm. 119.50, 52, 92,
93. Job 19.25. in temptations, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. Luke 22.31, 32. in spiritual
agonies, as in our Saviors case, Luke 22.43. and when men are upon the point
of despire, Psalm. 73.10, 11. Reason

First, all things are managed by God, who 1. Is in his nature full of
compassion, Psalm. 113.8, 13. 2. Has a peculiar interest in his children, Is.
43.1, 2. and 63.16. compared with ver. 9. 3. And is much honored by his
faithfulness, in remembering his Covenant made with them, Psalm. 106.45. and in
Perfecting his strength in their weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. 4. And his aim is not
to destroy his servants, Hos. 11.8, 9. but to purge them, Isa. 27.9. and to
cause them to walk more warily in their way, see Psalm. 119.67.


A singular comfort to the godly, Psalm. 23.4. and 73.23. and that of which they
stand in great need.

1. As being to encounter with many enemies, Psalm. 119.157. and potent, not
only men, Psalm. 22.13. and 59.13. but Satan himself, Ephesians. 6.12.

2. Being themselves weak, Psalm. 22.6. and 142.6. and apt to be discouraged,
Psalm. 75.13. But let this support our hearts, 1. That God has taken charge of
us, and given Christ to be the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23. out of whose
hand no man can pluck us, John 10.28, 29. 2. Is found by experience to be near
unto us, though we see him not, as David found, and comforts himself therewith,
Psalm. 119.150, 151. even a present help in time of trouble, Psalm. 46.1. Let
that consideration quiet our hearts, and encourage us to his service.


But it is farther worth our observation, that the first step that Adam makes
toward God, is the embracing of his Promise by faith. Whence we may

2 OBSERVE, The grace which God especially works and preserves in his childrens
hearts, is faith.
JOhn 6.29. that is it which Christ prays for in Peter, that his faith may not
fail, Luke 22.32. that is the scope of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. and 16.26. and
in which we are exhorted to stand fast, 1 Cor. 16.13. Acts 14.22. Reason

1. It is of all other graces most generally necessary and useful, as by which
we are united unto God by Christ, see Psalm. 73.25, 28. and by which we live in
Christ, Gal. 2.20.

2. By which we are justified before God.

3. Made his children, Gal. 3.28.

4. By which our hearts are purified, Acts 15.9.

5. By which we quench the fiery darts of Satan, Ephesians. 6.16.

Secondly, By it we must glorify God, Romans 4.20. setting to our seal that he
is true, John 3.33.

Thirdly, it is the mother of all Graces, Love, Humility, etc. see 2 Pet. 3.5.

Fourthly, that which must season all our services, which are not accepted
without it, Heb. 11.4, 6. especially our prayers, James 1.6. And

Fifthly, supplies us with all our comforts, Romans 5.23. Psalm. 116.10. and
encourages us to all our duties, Psalm. 119.166.

Labor above all things to get and preserve faith,

1. As most useful, as we have seen;

2. Hardest to be obtained, as apprehending things incredible, and which
natural reason must needs oppose.

3. And that against which Satan above all bends all his strength. The means
both to obtain and preserve it are, 1. The gaining of the true knowledge of God
out of his Word, Psalm. 9.10. Romans 10.17. 2. The laying up in our hearts, and
frequent meditation on Gods Promises, with holy David, Psalm. 119.11, 97. and
130.5. 3. The careful observation of acts of Providence, answerable to the
Promises, Psalm. 77.10, 11, 12. 4. Earnest prayer, Luke 17.5. for faith is only
Gods gift.


We may yet further observe, in what manner Adam embraces this Promise from
God, and builds upon it, as upon a thing certain and real, in so much that he,
as in remembrance of a mercy received, preserves the memorial of it in his
wives name. So that we may thence

3 OBSERVE, Gods Promises must be embraced by faith, as real performances.
John 8.56. Psalm. 16.9, 10. comfort, Psalm. 119.49, 50. insulting over enemies,
and despising dangers, Psalm. 6.8. This indeed is the power of faith, that it is
the substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. that it apprehends things that
are to come, as if they were in being; which it does without error; as without
error God calls the things that Are not, as if they Were, Romans 4.17. Reason

1. It may well be, seeing in Gods Will, things have a Being, though they have
not yet a Subsistence: for by him all things consist, Col. 1.17. and not only
By him, but In him, Acts 17.28.

2. And it is fit it should be so, that faith might have a firm foundation, as
being given us by God, both that thereby we may glorify him, Romans 4.20.
setting to our seal that he is true, John 3.33. and Almighty, Romans 4.21. and
besides, may have in our selves strong consolation, Heb. 6.18.

Let us then so ground our faith upon Gods Promises, as if we enjoyed that
which we hope for, having our conversation in heaven. Phil. 3 20. rejoicing
with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. enduring the crosses and
shame of the world, Heb. 12.2. and rejoicing in tribulations, Romans 5.3.

To testify his faith in Gods Promise, and to keep fresh in memory that great
mercy; Adam points at it in the name that he gives his wife, when he calls her
Chavah, that is, living. Whence we may

4 OBSERVE A godly man must be careful to preserve memorials of great mercies.
Hester 9.20, 21, 27, 28. for the same end they gave names to the places where
those mercies were performed, 1 Samuel 7.12. 2 Chronicles. 20.26. upon the same ground
God appoints a pot of Mannah to be kept in the Tabernacle, to remember
posterity of that miraculous feeding of their fathers with bread from heaven,
Exodus 16.33. Reason

1. It is the maine end which God aims at in his works, to have them
remembered, Psalm. 111.4.

2. And is of great use to us, Psalm. 78.7.

3. Who are apt of our selves to forget them, Psalm. 106.7.13.

Let it move us to revive the memory of special mercies to our selves; or the
Church in general,

1. By recording them.

2. By meditating on them often.

3. By relating of them to posterity, Psalm. 78.96. as being of special use,

1. To strengthen our faith. 2. To increase and inflame our hearts with Gods
love. 3. To quicken us to our duties. 4. To support us in temptations.

Again, the remembrance of this mercy Adam preserves in the name that he gives
his wise, and thereby teaches us what use to make of the names we give. So
that we may

5 OBSERVE, It is fit in giving Names, to make choice of such as may give us
withal something for our instraction.
Abraham's and Sarahs name, Genesis 17.5, 15. and Jacobs, Genesis 32.28. in giving
Solomon his name, 1 Chronicles. 22.9. and the name of Jesus to our Savior, Mat.
1.21. which holy persions have followed, Genesis 21.3, 6. and 29.32. Reason

1. We need all helps, to mind us either of Gods mercies, and acts of his
Providence, or of our own duties; which God himself implied, in causing his
people to write the Commandments on the posts and gates of their houses, Deuteronomy.
11.20. and to make fringes to their garments, to put them in mind of them,
Numb. 15.38, 39.

2. And there is no readier means, to mind us of such things then our names,
which we have daily in our mouths and memories.

VERSE 21.
UNto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord make coats of skins, and clothed
them.] How he made them, or of what skins, whether of any beasts, or whether he
made the skins as well as the garments, seeing the Spirit of God has not
revealed, it is presumption, and vain curiosity to enquire. Only we may hence

1 OBSERVE, The very clothes that we wear, are Gods provision.
Jacob expects them from him, and acknowledges them to be his gift, Genesis
28.20. and our Savior assures us, that God takes care to provide them, Mat.
6.30. It is true, that he brings in to us this, as well as other provisions, by
means, as by the parents care, 1 Samuel 2.19. or liberality of charitable men,
Job 31.19, 20. or by the providence and industry of good husbands and
housewives, Prove. 31.21, 22. but they are but the hands that reach out unto
that which they take out of Gods store Reason,

1. Because the earth and fullness thereof are all his, Psalm 24.1. The beasts
whose wool and skins are the materials of our garments; and the earth, that, of
which we get our linen, as we do our bread.

2. It is fit it should be so, that fetching all from him, we might return all
to him again: whose care for us exceeds that of our own parents, as David
acknowledges, Psalm. 27.10.

1. Serve him faithfully, that feeds us, and clothes us, and supplies us with
all the comforts of our lives.

2. Honor him with that which himself bestows. This we do,

First, when we seek all at his hand, Phil. 4.6. casting our care on him, who
cares for us, 1 Pet. 5.7.

1. Who can, Numb. 11.23. 2. And will supply us, Mat. 6.30. 3. And that freely.
Secondly, when we use our clothes for the ends, and within the bounds limited
by God that gives them. For necessity not for pride; or for distinction of
sexes, Deuteronomy. 22.5. or degrees, Luke 7.25. which whosoever exceed, see their
judgment, Isa. 3.18, 24.

Thirdly, praise him for all, Job 31.20. But we see, that though God provide
our first Parents clothes, yet they are of the poorest and basest materials,
serving rather for necessity, to cover their shame, and defend them from the
injury of the weather, then for ornament and bravery. Whence

2. OBSERVE, Necessary provision is as much as we can look for at Gods hand.
Mat. 6.11. food and clothing, which is all that Jacob craves, Genesis 28.20. or
Agur, Prove. 30.8. wherewith we ought to content our selves, 1 Timothy 6.8. and as
much as is promised, Psalm. 37.3, or as God gave his children in the
Wilderness; See Deuteronomy. 29.5, 6. Reason,

1. That is as much as we can use, Eccl. 5.11.

2. And is best for us.

1. For health of our bodies, Eccl. 5.12.

2. To fit us for employments.

3. And to keep the mind in a right frame, See Luke 21.34.

4. And for supporting of community, which must necessarily be much hindered by
excess in food and clothing.

First, desire no more then necessaries, with Agur and Jacob, Seeing 1. More
then that would but encomber us. 2. Might perhaps ensnare us.


3. And must increase our account at last, and cannot be made use of for our
selves. This indeed will be our peace, when our desires are moderate, and
limited by the bounds of such estates as God has allotted us.

Secondly, let no man be discontented at a mean condition, 1. Which is more
then he brought with him into the world, or shall carry with him out of the
world. 2. Or then he is worthy of by any desert of his own. 3. And as much as
God in his wisdom thinks fittest for us, who knows, and loves us better then
we do our selves.


These skins wherewith God clad our first Parents must needs be stripped from
the bodies of some beast or other, unless we conceive that God created them
extraordinarily for that purpose; at least those garments that ordinarily men
use, we know are borrowed from them. So that we may thence

3. OBSERVE, Our clothes for the most part, are but borrowed from other
Creatures.
Job 31.20. Prove. 27.26. our linen we draw out of the bowels of the earth;
cotton wools we borrow from the trees; silks and velvets are but the webs of
poor worms. Reason,

1. To humble and keep our hearts low, when we consider that we have nothing
but what we borrow, and that of our basest vassals.

2. To move us to take care of the creature, without the hep whereof we must
needs starve for hunger and cold.

Who are they then that lift up their hearts in pride for the bravery of their
clothing, which

1. Is but the body of men's shame.

2. Adornes but the outward man, which is least set by; See 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.

3. Wherein the meanest of the creatures excel us, Mat. 6.29.

4. Whereby we walk contrary to God, glorying in that which he has ordained to
humble us.

VERSE 22.
ANd the Lord God said] Not vocally, but mentally he considered.

Behold the man is become as one of us] Ironically scoffing at Satan's vain
promise, and man's as vain credulity; the falsehood and folly whereof were
manifested by a quite contrary event.

To know good and evil] Of good they knew less then they did before, and evil
they knew experimentally to their own shame and sorrow.

And now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life] An
imperfect speech, intimating one special reason why God drove man out of
Paradise, to prevent his further sin by profaning that holy Ordinance in eating
of the Tree of Life, which he had now no right unto, having broken the Covenant
whereof it was the seal; and which he was as likely by the policy of Satan to
be drawn unto, as he had been before, to eat of the forbidden fruit.

And live for ever] Which Satan might suggest, and man might as easily believe,
as well knowing that this tree had that virtue, though it were now of no
efficacy, by man's breach of the Covenant.

VERSE 23.
THerefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden] The place of
pleasure, and storehouse of plenty: how he sent him out, whether by express
command, or otherwise, it is not material.

To till the ground from whence he was taken] An hard task, considering what
curse God had laid upon the earth, and how unprovided he was of all necessaries
for that employment: And yet no wrong to Adam, who was no heir to Paradise,
being created out of it; as is evident by this expression, and is now put into
no worse condition then that in which he was created.

God, we see then, considers Adams weakness, and therefore in mercy toward
him, to prevent his falling into a second sin, shuts him out of that place
where he might have allurements to draw him into it. Thus even his judgments
are still tempered with mercy: but the Observation to be drawn out of the
Consideration thereof in general, we have handled already more particularly; We
may

1 OBSERVE, God oftentimes withholds from us, or deprives us of many blessings
for our good.
Agur desires that God would not heap wealth upon him, lest he should forget
God, Prove. 30.9. The Psalmist found that prosperity made him secure; but when
God his his face, it put him to his prayers, Psalm. 30.6, 7, 8. hence he
professes that God had afflicted him in faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75.

1. To keep him in a right way, Ps. 119.67.

2. To quicken him unto prayer, Ps. 116.4.

3. To take off his mind from the world, See Ps. 73.25. that we might prize
God and Christ, and heaven at an higher rate.

4. Sometimes he does it to make our faith and sincerity more evident to the
world, as he dealt with Job.

5. Perhaps to do us more good at the last, as he dealt with him.

Let this consideration quiet our hearts in wants and losses, remembering that
all things are ordered by God, who

1. Is good, and does good, Psalm. 119.68.

2. And turns all things to good to those that love him, Romans 8.28.

3. And knowing the frame of our hearts better then we our selves, foresees
that those things which he withholds, or takes from us, would corrupt us,
though we our selves discern it not at present.

The Lord knew and considered that our Parents had already fallen into one
soul sin, and therefore concludes upon good grounds, that they would be as
ready to fall into a second, and gives unto us thence sufficient warrant to

2. OBSERVE. When men have once broken out into one sin, they are in danger
to fall into any other.
Ephesians. 4.19. and sell themselves to work wickedness, 1 King. 21.25. but even
the godly, as appears in Lots falling from drunkenness into incest, Genesis
19.32. and David's adding of murder to adultery, 2 Samuel 11.4, 15, 17. Reason,

1. Every man has within him the root of every sin.

2. And having once broken the bond of obedience, has nothing to hold him in.

3. And has his heart weakened by the very act of sinning, as any part of the
body is by a stripe or wound, that it has received.

4. And Satan having prevailed upon us in one assault, is thereby encouraged to
attempt us with more violence afterward, as we have seen in his tempting of
Eve.

Beware of giving the water passage though never so little: he that standing on
an high place has lost his footing, knows not where to stay himself. Blessed
is the man that fears always, Prove. 28.14. Let it move us, having been
overtaken by infirmity, to repent speedily and seriously, to stand carefully
upon our guards, and to pray fervently: Lest if we wax bold and secure, God in
his justice leave us to our selves, and we be overtaken, as St. Peter was, Luke
22.33, 3^

Well, the Lord knowing Adams weakness, to prevent his falling into a second
sin, shut him out of Paradise, and thereby took away the occasion that might
have been a means to draw him thereunto. Whence

3. OBSERVE, God, as he always foresees, so oftentimes he prevents men's
falling into sin.
Psalm. 139.2. and has before him all the opportunities that may be presented
unto them, to allure them unto sin, and all the purposes and policies of
Satan that labors to ensnare them, must needs know what sins they will fall
into, and therefore may be able to prevent them, which he does often in his own
children, as he withheld David from spilling of Nabals blood, 1 Samuel 25.32,
33. and from killing Saul, 1 Samuel 24, 5. And many times in wicked men, for
preventing of mischief to his own children, as Jeroboam from seizing upon the
Prophet, 1 King. 13.4. the children of Isreal's violence from Moses and Aaron,
Numb. 16.42. Herod from destroying Christ, Mat. 2.12, 13.

Let all the godly take special notice of this special act of Gods providence
in preventing their falling into diverse sins, whereof they may find

1. The roots in their own hearts.

2. They feel the motions of diverse inordinate lusts, the quenching whereof,
that they break not out into open acts, must needs be acknowledged to be Gods
act, sometimes awakning our own consciences to prevent the farther growth and
breaking out of lusts, that have taken fire, into an open flame, as in David's
case, 1 Samuel 24.5. sometimes causing his spirit within us to fight against
these lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.17. otherwhiles giving us seasonable warnings
out of his word, which kept in David from persisting in that discontented
humor against the acts of Gods providence, Psalm. 73.17. which he acknowledges
to be Gods holding of him by his right hand, verse 23. And lastly by removing
occasions and taking away opportunities of producing sin into act.

Now to prevent Adams further sinning by eating of the Tree of Life, God casts
him out of the garden of Eden, where the Tree of Life stood, that he might not
have that allurement before him to tempt him, and to give him opportunity to
commit that sin. Whence we may

4 OBSERVE, The surest way to prevent man's falling into sin, is to be far
from the allurements that might entice him unto sin.
Job makes a covenant with his eyes, not to look upon a maid, that he might not
have occasion to think on her, Job 31.1. And Solomon advises us not to come
near the door of a lewd woman's house, if we would avoid adultery, Prove. 5.8.
not to look upon the wine in the cup, if we would avoid drunkenness, Proverbs
23 31. Reason,

1. The pronenesse of our corrupt nature to evil, which like gunpowder takes
fire by every spark.

2. The aptness of outward objects to work upon sense, which quickly kindle
affections, by which our judgment is corrupted, so that we are suddenly
overtaken before we can arm our selves to resist the temptation.

Let us betimes remove from us all outward provocations to sin-alluring
objects, wicked company, etc. as being conscious to our selves of the weakness
of our own hearts, and having no assurance to be assisted by God, if we cast
our selves upon needless dangers, as our Savior answers Satan, Mat. 4.7.
especially to be watchful over our selves in those sins, to which nature or
custom most inclines us.

But it were needless to prevent a danger where, is no likelihood of falling
into danger: wherefore we must needs acknowledge, that God in his wisdom
foresaw a pronenesse in Adam to fall into that sin which he so carefully
prevents: namely that Adam would be apt to take of that Tree of Life which now
could not profit him at all. So that we hence upon good ground

5. OBSERVE. Men are naturally apt to think themselves safe in the performance
of outward acts of holy duties.
Adam, not only to eat of that Tree of Life; but withal to persuade himself,
that by eating of it he should live for ever. Thus the Jews rest upon the
outward act of fasting, Isa. 58.3, 4. and think themselves wronged, because
that was not accepted; and conceive, that the very standing in Gods house shall
deliver them, Jer. 7.10. And the Pharisee pleads his fasting twice in the week,
etc. for his justification, Luke 18.12. Reason,

1. Carnal men embrace this common principle, that God will accept and reward
those that serve him.

2. And know no other service but the performance of the outward work, as being
uttenly unacquainted with the inward operations of the spirit which they never
felt in themselves.

3. And find the outward act approved by men.

4. Lastly, have their eyes blinded by Satan, lest by drawing near unto God in
sincerity of heart they should escape out of his snare.

1. It justly taxes all that blind their own eyes to their destruction
(without Gods infinite mercy) by resting upon outward performances, like the
Jews, Isa. 1.15. In praying, hearing, fasting, almsgiving, receiving the
Sacrament, as is manifest,

First, when they undertake them without preparation, not stirring up
themselves to take hold of God, Isa. 64.7.

Secondly, by remaining without life, both in and after such performances.

Thirdly, and think themselves wronged, if in such forms of godliness, they
be not approved by God and men. Wherein 1. They wrong God in conceiving him to
be like themselves, Psalm. 50.20. and in offering him the basest part only of
his service, when their hearts are far from him, Esaias 29.13. whereas God loves
truth in the inward parts, Psalm 51.6. and being a Spirit will be worshipped
in Spirit and truth, John 4.24. 2. And beguile themselves, deading their own
hearts, and losing all their reward.


2. Let it be our care to perform all our services with life and affection, to
hear with fear and trembling, Esaias 66.2. to pour out our souls in prayer,
Psalm. 62.8. to afflict them in fasting, Levit. 23.32. and to perform acts of
obedience with joy and cheerfulness, Deuteronomy. 28.47. To which end let us have
still before us, 1. The Majesty, 2. Holiness, 3. Spiritual nature, 4. All
piercing eye of that God to whom we address our selves,


First, in our services.

Secondly, our great obligation to him to whom we owe more then our selves, and
therefore our best abilities to serve him withal.

Thirdly, the weight of the duties themselves, which require our whole strength
in the performance of them, that we may,

1. Wash our hands in innocence, when we compass Gods Altar, Psalm. 26.6.

2. Draw in and unite all our thoughts, when we go about those duties.

3. Wait upon God for strength from above, Psalm. 51.15. and 119.18.

We see how careful God is to prevent Adams eating of that Tree to which he had
now no right at all, the Covenant being broken which it sealed. Whence

6 OBSERVE, God cannot endure the defiling of his Ordinances by such as have no
right to them.
Psalm. 50.16, 17. Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.27. Baptism to other then Believers,
Acts 8.36, 37, Mark 16.16. see what became of the guest that thrust in to the
feast without a wedding garment, Mat. 22.12, 13. and how sharply God reproves
the Priests for bringing uncircumcised persons into his Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44.7.
Reason,

1. It is an high dishonor to God, who by wicked men's drawing near unto him,
may seem to be their patron. Jer. 7.11.

2. Holy things are thereby profaned, Mat. 7.6. and brought into contempt, 1 Samuel 2.17.

3. It is a great means to harden wicked men's hearts, who enjoying these
privileges which of right belong only unto the godly, flatter themselves with
a vain conceit, that they are accepted and approved of God as well as his own
children; an evil to which men's hearts are very prone, as has been showed in
the last point.

First, how dare men then so boldly thrust in themselves without warrant into
the use of Gods Ordinances, in prayer, hearing, partaking of the Sacrament;
being

1. Ignorant of the nature of those duties, and consequently unable to perform
them as they ought.

2. Having no interest in the Covenant, as having never in their hearts
consented to live unto God, and not unto themselves, to deny themselves and the
world, which Christ requires of all his followers, Mat. 16.24.

3. And manifesting by walking after their lusts, that they take themselves to
be their own Lords, Psalm. 12.4. Whereby they

1. Beguile themselves, accounting themselves amongst Gods children, interessed
in all their privileges, to which they have no title.

2. And beguile others, who living as they do, are apt likewise to think well
of themselves, as well as they.

3. Offend others, 1 Samuel 2.17.

4. And increase their own judgment, 1 Cor. 11.29.

Secondly, let us examine our selves, not only in receiving the Sacrament (as
we are directed, 1 Cor. 11.28.) but in prayer, and in other religious duties,
what right we have to the use of them.

1. What faith and dependence upon God, such as Saint Paul expresses, 2 Timothy
1.12. grounded upon experimental knowledge.

2. What conformity we find in our hearts to the mind and will of God, upon
which David grounds his petition in prayer, Ps. 143.9, 10.

3. What abasement of our selves we find in our own hearts, with Job 42.6.

3. What contempt of all things in comparison of Christ, with Paul, Phil. 3.8.

No title in the world could be more firm then Adams was to the Garden of
Eden, which God had planted of purpose for him, and into the possession whereof
God had put him with his own hand. And yet we see for his rebellion, he is cast
out of all that God had given him. Whence

1 OBSERVE, There is no blessing so firmly assured unto us, whereof sin may
not deprive us.
Canaan it self, though confirmed by Gods oath to Abraham and his seed, the
unbeleevers were deprived and kept out of by unbelief, Heb. 3.18. as their
posterity were cast out of it even after they possessed it, as God had
threatened, Lev. 26.33. Deuteronomy. 28.63. Thus was Elies posterity cast out of the
Priesthood, 1 Samuel 2.29, 30. and David's out of the Kingdom, though both
assured by Gods firmest promises, Psalm. 89.35, 36. compared with ver. 39, 40.
Reason,

1. All promises are granted under the condition of obedience, sometimes
expressed, as Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. and always understood.

2 It were not for Gods honor to prosper men, and continue his blessings to
them in a course of ^ebellion, 1 Samuel 2.30. Psalm. 94.20.

3. Nor for man's good, who would abuse the blessings to his own destruction;
See Ps. 73.6, 7. and harden the hearts of others by continuing in ways of
rebellion, if they should prosper in them; See Ps. 73.10. Mal. 3.15.

First, it reproves all that walk in rebellious courses, promising themselves
impunity in their sinful ways, Deuteronomy. 29.19. and assurance of their estates at
present, Psalm. 49.11. wherein they highly dishonor God, as either not seeing,
or at least not regarding their ways, Ps. 94.7. as if he were like unto
themselves, Ps. 50.21.

Secondly, And beguile themselves like fools, Ps. 49.13.

1. Wanting many good things which their sins ( Isa, 59.2.) keep from them,
and forfeiting what they do enjoy, which God either deprives them of at
present, or reserves unto them for their hurt, Eccl. 5.13. and shut out
themselves from all hope of enjoying any good for time to come, as remaining
under the wrath of God, which they shall have hereafter poured out upon them to
the uttermost, and that to all eternity.

2. Let us be wise and walk in fear always, Prove. 28.14. Considering how prone
we are of our selves to carnal security, not only the wicked, Prove. 14.16. but
the godly also, Ps. 30.6. whence we are called upon to be watchful, Mark 13.37.
Considering

1. That all Promises are made under the condition of obedience, Lev. 26.3, 4.
and Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2. Prove. 2.21.

2. That outward blessings may be a snare unto us, Prove. 30.9. unless we use
them warily.

3. That even inward spiritual blessings, though they cannot be lost, yet may
be much empaired, and the comfort of them not felt for a time, if we grieve the
Spirit by any sin, as David found by experience, Psalm. 51.8.11.

Adam being cast out of Paradise is confined to labor in tilling the ground,
whence he was taken, which in all probability was not far from, (perhaps)
within the view of Paradise. A great change in his employment from keeping and
dressing (which was rather a recreation then any painful labor) to Tilling, a
tiresome toil, especially to him who wanted tools, beasts, servants and all
helps for that work; and had besides Tilling of the ground, to provide himself
some shelter to harbor himself from the weather, together with many
necessaries for the support and comfort of his life. But it is observable, that
when God sends Adam out of Paradise, he assigns him a place where to be, and
an employment what to do. Whence

2 OBSERVE, Men's dwellings and employments are both assigned by God.
Deuteronomy. 21.21, 22. and 32. and not only gave it to them in general, Ps. 115.16.
or assigned a Country to his own people in particular, Psalm. 105.44. but
allotted out every Tribe their portion in it, as appears by comparing, Genesis
49.13. with Josh. 19.11. which although he point not out now to us by lot, as
he did then, yet he disposes in the ordinary course of his providence,
directing the subordinate means to act only what he had before determined. And
for men's employments, the Apostle terms them Gods callings, 1 Cor. 7.17. Reason

1. The earth is Gods, Ps. 24.1. to which by consequent no man can have any
title but by assignation from him: And we are his, Ps. 100.3. and in him live
and have our being, Act. 17.28 and consequently may more justly be assigned our
employments by him, then a servant may be appointed his work by his Master, and
besides it is God; that must both furnish him with abilities for his
employment, and prosper his labors therein.

2. It is fit it should be so, as in all other acts of providence, for avoiding
confusion.

Let us first content our selves with our places and employments, as being
assigned to us by God himself; who 1. Has power to dispose of us. 2. And knows
what is fittest for us. 3. And orders all things so as may be most for our
good, and his own glory.


Secondly, and carry our selves in our places so as we may be able to give up
with joy our account to him that employes us, from whom we in our places doing
his will, and having our success from his prospering hand, have ground to
expect the reward of our faithfulness in discharge of our duty at the last
day, See Ephesians. 6.6, 7, 8. Now although we are assigned and trained up to our
employments by our Parents, or other governors; we must look on them only as
Gods instruments, executing only what he has determined concerning us.

The observation to be raised out of the consideration of the place where God
disposes of Adam when he sent him out of Paradise, and of the employment that
he assigns him, that he should Till the ground, and by his labor provide
himself means to maintain his life, have been noted, in ver. 19. But that which
is pointed at here, that it was the ground whence he was taken, may give
occasion to

3 OBSERVE, God every where leaves remembrances, to mind us what and how base
we are.
Isa. 40.6, 7. the eating of our garments by mothes, James 5.2. Isa. 50.9. the
Winter and Summer, darkness of the night, after the light of day, our eating,
drinking and sleeping, etc. much more our infirmities and diseases, the
messengers of death at hand. Reason. Nothing is more useful to us, then to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, Psalm. 90.12. and
take them off from the world, Luke 12.19, 20. and yet nothing is less thought
on, or laid to heart, see Psalm. 49.11, 12.

Let not us suffer our selves to be beguiled and lulled asleep by the deceits
of the world, having such a cloud of monitors, both within and without, to show
us both how vile, and of how short continuance we are; but study both to walk
humbly at present, and mind and prepare for our estate hereafter.

VERSE 24.
SO he drove out the man] Out of Paradise, driving out implies a removing, if
not by force, yet at least in displeasure; which is mentioned the second time,
that we might take the more notice of that judgment of God upon our first
Parents, in casting them out of this pleasant Garden, which he had planted for
them.

And he placed at the East of the Garden of Eden] Which in all likelihood was
the only way of entering into it; otherwise it had been in vain to stop up one
passage, and to leave the rest open.

Cherubims] Angels the forms whereof, (resembling young men, having wings, to
note their incorruptible nature and agility in service,) were by Gods
appointment Exodus 25.18. placed over the Mercy-Seat, and being well known by
that name unto the Jews, Moses here, and other Authors of Holy Scripture, use
to signify Angels.

And a flaming sword] By this outward visible sign, deterring Adam and his
posterity from attempting the entrance again into Paradise, which they saw they
could not endeavor without running upon their own destruction.

Turning every way] In what manner is not here expressed, and therefore not to
be curiously enquired into; the Holy Ghost being pleased, only to intimate,
that God so cast our first Parents out of Paradise, that there should be no
possibility for them to return thither again for ever.

To keep the way of the tree of life] The Seal of the Covenant of works; the
condition whereof, man being now corrupted and weakened by his fall, being
utterly disabled to perform, was for ever to be taken away. But by the
infinite mercy of God, the way unto the celestial Paradise, (whereof this
earthly was but a figure,) was opened by Christ by the Covenant of grace.

The double expression of the driving of man out of Paradise, seems to imply,
that God would have special notice taken of that judgment of his upon him. So
that we may thence

1 OBSERVE, Gods judgments are not to be passed over slightly, but to be
considered seriously, and observed and remembered carefully.
Psalm. 64.9. they made a deep impression on David's heart, Psalm. 119.120. and
wicked men are taxed, that they observe them not, Psalm. 10.5. Isa. 26.11. Reason

1. They are a great deep, Psalm. 36.6. and therefore not understood without
careful observing and searching into them.

2. They are instructions to us, Isa. 26.6.

1. Discovering Gods righteousness, as Psalm. 58.11. and 9.16. 2. Appertaining
unto us, Luke 13.3, 5. 1 Cor. 10.6, 7, 11. 3. Who are all of us warned by such
precedents, as being subject, not only to the same God, but besides, to the
same Law of Righteousness, according to which God dispenses to all men, Mercy
or Judgment, according to their ways or works, without respect of persons.
Let every one of us, 1. Search into Gods judgments, comparing them with the
rule, according to which they are acted, with the Prophet, Dan. 9.12, 13. and
enquiring into the cause of them, Deuteronomy. 29.24, 25. that we may justify God in
them, Psalm. 119.137.

2. Let us be careful to lay them up in our memories, as being performed, as
all the rest of his eminent works are, for that end, Psalm. 111.4.

3. Be as careful to apply them to our selves upon all occasions, Josh. 22.16,
17. till our hearts tremble at them, Psalm. 119.126.

But why did not God destroy Paradise, out of which he had now excluded man for
ever so that it could now be of no farther use? Certainly, it could be for no
other end, but that it might be a monument of Gods bounty, to make him the more
sensible of what he had lost by his rebellion. So that we may thence

2 OBSERVE. God loves to leave monuments, both of his Mercies and Judgments,
for the justifying of himself, and the convincing of men, of their unworthy
carriage toward him.
Exodus 16.33. the brazen Serpent, till Hezekiah brake it in pieces, 2 Kings
18.4. the song made by Moses at Gods Command, containing the sum of Gods
wonderful mercies to his people, and their manifold rebellions against him,
Deuteronomy. 31.19, 21. Reasons

1. The tender respect which He has to his own glory.

2. And man's pronenesse to forget Gods administrations toward his people,
Psalm. 106.21.

3. And the great use that might and ought to be made of both, Ps. 78.7, 8.

Let us carefully keep by us records of both, as to justify God, and shame our
selves, so to bring our hearts to an holy dependence on him, Psalm. 78.7. and a
care to walk before him with reverence and fear all our days.

But withal, the particle So, in the beginning of this verse, may not be passed
over, as pointing us back to all that went before; the sin of Adam, the
discovery of it, with the conviction of the offenders, the sentence pronounced
against them, and the danger of their falling into a farther sin; circumstances
all, manifesting the justice and equity of God, in casting man out of Paradise.
Whence we may

3. OBSERVE, In searching into Gods judgments, our special care must be to
observe the precedents and cause of them.
Judge. 5.8. Deuteronomy. 29.24, 25. Thus God himself sets out the sins of Sodom,
before he pronounces or executes his judgments on them; and that they may be
the more clearly manifested, he oftentimes over-takes men in the very act of
sin, as in the case of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Numb. ^6.31, 35. and the
peoples murmuring against Moses and Aaron, ver. 41.46, 49. Sometimes in the
very judgment he points at the cause of it, in the Kind, Instrument, Time,
Place, or some other circumstance, or more clearly by the mouth of his
Ministers. Reason

1. This makes most for his honor, in clearing his justice, which he
especially aims at, see Psalm. 58.11. Deuteronomy. 32.4.

2. This is the only way to direct and instruct us, See Neh. 13.18.

Now Adam, having so lately found by experience his own folly, in harkening to
Satan's counsels, and having been called to account by God himself, and so
sharply censured by him, and withal, having the Covenant of grace proposed unto
him in Christ; one would conceive might be sufficiently served against any
temptation of Satan, that might have drawn him on to a second sin. Yet we see
God thinks fit to set before him this terror of the flaming sword, to deter
him from attempting to eat of the tree of life. So that we may

4 OBSERVE, The best of Gods servants have need of the terrors of his
judgments to restrain them from sin.
Psalm. 119.120. and Joshuah thinks it needful, to lay the consideration of Gods
jealousy and revenging hand before his people, even then when he finds their
hearts most pliable, Josh. 24, 19, 20. Reason

1. Because the best, having some remainders of flesh in them, need that bridle
to hold in the inordinate motions thereof, seeing though the spirit be willing,
yet the flesh is weak, Mat. 26.41. and rebellious. Rom 7.23.

2. It is Gods honor, as well to be feared for his judgments, as to be loved
for his mercies.

3. Because the dearest of Gods servants, although they be delivered from the
wrath to come, yet may smart by his rods, and by laying his judgments before
their eyes, may be made more sensible of the benefit of Christ's sufferings,
when they take notice of the fearfulness of those judgments, from which they
are delivered thereby.

Who are they that deny the use of that means, which God found so needful to
our first Parents, annexed to his Law, as a bridle to restrain his people from
rebellion, and which experience both taught godly men to be so useful to
themselves? It is true, that love is a strong band to tie men to obedience, and
might be sufficient if it were perfect; but seeing we know but in part, 1 Cor.
13.9. and consequently, can believe but in part, it must needs follow, that
there must be the same defect in our love that we find in our faith and
knowledge, upon which that is grounded, and consequently there needs some other
help by the terror of judgment, to keep down the motions of the flesh, that
the weakness of our love may not be hindered, in carrying us on with life and
constancy, to the acting of those duties of service, that God requires at our
hands.

It is further to be observed, that the Lord thinks it fit to represent the
terror of his wrath by some visible object: for if it might be doubted,
whether the Cherubims that were placed at the entrance of Paradise were
discernable by the eye; it must needs be granted, that the flaming sword which
they held was visible. So that we may

5 OBSERVE, It is a great help to be informed by sense, of those things that
are to work effectually upon our hearts.


1. We are most easily, clearly and speedily moved by sensible objects, which
have a strong influence upon the affections; and the Lord who knows our frame,
Psalm. 103.14. is pleased to condescend unto our weakness, to teach us by those
means of which we are most capable, representing to earthly men heavenly things
in an earthly manner, John 3.12.

Let us make use of those means which the Lord has left unto us for this end,
not despising them, but abasing our selves, and admiring Gods infinite
goodness and patience, who is pleased to stoop so low, in compassion of our
weakness.

And long for heaven, wherein when our bodies are made spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.44.
we shall behold God with these eyes, Job 19.27. and seeing him as he is, 1 John
3.2. shall be satisfied with his likeness, Psalm. 17.15. filled with his love,
and transported with the sight of his glory

The Cherubims that held out this flaming sword, must needs be acknowledged to
be Angels, as we have seen already, to strike the deeper impression of terror
into Adams heart, if they were visible, seeing we find their presence so
terrible to the godly, Dan. 8.17. So that we may hence

6. OBSERVE, The Angls themselves are ministering spirits for the good of the
Saints.
Psalm. 104.4. sent at his Command, not only for Christ's service, Mat. 4.11.
Luke 22.43. but his childrens too, to keep them in their ways, Psalm. 91.11. to
destroy their enemies, 2 Kings 19.35. to instruct them, Dan. 8.16, 19. to
chastise them for their sins, 2 Samuel 24.16. and to gather the Elect to
judgment, and separate the wicked to be destroyed, Mat. 24.31. and 13.39, 41,
42. Reason

1. They are Gods creatures, and therefore at his Command.

2. And employed by him for the good of those that shall be companions with
them in the same glory, to increase love amongst all the Elect, as being
fellow members of one body.

1. See how dear Gods children are unto him, who is contented to employ his
own guard to do them service.

2. Learn from them, nay, from Christ himself, John 13.14, 15. to stoop to the
service of our brethren at Gods Command, Gal. 5.13. even Kings themselves with
David, who served his own generation, Act. 13.36.

The sword which those Cherubims held turned every way, that which way soever
the man should attempt the entrance into Paradise, it might meet with them, so
that there was no possibility of escaping Gods hand, the man should attempt the
returning into Paradise, from which God had excluded him. Whence we may

7. OBSERVE, There is no means to escape the hand of Gods Justice, if men walk
on in a course of rebellion against him.
Psalm. 139.7. nor consequently from his revenging hand, Job 20.25.16.22.23. so
that there is no peace nor safety to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. Reason

1. Gods Presence is every where, and as many creatures as are in heaven and
earth, so many instruments he has to execute his judgments, for all are his
servants, Psalm. 119.91. to fulfill his Word and Will, Psalm. 148.6.

2. Else God could not govern the word in righteousness, if men walking in
rebellious courses, might find any means to escape his revenging hand.

Let it move us to forbear all rebellious practices, as being assured therein
to run upon inevitable destruction, and to lay hold of Gods strength, that we
may make peace with him, Isa. 27.3. whose vengeance we can neither avoid nor
endure, ver. 4.

FINIS.
A Table of all the Observations, and Principal Points handled in this Book.
CHAP. I. Verse 1.
DIvine Truths sufficiently commend themselves, without the help of any
^^naments of Art or Eloquence. Page 5 We must first give our Assent unto the
Truths of God, and search into the fuller understanding of them afterward. p. 6
The World had a Beginning, nay, it began but a while ago. p. 7. Before the
World was, God is. ibid. Creation is the work of a Mighty Power. p. 8 The World
was nothing till God gave it a Being. p. 9 Heaven is more Excellent then the
Earth. ibid. The Earth, and all the store of it, is the work of Gods Hand, p.
10
Verse 2.
The best way to judge of things aright, is to look back and consider them in
their first Original. page 12 All Creatures, how Glorious and Beautiful soever
they appear at present, were Base and Deformed in their original. ibid. The
Earth was empty, till God furnished and stored it. p. 13 Imperfections and
Wants are no part of Gods Work. ibid. The forms and natures of all sorts of
Creatures are the Works and Effects of Gods Spirit. p. 14 God Spirit is present
every where, even in the midst of the greatest darkness. p. 15 The way of Gods
working is secret, etc. ib. All Creatures are Perfect by degrees. p. 16 God is
pleased to cherish the Meanest of all his Works. p. 17
Verse 3.
The general Good of the creature is Gods First care. d. 18 God needs no other
Means to effect any thing, but his Own Word and Will. p. 19 God loves to do all
his Works in the light. p. 20 Light is the Work of God Himself. p. 21 God can,
and often does, bring Light out of Darkness. p. 22 Gods Word and Deed are all
one. p. 23 The want of second means cannot hinder Gods Work. p. 24
Verse 4.
God takes a view of all his Works that he makes. p. 25 God is a Sufficient
Witness to Himself, p. 26 All that God does, is exceeding good and Perfect. p.
27 Light is a good Creature. p. 28 That and that only, is good which God
Approves. p. 26 Light and Darkness cannot subsist together. p. 30 Light and
Darkness take their turns, and succeed one another, in the Order that God has
appointed. ibid.
Verse 5.
All things must be called and distinguished by Names, as may be agreeable to
their Natures, Page 32 God takes Time and Leisure in bringing things to pass.
p. 33
Verse 6.
The Vaste Body of the Heavens is the work of God. page 35 The Air in which we
move and breath is Gods creature. ibid. God so orders all things, as they may
best serve for Use. p. 37 God can put Beauty and Excellency on the basest
things. p. 38
Verse 7.
God performs all things according to that which he has decreed. Page 39 Where
God does provide the Means, yet it is he that must perform the work by them. p.
40 The Clouds and Rain are Gods Works, and are raised up only by his Power. p.
41
Verse 8.
The Glorious Frame of the Heavens was raised by the Word of God. p. 42
Whatsoever God has Settled, shall continue for ever, etc. ibid.
Verse 9.
It is the Will of God that all Creatures shall depart from their own Private,
for a Common good. p. 44 All Creatures in the world obey the voice of God. p.
45 It is only Gods Powerful Restraint of the Seas and Waters, that makes the
Earth habitable for Man and Beast. p. 46 The huge and vaste Seas are the
Creatures of God, etc. ibid.
Verse 10.
The goodness of every Creature of God ought to considered in Particular. p.
48
Verse 12.
God will have nothing barren and anprofitable. Page 50 The Herbs and Plants of
the Earth are Gods Creatures. p. 52 The substance of all Trees and plants is
from the Earth. ibid. God can draw Life out of Death it self. p. 53 God
provides for all his Creatures, that they may not wholly perish. ibid. Fruits
ought to Resemble the Nature of the Stock of which they come. p. 54
Verse 14.
The Sun, Moon, and Stars are no gods, but creatures. p. 57 When God has
prepared Means, he does ordinarily perform all things by Means. p. 58 The
Places, and Uses of all Creatures, are assigned unto them by God himself. ib.
All sorts of Creatures are ordained by God for Use and Service. p. 60
Distinction between the Day and the Night, is an Ordinance established by God.
ib. It is not unlawful by the Stars and Planets, to guess at some Events that
follow. p. 61 All the Affairs of Men are ordered and directed by God himself.
p. 62
Verse 15.
The Excellencies of the Creatures are not of themselves, but are bestowed on
them by Him that made them. p. 63 Where God provides Ordinary Means, he takes
away those which are Extraordinary. p. 64 The Light which God bestows upon the
Creature, he gives for the use of others, as well as for those that Receive it.
p. 65 No distance can hinder us of the effects of Gods care and providence over
us for good. p. 66 Although God be pleased to make use of Means; yet he binds
not himself to work all by means. p. 67
Verse 16.
We may take notice of any Eminency of the Creature, to lead us to the
Admiration of the Super-eminent Perfection of the Creator. p. 69 God uses to
proportion the Abilities of his Creatures. ibid. Men must make use of Light to
direct them in their Employments. p. 70 Though all the Creatures be not
furnished alike, yet none of them wants that which is competent for their use.
p. 71 All Creatures are Perfect in their Kinds. p. 72 Those of weak Abilities,
may be useful for some kind of Employment, p. 73 God takes care for the
Government of the Night as well as the Day. ibid.
Verse 20.
Gods Works are carried on toward Perfection. p. 76 God leaves nothing Empty
that he has made. p. 77 God works all things, but of all things. p. 78 God
disposes all Creatures in such places as are most agreeable to them. p. 79
Breath and Life are the gifts of God. ibid. The variety of Gods Works are
Infinite. p. 80 The Motion and Being of every Creature is ordered by the Will
and Decree of God. p. 81
Verse 21.
The Eminency of any Creature ought to be observed, etc. p. 82 Many other
Creatures go beyond Man in outward things. p. 83 God furnishes every Creature
with Parts and Abilities. ibid. God can out of the same Mass draw out infinite
variety of several shapes and natures. p. 84 God Respects the Meanest of the
Works that he has made. ibid. The meanest of the Creatures that God has made,
are good. p. 85
Verse 22.
Fruitfulness is a gift bestowed only by God himself. p. 86 Fruitfulness in
the Creatures is a special Blessing of God. p. 87 The Blessing of Propagation
is from God alone. p. 88 Nothing so Vaste or Wide, but God can Furnish or Fill
at his Pleasure. ibid.
Verse 24.
Man and Beasts are of near Alliance. p. 90 Beasts are wholly of the Earth. p.
91 All the Beasts on Earth are Gods store. p. 92
Verse 25.
God brings to effect whatsoever he wills. p. 92
Verse 26.
Man is a singular and extraordinary Piece of work. p. 96 God provides
beforehand, all things for man's supply. p. 98 God is pleased to express
himself unto us, after the manner of men. ibid. Eminent Works of God, require
of Men especial observation of them. p. 99 Works of Moment and Importance ought
to be undertaken with Advice and Counsel. p. 100 God in all his ways and
works, is guided by no Counsel but his Own. ibid. Man has no Maker but God
Alone. p. 101 Man, in his first Creation, was made by God after his Own Image.
ibid. Gods Image in Man is his greatest Glory. p. 103 God has Advanced man to
have Dominion and Lordship over all his Works. p. 104 Man's Dominion over the
Creatures, is no right belonging to him, etc. p. 105 God gives Bountifully. p.
106 Gods blessings upon his Children ought to be remembered in Particular. p.
107
Verse 27.
Gods Purposes, and Promises, are all Yea, and Amen. p. 109 Gods Special
Favors ought to be often Remembered. ibid. The Distinction of the Sexes of Man
and Woman, is ordained by God Himself. p. 110
Verse 28.
It is by Gods blessing that Man must be sustained and upheld. p. 110 God will
have men to take notice of the Blessings that he bostowes upon them. p. 111 God
can easily bring Multitudes out of One. p. 112 All men and Nations are of one
Blood, and have but one Father. ibid. Man's Replenishing the Earth, is by
Special Command from God. p. 113 Those that have Possessions in the Earth, may
so manure them, that they may be useful and fraitful. p. 114 All the Creatures
of the Earth are the Servants of Man. ibid.
Verse 29.
God created Man without Means. p. 117 That God that has given us life, will
give Means to preserve our life. p. 118 Gods goodness in supplying us with
necessary provision, requires special observation. p. 119 Men that have the
greatest Possessions in the world, must receive their Allowance from Gods Hand.
ibid. Man's Food is the gift of God. p. 120 All the provision that God has
allowed Man for his Food, is drawn out of the Earth. p. 122 God does strangely
counterballance our Honors, in all his dispensations unto us. p. 123 Plain and
Ordinary Fare may and ought to content the best amongst men. ibid. Gods
Allowance of Food to Man, is of great variety. p. 125 God gives us not our
Provisions at once, but by a continual Supply. ibid. It is only by Gods Decree
and Blessing upon the Creatures, that they have strength to nourish us. p. 126
Verse 30.
God allows Sufficient Provision for the Creatures that he has made. p. 127
Men and Beasts are allowed by God the same Provisions of Food, etc. p. 128
Verse 31.
The whole Frame of the Works which God made in the Creation of the World, is
perfectly good. p. 129
CHAP. II
Verse 1.
IT must be our Care to observe, how God Disposes and Orders that which he
has wrought. Page 3 The Creatures that God has made, are to be looked on as
an Army arrayed in an excellent and well composed Order. ibid. God perfecteth
every work that he takes in hand. p. 4
Verse 2.
God Commands nothing, but that which is Convenient. p. 6 God makes his Laws
Equal and Reasonable. ibid. God Creates no more; then what he made in the
Beginning. p. 7 God cease not from his Works of Providence, etc, p. 8
Verse 3.
The Worship of God ought to be Man's first and chief care. p. 13 God makes
great account of the Sanctifying of his Sabbaths. p. 14 The Sabbath Day is a
day of Blessings. ibid. The Sabbath is a Day of Rest, set apart to an Holy Use.
ibid. The Law given by God to observe the Sabbath Day, is Perpetual. p. 18
Meditation in Gods Works, is a Christians chief Exercise. p. 19
Verse 4.
He that gives things their Being, may Order them as he will. p. 21 When we
mention the Being of the Creatures, we ought to Remember Him that made them.
ibid.
Verse 5.
Every Herb and Plant is Gods Creature. p. 22 The Mercies of God must be taken
Notice of. ibid. That which is brought to pass without ordinary Means, must
needs be wrought by the Power of God. ibid. There can be no Rain on the Earth,
unless God send it, p. 23 It is by Rain from Heaven, that all the Herbs and
Plants on the Earth do grow. ibid. God makes use of Man's Labor to cherish the
Fruits of the Earth. p. 24 The Fruitfulness of the Earth comes only by Gods
Blessing. p. 25
Verse 6.
God wants no Means to effect whatsoever he will. p. 26. God can bring things
to pass without any Means at all. ibid. Gods power is never clearly
discovered, till all Means be removed. p. 27 Every Creatures ought to be useful
unto that from whence it is produced. ibid.
Verse 7.
The Substance of Man's Body is exceeding Base and Vile. p. 28 God has framed
Man's Body into aa excellent piece of work. p. 29 The Soul of Man comes
Immediately from God himself. p. 30 The Life of Man consisting in the union of
the Soul with the Body, has a very weak foundation. ibid. The Life of Man is
only by his Soul. page 31 None worthy the Name of a Living Soul, but he that
lives by a Reasonable Soul. p. 32
Verse 8.
The Fruitfulness of one part of the Earth above another, is from God Alone.
p. 34 Man can have no more title to any part of the Earth then God allows him.
page 35 God bestows upon men his Best and Chiefest Blessings. p. 36
Verse 9.
God takes Special Notice of all things that he bestows upon us. p. 39 Every
Plant on the Earth grows where God Appoints it. p. 40 Gods Bounty abounds unto
men. ibid. It is usual with God to mix delights and pleasure, with usefulness
and profit in all his blessings. p. 41 The best amongst men have need of
Outward Means, to put them in mind of their Duties. p. 42 Spiritual and
Religious Duties ought to be remembered in our Employments in the things of this
Life. p. 43 Gods Commandments ought to be still before the face of his
Children. p. 44 God teaches his Children by things of Ordinary and Common use.
ibid. God engages himself by his Word to do us good. p. 45 The continuance of
Present, and hope of future Life are assured by Gods Providence. p. 46 All Gods
Promises must be understood under the Condition of the performance of our
Obedience. p. 47 Good and Evil are bounded and limited only by the Will of
God. ibid.
Verse 10.
Gods Blessings are every way Complete and Perfect. Page 49 Springs and Rivers
of Waters are not the least of Gods Mercies. ibid.
Verse 11.
Gold is a Creature of great Price with Men. p. 50 God is none of the Creatures
in which our Happiness consists, p. 53
Verse 15.
Every Son of Adam is bound to some Employment or other in a particular
Calling, p. 55 Men's Callings and Employments are by Gods Own Appointment. p. 57
Duty, and not Gain, should be the Ground of the undertaking of all our
particular Callings. p. 58 Man's Labor at last redounds unto himself. p. 60
Man's Employment ought to be in those places where it is most needed. ibid. The
Labor of man makes nothing at all, but only by his Husbandry, etc. p. 61
Verse 16.
Experience of Gods goodness, is the best Means to encourage us to cheerful
obedience unto Gods Will. p. 64 Man's Labor about the things of this life gives
him good title unto that which he enjoyes. p. 65 All Man's labor is for his own
good. ibid. The best way to quiet our hearts in what we want, is to set before
our eyes what we do enjoy. p. 66 The Provisions which God allows us for this
Life, are of wonderful variety. p. 67 Whatsoever God-bestowes upon us, he
bestows Freely and Fully. p. 68 The most Righteous amongst the Sons of Men
must live under a Law. p. 70 The Will of God is that which Man is to take for
his Rule. Page 71 God is pleased to give a Law to furnish us with all needful
Means to further us in the performance of our Duties. page 72 The Matters in
which God delights to try our Obedience, are in themselves of no great
importance. p. 73 Our Abundance and Delights must be used within the Limits of
Obedience. ibid. Disobedience is a fearful Sin in Gods Account, p. 74 The
Terrors of the Law are Useful to the best amongst the sons of Men, p. 75 Death
and Destruction are in Gods Hand, ibid. All kinds of Evils and Miseries are the
Wages of Sin, p. 76 Gods Judgments are certain, as well as his Promises of
Mercy. p. 77 Vengeance and Judgment follow Sin at the heels. ibid.
Verse 18.
God knows all our Wants, and makes Provision to supply them. p. 80 Gods
Providence and abundant goodness never fails us, p. 81 A Solitary life is an
uncomfortable life, p. 82 God takes Notice of our Wants, as a Faithful Helper,
p. 83 God makes nothing but for some necessary use, and to some profitable end,
ibid. A Wife is not good, till it be not good to be without a Wife, p. 84 It is
Gods Will that a man should be the better for his Wife, p. 85 It is only God
that must supply our Wants, p. 86 Nothing moves God to Compassion, but his own
bounty and goodness, ibid. A Wife is but an Helper to her husband. p. 87 A
Wife cannot be a good Wife, unless she be a Meet and a Fit Wife, p. 88
Verse 19.
Gods Mercies should be precious unto us. p. 90 We must know the
unserviceablenesse of other things, that we may Approve the profitablenesse of
that which is truly good, p. 91 God can dispose of the Creatures to be where he
Appoints them, ibid. Man may lawfully use that power over the Creatures which
God has put into his hand, p. 92 God is pleased to employ men in many things,
which of right belong unto himself, ibid.
Verse 20.
No Creature can be applied to any other use, then that for which it was first
created by God, p. 94 Beasts are not comfortable companions for men. p. 95
Verse 21.
Sleep and quiet Rest are given by God himself. p. 97 God is pleased to
manifest his Works to men, ibid. God takes care for us even while we sleep, p.
98 God delights to vary his ways in all his operations. ibid. Gods VVayes and
Works are full of holy Instructions, p. 100 The Wife must be neither her
husbands Lord nor Vassal, ibid. A Wife should be a strong Helper to her
Husband, p. 101 God requires nothing of us that may hurt us, ibid. God takes
nothing from us, but he takes care to recompense it to us, p. 102 It is usual
with God to leave with us lively Remembrances of his Mercies. ibid.
Verse 22.
God can change any thing into what Form he pleases, Page 104 God is Exact in
all the works that he undertakes, ibid. Women as well as men are Gods own
workmanship. ibid. God has allowed but one Wife to one man, p. 105 Man has
nothing but what God bestows upon him. p. 106 Every Child of God must desire
to receive his Wife from Gods hand, ibid.
Verse 23.
Gods Blessings ought to be entertained by us with Thankfulness, p. 108 We may
know as much of Gods Ways and Works as concerns us, for the quickening of us
unto our Duties. p. 109 It is Consent that makes the Marriage between Man and
Wife, p. 110 The best amongst men need to be minded of their Duty. p. 111
Verse 24.
Marriage of Man and Woman is an Ordinance of God, p. 113 Married persons must
be wholly and entirely one to another. p. 114 Married persons are to adhere and
cleave firmly one to another, ibid.
Verse 25.
Nakedness of man's Body was Glorious, till Sin made it shameful, p. 116
Inordinate Motions to evil thoughts arise from the corruption of the heart
within. ibid.
CHAP. III.
Satan's End in his Tempting of Gods people, Page 10 Of the Means by which Satan
endeavored to move Eve, to question Gods Love to Man. p. 12 Satan's cunning
Endeavors to win credit and a good opinion of himself, p. 14 Satan's
Practice to take away from the woman the terror of the Curse threatened by God.
p. 16 Satan's Practice to fasten man's heart to dependence upon the Creature,
page 17 A Consideration of Satan's great Art in managing this Temptation, p. 20
Verse 1.
It is the c^stome of Satan to attempt men before they be settled in a course
of godliness, p. 27 Satan contrives Mischief against such as never provoked
him, p. 28 No place can free us from Satan's Assaults, p. 29 Satan is the
Author of every sinful Motion, p. 30 Satan makes choice of the fittest
Instruments he can find for his own wicked Ends. p. 31 Cunning and Subtle
persons are dangerous Instruments to deceive, p. 22 No Advantage can assure a
Child of God from the Temptations of Satan, p. 33 Our Weakness is Satan's
Advantage, p. 35 Solitariness is many times a Snare, p. 36 Satan's main End, is
Man's Destruction, ibid. Satan usually pretends the good of those, whom he
intends to destroy. Satan and his Agents in tempting men to sin, are very wary
in discovering their full intentions at first. p. 40 Discretion and Wariness
in men's Actions, ought to hinder the Effectual prosecution of that which they
intend. p. 41 The forgetting of Gods Mercies is a great means to take off a
man's heart from him. ibid. It is a dangerous Snare to a man to have his Eyes
too much fixed upon his Wants. p. 42 The Nature of Man is apt to be carried
against all Restraint and Subjection. p. 43 Ambiguous and Doubtful expressions
are dangerous Snares. p. 44
Verse 2.
It is dangerous to lay open our selves freely to persons unknown. p. 45 It is
dangerous to question Evident and Known Truths. p. 46 Blasphemous Suggestions
ought not to be heard, without indignation, p. 47 When Gods Mercies are
mentioned, we must remember his Name that bestows them. ibid. Gods Mercies
ought not to be represented in weak and cold Expressions. p. 48
Verse 3.
Men's Speeches are Proportioned, according to the measure of the affections of
the heart, p. 50 When we remember any Law of God, we ought to set before us the
Sanction annexed thereunto, p. 51 When we lay the Law of God before us, we must
fix our thoughts upon him that gives it. p. 52 It is an hard matter to bring
man's heart to submit unto any yoke of restraint. p. 53 Whosoever will not be
entangled to sin, must not come near them. p. 54 The sleighting of the Curse of
the Law, makes way to the Transgression of the Law. p. 55
Verse 4.
A little yielding to Satan's Temptations, invites him to a stronger Assault, p.
56 Those which seem modest in sin at the first, grow bold in it at the last. p.
57 No Truth of God so clear and manifest, but Satan dare to contradict, ibid.
Satan and his Agents never make use of Gods Word, but for Mischief. p. 58
Verse 5.
Satan in his promises, gives men no ground to build upon. p. 59 It is Satan's
policy, to cast suspicions of evil ends, on that which he cannot blame, p. 61
It is usual with Satan to charge men with those evils whereof himself is
guilty, p. 62 Discontent at our Present Condition is a Dangerous Temptation of
Satan. page 63 Blindness and Ignorance is a great Misery. p. 65 It is great
Injustice in any man, to hinder others for his own Advantage. p. 66 It is false
Liberality to withhold things that are of true Value, and to bestow that which
is of little worth. p. 67 Man's leaning to the Creature, must necessarily divide
his heart from God. p 69 Self-Love and Seeking is one of Satan's most dangerous
Snares. p. 70 Satan lays his snares for men in those things wherein they take
most Delight. p. 72 Satan tempts us to sin in our Duties, p. 73 The searching
after the knowledge of unnecessary things is unprofitable, p. 74 The promises
of Satan are of such things as are either Evil, or Unprofitable, page 75 The
special End that Satan persuades wicked men to aim at, is, that they may be as
Gods. p. 76 It is Satan's Policy to draw men to depend upon the Creature, etc.
p. 77 Self-seeking, and Dependence on the Creature, are Evils that be
inseparable. p. 78 Satan's Preferments are Base slaveries. p. 79 Hasty
Resolutions are dangerous in the Issue. p. 80 The nearer things are to be
enjoyed, the more strongly the heart is affected toward them. ibid.
Verse 6.
Things usually appear unto us, as we stand affected toward them in our
hearts, p. 83 Sin proceeds not from the outward Object, but from the corruption
of the heart within. p. 84 It is dangerous for a man to fix his Senses upon
enticing Objects. p. 85 Men are more apt to give credit unto lies, then unto
the Truth of God. page 86 Men are easily drawn to believe, and hope any thing
of that which they affect and desire. p. 87 The Terrors of wrath to come
cannot prevail against strong Affections to things that are present. p. 88
Outward Sense is an ill and a dangerous guide. p. 89 A man cannot naturally
desire any thing, but under a show and appearance of Good. p. 90 Man is an ill
chooser of his own good. p. 91 It is a gross Evil to choose what we like out
of respect to our selves in particular. p. 92 Lust once conceived, will at last
bring forth actual sin, 94 It is not in the power of Satan to draw any man to
sin, without his own consent, 95 They that sin themselves, are seducers of
others. p. 97 One that is fallen into sin, is many times most dangerous to his
nearest friends, p. 98 It is the property of true Love, to communicate to
others whatsoever it self embraces for good. p. 99 The strongest man is not
able to stand against Satan, if God leave him to himself. ibid.
Verse 7.
Man can discern nothing, but what God is pleased to discover unto him. p. 102
It is a great folly in man, not to foresee Evil before it be too late to help
it p. 103 Satan never discovers any thing unto us, but to do Mischief. ibid.
Those which discover not beforehand the Evils, which the errors of their
ways lead them into, yet they shall in the end feel the misery into which they
bring them, p. 104 Sin is able to make the most Excellent of all Gods Creatures
vile and shameful. p. 105 Men are more apt to be affected with the outward
evils that sin brings upon them, then with the sin that causes them. p. 106
Garments are but the Covers of our shame, p. 107 Most of our necessities are
brought upon us by Sin. p. 108 When men are fallen off from God, their nature
thereby corrupted, carries them strongly to seek help from the Creature, ibid.
Sin besots men, and makes them fools, p. 109 All the care men take, is rather
to hide their sin, then to take it away. 110 All Satan's promises prove nothing
but Lies and mere Delusions. 111
Verse 8.
God will find men out in their sins. 114 God when he is provoked by our sins,
yet he is the first that seeks to make peace with us. ibid. God when he deals
with men, delights to be hearkened unto with Reverence, 116 God so deals with
men, that he may humble, but not confound them. ibid. God many times calls men
to Account, and proceeds in Judgment against them in the midst of their
Delights. 117 It is needful to observe a fit Season in dealing with Offenders
after they have sinned. 118 The Presence of God is terrible to a Sinner. 119
When men are fallen away from God, they are left to miserable Shifts. 120 Men
are naturally apt to fly from the Means of their own Good. 121 The Terrors of
God will shake the Hearts of all those that slight his Judgments. 122 A guilty
Conscience is filled with Terror upon every Occasion, 123 Whatsoever we truly
fear, we cannot but endeavor to fly from. ibid. Men's hearts are wonderful
prone to conceive of God as they do of a mortal man. 124
Verse 9.
Terrors may prepare a man's heart, but it is only the Word of God that
informs and subdues it. 125 The way to get our bearts affected with what we
hear, is to apprehend our selves to be spoken unto in particular. 126 Those
that endeavor to fly from God, can by no means shift themselves out of his
presence. page 127 God loves a free and voluntary Acknowledgment of sin from
his children. 128 God is full of mildness and gentleness in his dealing with
offenders. 129 The Knowledge of ones ill condition, is an effectual means to
bring him unto true Repentance, 130 All those that desire to get out of their
misery, must consider with themselves, what brought them into it.
Verse. 10.
All men must appear before God, and answer all that they are charged with,
when he comes to Judgment. 133 Men are apt to conceal all that they can, even
from God himself. ibid. One sin commonly draws on another. 134 Gods Word is
terrible to a guilty conscience, 135 It is an hard matter to bring men to
confess any more, then is evident in it self. 136 Men may be brought more
easily to acknowledge any thing then their sin. ibid. No Means can work any
further, then they are carried on by God Himself. 138
Verse 11.
Man's frowardness cannot overcome Gods Love and Patience. 139 God can easily
convince men by themselves. ibid. God takes notice of all our ways. 140 God
accepts of no Confession, till men acknowledge their sins. 141 Men must be
dealt withal in plain terms, before they will be brought to acknowledge their
sins. ibid. Whosoever will convince a man of sin, must charge him with the very
act in which he has sinned. Page 142 In sinful acts our hearts ought only to
be fixed upon our own Actions. 143 The breach of Gods Commandment, is that
which makes any act of ours a sin. ibid.
Verse 12.
No man can bear out sin before God. 146 When men's sins are manifest, yet they
will labor to extenuate them what they may. 147 A man in this state of
Corruption, Respects none but himself. 148 Seducers are justly chargeable with
all the sins committed by those that are seduced by them. 149 It is usual with
men, when themselves have committed the sin, to lay the blame upon God. 150 It
is usual with men, to cast Gods Blessings in his teeth with Discontent. 151 Men
may easily by their own folly, turn the Means ordained by God for good, into
snares for their destruction. 152 It is dangerous to embrace any motion
presented unto us, without examining the ground of it. 153
Verse 13.
No Actor in any sin can escape Gods discovery. 155 Men's sins must be so far
manifested, as may conduce to the Advancing of Gods glory. 156 A good man's
heart ought to be deeply affected with the sense of his own sin. 158 The
seducing of ones nearest friends is a foul heartbreaking sin. ibid. Sin, and
the enticements thereunto, are dangerous Deceits. 159
Verse 14.
God will not reason the case with such as he destinates to destruction. 164
Whosoever has an hand in sin, shall be sure to have a share in the punishment.
165 Every instrument in the acting of sin, is liable to Gods Curse. ibid. One
man's punishment, ought to be other men's instruction. 166 God lays his
Judgments upon no Creature, but upon just desert. ibid. Gods Curse upon any
creature is the fountain of all Plagues. 167 It is usual with God in his
Judgments to point at the sin for which they are inflicted. 168 It is only sin
that makes one more vile then another. ibid. It is a shameful abasement to be
glewed to the Earth. 169
Verse 15.
Man's Salvation is Satan's grief and vexation, 175 Gods indignation is never so
much kindled against the Wicked, that he forgets his Mercy toward his Own. 176
Gods Mercy toward man in the Means of his Salvation, proceeds merely from
Himself. ibid. God Sanctifies all those whom he Saves. 177 It is an Effect of
true Sanctification, to hate both Satan and all that bear his Image. 178
Whosoever truly abhors sin, must needs hate the very instruments of Evil. 179
Godly men, the more they are acquainted with sin and sinners, the more they
abhor them. ibid. Sanctification is the work of Gods Spirit. 180 The work of
Grace wroughts in the heart of man is unresistible. 181 The work of man's
Sanctification is not forced upon him. ibid. The state of man into which be is
now established by Grace, is unchangeable. 183 Hatred and Enmity is the fruit
of sin. ibid. Satan is the Author of all envy and malice against Gods
Children, 185 The Malice and Hatred between the godly and Satan, is by Gods
Decree. ibid. God directs the malice of Satan against the godly, to their good
at the last. 186 God supplies most comfort to those that most most need it. 187
God is able to strengthen the weakest of his Servants, and against Satan all
his Power. ibid. The greatness of man's sin, is no ^^rre to Gods Mercy, 188
Gods Mercies are bestowed on the godly, and to their posterity after them.
ibid. The Promises of Mercy and Grace belong only to the Holy Seed. 189 Only
godly children are worthy to be accounted Children. 190 Wicked men be the
Devils Children. ibid. There is irreconcilable hatred between the godly and
the wicked. 191 Enmity and Malice against godly men, is an evident mark of a
child of the devil, ibid. Christ is truly the woman's Seed. 192 Christ, in the
days of his flesh, was, in his own Person, wounded by Satan and his
instruments. 193 Christ suffered nothing in his Person, but what God had before
decreed. 194 Though Satan wounded Christ, yet he could not conquer him. ibid.
Christ, and all that are members of his body are one. 195 The Members of Christ
may suffer by the malice of Satan. 196 Christ, in his own Person, takes up the
Quarrel of his Church against Satan and all his Agents. 197 The wounds which
the Members of Christ receive by the hand of Satan, shall not be mortal. 198
The Combat between Christ and Satan, shall end at last in the Total subduing of
him. 199 Christ's Victory over Satan, is not for himself alone, but for all his
Members. 200
Verse 16.
All the Afflictions of Christ's Members are dispensed unto them under the
Covenant of Grace. 202 God has not freed his children from the Afflictions of
this life. 203 God in his Afflictions to his children, has mixed with their
bitterness some sweetness of mercy. 205 God has mixed Bitterness with the
Blessings of this life. 206 It is the Wifes Duty to be subject to the will and
direction of her husband. 207 The subjection of the Wife to the Husband must be
in the inward affection of the heart. 208
Verse 17.
The Curse upon all Creatures proceeds from the Will and Decree of God. 209 It
is our own sin that brings the Curse of God upon all that we enjoy. 210 The
greatest of all Creatures are under Gods Command. 211 The Curse of God upon the
Creatures is a part of Man's punishment. ibid. Man's life in this world, is a
life of pain and sorrow. 212 The Short pleasures of sin draws after it a Long
punishment. 213 Man's Food is out of the Earth. ibid.
Verse. 18.
Thorns and Thistles are the Effects of Gods Curse upon man for sin. 214 As we
are more or less serviceable unto God, so we may expect the Creatures to be
service able to us. 215 God makes good his Promises, by which he has engaged
himself unto us, etc. ibid. Though God restores us his Blessings, yet we enjoy
them with some abatement. 216
Verse 19.
Man's Emmployment in this life, is in painful Labors. 118 There is profit in
all the Duties which God enjoins us. 219 Whatsoever we undertake in obedience
to Gods Command, shall not want effect. 220 Gods Sanctions are certain, as well
of Judgment as of Mercy. 221 Though God has freed his children from eternal
death, yet he has left them under the sentence of temporal death. 222 Men's
bodies are base every way, etc. 223 The disposing of man's life is in Gods hand.
224 Death is certain to all men. ibid. The Judgments of God are Just and Equal
in all things. 225
Verse 20.
God leaves not his Children without means to support them. 226 The Grace which
God works in his Childrens hearts, is Faith. 227 Gods Promises must be embraced
by Faith. 228 A godly man must be careful to preserve memorials of great
mercies. 229 It is fit in giving Names, to make choice of such as may give us
something for our direction. ibid.
Verse 21.
The Clothes that we wear, are Gods provision. 230 Necessary Provision is as
much as we can look for at Gods hand. 231 Our Clothes are borrowed from other
Creatures. ibid.
Verse 23.
God withholds from us many Blessings for our good. 233 When men have broken
out into one sin, they are in danger to fall into another. ibid. God
oftentimes prevents men's falling into sin. 234 The surest way to prevent men's
falling into sin, is to be far from the Allurements that entice them unto sin.
235 Men are naturally apt to think themselves safe in the performance of
outward acts of holy Duties. ibid. God cannot endure the defiling of his
Ordinances. 237 No Blessing so firmly assured to us, whereof sin may not
deprive us. 238 Men's Dwellings and Employments are both assigned by God. 239
God leaves Remembrances, to mind us what we are. 240
Verse 24.
Gods Judgments are to be remembered carefully. 241 God loves to leave Monuments
both of his Mercies and Judgments. ibid. In searching into Gods Judgments, our
care must be to observe the Cause of them. 242 The best of Gods Servants have
need of the Terrors of his Judgments. ibid. It is a great help to be informed
by sense, of those things that are to work effectually upon our hearts. 243 The
Angels themselves are ministering spirits for the good of the Saints. p. 244
There is no means to escape Gods Justice, if men walk on in a course of
Rebellion against him. ibid.

