THE TROUBLES OF JERUSALEMS RESTORATION, OR, The Churches Reformation.

REPRESENTED In a Sermon preached before the Right Honorable House of LORDS, in
the Abbey Church Westminster, November. 26. 1645.

By JOHN WHITE, Master of Arts, and Rector of the Church of the Holy Trinity in
Dorchester in the County of Dorset.

ZACH. 14.6.7. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not
be clear, nor dark.

But it shall be one day, which shall be known to the Lord, nor day nor night,
but it shall come to pass that at evening time it shall be light.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for John Rothwel, and Luke Fawn, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The House of PEERS, assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IN obedience to your Command (Right Honorable) I make bold to present unto
your view these Meditations, which in part, I did, and intended fully, to have
delivered in your ears, the day where^n, by your appointment, I was called unto
this service. I may truly say, I intended it, rather then performed it. For the
Meditations themselves being conceived (as women's children are, Genesis 3.16.) in
sorrow and pain, upon the bed of languishing weakness, when they were come to
the birth, wanted the help of strength to bring them forth; I felt indeed so
much, I will not say sorrow, but extremity of pain, while I stood that day
before you, that I was enforced to present you only the heads, for the most
part, of what I intended to have delivered then unto you, if the infirmity then
upon me had not hindered it. You well know (Right Honorable) that the
infirmities of the body have a strong influence upon the soul, and therefore I
assure my self you will not expect that from a mind distempered and distracted
by the sense of pain and grief, which might be required of a free and enlarged
spirit. I make no question but some may be ready to pass that censure upon
this message of mine unto you, which old Cato gave once upon an Embassage sent
by the Roman Senate (wherein of the three Ambassadors, one had his head full of
scars, by wounds received in the wars, the second was lame in his feet, the
third defective in his intellectuals) Eam legationem neque Caput, neque Pedes,
neque Cor habere, that Embassage (said he) has neither Head, nor Feet, nor
Heart. I pass not for such censures; I only desire, that although these
Meditations be the issue of an infirm Head and Body, they may not be taken to
be aegri somnia, a sick man's dreams, nor the illusions of a deceiving Prophet,
that cries out, I have dreamed, I have dreamed, Jer. 23.25. The words which I
set before you, are the words of truth, the Oracles of God, and if they be so
esteemed by you, and all that love the truth, I have my desire, and God shall
have the glory. The chief Subject handled, is the Troubles which accompany the
Churches Reformation. In that particular God has made my work suitable to his
own, both the restoring of Jerusalem, and my Meditations thereupon were cast
into times of trouble, if pains and infirmities may be so accounted. In the
close of this Sermon, you shall find an humble Petition for the cherishing of
poor Students, which if you be pleased to entertain with favor, as the last
request of a dying man, nay as an intimation from the Man Christ, who dyed for
us, I know not whereby you may more engage, not man, but the Lord himself to
make good his promise to you, Mal. 3.10, 11, 12. to open the windows of
heaven, and to power upon you and the Land, blessings more then you can
receive, and to rebuke the devourer for your sakes; so that all Nations shall
call you blessed. That your care and endeavor may be, both in this, and all
other services for the Church, to fulfill the will of the Lord Christ, and that
this may be your reward, is, and shall be, the prayer of

Your Honors humble servant in the Lord Christ, JOHN WHITE.

THE Troubles of Jerusalems RESTORATION: OR, The Churches Reformation.
DAN. 9.15. The street shall be built again, and the wall even in the
troublous Times.


WHatsoever things were written aforehand, were written for our learning, says
the Apostle, Romans 15.4. The Laws for our Direction: The Prophecies for
Observation of their Accomplishment in answerable Events: The Promises for our
Comfort and conso ation: The Examples of Evil for Caution, of Good for
Imitation: And lastly the Events, ordered by the Wisdom, and Providence of
God, for Precedents and Patterns, representing our State and Condition, either
What it is at Present, and why so, or what we are to Expect it may be
hereafter. Upon this ground it is (Right Honorable) that I have made choice of
this portion of Scripture, to the Church of the Jews then, a Prophecy of that
which was shortly to be fulfilled, but to us, being long ago Accomplished, in
the nature of an History, or Relation of what God did then for his people, and
How, and When, setting before us, as in a Type, the state and condition of our
own Church at present, both what it Is, and what God is about to do amongst
Us, as will easily appear by Paralleling the particulers of the One with the
other.

Jews was then, and had full Seventy years, been held in Captivity and
bondage, under the Babylonian Monarchy: Our Church had bin far longer
oppressed, under a more heavy yoke of the spiritual Babylon, the Mother of
Fornications.

Jews was deprived of all Gods Ordinances, as with much bitterness themselves
complain, Psalm. 74.9. We see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet,
neither is there any amongst us that knows how long. Our condition, in this
respect, was every way as sad and miserable as theirs, we had indeed amongst
those that occupied the room of Seers; but those that should have been our
Watchmen, were all Blind, sleeping, and loving to slumber, Shepherds that
could not understand, looking all to their own way, every one to his gain
from his quarter, as the Prophet Isaiah complains of the Priests of his time,
Isa. 56.10.11.

Psalm. 126.1. Our deliverance from the Romish Bondage was no less sudden, no
less unexpected, then theirs even in a Moment, that yoke was broken, and we
were restored to liberty, to the admiration of all the Churches of Europe, who
said, as the Heathen did of the Jews; The Lord has done great things for
them, Psalm. 126.2.

Jews, was wrought by the change of the Princes, God suddenly cutting off
Belshazzar, who held them in Bondage, and raising up Cyrus in his room, whom
he calls his Shepherd to perform all his pleasure, in building Jerusalem, and
laying the foundation of the Temple, Isa. 44.28. Our Change (as you all know)
was in like manner brought to pass by taking away Queen MARY, who held us
under the yoke of Antichrist, and placing Queen ELIZABETH, of blessed memory,
in her Throne, to lay the foundation of his Temple, and set on foot the work of
Reformation amongst us.

Jews the foundation of the Temple was laid, Ezra, 3.16. And immediately after
the breaking and taking off the yoke of Antichrist from our necks, howsoever
other things needful for the perfecting of the work, were either Neglected, or
Deferred; yet we must needs grant, that the foundation of the Lords house was
presently laid, in the sound Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, upon which
the Church is built, JESUS CHRIST himself being the chief Cornerstone,
Ephesians. 2.20.

Jews found no means to perfect the work which they had so happily begun: Our
work, of this Churches Reformation, has bin interrupted now near twice 46
years, as the complaints of the faithful servants of Christ (manifested in
their Books, and Remonstrances from time to time) and the several
Informations given in unto your selves, since your Sitting here, evidence to
the whole world: Yea, so far have our Master Builders bin from bringing forth
the head stone of this Work, that they have rather labored to undermine, and
demolish the foundation of sound Doctrine, already laid, by broaching and
countenancing dangerous Errors, and Heresies, contrary thereunto, as you all
know.

Jews in building their Temple were their Adversaries of the Nations that
dwelt round about them, and amongst them Rebum the Chancellor, and Shimchai the
Scribe with their Companions, backed by a party at the Court, which they hired
to hinder this work, as they did, during all the reign of Cyrus, Ezra 4.5.7,
8.24. Now that the Nations round about us; Priests, and Jesuits, with all the
rest of the Romish Agents, have been great hinderers of our work of
Reformation, the world knows: I am sure the Chancellors, and Scribes, with
their companions, have had a deep hand in this mischievous design, supported
(as you all know) by an hired and engaged party in the Court of our Princes.

Jews adversaries for the building of their Temple was the filling the Princes
heads with jealousy, that the Jews were a dangerous people and, if the
Temple, and Ci^ie were built, apt to rise in Rebellion against the King, which
might turn to his great damage, Ezra 4.13, 15, 16. And that Satan and his
Instruments (as in all former ages, so at present) have made use of the same
policy, to ^inder our work of a thorough Reformation is as clear as the
light. And I wish, that jealousy were at this time so thoroughly removed out of
men's heads, that they might no more fear that the Reformation of the Church,
according to the Patterre laid down in Gods word, will prove like
Nchuchadnezzars stone, Dan. 2.27. a means to break all other Kingdoms (that
is, as too many conceive) all civil Power and Government in pieces.

Jews were in great reproach, and affliction, Neh. 1.3. And we know during
this long time of hindering our Reformation, not only such as pleaded for it,
but as many as were true Israelites, and looked toward Zion, had not only their
souls filled with the scorning of those that were at ease, and with the
contempt of the Proud as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 123.4. but were
continually followed, and vexed with sharp Persecutions, insomuch that
whosoever abstained from evil made himself a prey, as the Prophet complains
it was in his time, Isa. 59.15.

Jews adversaries, yet the Temple was finished, and the Walls and Streets of
Jerusalem were built at last. Now howsoever we are not yet fully Parallel to
them in this Particular; yet seeing the chiefest adversaries of this
Reformation are already taken away, and seeing the work by the mighty power of
God has bin thus far carried on in your hand, it gives us great ground of
hope that the same God, will in his own time, and way, perfect the work which
he has begun, and bring forth the head-stone thereof with shooting, that we
may cry Grace, Grace unto it, as he promises, Zach. 4 7.

Jerusalem, and the street thereof fell out in troublous times: I may spare the
labor of laying out the Parallel of our state to theirs in this Particular,
Res ipsa loquitur, we (as you see) are forced to build with our Arms in our
hands as they did, Neh. 4.17, 18.

The consideration of these Particulars, setting before us in the state of the
Jews, briefly pointed at in these words, our own Condition every way
answerable thereunto, as face answers face in the water, as Solomon speaks,
Prove. 27.9. is of great use unto us, both to raise up our hearts to more
heedfull attention to those things which in this portion of Scripture seem to
be spoken to us in their persons, and withal to move us to a more narrow
search into the particulars in these words laid before us as nearly concerning
our selves.

The truth is both upon that ground, and much more for the Wonders of that
great Work, to the performance whereof God ingageth himself in this Promise
which we have before us, it concerns us in duty to enquire thoroughly, and
observe, and search into every circumstance of this way of God, which when we
have all done is yet far above our reach. It is one end why God has made his
Works wonderful that they may be both Remembered, and sought out, of all that
have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2.4. And that this work, set before us in this
Prophecy, may be worthily accounted amongst Gods greatest wonders, is evident
by the account that himself makes of it; first by representing it the Prophet
Ezechiel, in a vision of a Field full of dried bones scattered all about, every
bone out of his place, and suddenly, by a Word of the Prophets mouth, coming
together, with a noise, and shaking, every bone to his bone, and clothed as
suddenly with Sinews, flesh, and skin; and by another word of his mouth,
receiving breath and life, so that they stood on their feet an exceeding great
army, which God himself calls a resurrection out of the Grave, Ezech. 37.7, 8,
10, 13. And secondly, by advancing it above the wonders which he wrought in
bringing his people out of Egypt, as himself in express terms affi^mes, Jer.
16.15. It shall be no more said the Lord lives, that brought up the Children
of Israel out of Egypt, but the Lord lives, that brought up the Children of
Israel out of the land of the North. This was indeed a work so far above all
possibility, in man's eye, that the Jews themselves concluded, Our bones are
dried up, our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts, Ezech. 37.1. A work
in it self wonderful to Admiration, but made more wonderful by the Time,
wherein it was wrought, a Troublous time, sufficient to hinder the most easy
and likely work, much more to make a work in it self so Difficult and
improbable, altogether Impossible in man's judgment.

To come therefore to the nearer Examination of these words, we shall find in
them three Particulars, worthy our serious consideration: First, the manner of
Expression, implying an infallibility; Know (says the Lord to the Prophet) and
Understand; that is, be sure of it, and make account of it, as of a thing
certain, that shall not fail, and afterward: The street shall be built
again and the wall, in the time expressed, after 7 weeks, that is (accompting
every day for a year) after 49 years from the going out of the Decree.
Secondly, we have represented unto us the Condition of the Time when it shall
be built, a Troublous time (for the exact Period of the time, that it shall be
accomplished after 49 years, it makes not much to our present occasion,
unless it be to give farther assurance to the certainty of the Prophecy, that
God limits it to a precise number of years, which none can do but he, which
has the times and seasons in his own hand) It is enough to our purpose to
look upon it as a Troublous time. Thirdly, we have the work promised to be
performed, the building of the Street, and Wall of Jerusalem. The
accomplishment of this Prophecy we have related, especially to the Book of
Nehemiah. Of these three Particulars, as I have laid them out before you, in
their order.

The manner of the expression, considered in relation to the Work (the most
difficult of all works) and the Time (the unfittest of all times) i^ worthy our
careful observation. Notwithstanding the impossibility of the work in man's
judgment, and the impediments by the Troubles of the time, the Street, and
Wall shall be built, yea they shall be built by such a time; Doubt not of it
(says God) but know this, be assured it shall be so. Thus God may speak, and
thus he thinks it fit to express himself. So that upon this particular
Instance we may observe in general that Gods Promises even concerning things
most Difficult, and Impossible things in Man's eye, are notwithstanding certain
and Infallible.

They are (says the Apostle) all of them Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. Yea and
not Nay, as he explaines it verse. 18. that is, True in the event and real
performance, and Amen, that is, Stable and firm, as that Hebrew word
signifies. This will evidently appear by instances. The greatest of all Gods
promises, was that of sending CHRIST into the world, to be borne of a Virgin,
and to be made Immanuel, truly Man, and so GOD with us, this when God
promises, Isa. 7.14. he prefixeth a Behold before it, Behold a Vigin shall
conceive and bear a Son, which is a note not only of Admiration, but
Confirmation too, as if God would represent it as a thing Present to be seen
with our eyes, so Peremptorily does he promise that wonder of wonders, which
was as really performed in the fullness of time, Gal. 4.4. It was a strange and
unlikely thing that Israel after so long and heavy a bondage under the
Egyptians, should be wrested out of the hand of such a mighty Nation, that kept
them under as their slaves, yet God not only promises it, but bids Abraham to
make account of it as of a certain thing, know (says he) of a surety that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and they shall afflict
them 400 years and afterward they shall come out with great substance. Genesis
15.13, 14. It was not more serioussy promised then really performed, and that
in the point of time limited by the Lord, The self same day it came to pass,
that all the Hosts of the Lord went up out of the land of Egypt, says Moses
Exodus 12.41. It seemed so impossible at hing, that Abraham should have a Son
by his wife Sarah, who had bin all her life barraine, and was now 90 years
old, and her husband an hundred, and both their bodies dead as to the having of
children, that Sarah laughs at the Promise. Genesis 18.12. and yet see how
peremptorily God promises it. I will certainly return unto thee according to
the time of life, and lo Sarah thy wife shall have a Son, ver. 10. And we
know the Lord made it good. God promises to provide flesh for his people in
the Wilderness, that they should eat their fill of it, for a month long,
Numb. 11.19, 20. The people thought it was more then God could do as they
spoke, Psalm. 78.19, 20. and Moses was almost of their mind, as it appears by
his objection of the impossibility of feeding six hundred thousand men, besides
women and children, in a barraine Wilderness that yielded no provision for the
sustaining of man's life: yet we see it made good in the event, by the sending
of innumerable multitudes of Quails, the most dainty of all flesh. Numb. 11.31.
Many more instances might be brought, to evidence this truth, but these are
sufficient. Let us see what grounds we have for it in Reason.

what hinders men that they cannot speak in that manner, or with like certainty
concerning their own purposes.

There be three things in men that may hinder the accomplishment of that which
they intend,

1. The man may die, and then all his thoughts and consequently his resolutions
and purposes perish with him, Psalm. 146.4. Now God we know lives for ever, from
everlasting to everlasting he is God, Psalm. 90.2. The earth may fail, and the
heavens may be roled up as a garment, but God remains the same and his years
fail not, Heb. 1.11. Whence the Apostle draws a strong ground of consolation
to us in Christ's mediation, that it shall be effectual to us, because he lives
for ever to make intercession for u^, Hev. 7.25.

2. Though the man continue and live yet his mind and purpose may alter. Never
had a man more full purpose to do any thing, then Esau had to kill his Brother
Jacob, Genesis 27.41. and this resolution continued with him 20 years, while
Jacob sojourned with Laban, as is evident by his gathering of four hundred men
to come against him, when he heard of Jacobs return homewards, Genesis 32.6.
Questionless to do that which Jacob feared, with the sword to cut off him and
his retinew: And yet when they meet together Esau instead of killing, salls to
kissing, and embracing, and weeping over his Brother, Genesis 33.4. In this Balaam
tells us God is not like man, Numb. 23.19, God is not as man that he should lie,
neither the son of man that he should repent, that is he neither speaks that
which hedoth not intend or purpose, nor puposeth that at present what he means
to alter afterward. No, God is always of one mind, Job 23 13. and the thoughts
of his heart stand throughout all ages, Psalm. 33.11. Upon both these grounds
the Lord concludes the safe condition of his people, I the Lord change not (he
means neither in nature nor in purpose, I am still the same God and of the
same mind) therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Mal. 3.6.

3. Men, who have no power in their hand, but what they receive from God, have
many times by him such impediments cast in their way, as they are not able to
remove or consequently to effect what they intended. Pharaoh may in his own
heart resolve, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my
lust shall be satisfied upon them, Exodus 15.9. But God puts a cloud between
the Army of the Israelites, and the Egiptians, and takes of their chariot
wheels, that they drive them with much ado, so that the Israelites recovered
the further shore, before their Enemies could overtake them, who perished in
the waters before their eyes. No such impediments can stand in Gods way, who
having all power in his own hand, does whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and in
Earth, in the Seas and in all deep places Psalm. 135.6. And none can stay his
hand, Dan. 4.35. No even the mountains shall become plains before him, Zech.
8.7. Hence it is, that, seeing Gods purposes and Acts are all one, he may speak
of what he will do as if it were already done, for his will gives a being to
those things that do not yet subsist which the Schoolmen call Esse Volitum,
otherwise God should speak falsely when he calls things that are not as if they
were. But men can speak no farther then of their intentions, because they have
already a being in their hearts, so that they may truly say this, I intend or
purpose to do, but if they speak of the event or effect, they must read St.
James his limitation. If the Lord will, Iam. 4.14. Because they know not what
shall be no not to morrow.

him to speak so, in point of honor, he must speak like a God as well as do
like a God, I will open rivers in high places (says God, Isa. 41.18, 19.) and
make the Wilderness a standing poole, and fruitful in pleasant and useful
plants, that they may know that the hand of the Lord has done this, ver. 20.
And as the Lord manifests himself to be God by doing things beyond belief and
above the power of any second cause, so does he by speaking of impossible
things to be done afterward. I will say unto the North give, and to the South
keep not back, Isa. 43.6. and ver. 9. He challenges all the world to speak as
he speaks, that is to foretell certainly things to come, to say Unto the deep
be dry and I will dry up thy Rivers, to say of Cyrus he shall perform all my
pleasure etc. Isa. 44.27, 28. There is no question but the history of the
Creation manifests the Lord to be God wherein we have him described speaking
first, and doing afterward, let there be light, a Firmament, Seas, Earth, etc.
And it was so.

3. In respect of us it was in a sort necessary that God should thus deliver
hsi promises in express and peremptory terms, because they are the foundation
of our faith, which must rest upon certain and immutable things, in which it
is impossible for God to lie, that so we might have strong consolation, Heb.
6.18. How easily our Faith in the apprehension of Gods promises may be
staggered, especially in times of trial, appears in the example of the
Prophet David, who finding himself compassed with the sorrows of death, so
that the pains of hell gat hold upon him, acknowledges that in that perplexed
condition he was ready to conclude that all men were liars Psalm. 116.3.11. He
means perhaps the Prophets, who from Gods own mouth had assured him of the
Kingdom. And the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.8. in express terms questions, not only
the mercies of God, but his promises also. It is therefore necessary in respect
of the weakness of our Faith in Gods Promises, and our pronenesse to question
the truth of them, that they should be delivered by God in certain and full and
clear expressions.

Use 1. If then Gods Promises be so certain and infallible in themselves, and
so represented and delivered unto us by God himself, how is it that we give so
little credit to them? That the words and engagements of men, that deceive and
are deceived, are esteemed above them? An Epigrammatist of our own, had rather
take King James his word then St. JAMES the Apostles.

Qui petit accipiet Iacobus Apostolus inquit
O si Jacobus Rex mihi dicat idem.
Whether that were his intention I know not, but I am sure he there expresses,
not only his own thoughts, but the opinion of men in general. For who sees
not but that those who will be contented to trust men upon their bands, with
hundreds and thousands if need be are like the Ruler, Luke 18.22, 23. who, when
Christ himself tells him that if he will part with his estate, for the relieving
of his poor servants, he shall have treasure in Heaven, as he then so men now
refuse the assurance, and depart with sad countenances. The best assurance that
men can have for the enjoying of the Manors or Lands, which they purchase of
other men, is but an evidence under the hands and seals of mortal men, and
yet upon such assurance men lay out and part with large sums of Money sometimes
with all they have, notwithstanding the possessions when they have them are of
an uncertain and changeable condition, and often wrested our of their hands by
fraud or violence: But where are the men that will take our Saviors word, Luke
18.29, 30. that if they make loss of any thing for the Kingdom of God, they
shall receive manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come life
everlasting, and upon that assurance adventure their whole estates? Where are
they that will take Salomons word, that if they cast their bread upon the
waters, after many days they shall find it, Eccles. 11.1. Or, that God will
repay us, whatsoever we lay out upon his poor servants, Prove. 19.17. Or the
Prophet Isaiah's promise, that he that devises liberal things shall stand,
(that is) secure his estate by liberal things, Isa. 32.8? And yet these are
not the words of men, but the Promises of the God of truth, more firm then the
earth it self. The Apostle tells us that Godliness has the promises of this
life, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Now seeing we are so greedy of
gain. why do we not follow after this gainful way of godliness which brings
so large and lasting a reward, assured by the word of God himself? Nay why upon
the same assurance doewe not lay hold of Eternal life? What do we grasping
after the world, when we have assurance of heaven, a Kingdom that cannot be
moved, by the firmest of all Gods promises in which it is impossible for him to
lie?

Consider (I beseech you) and let us weigh well what we do, and take notice.
First, of the great wrong and dishonor we offer to God himself: Secondly, of
the evils that we bring, and that deservedly upon our own souls. We dishonor
God

1. In that we receive not his Testimony, for what we believe not, that, in
effect, we deny, and by consequence make him a liar, 1 Ioh. 5.10. He that
believes not God has made him a liar: as he that believes on the contrary,
sets to his seal that God is true, Ioh. 13.33. Herein we do in effect cross
the maine end for which we came into the world, and for which God has endued
us with wisdom and understanding above the beasts of the field, that being
true of every man, which our Savior affirms of himself; for this cause came I
into the world, that I should bear witness to the Truth, Ioh. 18.36. Men will
indeed beapt to beguile themselves and others too, in professing that they
receive Gods testimony in all that he speaks, but the Apostle tells us that
there is a denial in Works, as well as in Words, Tit. 1.16. And to speak
truth denial in Deeds is the strongest denial, and manifests our affirming in
words to be mere Hypocrisy, as the Psalmist justifies it against the
Israelites in the Wilderness, that though they remembered that God was their
rock, and the high God their Redeemer, yet they flattered him with their mouth
and lied unto him with their tongue. Psalm. 78.35, 36. and proves by their
works, because they still went on in tempting and provoking God, and limiting
the Holy one of Israel, ver. 40.41.

2. It is the greater wrong and dishonor to God not to receive his Testimony.
First because God has so far condescended to our weakness, as to engage
himself unto us so many ways, being notwithstanding debtor to no man,
bestowing whatsoever he gives freely out of mere Grace. We account it a wrong
to a friend to require a bond of him for the assuring of a free gift. But God
has bin content to abase himself so far to us, as to engage himself unto
us by his Word, to confirm his Word by an Oath, and to ratify both by the
seals of his Covenant. That after the manifesting of so much tender respect to
us, and condiscending so far to our weakness, and affording such firm
footing for our Faith, God should not have so much credit with us as to be
believed upon his Word, his Oath, his Seal, is such a dishonor to the God of
Truth, as we would be ashamed to offer to a mortal man. Especially if we
consider in the next place that God has never given us cause to distrust him,
he never failed us in any one Promise, wherein he has engaged himself unto us.

Thirdly, it is yet the greater wrong to God if we consider by whom it is
offered. Nothing so far kindled Gods wrath as the provoking of his sons and
daughters, Deuteronomy. 32.19. (...), What thou my son (said Julius Caesar to Brutus)
when he saw him amongst the rest of the conspirators come to stabbe him: There
cannot be a greater wrong to a master then not to be trusted by his own
servants; much greater is the injury when a Father can have no credit from his
own children. How is it possible then that God should bear it at the hands of
those that call him Father, and desire to be known by the name of his children;
that great dishonor of slighting his Promises, and in their lives and
conversations declaring to the world that they make more account of men's
assurance then they do of them?



1. By this means we deprive our selves of all true grounds of comfort, which
might support us in time of trial. It was Gods Word which quickened David in
time of his affliction, Psalm. 119.50. It was Gods Word on which he depended,
Psalm. 130.5. When he powered out his complaint before God, out of the depths,
that is, in floods of distresses that overwhelmed him. For as for any other
means to establish our hearts and bear up our spirits in times of inward
distresses, or outward afflictions, we shall find our selves forced to take up
David's complaint I looked for comforters but J found none, Psalm. 69.20. and
Psalm. 142.4. I looked on my right hand and there was no man would know me,
refuge failed me. And as for Gods promises, whence only the ground of true
comfort arises, with what cold hearts must we needs either apply them to our
own souls, or urge them and press them upon God in our prayers, when our own
consciences tell us, that these are the truths of God which we have cast by, as
matters of which we never made any great account? Surely God can return us no
other answer to such suits, then he gives his people, Judge. 10.14. Go cry unto
the gods whom you have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your
tribulation. Cry to your Lands, to your Treasures, to your Friends in whom you
have confided; what have you to do with my promises which you never believed
nor regarded? This is and will be a sad condition into which our unbelief will
cast us when it will be too late to help it.

2.ly This want of staying on Gods promises wonderfully deads our hearts unto
all duties of Gods service, unto which we are in an especial manner
encouraged, because we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15.58. And the Psalmist professes the hope of Salvation from God, was it that
encouraged him to do Gods commandments, Psalm. 119.166. As on the other-side,
those that exported nothing from God, desire to have nothing to do with his
service, Job 21.15.

3.ly The want of this Faith by which we embrace Gods promises, utterly cuts
off all hope of eternal life, which nothing but Faith in Gods promises can lay
hold off: And to be shut of that hope, leaves unto a man nothing but a certain
looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the
adversaries, Heb. 10.27.

4. Lastly, in the mean time this want of Faith in the promises, leaves the
heart of a man full of distractions and unquietness thereby: so that one
becomes uneven in all his ways, unsettled in all his thoughts, raised up, and
cast down with contrary hopes and fears, as the outward things of this life,
subject to continual changes, ebb and flow from day to day; whereof we have
too many evidences in these times of trouble, wherein men fall on, and off, as
their vain hopes and fears carry them on to one party, or drive to the other,
to the shipwreck of their own consciences, and (as much as in them lies) the
betraying of the cause of Christ and of his Church, and to their shame,
discovering to the world that they were never yet settled upon any firm
foundation, whereas one that has built his Faith upon Gods promise, is like a
Ship moared by her anchors, in a safe harbor, from whence the ebbs and floods
of the sea cannot remove her.

2. Use. Let me therefore earnestly beseech you (right honorable and beloved)
by the mercies of God, to labor above all things to strengthen Faith, having
such a firm foundation to build it on; not cunningly devised fables as the
Apostle calls them, 2 Pet. 12.16. not the word of men who may deceive and be
deceived, but a faithful word; Tit. 1.29. A sure word, 2. Pet. 1.29. The word
of the God of truth who cannot lie, a word more firm then the foundation of
the earth, settled for ever in heaven, Psalm. 119.89. We have great reason to be
earnest and serious in laboring, with all our power, to attain to this
firmness of Faith, not only because otherwise we despise this great mercy and
compassion of God toward us, in condescending to our weakness, and abasing
himself to be engaged to us by his word, his oath, and his seals; but more
especially upon these sore weighty and important considerations.

1. Of all other graces, Faith is most necessary and useful unto us every way.

1. We thereby bring unto God the greatest glory by it setting to our seal
that God is true, Ioh. 3.33. As Abraham is said to give glory to God when he
staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in Faith,
Romans 4.20. Indeed there is no more mentioned in that place, but that he
believed, and thereby Sealed to the power of God, being fully persuaded that he
which had promised was able to do it, ver. 21. But without believing his
faithfulness and truth with all neither had he any sound comfort, nor God his
due honor by believing, wherefore it expressly testified of Sarah, that she
believed that he was faithful that had promised, Heb. 11.11.

2.ly To us is Faith of such necessity, that without it we were dead
spiritually, it is that which unites us unto Christ the fountain of life in
whom we live as the Apostle testifies of himself: I live (says he) yet not I,
but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by
Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. So that without Faith we are without
Christ who is our life, Col. 3.4. Again, it is Faith that quickens all our
endeavors and sweetens all our labors in Gods service, knowing that in due
season we shall reap if we faint not, Gal, 6.9. Thirdly it is Faith by which
both our persons and services are accepted. By Faith Abel offered a more
acceptable sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous, Heb. 12.4. Fourthly, it is Faith that holds up our spirits in
afflictions. I had fainted (says David) unless I had believed to see the
goodness of God in the land of the living, Psalm. 27.13. Whence he professes
that Gods word the ground of our Faith, was all the comfort which he had in his
afflictions, Psalm. 119.50. Fifthly, Faith only enables us to withstand all
terrors. By Faith Moses his parents feared not the Kings commandment, Heb.
11.23. And by the same power of Faith, the three Children feared neither King
Nebuchadnezzars angry countenance, nor his threatening words, nor his
preparations of the flames of fire to torment them; no not so far as to take
time to consider what to answer in so dangerous a case, Dan. 3.17. Lastly, it
is Faith that supplies us with strong consolations, Heb. 6.18. So that the
Apostle tells us, that being justified by Faith as we have peace with God; so we
not only bear tribulations patiently, but in the midst of them rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.3.



For, first, there is nothing in Nature that can help us to the attaining of
Faith. Sense cannot help us, for the objects of Faith are things that are not
seen, Heb. 11.1. That is, things that are above Sense, things that are in the
nature of them spiritual, 2. Cor. 4.18. Whereas Sense apprehends only things
that are gross and earthly, and things whereof many have no present being, but
are in hope, and expectation only. Much less can Reason help Faith, seeing
that takes all her grounds from Sense: Wherefore Abraham, that he might wax
strong in Faith, silenced Reason, which would have furnished him with arguments
against the promise of having a son by Sarah; for the Apostle tells us, that
he considered not (that is, did not so much admit into debate, reasons drawn
from) the deadness of his own body, and of Sarah's womb, Romans 4.19. No, Sense
and Reason are so far from helping Faith, that they are the most dangerous,
of all other meares, to hinder it, or overthrow it where it is. When David
judged by Sense of Gods ways and dispensations, which represented unto him the
prosperous condition of the wicked, and his own afflictions every morning; it
so shook his Faith, that he had almost slipped, and was upon the point of
condemning his own ways, and the state of the Godly too, as himself
acknowledges, Psalm. 73.2.13.15. And when Sarah began by Reason to examine the
promise of having a Child, at 90. years old, she was so far from believing
it, that she laughed at it, Genesis 18.11. And as long as Moses makes use of his
reason to weigh Gods promise of feeding six hundred thousand men, besides women
and children, with flesh, in the Wilderness for a month together; we see how
hardly he is brought to believe it, Number. 11.21, 22, 23. It must therefore be
concluded that seeing neither Sense nor Reason, nor consequently any thing in
Nature can bring any help to Faith; nay rather are the strongest means to
oppose and hinder it: it must needs be a difficult work (as being both above
and contrary to Nature) to obtain it.

hates all the workers of iniquity, as David testifies of him, Psalm. 5.3. and
will by no means pardon the guilty, as himself professes, Exodus 34.3. should
notwithstanding, from all Eternity, look upon men wholly defiled with sin,
with so much tenderness of compassion, as to choose out of them a people for
himself; and, out of his own goodness, and free Grace, give his own Son,
his delight from all eternity, to be a ransom for their souls, cause him, who
accounted it no robbery to be equal with God himself, to abase himself so
low, as to take upon him the nature of man, with the infirmities thereof; and
be found amongst men in the form of a servant, to humble him to the accursed
death of the Cross; to bruise him, who knew no sin, laying upon him the
iniquities of us all to heal us by his stripes; and not only to purchase unto
us the free pardon of all our sins, but to accept us in his Righteousness, as
righteous and holy before him; yea to take us as his own children, to bestow
on us the inheritance of everlasting glory, and to make us joynt-heires with
Christ, Romans 8.17. And lastly, to raise up these bodies of ours; perhaps
devoured by fishes, or wildbeasts, or consumed into ashes in flames of fire, or
at least turned into and mixed with the dust of the earth, the very same
individual body, Job 19.26.27. and of Natural bodies to make them Spiritual,
of Corruptible to make them Incorruptible, and immortal, as the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. 15.42.44.53. These are things in themselves so far beyond all
apprehension and admiration; wonders upon wonders, that if Faith were not a
Supernatural work, an effect of the Almighty power of the spirit of God
working in us, they were impossible to be believed, that it is no marvel
though they were rejected of the wisest amongst men, and accounted
foolishness, 1. Cor. 1.23.

Yea (says he) has God said, and afterward ye shall not surely dye, Genesis
3.1.4. In his encountering with our Savior Christ, he first assaulted his
Faith, which he attempts two contrary ways, First, to distrust where he had a
promise; and Secondly, to believe without a promise, as appears by our
Saviors answer to both his first temptations, Matt. 4.4.7. And it was Peter's
Faith that Satan aimed at, when he desired to sift him, as appears by our
Saviors promise to pray that his Faith might not fail, Luke 22.31.32.
implying that it was his Faith, against which Satan would bend all his
strength, as we see he did, when he shook it so sore, that he thrice denied
and forswore his Master. Questionless Satan both knows his own advantages,
and improves them to the uttermost. Now he is not ignorant, that if he can
overthrow our Faith, he destroys our life, separate us from Christ and from God
himself; from whom we depart by unbelief, Heb. 3.12. which is therefore the
most dangerous of all sins; and indeed a means to let in all the rest, Pride,
Coveteousnesse, Self-seeking, Rebellion, and what not: Besides he well knows,
that Nature yields him not stronger helps against any Grace, then it does
against Faith; which (as we have already intimated) both Reason and Sense (the
guides of our natural life) oppose.

It concerns us therefore nearly, to use all diligence, both to get and
strengthen Faith, so useful every way, so hard to be gained, and strongly
assaulted. The Apostle therefore exhorts us to follow after Faith, 1. Tim.
6.11. and to have it always about us as the chief part of our spiritual
Armor, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all (says he) take the shield of Faith, whereby you
shall be able to quench the fiery darts of the wicked. A strange expression,
that a shield should quench fire, unless perhaps he allude to the Hebrew name
(...) a shield or buckler, coming from (...) which signifies to cool. Solomon
exhorts us to get wisdom with all our getting, Prove. 4.7. to search for it as
silver, and for hid treasure; Prove. 2.4. And, when we have gotten it, not to
forget it, nor forsake it, Prove. 4.5.6. Now Faith is not the least part of true
wisdom, which makes us wise unto Salvation. To get and hold fast this Faith,
we must have an especial regard unto two things,

First, We must be sure to build our Faith upon a firm foundation, which can
be none other then the faithful word of God, as the Apostle calls it, Tit. 1.9.
established to all generations, Psalm. 119.90. Upon which David builds all his
Hope, Psalm. 130.5. I wait for the Lord (says he) my soul does wait; and in
his word do I hope: And, Psalm. 119.114. Thou art my hiding place, and my
shield: I hope in thy word. Now this Word, must be a clear Word, and a full
Word: It must be a clear Word, where the promise is laid down in plain and
express terms; such as are all, or the most part of the promises of eternal
life and salvation by Christ, and diverse others: As for those that are
delivered in more dark and obscure expressions, and such as are capable of
diverse constructions, though they may be of good use; yet Faith has no firm
resting on them, unless they be cleared unto us by other places that are
plain and evident. And as it must be a clear Word that our Faith must rest on,
so must it be a full Word, the promise taken with all the circumstances and
conditions annexed thereunto. It was a clear Word which the Devil alleges to
our Savior Christ, Matt. 4.6. out of Psalm. 91.11.12. That God gives his Angels
charge over his children, to keep them that they dash not their foot against a
stone; but it was not a full Word, a clause that restraines the promise to men's
ways was left out, now to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple
was not Christ's way: St. John tells us, If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1. Ioh. 1.9. To make this a full
Word, we must supply it with a clause out of Prove. 28.13. He that confesses
and forsakes his sins shall find mercy: which too many omitting and
neglecting, satisfy themselves with a bare and perfunctory confession of
sin, without any endeavor to forsake it, or to subdue their corrupt fusts
from whence it springs, remaining still under the dominion of sin, making
provision for sin, to fulfill tthe lusts thereof, living in all manner of
sensuality, and minding earthly things, to the scandal of Religion, and
(without speedy repentance) the destruction of their own souls.

Philopaemon, that as he walked either alone, or with his friends, he used to
view and consider the ground through which he passed, what advantages, or
disadvantages it might minister to him or his enemies, if he should be there
suddenly assailed, so that having considered before how he might best either
free himself or annoy the assailants, he was easily able to avoid the danger
when it came. Let us learn in this point wisdom of the children of this
world, our enemies are more subtle, more powerful, more vigilant, their
surprises more sudden and more dangerous, Be sober, be vigilant, because your
adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour,
whom resist steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. 5.8.9. The means which the Apostle
prescribes against this powerful and dangerous enemy, is the steadfastness of
our Faith, which we must not only have, but have always about us, laying up
the Promises always in our hearts, and by meditation supposing dangers and
temptations, before they come, to consider how they may be applied, and made
use of, as the several emergent occasions shall require. The want of this
providence in St. Peter left him naked, so that he was suddenly surprised, and
shamefully foiled by Satan, before he could prepare himself for the encounter
as is recorded, Luke 22.57, 58, 60. which he might have prevented, if he had
not been so securely and carelessly confident, ver. 33. but taken our Saviors
warning beforehand, ver. 31.34.

Faith, thus grounded and exercised, must be held out as a shield against
Satan's fiery darts in times of trial. David being sorely shaken by the
observation of wicked men's prosperous estate, and his own afflictions, has
recourse to the Sanctuary where the word of God was laid up, and see how
quietly he settles his heart thereby, Psalm. 73.12.14.17.25.28. And Psalm. 77.
the Psalmist being tempted to question not only Gods mercies but his Promises
too, verse. 7, 8. is forced to have recourse to Gods works, ver. 11, 12. (the
supporters (as I may term them) of that Faith which is founded upon the Word
for the quieting of his distempered thoughts. This is or should be the practice
of all the godly, in all our wrestlings with Satan and his instruments lest
Faith take hold on the word; if yet it seem to waver add unto it experiments,
either in our selves, as David does of his deliverance from the Lion and the
Bear, 1 Samuel 17.37. when he was to sight with Goliath; or others, as David
comforted himself by remembering Gods judgments of old, Psalm. 119.52.

This use of Faith the condition of the times wherein we live so full of
trouble and confusion calls for at present, whether we look upon the state of
the Church in general, or our own in Particular.

In general we see the Prediction, Rev. 12.17. that the Dragon should make
war with the Woman, (that is the Church) and the remnant of her seed which
keep the Commandments of God, made good and fulfilled before our eyes, as not
only the long continued wars in Germany, but the troubles over most parts
of Europe, evidence it to the world. By which that man of Sin, the Incendiary
thereof, has so far prevailed against the poor flock of CHRIST, that some
of the most famous and eminent States who had set up the Kingdom of CHRIST
amongst them, have hardly left unto them at this day the form or face of a
Church. In the beholding of such sad spectacles, let us lay before us that
Prophetical Promise, Dan. 2.44. That the Kingdom which God shall set up shall
never be destroyed, nor left to other people, and that faithful and full
assurance out of our Saviors own mouth, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, Math. 16.18. That rather then fail the Woman (the Church
he means) shall have wings to carry her out of the Dragons reach, Revel. 12.13,
14. That the Wilderness shall nourish her, for a time, and times, and half a
time, that if the Serpent cast out floods of water after her, to carry her away,
the earth shall swallow up the flood, verse. 15.16. In brief, that God will arm
and raise all the Creatures in heaven and earth for the defense of his Church.
Add unto these, the Decree pronounced against the Beast and the false Prophet
that deceived them that received the mark of the Beast they shall be taken and
be cast alive into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone, Revel. 19.20. A thing
not only decreed but done with God, though not yet executed in the sight of
men, for the Angel cries mightily, with a strong voice, Babylon the great is
fallen, is fallen, Revel. 18.2. The word is doubled, like Pharaohs dream,
because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to
pass, as Joseph speaks to Pharaoh, Genesis 41.32. yea, I dare boldly say, that
these present Troubles of the Church (which yet are but to purge out the Iniquity
of Jacob and take away the sin, Isa. 27.9.) are but preparations to that
great work. And these are no vain Dreams but the true sayings of God, as the
Angel tells John, Rev. 19.9.

Yea but (you will say) what Promise have we concerning this Nation, and the
Church of God therein? what may we believe the issue of our troubles shall be
at last? To this I answer in general, two things:

First, whatsoever our condition shall be (suppose it to the worst that we
fear) yet if we have any zeal for Gods honor, or any true love unto his
Church, as members of that body, we should put on St. Paul's resolution, None of
these move me (says he) neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I
may finish my course with joy, etc. Act. 20.24. It was resolutely answered by
the Roman Consuls, when they stood stiffly against the Law called Agraria (which
caused so many commotions at sundry times in the Roman state) for the opposing
whereof, their Predecessors, the Consuls of the former year, after the
extirpation of their office, had been most unjustly Fined by the people; Se
quoque damnari posse, and ipsos legem per far non posse: not regarding what
became of themselves, so they might secure the State. I am sure the Prophets,
think it a sufficient ground of comfort to support the hearts of Gods children,
under the heavy burden of the Babylonish captivity, that it should be well
with the Church in time to come, although few of them lived to see that happy
day?

Secondly, although particular Persons, and States be not named, yet they are
included, in those Promises made unto the Church in general, or to the Jews
in particular (considered as a Church) if we answer the Conditions, under which
the Promise is made. If we hearken to God, and walk in his ways, we have
sufficient ground to assure our selves of the fulfilling of those Promises to
have our Enemies subdued, and the hand of God turned against our adversaries,
Psalm. 81.13, 14. If we Sanctify the holy Sabbath, and keep it from
Profanation (the Lord under one especial duty of the Law includes all the
rest) we may warrant, as assured by the word of God, the fulfilling of all
those gracious Promises recorded, Jer. 17.24, 25, 26. For the things written
afore-time, were written for us, that we through comfort of the Scriptures
might have hope. Not to hold you long, look well upon your Covenant by which
you have in as solemn a manner as may be, obliged your selves, by lifting up
your hands to the most high God, in the presence of men and Angels (which if
you break, God will certainly recompense it on your heads, as he threatens to
do in a like case, Ezech. 17.19.) consider it well, and make good your solemn
engagements both for Public and private Reformation, and you may boldly
challenge God to make good unto you, any Promise which he has made unto his
Church in his Word, in any age past. Labor for Zerubbabels spirit in carrying
on the Lords work, and you may assure your selves of Zerubbabels success, and
the great Mountains that stand in your way shall become plains before you.
Zech. 4.7.

I add further that, if any thing may be concluded out of the course that God
has held with us hitherto, he has so strangely interposed himself, and
constantly stepped in between us and our utter ruin, at Keinton, at Brainford,
at Newbery, at York, at Cheriton, at Naseby, (when we may truly say with David,
1 Samuel 20.3. There was but a step between us and death or utter destruction)
has so compassionately looked upon us in our low estate, as the Psalmist
terms it, Psalm. 136.23. and raised us up to a condition beyond our hopes and
expectation, that we have great reason to hope, that he which has begun will
make an end, as himself speaks in another case, 1 Samuel 3.12. Indeed both
Moses, Exodus 32.12. and Joshua, cap. 7.7.9. press God with respect to his own
honor, which would have been much blemished if God, who had so strangely
brought his children out of Egypt, and over Ierdan, should have suffered them
to perish, either in the Wilderness or in the Land of Canaan. It is true, I
grant, that when God has called us to a work of thorough Reformation, if we
mix our carnal policies, with his Counsels, and drive on our own ends, with
more zeal then his: As God may, and will call them to account that do his
work Negligently, or unfaithfully, so he justly may, not only deny them the
honor of performing and accomplishing this service to him and to his Church,
but may put off the perfecting of this glorious work of thorough Reformation
for the present, and mix the accomplishing thereof, and the restoring of our
peace with more bitterness then we have yet tasted.

And particularly, I boldly affirm that every one, whose Conscience witnesses
unto him, that in singleness of heart he has put to his hand, for the
furthering and carrying on this work of Reformation, out of true zeal to Gods
honor, and the good of his Church, may assure himself, that though Israel be
not gathered, yet he shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and his God
shall be his strength, as Christ speaks of himself, Isa. 49.5. As he dealt
with David, whom though the Lord thought not fit to employ in the building of
his Temple, yet his desire and purpose to have done it, was abundantly
rewarded, 2 Samuel 7.11.12. Let us therefore up and be doing, and set forward for
the raising on of this great work, with resolution as being assured both of the
success and perfecting thereof at the last, and of the acceptance of our
labors therein, and of our reward hereafter, what troubles soever we meet with
in the way, of which I am to speak in the next place.

This great Work, which in the promise which we have before us, God engages
himself to perform for his Church, he casts into the unfittest, and in man's
Judgment the most unlikely of all Times, into Times of trouble, the reason
whereof we shall consider by and by. In the mean while we may take notice,
that it is usual with God to intermixe some bitterness with his sweetest
mercies. The Passover it self must be eaten with bitter herbs, Exodus 12.8.
More particularly, God usually mixeth troubles and afflictions with the
Churches Reformation, so that we may lay this before us as a general rule.

It is usual with God to carry on the work of raising and restoring his
Church in times of Trouble. The building of the Temple was indeed put off from
David's troublesome Reign to the days of Solomon, a man of Peace (as his name
imports) or of Rest as God terms him, 1 Chronicles. 22.9. in whose time God
promises to give his people Peace and Quietness: But that is an unparalleled
example, as it may be easily made good by instances of all times ancient and
modern. The time of delivering Israel out of Egypt was not only a time of
heavy bondage, but as Moses hastened on that work, that yoke was made heavier
upon them, in so much, that, for anguish of spirit, and cruel bondage, they had
no mind to hearken to Gods message by Moses of their delivery Exodus 6.9. When
God had by strong hand brought them out of the Land of Egypt, besides their
forty years troublesome travail in the Wilderness, what troublesome and
dangerous wars they were encumbered withal in the Land of Canaan, in their
setting and planting there, is at large recorded in the book of Joshua.

In the planting of the Church under the Gospel, both the history of the
Apostles Acts, and the records of the state of the Church, for the first three
hundred years after CHRIST, testify to the World, what bitter Persecutions it
endured, to the effusion of the blood of many hundreds of thousands of Men,
Women, and Children, in all places where the Gospel was planted. Yea, the
master builders themselves, drunk as deep, or deeper, of that bitter cup of
Afflictions, as any of the rest, as St. Paul testifies of himself at large, 2
Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. and is as fully witnessed of the rest, in Histories of
undoubted verity.

To come nearer to the times of the Waldenses, who near 500 years past held
out the light of the Gospel in those days of palpable darkness, which had
overspread almost the face of the whole earth, when they began once to increase
to a considerable number (as indeed in the space of a few years, there were
reckoned near Eight hundred thousand, that embraced their Doctrine) the
Records of those times, howsoever much corrupted by the adversaries, testify,
what bloody Wars were raised up against them by the Pope, continuing near one
hundred years, and ending almost in the utter extirpation of that holy seed.

To speak nothing of those long and bloody wars, raised by the Emperor
Sigismund thorough the instigation of that same man of sin, against the
Reformers of the Churches in Bohemia which continued all the days of that
worthy Commander John Zisca, and diverse years after his decease, and to draw
nearer to our own times: We know, that when Luther began the Reformation of the
Church, the Pope and his dependants never left raising of troubles against him
and his followers, till at length he had engaged the German Emperor CHARLES
the sift, in a cruel war against the Duke of Saxony, and his party as most
men know; And to speak truth, that Sword, which was then drawn, has been
hardly ever since sheathed, but to this day in one part of Europe or other,
goes on bathing it self in blood, wherewith how much it has bin made drunken,
we, as well as our neighbors, feel to this day to our smart.

There are Instances of Troubles raised by Satan and his instruments against
the Church by those which are without, no less are those that are stirred up
within the bowels of the Church, by false Brethren, who by speaking perverse
things, to draw Disciples after them (as the Apostle tells us they shall do,
Act. 20.30.) strike at the very foundation, on which the Church is built, the
very doctrine of Truth. What divisions were raised thereby in the Churches,
even in the Apostles own days, diverse of their Epistles do sufficiently
declare, and that Satan continued by the same policy, to divide the Church in
sunder, and thereby to ruin it (as our Savior tells us, That a Kingdom, or
house divided cannot stand, Math. 12.25.) the records of the Primitive time,
setting before us the Factions that infected the Church in those ages, and the
Excommunications, Banishments, and other Persecutions, which ensued thereupon,
make it evident enough to all that will take the pains to look into the
Histories of those times.

Neither do these troubles, howsoever raised by the practice of Satan, fall
upon the Church, without the foreknowledge, and both Permission, and direction
of God himself. Our Savior tells his Disciples in express terms, that he came
not to send Peace on earth, but a Sword, Mat. 10.34, 35. Not that this is an
effect, but a consequent of the Gospel. The Gospel is in it self a message of
glad tidings of Peace, Romans 10.15. Ephesians. 6.15. But is of Peace between God and
Man, Luke 2.14. Romans 5.1. Yea, and between man and man amongst as many as
receive it, as the Prophet fore-tels, that amongst those that are under Christ's
government, the Wolf and the Lamb shall dwell together, Isa. 11.6. all enmity
shall be taken away, so that none shall destroy in his Holy Mountain, Isa.
65.25. And a Gospel to settle Peace in men's consciences, but not in the World.
In me you shall have Peace (says our Savior) in the World you shall have
affliction, Ioh. 3.33.

To search into the Reasons of this truth; if we look upon second cause it is
easy to conclude, that it can be no otherwise, unless Satan, and such as
bear his Image, and do his Will, should change their Nature. For (besides the
contrariety in the Natures of the children of Light and of Darkness, whereof
one is Abomination to the other, Prove. 29.27. and consequently like contraries
they must needs destroy one another): The establishing of Christ's Kingdom in
the Church, is the overthrowing of the Devils Kingdom in the World, as many
subjects as CHRIST gains, so many the Devil loses. Our Savior tells us, Luke
10.18. That when the Gospel was Preached, it brought down Satan from Heaven
like lightening. No mervaile then if Satan to save his own Kingdom, labor
to hinder the planting of the Church, and as little mervaile if his servants
join with him therein, as for other reasons so especially because the Gospel
which the Church embraces, discredits and condemns all their ways,
restraines their Lusts, and cuts off all their hopes, sentencing them to hell,
to be made the subjects of Gods wrath to all Eternity.

But it yields little comfort to the Godly, or Honor to God, to look upon the
Churches troubles, as the effects of Satan's and his childrens malice, unless
we raise up our thoughts higher, to look; not only upon the rod but withal on
him that has appointed it, Mich. 6.9. To consider his faithfulness in raising
troubles and afflictions, which quieted David's heart, Psalm. 119.75. J know that
thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. His compassion even when he causes
grief, Lam. 3.32. his wonderful wisdom and Power in being good unto those
that love him out of evil, Romans 8.28. That by the consideration of Gods
righteousness in all his ways, we may gather comfort to our selves, in the
troubles raised up against Gods Church by wicked men, we must first therefore
settle this position firmly in our hearts, that the Devil and his instruments
are but vassals to execute what he has decreed to be done, as St. Peter
testifies concerning Christ's sufferings, that he was delivered although by the
treachery of Judas, yet withal by the determinate council and foreknowledge
of God, Act. 2.23. and all the Apostles witness that Herod, Pilat, the
Gentiles, and people of Israel which were gathered together against Christ,
were but Gods Executioners to do whatsoever his hand and his Council had
determined to be done, Act. 4.18. Now we know that God (who is Righteous in all
his ways and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17) Orders all things for his
own ends, which are his own glory, and (that which is never severed from it)
the God of his people. Let us then draw the Reasons of this truth which we have
before us from the relations which the troubles raised against the Church in
the time of the planting or Reforming thereof, have unto those two maine ends
at which God principally aims his own glory and his Churches good.

And first Gods honor is much advanced by the troubles raised by Satan and his
Agents to hinder the Churches Reformation, three ways.

1. God is much honored, by making it evident to to the World, that the work
of the Churches Reformation is his own Act. As Joseph makes his brethren
understand that, in selling him to the Midianites, they were but Gods
instruments to bring him into Egypt because there came so much good out of that
wherein they intended nothing but evil. Genesis 45.7. and 50.20. And David
foretelling that great work of making Christ the head stone of the corner,
proves it to be Gods doing and a work of admiration, because the builders had
cast him aside, Psalm. 118.23, 24. All effects must have some cause, by the
power and Virtue whereof they are produced, wherefore when there appears no
second cause in the bringing forth of any effect, it must be ascribed to him
that works, without, or above, or against all causes, as pleases himself.
When the Wilderness (which by nature brings forth nothing but bushes and
shrubbs) is stored with pleasant fruitful and useful plants, it is that men
may see and know, and understand together that the Lord has done this, Isa.
41.18, 19, 20.

So when men (by whose councels and endeavors ordinarily things are effected)
intend any thing, and the event falls out contrary to what they purposed, it
must be concluded, that when the heart of man devises his way, yet it is God
that directs his steps, Prove. 16.9. Thus that it may appear the restoring of
the Church is Gods own Work, he suffers Satan and his wicked instruments to
oppose and hinder it what they can that the effecting of that Work without and
against men's intentions may be ascribed to God alone.

2.ly As the carrying on of the Churches Reformation in Troublous times
discovers it to be Gods Work, so it manifests it to be the Work of his
Almighty power, when his enemies having armed themselves against him with all
their strength are overmastered by him. Now I know (says Iethro) that the Lord
is greater then all Gods for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was
above them. Exodus 18.11. When Nebuchadnezar saw that with all his power, and
with the help of his fiery furnace, he was not able to hurt so much as an heir
of the heads of the three children, it moved him not only to Astonishment at
the present, but withal to pass a decree for the honoring of that Almighty
God, whom those menserved. Neither does this way of Gods, in restoring his
Church in Troublous times more manifest his power then it does his goodness in
drawing Good out of Evil, and his wisdom in serving himself of the Councels
and endeavors of his Enemies, and turning all their cross ways to meet in
the furthering of his own ends as he did Satan's practice in crucifying our
Savior, to the accomplishing of the Work of man's Salvation, which Satan
labored to overthrow.

Thirdly, God is highly honored by the Churches troubles, when his children
thereby discover their sincere love to Christ and his truth, when they choose
him in the midst of all outward discouragements. When Moses chose afflictions
with the people of God rather then the honor to be accounted the Son of
Pharaohs daughter, he testified, that he esteemed the Reproach of Christ
greater then the Treasures of Egypt. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. And when Jobs
sincerity being questioned by Satan, God delivered him over to be exorcised by
the Devil under so many bitter afflictions in the midst whereof his heart
still rested on God, in whom he resolved to trust I though he should slay him,
Job 13.15. Those afflictions of his were but as so many windows (as an ancient
Father calls them) through which the World might look into the uprightness of
his heart and true love unto God, from which no afflictions could move him. It
was an honorable testimony given of Christ by John Lambert that holy Martyr,
as due unto Christ, when in the midst of the flames of fire he lifted up his
hands clapping them together over his head, and cried out with a loud voice,
None but Christ, None but Christ.

How the troubles which accompany the Churches Reformation, serve to the
advantages of Gods honor we have seen: We shall find them no less
Beneficial to his Church, and that sundry ways:

First therefore, by these Troubles which fall in with the first Planting or
Reforming of the Church, Gods people are prepared to Endure hardness, as good
soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, which St. Paul in the person of Timothy, exhorts us
unto, 2 Timothy 2.3. It is true, that warnings beforehand are of use to prepare
men for sufferings, to which purpose our Savior exhorts his followers, to take
up the Cross, Math. 16.24. and St. Paul fore-tels his, that they must through
many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. But this Dream of
an outward, glorious, and Peaceable estate, under Christ's government, so fills
the heads, not only of the Papists (who reckon it among the marks of the true
Church) and of the Jews, who despised Christ because they saw no form or
Beauty, (that is, no outward Pomp or Glory) in him, Isa. 53.2, 3. (an error,
that possessed the very Apostles themselves so far, that, both the sons of
Zebedee sued for places of honorable preferment in CHRIST's Kingdom, Math.
20.20, 21. And all the rest of them, disputed the Point, Who amongst them
should be greatest, Mark. 9.34.) But generally, is so rooted in the hearts of
all men, that unless experience of Troubles in their first entrance under
Christ's government, taught them the contrary, admonitions would be of little
force, to awaken men out of that Dream: Wherein if they should be confirmed,
by a Peaceable and quiet settling of the Church at the first, it would endanger
men's Apostasy afterward, when they should find the course of a Christian life,
full of Troubles and Persecution, so far unanswerable to that which their
Peaceable entrance, in taking up the yoke of CHRIST, seemed to promise, as
appears both by the falling away, of such as are resembled by the Stony
ground, Math. 13.22. And by David's danger of condemning his own ways, upon
the same ground, Psalm. 73.13, 14. So that troublesome beginnings of the
Churches Reformation, are a great means of preferving men from Apostasy
afterward, or at least from great discouragements in the course of a Christian
life.

by that expectation acquainted with Evils before they come, which much abates
the fear of them when they happen. Julius Caesar in his wars in France, was
wont to tell his Soldiers, strange things of the great Power wherewith the
Enemy came against them, whereof they having knowledge beforehand, and, when
they came to the encounter, finding their forces no more (or usually far
less) then they expected, they despised the danger, and fought with incredible
resolution. Troubles and afflictions are formidable to men a far off, the
more we are acquainted with them, the less cause we see to fear them. So
that the acquainting of the Church with Troubles in the beginning, arms the
godly with resolution against them, and by expectation makes them familiar unto
them, that they bear them with incredible patience, when they come. St. Paul,
warned by the Holy Ghost, that he was to expect Bonds and afflictions in every
City, grows so resolute, that he despises his own life, Act. 20.23, 24.

Thirdly, such Troubles, although they are unpleasant to the flesh, are very
available to put the Spirit in a right frame, moving us to retire nearer to
God, to hide under the shadow of his wings as in a place of security, Psalm.
91.2, 3. David's afflictions every morning, made him find, that it was good for
him to draw near unto God, Psalm. 73.28. Again it makes us to look more
carefully (as David professes he did) to our ways, Psalm. 119.67. Before I
was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy word) as well that we may
cut off occasion from those that watch for our halting, as that we may farther
interest God in our Protection; and lastly, if we suffer, may have the
comfort, that we suffer for well-doing, 1 Pet. 3.17. Again, it unites the
godly more in love, and communion, and fellowship one with another: as the
Shepherds Dog drives the scattered sheep together. When the bands of the
wicked had robbed David, in the next verse save one, he joins to the company of
those that feared God, Psalm. 119.61.63. It awakens faith, quickens to Prayer,
Psalm. 116.3, 4. exercises patience, and raises up our hearts to look after
those things that are spiritual and eternal, 2 Cor. 14.16, 17.

Jobs sincerity, when he professed his resolution to depend on God, though he
should kill him, Job 13.15. and comforts himself with the hope of a glorious
resurrection, wherein he should see the face of God with joy, whatsoever became
of him and his outward condition at present, Chap. 19.26, 27. The very light of
nature taught Heathen men, that the services which they performed to their
gods, with peril and hazard to themselves, were best accepted of them: The
Family of the Fabii had a solemn universary sacrifice to be offered, by one of
that Family, on the hill called Quirinalis. Now, when the Gauls sacked and
burnt Rome, and besieged the Capitol, so that there was no coming to that hill,
but by marching through the enemies camp, one Caius Fabius Dorso attired as a
Priest, with his sacrifice, and other necessaries in his hand, marches through
the midst of the enemies, astonished at his resolution, offers the sacrifice,
and returns in safety, satis sperans (says the Historian) propitios esse deos
quorum cultum ne mortis quidem metuprohibitus intermisisset. That which he
hoped, upon uncertain and false grounds, we have reason to believe, upon
undoubted evidence of the word of truth; whence the Church urges this, before
God, as an undoubted evidence of the sincerity of their hearts toward him,
that they had not forsaken him, though he had broken them in the place of
dragons, and covered them with the shadow of death, Ps. 44.18, 19.

hiding place, and their shield, Psalm. 119.114. yet is wonderfully supported by
experiments, which beget hope, Romans 5.4. whereof the godly make special use
upon all occasions, as Psalm. 44.1. and 77.11, 12. Now there can be no greater
experiment of Gods Almighty power, and readiness to support his Church, then
the erecting of Christ's Kingdom, in the midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110.2.
yea, in the midst of their tumultuous and violent oppositions, Psalm. 21.2.
Questionless, if all Satan's power cannot hinder the erecting of Christ's
Kingdom, much less shall it overthrow it, when it is established, as our
Savior has promised, that the gates of hell (that is, all the power of the
Prince of darkness) shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18.

Michael, (which is Christ) and by his power, had driven the Dragon out of
heaven, see what joy there is after that glorious conquest, Rev. 12.10. Now is
come salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, etc.

light afflictions work for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Wherefore all those glorious promises made to the Churches,
Rev. 2.7.11.17.26. and 3.5.12.21. are made under the condition of overcoming.

These reasons only weighed, are sufficient to settle the heart of any godly
man, when it appears, that though the Churches troubles are raised by Satan's
malice, and his instruments, yet they are so ordered, by the wisdom and
goodness of God, that he has much honor, and the Church so many large
benefits thereby.

The consideration of these ways of Gods providence, in ordering the affairs
of his Church, is of singular use sundry ways.

What do thon? Dan. 4.35. So DAVID was dumb, and opened not his mouth,
because he did it, Psalm. 39.9. And withal, it is the decree of that God, who,
as he made the heavens by wisdom, so he orders his ways toward men in
wisdom, as the Heathen Poet acknowledges: Et projucundis aptissima quaeque
dabunt Dii, who in his wisdom gives not so much pleasant, as fit things, that
may rather do us good, then delight us; yea, of that good God, who is good, and
does good, Psalm. 119.68. who loves us better then we love our selves, as the
same Poet acknowledges, Charior est ipsis homo quam sibi. How apt are men to
quarrel at their estates, when they suit not with their carnal humors. The
Prophet David gives himself for instance, acknowledging, that when he saw
himself plagued every morning, Psalm. 73.14. his heart was full of envy at
wicked men's prosperity, by which he gained nothing, but the grieving of his
heart, and pricking of his reins, verse. 21. and the shaming of himself for his
folly and ignorance, verse. 22. Indeed, by these murmurings of ours, we both
disquiet our hearts in vain, and wrong God himself, as if there wanted wisdom,
or compassion, or faithfulness in his dispensations toward his people.

David looked upon his chastisements, he was ready to condemn his own way; Ps.
73.13. and when the Barbarians saw the Viper upon Paul's hand, they judged him a
murderer, Acts 28.4. but when they found he had no harm by it, they took him
for a god, v. 6. Three things should move us to think well of the Churches
cause, notwithstanding the troubles incident thereunto: First, that those
troubles are ordered by God, not out of hatred, but out of love and
faithfulness for the Churches good; faithful are the wounds of a Lover, Prove.
27.6. And David finds Gods faithfulness in his afflictions, Psalm. 119.75.
Secondly, it has been the Churches portion in all ages, the lot of the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles; yea, of Christ himself, whom we should condemn,
in condemning the cause in which they stood, which David fears to do, Psalm.
73.14. Thirdly, the issue of those troubles appearing to be the good of the
Church, as the Apostle affirms, Romans 8.28. though it should not move us to
think them gods, with the Barbarians; yet it may warrant us to conclude, that
the cause is Gods, and the events the effects, not of his wrath, but of his
love.

does whatsoever he pleases in heaven and in earth, Psalm. 136.5. and on his
goodness, which, as it extends to all his works, Psalm. 145.9. so is it in a
more especial manner manifested to his Israel, Psalm. 73.1. And lastly, on his
faithfulness, which continues to all generations, Psalm. 119.90. and therefore
he must make good his word, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against
his Church, Mat. 16.18. and that he will not forget his people; though a woman
should forget her sucking child, Isai. 49.15.

Paul, Ephesians. 6.11.12. and St. Peter, 1 Epist. 5.8. exhort us, both to be armed,
and to stand upon our guard, upon that ground, because we shall meet with
strong encounters. We had indeed need to be stirred up to make such provision.

counsels stand throughout all ages, Psalm. 33.11. You shall have afflictions in
the world, says our Savior, Joh. 16.33. The king of Syria will come against
thee, at the return of the year, Gostrengthen thy self, and see what thou
do, says the Prophet to Ahab, 1 King. 20.22.

light afflictions, 2 Cor. 4.17. yet to flesh and blood they seem grievous for
the present, Heb. 12.11. as the Prophet David's bitter complaints, not only in
sore sicknesses, Psalm. 38.6, 7, 8. but besides, in the persecutions of his
enemies, Psalm. 143.3. sufficiently testify. When nature is so sensible of
afflictions, and by the sense of them makes so strong impressions upon the
spirit, when we feel so much smart by these, although but outward troubles, it
concerns us nearly to be well provided of such strong helps as may support our
spirits in such trialls.

Psalmist acknowledges, that in his present distresses he was moved to
question, both Gods Mercy, and the Promises themselves, Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. Now,
if faith should fail us, we are left destitute of all comfort at present, and
of all hope hereafter; it must therefore be our care to be well prepared for
that conflict, wherein, if we should be mastered, we are lost for ever.

To make provision for the supporting of our selves under such troubles as
attend the Church, and every member of it, under Christ's government, our care
must be:

Tim. 2.4. It is the love which we bear unto, and high esteem that we have, of
the honors, riches and pleasures of the world, that keeps us off from Christ,
as it did the young man, Mat. 19.22. and makes us look back oftentimes, and
thereby unfit for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9.62.

a crown of righteousness laid up for him, which strengthened St. Paul to
fight that good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. We must have treasure some where; if we
have taken off our hearts from earthly treasures, we must lay up for our selves
treasures in heaven, as our Savior advises, Mat. 6.19, 20. The Merchant never
sold all that he had, till he had found that pearl of great price, and bought
it, Mat. 13.46.

Ephesians. 6, 13, 14, 15. above all, the shield of faith, ver. 16. of which we have
spoken already sufficiently.

Mark. 13.37. First, watch our selves; keep thine heart with all diligence,
Prove. 4.23. because it is deceitful and desperately wicked, Jer. 17.3. full of
evil thoughts, whence proceed adulteries, fornications, murders, Mar. 7.21.
None ought to be more carefully watched then the traitors within our own
bosoms: Watch the world, our company, or any temptation that may assail us
from without; David was of all things most careful of his company, joining
with those that feared the Lord, Psalm. 119.63. and commanding the wicked out of
his sight, verse. 115. Above all, watch Satan, 1 Pet. 5.8. and be not ignorant
of his devises, as the Apostle calls them, 2 Cor. 2.11. And to be the better
armed against all these, keep the heart filled with holy thoughts, hide the law
there, Psalm. 119.11. that it may be our meditation all the day, verse. 97.



Lastly, look at the reward that follows, as our Savior, for the joy that was
set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame. Afflictions are light
while we look at the things which are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. the crown of
righteousness which God the righteous Judge gives those that fight the good
fight, 2 Timothy 4.8.

The last considerable circumstance in my Text, is the matter, or thing
promised, the building of the walls and streets of Jerusalem, the walls for
defense, and the streets, to reduce it into an orderly form. That the material
Jerusalem is to be looked on as a type of the Church, is evident by St. John's
description of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.2.10.12. by the types of the walls,
gates, foundations, and circuit of that old Jerusalem, and the resemblance of
the Church figured by the Temple in Ezekiels vision, Chap. 41. and 42. So that
in this promise before us, we have represented to us, how God will have his
Church ordered for time to come; he will not only have a people freed from
Satan's bondage, as the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, but will have a
Jerusalem built, a people united into a body, a regular body, compassed with
walls of government, for protection, and digested into an orderly form, as
cities are by streets; so that we may hence

Observe,

Gods Church must be united into a well compacted body, furnished with needful
helps, both for safety and order.

That the building of cities aims both at safety and orderly government, I
conceive, cannot be denied. The first builder of a city, left upon record, was
Cain, as is supposed, for his own security, being cast out of Gods protection,
Genesis 4.14.17. And Solomon, to express what confidence worldlings put in their
riches, tells us they account it their strong City, Prove. 10.15. Implying that
Cities are accounted places of great strength and security. Secondly, it is
evident, both by reason and experience, that Bodies nearly compacted, are more
easily and better governed and kept in order, then a people scattered and
dispersed abroad. Now that the Lord himself had these ends before him in
uniting his Church into a body, is clear enough to those that will understand.
When he plants his vineyard (the House of Israel he means, Isai. 5.7.) the
first thing which he does, is the fencing of it, verse. 2. And Cantic. 4.12.
The Church is therefore resembled by a Garden enclosed, or barred, (as it is in
the original) that is, strongly fortified, to keep out all that might break in
to spoil or destroy. This wall of the Churches defense, is the power of the
Magistrate for whom we are to pray, that under him we may lead a peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. that is, that being by his power
preserved in peace, we may serve the Lord without disturbance in holiness; the
sword being put into the Magistrates hand for the terror of the wicked, and for
the praise of them that do well, Romans 13.3.4. Wherefore the Lord promised,
that in the erecting of Christ's Kingdom, Princes shall be unto his Church, a
hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, Isa. 32.2. so that
none shall hurt or destroy in his holy mountain, Isa. 65.25. There is besides
the Magistrates sword, an inner wall, Ecclesiastical discipline, by which the
little Foxes (as they are termed, Cant. 2.15.) are taken, or kept out: such as
speak perverse things to draw Disciples after them; of whom the Apostle gives
the Elders of Ephesus a special charge to take care, Acts 20.30, 31. And
commands Titus to proceed against them by Ecclesiastical censure, Admonition
and Rejection, Tit. 3.10. And by the same Discipline Christ's Ordinances are
preserved pure, as the Temple was preserved from pollution by the Priests, who
were to teach the people the difference between the clean and unclean, and to
give judgment accordingly, Ezekiel. 44.23, 24. These are indeed the true Rails
about the Lords Table, to keep out Dogs and Swine (as Christ terms them,
Matthew. 7.6.) from polluting and profaning holy things, and these are Jerusalems
walls.

The second thing that God will build in Jerusalem, is her streets, both for
Order and Beauty. If the body were a gross lump (as some say Bears whelps are
when they are newly fallen) not distinguished by parts and members, it were
both uncomly and unserviceable, 1 Cor. 12.18, 19, 20. There must therefore be
streets in Jerusalem, distinction of Offices and Functions, and distributions
of the people into Tribes, Cities, and Daughters of Cities (as the Scripture
terms them) Villages and particular Congregations, without which there can be
no orderly government, as Jethro tells Moses, Exodus 18.18, 21. That resemblance
of the Church to an Army terrible with Banners, Cant. 6.4. may perhaps upon the
by, under the type of an Army, consisting of several Troops, and Companies,
marshalled under their several Standards, and Banners, and yet making up but
the entire body of one Army, shadow out these divisions of the Church into her
several members, making up together the body of one Church, which by this
unity and order grows and increases, not as Cities do in outward wealth,
but in those durable Riches (as Solomon terms them, Prove. 8.18.) of faith,
love, and other spiritual graces, as the Apostle testifies, Ephesians. 4.16. and as
experience made it manifest in the Church newly gathered in the Apostles time,
which having some time of rest, and opportunity thereby to join in fellowship,
not only increased in numbers, but besides thrived in grace, being edified, and
walking in the fear of the Lord, Acts 9.31. which was furthered by those
Ordinances which they enjoyed in common, called living waters, streams from
Lebanon, Cant. 4.13. conveighing that oil of grace, which (like the ointment
powered on Aarons head, and running down to the hem of his garments) Psalm
133.2. flows from Christ our head, full of grace and truth, of whose fullness
we all receive grace for grace, John 1.14, 16.

These are the advantages that the City of God and Church has by uniting into
a well compacted body, fenced with Civil and Ecclesiastical power, and in an
orderly manner divided into streets or congregations, according to Gods
appointment. Why God will have it so, there may be given these reason:

One Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, shuts up all in one
God, and Father of all, Ephesians. 4, 4, 5, 6. implying, that this unity of the
Church flows from him who is One: Whence also but Savior prays for the
Church, that the members thereof may be all one, as he and the Father are one,
John 17.21, 22. And indeed seeing the Church is united to Christ, as the Head
thereof, it must needs be one Body. Now from this spiritual union of the
mystical body of the Church, arises a kind of necessity of uniting the
members of the Church visible, as much as may be.

credits Religion, It is a good and delightful thing for brethren to dwell
together in unity, Psa. 133.1. Unity begets Order (which proceeds ab uno, and
diverts ad unum) and Order follows Decency, which moves the Apostle to join
them together, 1 Cor. 14.40. Both these, Unity, and Order thereby, so grace and
commend the Church, that many are thereby moved to join unto that Society. When
the Church was magnified of the people, many were joined unto it, Acts 5.13, 14.

A Kingdom, a City, an House, divided against it self, cannot stand, says
our Savior, Matthew. 12.25, 26. This care of the Churches preservation is the
more needful, because it is but a little Flock, Luke 12.32. And which is more
dangerous, a flock of Sheep amongst Wolves, Matthew. 10.16. which moves Saint
Paul to warn the Elders of Ephesus to look to themselves and their Flock,
because grievous wolves shall enter in amongst them after his departure, Acts.
20.29.

David's example Psalm 132.3, 4.) to make this great work which God has called
us unto, our first and chiefest care, which we would certainly do, if the
zeal of Gods house had eaten us up with David, Psalm. 69.9.

That the fencing and ordering of the Church, is a work that God will bring to
pass, I have showed already: And that it is our duty to join with him
therein, no man will deny, lest the curse of Meroz fall upon us, Judge. 5.23.
Thirdly, that the greatest weight of this work lies upon the hands of the
Princes and Rulers appears by Gods message sent unto Zerubbabel, Hag. 1.2. By
David's charge to his son Solomon, and all the Princes of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 22.6,
17, 18, 19. and by the examples of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.8, 9, Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.3, 4.5.11. and Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. commended, and set before us as
patterns, for their zeal in establishing and reforming the Church of God. And
lastly, that this is the time wherein you are called upon, to bring forth the
head stone of this work, as your selves cannot deny, so God himself makes it
evident, by the course of his dispensations toward us, for the farther we
proceed in this work, the nearer God draws unto us in ways of mercy,
scattering our enemies, and crowning us with such successes, as exceed our own
hopes and expectations.

Let me therefore speak unto you in David's words to his son Solomon, 1 Chro.
22.16. Arise (Right Honorable) and be doing, and the Lord be with you: or, a
little more fully in the Nobles words to Ezra, chap. 10.4. Arise, for this
matter appertains to you, we also will be with you, be of good courage, and
do it. Not only the Ministers, and people of the Land, but of all the reformed
Churches abroad assist you with their prayers, as Moses, Aaron and Hur, did
Joshua, fighting with the Amalekites, Exodus 17.10, 12. till this work be
carried on to perfection. Besides the honorable name which you shall leave
behind you to all posterity, to be called The Repairers of the breaches, and
Restorers of paths to dwell in, Isai. 58.12. your labor will not be in vain in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. and will be found upon your account at the last day.

To descend to the particulars of the duty required of you, in this great work
of the Churches reformation, Let us (I beseech you) have the help of that power
that God has entrusted you with, to protect us, that the Boar out of the wood
waste us not, nor the wild beast of the field devour us, Psalm. 80.13. that
enjoying abundance of peace under you, our souls may be redeemed from deceit
and violence, Psalm. 72.7.14. which must be done, either by cutting off wicked
doers from the city of the Lord, Psalm. 101.8. or by breaking their jaws, and
plucking the prey out of their mouth, Job 29.17. or, so discountenancing their
ways, that they may be the scorn of the world, and men may cry after them as
after a thief, Job 30.5.

In the next place, let me humbly desire, that the building of the inner wall
of the Church may be hastened, with all possible speed; I mean, that
Ecclesiastical Discipline may be established.

Mat. 22.11.13. For the removing of that block of offense, from such, as upon
that pretense separate themselves from our Assemblies, as polluted by the
leaven (as the Apostle terms it, 1 Cor. 5.6.) of such unclean persons, who
being mixed with us, and admitted by us, to partake of our holy things, leaven
the whole lump. Something you have assaid to do that way already, my prayer is,
that you may do, and I hope the Lord will stir up your spirits to do, yet much
more. Perhaps, ye fear to commit too much power to Ministers, lest the
undiseneet abusing it, liberty may thereby suffer prejudice; Let me answer with
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.2. If the world shall be judged by you, are you unworthy
to judge the smallest matters? If Christ have committed to the Minister alone,
the highest power of the keys, to bind over some to wrath and judgment, and to
loose others, and acquit them from that dreadful sentence, in the dispensation
of the Word, (as you must needs acknowledge) promising to ratify in heaven
what they do on earth, Mat. 16.19. Do you think it much to commit unto them,
assisted with the whole Presbytery, matters of far less moment, the
suspending of men for a while from the use of some outward ordinances? But my
hope is, you purpose to try them in a little first, which if they manage well,
you intend to trust them with more hereafter, as the Master dealt with his
servants, Mat. 25.21.23.

Secondly, for the preventing, or repressing of such as make divisions amongst
us, Romans 16.17. speaking, and teaching perverse things, to draw disciples after
them, Acts 20.30. That divisions and drawing into parties, are the most
destructive ways to Christian society, besides the grounds of reason, the
constant practice of Satan (who both knows, and pursues his own advantages) in
making use of this dangerous Engine to undermine the Church, makes it evident
to the world. Thus he labored to trouble the Church in the Apostles own times,
as both the histories of the Acts, and their own Epistles testify. The like
practice he used in all succeeding times, as is witnessed by all
Ecclesiastical Records. And, in this last age, when Luther began the work of
Reformation, he raised up, first the Anabaptists, in great multitudes in
Germany, to disturb the peace, and to hinder the growth of the Church, and
afterward by dividing the Lutherans from the Calvinists, has made that wide
breach between the Reformists, that will hardly be closed up, and in the mean
time, gives daily infinite advantages to that man of Sin, to work the Churches
utter ruin.

No marvel then that the Apostle adjures the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. by the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and the same judgment: And afterward uses that vehement obtestation,
Phil. 2.12. If we have any consolation in Christ, any comfort of love, any
fellowship of the Spirit, any bowels and mercy, to be of one accord, and of one
mind: That in all things, men should be of one mind, we must suppose them to
be one man; while we are diverse men, we shall have diverse minds in many
things, which yet need not hinder us from walking by the same rule, and minding
the same thing in our aim and scope, Gods honor, and our salvation by Christ;
whereunto, if we be guided by the same rule, the Law and Word of God, the light
to our paths, Psalm. 119.105. differences in judgment, in matters of less
moment (grounded commonly rather upon inferences out of Scripture, then upon
the clear letter of the Text) neither ought to settle our minds upon an
infallibility of what we maintain, (considering that the more use there is of
humane reason, by drawing out conclusions, by way of inference, the less
certainty there is in the conclusions so deduced) nor much less cause
divisions between those, who, embracing the unity of faith, may hold it in the
bond of peace, and would so do, if there were amongst us that lowliness,
meekness, and long-suffering, which is commended to us by the Apostle, Phil.
4.2.3.13. which we ought earnestly to pray for, and labor to work thoroughly
into our hearts.

No such differences of judgment (as suppose about forms of Ecclesiastical
Discipline) though they may for a time disturb, yet they destroy not the
Church, as long as we accord in the fundamentalls upon which it is built. The
divisions against which we crave the help of all power, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical, are such as are occasioned by the reviving of such dangerous
Heresies, as strike at the foundation of faith, and power of godliness, taken
up by most of our Antinomians, Arminians, Anabaptists, Seekers, and many the
like; some of them setting their mouths against heaven (as David speaks in
another case, Psalm. 73.9.) denying the Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost,
uttering unheard of blasphemies against the sacred Trinity, establishing
free will, against the free grace of Christ; others crying down all endeavors
of mortification, exercise of repentance, confession of sin, humiliation for
it, and prayers for pardon, either as legal injunctions, or derogatory to
Christ's satisfaction. The character and censure of such persons, you may read,
Jude 8.10, 12, 13.16. These taking advantage of our present unsettled
condition, both creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with
sin, 2 Timothy 3.6. and boldly assemble in congregations, poisoning the hearts of
the unstable with their pernicious doctrine. Against these, when we crave the
help of the Magistrates sword, it is answered, That there is no established law
that warrants them to proceed against them. Let me therefore humbly beseech
you, by the mercies of Christ, and in his Name, from whom you receive your
power, to hasten some speedy remedy for these evils, lest the blood of the
souls that perish by these seducers, be put upon your account at the last day;
which, I assure my self you would not defer a moment, if those complaints, of
which all men's mouths are full, might be truly represented unto you.

In the next place, (Right Honorable) be pleased (I beseech you) to take care
of the streets of our Jerusalem, the divisions of our Congregations, the
inequality whereof, both takes away much from the beauty of our Church, and
besides hinders the growth of it in knowledge and grace. We have Parochial
Congregations, in which one Minister takes charge of ten thousand souls, and
many others, that have scarce twenty to make up a Congregation. In the
re-edifying of Rome, when the Gauls had burnt it, such haste was made in
building (for the whole city was built in one year) that the Historian tells
us, Eestinatio ademit curam vicos dirigendi; so that the city was magis
habitata, quam divisae similis, more like a city inhabited, then orderly
divided. Whatsoever the cause has been, I am sure it is so with our Church. I
befeech you, let not the redressing of this disorder be the least part of your
care; I confess it is a long work, and requires a more settled condition, then
yet we have attained unto, to reduce all the Parishes of the Kingdom to such
an equality, that each Minister may have a sufficient charge to fill his hand,
and not so great, as to break his back. I desire only, that what may be done at
present, may be speedily taken in hand. We have in London, Westminster, and
the Suburbs, at least ten Parishes, that have each within their circuit, from
five thousand to twenty thousand souls. These places are the shelters for
Papists, Sectaries, Atheists, who nestle themselves there securely, as not
subject to observation in such multitudes.

It will be objected, That we want Ministers for the supply of those Pastoral
Charges which we have already, where then shall we find Ministers to furnish
these new divisions? To that I answer two things.



Zach. 11.17. The sword is upon the arm, and upon the right eye, the arm is
clean dried up, and the right eye utterly darkened. But for the other, there is
that hopeful Spring of godly, studious, and well-grounded youths in learning,
that we have cause to look upon it as an evidence of Gods purpose to make his
Church amongst us glorious and flourishing in future times, if our care be not
wanting to assist them with some competent supply, that they may be enabled to
continue their studies there, till they be fit for the Churches service
abroad. Besides, in the Western parts (I speak upon certain knowledge) there
are very many youths well grounded in Grammar-learning, and of godly
dispositions, ripe for the Universities, if their friends were able to
maintain them there, which for the present they want means to do, being cast
out of, and robbed of their whole estates, as most of you know. And doubtless
there may be found in many other places of this Kingdom, diverse hopeful
youths who are in the like condition.

Give me therefore leave (I beseech you right Honorable) to present my humble
request unto you, and that by the mercies of Christ, as you tender the good of
his Church, and desire the advancing of his Gospel, and the salvation of men's
souls thereby, to think upon some speedy way for the cherishing of those tender
and hopeful plants, that they starve not for want of watering. Alas! what were
the allowance of a thousand pounds yearly (or more if need require) taken out
of the lands of Bishops, and Cathedrals, or some other such means, as your
Wisdoms shall judge most convenient, out of which an hundred poor Scholars
might receive each a yearly exhibition of ten pounds; which, with such other
helps as will be found, might enable them to continue their studies in the
Universities, till the Church need their service elsewhere. Let me, in this
case, set before you the example of Papists, and Jesuits, that spare no cost
for the training up of such as they find fit for their service. I have with
mine own eyes, some years since, seen the letters sent from the College of
Doway, to the Bishop of Calcedon here in England, and his Chancellor, wherein
they complain, that their allowance from the English Catholics, being six
hundred pounds yearly, is not sufficient for the training up of so many
Students as their affairs required. And withal they grant a commission to
diverse persons, to require such arreares, as by Legacies, or other Gifts, were
then due unto them, amounting (as I remember) to wel-neere twelve thousand
pounds. This is well known to many: for the letters were sent up to the
Parliament then fitting. Now (I beseech you) although the children of this
world be wiser in their generation then the children of light, yet let it be a
shame to us, that their zeal in upholding the Kingdom of Antichrist, should
exceed ours in the supporting of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Let me therefore
in his Name, as if God did beseech you by me, crave leave to double my request
unto you, to take this motion to heart, and that speedily: for many of those
hopeful youths, whom I mentioned, are already driven to such extremities, that
without some present supply, they must be forced to leave their studies, and
undertake some other employment.

Now the Lord in mercy so fill your hearts-with an holy zeal for his glory, so
strengthen your hands unto his work, and give that success to your labors
therein, that when you have with restless endeavors, brought forth the
head-stone of his Temple, we may all, with shoutings cry, Grace, Grace unto it,
and your selves, approved for your faithfulness in his work, may be received
into your Masters joy, Matthew. 25.21, 23. Which is and ever shall be the prayer
of

Your humble though unworthy servant in the Lord,

FINIS.
Iovis 27. November. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That M. White, who preached yesterday in
the Abby-Church Westminster before the Lords in Parliament, being the day of
the Public Fast, is hereby thanked for the great pains he took in the said
Sermon; And desired to print and publish the same; which is only to be printed
by Authority under his own hand.

Jo: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

I appoint John Rothwel and Luke Fawn to print this Sermon, and no other.

John White.


