REDEMPTION OF TIME The Duty and Wisdom of Christians in EVIL DAYS. OR A
Practical Discourse Showing what SPECIAL OPPORTUNITIES Ought to be redeemed;
What MISSPENCES of TIME Are to be avoided: with convincing REASONS, Quickening
MOTIVES, And proper DIRECTIONS For the right Improvement of precious Time. By
J. W.

London, Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the King's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683

To the Gentlemen and Inhabitants of HAMMERSMITH.
Honored, Worthy, and Well-beloved Friends,
THe great and good God made Man Lord of the Genesis 1.28. Psalm. 8.6. and 115.16.
whole Earth, but this is not the highest Preferment, and utmost Advancement
that he is capable of, and destined to. The incorporeal and diviner Part of him
sufficiently discovers, and evidently demonstrates that he pertains and belongs
to another World. Tully brings in Cato delivering this high point of
Philosophy, that this Est animus coelestis, ex altissimo domicil^o depressus,
and quasi demersus in terram, locum divinae naturae, aternitai^ que contrarium.
cic. in Cat. Maj. seu de senect.
Earth and earthly Body, into which the Soul is sunk at present, is a place
extremely contrary to a divine Nature, and to Eternity. This Earth is but our
Ex vita ista discedo, tanquam ex hospitio, non tanqu im ex domo. Commorandi
enim natura diversorium nobis, non habitandi dedit. Id. ib.
Inn, says he, in which as Travelers we are to lodge in our Journey, hastening
through Time to Eternity; not our House and Home in which we are to dwell
continually. This World is appointed only as a Passage to a better place and
state: We are now in a way of Preparation for it. This World (as Sir Mat.
Hale's Contempl. M. and D. 1 part, p. 263.
one says well) is the great Laboratory for perfecting of Souls for the next.
We are here indeed to make but a short stay; yet we must not [ repine at the
brevity of this Life, but ought to be content with that space of time which is
allowed us for our Life on Earth; and to take care, that in Neque enim
histriont, ut placeat, peragenda est sabula: modo in quocunque fuerit actu,
probetur: nec sapientis sque ad, plaudite, vivendum. Breve enim tempus aetatis
satis est longum ad been honesteque vivendum. Cic. lib. cit.
whatsoever Act we are appointed to appear, we perform our particular parts
well, though they prove but short ones that are assigned and committed to us,
in the great Comedy acted in the Theater of this inferior World: for (as the
forementiond Philosopher acknowledges) a short time of Life is long enough to
serve us to live well and honestly. It concerns us only to endeavor, to use
and improve what time God pleases to afford us, in doing those things which
will fit and dispose us for a happy Eternity, and make our Translation and
Removal hence gainful and advantageous, comfortable and desirable to us.

God has prescribed a course of convenient means to be observed and used by us
in this Probation-state. Non per difficiles Quaestiones ad beatam vitam nos
ducit Deus. Hilar.
He does not lead us to a Life of Blessedness (as St. Hilary tells us truly)
through thorny difficult Controversies, and knotty hard Questions. He would
have us, not dispute, but live: for (as the Mic. 6.8.
Prophet informs us) He has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? And (as the Tit. 2 11, 12.
Apostle expresses it) The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared
to all Men; teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present World. He requires us
to believe in order to Practice and Obedience.

God has given us but a Pauca credenda, multa facienda. Cosid. Mod. and Pac. in
epist. Praef.
few things to be believed; (as Bp. Forbes was wont well to observe) but he has
plainly ordered and appointed a great many necessary things to be done by us.
We must Rev. 22.14.
do his Commandments, that we may be blessed, and have right to the Tree of
Life, and enter in by the Gates into the City. We mmst Romans 2 7.
by patient Continuance in well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality.

The Scope and Drift of the following Treatise is, to show you particularly and
fully, how to redeem the Time of this Life, so as to gain a glorious
Immortality.

As for the Matter of it, it is useful to instruct you in the Divine
Arithmetic, to make you wiser than The Philosopher affirms that Man is
therefore the wisest of all Creatures, because he alone can number; and they
note this as an essential difference between them, that Bruta non numerant;
Brure Creatures cannot number; I am sure this is most true of that Divine
Arithmetic which the Psalmist prays for, Lord teach us so to number our Days,
that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. Dr. Stoughton's Heavenly Conversat.
p. 80.
brutish Sinners, that know not how to number their Days: It is apt to engage
you upon an early, present Industry; a diligent, speedy Care of your Time, and
of your Souls; and is a Manuduction to the Exercise of a great part of
Practical Religion.

The Style of it is plain, familiar, and easy to be understood by all, which
renders the Treatise the more generally useful. Some affect a Language so gaudy
as is not consistent with the Gravity of Theology. Others discourse in so
strong a Style, that by their lofty Words and Expressions they shoot quite over
the Heads, and so miss the Hearts of too too many of their Auditors. Some paint
the Glass, till they darken the Window, and keep out the Light. Seneca
professes, that he does not approve of any jejune and dry Discourses about the
great and weighty matters of Morality; for Philosophy, says he, does not
renounce all Wit and Ingeny: but he does not allow much labor to be laid out
upon Words. Non quaerit aeger medicum eloquentem, sed sanantem, etc. non erit,
quare gratuletur sibi, quod inciderit in medicum etiam disertum: hoc enim tale
est, quale si peritus gubernator et tam formosus est. Quid aures meas scalpis?
quid oblectas? aliud agitur, urendus, secandus, abstinendus sum. Ad haec
adhibit us es: curare debes morbum veterem, gravem, ^ublicum. Tantum negotii
habes, quantum in pestilentia medieus: circa verba occupatus es? jamdudum
gaude, si sufficis rebus. Sen. ep. 75.
A sick Man, says he, does not seek a Physician that is eloquent, but that is
able to cure his Disease: no more than the Passenger regards and enquires,
whether the skilful Pilot, or Governor of a Ship, be a very comely and
handsome Man? Thou have as much business upon thee, says he, to heal the
Distempers of Men's Minds and Manners, as a Physician has in a Plague-time; and
art thou employed about Words? be glad if thou can be sufficient for things.
I have not studied for great Words, nor labored for high Language; but only
sought out (...), 2 Timothy 1.13.
sound, wholesome, healing words.

It may be, some candid, courteous Reader, if he see Occasion, may make the
same or like Apology for me, as Seneca once did for Fabianus Papyrius, when
Lucilius had taken no small Prejudice against certain Books of that
Philosopher, because his Style was not elaborate and polite, but seemed to him
to be Effundi verba, non fingi.
low and mean: Mores ille, non verba composuit; and animis scripsit ista, non
auribus, etc. -- Electa verba sunt, non captata. -- Ad profectum omnia tendunt,
and ad bonam mentem: non quaeritur plausus. Sen. ep. 100.
He formed Manners, not Words, says Seneca; and wrote to the Minds, not Ears of
Men. It does not become a Philosopher to be studious and solicitous about
Language. He was not negligent in his Style, says he, but only not over-careful
about it: and therefore you will find nothing sordid or slovenly in it. His
Words are chosen, not affected. His Discourses are not flat and low, but
pleasing and plain. Look on the whole Body of the Book; though it be not trim,
it is honest. Would you have him set himself to so small a thing as Words? He
addicted himself to the Greatness of Things. -- And you may perceive by what he
has performed, that he felt what he wrote. What ever he delivers tends all to
Profit, and a good Mind: Applause is not sought for, or looked after by him.

I shall only speak for my self in the Words of Salvian; Nos qui rerum magis
quam verborum amatores, utilia potius quam plausibilia sectamur; -- In
scriptiunculis nostris non lenocinia esse volumus, sed remedia, quae scilicet
non tam oriosorum auribus placeant, quam aegrotorum mentibus prosint. Salvian.
Praefat. ad libros de Gubern. Dei.
We that are greater Lovers of Things than of Words, follow what is profitable
more than what is plausible; nor do we seek that the empty Ornaments of the
Age, but that the wholesome Emoluments of things may be commended in us. We
would have our Writings contain, not Enticements, but Remedies, which may not
so much please the Ears of the idle, as profit the Minds of such as are sick.

The Design and Aim of this Discourse in its composure was, not to tickle the
Ear, and strike the Fancy; but to warm the Heart, and reach the Conscience, and
direct the Life; to teach Men how to live, and how to die, and how to attain a
blissful Life after Death.

I here present you with a plain Discourse in a very learned Age. I have
prepared and provided for you, not fine Manchet, but rather Barley Bread, such
as Fox Acts and Mon. 2 vol p. 1456.
Bucer encouraged holy Bradford, for want of better, to give unto the People.
As St. Peter said to the lame Man, Acts 3.6.
Silver and Gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: In the Name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk: I say to you in like manner; I have
no rich Present to offer you; but such as I have give I unto you: I would,
under God, be a means to help you to find your Feet, and walk in the way of
God's Commandments, and run the Race that is set before you.

I was induced to make these Papers public, not only to satisfy the Desires of
some Friends, but because I found so very little performed by others on this
Subject, which I thought deserved a larger and fuller Handling: And that by my
own appearing in it, I might oblige my self above all others to a greater and
stricter care of my own Time, and might leave some wholesome Counsels, and
seasonable Helps to a holy Life, to my own Children, Friends and Acquaintance;
and do some lasting Service to your Souls; and when I shall be dead, may be
these Papers continue to speak to you and yours: Phil. 1.7, 8.
For God is my record, how greatly I long after you all, in the Bowels of Jesus
Christ. I have you in my Heart; and Romans 10.1.
my Heart's Desire and Prayer to God for you is, that you might be saved.

I shall only here crave your leave to put you in mind of a few very necessary
things.

1. Let me earnestly exhort and beseech you, that you would worthily and
becomingly act the parts of Men, and Christians. Live as those that have
rational Souls, noble and immortal Spirits within you; and do nothing repugnant
to the Light of your own Minds and Consciences. Yea live as those that have the
benefit and advantage of Divine Revelation. Let none that name the Name of
Christ allow themselves in the constant, confident Practice of any notorious,
scandalous Sin or Vice, directly and expressly contrary to the holy Word, and
righteous Law of God; proceeding upon a false, imaginary Supposition; venturing
upon a fond, ungrounded, foolish Presumption; that the Mercy of God will at
last prevail against his Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, and Truth: persuading,
promising, slattering themselves in any evil Way, that God (according to their
Idea and Model of a Deity) will never find in his heart to punish the
unreclaimable Sinner, and obstinate final Impenitent, with everlasting Misery,
and eternal Torment; though he has over and over threatened it in the Gospel,
and though it stands with See p. 439, 440, 441.
good and great Reason that he should do it. Walk closely according to the
Rule, and maintain a Phil. 1.27.
Conversation becoming the Gospel of Christ.

2. If any of you, upon search and enquiry into your selves, shall find in your
selves any decay of Piety, declining in Godliness, abatement of Strictness,
neglect of Watchfulness, any slackness and remisness in Duty, any vanity of
Mind, and carelessness of Spirit growing upon you; if you can perceive you have
Rev. 2.4, 5.
left your first Love; Rev. 2.4, 5.
Remember from whence you are fallen, and repent, and do the first works:
recover, maintain, increase the old Warmth: and 3.2.
Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die.
Fortify natural Principles, suscitate your natural Power, stir up the Gifts and
Graces of God in your selves.

Herb. Poem. Employment, p. 71.
Man is no Star, but a Quick Coal Of Mortal Fire:
Who blows it not, nor does control A faint Desire,
Lets his own Ashes choke his Soul.
Look up to Heaven continually for the help and benefit of Divine Influences,
Illuminations, Impressions; and receive not the Grace of God in vain; but up,
and be doing; go in the Strength of the Lord, and work out your Salvation with
fear and trembling.

3. Take heed of the Profanation, and beware of a partial, formal observation
of the Lord's Day: Where it is partial, it is likely to be formal. Read
attentively and frequently the earnest Exhortation to a thorough Redemption of
the Lord's Day, Chap. 2. page 32, to 73. There you are informed, that a due
Redemption of the whole Lord's Day, is the way to redeem all other Days to the
greatest Advantage, See p. 66, 67.
as to Spirituals, and as to Temporols too. And in reference to this latter, I
shall here confirm what is said there, by proposing the Experience, and
producing the notable, considerable Testimony of a wise and learned, a great
and very good Man, the worthily renowned late Chief Justice Hale, who was (as
Seneca says of good Men) natus ad exemplar, born to be an Example to others: In
a short Discourse of his about Redemption of Time I find these Words; Sir Mat.
Hale's Contempl. Mor. and Div. 1 Part, page 258, 259.
Be sure, says he, to spend the Lord's Day entirely in those Religious Duties
proper to it; and let nothing but an inevitable Necessity divert you from it.
-- It is that which will sanctify and prosper all the rest of your Time, and
your secular Employments. I am not apt to be superstitious, says he, but this I
have certainly and infallibly found true, that by my deportment in my Duty
toward God, in the Times devoted to his Service, especially on the Lord's Day,
I could make a certain conjecture of my success in my Secular Occasions the
rest of the Week after: If I were loose and negligent in the former, the latter
never succeeded well; if strict, and conscientious, and watchful in the former,
I was successful and prosperous in the latter. And again; in a Godly Letter to
his Children Gal. 4.19.
( of whom he travailed in birth that Christ might be formed in them) he freely
opens his mind in these remarkable Words to them; In his Directions for keeping
the Lord's Day, in a Letter to his Children, Ibid. p. 324.
I now write something to you, says he, of your observation of the Lord's Day,
because I find in the World much Looseness and Apostasy from this Duty. People
begin to be cold and careless in it, allowing themselves Sports and
Recreations, and Secular Employments in it, without any necessity; which is a
sad spectacle, and an ill presage. And he there makes this Profession and
Declaration to them; I have found by a strict and diligent Observation, that a
due Observation of the Duties of this Day, has ever had joined to it, a
Blessing upon the rest of my time, and the Week that has been so begun, has
been blessed and prosperous to me: And on the other side, when I have been
neglignet of the Duties of this Day, the rest of the Week has been unsuccessful
and unhappy to my own Secular Employments; so that I could easily make an
estimate of my successes in my own Secular Employments the Week following, by
the manner of my passing of this Day: And this I do not write lightly or
inconsiderately, but upon a long and sound Observation and Experience. You see
how this was much upon his Heart, and how ready he was to remark this upon all
Occasions.

4. Let me charge and press it upon your Consciences, that on a Lord's Day, you
would be so kind and charitable, so true and faithful to your Souls, as not to
lose the Season of a Sacrament, if you can by any means redeem it. Let none
among you live in a sinful, shameful Disuse, and an unwarrantable inexcusable
Neglect of the holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Let me solemnly invite you
in the moving pathetical Words of the devout Herbert,

The Invitation.
Come ye hither all, whose taste Is your waste;
Save your cost, and mend your fare.
God is here prepared and dressed, And the Feast;
God in whom all dainties are.
I do not call you to a Profanation, but to a worthy Participation of this
sacred Ordinance. They that do customarily live unholily, must needs receive
unworthily. Are they fit to partake of the Lord's Supper, who allow themselves
in the Love and Practice of any known Sin? Are they disposed to eat Christ's
Flesh, who will not abstain from fleshly Lusts, but usually walk after the
Flesh? Are they prepared to drink Christ's Blood, who commonly drink in
Iniquity like Water, and frequently drown themselves and others in Drink? Are
they that walk unworthy of their Baptism, in a condition to venture upon the
holy Communion?

I invite you to all that is duly previous and preparatory to the Duty, and to
a right and requisite manner of the performance of it.

Come, but take God along with you, whenever you intend to come. By the help of
God, you may receive this Sacrament as you ought. Excuse not your A^stinence
and Forbearance by pretending your Unfitness: but set your selves in good
earnest, with an honest, willing, resolved Mind, under God, to fit your selves;
and you shall quickly find, that God will readily assist and enable you,
promote and further you in the way of your Duty.

Come, but competently understand the nature and ends of this Ordinance; and
impartially try, and examine your selves before you come. Come with a hearty
willingness to part with your Sins for him, who lost his Blood, and laid down
his Life for you; and with a firm Resolution to live to him, that died for you.
Labor by habitual Devotedness to God, and by continual circumspect walking and
holy living to be in a general disposition for worthy Receiving. A well-ordered
Conversation is the best Preparation for the Communion, and will most certainly
make all other Preparations more easy.

Come for I tell you plainly, it is not at your own liberty and choice, to
come, or keep away. There is a special Mandate for your coming, Luke 22.19. 1
Cor. 11.24, 25.
This do in remembrance of me, says Christ. He does not only simply allow, or
barely recommend it to his Church; but as a Lawgiver, strictly commands and
requires it; and as a dying Testator, orders and enjoins the Observance of it.
Christ says as clearly and expressly, Do this; as God in any Precept of the
Decalogue says, Thou shall not do this. Now the Law of Christ should be more
forcible and prevalent with you, than any Statute, or Law of the Land, to
accelerate the Practice of this Duty.

There is as much Danger in an unworthy Refusing this Sacrament, as there is in
an unworthy Receiving it. You can go for no more than Half-Christians, if you
totally abstain from this Ordinance; which is, equally with the reception of
the Sacrament of Baptism, a Badg and Cognizance, Note and Character of your
Discipleship; an Evidence and Demonstration, Sign and Expression, Token and
Testimony of your Profession of Christianity. To live in a constant Neglect of
this Sacrament, is a manifest Violation of your Baptismal Vow. You promised at
your Baptism, that you would obediently keep God's holy Will and Commandments,
and walk in the same all the Days of your Lives: But how apparently do you
break this part of your Vow, by living in a long continued course of
Disobedience to this so reasonable Command of Christ? Yea, this unchristian
Practice of yours, is, by interpretation, a kind of Renunciation of your
Baptismal Covenant, entered into in your Infancy: you do, in a manner, openly
disown and disavow it, when you will not yield, at Years of Discretion, to
renew and confirm it; though often minded of it, frequently required, and
called upon in the Name of Christ, to do it in the Use and Celebration of this
Sacrament. And by being so utterly averse and unwilling to bind your selves by
this means to Christ, and to ratify and strengthen your Covenant with him, you
seem to quit your Part in Christ, and to disclaim all Interest and Propriety in
the precious Benefits purchased by his Blood and Death; and to be guilty of the
basest Ingratitude, and greatest Unkindness imaginable, in refusing to remember
in a solemn manner your Blessed Savior, who has so lovingly remembered you, and
been, with so much charge and cost, so great a Benefactor to you; and in
unworthily undervaluing the inestimable Benefits of his Death and Passion,
sealed and exhibited in the right Use of this Sacrament.

When Christ has said in plain terms, Do this; will you, in effect, dare to
say, We will not do this; we will break a known Law, and will not regard the
Authority of Christ? Will you persist in such Omission as you cannot justify,
but are forced, if reasoned with, to condemn your selves for?

Can you be so weak, and short in your reasoning, as to think, you reserve to
your selves a freedom and liberty to sin for the present, without any great
Danger to you, by absenting your selves from the Sacrament, which would closely
tie, and straightly bind you up to a stricter way, and more exact course of Life?
never considering, that by your relation to God, and dependence upon him; by
your early Covenant made in Baptism; by all your hearing, or reading the Word
of God; and by every Prayer you have in all your Life put up to God, you are
already strongly obliged to all that Duty, which the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper would further engage you to perform.

Will you put off this Sacrament from Time to Time, and satisfy your selves at
present, that you purpose to prepare, and receive hereafter? why this is just
as foolish and absurd, as to resolve, that when you have very greedily
swallowed much more Poison, then you will take the benefit of an Antidote; that
when you have stuffed your selves with trash, and filled your selves with
abundant crudities, and by so doing weakened and destroyed your Appetite; or by
long Fasting quite lost your Stomach; then you will hasten to a Feast: That
when you have further despised the Riches of Divine Goodness and Grace, made
more light of Christ, and of his precious Blood and Benefits; and grieved his
Spirit by longer De^ays, and Non-improvement of Gospel-seasons, and golden
Opportunities; then you will seek Reconciliation to God, Union to, and
Communion with Christ, Purgation from Sin by the Blood of Christ, and the
Consolation of the Spirit of Christ, You may delude your selves with Intentions
and Resolutions to remember Christ in the Sacrament at some convenient Season
hereafter; but if you neglect and closer it now, you may lose your Senses and
Memory, before ye have another Occasion offered you of remembering Christ in
this Sacrament. You may die and depart; and Christ may come to you in
particular Judgment, before you can enjoy another Opportunity of (...) to the
Table and Supper of your Lord: We may tell of your Death, and show to others
where you lie low in your Graves, before the Times comes that you should show
forth your Lord's Death, in the celebration of the holy Communion. And ifyou
should communicate upon a Deathbed; the Sacrament so late sought and received,
is very unlikely to assure Heaven to you when you die, when it was never
desired and used by you, as a necessary Means of helping you to Holiness, and
so of leading you on to Happiness, all your Life long.

Let not humble, honest-hearted Christians debar and deprive themselves of this
Ordinance, by over-looking, or mis-judging their own Qualifications: But
finding, that they regard no Iniquity in their Hearts; and feeling in
themselves vehement Longings and earnest Breathings after Christ, and continual
Hungrings and Thirstings after Righteousness; let them own with thankfulness
any measure of Grace discernible in themselves; and not deny to themselves what
Christ so freely affords and offers them; but when invited to this Spiritual
Feast, draw near with Faith, and take this holy Sacrament to their Comfort, and
use it as a means of supplying their spiritual wants and needs.

Come, yea frequently come to the Lord's Table. The Sacrament of Baptism is the
Symbol and Seal of our Regeneration, or New Birth; and therefore it is to be
received but once: But the holy Communion is the Symbol and Seal of our
spiritual Nutrition; and therefore, in reason, we are to receive it often. When
Christ appointed that this should be done in remembrance of him, can you think
he intended only a single, or seldom remembrance? Did not Christ himself, in
giving that Command, and enacting that Law, intimate, insinuate, and suppose a
reiterated, frequent remembrance of himself, when he said, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26.
as often as ye drink it; the Apostle subjoining, as often as ye eat this Bread,
and drink this Cup? Will he then accept and take it kindly at your hand, if ye
do it so seldom, as is next to a total Omission of it? Did the Primitive
Christians communicate every day, or at least every Lord's Day; and can you
content your selves to live many Weeks, Months, and Years without it?

Did you but know and understand, consider and meditate of your own spiritual
great necessities, Wants, Weaknesses; and of the certain, considerable
Advantages of a frequent Participation of the holy Communion; you would quickly
find a Law within your selves, to bind and oblige you; a strong Argument and
Impellent within your own Breasts, a pressing powerful Motive in your own
Bosoms, to draw you to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: you would as soon
forget to take your daily Bread, as neglect to receive this blessed Sacrament,
upon any good Occasion, and fit Opportunity offered to you.

Among all your Cares, take special care to feed and nourish, to strengthen and
comfort, to cleanse and save your Souls. Among all your Employments, find some
leisure to remember your Savior, to meet with your dearest Lord, and to
receive the seasonable, plentiful, rich Phil. 1.19.
Supplies of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Will you pretend to value a Sermon, and yet unworthily slight the Sacrament?
seem to make conscience of hearing two Sermons usually every Lord's Day; and
yet let your receiving the holy Communion twice or thrice a Year at most,
suffice your Souls, and satisfy your Consciences? Have you been swift to hear
some thousands of Sermons in your time; and yet so slow, some of you, as not
once to receive this holy Sacrament in the many Years of your whole Lives;
though so very many of the Sermons preached to you, urged and pressed you, with
due Preparation, to receive the Communion? Know ye not, that the Sacrament has,
in sundry respects, the advantage of a Sermon? for in the Sacrament there is a
Sermon to the Eye, as well as to the Ear. Preaching alone cannot possibly so
clearly and lively set forth the Evil of Sin, and the Love of Christ to you; as
the visible Representation of the Crucifixion and bloody Death of Christ, made
in this Sacrament, by the breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of the Wine
before you, is apt to do. Besides that; The Sacrament calls you to a more
solemn previous Examination of your selves, than a Sermon does; and requires
you publicly to renew your whole Covenant with God and Christ; whereas a
Sermon ordinarily engages you to some one or few particular Duties only: And
the Sacrament is a Seal and Confirmation of the Covenant on God's part, of all
the great and precious Promises made in Christ to penitent Believers, as well
as a Ratification of the Covenant on your part. Again; The Sacrament has a
singular Virtue and Efficacy, to join and unite you more nearly and closely to
Christ your Head, and to knit and cement you more firmly and strongly one to
another in Christian Love. And is moreover a powerful Instrument, and effectual
Means of conveying spiritual Strength from Christ, and Grace sufficient to
enable you to perform the Covenant made and repeated by you, and to practice
the Precepts explicated and inculcated in the very many profitable Sermons
preached to you.

5. You that are Parents, and Masters of Families; in the Fear of God, set up
the Duties, and maintain the Exercises of Christ's Religion in your Families.
Let Prayer, and Reading the sacred Scripture, and a course of Catechizing, be
things they are used to, and well acquainted with. Resolve with Joshua, Jos.
24.15.
As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. And vow deliberately with holy
David, Ps. 119.2.
I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart. Walk so closely and
constantly with God, and be so faithfully obedient to him, that your Children
may fare the better for your Covenant interest in him, and relation to him.
Train, bleed, and Ephesians. 6.4.
bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Teach them
to know, fear, love, and serve God; and with Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
command your Children and your Household, that they keep the Way of the Lord:
This will be a means to propagate Religion to Posterity. Suffer not your
Children to have their Heads, and Humors; but labor betimes to break them of
their Wills, lest by their Stubbornness and Disobedience they break your very
Hearts at last. Adonijah was a Person unlikely ever to come to good, when his
Father was so indulgent to him, as 1 Kings 1.6.
not to displease him at any time, in saying, Why have thou done so? Follow the
Direction, which St. Austin gives, to teach Men to do the Works of Abraham;
Omnis qui trucidat sitiorum voluptates, tale sacrificium offert Deo, quale
Abraham. Aug.
Kill sinful Pleasures, says he, and slay youthful Lusts in your Children; by
this means you will offer such a Sacrifice to God, as Abraham did.

Let this Thought often arise in your Minds, that the young Plants, that stand
in the little Nourseries of your private Families, will, according to your
care, or neglect of them, grow up to be good and useful, or vicious and noxious
Members, in Church and State: and so, the Gratum est, quod patriae civem,
populoque dedisti,
Si facit, ut patriae sit idontus. --
Juv. sat. 14.
Public will be profited, or prejudiced, by your well or ill ordering the
Dispositions and Manners of those that belong unto your charge.

Restrain and regulate the rude and loose manners both of your Children and
Servants; Labor to instill good Principles into them; and to render all your
seasonable Instructions, prosperous and profitable by your good Examples: --
Velocius and citius not
Corrumpunt vitiorum exempla domistica, magnis
Cum subsant animos autoribus, --
Id. ib.
Domestical Examples are very notably leading, and drawing, and wonderfully
powerful and influential. Your Children and Servants, they have their
Maintenance from you, Dependence upon you, and are much inferior to you; and
so are apt to eye and imitate you, and ready to conform themselves to you.

You that are Parents, is it not enough that you have conveyed and communicated
a corrupt Nature to your Children; but will you proceed to deprave them further
by your ill Examples, and to draw forth the Corruption of their Nature into
manifold actual Miscarriages and Transgressions? Will you make your Children,
as far as ever lies in your power, the Children of the Devil? You that are
Masters, will you make your Servants the Servants of Sin, and bind them
Apprentices to the very Devil? Will you dare any longer to Nil dictu foedum
visique hac lime ia tangat,
Intra quae puer est. --
Maxima debetur puero reverentia. --
Illud non agitas, ut sanctam filius omni
Aspiciat sine labe domum, viti^que carentem?
Id. ib.
corrupt and debauch your Children and Seavants, by your frequent Drunkenness,
common Swearing, vain and loose Talking, Profanation of the Lord's Day,
Atheistical, ungodly Living? Let Governors of Families charge themselves to
give better Examples.

6. Yea, let every one of you study to be Exemplary, in every relation and
capacity, in every carriage and deportment, both within the private Family, and
before all the Neighborhood round about you. Let this consideration discourage
and deter you from being ill-exemplary, that if at last you should go to Hell
your selves, your own Damnation will receive aggravation from the Damnation of
others, who have been Sinners and Sufferers through your ill Examples: Which
may be the reason, why Luke 16.28.
Dives desired to keep his Brethren out of the place of Torment. Nay, St.
Austin goes a great deal higher, in those very notable Words of his, which
deserve to be pondred in your most serious Thoughts; Quantiscunque exemplum
malae conversationis, etiamsi non eum illi sequantur, aliquis praebuerit, pro
tantis se malis rationem noverit redditurum. Aug. sermon. 163. de Tempore.
If thou have given an ill Example, says he, thou shall one Day give an account
for so many wicked Persons, as thou have shown an ill Example to, though they
have not followed thy ill Example. For it is no thank to thee, that they did
not imitate and take after thee. If thou do not sincerely repent, and
faithfully endeavor, to the utmost of thy power, to reclaim those who by thy
means have become vicious; thou shall at last be sorely punished, not only for
those that have miscarried, but for all those that might have miscarried, as if
they had indeed miscarried through thy ill Example; because if God had left
them, thy ill Example was enough to make them miscarry for ever.

7. And lastly; Remember and consider every day of your Lives, what are the
true and proper ends of Life. Think, and conclude, that you were not sent into
this World to eat and drink, to lie down to sleep, and rise up to play. Be
ashamed to come short of mere Heathens: Blush to read what Cato in Cicero says
of himself; Nemo adhuc convenire me valuit, quin fuerim occupatus. Cic. in Cat.
Maj. seu de sen.
No body could ever yet find me idle and unimployed. With Curious Dentatus, that
noble and worthy Roman, count it Se malle mortuum esse, quam non vivere.
more eligible to be dead indeed, and not to live at all, than to be dull and
dronish idle and unactive, useless and unprofitable in the World. Reckon with
your selves, that Herb, Poems, Employment, p. 71.
Life is a business, not good cheer: That your work and business in this World,
is, not to labor for the Meat which perishes, to seek and study to satisfy a
delicate, wanton, luxurious Appetite, and to take your fill of carnal, sensual,
corporeal Pleasure; to Mat. 6.19. Luke 12.21.
lay up for your selves Treasures upon Earth, to Job 27.16. Zech. 9.3.
heap up Silver as the Dust, and prepare Raiment as the Clay; to acquire
secular Grandeur, and Honor; Laborare in titulum Sepulchri, (as Sen. de brev.
vit. c. 19. in fine.

Quidam disponunt etiam illa qua ultra vitam sunt, moles magnas sepulchrorum,
and operum publicorum dedicationes, and ad rogum munera, and ambitiosas
exequias. At mehercule istorum funera, tanquam minimum vixetint, ad facis and
ad cereos ducenda sunt. Id. ib. c. 20. in fine.


Seneca speaks) to take unwearied pains for a pompous ambitious Funeral, an
honorable Inscription upon your Monument, a swelling Title upon your
Tombstone; but to store your selves with such good things, as will bear you
company beyond the Grave, enrich and ennoble you, and render you worthy, and
honorable for ever in another World. Give all Diligence to be virtuous, and
gracious; to get Absoluta libertas est, in scipsum habere maximam potestatem.
Inastimabile bonum est, suum fieri. Sen. ep. 75.
great power over your selves, and to become your own Men; which the forecited
Moralist tells you, is absolute Liberty, and an inestimable Good: To govern
your selves, and to inspect, and do good to others: To lay out your selves for
God; to Mat. 6.20.
lay up durable Treasures in Heaven; to gain and obtain the Praise of God; to
Phil 3.14.
press toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ
Jesus; 1 Cor. 9.24, 25.
So to run, that you may obtain an incorruptible Crown; and have 2 Pet. 1 11.
an entrance ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

I have written a long, yet, I hope, not tedious Epistle to you: It is large,
from an 3 Cor. 6.11.
Heart enlarged toward you. I will detain you no longer from the Treatise it
self; to which you will find many Quotations annexed: Let none condemn them,
before they have read them: It may be, then you will judge them pertinent,
pregnant, pleasant.

I desire you to accept of these seasonable Fruits of my Ministerial Labors
among you, as a Token and Testimony of my cordial Love, and unfeigned Affection
to your Souls.

It remains, that you think and consider well with your selves, that when the
most important Truths are, not only delivered in Public, and spoken in your
Ears, but brought home to your Houses, put into your Hands, and presented to
your Eyes; how you can escape, if you will not lay them to your Hearts; but
neglect and reject such means and helps of your Instruction and Salvation. O
read, and consider them, and lay your Consciences closer than your Eyes to
them: If they prevail not to reform and amend your Lives and Manners, they will
come in, and witness against you, and heavily condemn you another Day.

Now that the only wise and good God, who put it into my Heart to undertake
this Work, and assisted me in it, to the End of it; (for though 1 Cor. 15.10.
I labored, yet not I, but the Grace of God which was with me) would
graciously vouchsafe to guide and direct your Minds and Hearts into the
Knowledge, Belief, Consideration, Love, and Non est beatus qui scit illa, sed
qui facit. Sen. ep. 75.
Practice of the great and weighty Truths contained in it; and would
effectually bless and prosper it, (and all other serious, profitable
Discourses, that have been already in somewhat more than 20 Years of my
Ministry among you; or shall hereafter by me, or others, be further made unto
you;) to the spiritual Edification, and eternal Salvation of your Souls, is the
earnest Desire, and hearty daily importunate Prayer of,

Dear Friends, Your Servant in the Work Of the Ministry, For Jesus sake, JOHN
WADE.

THE CONTENTS Of the several CHAPTERS in the following Treatise.
CHAP. I. THe Coherence of the Words. The Text divided. The Doctrine
propounded. page 2. The Method laid down for the clearing and opening of it.
What it is to redeem the Time: the Phrase in the Text may signify these four
Things; 1. To buy back the Time that is past: In what sense that may be done.
(p. 3.) 2. To buy up the Time that is present; that is, to forgo or part with
any thing for it; and to make it our own, and use it for our spiritual and
eternal Advantage. (p. 5.) 3. Not only to buy it up, but to buy it out; to get
it out of the hands of the Devil, and the World, and the distracting Cares, and
tempting Pleasures of it. (p. 10.) 4. To use all Wariness and Wisdom of
Behavior to secure our selves from Snares, and to preserves our selves from
spiritual Dangers, and from running rashly and unseasonably into any temporal
Suffering and Calamity. CHAP. II. What the Time is that ought to be redeemed,
largely explained. Opportunity more than Time: it is Time with an Aptness and
Fitness it has for some good. The Opportunity to be redeemed is either General,
or Particular: (p. 14.) The General is all the Time of our Enjoyment of the
glorious Light of the blessed Gospel. (p. 15.) The Particular Opportunity
fivefold. 1. The Morning of our Age. (p. 22.) The well-redeeming your younger
Days will be most acceptable to God, (p. 24.) will make you more serviceable
to others, and prove most profitable to your selves. (p. 26.) They that redeem
the Time of their Youth, are likely to redeem their riper Years. (p. 27.)
Instances of those that have redeemed their youthful Days. (p. 28.) 2. The
Morning of the Week; the first Day of every Week. (p. 32.) Magistrates, (p.
47.) Ministers, (p. 48.) People, (p. 49.) Masters (p. 50.) and Servants, (p.
52.) Poor and Rich, (p. 54.) should study to redeem this Opportunity, and take
heed they redeem it not by halves. (p. 55.) Our Observation of the Lord's Day a
good help to the Redeeming of all the six Days following, both as to
Temporals, and as to Spirituals: (p. 66.) and a means to prepare us to keep an
eternal Sabbath in Heaven. (p. 68.) Carefully redeem the Lord's Day, and every
Day after show in thy Life that thou have redeemed it. (p. 72. 3. The Morning
of every Day; (p. 73.) That is an Opportunity of giving God the first and best
of our Time. (p. 74.) By redeeming the Morning, we are likely to redeem the
whole Day following. (p. 76.) 4. The Society and Company of the most Religious
and Godly: in which we have an happy Occasion both of doing and of receiving
good. (p. 78.) 5. The special Seasons of practicing and performing Particular
Duties, of getting and increasing, acting, and exercising Particular Graces,
must be observed, embraced, and improved by us. (p. 79.) CHAP. III. The Grounds
and Reasons why we ougth to redeem the Time. The special Reason laid down in
the Text; because the Days are evil. (p. 83.) What to be understood by evil
Days. Days are said to be evil, not inherently, but adherently, or
concomitantly; by reason of any sinful, or penal Evil that befalls in them.
The Evil of the Day, is either General, or Special: General; the Shortness and
Trouble, which does accompany the Time of this Life. (p. 84.) The Particular
Evil of the Day is, when any special Evil takes place in such a Time. The
particular Evil of the Apostles Times threefold. It stood, 1. in dangerous
Errors and false Doctrines. (p. 85.) 2. In the vicious and wicked Lives of
scandalous Professors of the Gospel. (p. 94.) 3. In sharp and hot Persecutions.
(p. 109.) How far these several Evils are to be found in these our Days. (p.
86, 95, 123.) Our redeeming of the Time, and endeavoring to grow better our
selves, is the ready way, and only means to make the Evil Days better. (p.
108.) CHAP. IV. Six other Reasons added to that in the Text. We ought to redeem
the Time, 1. Because our Time is afforded us by God to this very End and
Purpose. (p. 128.) 2. Because we have all of us lost much Time already. (p.
137.) 3. Because the Time, that remains, is very short and uncertain, and our
Special Opportunities far shorter, and more uncertain; and the Work, we have to
do, very great. (p. 141.) 4. Because we can neither bring Time back, when once
it is past unimproved, nor any way prolong and lengthen out the Days of our
Lives, when Death comes to put an End and Period to them. (p. 158.) 5. Because
we shall all be certainly called to an Account for our Time. (p. 161.) 6.
Because this Time is all we can redeem, and upon this short Moment of Time
depends long Eternity. (p. 165.) CHAP. V. The Use and Application of the
Doctrine. Ought we to redeem the Time? Then 1. Let not the Men of the World
think strange, that serious and conscientious Christians do not lose their Time
as desperately as they do. Good Men know the Worth of Time, and understand the
great Consequences and weighty Concernments of well or ill husbanding of it.
(p. 171.) (Use 2.) Let us all examine our selves, and see whether we have
redeemed our Time, or no; bewail and bemoan our Loss of Time. (p. 172.) (Use
3.) A seasonable sharp Reproof of several Persons, who are grossly guilty of
misspending their Time. 1. A Reproof of those that misspend their Time in
Idleness and Lasiness. (p. 179.) Idleness a Sin against our Creation, (p. 180.)
against our Redemption, (p. 182.) against our Bodies and Souls, against our
Neighbor; (p. 283.) and an Inlet to many other Sins. (p. 186.) 2. Such Persons
are justly censurable, who misspend their Time in excessive Sleep and
Drousiness; which wastes, not only much of our Time, but the best of our Time
too. (p. 190.) Immoderate sleeping naught on any Day, but worst of all upon the
Lord's Day. (p. 191.) 3. Many misspend their Time in impertinent Employments.
(p. 192.) 4. Many lose much precious Time in vain Thoughts. (p. 194.) 5. In
vain Speeches. (p. 195.) 6. In vain Pleasures. (p. 205.) In Curiosity about
Dressing and Trimming the Body. (p. 206.) In making dainty Provision for the
Belly. (p. 207.) In using unlawful, (p. 210.) or abusing lawful Recreations:
either using them unseasonably, or else immoderately. (p. 211.) 7. In
excessive, immoderate, worldly Cares. (p. 219.) 8. Some Persons are to be
reproved for misspending their Time in Duties. 1. By performing them
unseasonably. (p. 224.) 2. By doing them formally. (p. 226.) Time lost in
Duties by unseasonable Performance, two Ways: 1. When one Duty thrusts and
justles out another; and so the Duty is mistimed. (p. 224.) 2. When Duty is
performed at such a Time when we are most unfit for it. (p. 225.) CHAP. VI. The
fourth and last Use is of Exhortation, (p. 229.) to Magistrates, Ministers, (p.
230.) the People in general. (p. 231.) Six quickening Motives to press the Duty
of Redemption of Time. 1. Consider how notably Jesus Christ redeemed the Time,
when he was here in the World. (1.) He redeemed the Time to save us. (p. 232.)
(2.) He redeemed the Time, to be an Example to us. (p. 233.) 2. Consider
further, that as Christ did once redeem the Time, to save us; So the Devil does
daily redeem the Time, to destroy us. (p. 236.) 3. Consider, how very notably
many of the Saints and Servants of God have improved and redeemed their Time.
(p. 241.) 4. Consider, that it is an Act of Spiritual Wisdom to redeem the
Time, (p. 252.) and mere Madness, and gross Folly, not to redeem the Time. (p.
253.) 5. Consider, that if now thou losest and squanderest away thy Time, thou will at last be forced thy self to condemn thy foolish Negligence, and to
justify the Care and Diligence of others, that were wiser for their own Souls
than thy self. (p. 257.) 6. Consider, that do what we can to redeem our Time,
we shall never repent at last of any Care we have had to redeem it, but shall
certainly blame and find fault with our selves for being so careless of our
Time, so negligent of good Opportunities as we have been. (p. 259.) Serious
considerative Christians do blame themselves for their Loss of Time, even in
their Lifetime: (p. 260.) But they are especially sensible of it, and
exceedingly ashamed of themselves for it, at their Death. (p. 262.) CHAP. VII.
Direction 1. If ever we would redeem the Time, we must endeavor to be
thoroughly convinced of the great Value, and real Worth of Time; In respect of
the Price paid for it: In regard of the Use and End to which it serves: (p.
268.) Considering what precious Thoughts the more improved Heathens had of
Time: (p. 269.) And what damned Spirits, (p. 271.) and dying Persons who have
not made their Peace with God, think of Time. (p. 272.) Direct. 2. If we would
well redeem the Time, we must examine our selves, and call our selves to a
serious strict Account for the spending of our Time. (p. 277.) This was the
Precept of Pythagoras; (p. 278.) and the Practice of Sextius, Seneca, (p. 279.)
and Titus Vespasian. Direct. 3. That we may rightly redeem our Time, let
Conscience have some Authority with us, and procure some Reverence from us. (p.
284.) Stand much in aw of thy own Conscience, (p. 285.) which will either
acquit and absolve thee, or surely judge and condemn thee. (p. 286.) Direct. 4.
If ever we would redeem the Time, we must live and act, and do every thing as
in the Sight and Presence, and under the Eye and Inspection of God. (p. 286.)
The Apprehension of God's all-seeng, all-searching Eye, will be of excellent
Use and Advantage to us at four times especially; 1. Actually consider that God
sees you, when you ordinarily visit one another, and at any time feast and make
merry together. 2. When Buying or Selling, remember you are manifest in God's
Sight (p. 291.) that Godstands by and sees your Dealings. (p. 292.) 3. Consider
this in your secret Retirements, (p. 292.) and in your private Families. (p.
294.) 4. Whenever we come to the public Worship of God, let us seriously
consider, that we stand in his Presence, and ar ein his Eye. (p. 295.) Direct.
5. That we may wisely redeem the Time, let us be sure to propound a good End to
our selves in all our Actions, (p. 297.) and do nothing deliberately, but what
we can safely and freely, warrantably and comfortably ask God's Assistance in,
and Blessing upon, when we go about it. (p. 300.) Direct. 6. We must be sure to
give our selves to Prayer, as a special Way in which, and principal Means and
Help by which we may redeem and improve our Time aright. And here, 1. Be
careful to keep up set and stated Times of Prayer: (p. 302.) of secret Prayer,
(p. 303.) and Family Prayer. (p. 304.) 2. Be ready to betake thy self to
Prayer, upon special, extraordinary, emergent Occasions. (p. 309.) 3. Use thy
self to frequent, sudden, ejaculatory Prayers to God. (p. 313.) This is the
Privilege of Ejaculation, that it is a gaining of Time for the Exercise of
Religion, without any Prejudice or Hindrance to your Calling. (p. 318.) Direct.
7. We must set our selves to the frequent diligent reading, and serious
studying of the sacred Scriptures. For 1. This is a gaining and making
advantage of all the Time past which the Scripture gives us the History and
Account of. (p. 320.) 2. Our Reading the holy Books of Scripture, is a well
improving the present Time that is employed in this Religious Duty: for, it is
an honoring of God; and a means of attaining divine Knowledge, (p. 323.)
heavenly Grace, (p. 324.) and spiritual Comfort. (p. 325.) 3. It is moreover a
means and help to the right redeeming of our Time for the future. (p. 327.)
Direct. 8. If we would effectually redeem the Time, we must give our selves to
frequent and serious meditation. (p. 347.) Set some Time apart for this Duty.
(p. 348.) Think of the four last Things especially; 1. Of Death; of the Day of
thy own particular Death, (p. 349.) and of the Time of the general Dissolution
of the World. (p. 367.) 2. Of the Day of Judgment. (p. 376.) 3. Of the Joys of
Heaven. (p. 388.) 4. Of the Torments of Hell. (p. 432.) Direct. 9. If you would
redeem the Time, you must labor to spiritualize even your ordinary worldly
Employments; and must take care that your natural, as well as civil Actions
partake of Religion. (p. 453.) Direct. 10. If we would wisely redeem the Time,
we must make a good Choice of our Friends and Acquaintance, and a good
Improvement of our Company and Society with them. (p. 463.) Direct. 11. We must
remember and consider, perform and answer our solemn Sacramental Vows,
Occasional Promises, and Sickbed Resolutions. (p. 488.) Direct. 12. Lastly; If
we would effectually redeem the Time, we must not give way to any Delay, but
strengthen and settle our Resolution against any farther Procrastination. (p.
495.)

Errata in the Treatise.
Page 50. l. 12. read warming. 64 l. 22. Assembling. 143 l 4. fall. l. 16.
seiseth. 157 l. 6 - meant. 270. l. 14 their. 287. l. 17. be to be. 334 l. 1.
Mouth. 349. l. 25 dele 1 Use. 378. l. 27. concerned. 396. l. 30. will be. 398.
l. 6. Aptitude. 486 l. 23. Servants. 530. l. 1. use his.

Errata in the Quotations.
Page 63 l. 1. read Constant. 112. l. 7.15. Annal. 137. l. 6. adhuc -- esse.
331. l. 4 (...). 342. l. 2. (...). 390. l. 1. divinorum antmorum. 459. l. 2.
saturantur. 484. l. 3. read p. 332. 486. l. ult. 33.

In the running Titles of the Epistle, for [Preface] read [Epistle Dedicatory.]

Redemption of Time a good Duty in evil Days.
Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the Time, because the Days are evil.


CHAP. I. The Coherence of the Words. The Text divided. The Doctrine
propounded. The Method laid down for the clearing and opening of it. What it is
to redeem the Time: the Phrase in the Text may signify these four Things; (1.)
To buy back the Time that is past: In what Sense that may be done. (2.) to buy
up the Time that is present; that is, to forgo or part with any thing for it;
and to make it our own, and use it for our spiritual and eternal Advantage.
(3.) Not only to buy it up, but to buy it out; to get it out of the hands of
the Devil, and the World, and the distracting Cares, and tempting Pleasures of
it. (4.) To use all Wariness and Wisdom of Behavior to secure our selves from
Snares, and to preserve our selves from spiritual Dangers, and from running
rashly and unseasonably into any temporal Suffering and Calamity.
THE whole Chapter contains several Exhortations, some to General, and others
to Particular Duties. (1.) To General Duties, such as concern and oblige all
sorts of Christians; from the first to the 22th Verse. (2.) To special and
particular Duties, which relate particularly to Husbands and Wives, in their
Carriage and Behavior one toward another; from the 22th to the End.

In the former Part of the Chapter he gives general Exhortations, to a
following of God, verse. 1. to a walking in Love, in imitation of Christ, verse.
2. to the fleeing of Fornication, and all Filthiness and Impurity, so much as
in Word, or only by way of Jest; from the Beginning of the third, to the end of
the sixth verse. To have no familiar Converse, no intimate Communion and
Fellowship with the Wicked, but rather to reprove their evil Deeds, and wicked
Works; from the seventh to the fifteenth verse. And to that end to walk
circumspectly and wisely, and to express their Circumspection and Christian
Wisdom by this excellent good Effect of it, the Redeeming of their Time; in the
15th, and 16th verses; See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but
as wise, redeeming the Time, because the Days are evil.

The Words of my Text do easily break into these two Parts; (1.) A Duty,
redeeming the Time; and (2.) a special Ground and Reason of the Duty, because
the Days are evil. I begin with the former.

It is the Duty of a Christian to redeem the Time.

For Explication of the Duty I shall show

I. What it is to redeem the Time.

II. What the Time is, that is to be redeemed.

I. What it is to redeem the Time. The Word in the Original imports and
signifies several things.

1. The greek Word (...) is commonly rendered redimentes, redeeming. Now to
redeem Time, is properly to buy back the Time that is past, to regain Time
formerly misspent, to recover, as it were, the Jewel of Time that has been
formerly lost. Time once let slip is indeed physically irrecoverable. We can
never truly and properly live one Day, one Hour of our Lives over again. But in
a moral Consideration Time is accounted as regained:

(1.) When we seriously consider, and Oportebat quidem, si fieri posset,
revivere me (ut it a loquar) denuo, quod male vixi; sed quia hoc non possum,
faciam recogitando, quod reoperando non possum. Bernard. sermon de Cantic,
Ezechiae Regis.
sadly think upon our former evil Ways; Tempus redimimus, quando anteactam
vitam quam laserviendo perdidimus, flendo reparamm, Gregorius lib. 5. Eposit.
Moral. c. 28.
weep and wall over our past Sins, lament and repent of all our lost and
misspent Time, and wish with all our Hearts and Souls that we had ordered
aright the whole Course of our Conversations, and lived and acted always as we
ought; and by condemning our selves for our old Follies, undo (as far as in us
lies) whatever formerly we have ill done.

And (2.) when by double Diligence, and extraordinary Care, and Endeavor, we
do that in the remaining Part of our Life, which should have been in some good
measure done before, and which is ordinarily work enough for a Man's whole
Life: As a Traveller that has stayed too long by the Way, when he sinds the Day
is far spent, and that it is not long to Night, he puts on, and makes all haste
and speed, and goes as many Miles in a few Hours as he did before in many. Or,
as a Merchant who has suffered very great Losses, doubles his Diligence in his
future Traffic, and so gets up his Estate: in which Sense both the Traveller
and Merchant are said to redeem their Time. Thus the Christian, by his Activity
and Industry extraordinary, does, as it were, recover his lost Time, he does in
effect redeem it. To live much in a little Time, is in a manner as good, as if
the very Time past were really lived over again: it is in some sense as much as
if the same Time were returned into our hands, because the same thing, which
should have been done in the whole course of our Life, is effectually done in
some one Part of it better employed than the rest of it.

Neither is this any Encouragement to a wicked Person to loose and let go the
present Time, because it may be redeemed again after a sort; for they that thus
redeem it, must pay fall dear for it; and it is very uncertain, whether he that
now lets it slip, shall ever have the happiness to redeem it hereafter, though
at the highest Rate that can be. That is the first particular, it is to buy
back the Time that is past: and this comes nearest to the Latin Word [
redimentes] [redeeming] the Time.

2. The Greek Word (...) does not necessarily suppose a former Possession of
what is now bought, but properly signifies A Lapide in loc.
buying only, or the parting with one Thing for the purchasing of another. The
word is properly rendered emercantes, and may be well translated buying the
Time. (...) then may signify, not only to buy back the Time that is past, but
to buy up the Time that is present: and this is rather intended by the Apostle
in the Text. Now if we take redeeming here to signify no more than buying or
purchasing, it speaks then these Bayne in loc.
two Things; (1.) Redeeming the Time is the forgoing of any thing that would
any way hinder us from taking the Time. (2.) The making it our own, by using
and improving it to all possible Advantages: as in buying a thing [1.] we pay
the Price of it, then take it into our Possession and Use.

(1.) Redeeming, or buying the Time, it is the forgoing of any thing that would
any way hinder us from taking the Time: For if you part with nothing, says
Perde aliquid, ut Deo vaces: Ex eo quod perdis, pretium est temporis, etc.
August, in text. Hom. 10. inter 50.
St. Austin, and yet get something you had not before; you either found it, or
had it given you, or got it by Inheritance: but when you part with somewhat to
purchase somewhat, then you buy a Thing.

Beza upon the Place, makes the Redeeming here to be a Metaphor taken from
Merchants, who very curiously and carefully consider what the several Wares and
Commodities be, and ever prefer a little Profit before much Pleasure, and
choose a small Gain before great Delights. We daily see, that they who use
Markets and Fairs will lay aside their Pleasures and Recreations, and often
lose their sleep, and their set meals, and deny themselves many Conveniences
for the present, that so they may closely attend their Businesses, and know and
take their Advantages, and may not lose any good Bargain, but be sure to meet
with the best A Lapide in loc.
Wares, and to lay out their Money for the choicest Commodities. Thus, in a
spiritual Sense, we should be greedy and covetous Buyers of the Time; we should
be wise No Man is a better Merchant than he, that lays out his Time upon God,
and his Money upon the Poor. Bp. Taylor's Rule of Hol. Lif. c. 1. p. 3.
Merchants, let any thing go to gain the Time; be willing to bestow our Care,
Pains, To redeem the Time, is properly, to buy the security of it at the Pate
of any Labor and honest Arts, Id. ib. cap. 1. sec. 1. Rule 20.
Labor, Diligence, which is, as it were, our Money, which we give for the
Commodity of an opportunity of doing or receiving good: be ready to forgo and
part with our Ease or Pleasure, our Profit and temporal Advantage, our Honor
and Esteem in the World, rather than lose the blessed Occasion of trading for
Heaven, and improving our Time for spiritual Advantage. Plutarch. in vita
Sertorii.
Sertorius the Roman General, in his Passage into Spain, yielded to pay the
Tribute demanded by certain barbarous People, that inhabited the Pyrenaean
Mountains, over which he was to pass; at which his Soldiers were offended, and
said, that it was too much Shame and Dishonor for a Proconsul of Rome to pay
Tribute to vile barbarous People: but the wise Commander gave his Soldiers
this sober Answer, that he bought a Commodity, which such as aspire to high
Enterprises, must take up readily at any Rate. And should not we be much more
willing to give any Rate for the spiritual Redeeming of Time? surely we should
not stick at any thing; we should not think Time dear, or an hard Bargain,
whatever it costs us.

Somewhat to be sure it will cost us; and Calvin here puts the Question,
quodnam erit pretium redemptionis? what Price must we give for the redeeming of
Time? The Price is plainly this, Calvin, in loc.
says he, to shun the infinite Snares that would entangle us, to free our
selves from the Cares and Pleasures of the World, and to renounce and part with
whatever would hinder us from using our time aright. To redeem the Time, says
Zanchius in loc.
Zanchy, is only not to suffer Time to slip away unfruitfully, that we may
enjoy our Pleasure and Leisure; but rather than lose our Time, to suffer the
Loss of any thing. He is said to redeem the Time (says the Reverend Dav. in
Coloss. 4.5. Vos adhortor ut redimatis tempus, id est, ut quovis pretio tempus
hoc salutare faciatis vobis liberum ad serviendum Deo. Poti^s patimini bonorum
temporalium dispendia, quam ut ea cum aliquo salutis aut Euangelis dispendio
velitis retinere. Estius in text.

Tempus redimere, est, occasionem and opportunitatem, quae se nobis offert,
diligenter captare, and cum damno etiam altquo and jactura commodorum nostrorum
illam arripere. Crellius Ethic. Christian. p. 32.


Davenant) who yields to the worst conditions that can be, so they be but
lawful, that he may be able to cleave to God, to hold the Faith, and to keep a
clear and a good Conscience. Whatever he paies for it, he counts this a very
good Bargain. Dan. 6.10.
Daniel would redeem Time for Prayer, though he ventured his very Life for it.
2 Samuel 6.20.
David had rather be mocked and despised by Michal, and lose hi Honor, than
part with a special Opportunity of dancing before the Ark. A sincere Christian
had rather be scorned and nick-nam'd, reproached and reviled, than neglect any
special good Season of honoring his God, and advantaging his own or others
Souls. The Apostles would Acts 5.41.
suffer Shame, endure Reproaches and Imprisonments, rather than omit any
Occasion of teaching and preaching Jesus Christ. Rather than the Primitive
Christians would lose any Advantage of serving God, and consulting their Souls
good, they would Heb. 10.34.
suffer joyfully the spoiling of their Goods: yea, rather than lose that, they
would lose their very Life and Blood. Acts 21.13.
I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the Name
of the Lord Jesus. This was the Price St. Paul was ready to give to redeem the
Time for Christ's Service. Musculus, communibus suffragus Prior electus,
rejecit eum honorem: intelligens nimirum hoc agere Satanam, ut a pio proposito
ipsum retraheret, and hoc quasi vinculo injecto, huic vitae generi magis
obstringeret, ani^^ nque propagandae veritatis studio ardentem, his quasi
honorum and deliciarum lenocintis emoli^et. Melch. Adam. in vit. Musc. p. 372.
Moses, the adopted Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, a Person brought up at Court,
who had the Education of a Prince, and large Expectations of rare and
extraordinary temporal Advantages; when he Heb. 11.24, 25, 26.
came to Age, and well understood the inviting alluring Circumstances of a
temporal Felicity, and was most capable of tasting the Pleasures of a
prosperous State, and Courtly Life; this Moses, at this Time, was willing to
part with the Pleasures and Treasures of Egypt, and refused the Honor of being
called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, to gain an Opportunity of bearing the
honorable Reproach of Christ, and of suffering out of Choice and Election most
comfortable Affliction with the People of God. And so the famous Galeacius
Caracciolus, a Courtier to the Emperor Charles the fifth, Nephew to Pope Paul
the fourth, and the only Son, and lawful Heir of the Marquess of Vico; being
powerfully wrought upon by Peter Martyr's Sermon (like another Moses) See
Calvin's dedicatory Epistle to Galeacius, before his Commentary upon the first
to the Corinthians.
he freely forsook his Marquesdom, the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of Italy,
and of the Emperor's Court; to enjoy God, and the Purity of the Gospel, and
the Peace of his Conscience, and the Fellowship and Society of the People of
God, in a mean and private Condition in a poor Geneva; notwithstanding variety
of mighty entisements from his Father, his Wife, his Children, and
Acquaintance, to renounce the Profession of the Reformed Religion, and to
return to Popery. To redeem, or buy the Time, it is to part with somewhat to
gain the Time. And then,

(2.) To improve and make the best of it for our good. To buy the Time is
(...). Sic Scholia. (...) autem (...), quando in ipso been operamur, ut
placeamus Deo. Z^nch. in loc.
to make it our own: now we make the Time our own, when we make a special
Advantage of it; when we employ and lay it out in doing whatever we do to the 1
Cor. 10.31.
Glory of God, when we spend it to the good Gal. 6.10.
of others, when we use our Time to Phil. 2.12.
work out our own Salvation with Fear and trembling, to make our 2 Pet. 1.10.
Calling and Election sure, to get and grow in Grace, to provide for our
precious immortal Souls, and to fettle and secure our everlasting State and
eternal Welfare. That is the second Sense of the Words.

3. (...), it is not only to buy up the Time, but also to buy it out: and this
is the most proper rendering of the Word. As when you see others watch and wait
for a Commodity which is for their turn, and you presently clap hold upon it,
and lay down the Price of it, before any one else can get it into their hand:
So, to redeem the Time, it is to gain it out of Hucksters hands, as I may say.
Pleasure and Play, on the one side; or overmuch Labor and excessive Care for
the things of the World, on the other side; these, or such things as these,
have got the Possession of our Time at present, or at least are ready to seize
and lay hold upon it. Now we should not suffer them to engross it, but by all
means strive to keep it out, or else to recover it out of their hands, that we
may make a special Use and Benefit of it. Our Time must be gained out of the
hand of the World, yea out of the hand of the very Devil, who is continually
busy to get Possession of it. Since the World is so corrupt the Devil seems,
says Calvin. in loc.
Calvin, to exercise such a Tyranny, that our Time cannot be consecrated and
devoted to God, unless it be after a sort redeemed.

4. The learned Annotat, on Ephesians. 5. not. (e)
Dr. Hammond says, that the Phrase of Redeeming the Time, of gaining or buying
the Season, seems to be a Proverbial Expression, which use had made to signify
more than the very Letter of the Words imported: and he produces several
Instances out of Authors, from which he gathers, that the meaning of redeeming,
or buying out, or gaining the Time, is this; for Christians to use good Caution
and Cunning, Wisdom and Dexterity, to save themselves from Spiritual Dangers,
and the Snares that are near their Souls: to use all prudent artificial
Devices; to preserve themselves from the evil Time in which they live; Times of
carnal Sensuality, and high Corruption; and so of great Temptation, and present
Danger to their Souls. Besides this primary meaning of the Phrase, he says it
may be applied also to that other Prudence for avoiding of Persecutions, as
those are expressed in Scripture by evil Days: not to throw our selves upon
Dangers unseasonably, where there is no probable Advantage in our Prospect: but
to speak and exhort when it is likely to prosper, and at other Times to
refrain. And this, says he, may properly be styled gaining the Time, watching
Opportunities; and when interposing would prove gainless, then to hold the
peace, and expect some fitter Season. And in this latter Sense the most learned
Grotius in loc.
Grotius expounds the Phrase: Redeem the Time, says he; that is, by any Pains
and Labor, and by all fair Language, and respective Speeches, and innocent
condescending Carriages, avoid the Dangers of the Times you live in, and
lengthen out your own Tranquillity.

Thus I have opened the First Term, and shown you what is meant by the (...),
commonly translated [ redeeming] the Time. The Phrase may signify these four
Things, to buy back the Time that is past; to buy up the Time that is present;
that is, to forgo and part with any thing for it, and so to make it our own,
and use it for our spiritual and eternal Advantage. Again, not only to buy it
up, but to buy it out; to get it out of the hands of the Devil, and the World,
and the distracting Cares, and tempting Pleasures of it. And lastly, to use all
Wariness and Wisdom of Behavior, all prudent and pious Arts, to secure our
selves from Snares, and to preserve our selves from spiritual Dangers, and from
running rashly and unseasonably into any temporal Suffering and Calamity.

CHAP. II. What the Time is that ought to be redeemed, largely explained.
Opportunity more than Time: it is Time with an Aptness and Fitness it has for
some good. The Opportunity to be redeemed is either General, or Particular: The
General is all the Time of our Enjoyment of the glorious Light of the blessed
Gospel. The Particular Opportunity five-fold. (1.) The Morning of our Age. The
well-redeeming your younger Days will be most acceptable to God, will make you
more serviceable to others, and prove most profitable to your selves. They that
redeem the Time of their Youth, are likely to redeem their riper Years.
Instances of those that have redeemed their youthful Days. (2.) The Morning of
the Week; the first Day of every Week. Magistrates, Ministers, People, Masters
and Servants, Poor and Rich, should study to redeem this Opportunity, and take
heed they redeem it not by halves. Our Observation of the Lord's Day a good
help to the Redeeming of all the six Days following, both as to Temporals, and
as to Spirituals. (3.) The Morning of every Day; that is an Opportunity of
giving God the first, and best of our Time. by redeeming the Morning, we are
likely to redeem the whole Day following. (4.) The Society and Company of the
most Religious and Godly: in which we have an happy Occasion both of doing and
of receiving good. (5.) The special Seasons of practicing and performing
Particular Duties, of getting and increasing, acting and exercising Particular
Graces, must be observed, embraced, and improved by us.
II. WHat is the Time that is to be thus redeemed. What is meant here by (...).
This Word is sometimes used largely and indifferently, to note Time in common;
which is only the Succession of so many Minutes, Hours, Days, or Years, one
after another, from the Beginning of a Man's Life to the End thereof. So (...)
is all one with (...). But most properly (...) is taken in a narrower Sense
than (...), and is used to denote, not Time simply, but (...). Tempus actionis
opportunum, Graece (...) Lat^ne appellatur Occasio. Modestia, ut and prudentia
est scientia opportunitatis; idoneorum ad agendum temporum. Cic. l. 1. de Ossic.

Vbique in opportunitate multum est situm, and plurimum prodest, suo rem
quamque facere tempore; quemadmodum alieno eandem facere, saepe etiam nocet: --
Certe vel primum est prudentiae officium, vel inter prima. occasionem and
videre and non praetermittere. Crellius Eth. christ. p. 33.


Opportunity, Time with Advantage. Opportunity is the Cream of Time, the Flower
of Time. And in this Sense we must take the (...) here in the Text: not only
for the passing away of Hours, and sliding away of Minutes, for the bare Space,
and mere Leisure of any thing; but for proper Seasons, fair Occasions, good
Hours, and fit Opportunities: Opportunity is Time with an Aptness and Fitness
that it has for some good, with a suitableness and serviceableness to our use
and Advantage: it is a meeting of Time and means together, for the accomplishing
of our End, and the effecting of any Work or Business.

Now Opportunity is either General or Particular.

The General Opportunity to be redeemed.

The whole Course of our Lives is a General Opportunity of doing and receiving
good. We are to look upon all our Time, which we live under the glorious light
of the blessed Gospel, as an happy Opportunity of laying out our selves for
God, and for our own and others Advantage. When God continues the Gospel among
us; when he daily calls us to Faith and Repentance; when he stands ready with
Strength and Assistance; when he publishes great and precious Promises; when
the golden Scepter is held out by God to us, as it was to Esther 5.2.
Esther by Ahasuerus; when gracious Offers, merciful Tenders, kind and loving
Invitations are made and repeated, and very sweet and comfortable
Encouragements propounded and assured to penitent Sinners in the Ministry of
the Word; this is Rev. 2.21.
space given for Repentance: this is a golden Season of Grace, in which we may
have Christ, and all his precious and saving Benefits, upon the reasonable
Terms and acceptable Conditions of the Gospel. When the Trumpet of the Jubilee
sounds; when Liberty to the Captives, and the Opening of the Prison to them
that are bound is proclaimed; 2 Cor. 6. i, 2.
Behold, now is the accepted Time; behold, now is the Day of Salvation: O 2
Cor. 6. i, 2.
receive not the Grace of God in vain: lose not so long and large a Season:
make your Advantage of the Time of the Gospel, be thankful for it, and faithful
in the Use and Improvement of it: close with the Gospel, and daily and
earnestly endeavor and pray that it may be made effectual to you.

Repent, believe, sincerely obey in this thy Day.

Repent: think upon thy Ways, be sorry for thy Sins: hate them, forsake them:
repent with a Repentance from dead Works, never to be repented of. So change
thy Mind, as to change thy Manners, to reform and alter the Course of thy Life
for the future. So truly repent, as to take care to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance.

Believe, not with a bare historical, a mere intellectual Faith; not with an
idle, dronish, wholly ineffectual Assent; but with a Fortasse unusquisque apud
seipsum dicet: Ego jam credidi, salvus ero: verum dicit, si fidem operibus
tenet: vera etenim fides est, qua in hoc quod verbis dicit, moribus non
contradicit. -- Fidei nostrae veritatem in vitae nostrae consideratione debemus
agno cere. Greg. Hom. 29. in Euang.

Credere in Deum est credendo amare, credendo diligere, credendo in eum ^re,
and membris ejus incorporari.

Putasne Filium Dei Iesum reputat quisquis ille est homo, qui ipsius nec
terretus comminationthus, nec attrahitur promissonibus, nec praeceptis
obtemperat, nec consiliis acquiescit? Nonne is, etiamsi fatearur se nosse Deum,
factis tamen negat? Bernard. in Octav. Pasc. de tribus Testim. in coelo and
ter, sermon. 1. p. 88.


practical, active, operative Belief.

So believe the Word of God, as to take it seriously, and in good earnest, for
the only Rule of thy Conversation, in Matters necessary to Salvation. So firmly
receive and assent to the Divine Testimony, as to have thy Heart rightly
affected, and thy Life powerfully influenced by it. So cordially believe the
Truth of the Gospel, as to resolve, and on all Occasions to endeavor to carry
suitably to such Belief; to live and act as a Person that does indeed believe
it, and to answer the end for which divine Truth was revealed, which is the
bringing us to good Lives.

So yield Assent to the Doctrine of the Gospel, as to close and comply with the
Terms of the Gospel, and heartily to consent to the whole Duty of Man,
contained and delivered in the Word or God and Gospel of Christ.

so assent to the Commands of the Gospel as true, as withal to love and like
them, to choose and embrace them as good, and as good for thee, yea as
incomparably better for thee to observe, than any other Rule that possibly can
be respected by thee, whatever they cause thee to lose or suffer here in this
World. So give your undoubted Assent to them, as to cleave closely, and stick
invincibly to them, against all flattering, or affrighting Temptations to the
contrary; and still to engage, and charge, and provoke thy self, to conform thy
whole Heart and Life to them.

Farther; So assent to the Truth of the Gospel-Promises, as to take care to
perform the necessary Conditions of them: to trust in the Promises of the
Gospel with an obediential Affiance, with an obsequious and dutiful Reliance:
to trust in them, according to the Tenor of them: to trust in the Promises of
Pardon and Remission, in the Exercise of sincere and unfeigned Repentance: and
in the Promises of Sanctification, in the Use of Gospel Ordinances and Means,
and diligent Improvement of the Grace of God already communicated and received:
and in the Promises of Life everlasting, in the way of new and sincere
Obedience. Assent to the Promises, not only that they are true and real; but
that they are also the most valuable that can be; 1 Pet. 1 4.
exceeding great and precious Promises: so as to prefer the Promises of God
above all the Proffers of the World, as better than any thing that the Devil
can offer, or the World afford.

Farther yet; So assent to the Truth of the Threatenings of the Word, as to fear
and stand in aw of them, and to study to avoid those Sins, which will put thee
in Danger of temporal and eternal Sufferings; and to keep thy self free from
the Fear of the Menaces of Men, while thou art in the way of thy Duty to God.

Believe the whole Word of God; and

Believe in all the Persons of the holy and blessed Trinity. So assent to the
Truth of whatsoever is spoken in the Scripture of God, and Christ, and the
Spirit of God and Christ, as deliberately to choose God the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, for thy Portion and Treasure, thy Happiness and chief Good.

To bring thy Heart to own, love, honor, serve and worship God the Father, as
thy good and bountiful Creator and Preserver, and very merciful God Redeemer by
Jesus Christ: and freely and gladly to consent to have God the Father for thy
Covenant-Friend, and reconciled gracious Father.

And to accept, with all Love and Thankfulness, even a crucified Christ, for
thy only Lord and Savior, to bring thee to God, thy chiefest Good, by
reconciling thy Person and Nature to him; to recover and bring thee back both
in Heart and Life to God: and to rest and rely upon Christ, and on God only in
and through Christ, for Justification, Sanctification, and eternal Salvation,
according to the Promises of the Gospel.

Cordially receive him in all his Offices. And here,

1. Accept of Christ as a Priest, to save thee by the offering of himself a
Sacrifice in thy stead, and by making Intercession on thy behalf. And labor to
answer the ends of his Death, by Purity and Holiness of Heart and Life: and to
act becoming his Intercession: to live so, as it may be fit for Christ with
Honor to present your Works and Services to his Father, to be accepted by him:
to do nothing but what is worthy of such a Mediator as Christ is, to present
unto God on your behalf. Now tell me, is any act of Profaneness, Sin and
Wickedness, a fit Action for Christ to take, and present unto his Father for
Divine Acceptance? Certainly our Actions must have the Truth, though not the
Perfection of good Works: for otherwise 'twere a Thing unbeseeming Christ to
present them, and unbecoming God to accept them: for in so doing, Christ must
become a Patron of Sin; and God an Owner of the Works, and an Encourager of the
Workers of Iniquity. O then take care that your Actions be such as may be fit
to be presented by Christ unto his Father, and to be accepted by God, in and
thorough Christ. This is the Way to honor Christ considered as a Priest.

2. Accept of Christ as a Prophet, to teach and instruct thee; thoroughly to
teach both thy Head and Heart: and be willing and forward to learn of Christ,
and to be taught by him the Truth as it is in Jesus, and to profit both by his
Doctrine and Example.

3. Accept of Christ, not only for thy Priest and Savior; and for thy Prophet,
Teacher and Instructour, but for thy wise and holy Lawgiver, and for thy
sovereign King and Governor, to rule and to reign over thee. Give up thy self
in hearty Subjection to the Person and Authority of Christ, and Credere se in
Christ^m quomodo dicit, qui non facit quod Christus facere praecepit? aut unde
perveniet ad praemium fidei, qui fidem non vult servare mandati? Cyprianus de
Eccles. unit.

Quid est credulitas vel fides? opinor fideliter hominem Christo credere, id
est, fidelem Deo esse, hoc est, fideliter Dei mandata servare. -- Christiani
homines infideles sunt, si bona sibi a Deo assignata corruperint. Salvian. de
Gubern. Dei, lib. 3.


vow and be ready to perform sincere Obedience to all the Particular Commands
of Christ. When others cry, these are hard Sayings, who can bear them? do you
profess that his Commands are not grievous; and do thou say from thy very
Heart, I delight to do thy Will, O Christ. Love and Delight in the Laws of
Christ, and choose and strive to keep and observe them, when others censure,
break and violate them. While other Men dishonor Christ, and put him to an
open Shame, and cause his worthy Name to be blasphemed; let thy Life lead Men
to high and excellent Thoughts of Christ, and of his Laws, and Ways, and
Government. This is the right Acceptance of Christ, so Coloss 2.6.
to receive Christ Jesus the Lord, as to purpose and endeavor to walk in him.

And then for the other Act of Faith; Have not only a bare Opinion of Christ's
Fidelity, but trust in Christ with a practical Trust: So thoroughly trust him,
as to venture all thy Happiness on him in his own way. Trust him so far, as to
be sincerely and heartily willing to leave and forsake all to follow him: to
part with Sin, and the World, yea Life it self for him, who will not suffer
thee to be finally a Loser by him: to be ready to relinquish all that thou
see and possessest here, for things invisible, which Christ has promised to
render to the Believer in the other World.

And so believe what is said concerning the Holy Ghost, as heartily to believe
in the Holy Ghost: Consent to take him for thy Teacher, and Guide; Sanctifier,
and Quickner; Advocate, and Comforter.

Enter into solemn Covenant with, resign and give up thy self to the Worship
and Service of the sacred Trinity. Be fully resolved to live to God and Christ;
and to worship in the Spirit, to be led by the Spirit, to walk in the Spirit,
and to bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit.

Believe, and learn to live by Faith; and let thy Faith work by Love, and show
it self by good Works, and be productive of the Obedience of Faith. And let thy
Obedience be voluntary and cheerful, uniform and universal, constant and
perpetual.

Thus, thus improve the precious Season of Gospel Light, Grace, and Strength,
by plainly and fully coming up to the Terms, and faithfully performing the
great and necessary Conditions of the Gospel. Honor and glorify the Lord Jesus
Christ, by entertaining, and walking worthy of the Gospel of Christ.

There was a memorable Statue set up in the Isle of Rhodes, in honor of the
Sun, which once a Day is said to shine upon that Island, be the Air in all
other Parts never so overcast with Clouds. But we enjoy a greater and higher
Privilege than they: The Sun of Righteousness shines upon this our Island, and
affords the Light of the blessed Gospel, not only once every Day, but all the
Day long every Day: And now shall we be so blind and unthankful, as to take no
notice of it; so idle and careless, as to make no use of it? Since the Light of
the Gospel does clearly and sweetly beam out in our Faces, when the Air is dark
abroad, and many other places are covered with the thick Clouds of Ignorance;
let us Joh. 5.35.
rejoice in the Light, and 1 John 1.7.
walk in the Light of the Glorious Gospel, as Children of the Ephesians. 5.8.
Light, and of the 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
Day; and then we shall be as so many Statues set up in Honor of Christ the
Sun of Righteousness, that shines in his Luster and Strength upon us.

But besides the General Opportunity of the Continuance of the Gospel, which is
afforded to many all their Life long: I say, besides this, there are some
Parcels and Portions of our Lives, some Days and Hours of our Time, that are
Particular and special Opportunities above others; as namely these following.

The first Particular Opportunity to be redeemed.
1. The Morning of our Age: the Time of Youth, and Health, and Strength: this
is an Opportunity of providing for Eternity: this is a fit Season of working
out our Salvation; of laying up in store against a Time of Sickness, an Hour of
Weakness, and the Day of Death. This is a Time, wherein Juvenes possumus
discore, possumus facilem animum, and adhuc tractabilem, ad meliora convertere:
hoc tempus idoneum est laboribus, idoneum agitandis ^er studia ingeniis, and
exercend^s ter opera corporibus. Quod superest, segnius and languiaius est, and
prop^^^ a fine. -- Primus quisquo tanquam optimus dies placeat, and redigatur
in nostrum. Sen. ep. 103.
both Body and Mind are strong and vigorous. This is an Age meet for
Impression, capable of Instruction, and fit for Action. The Wise Man calls
young Men to redeem this choicest Part of their Time: to think of him early,
who loved and minded us so early ( Eccles. 12.1.) Remember now thy Creator in
the Days of thy Youth, [thy choice Daies] while the evil Days come not, nor
the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no Pleasure in them. The Days
of Youth are good Days: the Time of Health and Strength is a good Time indeed:
Now the Understanding is quick and perceptive, the Memory strong and retentive,
and the Body able and fit for Service and Employment, The Days of old Age,
they are evil Days: then the Eyes grow dimm, the Ears deaf, the Hands tremble,
the Legs are feeble, and the Memory fails. Old Folk they cannot do as they have
done: they cannot follow the Markets, and manage House-hold-Businesses, and
order the Affairs of their Families and Callings, with such quickness and
dispatch as formerly. Now, if Old Age be unfit for any Action, then to be sure
it is most unfit for the Exercises of Religion; it is most weak and strengthless
here. Pray tell me, what will thou do to remember thy Creator then when thy
Memory fails thee? Will thou be fit to turn to God, when thou art unable to
turn thy self in thy Bed? how can thou serve the Lord thy God with all thy
Strength, when almost all thy Strength is gone?

Such of us as have been prodigal of this precious Time, let us lay our Loss to
heart, and mourn in secret for it. What a sad Consideration is it, that many of
us have made our selves incapable of taking Solomon's excellent Counsel. They
that have already spent their Youth in youthful Lusts, they are not in a
Capacity of remembering their Creator in the Days of their Youth. All that such
can do, is only, with an holy Shame, and Godly Sorrow, to remember in
Confession before God, that they have not remembered what in due Time they ought
to have remembered; and to beg of God, that for Christ his sake he would not in
Judgment remember their non-remembrance; but that he would in Mercy remember
them, though they have not as they ought remembered him.

But now for such, as have not as yet past the Days of their Youth; O let them
prize, and presently improve these precious Days and Hours; O (...) (as the
wise Pittacus once said) know Time, know this particular Time; lose not, if
possible, a Minute of it. 'Twill be grievous to Job 13.26.
possess the Sins of your Youth in your Old Age.

Now for your encouragement to redeem this Part of your Time, consider
seriously these few Things;

1. That the early Redemption of your youthful Days, for the Honor, and
Worship, and Service of God, will be very pleasing and acceptable to him. God
of old required that the first ripe Fruits, and the Firstborn should be
dedicated to him: and his Sacrifices he would have to be young; to show that he
delights in the Flower of Age, and well accepts the Jer. 2.2.
kindnesses of our Youth. As in the distilling of Waters, that which is drawn
off first, is the strongest, and fullest of Spirits; and the last is the
weakest and smallest: Or, as in the pouring out of a Bottle, or drawing out of
a Vessel (to use Q^emadmodum ex amphora primum quod est sincerisssimum ^fflu^t,
gravissimum quodque turbi^ ^nque subsidit: sic in aetate nostra, quod optimum
in primo est. Id exhauriri in aliis potius patimur, ut nobis faecem reservemus.
Sen. ep. 108.
Seneca's Similitude) that which is purest and clearest comes forth first; and
that which is thickest and most dreggy, sinks and remains at the Bottom: so the
Optima quaeque dies miseris morta^ibus aevi
Prima fugit: fubeunt morbi tris^sque fenectus.
Virgil. Georg. lib. 3.
best of our Days run out first, and the worst at last. Now it is a Disgrace to
God, to give him the Devil's leavings: it is a Contempt cast upon God, to give
the Devil the Flower of your Age, and him the Bran. Suppose a Landlord should
come to his Tenant, and entreat him to set before him somewhat to eat; and he
should reply, Excuse me, I pray Sir; there are a Company of Villains and
Varlots, which I am at present providing for; but if you will be pleased to
stay a while, you shall have those broken Scraps which they shall leave: would
not this be a strange, rude, unseemly Behavior? Thus, thus it is with the most
of us: God is our great Landlord, and he comes, and moves, and solicits us to
serve him: but we have fleshly filthy Lusts that war against our Souls; and yet
these must be straight provided for: they must have the Strength of our Bodies
and of our Souls. This is unworthy, dishonorable Dealing with God, and we
little think how ill he takes it at our hands. But how welcome are they to God,
who prefer God before the Devil and the World; and honor God with their very
first choice, and virgin Love! Who do not stay, as it were, till they are weary
of Satan's Service, and then take a new Master; but follow God even as soon as
they can go, seek and enquire early after him, and bind themselves in their
Youth to him.

2. The well-redeeming of your younger Days, as it will be most acceptable
unto God, so 'twill make you more useful and serviceable unto others. Thou
can hardly do any considerable Service either to God, or the Church, or the
State, if thou make it late before thou beginnest to be well employed. He can
do but a little Work, that takes none in hand till the Sun is a setting.

3. The redeeming and husbanding of the Time of thy Youth is apt to prove most
profitable to thy self. The earlier Men set out in the Morning of their Age,
the farther they may walk in the Ways of God's Commandments in the Day of
their Life, and make more Progress in the Path of Holiness. The sooner you
begin, the more work you may do, and so may receive the greater Reward: Yea, be
Gainers here, as well as hereafter, by being thus busy betimes. He that makes
Religion his Business in his Youth, may easily lay up a Stock of Grace, and of
comfortable Experience, which may be of much use to him. If thou beginnest
young, thou may get abundance of Grace into thy Heart before thou art old:
Thou may go from one Degree of Grace to another, from Strength to Strength:
thou may be almost a perfect Man in Christ Jesus, by that Time others are
but newborn Babes, if thou will but begin betimes. But a late Christian cannot
probably be an eminent Christian; As a Man that begins the World late, can
hardly grow a very rich Man: Or, as we say of Bees that swarm late, they get
not any great Store of Honey. Manna was not to be met with but in the Exodus
16.21.
Morning: Who would misspend, or neglect the Morning-Season of his Life, and
lose that Portion of heavenly Manna, which he might have gathered and gotten in
it? Who would have a thin Crop, and lean Harvest, by later sowing his Seed? Sow
early, that you may reap the more plentifully.

4. Consider moreover, that they that redeem the Time of their Youth, are
likely to redeem their riper Years: They have not only more Time to get good,
but a greater Disposition, and a stronger habitual Inclination to be, and to do
good. A young Saint, and an old Devil; is a cursed and an absurd Proverb: There
is the greatest fear that a young Devil will prove an old Beelzebub. Who can
ever expect, that a Tree that is Aestatis tempus est fructificandi tempus: Quae
aestate steriles est, hyeme foecunda non erit. Muscul.
barren in the Summer, should bare and bring forth Fruit in the Winter? It is
said of the Trees of Righteousness, that they shall bring forth Fruit Psalm.
92.14.
in old Age: not then begin to do it, but shall continue still to do it. Lam.
3.27.
It is good for a Man, that he bear the Yoke in his Youth: It is true of the
Yoke of Christ; They that bear it in their Youth, there is hope they will count
it an easy Yoke, and not offer to throw it off afterward. Fingit equum teu^ra
dociteni cervice magister
Ire viam, quam monstrat eques: Venaticus ex quo
Tempore cerviuam pelem latravit in aula,
Militat in sylvis catulus. Nunc adhibe puro
Pectore verba, puer, nunc te melioribus offer.

Prove. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the Way he should go; and when he is old, he will not
depart from it. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem
Testa diu.
Horat. ep lib. 1. ep 2.
What the Vessel is first seasoned withal, it will have a taste of a long Time
after. Remember God in your Youth, and you will hardly forget him ever after.

5. Consider once more, it is plain and evident some young ones have redeemed
the Time of their Youth: do you follow and imitate their Example. Holy David
was able to say, Psalm. 71.5.
Thou art my Hope, O Lord God; thou art my Trust from my Youth. 1 Kings 18.12.
Good Obadiah feared the Lord from his Youth. It is said of Abijah the Child of
Jeroboam, that in him there was found some good Thing, some Seeds of true Piety
toward the Lord God of Israel; that is, in regard of the Worship of God: and it
is the Commendation of this young Man, that he was not only truly Godly, but
pious and religious in a wicked and flagitious 1 Kings 14.13.
Jeroboam's House. You know, 1 Samuel 2 18.
Samuel in his Childhood ministered before the Lord. And 2 Timothy 3.15. 1 Timothy
1.18.
Timothy Hoc non vulgar erat adjumentum, quo la pueritia assuefactus erat
Scripture lectioni: nam hac longa exercitatio muito instruct^orem reddere
hominem potest adversus omnes circumventiones. Itaque prudenter olim cautum
fuit, ut qui dest n^bantur verbi Ministerio a pueris erudirentur in solidiore
pictatis doctrine, ad Oque sacras literas penitus imbiberet, ne ad ipsum munus
accederent novi adhuc and tyrones. Atque hoc in singulari Dei beneficio
ponendum est, si quis it a fuerit a teneris Scripture cognitione imbutus. Call.
in. in 2 ep. ad Tim, c. 3.15.
from a Child had known the holy Scriputres: He began betime in Religion, in
holy Learning and Knowledge; and gave such Proofs of forwardness therein, whence
it might be, and was prophesied concerning him, that he would become an eminent
Instrument in the Church of God, in communicating to others the Light of saving
Knowledge, wherein himself so early had made so good a Beginning, so great a
Progress.

We read of the elect Lady's Children 2 ep. Joh. 4.
walking in Truth; that is, in Sincerity and Integrity of Faith and Manners, or
ordering their Actions as the Truth prescribes, and living according to the
Rule of the Gospel. Our Savior Christ was early about his Father's Business:
we find him at it Luke 2.42, 49.
at twelve Years old. 2 Chronicles. 34.1, 2, 3.
It Is said of that good King Josiah, that in the eighth Year of his Reign
(which was the Adolescens jam regiae administr^tionis factus compos; nam tutela
durabat and finem anni 13. simulaique ad regni gubern^tionem libertoren,
pervenit. Syno^s Crit. in 2 Par 34.3.
sixteenth Year of his Age) while he was yet young, he began to seek after God.
Certainly his Heart was seasoned with the Fear of God in his Childhood, when
first he began to reign: But now in his Youth, as soon as he could get the
Reins of Government in his Hand, he began to seek after God: that is, to
endeavor the Settling of the true Religion, and publicly to manifest his Faith
in God, and Zeal for his Glory: And in the twelfth Year (when he had attained
to more Authority) he began to act most vigorously against Idolatry: And in the
eighteenth Year he had quite purged the Land, and the House of the Lord. v. 8.

And it is well known concerning our English Josiah, King Edward the sixth, that
he was most exemplarily holy in the Days of his Youth. How did he honor the
Bible, and Word of God! Fuller's Church History, 7th Book, p. 424.
When one of his Play-fellows proffered him a bossed-plate ^ Bible to stand
upon, and heighten him to take down somewhat he desired, which then stood above
his Reach; perceiving it a Bible, with holy Indignation he refused it, and
sharply reproved the Owner thereof, as counting it unfit to trample that under
his Feet, which he was to treasure up in his Head and Heart. And upon the Day
that he was crowned King of England, when three Swords were o^^ered him, to
signify that he was King of three Kingdoms, England, France, and Irland;
Wolsins Lection, Memorab.
he is reported to have sad, There is one Sword wanting yet: and being asked
what that was, he said it was the Bible: that Book is the Sword of the Spirit,
sa d he, far to be preferred before all these. He was constant, fervent, and
successful in his private Devotions. Fuller loc. cit. p. 415.
How did his faithful Prayer wonderfully recover Sr. John Cheek his
Schoolmaster, who by his Physicians was quite given over for a dead Man! How
did he promote and carry on the Re^ormation of Religion, from Idolatry and
Superscition, in this Land and Nation! And when the Emperor Charles the fifth
sent an Emba^^adour with a menacing Message of War, in case his Cousin the Lady
Mary should not be admitted the free exercise or the Mass: and the Counc I
thinking it fit to gratify the Emperor, engaged Archbishop Cranmer, and
Bishop Ridley to press the King with Pol^tick Reasons for the toleration
thereof; the King refused upon Scripture-Grounds to condescend there into: and
when he found them still urgent, and very importunate with him; at last he
^ilenced them with his Tears, and stopped their arguing with his Weeping, and
forced them to weep in company with him. It is Hi Life, p. 218, 220.
reported of the early and eminently holy Mr. Joseph Allein, that, when but a
Schoolboy, he was observed to be so studious, that he was known as much by
this Periphrasis (the Lad that will not Bibentibus and colludentibus aliis,
ipse sumto libro i^ sylvulam vicinam sese proripuit: tantisper in illa vel ad
legendum considens, v^l ad meditandum deambulans, donec ipsum hora coenae domum
revocaret. Melch. Adam in vit. Musculi, p. 369. Bishop Andrews, from his first
going to Merchant-Taylor's School accounted all that Time lost that he spent
not in his Studies. He studied so hard when others played, that if his Parents
and Masters had not forced him to play with them also, all the Play had been
marred. His late studying by Candle, and early rising at four in the Morning
procured him Envy among his equals, yea with the Ushers also, because he called
them up too soon. The Sermon preached at the Fun. of Bp. Andrews, p. 17.
play) as by his Name. And when in the University; he so demeaned and carried
himself, that he deserved to be called the Scholar, who by his good Will would
do nothing else but pray and study. Yea so early, as about the eleventh Year of
his Age, he was noted to be very diligent in private Prayer, and so fixed in
that Duty, that he would not be disturbed, or moved by the coming of any Person
accidentally into the Places of his Retirement. And it is remarkable, what is
storied Mr. James Janeway's token for Children, p 30, 35.
of a young Child, who died about five or six Years old, that he would so beg,
and expostulate, and weep in Prayer, that sometimes it could not be kept from
the Ears of Neighbors; so that one of the next House was forced to cry out,
The Prayers and Tears of that Child in the next House will sink me to Hell:
because the forward Piety and Devotion of the Child, did reprove and condemn
his neglect of Prayer, or his slight Performance of it. And to what a Degree of
good Understanding and holy Affection had Mr. White's little Book for little
Children, p. 106, 107.
that child of Mr. Owen the Minister arrived? who was but about fourteen Years
old when he died: and in his Life time would often write very serious Godly
Letters to his Brother, which showed his great Piety, and happy improvement.
And how savourily and spiritually he exerCised himself in Meditation notably
appear in this Instance; that though he much delighted in young Lambs, yet one
Day his Mother bringing a Lamb, newly fallen of an Ewe of his; and showing a
little Displeasure, that he should take no more notice of her bringing it to
him: He told her, that as he saw the Lamb in her Arms, he was thinking of the
Lamb of God, how he presented him to the Father: and that the Lamb his Mother
brought him, was but a poor thing for him to rejoice in, for he had far higher
Matters for his Joy. Some young ones have redeemed the Time of their Youth; O
do you so too. Be able to say upon better Grounds than the young Man in the
Gospel, that all God's Commands you have kept from your Youth up. The Time of
Youth is a special Season of doing, and receiving good: That Is the first.

The second Particular Opportunity to be redeemed.
2. As the M^rning of our Age, so the Morning of the Week, the first Day of the
Week, is a special Time to be redeemed. Let this Day be religiously observed by
us, which was applied and consecrated, separated and appropriated to sacred
Uses, and holy Offices, by the blessed Apostles; who were either commanded by
Christ to do it, when for forty Days after his Resurrection he instructed the
Apostles, and Acts i. 3.
spoke to them of the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God: Or, having
received the holy Ghost, Christ's Agent or Advocate, promised and sent to
inspire their Minds, to teach and show them how to manage Affairs, and order
Matters relating to the Church; were extraordinarily guided, and divinely
directed by the Spirit of Christ, in this weighty Business of the Surrogation
and Substitution of the first Day in the place of the Jewish seventh Day
Sabbath, which was partly a Ceremonial Rest, and was joined with the Ceremonial
Law, ( Lawson's Theo-Polit. p. 182, 183.
the Services and Rites whereof were to be observed in the Tabernacle and
Temple upon this Day) and was a distinguishing Sign, and Part of that
Partition Wall whereby the Jews were separated from the Gentiles; and was
therefore fit to be now removed and laid aside: And were moreover plainly lead
to it by the Providence of God, which imprinted and put a most not able
Character and signal Honor on this Day, and made it more excellent than any
other, by Christ's Resurrection, and Apparitions, and the Spirit's Mission upon
it; which were a remarkable pointing, and special singling out of this Time;
and a clear Intimation, that this very Day should be publicly kept, and
universally observed, in perpetual Honor of the Lord Christ. Words that have
their Termination in (...) signify actively.
As the Sacrament is called 1 Cor. 11.20, 23, 26.
(...), the Lord's Supper, not only because it is kept in Remembrance of the
Lord's Death, till his coming again; but because it was instituted by the Lord
himself: So the first Day of the week is expressly styled Rev. i. 10.
(...) the Lord's Day; not only because it is observed by the Church in Memory
of the Resurrection of the Lord Christ; but because it was appointed by the
Lord Christ, because he was the Author and Ordainer of it, either immediately by
himself, or mediatly by his Apostles. And we cannot imagine, that there shall
ever occur a sufficient Reason for the Who that is well instructed would
endure to hear of a Pope Sy vester, that durst presume to alter the Day,
decreeing that Thou^d^y thould be kept for the Lord's Day through the whole
Year; because on that Day Christ ascended into Heaven, and on that Day
instituted the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood. Bp. Hu^^ Peacemaker,
p. 198. ex Hospinian, de festis Christ
Alteration of this to any other Day; for we can never look to receive a richer
Benefit in this World than Redemption by Christ, who rose from the Dead; and
Sanctification by the Spirit, sent down from Heaven on this very Day. We can
never have greater Blessings to remember on another Day, and therefore the
Sanctification of this Day must be perpetuated to the End of the World.

On this Day especially the Apostles performed those Offices, which are most
proper and most agreeable to a Sabbath Day. Acts 20.7.
There was a Convention and Congregation of the Disciples on the first Day of
the Week, to break Bread; and St. Paul preached to them the same Day: And though
the Apostles preached, and celebrated the Lord's Supper on other Dates of the
Week; yet why are the4se Things mentioned as done on that Day particularly and
remarkably, unless it were for some singular Eminency of this above any other
Day; and because they were bound to do those Duties on this Day more than on
any other. And the Apostle gave express Order, that 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
the Collection for the Saints, a Work especially fit for a Sabbath Day, should
be made particularly on the first Day, that is, Beza in loc.
every first Day of the Week; which was the fore-ordain'd and customary Day of
the Christian, religious, Church Assemblies. Upon (or Bp. of VV. Opuse. Speech
against Mr. Trask. p. 73. (...) So the Word is used Mark 15.6. (...). The
Sense is, against the Feast.
against) the first Day of the Week, every Person was to lay apart what God
should move and incline him to offer.

The Preparation and Separation of it was to be at home, every Week: but the
Collation and Contribution to be in the Public Congregation, every Lord's Day.
For, Hammond's Par.
it was not reasonable for any to come to the Lord Exodus 23.15. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
empty, upon the Day of the most solemn Christian Assembly. And this Day was
appointed for the Oblation of their Alms, because of the inestimable Benefits,
and infinite good Things we this Day had bestowed upon us.

And the Church of Christ has constantly observed this high Day, ever since the
Apostles Days, and spent it in Reading, Exhortation, Prayer, Sacraments. Si
die Solis laetitiae indulgemus, alia long ratione quam religione Solis,
secundo loco ab eis sumus, qui diem Saturni otto and victus ^ecernunt,
exorbitantes and ipsi a Judaico more, quem ignorant Tertul. Apol. c.16.
The Primitive Christians were suspected to worship the Sun, because they used
to celebrate the Sunday. It was an Bp. of VV. Speech in the Star Chamber,
Opusc. p. 74.
usual Question put of old by the Heathen to the Christians, before ever they
offered to torture and martyr them; Number Dominicum servasti? Did you keep the
Lord's Day? To which they answered, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum. I
am a Christian, and dare not omit, or give over the Observation of it.

This is a Day, in which God is to be solemnly worshipped and served; and
Christ to be pbulickly magnified and glorified: A special Season to be laid
hold on, a particular Opportunity to be improved for our Soul's Good. This is a
special Day of Grace, in which (as I may say) the Mint is going, and in which
we may take our Stamp of Holinefs. Whole duty of man, Partit. 2. sect. 18.
This is the gainfullest, the joyfullest Day of the Week: a Day of Harvest,
wherein we are to lay up in store for the whole Week, nay, for our whole Lives.
This is a Market Day for our Souls, in which we may trade for Eternity. This is
a Day in which we may hear and understand the Things that belong unto our
Peace. Pious and pathetical is that of the divine and holy Mr. Herbert,
(Sunday.)
O Day most calm, most bright,
The Week were dark, but for thy Light:
Thy Torch does show the way.
(Sundaies.)
They are the fruitful Beds and Borders
In God's rich Garden: that is bare,
Which parts their Ranks and Orders.
On Sunday Heaven's Gate stands open;
Blessings are plentiful and rife,
More plentiful than Hope.


This is a Day, in which the most precious Commodities that ever the World saw,
or heard of, are set forth: in which the Riches and Treasures of the Gospel are
opened, Christ himself offered, his Merit and Spirit tendered; Pardon and Grace,
Light and Life, Strength and Comfort held out and exhibited. This is a Day, in
which no Pandora's Box is opened, but in which the Cabinet of God's Jewels is
unlocked, and his precious Gifts and Graces dispensed. This is a Day, in which
a spiritual Mart, a divine Fair is publicly kept: in which, with the wise
Virgins, we may buy Oil for our Lamps; buy spiritual Eye Salve, to anoint our
Eyes, that we may see (as our Savior counsels excellently); buy the Truth (as
the wise Man advises us) and be persuaded so well to like it, as never to sell
or part with it: buy Wine, and Milk, and Bread, to fill and satisfy our empty,
hungry, and thirsty Souls: buy white Rainment, that we may be clothed, and that
the Shame of our Nakedness may not appear: buy the Christian's complete Armor,
that we may be furnished for our Warfare, and well provided against the
Assaults of our Spiritual Enemies: buy Gold tried in the Fire, that we may be
rich: yea, in which we may buy the Pearl of Price; in which we may receive and
lay hold on Christ, and all his Benefits; and embrace and apply the great and
precious Promises of the Gospel. This is a Day, in which the Word of God's
Grace is opened and applied; and the holy Sacraments, the Seals of the
Covenant, frequently administered: in which we have the Privilege of hearing God
speaking unto Sinners, and wooing and beseeching Rebels to be reconciled: and
in which we may enjoy the glorious Liberty of speaking our selves to God, with
an holy Boldness at the Throne of Grace; and pouring out with one Accord our
Supplications and Souls in Prayer to him. This is a Day of solemn Rest from
servile Offices, and worldly Works: A Time of drawing nigh to God, and of
meeting the Lord in his own Ordinances; of joining with the Saints and Servants
of God, in the Worship of God, in Prayers to God, and the Praises of him: of
having Communion and Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ,
through the blessed Spirit; and of enjoying a kind of Heaven here upon Earth.

The Lord's Day, you see, is a special Season of Grace and Mercy: O let us be
spiritually thrifty of this Opportunity: Let Us not live as if we were of the
same Mind with the modern carnal Jews, who think (as the learned Tempore
Sabbati matutino, non tam cito quam solent alias, cubitu surgentes, in lucem
multam, voluptatis certe magis quam Sabbati debite colendi causa, stertunt.
Quanto enim voluptatis isti plus percipiunt, tanto se devotrus Sabbatum colere
statuunt. Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. c. 11. initio.
Buxtorf tells us) that sleeping excessively on their Sabbath is a great Honor
done to God.

Let Us not content our selves with an idle Rest: Let our Rest be the Rest
Lawson's Theo-Pol. p. 179.
of Men, and not of Beasts; and the Rest of holy Men, as holy: Let Us not only
cease from secular Works, but exercise our rational and spiritual Faculties in
heavenly and divine Employments; and set our selves to Works of Piety, Charity,
and Mercy. Let us redeem this Time out of the Hands of the Devil, the World,
and our own carnal, cozening, corrupt Hearts. Do not offer to work the Works of
your Calling, the Works of the Flesh, the Works of the Devil, on the Lord's
Day: Take heed of serving the Devil more upon the Lord's Day, than on any other
Day, than on all the Days of the Week besides. Let not the Lord's Day be
leisure for the Devil; as if the first Day of the Week were Daemoniacus potius
quam Dominicus; the Devil's and not the Lord's Day. Let not any Temptations, or
Delusions of Satan, keep and detain us from the public Ordinance, divert our
Attention at it, and hinder our Spiritual Benefit by it. Let not any
Recreations, and sensual Pleasures, upon this Day especially, hinder the
Performance or Family Duties, and private religious Exercises. Let not vain
Thoughts this Day lodge within us, and justle out heavenly Meditations. Let not
worldly impertinent Discourses, upon this Day, shut out more profitable
Christian Conferences.

The Lord's Day, it is the most considerable Advantage, the most notable
Opportunity that is afforded us, and the best Price that is put into our Hands
all the Week long. You have several Market-daies in the Week, for civil
Affairs, and worldly interests: but you have this one only for spiritual and
eternal Interests and Advantages. O do not neglect so great Salvation as is
this Day offered and tendered to you. Having such an excellent Price in your
Hands, O be not such Fools as not to make a good and a right Use of it. Mr.
Valentine Marshal in his Preface before Capel's Remains.
Mr. Richard Capel, pressing the strict Observation of the Lord's Day, would
usually say, that we should go to sleep that Night with Meat in our Mouths (as
it were) The Lord's Day being our best Opportunity; if we mis-spend that, we
cannot be said to redeem the Time.

Now that we may redeem the Lord's Day to good Effects, and useful Purposes,
let us not be wanting to put our selves in a sit Preparation for the due
Observation of it: not only by previous Meditation of the Day, and the Duties
of it; but by ordering aright the constant Course of our Conversation, and
laboring for habitual Sanctification. Let us every Day live as those that
expect to have Communion with God the next Lord's Day. Let us act so regularly
all the Week, that nothing may be done by us, which may breed any strangeness
between God and us, and hinder our delightful Converse with him on his own Day:
that on that sacred, separated Day, we may not bring the fresh Guilt of any
gross and wilful Sin along with us, which may make us blush and be ashamed to
come into his Presence. Let us walk so circumspectly every Day, that upon the
Return of his own Day, we may meet him with a pure and clear Conscience, with
clean Hands, and clean Hearts, and may be made joyful in his House of Prayer.
That we may keep the Lord's Day holy, let us strive and study to live holily
all the Week; and be so provident and diligent, as to finish and dispatch in
the six Days all kinds of secular Works, and common Employments; that no Sin
committed on the one hand, nor any Business of our Calling omitted on the
other, may disturb and slacken our Attention, distract and discompose us in the
Exercise of our Devotion; but that we may cheerfully and fruitfully spend the
Lord's Day in the Lord's Work. Let us every Day carry our selves so
spiritually, and perform our Closet and Family religious Duties so conscionably
and constantly; that we may be the fitter and readier to spend this choice,
select Day in the solemn Worship and Service of God; and may go through the
several Duties of it with less Tediousness, and more Delight. Let us be with
God some part of every Day, that so we may grow into Acquaintance with him; and
may taste the Sweetness, and experience the Gainfulness of Communion with him;
and long for the return of the Lord's Day, that we may meet and enjoy him in
the public Ordinances, and have Opportunity of larger and freer Converse with
him. Let us pray to God every Day, that so, by using our selves to the Duty, we
may be the better disposed to join in Prayer with the Congregation on the
Lord's Day. Let us read the Bible every Day, and daily do whatever we know to
be our Duty; and this will make us more apt to hear, and the better prepared to
receive the Word that is preached on the Lord's Day.

And when the Lord's Day comes, let us get up as early as may be, that so we
may have the more Time before us to work the Work of God in: And take some
Pains to prepare our selves in private, for our better Attendance upon the
public Ordinances; and timely Quisquis incolit civitatem, in qua extat
Synagoga, and inibi non precatur cum coetis publico, is est qui merito dicitur
malus vicinus. Dictum Maimonidis.
resort to the Place of public Meeting; Follow the Counsel of holy Mr. Herbert;

The Church Porch, p. 14.
Sundaies observe: think, when the Bells do chime,
It Is Angel's Music; therefore come not late.
God then deals Blessings: if a King did so,
Who would not haste, nay give, to see the Show?
-- O be dressed;
Stay not for the other Pin: why thou have lost
A Joy for it worth Worlds. Thus Hell does jest
Away thy Blessings, and extremely flout thee,
Thy Clothes being fast, but thy Soul loose about thee.
And when thou art come into the Church, watch over thy Behavior there: make
thy self all Reverence and Fear. Open thy Ears; but shut thy Eyes to all
distracting Objects.

The Church Porch, p. 15.
Who marks in Church-time others Symmetry,
Makes all their Beauty his Deformity.
As the same Divine Poet pathetically expresses it.

Let God and Angels see your most devout Behavior, and serious Composure, the
whole Time of Prayer: And give all diligent close Attention to the Word of god,
read and preached. Do not carp and catch, jest and jear at the Preacher's
Language or Expression. Do not show by your vain and profane Carriage, your
ridiculous Gestures, and unseemly Actions, your Laughing and Whispering, Toying
and Talking, that you slight and contemn the God calls Preaching folly. Do
not grudg to pick out Treasures from an earthen Pot. The Church Porch, p. 15.
Foolishness of Preaching.

And when, on the Lord's Day the Lord's Table is richly furnished with a
spiritual Banquet, make not needless and frivolous Excuses to absent your
selves from this Marriage Feast. If any crowd in, that have not a
Wedding Garment; let not this make you stay out, that have one. Lose not your
Portion of this heavenly Food, because of others impreparation. Though others
eat and drink their own Damnation, let your Faith feed on Christ to your own
Salvation. By your frequent receiving of this Sacrament, show your real Sense
of your own need of it, your high prizing and valuation of it, your hearty
Thankfulness to Christ for it, your Obedience to your Lord, who does not only
vouchsafe it as a Privilege, but command it as a Duty: Do this in Remembrance
of me. Perform this easy sweet Command of thy dying Lord and Savior, who has
freed and delivered thee by his Death from the heavy Yoke and grievous Bondage
of Jewish Sacrifices and Observances. O let our Hearts, at such a Time, be
broken and bleed at the Remembrance of our Sins, which brake Christ's Body, and
shed his Blood. Behold in the Sacrifice and bloody Death of Christ, represented
in this Sacrament, the odiousness and baseness of your own Sins: and resolve to
be the Death of that, which was the Death of Christ; and rather to die, than
willingly to do that for which Christ died. Abhor the Thoughts of wilfully
choosing so great an Evil, as once brought so great a Punishment upon so great
a Person as the holy Jesus, the well-beloved Son of God. Consider seriously
upon this Occasion, that if God would not spare Christ, when he, who knew no
Sin, was, by voluntary, charitable Assumption of our Guilt, to answer for our
Sins; to be sure then he will not spare us, if we wilfully run on in Sin, and
obstinately allow our selves therein, notwithstanding so convincing a
Demonstration of his sin-hating Holiness and vindicative Justice. Upon due
Meditation draw this Conclusion, (which is the excellent Reasoning of the
Facilis est collectio, si Deus ne resipiscentibus quidem peccata remittere
voluit, nisi Christo in poenas succedente; multo minus inultos sinet
contumaces. Grot. de Satisfact. Christi.
learned Grotius) that if God would not pardon the Sins, no not of penitent
Persons, unless Christ did substitute himself in their Room, and stand in their
Stead, to bear the Punishment; much less will he suffer unreclaimable Rebels,
and contumacious Sinners to go unpunished.

When Christ is set forth, in this Sacrament, crucified before your Eyes;
think, how he intended and aimed at our Mortification and Sanctification, in
his Death and Passion: Tit. 2.14.
Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify
to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works: Pet. 2.4.
Who his own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree; that we, being
dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness. Let us yield, that Christ should
have his End in his Death; and never allow our selves to live in Sin, which
will render us incapable of receiving the Benefit of Christ's Death. Think, how
the Unholiness of our Lives is a greater wrong to Christ, than the Jews being
the very Death of him: because (as the D. Jackson, Vol. 3. p. 343, 344, 345.
learned Dr. Jackson notes) it is more against the Will, and Liking, and good
Pleasure of our Savior; whose Will was regulated by Reason, and was a constant
Rule of Goodness: for, though a painful, shameful Death, and that inflicted by
his own People, went much against his human Will; yet he chose rather to die,
and to suffer the most afflictive Circumstances of Death for us, than to suffer
us to live and die in our Sins, and in the Servitude and Power of Satan.

Shall we pretend, when we approach to the Table of our Lord, affectionately to
remember a loving dying Savior, and to desire to have his Memory continued and
transmitted to Posterity; and yet so much forget him, upon the return of any
Temptation, as to repeat that which was the Death of him? Shall we weep at the
Sacrament, and seem to be hugely troubled for those Sins which were the Cause
of Christ's Sorrows; and yet go about again to destroy, and to crucify Christ
afresh? Shall we commemorate at the Lord's Supper our wonderful Redemption by
the precious Blood of Christ; and when we have done, shall we do the Devil more
work and service than the Lord Christ? O what a Reproach is this to Christ, and
what a Sport to the Devil, that they, that pretend to remember Christ's Dying
for them, should not find in their hearts to live to him! Ego pro istis quos
mecum vides nec alapas accepi, nec flagella sustinui, nec crucem pertuli, nec
sanguinem fudi, nec familiam meam pretio passionis and cruoris redemi; sed nec
regnum illis coeleste promitto, nec ad paradisum restituta immortalitate denuo
revoco: Tuos tales, Christ, demonstra: -- vix tui meis pereuntibus
adaequantur, qui a te divinis mercedibus and praemiis coelestibus honorantur.
Cypr. de Opere and Eleemosynis. p. 220.
St. Cyprian brings in the Devil boasting and bragging against our Savior, and
insulting over us silly and sinful Wretches, in this manner; I have endured no
Buffetings, nor born Smitings with the Palms of Men's Hands: I have suffered no
Scourgings, nor under-gon the Cross for any of these: nor have I redeemed my
Family with the Price of my Passion and Bloodshedding: yet show me, O Christ,
so many, so busy, so painful, so dutiful Servants of thine, as I am able to
show thee every where of mine. Bring forth, if thou can, such a Number of
Persons, who devote themselves, and give their Labors, Estates, and Time to
thee; as I can easily produce of those, who do all this to me.

When thou professest to remember that Christ died for thee, O die to that for
which he died: Offer thy self to him, and lay out thy self for him, who once
offered himself for us, and in the Sacrament offers himself to us. Think no
Duty too much for him. For Shame, for Shame, do not serve any longer a bloody
Murderer, instead of a blessed Savior and merciful Redeemer.

Let our Thoughts and Meditations dwell upon the Demonstration, given us in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, of Christ's exceeding, incomparable Love to
Mankind. See there, how contrary the sweet and kind Nature of Christ is, to the
cruel and execrable Nature of the old Tyrant, the Devil: For (as the learned
His Mystery of Godliness. p. 133, 245.
Dr. More very well observes) whereas the Devil (who by unjust Usurpation had
got the Government of the World into his own hands, tyrannizing with the
greatest Cruelty and Scorn, that can be imagined over Mankind) thirsted after
humane Blood, and in most Parts of the World required the Sacrificing of Men;
which could not arise from any thing else but a salvage Pride, and Despite
against us: This new gracious Prince of God's own appointing, Christ Jesus, was
so far from requiring any such villainous Homage, that himself became at once
one grand and all sufficient Sacrifice for us, to expiate the Sins of all
Mankind, and so to reconcile the World to God. Shall not all this disengage us
from Sin and Satan, and win and gain us over to Christ?

And let Christ's Death make thee study to do something answerable to the
dearest Love of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has dealt so
graciously with thee, as to transfer the Punishment from thee upon his Son; and
so bountifully with thee, as to give his own Son for thee, and to thee. O bless
and praise God, by studying to do such good Works, as may provoke others to
bless and glorify him.

And when you come home from the public Ordinance, take heed you do not
entangle your selves with Businesses, or Recreations; which have as much Power
to render the public Duties ineffectual, after, as before their Performarsce:
But carefully spend that which is not Church-time, in Meditation, Prayer,
Reading, savoury Speeches, heavenly Discourses, and the conscionable
Performance of such Duties as tend to your own and others Edification.

Let Magistrates redeem the Lord's Day, by personally frequenting, open owning
and countenancing the public Worship of God, and Ordinances of Christ; and by
improving the utmost of their Power for the Glory of God, and Honor of
Religion, in the zealous Prevention, or speedy Reformation of the horrid
Prosanation of the Lord's Day; and vigorous promoting the general
Sanctification of it: out of serious Consideration, and a strong Conviction,
that the Preservation and Continuance of Religion does much depend upon the due
Observation of the Lord's Day: And that a Disesteem, and Neglect of the
Sanctification of that Day, does quickly cause a lamentable Decay of Christian
Piety, and hasten the infliction of It is somewhat remarkable, and not
altogether to be neglected, that even in this Nation, upon the public
Allowance of Sports and Recreations upon the Lord's Day, which is our Christian
Sabbath, Civil and bloody Wars, and Ruin of the Royal Family, should so
shortly follow; and that the Hand of God should be most against those, who by
VVriting, Words, or Practice, had maintained the lawfulness of that Doctrine.
Lawson's Theo-Polit. p. 181.
fearful Judgments upon a Land and Nation.

Let them do this, in imitation of the brave and holy-spirited Nehem. 13. from
15. to 22.
Nehemiah, who testified against, and contended with the notorious Profaners
and Violators of the Sabbath Day; and would not suffer the open selling of
Victuals, and Wares; the trading with Commodities, and carrying of Burdens,
and doing the servil Works of their ordinary Callings on that Day. Did not your
Fathers thus, says he; and did not our God bring all this Evil upon us, and
upon this City? yet ye bring more Wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath.

Let Magistrates see to the Observation, and look to the Sanctification of this
Day; and so become the happy Instruments, and blessed Means of the subsisting
and flourishing of Religion in the World; of keeping up in the Minds and Hearts
of Men a Sense of God, a Sense of Sin, a Sense of Duty to God and Man, a Sense,
or believing Apprehension of a certain Reward or Punishment, a Sense of Heaven
and Hell, a Sense of Eternity: of begetting and preserving a Tenderness and
Quickness in Men's Consciences, which are apt to be roused and awakened under
every Ordinance: of maintaining the Life of Religion and the Power of
Godliness: of upholding the outward Worship and Service of God, and heightning
and increasing the inward Honor, and hearty Love and Fear of him: All which
depend, in a great measure, upon Magistrates securing, what lies in them, the
due and sacred Observation of the Lord's Day.

Let Ministers redeem the Lord's Day; not by composing their Sermons, or
committing them to their Memories on that Day, (which Toil and Task is fitter
to be the Labor of other Days) but by striving to work their Sermons and
Discourses upon their own and others Hearts and Consciences. Let them spend
that Day in Dexterius loquentur cum hominibus, qui prius tota mente cum Deo
fuerint collocuti. Erasm.
wrestling with God in secret, for Assistance in, and a Blessing upon their
public Employment: In first confessing their own Sins in their private
Closets; and in begging divine Gifts and Graces, to make them able Ministers of
the New Testament; in setting right their aims and ends in all their Exercises
and Undertakings; and in imploring the special, spiritual, gracious, powerful
Presence of God with his own Ordinances. And then in humbly consessing the Sins
of the People in the public Congregation, in earnestly praying for their
Souls, and praising God for his wonderful Mercies in the Mediator, for the
happy Restoration of sinful and miserable Mankind, and the Communications of
himself to the lost World by Jesus Christ: In propounding and pressing the most
sound and solid Reasons; the most convincing, cogent Arguments, to engage them
to their Duties; and in giving, with the greatest Expression of Affection, the
most proper Directions, and seasonable Counsels, to guide them in the Way to
Heaven.

And, Let the People redeem the Lord's Day, by privately reading, or hearing
read, some Part and Portion of Scripture, which would season their Hearts, and
make them more teachable, when they hear the Word publicly read or preached:
By praying for themselves to the Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls; and by
praying for their Minister to the chief Shepherd, that Shepherd both of
Shepherd and Sheep, of Pastor and People, that great Prophet and Teacher of his
Church; that he would teach their Teacher, instruct their Instructor, and so
lead and guide him by his Word and Spirit; that he may safely conduct them by
sound and seasonable Doctrine, and winning Example, in the Way everlasting.
Yea, Let them redeem the Lord's Day, by attending on the Lord without
Distractions; by joining in the public Prayers; by being present at public
Baptism, that they themselves may be minded and remembered of their own
Baptismal Vow and Covenant: By worthy and frequent receiving the holy Communion
of the body and Blood of Christ; By diligent hearing the Word preached; By
serious Meditation on it, and conscionable Practice of it; and by charging
themselves, and humbly desiring God to help them, to walk worthy continually of
the Means, Mercies and Privileges they enjoy: By maintaining heart-warning
Conference; By charitable Visitation of, and Ministration of seasonable,
suitable Counsel and Comfort to any sick and weak, afflicted or distressed
Persons: By acknowledging all their Offenses to God, and Amendment of the same;
and by endeavoring heartily to reconcile themselves charitably to their
Neighbors, where any Difference or Displeasure has been.

You that are Masters and Governors of Families, redeem the Lord's Day for
your selves, and cause your Families to redeem it. The Lord of the Sabbath
commands, that thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter, thy Manservant, thy
Maidservant, and all within thy Gate, keep that Day holy. Set not, suffer not
your Servants to work, nor your Children or Servants to play on this Day. Be as
much ashamed to see your Child or Servant steal and take God's Time to
themselves, as you would be to find them pilfering or stealing from your
Neighbor. You can keep your Servants close to your own work all the
Week-daies: See that they neglect not the Work of God on the Lord's Day. Will
you make them labor for you six Days together, and will not you cause them to
serve God one Day in seven? Be at least as much concerned in Case of neglect of
God's Service, as you are at any Time when your own Work and Family-business is
neglected. Do it for God's sake: Show that you love the Honor of God, and not
only respect your own Commodity, and look to your own Advantage. Do it for your
Servant's sake: Make it their Business to do God Service, that they may be
approved and rewarded by him. Yea do it for your own sake. Make your Servants
God's faithful Servants, that so they may prove more faithful to you; and that
God may bless them in your Service; and that your Work may thrive and succeed
in their Hands. On this Day especially, call thy Family, thy whole Family to
Family Duties: prepare them for, and hasten them to the public Ordinances. It
is reported of M. Clark in his Life.
Dr. Chaderton, the first Master of Emmanuel-Colledg, that he was married three
and fifty Years, and yet in all that Time he never kept any of his Servants
from the Church, to dress his Meat; saying, that he desired as much to have his
Servants know God, as himself. And it was the Custom of the Reverend and pious
See his Life among Mr. Clark's Lives of ten Em. Div.
Dr. Gouge, to forbear providing of Suppers the Eve before, that Servants might
not be occasioned thereby to sit uplate: neither would he suffer any Die
Dominica, ut in festis, licet etiam ciborum lautiorem apparatum habere; quamvit
in eis parandis ne majora impediantur, and servorum animae detrimentum non
necessarium iucurrant, summopere curandum est. Baxter Meth. Th. part. 3. c. 14.
p. 172.
Servant to stay at home for dressing any Meat upon the Lord's Day, for the
Entertainment of Friends, whether they were mean or great, few or many. Take
your Family to Church along with you; and when you return home again, examine,
catechize, inform, instruct them, recapitulate the Sermon, read the Scripture
and good Books to them, whet practical, profitable, necessary, saving Truths on
them; sing Psalms among them, and pray most heartily and affectionately with
and for them.

And you that are Servants, who have little leisure, most of you, on other
Days; and who live, too many of you, in such profane and ungodly Families,
where you hear not so much as one Prayer put up to God, nor one Line of the
Word of God read, nor one serious Word spoken of God all the Week long: what
reason have you carefully to redeem the Lord's Day? to redeem it in public, by
devoutly attending to the Prayers that are made, and the Word that is both read
and preached in the public Congregation: And to redeem it in private, by taking
all possible Occasions to retire and go aside by your selves, to consider in
secret the needs of your Souls, to examine your Hearts and States, to review
your Lives and Actions, to humble your selves in Confession of Sin, and to pour
out your Souls in Prayer for Pardon and Grace; to read the Bible, and some
instructive, practical Writings of the most judicious, experimental Divines;
apt to inform your Judgments, and to work and prevail upon your Affections: to
set your selves to meditate of God, to draw out and engage your Hearts to God;
rather than to lavish out, and throw away those precious Hours, in foolish
Talk, and frothy Discourse; or in gadding abroad, and walking idly in the
Fields, and recreating your Bodies rather than your Souls, and in thrusting
God, and turning Religion wholly out of your Minds and Hearts, and nourishing
your selves in Ignorance of God, and Unacquaintance with him, and in Increasing
the Atheism of your Hearts and Lives, and hardening your own and others Hearts,
through the Ensnarements of the World, and the Deceitfulness of Sin.

But, it may be, you will say, you are hard wrought all the Week long; and you
have reason to take your ease and pleasure, and to rest and recreate your tired
Bodies one Day in seven, that so you may endure your Labor, and go through all
your Work the better.

I answer; that your very Cessation in any measure from your wonted Labor, is
an ease and relief to your weary Bodies: and that the very change of your Work
and Occupation from secular servile Employment to spiritual divine Worship and
Service; and the Diversion of your Minds from worldly Businesses to the Offices
and Exercises of Religion (if you would but acquaint your selves with them, and
use your selves to them) would be delightful and refreshing to you: And the
Peace and Quiet, Joy and Comfort of a good Conscience, in the faithful
Discharge of your Duty to God, and a tender Care of your immortal Souls, would
strengthen and hearten you to bear all the Burden of the hardest Labors of
your domestic Ministeries; in consideration, that your heavenly Father, Lord
and Master, will accept and reward your Works of Piety, and bless and prosper
the Works of your Hands, in the Houshold-businesses, and Family-employments,
incumbent on you, and belonging to you. Rather break your Sleep, to rise the
earlier, than lose the Opportunities of that Day: Or, choose to leave, and live
out of those Families, in the which you are forced to live without God, are
debarred from his Service, and can have no Liberty allowed you to mind God and
your Souls, on a Day that was purposely ordained and appointed for your
spiritual Proficiency and Improvement.

Let the Poor of this World redeem this Day, by taking this Opportunity to
labor spiritually for the Meat which perishes not, but endures to
everlasting Life; and by hearing the Gospel preached in this Season to them, to
become rich in Faith, rich in Grace; to know, and to partake of the Grace and
Favor, the Love and Kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ; who, though he was
rich, yet, for our sakes became poor, that we through his Poverty might be made
rich. You that are poor, and mean, and low in the World, and who cannot take so
much Time as others to worship and enjoy God on the Week-Daies, see that you
well improve this Day. Now you are released from secular Businesses and common
Services, and your Bodies rest from their hard Labors; be sure that you
spiritually busy, and holily employ your selves in the Service of God.

Let me likewise charge them that are rich in this World, to redeem this
choicest Part of their Time; and in it to endeavor to be rich toward God, rich
in God; to lay up for themselves a Treasure in Heaven; to obtain the true,
certain, durable Riches; which, when they fail, will never leave them; but when
they remove, will bear them company into the other World.

And here let me hint to you of the Gentry, what Fuller's Church-Hist. B. 11.
p. 146.
Dr. Paul Michlewait once urged and pressed in a Sermon at the Temple; that
Gentle-folk, of all People, are obliged to a strict observation of the
Lord's Day. The Gentry, in comparison, rest all the Week long: their Cheeks are
not moistened with Sweat; their Hands are not hardened with hard Labor; they
are not tired and wearied out with pains-taking: They who take their Pleasure,
and recreate themselves every Day in the Week, have nothing to plead for
Recreations on the Lord's Day. Though, for my own part, I should be far from
indulging a Liberty to any, to take such Recreations as hinder the Devotions
due to any part of the Lord's Day, and are Impediments to the Sanctification of
it aright. Let all industriously redeem the Lord's Day.

And take we heed we redeem it not by halves: but let us religiously observe,
and covetously redeem the whole Lord's Day.

We are bound in justice to God to do it; because God has set a Day, not a
Piece of a Day, apart for himself, and requires this Portion and Tribute of
Time to be paid to him, who has graciously given us all our Time. We should be
as much, yea more afraid, to steal God's Time, than Men's Goods. Do not only
observe the former Part of the Day, repairing to the Church or Chapel in the
Morning, but commonly and customarily absenting your selves, and growing quite
weary of any such Duty in the Afternoon: for God has allotted and appointed a
seventh Part of our Time for his own Worship and Service: but if you keep only
one half of the Lord's Day, you give God but a fourteenth Part of your Time:
Nay, of one Day in seven, I fear, too many spare him no more, than that Time
only, which their Morning-Attendance takes up in public on the Lord's Day. And
here I appeal to their own Reason, whether it be a meet and fit Thing, that
rational Persons, created by God, and redeemed by his Son, should afford to the
Worship and Service of God and Christ, and the great concerns of their immortal
Souls, but two Hours at most of the whole Lord's Day; and it may be no more of
the whole Week) and shall spend those Hours in a formal, customary, cold and
heartless Worship of an infinitely holy and just Deity, the tremendous,
impartial Judge of Angels and Men.

Grudg not to give God one whole Day in seven, who largely and liberally grants
and allows six whole Days in seven to you: and who designs a greater Benefit
and Advantage to you by your Observation of this one Day, than possibly can
accrue to you by the carefullest and painfullest worldly Improvement of all the
rest. O believe, and consider, that the taking out of this one Day, and setting
it apart for such an excellent Service, and high Employment as you are called
to in it, is certainly the greatest Gift of all. How can you be loath to spend
one Day in seven in Familiarity with Heaven, in communion with your Maker, and
Fellowship with your Savior? Let us all call the Christian Sabbath, the
Lord's Day, a Delight: take as much Contentment and Satisfaction in doing on
this Day the Exercises of Religion, as Men usually take in doing the Works of
their ordinary Calling: take as much Pleasure in God's Service, as others take
in Sin and Vanity. Let us spend the Lord's Day, as becomes those, who profess
that they love God better, and delight in him more than in any Thing in the
World: Spend it as they that are glad of so honorable, and profitable, and
pleasurable an Employment, as the public and private Worshipping of God. Let us
go to the House of God with Joy. Let the Church, on the Lord's Day, be a
Banqueting House, and not a Prison to us. Do but bring your selves to spend
the Lord's Day with Delight, and then you will keep it to the End of it.

The Jews were bound to keep a whole Day holy, in a grateful Memory of the
lesser Benefits of the Creation, and their Deliverance out of Egypt: And shall
not we solemnly observe the whole Lord's Day, in a thankful Remembrance of
greater Blessings? not only of the Goodness of God in our Creation, but of his
Grace and Mercy in our Redemption, and Deliverance from Hell, and Death
eternal. We have greater Engagements to do it, than they: not only greater
Motives, but greater See Mr. Cawdrey's Sabbathum redivivum. p. 563, 564.
Means too. We have greater Variety of public Exercises on the Lord's Day,
than they had on their Sabbath: We have more Scripture to read in private than
they had: We have the Old and New Testament; many Expositors upon them; many
good Practical Theological Tractates written: We have more Knowledge afforded us
than they had; more Grace offered us to do the Duties incumbent on us: Now we
that have more Means and Helps, how can we offer to put God off with less Duty,
and smaller Service, and shorter Performance?

Nay the very Heathens, guided by the Light of Nature, held it reasonable, that
the Days consecrated to their Gods, should be devoutly, and totally observed
with Rest and Sanctity. Saturn. l. 1. c. 7.
Macrobius tells us, that, on their holy Days, the People came together to
spend the whole Day in learning Fables, to be conferred upon. and will you,
that call your selves Christians, refuse to come together on the Lord's Day, to
spend one Hour in the Morning, another in the Afternoon, in learning the
Mysteries of the Gospel, and in receiving saving Instructions out of the Word
of God?

You that give your Bodies two Meals every Day, will you feed your Souls but
once on the Lord's Day? Give me leave to deal with you in the winning Words of
that sweet Singer of our Israel: Speaking of the Lord's Day, says he;

Church Porch, p. 14.
Twice on the Day his due in understood;
For all the Week thy Food so often he gave thee.
Thy cheer is mended; bate not of the Food,
Because it is better, and perhaps may save thee.
Thwart not the Almighty God: O be not cross.
Fast when thou will, but then, it is gain, not loss.
Consider, that your own, and your Families spiritual Necessities do require
and call for a most strict Observation of the whole Lord's Day, and a faithful
Improvement of all the Helps and Advantages of it. The Works of your Callings,
and your worldly Occasions and Employments, do, in a manner, take up six Days
of the Week; and you have but one whole Day in seven to provide for the Needs
of your immortal Souls: Now the Necessities of your Souls are far greater than
those of your Bodies: your spiritual, eternal Estate, is of nearer and higher
Concern than your outward and temporal Estate: And will you not labor then to
improve every Hour, and endeavor to redeem every Minute of this one Day? Do
but seriously think with your selves, how much work you have to do in this one
Day; and then tell me, whether in reason and Prudence you can spare any Part of
it, yea or no. What have you to do for God, for your selves? What for your
Families? for your Children, and Servants? How many and great Mercies of God,
toward you, and yours, and all Mankind, are you bound to recount, and to be
affected with on this Day? Ought you not still, on this Day, to remember and
consider, and solemnly and heartily to bless God and Christ, for the capital
Mercies of Creation, and Redemption, and for the gracious seasonable Sending of
the Holy Ghost; and to spend some Time in speaking highly and honorably of
these Benefits, to the Praise of your Maker, and Glory of your Redeemer? Are
not you ignorant of many Things, in which you ought to be informed? and have
not you need then to spend some Part of the Lord's Day in reading the Bible,
and some select Books of sound Divinity: in hearing the Word preached, and in
Conference with godly, understanding, and well-experienced Christians? Are you
not too great Strangers to God, and your selves? and have not you need then to
improve some Portion of this Seasonn in Meditation and Self-examination, that
you may get more Acquaintance with God, and your own Hearts? Have not you the
Sins of the whole Week past to confess to God in secret, and to beg the Pardon
of, every Lord's Day? when you have leisure from your bodily Labor, is it not
fit you should take some pains in conquering the Corruptions, and mortisying
the Lusts of your own Hearts, and in wrestling with God in Prayer for his
Strength and Grace? Can you idle away your Time, and take your Pleasure on the
Lord's Day, when you have Families to inform, and Children and Servants to
catechize and instruct? Let your Consciences tell me, whether it be better, on
the Lord's Day, to spend your Time in unnecessary Divertisements, in fruitless
Visitations, in vain and frothy Discourses; to talk freely together of worldly
Businesses; to judge the Preacher, to censure your Christian Neighbor: Or to
commune with your selves, and to labor to edify your own Families: To teach
your Children the Doctrine of Adam's Fall, and of the Redemption wrought by
Christ: To acquaint them, what Sin and Corruption they brought with them into
the World; and how they have increased it since they came into the World: That
the Wages of Sin is Death: To tell them what Christ has done and suffered, to
free and deliver them from Sin and Death; and what they must do, to be capable
of partaking of Christ's saving Benefits: To ground your Servants in the
Principles of Religion: To take account what they remember of the Sermons they
heard that Day, and to examine how they have profited by the public
Ordinances. You see what a great deal of Work you have to do, and what a little
Time you have to do it in: You have but one whole Day in seven; It concerns you
then to be very saving of this whole Day: Quicunque hisee sacris ita serio se
excicent, ut ipsorum and familiae necessitas plani postulat, locum nullum
relictum esse quaestioni ists carn ^liter de larantium invenient, An licitum
sit die Domin^co aut oftari, aut ludere, aut epu is, aut inanabus, aut mundanis
non plane necessariis tempus sacrum conterere? Et qui serpsum and alaos were
novit, ut and diei negotia and commoda oblata; and verbo divino de rebus
sparitio, libus and aeternis vere credit; and ipsius and altorum ex vera
necessitate and ut ^^^tate interesse percepiet, diem totum, quantum fieri
potest, in sacris colocare; neque frustra and sine fruge horae moment um
essluere sinet: Neque ni^^ges quaestionem movebit, An liceat ludis vel aliis
manibus ad perdere, quam, An laceat sanguinent s^um inaniter fundere, and aurum
oblasum resp^ere, and in canum projicere: Carnalis quippe pe animus, and sui
and rerum spiritualium ignarus, disputationum talium author est plerumque and
promus-condus. Baxter. Method. Theol. part. 3 c. 14. P. 172.
To be as far from disputing, whether it be not lawful to use Recreations and
Sports on some Part of it, or to employ some Hours of it in any unnecessary
worldly Businesses; as from putting the Question, Whether it be not lawful
vainly to spill your own Blood; or to make a refusal of Gold that is offered
you, and to cast it contemtuously into the Dirt.

'Twill but little avail you, to make the utmost worldly Advantage of all the
other six Days, if you make not a sufficient spiritual Improvement of this,
which is more considerable than all the rest. What would it profit you, if, as
God made the World in six Days; so, you could gain the whole World, by working
hard the six Days; if, by gross neglect of the Lord's Day, you at last lost
your own Souls?

The Church of England, in her pious and useful Homily of the Time and Place of
Prayer, declares, that in the fourth Commandment God has given express Charge,
that his obedient People should use our And truly it is strange, that some, who
have a dearness, yea fondness for some Words of Jewish Extraction ( Altar,
Temple, and the like) should have such an Antipa by against the Sabbath.
Fuller's Church-Hi^^ B. 11. p. 144.
Sabbath Day (which is now our Sunday) holily; and rest from their common and
daily Businesses; and also give themselves wholly to heavenly Exercises of
God's true Religion and Service.

And in his Majesty's Royal Proclamation for the Observation of the
Lord's Day, all his Majesty's Subjects are bid to take notice, that, by the
Law, the resorting to divine Service, enjoined on that Day, does comprehend the
entire Day, and entire Service, both Morning and Evening.

Yea, every Lord's Day Morning, you your selves make this open Confession, and
public Prayer, in the Congregation, after the Reading of the fourth
Commandment; Lord, have Mercy upon us, and incline our Hearts to keep this Law:
As much as to say; Lord, we acknowledge we have neglected this thy Day: We pray
thee, pardon all our unchristian Sabbath-breaking, for the Time past; and give
us Grace, to observe the Christian Sabbath better for the future. Now will you
confess in the Fore-noon, and transgress in the Afternoon? Will you beg pardon
in the Morning, and sin again the very same Sin before Night? Will you open
your Mouths, to ask God's Grace, to sanctify and keep holy the Sabbath Day;
and, it may be, profane it in a graceless manner, as soon as you are out of the
Congregation?

If the Lord's Day ought to be observed at all, it is to be kept both Parts of
the Day. And for those that commonly stay away in the Afternoon, I would ask
them, what their Employment is at home in the mean Time? Do not some of them
spend the Afternoon in sleeping, or walking, or talking, or drinking, or
gaming? while others are jointly confessing, and praying, and praising, and
hearing? If God requires a Day, is this to sanctify a Day to the Lord? to
worship God in the Morning, and to dishonor God, and serve the Devil, and
diverse Lusts, in the Afternoon. Do you spend your Time as religiously at home,
as you might do at Church? Do you catechize, read, and pray, and sing Psalms at
home in the mean Time? If you do, you do it unseasonably; and plainly break the
Lord's Day, by ordinarily performing private Duties in the Time of public
Ordinances: The Lord's Day being chiefly appointed for the public Worship and
Service of God; The most The sixth Council at Constans decreed, That whosoever
was absent from the Congregation three Lord's-daies together, without
necessity; If he was a Minister, should be put from the Ministry, and if he was
a private Man, he should be cast from the Communion of the Church.
public Worship being the highest Honor that can be done to God and Christ.

Reading a Sermon, or some Catechistical Doctrine, at home, in the Time of
public Preaching or Catechizing, though, in it self, it may be a better
composed Sermon, or Exposition; yet is not so good as hearing a Sermon, or
Exposition, at Church: For, the public Ministry of the Word, is a divine
Ordinance, which has a special Promise of God's gracious Presence: Matthew. 28.
last: Go, teach, says Christ, lo, I am with you always, even unto the End of the
World: You are therefore bound to frequent and attend upon it.

You must not mis-time and mis-place Duty: You must not read at home in
private, when God calls you to hear in public: You must not use one Ordinance,
in contempt, or neglect of another: You cannot hope to profit, if you do. You
cannot expect not hope to profit, if you do. You cannot expect God's Presence,
and look for the Gift of God's Grace, in a way of Disobedience to his Command,
and Neglect of his appointed Means. When God sets up the Ministry of the Word
in any Place, his Spirit then opens his School, and expects that all, who would
be taught for Heaven, should come thither: Now whether is it most fitting, that
a Scholar should wait on his Master at School, to be taught; or the Master
should run after his truant Scholar, at Play in the Field, to teach him there?
as the accurate Preacher, Christ, Armor, 2 part, p. 552. in quarto.
Mr. W. Gurnal, does well illustrate it.

Moreover, in Attendance upon public Preaching, there are the Prayers of the
Deus pluris facit preces in ecclesia quam domi factas, non ob locum, sed ob
considerationem multitudints fidelium Deum communi consensu invocantium. Rivet.
Cath. Oath.
whole Congregation put up for a Blessing upon the Word that is spoken and
heard; which is an Advantage, that cannot be enjoyed in private Reading.

There is also somewhat in this; that the lively Voice of the Preacher is more
affecting, and powerfully working, than private Reading.

And as for reading the Scripture, and Books of Theology, it is to be feared,
that they care but little for reading, who pretend such reading, to excuse
their Absence from public hearing.

But grant you do read; yet certainly the Scripture and good Books were never
written to divert and hinder you from public Hearing, so long as you are able
to go to the public; but to fit you for it, and help you in it. Nay, the
Bible, and good Books, forbid you to stay at home in Time of public Worship
and Service; and command you to be present at public Prayer, Baptism, the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, Catechizing, Preaching: Heb. 10.25.
Not to forsake the Assembly of your selves together, as the manner of some is.

Take notice further; that if you, then every one, as well as you, may stay
away, and read a Book at home; and so, what will become of all public
Assemblies?

Once more, consider; you know not how much you may lose by but once neglecting
a public Ordinance. Joh. 20. from 19, to 29.
Thomas merito privaetur communi fratrum suorum gratia, quod tanquam vagus aut
erraticus males ab unitatis vexillo discesserat. Calv. ib. in verse. 19.
Thomas, by reason of his Absence, when Christ appeared to the Disciples, that
were assembled together, lost the Advantage of receiving Satisfaction
concerning the Truth of Christ's Resurrection, and lay a whole Week in Unbelief.

That may be spoken in thy unnecessary Absence, so agreeable and congruous to
thy Condition, as, it may be, thou may not meet with the like, for a long
time after, if ever after. The Devil may be busy to detain thee from the
public, that very Day or Hour, when he knows well enough that is provided and
prepared, which is most suitable to thee, and apt to work upon thee.

Obj. But he that preaches, is a Man of weak Parts, mean Gifts, and very
ordinary Abilities.

Answ. But if he be an approved, ordained Minister; be conscionable in his
Place, and unblameable in his Life; and if what he delivers, be sound and
profitable; blame your own Hearts, if you do not profit by him: and take more
Pains with them in hearing: and see that your Carelessness or Prejudice cause
not your unprositableness. It is a remarkable Saying of the Reverend and Holy
Hilders. on John p. 241.
Mr. Arthur Hildersam: I am persuaded, says he, there is never a Minister,
that is of the most excellent Gifts (if he have a Godly Heart) but he can truly
say, he never heard any faithful Minister in his Life, that was so mean, but he
could discern some Gift in him, that was wanting in himself; and could receive
some profit by him. You know, a Torch may be sometimes lighted by a Candle; and
a Knife be whetted and sharpened by an unhewn and unpolished Stone. And it is
considerable (which the same judicious Author adds there) that the Fruit and
Profit that is to be received from the Ministry, depends not only, nor chiefly
upon the Gifts of the Man that preaches, but upon the Blessing, that God is
pleased to give unto his own Ordinance: and God does often give a greater
Blessing to weaker than to stronger Means: and therefore despise not any sound
Ministry, because of the meanness of it.

Obj. But some may say, The Exercise is too long, and the Season is too hot or
cold, to come twice a Day.

Answ. But let me ask you; Could not you willingly stay, in any Season of the
Year, as long again at a Play? It Is the Coldness of your Hearts, and your
frozen Affections, that make you plead, either the Heat, or Coldness of the
Weather, in excuse of your Absence from Church Assemblies: and, I pray,
seriously consider, whether Hell at last will not prove too hot, for wilful,
careless, causeless Sabbath Breakers.

I shall further offer two Things to your Consideration, to move and provoke
you to a careful and diligent Redeeming of the Lord's Day.

Mot. 1. The right Redemption of the Lord's Day is an apt and likely means of
redeeming the whole Week following:

Of redeeming it as to Temporals:
Of redeeming it as to Spirituals:
1. As to Temporals: They that serve God sincerely on the Lord's Day, will use
all Diligence and good Conscience, in their Calling and Trading on the
Weekday. And their Pains-taking and honest Dealing, is likely to bring God's
Blessing on their outward Estates. Besides, They that faithrully worship God on
the Lord's Day, will seek to God for a Blessing on the Weekday: and they that
seek it are likely to find it.

Once more; God will not be wanting to those, who would not be wanting to him: God
will bless you six Days, for your Blessing and Serving him one whole Day in
seven.

2. Our Observation of the Lord's Day, as it is a spiritual, wise redeeming of
that special Season; so it is a good Help to the spiritual Redeeming of all the
six Days following. The more Liberty Men allow themselves upon the Lord's Day,
the more loose their Hearts are, and negligent of good Duties, and religious
Exercises, all the Week after. They that pray not on the Lord's Day, will
hardly so much as say a Prayer all the Week long. They that hear not a Sermon
on this Day, will searcely read a Chapter the whole Week. They that rob God of
his due on the Lord's Day, will rarely deal justly and honestly with their
Neighbor on the Weekday. But if we keep holy the Lord's Day, then every
Weekday will have a Tincture and Savor of the Lord's Day. Our being Spiritual
on the Lord's Day, will put us into a very good Frame of Heart, will awaken
Principles of Conscience, compose our Minds, six our Wills, call in and set in
order our Assections: Our Sanctification of this Day will season and sanctify
us, sit and dispose us for a close and holy Walking with God all the Week
after. If we attend upon God, and converse with him on this special Day of his
own Appointment; we shall find a sensible spiritual Vigor, a divine Power, and
heavenly Strength, to carry us through all the Duties of the whole Week
following, relating either to God or Man. If we earnestly redeem the
Lord's Day, the Observation of that Day will have a strong and mighty Influence
on our Lives on other Days too: We shall endeavor to carry our selves after
it, suitably to it: to live, and walk, and act continually, as those that have
newly, or lately enjoyed so blessed and happy an Opportunity; as those that
have heard of God, heard from him, spoken to him, had to do with him: we shall
labor to live in pursuance of the End and Design, of the work and Business of
the Lord's Day.

Mot. 2. Our Sanctification and good Improvement of the Lord's Day, will fit
and prepare us to keep and enjoy a blessed Rest and eternal Sabbath in Heaven.
They that delight in God here, will much more delight in him hereafter: and
those whom God delights in here, he will delight in for evermore. They that
keep holy the Christian Sabbath here, shall be translated and admitted to
sanctify and [celebrate] an everlasting Sabbath in Glory hereafter.

The Church Porch, p. 15.
He that loves God's Abode, and to combine
With Saints on Earth, shall one Day with them shine.
But on the other side; your gross continued Neglect, and wilful, resolved
Profanation of the Lord's Day, will unfit and unqualify you, to keep a glorious
festival, and a joyful, happy Holy Day in Heaven.

God can take no Complacency and Delight in you, if you can take no Complacency
in him, no Delight in his Sabbaths, no Pleasure in his Worship and Service.
They that refuse to sanctify a Sabbath, and totally to rest on that Day from
their worldly Labors, and secular Negotiations; have reason to fear, lest God
swear in his Wrath, that they shall never enter into his Rest. They that will
not rest from their Works and Pleasures on this Day, have cause to conclude,
that in Hell they shall have no Rest, neither Day nor Night. They that will do
their own Works on the Lord's Day, may expect to suffer for their evil Deeds in
the Day of the Lord. They who wilfully absented themselves from God's House, on
God's Day, have no ground to hope, that God will receive them to Communion with
himself in his heavenly Kingdom.

And as God can take no delight in you; so, if you pollute and profane, break
and violate the Lord's Day, neglect Religion, contemn the Worship, and despise
the Service of God; if you changed your place, you would there no more delight
in God than you do here. Heaven would be a Burden, Heaven would be an Hell to
the unsuitable Spirit of an irreligious, profane, voluptuous Person. Thou that
art weary of Prayers, and Praises here, what would thou do in Heaven tro?
there is nothing else there. You that are sick of a Sabbath here, and long till
it be over, and cannot endure to think of spending a whole Day in Religious
Exercises; what will thou do in Heaven? where there is a perpetual Sabbath to
be kept for ever. Thou that hate the Communion of Saints here, I wonder what
thou would do in Heaven; where, next to the Fruition and Enjoyment of God in
Glory, the best Entertainment will be the Company and Society of the holy
Angels, and of the blessed and glorified Saints to all Eternity.

I have given you some Motives, to persuade and engage you to the due
Observation, and right Redemption of the Lord's Day: Now what are you resolved
upon? Shall your former Profanation of this Day be the present Burden of your
Spirits, and Sadness of your Souls? Will you live as those that are convinced,
that Religion depends upon the Sanctification of this Day, and your Salvation
upon Religion? Will you forbear any more to break into God's Enclosure, to
encroach upon God's Propriety, sacrilegiously to engross God's Day to your
selves, or to make bold with any Part of it, for worldly Employments, or vain
Pleasures, or such Recreations as are apt to prove Lets and Hindrances of your
Duties and Devotions? and be careful to give God that Portion of Time which is
his due? Will you for the future sequester your selves from worldly Cares,
Affections, Affairs, on this Day? and henceforth dedicate the Lord's Day to the
Honor of God and Christ? Will you, not only cease to censure those serious
Christians who dare not lose this choice Time, and precious Opportunity, as
profanely and desperately as formerly you have done? But will you so consider
the Worth of this Time, and so far weigh the great Consequences, and weighty
Concernments of the well or ill spending of it, as to count it honorable, and
keep it holy; without intermixing of secular Matters, or indulging profane
Thoughts, and introducing inconvenient, improper Discourses, in any part of it?
Will you labor to walk accurately, exactly, precisely, on this Day? and not be
afraid of being He keeps the Lord's Day best, that keeps it with most Religion,
and with most Charity. Bp. Taylor's Rule and Exerc. of Hol. Lif chap. 4 sec. 6.
rul 8.

Hypocrites are out disputing the Obligations to their Duty, and asking, How do
you prove that it is a Duty to pray in my Family, or a Duty to observe the
Lord's Day, or to come constantly to the Congregation, -- or to repeat Sermons,
-- and the like? -- If these ungodly Wretches had one spark of spiritual Life
within them, and any taste and feeling of the matters that concern their own
Salvation; instead of asking, How can you prove that I must pray with my
Family, or that I must keep the Lord's Day, -- they would be readier to say,
How can you prove that I may not pray with nay Family; and that I may not
sanctify the Lord's Day? and that I may not have Communion with the Saints in
Holiness? -- I can perceive in many that I converse with, the great difference
between an Heart that lo^es God and Holiness, and an Heart that seems religious
and honest without such a Love. The true Conveit perceives so much sweetness
in holy Duties, and so much spiritual advantage by them to his Soul, that he is
loch to be kept back; he can not spare these Ordinances, -- no more than he can
spare the Bread from his Mouth, or the Clothes from his Back; yea, or the Skin
from his Flesh, no not so much. He loves them; he cannot live without them. --
And therefore if he had but a bare leave from God, without a Command, to
sanctify the Lord's Day, and to live in the holy Communion of the Saints, he
would joyfully take it, with many thanks: for he need not be driven to his Rest
when he is weary, nor to his spiritual Food when he is hungry. -- But the
unsanctified Hypocrite, that never loved God or Godliness in his Heart, he
stands questioning and enquiring for some proof of a Necessity of th^se
Courses. And if he can but bring himself to hope that God will save him without
so much ado, -- away then goes the Duty. -- He never was Religious from a true
Predominant love to God, and an holy Life, but for fear of Hell, and for other
inferior respects. Mr. Baxter's Direct. and Perswas. to a sound Convers. from
p. 372, to 376.


too strict, of being too holy on this holy Day? It Is an excellent Saying of
Tully, Nemo pius est qui pietatem cavet: The plain English of which is this; No
man is truly godly, who is afraid of being too godly. Will you so observe the
Lord's Day, as you were ready to promise you would, when you lay last upon a
Sickbed? and as careless Sinners commonly wish they had, when they come to lie
upon a Deathbed? Will you make every Sabbath here on Earth, resemble in some
Degree that eternal Rest, which you hope to hallow more perfectly in Heaven?

Seriously consider, how many Lord's-daies you have lost already, and what
reason you have to observe and improve those that remain. Do you know, how few
such Days you shall ever enjoy more? It may be this Lord's Day may be the
last, Before the next Sabbath comes, thou may be called to a reckoning for
neglecting and mis-spending all that are past. Thou art not sure, that ever
thou shall pray in public more: that never the Liberty shall again be afforded
thee, of hearing another Sermon preached to thee: Thou may never enjoy such
a blessed Opportunity to take pains with thy Family, and to save their Souls
from Death, before thou die. If God shall please to put such Prices into thy
Hands, God give thee an Heart to make use of them.

Carefully redeem the Lord's Day, and every Day after show in thy Life that
thou have redeemed it. Make it appear by the Frame of thy Actions, and Course
of thy Life all the Week long, that thou have been under spiritual, powerful,
quickening Ordinances the last Lord's Day. You that enjoyed Communion with God
on the Lord's Day, have no parley with Satan, no familiarity with Sin, no
fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness on any of the Weekdaies
following. Be sure you every Day avoid those Sins, which you solemnly confessed
the last Lord's Day, and live over the Prayers you made that Day: and live up
to the Sermons you heard that Day; and obey from the Heart that Form of
Doctrine, which that Day was delivered to you. Perform every Day those
Resolutions and Promises, which you made to God on the Lord's Day; and keep the
Covenant you renewed at the Sacrament on that Day; and maintain the Warmth that
was wrought on your Souls by the Word and Spirit on that Day. Use every Day the
Grace you asked, obtained and received on the Lord's Day; and act in the
Strength and Power of Christ, which was communicated and given in to you, in
your Attendance upon him in his own Ordinances, on his own Day.

This is the second particular Season, and special Opportunity, that is to be
carefully redeemed by every Christian; The Morning of the Week, the Lord's Day.

And I have purposely treated so largely concerning the Redemption of the
Lord's Day, because it is so despised in the Judgment, and disregarded in the
Practice of the confident Men of this dissolute and degenerate Age.

The third Particular Opportunity to be redeemed.
As the Morning of every Week, the first Day of the Week, so the Dr. Gouge was
very conscientious in the expense of his Time from his Youth to the very Time
of his Death. His custom was to rise very early both in the Winter and Summer.
In the Wintertime he constantly rose so long before Day, as that he always
performed all the exercises of his Private Devotions before Daylight: And in
the Summertime he rose about four a Cleck in the Morning; by which means he
had done half his Work before others began their Studies. If he happened to
hear any at their Work before he began his Studies, he would say (as
Demosthenes spoke concerning the Smith) that he was much troubled that any
should be at the Works of their Calling, before he was at his. In his Life
among Mr. Clark's Lives of ten Em Div. p. 116, 117. He continued in King's
College for the space of mine Years, and in all that Time (except he went forth
of Town to his Friends) he was never absent from Morning-Praiers in the
Chapel, which used to be about half an Hour after five a Clock in the Morning;
yea, he used to rise so long before he went to the Chapel, as that he gained
Time for his Secret Devotions, and for reading his Morning-task of the
Scriptures. Ibid p. 97.
Morning of every Day, is a special Season, that ought to be redeemed and
improved by a Christian, to spiritual Advantage. The Morning is an Opportunity
of giving God the very first, and best of the Day; and the chief of our Life,
Spirits, and Strength. In the Morning our Spirits are recreated and repaired,
and our Bodies strengthened and refreshed with the Rest and Sleep of the Night
past: and our Minds are vacant, and not disturbed with those Images and
Representations of Things, which the variety of worldly Employments in the Day
usually fill and possess us with. In the Morning our Minds are most free, and
our Affections most lively (as those strong Waters are fullest of Spirits,
which are first drawn) and our Hearts not so entangled and encumbred with the
Things of the World. In the Morning we are clearest and sit for any thing;
and therefore, to be sure, sit for God, and the Worship of God; freest and
freshest for holy Duties, spiritual Services, and religious Exercises. The
Morning is as much a Friend to the Graces, as to the Muses. As the Morning is a
special Time for Study, so for Duty: As it is the best studying Time, so it is
the best praying Time.

The People of God have ever accounted the Morning the fittest Season for
Devotion: And therefore we find, that holy Job 1.5. See Mr. Caryl on the place.
Job rose up early in the Morning, and offered Burnt-offerings: Thus did Job
continually: Not only in the Morning, but early in the Morning; in the very
Beginning, or first of the Morning. We read how God commanded, that Exodus 23.19.
the first of the first Fruits of the Land should be brought into the House of
the hLord: So here, Job gave God, not only the first Fruits of the Day, but the
earliest Time in the Morning, which is the first of the first Fruits of the
Day; the Morning of the Morning (as I may so speak). So David chooses the
Morning-season: Psalm. 5.3.
My Voice shall thou hear in the Morning, O Lord; in the Morning will I direct
my Prayer unto thee. It is a good Thing to Psalm. 92.2.
show forth thy loving kindness in the Morning. Psalm. 119.147.
I prevented the drawning of the Morning, and cried. And again; Psalm. 139 18.
When I wake, I am still with thee, says he; He gave God the first of his
fixed and settled Thoughts. Is is recorded of our blessed Savior, that he Mark
i. 35.
rose up in the Morning, a great while before Day, to go into a solitary Place
to pray. And it is said of the Apostles, that they Acts 5.21.
entered into the Temple early in the Morning. So we should enter into our
Closets early in the Morning; and make it our first business and employment to
converse with God, and commune with our own Hearts, to betake our selves to
Prayer, and to Who read a Chapter when they rise, Shall never be troubled with
ill Eyes. Herbert's Poem-charms and Knots.
Reading of the Scripture, and to give our selves to Meditation.

And surely (as a Dr. Jackson, V 3. p. 92.
great Divine says excellently) If Men would give some divine Precepts or
Sentences full possession of their Morning Thoughts, these would serve as so
many Armed Men, to keep out the Suggestions of the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, from entering into their Hearts. -- Et ni
Posces ante diem librum cum lumine, si non
Inten les animum studiis and rebus honestis;
Invidia, vel amore vigil torquebere.
Horat. Ep. l. 1. ep. 2.
The filling our Minds, and possessing our Hearts with serious holy Thoughts in
the first place, as soon as ever we wake in the Morning, is an excellent Means
to prevent those frothy vain Thoughts, which are apt to arise in empty Hearts:
As, you know, the taking a good Draught in the Morning, is the way to keep out
the Wind, which would offend and troubled an empty Stomach. When we first open
our Eyes in a Morning (as a Dr. Tho. Guodwin of the Van. of Thoughts. p. 32.
worthy Doctor does well illustrate this matter) many Vanities and Businesses
stand like earnest Suitors, or as diligent Clients at Lawyers Doors, waiting to
speak with our Thoughts, and ready to press and crowd in upon us: but let us
speak with God first, and he will say something to our Hearts, will fix and
settle them for all Day.

The Morning is a special Opportunity to be carefully redeemed; and the rather
to be redeemed, because by redeeming the Morning, we are likely to redeem the
whole Day following. If a Watch or Clock be wound up well in the Morning,
'twill go right, and keep true all the Day after: So tho winding up of our
Hearts by devout Meditation in the Morning, will be a means of our regular
Proceeding to the Close and End of the Day following. If we awake with God in
the Morning, we are likely to walk with God all the Day long. Our doing God
service in the Morning, will stand us in stead all the Day after: will engage
and oblige us, dispose and incline us to keep a Decorum all the Day, and to do
nothing unworthy of our Morning's Work.

The serious Consideration of the Goodness and loving Kindness of God toward
us, his Watchfulness over us, Protection, Preservation, Refreshment of us the
very Night past; will make us study to render suitably to such a Mercy; and to
live to him all the Day, who gives us, as it were, a new Life every Morning.
Our laboring to get our Minds and Hearts, early and thoroughly poslest in the
Morning, with quick and lively Apprehensions, and powerful, deep Impressions of
the glorious, divine Attributes and Perfections, of God's Greatness, Holiness,
Justice, Omniscience, Omnipresence, will keep us close to God and our Duty all
the Day. Our being with God in the first place, as soon as we are up every
Morning; this will season our Hearts, spiritualize our Affections, aw our
Consciences, and be a means to regulate our Actions, and to sanctify our
Employments, Carriages and Converses the whole Day following.

Whereas if we neglect God in the Morning, God may justly leave us to our
selves all the Day after. If we venture to go into the World, before we have
first go^^ to God; we rashly rush into Danger, because we take not God along
with us; whose Presence, Guidance, Grace and Strength, is our only Safety and
great Security against the Malignity and Evil of the World. If we don't in the
Morning, and Beginning of the Day, implore the divine Presence and Assistance,
and beg God's Providence over us, Direction of us, and Blessing upon us: If we
seek not God, before we seek the World, before we seek our selves, we are
likely to do nothing but mis-carry in every Thing all the Day: We are apt to be
caught in every Snare, to be overborn by every Corruption, and overcome by
every Temptation: and therefore be sure to redeem the Morning-Season.

The fourth Particular Opportunity to be redeemed.
4. The Society and Company of the most Religious and Godly, is another Special
Opportunity, to be presently laid fast hold on, and faithfully made good Use of.

You have here an occasion of doing good, by your serious and savoury Speeches.
Honest Hearts will presently close with them, receive and embrace them,
entertain and accept them, and not slight and reject them, scoff and mock at
them.

Further; You have here an occasion of receiving good, from other's suitable
and seasonable Discourses: you may be edified by their Gifts, profited by their
Graces, quickened by their Affections, encouraged by their Examples, recovered
by their Reproofs, directed by their Counsels, assisted by their Prayers,
instructed, strengthened, and comforted by their Experiences. When you come in
company with able, godly Ministers, or knowing, experienced Christians, you may
put Cases, and have them resolved: propound Doubts, and have them satisfied:
you may light your Candle by their's: you may kindle your Coal at their Fire,
and stay and warm your self well before you go away. Godly Company is an
Opportunity to be prized, and improved. Whenever you enjoy good Company, make
the best of it. Let not carnal Bashtulness, nor a vain and worldly Heart (which
is apt to seek idle and unprofitable Discourse) hinder and deprive you of the
Profit and Benefit, which may be reaped by godly Society.

The last Particular Opportunities to be redeemed.
5. And lastly; The particular Seasons of practicing and performing particular
Duties; of getting and increasing, acting and exercising particular Graces;
these have a special, commodious Fitness, for the doing, or receiving some
particular Good, and ought accordingly to be embraced and improved by us.

When we know a Person (a good Man especially) to be in real Necessity, and
great Extremity, then is an Opportunity of exercising Charity, in giving
liberally according to our Ability. When another has wronged and injured us,
then we have gotten a good Occasion of exercising Charity, and showing Mercy,
in free and full Forgiveness. When a Brother is fallen into Sin at any Time,
then it is a Season to Gal. 6.1.
restore such an one in the Spirit of Meckness. When any Person is flexible and
tractable, yielding and pliable, being melted and mollified by an afflictive
Providence, or moved and inclined to hearken to us, by Dependence on us,
Expectation from us, or any Relation and Obligation to us; we have a fair
Opportunity to deal with such an one, at such a Time, for the furthering of his
spiritual and eternal Good.

When any are cast upon Sick-beds, and are somewhat awakened and softened by
God's Hand, then they are prepared for your Hand; you may the more easily work
upon them. When any have newly received a Benefit from us, or hope to be
shortly beholden to us, and so are ready to think well of us, and to take all
well from us; then we may reprove, admonish, exhort them, with a comfortable
Hope of happy Success, and good Effect.

The Conscience of a Man is a nice and sullen Thing; and if it be not taken at
fit Times, there is no meddling with it.

And so likewise in respect of our selves; when we have received any fresh
Mercy from God, or are actually enjoying the Blessings of God, and tasting how
good and gracious the Lord is, then is an Occasion of stirring up our selves to
Praise and Thanksgiving. When we lie under an heavy Affliction, then it is a
Season of acting and exercising Faith, Repentance, Patience: a convenient
Season for Self-Examination, sound Humiliation, earnest Supplication, and
thorough Reformation. When we find a secret Cheerfulness of Spirit, then it is
a Season to spiritualize our Joy and Gladness, to think upon God's Mercies, to
recount his Benefits, to set forth the Praises of our Creator, Preserver, and
Redeemer. Jam. 5 13.
Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. When we find any Sadness growing upon our
Spirits, then it is a Season to spiritualize our Sorrow and Sadness: to mourn
and grieve for our Sins especially: to weep in secret for them, to confess and
acknowledge them, and pray against them.

Once more; When at any Time We must not measure our Time by the length, but by
the weight; not by its greatness, but by its worth. Let us not in asure our
Daie^ (as we do) by the motion of the Sun which we see, but by the shining of
the Sun of Righteousness upon our Souls: not by the celestial Bodies, but by
the celestial Inspirations. -- As to the purposes of Holiness, and getting
nearer to Heaven, one moment, when the Spirit of God is upon us, and strongly
possesses our Mind with good Things, and breaths into us holy Affections, is
worth many Hours, yea Days and Years when that is not with us, or does not so
powerfully incite us. D. Patrick's Div. Arithm. p. 37, 38.
the holy Spirit of God, joining with the good Word of God, or concurring with
the Providence and remarkable Works of God, does strongly work upon our Minds,
and sweetly and powerfully move and stir our Hearts and Affections: When the
Spirit instills any good Motions into our Souls, and kindles any good Desires
in our Hearts, and kindly draws us on to holy Purposes and good Resolutions;
This is a special Opportunity indeed: This is Temporis Articulus, the very Nick
of Time, which must be taken on a sudden, or it is presently lost to our great
Disadvantage. Do not fail to strike, while the Iron is hot. Step into the Pool,
whenever the Angel stirs the Water. Lanch out immediately, whiles Wind and Tide
serve. When you feel any gentle Gale, spread open your Sail: This Wind blows
when and where it lists: You know not how soon this Wind may turn. Whenever
the Spirit knocks, open the Door: Rara hora, brevis mora. O si durasset!
Bernard.
you know not how soon he may have done, how quickly he may be gone. Delicata
res est Spiritus Sanctus, says Tertullian; The Spirit of God is a nice and
delicate Thing: it is soon offended, and quickly grieved. And therefore subject
your selves to the Working of the Spirit; and work with the Spirit, while the
Spirit is at work: Gladly receive every Impression of this immediate, gracious,
free Operator: Welcome every Suggestion, of this blessed Monitor: Let every
Inspiration find thee, as the Seal does the Wax, or the Spark the Tinder.
Kindly entertain all its Visits, and readily obey all its Motions: follow them
home; don't check and quench them, stifle and smother them: Never suffer them
to die and decay, to languish, and perish, and come to nothing. Do the
Particular Duties, the Spirit calls you to: Get, and grow in the special
Graces, which the Spirit is ready to beget and increase in you. Run freely and
willingly, so soon as ever you feel and perceive that the Spirit draws you. If
you don't stir when the Spirit moves, and act when it works; you may drive and
chase away the Spirit, and so lie dull and dead, graceless, and helpless, and
hopeless for ever.

And thus I have opened and explained the Duty; and shown you particularly,
both what it is to redeem the Time, and what the Time is that is to be redeemed.

The Sum of all is briefly this; that our whole Lifetime, and every particular
Occasion afforded us in it, must (whatever it cost us) by all means be laid
hold on, and improved by us, for the Glory of God, and our own and others
spiritual Advantage.

CHAP. III. The Grounds and Reasons why we ought to redeem the Time. The
Special Reason laid down in the Text; because the Days are evil. What to be
understood by evil Days. Days are said to be evil, not inherently, but
adherently, or concomitantly; by reason of any sinful, or penal Evil that
befalls in them. The Evil of the Day, is either General, or Special: General;
the Shortness and Trouble, which does accompany the Time of this Life. The
Particular Evil of the Day is, when any special Evil takes place in such a
Time. The particular Evil of the Apostles Times threefold. It stood (1.) in
dangerous Errors and false Doctrines. (2.) In the vicious and wicked Lives of
scandalous Professors of the Gospel. (3.) In sharp and hot Persecutions. How
far these several Evils are to be found in these our Days. Our redeeming of
the Time, and endeavoring to grow better our selves, is the ready way, and
only means to make the Evil Days better.
The Special Reason laid down in the Text.
I Come now to the Grounds and Reasons of this Duty. There is a special Reason
laid down in the Text. I shall first fully speak to that, and then I shall add
some others to it. The Apostle here presses Christians to redeem the Time,
with this Reason or Argument, because the Days are evil.

Now what is here to be understood by [evil Daies]? Days are said to be good
or evil (says Bayne in loc.
Mr. Bayne) according to that which befalls in them: As a good Time, when
matter of Commodity or Merriment is in hand: and an evil Time, when the
contrary. The Hebrews call those Days evil, which are full of Troubles and
Dissiculties (says Beza in loc.
Beza). Days are not morally evil: They are said to be evil, not inherently,
but adherently, or concomitantly, by reason of any moral and sinful, or penal
and troublesome Evil, that prevails and takes place within the compass of them.

Now the (...), or Evil of the Day (as Christ Matthew. 6.34.
calls it) is either General, or Special.

The General Evil of Days or Times.
1. The General Evil, is the Shortness, Omnia ad quae gemimus, quae
expavescimus, tributa vitae sunt. Sen Ep. 96.
Trouble and Misery which does accompany the Time of this Life. Of this Jacob
speaks: Genesis 47 9
Few and evil have the Days of the Years of my Life been. In this sense (says
Dies malos duae res faciunt, miseria hominum and malitia, etc. Istos putros qui
nascuntur interrogemus, quare a ploratu incipiant, qui and ridere possunt.
Nascitur, and statim plorat: post nesc^o quet dies ridet. Quando plorabat
nascens, propheta suae calamitatis erat. Lachrymae enim testes sunt miseriae.
Nondum loquitur, and jam prophetat in labor se futurum, in timore. August. in
Text. Hom. 10. inter 50.
St. Austin) the Days were ever evil since Adam? Fall, because Mankind has
been subject to Misery ever since. Let us ask the Children newly born, says
he, why they begin with weeping, that are capable of laughing. The Child is
born, and cries immediately: he laughs not till I know: not how many Days
after. By crying as soon as it came into the World, it became the Prophet of
its own Calamity. Its Tears are the Witnesses of its Misery. Before it is able
to speak a Word, it foretells the manifold Labors and Sorrows it is born to go
through in this World.

We may likewise reckon into the general Evil of Times and Days, that Dies
mali unt, id est, tempus hujus vitae plenum est tentationibus amp; laqueis
peccatorum. Estius in loc.
common Wickedness which is to be found in the World in all Ages of the World.
No Time or Age, but may be denominated evil, from the Mali sunt, non a temporis
vitio, sed hominum qui in tempore vivunt, Id. ib Non sua natura: sed propter
hominum malitiam, quae in iliis grassatur. Sunt igitur mali, i. e. peric^lorum
ab impits hominibus plem. Zanch. in loc.
evil Men and evil Manners thereof.

2. The particular Evil of the Day, is, when any special Evil takes place in
such a Time: And thus we must understand the evil Days in the Text, of some
Particular Evil that reigned in them; because it is spoken with an Eminency of
those Times.

Now the Evil of those Times was threefold; There was the Evil of Error: the
Evil of Looseness of Life and Manners: and lastly, the Evil of Persecution.

The first Particular Evil of the Apostles Daics, and ours.
1. The Evil of those Times stood in the Errors and salse Doctrines, which
were vented and broached in the Church, and began to spread like a Gangrene.
That which made those Days Evil, was, the great Danger from Seducers, by
reason of their E^h 4.14.
slight and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to deceive: Lay in
wait, as a Thief to rob; or as a Fowler, to take silly Birds: and 2 Pet. 2.3.
made Merchandise of People with feigned Words: And by good Words and fair
Speeches, by plausible Pretenses and Discourses, deceived the Hearts of the
(...), Romans 16.18.
Simple, of easy and seducible Persons, That which made those Days evil was,
those 2 Pet. 2.1.
damnable Heresies, slily brought in by false Teachers: and the 2 Pet. 3.17.
Error of the Wicked (as it is called by St. Peter). Such Error in Judgment,
as disposed Men to Wickedness in their Conversations.

Now this Evil of Error, is to be found in ours, as well as in the Apostles
Days. The Times we live in, are Times of Seduction, erroneous Times. What a
strong Head has Atheism gotten in this our Land, in these our Days! God
governs the World now by Wisdom, which might sufficiently convince Men of his
Deity: But because there are now no more visible sensible Appearances of his
Power in the World, in the immediate exemplary Punishment of Sinners, therefore
they fear and acknowledge him no more. And how does Atheism in Life and
Affection lead too too many to a radicated Atheism in Judgment and Opinion? How
many of the Gentry of this Nation are miserably tainted and poisoned with it?
So that our Nation comes far short of the State and Condition of the Heathen
Rome, which Cicero thus describes; Pietate, ac Religione, atque hac una
Sapientia, quod Deorum immortalium numine, omnia regi, gubernarique
perspeximus, omnes gentes nationesque superavimus.
In Piety, and Religion, and in this one piece of Wisdom, that we have known
and acknowledged that all Things are ruled and governed by the Power of the
immortal Gods, we have excelled all Nations and People in the World. How far
are we this Day from deserving such a Character as this?

When Atheism, Socinianism, Arminianism, Antinomianism, Quakerism, Popery, have
broke in like a Flood: when Errors and Heresies have made such an Inrode upon
us, and spread so far and wide among us: When so many so boldly deny the
Providence and very Being of God, the Immortality of the rational Soul, and a
Life and State of Retribution in another World; the Divine Authority,
Perfection, and Perspicuity of the sacred Scriptures, the eternal Duration of
Helltorments, the Divinity and Satisfaction of our Savior Christ, the divine
Institution of the Lord's Day; deny the Necessity of the Moral Law, disown
Original Sin, and any such Thing as Special, Effectual, Discriminating Grace,
infallibly securing the Event as to the Elect: assert Perfection, contend for
Papal Infallibility, plead for Idolatry, and gross Superstition; and design,
and endeavor, and hope to make Popery become the Religion of the Nation; it
concerns you surely carefully now to redeem the Time.

The Evil of Error mightily prevails in these our Days. Seducers and
Impostors are subtle and industrious; and Error is of a catching, spreading
Nature: therefore (as St. Paul said to the Corinthians) 2 C^r. 11.3.
I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his Subtilty,
so your Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in Christ. Take
heed that the Leprosy get not into your Head: (In that case, you know, the
Priest was to pronounce a Man Levit. 13.44.
utterly unclean.) That Error take not Possession of your Mind, for that is
the Eye, the leading Faculty: and it it slip into the Mind, and Judgment, it
will steal and creep into the Conscience, and that is so active a Faculty, that
it will engage all. O do your utmost and best endeavor to keep your selves
clear and free from the foul and infectious Errors of the Times you live in. 2
Pet. 3 17.
Beware, lest ye being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your
own Stedfastness.

1. Be not too credulous. 1 John 4.1.
Believe not every Spirit: not every one that pretends to a Spirit of Truth,
acting and breathing in him. Now the Air abroad is so pestilentially infected,
take heed what Air you suck in. be very wary what Money you take, since the
Markets are so full of adulterate Coin.

2. Be careful to avoid the Meetings, and to shun the Society of Seducers. From
1 Timothy 6.5.
Men of corrupt Minds, and destitute of the Truth, from such withdraw thy self:
Don't venture to keep them Company, and to take their Breath, who have the
Plague of wicked Error upon them, and whose Converse is Death, and the eternal
Ruin of your Souls. Forbear to hear their Discourses, or to read their
Writings. You are bidden indeed to 1 John 4.1.
try the Spirits: that is, to try all you hear; but you must not be bold to
hear all, when you can shift it. The Wise Man forbids that; Prove 19.27.
Cease, my Son, to hear the Instruction that causes to err from the Words of
Knowledge. Remember the sad Event of Eve's Rashness, in venturing to listen to
the Discourse of the Serpent.

3. And that you may be the better secured from Error, labor to get a good
Understanding of your Catechism: to be well grounded in the Principles and
Essentials, and settled in the radical sundamental and practical Truths of
Religion, and thoroughly acquainted with the Necessaries to Salvation. Do not
stick to say with Fateor me Catechismi descipulum.
Luther, I confess, I am still a Learner and Studier of my Catechism. Learn it
your selves, and teach it your Children and Servants, understandingly.

The want of Peoples being well instructed, and thoroughly grounded in the
Principles of Religion, is a great If this Duty of Catechizing be neglected, we
may preach our Lungs our, if we will, but which little Effect; When we have
spent all our Wind upon the Ears of our People, their Hearts will be still apt
to be carried away with every Wind of Doctrine. Ep. Hali's Peacemaker. p. 202.
Reason of the many Errors that have been so rife in these late Times. Men
have not lain fast in the Building, upon the Foundation; and therefore it is,
that they have so easily been tumbled up and down like loose Stones. Converse
with your Catechism.

4. And confirm your Belief of the Divinity of the Scripture, by getting
rational Evidence, and an inward Sense and Experience of it. And search, and
study the Scriptures; and compare the Doctrines taught by Men with the Word of
God, and try and examine them by that Rule.

5. Again; Beg the Spirit of Truth, to lead and guide you into all necessary
Truth. As it is not a strong Constitution that will secure you from the Plague,
so it is not your best Parts that will preserve you from the Infection of
Error, if the Spirit of God do not keep and protect you; if the Spirit of
Christ, the Spirit of Truth withdraw from you.

6. Add to all, your earnest Endeavor to get your Hearts Romans 12.2. Heb. 13.9.
2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
renewed, and seasoned, and Romans 12.2. Heb. 13.9. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18.
stablish'd with Grace; which will prove an excellent Preservative, a sovereign
Antidote and Defensative against the Contagion and Infection of Error. Any
Error will easily slip into an ignorant, uncatechized Head; and an
unmortified, unsanctified, ungracious Heart. The 2 Timothy 3 6.
silly Women, that were led captive, were such as were laden with Sins, led
away with diverse Lusts. So they were Jude verse. 4.
ungodly Men, who turned the Grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denied
the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. They that walk in loose Garments,
soon take Wind: Loose Lives will gather in and breed loose Principles. If you
don't take in sufficient Ballast of Grace to settle you, you will be tossed to
and fro, and carried about with every Wind of strange Doctrine. If you want a
good Biass of Sincerity for God, carnal Interests and Ends will easily mis-lead
you. If you be devoid and destitute of Grace, you will be proud and conceited,
rash and unwary, you will never distrust your selves, you will never weigh and
consider Things well before you take them up. Want of Grace, will also breed an
Itch of vain Curiosity in your Minds, and cause you to linger and hanker after
Novelties. Further; your depraved Wills will have a malign Influence on your
Understandings; and your carnal Affections will too often bribe and pervert
your Judgments: so that whatever your Wills and Affections are vehemently set
upon, must be allowed by the Authority of your Judgments, and secretly, if not
openly maintained and pleaded for. Those various Opinions about the Chief Good,
might arise and proceed from their Over-affection to some created and inferior
Good. Your foul Stomach will infect your Brain: your unsound Heart will cause a
corrupt Head. And an ill Life will engage you to entertain and take up such
corrupt Principles, as may favor and foster your Viciousness, give allowance
and countenance to your Wickedness. Your Sin will become the Root of Error. If
you be loath to be ruled by the Laws of Christ, you have a Temptation from your
own Lusts to turn to Antinomianism. As Luther said, that Every Man had a Pope
in his Belly; So, every wicked Man has an Heretic in his Breast. And let me
moreover tell you, that without Grace you will never taste and savor, relish,
love and like the Truth; or have any sensible, sweet, experimental Knowledge of
it, which may engage and keep you close to it. The Truths of God are so
suitable to a gracious Heart, that it quickly closes with them: But the
Errors of the Wicked are slatly against such and such practical Impressions
upon the Soul of a Christian. A gracious Person has a good Complexion and
Constitution of Soul, which disgusts and disrelisheth whatsoever is contrary to
it. And therefore many an Error lies but unevenly and untowardly in a good
Man's Mind, when presented to his Thoughts; And when an honest-hearted
Christian hears some Sermon or Discourse that is erroneous; though he be not
able handsomely to detect, and logically to lay open the Nature, and Danger of
the Error; yet it goes against him; he cannot down with it; he finds a strong
Antipathy against it, he has (not by Inspiration, but by real See Mr. Baxter's
Unreason. of Infid. His 2d Discourse there, on 1 John 5.10. p. 116, 117, 127;
128, 158, 161.
Impression on his Soul) a Witness within himself against it; an inward Sense,
that disapproves it; a new Nature, that nauseats, rejects, and rises against
it. Just as the Sea, by the Strength of its Nature, casts up, works out, and
purges it self of those Straws and Sticks, that Filth and Dirt, that Frippery
and Trash, which flowed into it with the River-water. And therefore get a
Principle of Grace into thy Heart, as ever thou would keep Error out of thy
Head. And be sure to 1 Timothy 1.19.
hold a good Conscience, that you may be able to hold the Doctrine of Faith, 1 Timothy 3.9.
Hold the Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience: Like heavenly Manna, let
it be kept in a Pot of pure Gold.

By all means labor to be Tit. 2.2.
sound in the Faith; and 2 Timothy 1.13.
hold fast the Form of sound Words: Resolve, by the Help of God, to 2 Timothy 1.13.
hold it fast against all Temptations to let it go: Hold it fast in Faith and
Love: Let the Grace of Love even glue you to the Truth, and constrain you to a
firm Adhesion to it. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11.
Receive the Love of the Truth, that you may abide in the Truth, and may not be
given over to strong Delusions, to believe a Lie.

Jude 3.
Contend earnestly for the Faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints.
Vigorously oppose fundamental Errors, such as directly, or reductively,
expressly, or by necessary Consequence, destroy the Articles of our Faith.
Contend for fundamental Truths: for these especially, and most earnestly; but
not for these only. Contend for all Truth; (All Truth is valuable) for the
least Truth: The very Parings and Filings of Gold are precious. Contend as well
for that, which is not acknowledged to be necessary to Salvation; as for that
which is accounted commonly and ordinarily necessary, though not with an equal
Contention. We are chiefly to look to the Foundation, or else the House will
certainly fall: But yet we must look to the Tiles of the House too, or else the
Rain will beat into the House, and in time the very Foundation may rot, and
moulder, and perish. If we neglect those Truths which are not fundamental, we
may in Time be brought to neglect Fundamentals themselves.

Yet in smaller Errors be content to bear what you cannot cure. Very good
Christians may have (as it is said of St. Cyprian) naevos in candido pectore;
here and there a Mole or Mark in otherwise a fair and clear Breast. Very honest
Hearts may have some lighter Errors in their Minds, some Mistakes or other in
their Judgments, which ought to be prudently tolerated, rather than brotherly
Peace and Union be broken and violated, or Christian Love and charitable
Affection be withdrawn and alienated. Wisely and carefully distinguish between
those Differences in Opinion, which are as the striving of one Israelite with
another (which is the Lord Advanc, of Learn. l. 9. p. 473.
Verulam's elegant Comparison) and those pernicious damnable Heresies, which
are as the fighting of an Egyptian with an Israelite: You must, with Moses, be
mild and gentle, fair and peaceable in dealing with the former; but sharp and
severe in oppugning and suppressing the latter.

Take care that you your selves don't desperately fall into the gross and
grievous Errors of the Times you live in: And take all Opportunities,
according to your Abilities, to inform and instruct, to gain and win and bring
over the erroneous and incredulous, to the Tit. 1.1.
acknowledging of the Truth, which is after Godliness.

That is the first; Redeem the Time, because the Days and evil: Days, in
which dangerous Errors and false Doctrines are vented and propagated.

The second Particular Evil of the Apostles Days, and ours.
2. The Evil of the Apostles Times stood in the vicious and wicked Lives of
scandalous Professors of the Gospel.

The Days are Evil; that is (says Dies malos esse dicit, h. e. omnia
scandalis and corruptelis esse plena, ut difficile sit pios manner illaesos.
Calv. in loc.
Calvin) all Things are full of Scandals and Corruptions: insomuch as it is hard
for those that are good to be kept free from hurt, to be preserved untainted
with the Infection of the Times.

And in this Sense, the Days we live in, are evil Days too.

The present Age, is an ungodly Age. Matt. 24.12.
Iniquity everywhere abounds. Great and gross Irreligion and Profaneness,
extreme Looseness and Licentiousness, boundless Sensuality and Voluptuousness,
immeasurable Gluttony and Drunkenness, beastly Wantonness and Uncleanness,
prodigious Pride and Haughtiness, bitter Animosity and Revenge, malicious
Slandering and Backbiting, rash and uncharitable Judging and Censuring; Lying,
Swearing, Subornation, Perjury, Cursing, Sabbath-breaking; Unthankfulness,
Unfruitfulness, Want of Humiliation and Reformation under Variety of sore and
severe Judgments, Carelessness of God's Providence, Contempt of his Word and
Ordinances, Abuse of his blessed Spirit, Playing and Drolling with Scripture,
Mocking at Religion, Scoffing at Holiness, and Enmity against Purity and the
Power of Godliness, are now rife and common, the reigning and crying Sins of
this Land and Nation.

Now what should we do, to make a good Use, and due Improvement of such evil
Days as these? I answer;

1. Are the Days thus evil? let us then, in a right manner, be troubled at the
Evil of them. It is said, that 2 Pet. 2.8.
righteous Lot, dwelling among the filthy Sodomites, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous Soul, from day to day, with their unlawful Deeds. [He]
vexed [himself;] was active in it. Saint Peter expresses more in this than in
the former Verse (as Calvin observes) to wit, that Lot did Nempe quod
voluntarios cruciatus justus Lot subierit, Calv. in loc.
voluntarily and willingly afflict himself: He did it freely; he was not forced
to it. He [vexed] himself; (...). It Is Est Metaphera a to^mentis ducta. Gethar.
in loc.
a Metaphor drawn from Torments, (says Gerhard) (...). The Rich Man being in
Torments, Luke 10.23.
The same Word is used to set out Hell Torments. This good Man continually
tortured and tormented himself: He lived a grievous painful Life; laboring no
less, than if he had laien upon the Rack. It was a kind of Hell upon earth to
him, to see and hear such Things among them. They gave him Ground and Cause
enough of Trouble and Grief, by their Impieties and Impurities; and his
righteous Soul could not but work upon that Matter, and vex and afflict himself
therewith.

The gross Wickedness of ungodly Men, is contrary to the gracious Temper, and
new Nature of a good Man: and therefore he is no more able to bear it, than the
Stomach can bear that which it nauseates. As a musical Ear will be offended
with any harsh Sound; So Sin grates upon a godly Man, and is a Discord to him.
At his new Birth there was implanted in his Nature a true Zeal to the Cause and
Interest of Righteousness and Goodness in the World: an inward Sense of its
Beauty, Excellency, and Usefulness in the World: and a clear Conviction, and
strong Apprehension of the Vanity, Unprofitableness, and Mischievousness of Sin
in the World. The righteous Man has a real Dislike of, a mighty Prejudice, and
inward Antipathy against Sin, as Sin: He hates Sin, and loves Holiness
heartily, wherever he sinds it; and really wishes that there were no such Evil
as Sin in the World. He is of another Spirit than wicked Men are: of a better
Constitution, of a purer and more refined Temper. His new Nature and
Disposition is directly contrary to that which is evil: and therefore, whenever
he sees it, wherever he meets with it, it is a Vexation and Torment to him.

So holy David seriously laid to heart the Sins of others, was deeply affected
with them, and heavily afflicted for them. Psalm. 119.53.
Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the Wicked that forsake thy Law.
Verse 136, 139.
Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because they keep not thy Law. Verse 158.
My Zeal has consumed me; not because I have Enemies, and these Enemies
despise me; but, because mine Enemies have forgotten thy Words. I beheld the
Transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept not thy Word. Psalm 69.9.
The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up; and the Reproaches of them that
reproached thee are fallen upon me. When he was in Trouble, he testifies his
Sorrow for the Reproaches that fell upon God, as if he himself had been
reproached. And the Prophet Jeremy could say; Jer. 13.17.
My Soul shall weep in secret Places for your Pride. And the Saints in
Jerusalem are described to be Ezekiel. 9.4.
Men that sigh, and that cry, for all the Abominations that be done in the
midst thereof. And you know St. Paul is very famous for this Affection: In the
case of the incestuous Person he wrote unto the Corinthians 2 Cor. 2.4.
with many Tears, out of much Affliction and Anguish of Heart. I fear, lest
when I come again (says he) my God will humble me among you, and that I shall
bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the Uncleanness
and Fornication, and Lasciviousness which they have committed: 2 Cor. 12.21.
Phil. 3.18.
Many walk (says he) of whom I have told you often, and now tell you, even
weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ.

1. O that it might be thus with every one of us: Let a Time of others Sin, be
the Time of our Sorrow Let it greatly trouble us, to see our good God wronged,
our heavenly Father abused, and his holy just and good Law broken and violated;
To see the Gospel dishonored, and Religion discredited: To see Satan pleased
and honored, and his Kingdom strengthened and advanced by the Wickedness of the
Wicked: To see the precious Souls of Sinners hazarded and endangered by their
own wilful Sin and Wickedness: To observe rarional Creatures living like mere
brute Beasts; Baptized Christians acting like very Devils incarnate: To find
Men rebelling against Light, resisting a Reproof, loath to be reclaimed,
hardened in their Sin, and hating to be reformed: To see so many Fools and
Madmen besotted and bewitched, cruel to their own Souls, and Enemies to their
own Peace; refusing all Helps of Health and Cure, contemning the Means of their
Recovery, fond of a Disease, in love with Slavery, devoted to their Enemy,
courting their own Misery and Calamity, choosing Death rather than Life, eternal
Life; walking apace in the broad Way that leads to Destruction, running on in
the Way to Hell, the Way that goes down to the Chambers of Death: To behold so
many stabbing themselves to the very Heart, greedily swallowing their own
Poison, running into Pest-houses and infected Places, drowning themselves in
Destruction and Perdition, and casting themselves into intolerable, eternal,
unquenchable Flames.

2. And let us moreover mourn to see so much Hurt and Misohief done in the
World by others open Sin and Wickedness: To see Sin become so fashionable and
creditable: To behold so many corrupted and infected, hardened and confirmed in
Sin and Wickedness, by the ill Examples of loose Livers and vicious debauched
Persons: To discern the heinous, provoking Sins of notoriously wicked Persons,
hastening and pulling down Judgment after Judgment upon the Land of our
Nativity, and the Places of our abode: To see Sin spread, this spiritual Plague
increase, and a Cloud of divine Wrath and Judgment gathering, and growing thick
and black, and hanging over our Heads, ready to drop and shower down upon us.
Let us be so public spirited, as to be troubled, exceedingly troubled, that so
much Mischief, public Mischief, should be done by others Sins: That so many
should be drawn into Sin, or brought under Suffering, by the common and open
Wickedness of the Wicked.

3. Farther yet; Let it be a Thing very grievous to us, to meet with a Sort of
Men, who instead of perplexing and tormenting themselves with the Sins of
others, do please and delight, recreate and refresh themselves with the Sins of
others; Do tempt and entice them into Sin, and hearten and harden them in their
Sin: Who are so far from troubling themselves at others Sins, that they Romans
1.32.
do the same, and have pleasure in them that do them: Who make themselves merry
with those Sins which make the Land mourn; That will laugh at Lewdness, and
make a mock at Sin, and hear the Relation of another's Wickedness with an
inward Tickling, and secret Delight; As if the Reproach and Dishonor of God
were a very good jest, and the eternal Damnation of immortal Souls were a Thing
fit to make sport with.

4. Once more; Let it make our very Hearts ache, to take notice-of some, who
instead of vexing themselves with the unlawful, ungodly Deeds of the Wicked; do
daily vex and afflict themselves with the lawful and godly Deeds of the
Righteous: Who miserably trouble and torment themselves with the Goodness and
Holiness, and not with the Vileness and Wickedness of others: Who storm at
others Strictness, and fret and fume at others Forwardness in the Way of
Holiness; and are mad at heart, that any that live among them refuse to run
with them into all Excess of Riot: To whom the very Presence and Company of a
good Man is oftentimes as offensive and troublesome, as would be the visible
Appearance of the Devil among them: Who heartily vex to hear at any Time any
serious, savoury, good Discourse from them; and are tormented before their Time
by the gracious Lives, and good Conversations of serious, conscientious
Christians.

5. And after all; Let it be no small trouble and grief to us, to find so few
troubling themselves with such Matters as these. That Men, too generally,
should only regard themselves, and mind their own Bags, and Backs, and Bellies,
and Bodies; and feel nothing but that which touches their outward Estates, and
nearly concerns their worldly Interests; but wholly neglect and disregard the
Cause and Interest of God and Goodness in the World. That so many, so
patiently, can see, and hear, and bear any open and common Wickedness; and if
they can be respected themselves, matter it not much though God be dishonored:
So they themselves be pleased, care little or nothing though God be displeased:
and if they themselves can but get gain, let God and Religion lose what they
will for them. That Men should count it a piece of overmuch Righteousness to
take any notice of others Faults; and think it enough to cry God mercy for
their own Sins, without afflicting and tormenting themselves with the Sins of
others. That Magistrates should be so little sensible of daily Affronts done to
God. That Ministers should see their Flocks running on to Destruction, and have
no more Bowels of Compassion. That Masters of Families should not at all lay to
heart their Servants Offenses, and frequent Trespasses against their heavenly
Lord and Master. That Parents Hearts should even ache again, if any little Hurt
or Illness come to their Children's Bodies; and their Bowels never yearn at
all, though mischief and Misery, through Sin and Iniquity, fall upon their
Souls to all Eternity. That Men should kindly do their Neighbors any friendly
Offices in Civil Matters; relieve them, if in Want; visit them, if they be
sick; pull out their Ox or Ass, if fallen into the Ditch; and if their House be
on Fire, presently run and help to quench it: and yet-never be affected with
the sad and lamentable shiritual Estate of their Neighbors. That Men should
see and suffer those about them to make Shipwreck of a good Conscience, to lose
their Peace, lose Heaven, lose their God, lose their Souls; to be just falling
into Hellfire; to grow violently sick of the Plague of the Heart; to die in
their Sins before their Eyes, and perish in their Iniquities before their
Faces; without fetching one Sigh, or dropping one Tear for them, or speaking
one Word to them, or lending a seasonable Hand to help them. How ought they to
be ashamed, that can be passionatly affected in other Matters; and yet have no
Passion, no Trouble, no Tears, for the common and dangerous Sins of the Times
and Places in which they live, and to which they belong? Let us be affected
with their Want of Affection upon so great and urgent an Occasion.

Are the Days evil, in respect of evil Men, and their evil Manners? let us be
troubled at the Evil of them. That Is the first.

2. Are the Days thus evil? Let us then see that we be not made worse by them.
Let Us Ephesians. 51.11.
have no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of darkness (as the Apostle
advises) Philip. 2 15.
Let Us be blanieless and hurmless, the Sons of God, without Rebuke, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse Nation (as the same Apostle exhorts) Where
you see the Apostle argues from the ill Quality, and bad Condition of those
among whom they conversed: for (as Erant enim eo tempore mores Judaeorum and
Gentium non conversarum ad Christum corruptissimi. Grotius in loc.
Grotius observes) the Lives and Manners, both of the Jews, and unconverted
Gentiles, were at that Time exceeding corrupt.

And here the Argument holds these two Ways;

(1.) It concerned the Philippians to be sincere and upright, Quod agerent
inter maloi, qui pro animi sui pravitate etiam been facta criminarentur. Estius
in loc.
because they lived with such wicked Persons, who were ready to slander that
which was good; and therefore would be sure to aggravate that which was bad. So
Estius. And this same Duty greatly concerns our selves this Day, for the same
reason.

(2.) It behooves us to be careful of our Conversation, in the midst of a wicked
and adulterous, a crooked and perverse Generation, Vt nihil ab illis malitioe
and pravit at is nobis affricars sinamus. Zanchius in loc.
that we our selves be not corrupted and depraved with the evil Manners of
those among whom we live. So Zanchy upon the Place. Let Us be careful to avoid
all Occasions of Sin, and to resist all Temptations to tlie Sins, which reign
and abound in the Times and Places wherein we live. Though we dwell among the
Wicked, let us not communicate in their. Sin, nor give any countenance to their
Wickedness: But beg and use God's Grace and Help, implore and employ the divine
Strength, for the overcoming and conquering the Temptations both of Men and
Devils: And heartily bless God, that we are not left and forsaken of God, and
given up to the reigning Sins and Vices of the Times. Let Us not be conformed to
this World; to the evil Customs and vicious Manners that generally prevail and
take place in it; nor follow a multitude to do evil. If never so many should
stab themselves at their very Hearts, or drown themselves in the Thames, or
sore their Houses with their own Hands to consume and destroy themselves; would
this induce any wise Man to do the like? Why then should any offer to 1 Timothy
6.9.
drown themselves in destruction and perdition, to throw themselves into
Hellfire, and to cast away their Souls for ever, because many others do so?
When Vice grows into Fashion Singularity is a Virtue. When Sanctity is counted
Singularity, happy is he that goes in a Manner alone; and walks unweariedly in
the holy Path, though he has but few to bear him company in the narrow Way to
Heaven. Though the common Vote should go against us, yet, with holy Josh. 24.15.
Joshua, le us be singular in our virtuous Choice and plous Resolution, Let us,
with Noah, be upright, and walk with God, even when Genesis 6.12.
all Plesh have corrupted their way. Let us, with Lot, be righteous even in
Sodom; and keep our Garments underfiled and unspotted with the Flesh, even in a
Sink of Sin and Uncleanness. Let Us use all possible Arts and Means, to retain
our Healthfulness in a very bad and corrupt Air: to keep the Spark of Grace
alive in the very midst of the Ocean: to preserve and maintain a gracious
Disposition in the mids of a Deluge of Temptation. Let us labor to be like
Fish, sweet and fresh in salt Water: like Pearls or Jewels, sparkling in a
Dunghill: yea, to be like the Sun, shining upon a Dunghill; whose pure Rays
and clear Beams are no way polluted with the Filthiness of it. Let Us endeavor
to be righteous among the Unrighteous, and zealous among those that are
careless and negligent of God and Religion: And let the Coldness of the ambient
Air. without, not extinguish or weaken, but fortify and strengthen our
supernatural Heat within. Though we live in bad Times, yet let us keep our
selves free from the Evil of the Times. And the freer we keep and preserve our
selves from the Taint and Infection of the common Corruption, we shall the more
notably reprove and condemn, discourage and discountenance the reigning Sins
and abounding Vices of the Times we live in. Though we be in the World which
lies in Wickedness, yet let us not be of the World; but pray to God to keep us,
and endeavor to keep our selves Joh. 17.15.
from the Evil of the World.

Let not us be the worse for these evil Days, for if we be made worse by them,
we shall also make them worse. Let our Care and Endeavor be, to be good in
evil Days: and as the Evil of Sin abounds, let us increase in Holiness.
Farther;

3. Let us labor, as to be good, so to do good in evil Days: As to be good
our selves, so to make others good in the worst Times that can be: By a holy
and exemplary Conversation to be instrumental to their Conversion; and, if it
be possible, a Means effectual to bring the very Worst and Wickedest home to
God. In the Phil. 2.15, 16.
midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, let us shine as Lights in the World,
holding forth the Word of Life. By our virtuous Lives adorned with excellent
Actions, let us shine as so many Stars before them: and be as so many Lights set
up in Towers, to direct others how to steer aright their Christian Course, and
safely to arrive at the Port of eternal Rest, and the Haven of heavenly
Happiness. Let us pity and pray for those who pity and pray not for themselves:
let us exhort, admonish them; rebuke, reprove them; and Jude 23.
save them with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire. Let us labor in this
manner to make the evil Men of the Times as much better as we can.

By way of Motive, Consider seriously these three Things.

Mot. 1. That if we grow bad in evil Times, we can fetch no excuse from the
Times for our Sins. Men are apt indeed to translate the blame of their own
Actions upon the Times and Places in which they live. Intelligas tua vitia
esse, quae put as renum. Non ego ambitiosus sum, sed me mo aliter Romae potest
vivere. Non ego fumptuosus sum, sed Vrbs ^psd magnds impensas exigit. Quid nos
decipimus? non est extrinsecus malum nostrum: intra nos est, in visceribus
ipsis sed t. Seneca E0. 50.
Seneca complains of some, too ready to do so in his Days: that would argue,
and plead thus for themselves; I am not ambitious, but no man can live
otherwise in Rome. I am not extravagantly sumptuous, but the City enforces
great Expenses: it is costly and chargeable living in the City. But why do we
deceive our selves (says he)? This Evil is not from any Cause without us, it is
within us, it is seated on and sticks in our very Bowels.

If our Minds and Hearts were well disposed, and rightly inclined; Temptations
would prove like Fire falling upon Nec interest ex quam magna causa (ira)
naseatur, sed in qualem perveniat animum. Sic ignis non refert quam magnus, sed
quo incidat: nam etiam maximum solida non receperunt: rursus arida, and corripi
facilia, scintiliam quoque fovent usque adiacendium. Seneca Ep. 18. in sine.
uncombustible Matter.

Evil Times and Places are indeed an Occasion of Sin; but the Cause is, our own
Hearts and Wills. If we would carefully watch over our selves, and above all
keepings keep our Hearts, we might keep our selves Jam. 1.27.
unspotted from the World, in the corruptest Times and Places; as well as
others, recorded in Scripture for our Example and Encouragement, have done
before us. The Badness of the Times (as Of the Decelifulness of Man's Heart. p.
157.
Mr. Dyke, occasionally citing my Text, notes well upon it) did not serve with
St. Paul for a Cloak to excuse our Conformity to the Times, -- but as a Spur to
excite us to be so much the more careful of our selves, not to be swaied with
the common Stream. -- And good reason have we (says he) to make this use of
the Corruption of the Times; for, if the Air be generally infectious, had we
not need to be so much the more strict in our Diet, and careful in the use of
wholesome Preservatives? Surely (as the same Author adds) the worse the Times
are, the nearer grow they to their End; and therefore so much the more
apprehensive ought we to be of the Occasions of good, because the Day, in which
only we can work, is declining apace, and that fearful Night approaches,
wherein none can work.

Consider,

Mot. 2. It will be our high Praise and Glory, to be religious and holy, when
the Times are profane and ungodly: To be good Husbands in redeeming the Time,
when others are prodigals round about us. Sicut gravior is culpae est, inter
bonos bonum non esse, it a immensi est praeconit bonum etiam inter malos
extilisse. Greg. l. 1. Mor. c. 1.
As it is a great Sin to be bad in good Times, so it is an admirable Virtue to be
good in bad Times. It is not so praise worthy to be good in good Times, and
among good Persons: But to resist the Stream of evil Times and Persons, to tug
hard against Wind and Tide; to resolve to be good, and to endeavor to do good,
against all Opposition and Discouragement whatever: Not to follow others in any
sinful Ways and Courses; but to tread contrary, and to become Examples of
Virtue to others; this will tend to our great Commendation. He that can be
strict among loose Livers, holy among most profane Persons, chaste among the
lascivious, Hoc multo fortius est, ebrio ac vomitante populo, siccum ac sobrium
esse. Seneca Ep. 18.
sober among Drunkards, modest among impudent Railers, just among Defrauders,
heavenly among Earthworms; He is an excellent Person indeed: He deserves an
Ecce to be put upon him: We may say of him, as our Savior said concerning
Nathanael, Behold an Israelite indeed! Non mediocris titulus virtutis est,
inter pravos vivere bonum, and inter malignantes innocentiae retinere candorem.
Bern, form. 48. in Cant.
This sets off the Righteousness of the Righteous, and makes it more
conspicuous and glorious.

Mot. 3. Consider thirdly; That our Redeeming the Time in this manner, is the
only way to make the Evil Days better. The Reforming and Amending our selves
and others, is a proper means to alter and rectify the Times. The freeing both
our selves and others from the Evil that is in any of us, will surely free the
Times from the Evil that is in them. Our Sins are they that make the Times to
be every way so bad as they are. Our aggravated Sins are the greatest Evil of
the Times; And the Evil of Sin draws all other Evils along with it: and
therefore remove the Evil of Sin, and the Times will quickly be every way well
amended.

The Third Particular Evil of the Apostles Days, and in what Degrees of Ours.
3. The Evil of the Apostles Times stood also in Persecution, which was hot
then, and like to grow hotter. Those Days were Ecelesioe dies Caniculares, (as
Tertullian calls them) the scorching Dog Days of the Church. The Apostles were
forbidden to preach in the Name of Christ; and Christians were prohibited to
name the Name of Christ. Then it was perilous for any Person to profess himself
a Christian. Tertul, Apolog. c. 2.
The Confession of the Name, was enough to make Men the Objects of a public
Odium, without any Examination of the Crime. Ibid. c. 3.
Only the Name did precondemn a Sect unknown, and an Author of it whom they
were ignorant of; because they were nominated, not because they were convinced.
De vestris semper aestuat carcer: -- Nemo illic Christ sanus, nisi hoc tantum.
aut si and aliud, jam non Christianus. Ibid. c. 44.
If you should have searched their Prisons, you should have found them filled
with Malefactors only of their own Religion: you could not have seen a
Christian there that was a Criminal, unless it were only on this Account, that
he was a Christian. But (as Ibid. c 2. Nunc igitur sinominis odium est, quis
nominum reatus? quae accusatio vocabulorum? c. 3.
Tertullian argues excellently in his sinewy Apology) if Christian be a Name of
no Crime, it is ridiculous to make a Crime of the mere Name. Yet the Heathen (as
he remarks there) Bonus vir Cajus Scius tan^um q^od Christianus alius. Ego
miror Lucium sapientem virum repenie factum Christianum. Nemo retractat, ne
ideo bonus Cajus, and prudens Lucsus, quia Christianus: aut ideo Christianus,
quia prudens and bonus. Ib. c. 3.
fell so blindly into the hatred of Christianity, that whenever they gave a
Testimony of the Probity of any such Person, they mingled some Expression of
Exprobration for their Name. 'Twas common to say, Such an one indeed is a good
Man, but only that he is a Christian. And again; I wonder that such an one, a
wise Man, should of a sudden be made a Christian. To which it might have been
well replied, That such an one is good, and such an one prudent, because he is
a Christian: Or, it therefore appears that such an one is in truth a Christian,
because he is prudent and good. Vt quisque hoc nomine emendatur, offendit.
Tanti non est bonum, quanti est odium Christianorum. Ibid.
As any was bettered by bearing this Name, he became by so much the more
offensive; For the good that was in any Christian, was not of so great Force
and Power as was the hatred against all Christians. Oditur in hominibus
innocuis etiam nomen innocuum. Ibidem.
Even an innocent Name was odious in very innocent Men. The Gentiles declared
themselves Enemies to those who Ibid. c. 43, 44.
delivered them from the Power of Devils, and put up Prayers for them to the
true God; and were ready to be trusty Guards about them, for the Preservation
of them; and were Persons prositable to the Commonwealth. The same
argumentative Author, in that most rational, convincing Defense of the
Christians against the Heathen Magistrates, takes special Notice that the
Philosophers were tolerated, when Christians were urged under greatest
Penalties to the most unreasonable Things: Ibid. c. 46.
Who compels a Philosopher to Sacrifice, or to swear by the Gods? (says he)
They openly destroy the Belief and Worship of your Gods, and accuse your
Superstitions in their public Writings; and you applaud them for it: Many
among them do bitterly inveigh against their Princes and Governors, and yet
you patiently bear with them: and they are sooner honored with Statues, and
rewarded with Salaries, than sentenced to suffer the Fury of the Beasts: and
all for this only Reason, because they are known by the Name of Philosophers,
and not of Christians. Philosophers were permitted to propagate Pythagoras's
Opinion of the Transmigration of separated Souls into other Bodies: But if a
Christian affirmed the Return of the Soul into the same Body; Ibid. c. 48.
the People not only followed him with Blows of the Fist, but even cast Stones
at him. The Societies of the Christians were accused and prosecuted as factious
Meetings: In cujus perniciem aliquando convenimus? -- eum probi, cum boni
coeunt, cum pii, cum casti congregantur, non est factio dicenda, sed curia. c.
39. At e contrario illis nomen factionis accommodandum est, qui in odium
bonorum and proborum conspirant, qui adversum sanguinem innocentium conclamant.
Ibid. c. 40.
But did we ever meet together (says the forecited Father) to the Hurt of any
one? We are the same when congregated, as we are when separated: wronging no
body, grieving no body. When good and honest Men convene, when pious and chaste
Persons come in Company together, it is not to be termed a Faction, but a
lawful Assembly: But on the contrary, the Name of Faction fitly belongs to
those, who conspire to an hatred of good and virtuous Persons, and exclaim
together against the Blood of Innocents. Ibidem.
The Christians were censured as the grand Causes of all general Calamities,
and public, popular Incommodities. If Tiber nowed up to the Walls, if Nilus
did not overflow the Fields, if the Heaven stopped its Course of seasonable
Rain, if there were an Earthquake, or Famine, or Plague; then presently they
cried, Christianos ad leonem; away with the Christians to the Lion. Ibid c. 50.
But such was the malignant Method of their Cruelty, that they ordered
Christianam ad lenonem, potius quam ad leonem: They condemned a certain
Christian Virgin rather to be prostituted to the Lust of a lewd Person, than to
be delivered to the Rage of a devouring Lion: By which they confessed, that the
Corruption of their Chastity, was more intolerable to Christians than any
Punishment, more grievous and afflictive than any Death. Christians were
commonly punished like Slaves, St qui in metallis, and si qui in insulis, vel
in custodi is, duntaxat ex causa Dei secta. c. 39.
made to serve in the Mines, or banished into Islands, or shut up in Prisons,
and put to the Sword, or consumed with Fire, or hung upon Crosses, or cast to
wild Beasts, only for the sake of Christ's Religion. Addita pereuntibus
ludibria, ut serarum tergoribus contects, canum laniatu interirent; aut
crucibus affixs, ant flammands; and ubi dies defecisset, in usum nocturni
luminis urerentur. Tacitus l. 1. Annal. Suetonius in Claud.
Sometimes they were covered with wild Beasts Skins, and torn in pieces with
Dogs: and when the Day failed, they were burnt with a pitched Coat upon them,
to serve as Torches to give light in the Night. Tertulliani Apologia c. 37.
Yea the enraged common People (as Tertullian informs us) during the Fury of
the Bacchinal's, did not spare the very Christians that were dead; but drew
them from the rest of their Graves, and the Sanctuary of their Sepulchers, and
tore and dragged their Bodies in the Streets, now so much changed and altered,
mangled and defa^^^, that it could not be known whose Bodies they were. Ibid.
c. 49.
The blind vnlgar sort of People, exulted and insulted on Occasion of the
Abuses that were offered to the Christians, and some of the Magistrates gloried
in the cruel Usages of the Christians, thereby to gain the Favor of the
People. As many as owned and acknowledged themselves the Disciples of Christ,
did presently draw the Rage and Fury of Heathen Idolatrous Persecutors upon
them. Reperietis primum Neronem in hanc sectam
But it is notably observed in the forementioned Apology, as a Thing the
Christians gloried in, that, of all the Emperors, Nero was the first that was
fierce upon the Christians, and made a Law to condemn them to Death; who never
was known to condemn any Thing but what was greatly good and singularly worthy.
It was this Nero, this Prodigy of Cruelty, that put St. Peter and St. Paul to
Death, causing the one to be crucified, the other to be beheaded (which
Tertullian is judged to have Caesariano gladio serocisse. Sed tali dedicatore
damnationis nostiae etiam g'oriamur. Qui enim scit illum, intelligere potest
non nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum. -- Tales semper nobis
insecutores, injust, impii, turpes, quos and ipsidamnare consuestis, d quibus
damnatos restituere soliti estu. Caterum de tot exinde principibus ad
hodiernum, dirinum human umque sapitntibus, edite aliquem debellatorem
Christianorum. At nos e contrario edimus, rotectorem. -- Quales ergo leges
istae, quas adversus nos soli exeqvuntur impsi, injusti, turpes, truces, vani,
dementes? Ib. c. 5.
here respect to) and who (as Historians affirm) suborned false Witnesses
against the Christians, and put many of them to Death, as Authors of that Fire,
which he himself had caused to be kindled in twelve Places of Rome together,
that he might more lively represent to his Fansy the general Conslagration of
Troy. Reperietis primum Neronem in hanc sectam
It is moreover pleaded, and strongly urged there in the behalf of the
Christians, that the most vicious Princes always proved their most violent
Persecutors: But that they that were the most virtuous, became their Favorers
and Protectors: (an eminent Instance of which he gives us in Marcus Aurelius)
That Trajan did, in some Part, frustrate the Laws that were made against them,
and forbad the making Enquiry after them: That no Adrian, no Vespasian, no
Pius, no Verus confirmed the Laws against the Christians. But if the Christians
had been a naughty Sect of Men, surely then the best, and not the worst of
Princes would have been their open Adversaries, would have set themselves in
greatest Opposition against them, and have endeavored to eradicate and
extirpate them.

Sharp and hot Persecution was a sore Evil in the Apostles, and in many of the
Primitive Christians Days: And the Christians that lived in those hard Times,
were bound to do and suffer any Thing, that so they might make (...), a good
Opportunity of an evil Time; and gain an Occasion of honoring God, and Christ,
and the Gospel, and of furthering their own and others Salvation.

And this was their Practice, as well as their Duty: for (as Ad coelistis
regiae januam gradibus poen trum suarum ascendentes, scalas sibi quodammodo de
eculeis catastisjue fecerunt. Salv. de Gub Der. l. 3.
Salvian says concerning them) ascending to the Gate of the heavenly Court by
the several Steps of their own Punishments, they made as it were Ladders for
themselves of the several Instruments of their Torments.

But, blessed be God; he has provided better Times for us than those. They that
are called by the Name of Christians, are not so persecuted in the Times and
Places wherein we live. I may here very pertinently apply both to our Times and
to our selves that pious Passage of the forementioned Father, in his third Book
de Gubernatione Dei. Non td esse nunc temporis, etc. Contentus est Deus noster
ut ei pax nostra serriat, ut sol a ei immaculatorum actuum puritate, and vitae
mcontaminabilis sanctitate placeamus. Quo plus ei fides and devotio nostra
debet; quia minora a nobis exigit, and majora concessit. Et ideo cuer and
princi^es Christiani sine, and ^ersecutio nulla sit, and religio non
inquietetur; qui ad probandum fidem experime at is durioribus non compellimur,
i ferioritua salt n officiis Domino plus placere debemus. Probat enim etiam in
majoribus, sires exigat, executorem se idoneum fore, a quo minora complentur.
Sa^ian. de Gub. Dei. l. 3.
But some perhaps will say, (says he) that it is not now a Time wherein we are
in Danger to suffer such Things for Christ, as the Aposties formerly did: True,
says he, for our Princes are not now Pagans, nor our Governors Persecutors:
the Blood of Saints is not shed now a days, nor is our Faith tried by
Torments. Our God is contented that we should worship him in the Christian
Religion upon more mild and moderate, more gentle and favorable Terms than
others have done; that we should serve him in quiet, peaceable, prosperous
Circumstances; and that we should please him only with the Purity of our
unspotted Actions, and with the Sanctity of an undefiled Life: So that our
Faith and Devotion is the more deeply indebted to him, because he exacteth less
of us, and yet has vouchsafed more to us. And therefore since our Princes are
now professed Christians, and we are not under any Persecution from the higher
Powers, and our Religion is not disturbed; we that are not forced to make Proof
of our Faith by harder Experiments, ought certainly to study the more to please
our Lord and Master, by being faithful in those cheaper Services and less
costly Duties that lie before us, and are incumbent on us: For he that fulfils
his lesser Offices, does give some proof and pledge thereby, that he would be
ready to perform his Duty in higher Instances and harder Matters, if the Case
required it, and if he were called to it. So far that ancient and excellent
Father.

And truly, how reasonable is it, and how becoming, that if God do not call us
to suffer so great and terrible worldly Evils in the Cause of the Gospel and
the reformed Religion, we should therefore readily and cheerfully bear and
sustain Troubles and Exigencies of less Weight, at his Desire and Request: That
we should confess him by Integrity and Fidelity in his Service, and please him
by Abstinence from unlawful Pleasures of what kind soever; none of which can be
so dear to us as is our Life: That we should speedily part with our Lusts, when
we are not commanded presently to part with our Lives: That we should regulate
and reform our Lives, when we are not required to lay down our Lives, and to
shed and sacrisice our Blood. Thanks be to God, we are free from the
Magistrate's Persecution in the Cause of Religion.

But beside such Persecution arising from the Civil Magistrate, merely upon the
Account of Christianity, or of the Profession of the Reformed Religion; there
is another Persecution proceeding from wicked Men, whereby they persecute those
that are good, these two Ways;

1. By their injurious Carriages toward them in Particular.

2. By the Wickedness and Ungodliness of their Lives in General.

1. By their Injuries and Indignities offered and done to good Men in
Particular. Isa. 59.15.
He that departs from evil, makes himself a Prey. He that will not do as
others, is in Danger of being undone by others. He cannot be safe, that will
not be wicked. It is not enough, that the Wicked will not be the better for the
Good, but the Good shall be some way the worse for them: If they cannot corrupt
and deprave them, they will molest and disquiet them: If they cannot draw them
into Sin, they will, if possible, bring them into trouble, and create them
Suffering and Sorrow enough: They will endeavor, some way or other, to
infringe their Liberty, to disturb the Peace and Quiet, and to destroy the
Comfort of their Lives: They will sometimes sin, if it be but of purpose to
grieve them: as by beginning, and offering to impose Healths in drinking, out
of a Design to displease and dissatisfy, or ensnare and entangle some part of
the Company; who, they know, will either refuse and deny it, or be drawn with
Reluctance and unwillingly to it, So likewise by customary Swearing, and by
repeating and multiplying their Oaths, to vex and trouble a sober Reprover.
And, in like manner, by railing, reviling, vain and idle speaking, frothy and
filthy Communication, on purpose to cause Vexation and Affliction.

Of all which Course and Carriage of theirs you may take this double Account;
The Wicked have a Frejudice, and an Antipathy against the Righteous; and these
are the Reasons of their Dealing with them in this manner.

1. The Wicked have a strong Prejudice against them: They have a wrong Opinion
of them: They judge amiss concerning them. He that departs from evil is
counted a mad Man, or causes himself to be counted a mad Man: See Mr. Gataker
in the Engl. Annot.
So some render that Place Isa. 59.15. 2 Kings. 9.1.
as Elisha's Minister was called a mad Fellow.

Again; Ungedly Men count those that are good the Troublers of Israel, and
postilent Fellows; the Causes of Calamities, and Procurers of Judgments (an
Imputation which we showed you out of Tertullian was cast of old upon the
Primitive Christians) They reckon those a very Plague and Curse, that are a
Blessing to the Places where they live, and under God the grand Preservers and
chief Supporters of them. They judge those unworthy to live, of whom Heb. 11.38.
the World is not worthy; and to whose living and dwelling among them they
themselves do sometimes ow their very Lives. They deem those as the 1 Cor. 4.13.
Filth and Offscouring of the World, who are indeed God's Mal. 3.17.
Jewels, and the Psalm. 16.3.
Excellent in the Earth, and Prove. 12.26.
more excellent than their Neighbors. They look upon good Men as troublesome
and vexatious, proud and imperious, because they reprove them.

2. The Wicked and Ungodly have an Enmity and Antipathy against good Men: They
are 2 Timothy 3.3.
Despisers of those that are good: It is in the Original (...), not Lovers of
the good: Omni immonorum hestes, qut ob morum discrepantiam ab amicitia bouorum
abhorrent. Opposium ei laudi quam habemus, Tit. 1.8. Estius in 2 Timothy 3.3.
Haters and Persecuters of all good Men; So Dr. Hammond paraphrases upon that
Place. They are displeased with them, because they study to please God; and are
careless of them, because they have a care of their Time, a care of their own
Souls: Quibus ipsum nomen vsrutis odio est. Sen. de vit. beat. cap. 19.
They hate Holiness, and the Righteous for it: Amos 5.10.
They hate him that rebukes in the Gate, or, in public. And as it is
expressed Isa. 29.21. They make a Man an Offender for a Word, and lay a Snare
for him that reproves in the Gate, and turn aside the Just for a Thing of
naught; by falsehoods make the Cause of the Righteous go the wrong Way. They
cannot endure the Dispositions and Affections, nor bear the Livers and
Conversations of the Godly, which they find as contrary to their own Humors
and Manners as can be. We have a notable lively Character and Description of
them, Wisd. 2. from the tenth to the End; Let us oppress the poor righteous
Man, say they, let our Strength be the Law of Justice: let us lie in Wait for
the Righteous: because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our
Doings: he upbraideth us with our offending the Law, and objecteth to our
Infamy the Transgressings of our Education. He professes to have the Knowledge
of God: and he calls himself the Child of the Lord. He was made to reprove
our Thoughts. He is grievous unto us even to behold: for his Life is not like
other Men's, his Ways are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as
Counterfeits: he abstaineth from our Ways as from Filthiness: he pronounces
the End of the Just to be blessed, and makes his Boast that God is his Father.
Let us see if his Words be true: let us examine him with Despitefulness and
Torture: let us condemn him with a shameful Death, etc. The Wicked are so
ill-natured as to render to the Righteous evil for good: to vex and abuse their
Physicians, Chirurgians, Advocates, Guardians, Friends: To use them harshly and
unkindly, that endeavor to benefit them by their Counsels, to better them by
their Examples; and labor, by earnest Prayers to God for them, to keep off
many a Judgment that hangs over their Heads from falling upon them. They watch
and study to harm those that are really ready to help them: to grieve and break
their Hearts, whose Bowels yearn toward them: to vex and torment their Souls,
which is a great Misery than to persecute and afflict their Bodies.

2. The Wicked persecute those that are good, as by their Injuries to them in
particular, so by the Wickedness and Unholiness of their Lives in General. The
ill Conversation of the Wicked, is a spiritual Persecution of the Godly; It is
Matter of exquisite Torment to them: It wounds and rends the very Souls of the
Righteous: It plainly cuts them even to the Heart, and makes their very Heart
bleed.

I find [z] August. Hom. 10. inter 50.
St. Austin, in a Discourse of his upon my Text, insisting pathetically and
particulary on this very kind of Persecution; applying and accommodating that
of the Apostle, Tim. 3.12. All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer Persecution. Behold here, says he, because the Days are evil, there is
no living for the Righteous without suffering Persecution. But ye, says he, are
ready to say thus to me: What? when we enjoy Peace among us, when the Judges of
the Provinces honor the Church, when Kings and Princes do not appear and carry
themselves as Enemies to the Church, and when all the Laws are in favor of the
Church; pray how do they that live godly suffer Persecution? His Answer is,
that they that live among wicked Persons do suffer Persecution for all this:
Why so? Because all the Wicked do persecute the Good, Nonferro and lapidibus,
sed vita and moribus: [though not with Fire and Fagot] though not with Swords
and Stones, yet by their Lives and Manners. Did any persecute righteous Lot n
Sodom? says he, No Man troubled or molested him: [We read indeed of no
Rudeness of theirs toward him, of no Assault made upon him, but only of one,
done just before his Departure out of Sodom.] And yet that good Man suffered
continual Persecution, Non vapulando sed inter malos vivendo; not by being
beaten and smitten of them, but by living among those vile and vicious, proud,
blasphemous, lewd and debauched Persons: For, whoever is truly righteous and
holy, says he, when he sees any to live wickedly, to serve Luxury, to carry
Things unjustly, to follow Pride and Vanity, to disregard Charity; when they
that are good see any live after this manner, they mourn and grieve, are sadned
and afflicted: for, with the Apostle, they bewail many that have sinned
already, and have not repented.

It is said, that * 2 Pet. 2.7.
just Lot was vexed with the filthy Conversation of the Wicked: The Word which
we render vexed, is in the Original [a] Verbum (...) significat opprimi,
fatigari, graviter affligi. Gerard. in loc.
(...), he labored under it as an heavy Burden, was oppressed, wearied,
grievously afflicted with it. And as Lot was burdened with the loose and
lawless Lives of the Sodomites; So good Jeremiab was wearied out with the
wicked and exorbitant Courses of the Jews, and constrained to cry out under the
Pressure and Persecution of them, Jer. 9.2, 3, 5.
Oh that I had in the Wilderness a lodging Plate of wayfaring Men, that I might
leave my People and go from them to wish with all his Heart that he might
withdraw himself from his People, and live in any solitary Desert, and in any
sorry Traveller's Lodge, or Shed there, rather than among them, whose wicked
Lives were such a continual Eyesore, and daily heart-sore to him: for, tey
proceed from Evil to Evil, says he; from one Evil to another; or, from one
Degree of it to another; they grow daily worse and worse; and weary themselves
to commit Iniquity: take Pains to do wickedly, and tire out themselves in it.

Alas! the Wicked little think, how they vex God in vexing his Servants; and
that God will one Day sorely vex them for it, and make them weary of wearying
his People; that he will torment them in Hell hereafter, for tormenting his
People here on Earth.

They little think, that the Righteous themselves will one Day heavily vex
those that have given them such Occasion and Cause of Vexation; vex them in the
Day when the * 1 Cor. 6.2.
Saints shall judge the World.

Yea, they little think, that they shall torment themselves hereafter, for
making good Men torment themselves here. That if they do not grieve in Time
with a penitent Grief, they shall certainly grieve with a desperate Grief, to
all Eternity, for being a Grief and Heart-break to the Godly.

Now this Persecution, which in the Ways forementioned is managed and carried
on by the Wicked; as it is the Evil in some measure of all Ages, so more
especially and remarkably of the Times and Places in which we live. It Is true,
that now we suffer nothing barely for owning the Name of Christians: There is
no Persecution in our Nation merely for the outward Profession of the
Christian, and of the Reformed Religion: But was ever the other Persecution
hotter among us than in these Days? How do the Wicked persecute with their
Eye? looking upon the sincerely Godly with an evil, a scornful, a malicious
Eye. How do they persecute them with their Tongues? (which are as so many Psalm.
57.4
sharp Swords) [b] Nemo plus videtur aestmare virtutem, nemo magis il'i esse
devotus, quam qui boni viri famam perdidit, ne conscientsam perderet. Sen. Ep.
maliciously standering, reproaching, reviling the Godly, as a Company of weak
Vt sis beatus, inquit Socrates, and te alicui stultum videri sieve. Id ep. 71.

Plerumque boni inepti and inertes vocautur. Mihi contingat iste dersus: AEquo
animo audienda sunt imperitorum convitit, and ad honesta vadends contemnendus
est sste contemptus. Idem.


Fools, and conceited Fanatics: frequently making them their very Songs in
their drunken Meetings, and even mocking their very Prayers in their public
profane Plays; and often uttering very false, and proud, and hard Words
against them.

And, according as they meet with Occasion and find any Opportunity, how do
they persecute with the Hand? * Mich 7.3.
Do evil with both Hands earnestly? How ready are their Hearts to rise against
them, and their Hands to be lifted up to strike at them, and to pull them down
to the very Ground, that so they may be trampled upon, and trodden under Foot?
Yea, how do they persecute them by their Lives? continually vexing their pious
Souls with their unlawful Deeds; grieving and wounding, paining and piercing
their very Hearts. The wilful Wickedness of the bold and daring Sinners of the
Times, in their open dishonouring God and Religion, is a cruel Torment to
serious Souls, and makes their Lives a wearisome, pressing Burden to them.
They that live godly, do suffer daily the sad Persecution of wicked Men's
offensive, afflictive Lives and Manners. What a Persecution is this? to force
good Men to cry out with David, Psalm. 120.5,
Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of Kedar: to
cause Psalm. 119.136.
Rivers of Waters to run down their Eyes (as they did from David's) because Men
keep not God's Law.

Now since we live in such evil Days, in which there is such inveterate Enmity
against the Practice of Piety, and such a [b] Omne tempus Clodios, non omne
Catones feret. Seneca Ep. 97.
malignant persecuting Spirit reigning and raging in the Breasts of the Wicked
against the Good; let us keep a Amos 5.13.
prudent Silence in an evil Time: Let us take care that we do not unnecessarily
Quia dies mali sunt, h. e. quia periculosa sunt tempora, and bonis adversa, ut
cave hi: sit agendum, ne crabrones, quod dicitur, urites. Crellii Ethica
Christiana, page 32.
provoke and exasperate them; for we know not what their Malice may grow to:
nor give them any just Occasion of furious, vexatious Opposition. Let us see
that we do not 1 Pet. 4.15.
suffer as Evildoers from them, nor as rash and heady, imprudent and unwary
Persons. In evil Days, Evil will come soon enough upon us: and we have no
reason to accelerate and hasten our own Suffering. Let Us labor therrfore by
all discreet and wise, direct and innocent Means, to keep our selves out of
their Hands, to prevent their taking Advantage against us; and endeavor to
solace our selves in God, and to preserve the Comforts of a good Conscience: To
be patient under, and to glory in our Sufferings from them: To consider with
our selves, that it is far better to be troubled by the Wicked, than to be
Troublers of the Good: and to be thankful and joyful that we are not guilty of
their Wickedness, nor deserve such Usages at their Hands. And let us study, and
endeavor to render, Romans 12.17, 21. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15.
not Evil for Evil; but still to return good for evil to the very Worst and
Wickedest of them. And whatever Measure we receive from them, let us not be
disheartened and discouraged and dish'd out of Countenance by them, nor suffer
our selves to give Way to their Wickedness, to be wearied out of our Holiness,
to be laughed, and jeered, and sconed out of our Religion; but let us run the
Race that is set before us, though all the Dogs in the Street bark at us. Let
us with Zeal and Courage bear up against them: and bear Witness against them:
and if we cannot win and gain them, at least shame and silence them, judge and
condemn them, by an holy, unblameable, exemplary Life, as Noah Eeb. 11.7
condemned the Old World. Like Stars, let us appear most clear and bright in
the sharpest and coldest Night. And let the Vexation we meet with from the
Wicked here, drive us the oftener to God, to make our Complaint and Moan to him;
and cause us to long the more earnestly for Heaven, where we shall be for ever
out of the Reach of Satan, and all his Instruments, and out of all Danger of
any Enemy, Persecutor, or bad Neighbor.

And so we have fully considered the Reason in the Text; the Force of which,
even as to our selves, lies plainly thus; The Days are such, wherein year in
Danger of Infection by the wicked Errors and damnable Heresies of the Times:
In Danger of Corruption, by the common Sins and reigning Vices of the Times:
and in Danger of Persecution, by the injurious Carriages, and grievous wicked
Lives of the profligate and desperate Sinners of the Times: and therefore
redeem the Time, because the Days are evil in these respects.

These various Evils must not make us give place to Unfruitfulness, but make us
much more careful and watchful to take every good Occasion. See Mr. Bayne on
the Text.
If an Harvest-Day be cloudy and windy, or prove catching Weather (as well call
it) Men will not therefore keep in, but work more diligently and warily. Good
Opportunities in evil Times are Qusa dies mali sunt, hoc est, quia tempus ab
hominibus plerumque malis rebus transigitur, it aut nonfacile sese opportunitas
offerat eos arguends and officii commonefaciendi. Crell. Eth. Christ. p. 31.
few and scare: The more rare these Commodities grow, the more we should
engross them. And as some kinds of good Opportunities are hard to come by, so
not like to abide and continue long with us in evil Times: and therefore while
the Occasion lasts, we should strive to make the utmost Advantage and
Improvement of it.

CHAP. IV. Six other Reasons added to that in the Text. We ought to redeem the
Time, (1.) Because our Time is afforded us by God to this very End and Purpose.
(2.) Because we have all of us lost much Time already. (3.) Because the Time,
that remains, is very short and uncertain, and our Special Opportunities far
shorter, and more uncertain; and the Work, we have to do, very great. (4.)
Because we can neither bring Time back, when once it is past unimproved, nor
any way prolong and lengthen out the Days of our Lives, when Death comes to
put an End and Period to them. (5.) Because we shall all be certainly called to
an Account for our Time. (6.) Because this Time is all we can redeem, and upon
this short Moment of Time depends long Eternity.
BUt besides the Reason in the Text, I shall farther show you that we ought to
redeem the Time upon a six-fold Account.

The first Additional Reason.
We must redeem the Time, because our Time is afforded us by God to this very
End and Purpose, that we should improve and apply it to rational and religious
Uses. Ego non quaeram, quae sint initia universorum, quis rerum formator, quis
sit artisex hujus munde? qua ratione tanta magnitudo in legem and ordinem
venerit? -- unde lux tanta fundatur? -- Ego nesciam unde descenderim? semel
haec mihivid^nda sint, an saepe nascendum? quo hanc sturus sim? quae seeds
expectat animam, folutam legibus servitutis humanae? vetas me caelo interesse,
idest, jubes me vivere capite demisso? Sen. Ep. 65.

Tunc natarae rerum gratias ago, -- cum secreticra ejus intravit cum disco,
quis universi auctor, aut custos: quid sit Deus -- Nisi ad haec admitterer, non
fuerat nasci. -- Detrahe hoc inaestemabile bonum, non est vit a tanti, ut
sudem, ut aestuem. O quam contempta res est homo, nisi supra humana surrexerit!
Sen. Praef. Not. Quaest.


Our Time is given us to study to know and acquaint our selves with God and our
selves: To contemplate the Creator: To rise and ascend from the Effects to the
prime Cause, and ultimate End: To seek and embrace the first Truth, and chief
Good; which only can satisfy Man's Mind, desirous of more Truth; and his Will,
capable of more Good than finite Beings can afford: By diligent Searching to
find out God to be our absolute Owner, supreme Governor, and great Benefactor;
and to labor to be suitably affected toward him, and every way answerably
observant of him: Magnum, majusque quam cogitari potest, numen est, cut vivendo
operam damus. Huic nos approbemus. Sen. apud Lactant. de vero cultu. l. 6. 24.
To own and acknowledge, love, fear, and serve the Author of our Beings, and
Patron of our Lives: to put our Trust, and place our Confidence in him; and to
take care to promote and advance his Interest in the World. To contemplate and
reflect upon the (...), I hoc lid. Poem.
Royal Pedigree, the noblo and divine Extraction, the high and heavenly
Original, the excellent Nature and large Capacity of our incorporeal and
immortal Souls, the Alliance of our Spirits to the Father of Spirits; and to
charge our selves to live and act worthy of so high and honorable a Descent,
so noble a Nature; such excellent Endowments. To confider and ponder the direct
Respect and certain Referenoe that this Life has to another: That the World we
live in, we must not live always in: That this is not the Place of our
Happiness and Rest; That we are but Pilgrims and Strangers here, and Travelers
toward Heb. 11.16.
Sapiens patitur mortalia, quamvis sciat ampliora superesse. Sen. Ep. 65.
a better Country: That this World is but the Road and Way that surely leads to
another: That this World is but a Nursery for Eternity; that we are planted in
this, in order to our Transplanting into the other World: That the present Li^e
is not a durable, permanent Condition, nor the final State of Mankind; but is
only intended as a certain See Mr. Howe's very rational Proemial Discourse to
the Blessedness of the Righteous.
preliminary, preparatory State; Per has mortalis aevi morns, illi meliori
vitae longto ique proluditur. Quemadmoduns novem mensibiu nos tenet maternits
uteries, and praeparat non sibi, sed ili loco in quem videmur emitri, jam
idonei spiritum trahere and in aperto durare: Sic per hoc spatium, quod ab
infantia pates in senectutem, in alium maturescimus partum. Ala origo nos
expectat, alius rerum staius. Nondum coelum, nisi en intervallo, pati possumus,
Seneca Epist. 102.
and fitly contrived, and wisely designed by way of present previous Probation,
in order to future Happiness or Misery: that God has placed us here for a Time,
that we may be Aeternitatis candidati, Tertull.
Candidates for Eternity. Disciteque, 8 miseri, and causas cognoscite rerum,
Quid sumus, and quidnam victuri gignimur: --
-- Quem te Deus esse
Jussie, and humana qua part locatus et in re.
Pers. Sat. 3.
Time is allowed us, to consider and answer the Ends of our coming into this
World; to dispatch the Errand and finish the Business which our heavenly
Father, Lord and Master has given us to do: To find out and discover the ill
Condition and unsound Constitution, the Incurvation and Depression of our
Souls; the Vitiosity, moral Deformity, and wretched Degeneracy of our Nature;
the Sickness and Weakness, Disorder and Distemper of all our Faculties; the ill
Bent, and wrong Biass, and perverse Inclination of our Minds and Wills, Hearts
and Affections: To observe and bewail that lamentable Plut. in (...).
(...), and unhappy (...), the hanging and flagging of our Soul's Wings, the
drooping and moulting of our Souls; their losing those noble Feathers by which
they should nimbly raise themselves, and fly and soar as high as God, and mount
up and aspire to heavenly Things: To be truly sensible of, and sadly affected
with the Mutiny and Rebellion of the brutish and inferior Faculties of our
Souls against the higher Power and sovereign Faculty of our Reason: And to
endeavor, what in us lies, by all possible means to recover and rectify, to
purify and sublimate our heaven-born Souls; and to use well and rightly our
seeing and foreseeing, our intellectual and elective Faculties and Powers: To
open and clear the Eye of our Souls, to Dociles natura nos edidit, and ratienim
ded^t im ^rfectam, sed quae perfici posset. Sen. Ep. 49.
improve and heighten our Reason, to ripen and strengthen our Judgment, to
enlarge and widen our Understanding, and to live and act suitably and agreeably
to right Reason, and the sober Dictates and most mature Judgment of a sound and
solid Understanding: To consult the divine Oracles, and search the sacred
Scriptures; and thence more clearly to gather, and fully to discover our sinful
miserable State by Nature: To learn plainly and certainly from divine
Revelation the particular Manner of our Apostasy and Defection, the
Universality of our Depravation and Corruption, our Obligation to Punishment
for our Transgression and Rebellion, and the ready Way and infallible Means of
our happy Recovery and Restitution to the Image and Favor of God: And out of a
deep Sense and Feeling of all our Sin and Guilt, and spiritual Impotency and
Inability, to seek God's Face and Favor in Christ, to seek his Grace and
Strength; and with Faithfulness and Diligence to use his Grace, and uct in his
Strength; And in the Use or Reason (which is Man's proper Vtensil) and by the
Help of divine Grace, to govern our Senses, to tame our wild and extravagant
Fancies, to curb our Efficiendum est ut appetitus rationi obedtant, -- cui sunt
subjects lege naturae. Cic. l. 1. de Offic.
Appetite, to moderate our Affections, to bridle our violent and boisterous
Passions, and to If we suppose this Life to be a State of Trial in order to a
better (as in all reason we ought to do) what can be imagined more proper to
such a State, than to have the Soul constantly employed in the Government of
those sensual Inclinations which arise from the Body? in the doing of which the
proper Exercise of that Virtue consists, which is made the Condition of future
Happiness. Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon on Prove. 14.9.

Animi imperio, corporis servitin, utimur. Salust.

Quicquid imperavit animus, obtinuit. Sen. de ira.

Tantum proficies, quantum tibi ipsivim intuleris. Thom. ^ Kempis, l. 1. c. 25.
n. 11.


keep our Bodies and rebellious Flesh in an orderly Subjection to our Souls.
Faithfully to pursue Principles of Conscience, and to live strictly under the
Power of Principles: To exercise our selves to have always a Conscience void of
Offense both toward God, and toward Men: To perform a Course of sincere
Obedience to the revealed Will of God, and the good Institutions and excellent
Laws of Christ: To make Religion our Work and Business: To be blameless and
harmless, to be useful and Exemplary in our Stations and Relations: To serve
our Generations according to the Will of God: To watch and take all possible
Advantages of daily doing and receiving Good; and by patient continuance in
well-doing to provide for Honor and Glory and Immortality, and to secure a
blessed and happy Eternity.

Time is allotted us for Proof and Trial of us: And now God looks to see what
we will do with it; He waits to behold how we will improve it: God expects we
should make a wise and a good Choice in it: That we should use the necessary
Means for the sure obtainment of our desired End: That we should live up to the
Ends of Life; answer the Ends both of our Creation and Redemption: That we
should live not merely the animal, but chiefly the rational, angelical, divine
and spiritual Life: That we should not live and act at Random; but that we
should, in several Instances, and on all Occasions, approve our selves strict
Vis deos propitiare? bonus esto. Satis illos coluit, quis. quis imitatus est.
Sen. Ep. 95.

Te quoque dignum finge Deo. Id. Ep. 31.


Imitators and close Followers of God and his Son Jesus Christ, faithful
Friends to God and Religion, Friends to our selves and our immortal Souls: That
we should pass the Time of our Sojouruing here in Fear; That we should be ruled
by the Hopes and Fears of another Life: That we should live as those that have
serious and satisfying Apprehensions of the unseen World: That we should live
and walk in believing and delightful Forethoughts and Fore-tasts o^ the Glory
to come: That we should use this World as if we used it not, and have our
Conversation in Heaven, and learn the Manmrs of the heavenly City and celestial
Country, and give our Minds to such Pleasures as are most proper to the other
State: That we should labor by Heaven moral (which is an heavenly Frame and
Temper, Conversation and Life) to be prepared for Heaven local, the Seat and
Receptacle of the Blessed; By entering into an heavenly State, and getting
Heaven first into us, to fit our selves to enter into Heaven at last: By
becoming the spiritual Children of Abraham, Followers of Abroham's Faith and
Obedience, to be apt to receive our Rest and Repose in Abraham's Bosom: That we
should unfeignedly Omnia honest sient, si honesto nos add^xer imus, idque unum
i^ r^bies humanis bonum judicaverimus, quaeque ex eo sunt. Sen. ep. 95.
addict and devote our selves to Goodness, constantly endeavor to habituate
our selves to true Piety, and real substantial Godliness and Religion; to
attain that Purity of Heart, these gracious Affections, those heavenly, divine
and God-like Virtues; and to maintain that Life of Holiness and Spirituality,
which will suitably qualify, and make us meet for the blessed Vision and
Fruition of God, in the heavenly, supernal Kingdom of Glory: Which will
reconcile our very Natures to that perfectly pure and holy State; dispose and
incline us to love, and delight our selves in God; and frame and fit us to be
for ever the blessed Objects of God's complacential Love: and which will
prepare us for the comfortable, delectable Enjoyment of the Spirits of just Men
made perfect. God now expects that we should do the Work of Time, in Time; That
we should use the Price put into our Hands, and for a certain appointed Time
walk with Watchfulness and Circumspection, keep a due Decorum id est, quod
consent aneum est hominis excellentiae, in eo, in quo naturae ejus a reliquis
animantibus differt. Tum servare illud Poetas dicimus, quod deceat, cum id quod
quaeque person a dignum est, and fit, and dicitur. -- Nobis autempersonam
imposuit ipsa natura, magna cum excellentia, praesta^tiaq e anim
intiumlreliquorum. -- Nobis a natura constantiae, moderationis, temperantiae,
verecundiae parts datae sunt. Cicero l. 1. de Offic.
Decorum in all our Carriages, and act a virtuous, prudent, Vt pulchritudo
corporis apta compositione membrorum movet oculos, and delectat hoc ipso, quod
inter se omnes parts cum quodam lepore consentiunt: sic hoc decorum, quod
elucet in vita, movet approbationem eorum, quibuscum vivitur, ordine and
constantia and moderatione dictorum omnium atque factorum. Id. ibid.
commendable Part, in the Sight of God, Angels, and Men, upon the Stage of this
lower World, before we be advanced higher, and translated hence into those
Vpper-Regions and glorious Mansions: That we should quit our selves like Men,
and behave our selves like Christians in this present State of Nurture and
Discipline, Trial and Probation; that so we may be capable of a blessed Reward,
and an honorable Retribution in the other World; and at last may come to be
Mat. 22.30. Luke 20.36.
equal to the Angels of God in Heaven; yea, to be like the very blessed Son of
God himself, and to enjoy the happy Fellowship of Saints and Angels, and the
Company and Society of the blessed Trinity, to all Eternity, in the unseen and
unconceivable Glory Time is given us to repent in, to appease the divine Anger,
to prepare for and hasten to the Society of Angels, to stir up our slackned
Wills, and enkindle our cold Devotions, to weep for our daily Iniquities, and
to sigh after, and work for the Restitution of our lost Inheritance. Bp.
Taylor's Sermon. 1. Vol. page 294.
.

Our great Creator and wise Governor, when he gives and continues Time to
us, expects from us, that whatever it costs us, whatever sensual Pleasures we
deny our selves, whatever worldly Profit or Honors we refuse or lose, whatever
we be put to do or suffer in this World; we very faithfully spend our Lifetime
in the constant Exercise of right Reason and true Religion, and improve all
special Opportunities to our spiritual and eternal Advantages. Time and
Opportunity are Talents with which we are entrusted; and therefore they are to
be traded with, and not to be hid in a Napkin, much less to be spent and wasted
in riotous Living. And the longer Time God gives us, the more Days, and Weeks,
and Months, and Years, and Seasons, and Opportunities he affords us to work the
Work of God, to abound in the Work of the Lord, to repent of our Sins, to work
out our own Salvation, to do good to others, to be Helpers of their Faith, and
Furtherers of their Salvation; the more Advantages he affords us to these
Purposes, the greater Improvement he looks for from us: And we find him
complaining for want of it: Rev. 2.21.
Christ says concerning Jezebel, I gave her (...). Plutarch. de his qui ser o
puniuntur a Numine.
Space to repent of her Fornication, and she repented not. And he speaks to
Jerusalem, even weeping; Luke 19.42.
If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the Things which
belong unto thy Peace. And in the Parable, he that planted the Fig Tree in his
Vineyard, complained, Luke 13.7.
Behold, these three Years I come seeking Fruit on this Fig Tree, and find
none. That is the first Reason; We must redeem the Time, and whatever it cost
us, use and improve it to all possible Advantages to our selves and others,
because our Time and Opportunities are afforded us by God to this very End and
Purpose.

The second Additional Reason.
We should carefully and faithfully redeem the Time, because we have all of us
Animus si unquam illi respirare and recedere in se vacaverit, o quam sibi ipse
verum, tortus a se, fatebitur, ac dicet: Quidquid feci adhud, infectum isse
mallem: quidquid dixt, cum recogito, mutis invideo: quidquid optavi, inimicorum
execrationem puto: quidquid timui, dti toni, quanto leviu; fuit, quam quod
concupivi? Cum multis inimiciuias gessi, and in gratiam ex odio (si modo ulla
inter malos gratia est) redii: mihi ipss nondum amicussum. Sen. de vit. beat.
cap. 2.
lost much Time already.

It is to be feared, that some of us have lost our whole Time ever since we
came into the World; have stood idle all the Day long hitherto; have done
nothing at all for God's Glory, or for the Salvation of our own and others
Souls: have made no riddance at all of our Work, but only made our selves more
Work to do. There are some, I fear, so far from having finished their Work,
that they know not as yet what Work they have to do; that are as yet grossly
ignorant of the Terms and Conditions of the New Covenant.

And of those that have known and understood them, how few have considered and
consented to them, sincerely kept and faithfully perform's them! How many among
us have lived in practical Atheism, in habitual Non-atendance upon God, and in
a gross Neglect of their future Welfare and eternal Good? lived without any
Sense and Taste and Feeling of God, or of divine Things? lived a very brutish,
sensual, flesh-pleasing Life!

And such of us as have not quite lost our Time, yet how much of it have we
wasted? how considerable a Part of it have we fooled and trifled away? Might we
not have minded God and Religion, a State of Immortality, and a glorious
Eternity more than we have done? How little Knowledge have we got of God, how
sinall Acquaintance with him? how little Communion and Fellowship have we
enjoyed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, through the blessed
Spirit? What Degrees of Affection do we still retain to the Things of the
World? which we might have become more mortified to, and weaned from. How too
too frequently predominant and masterly are our Senses? how strong and
impetuous are our Passions? how violent and unruly are our Lusts and
Corruptions? How short and narrow, how flat and low, how weak and impotent is
our Reason? which might have been heightened and improved, widened and enlarged,
and grown more strong and masculine, sober and solid. How insirm and infantile
is our Faith? how feeble our Graces? how mean our Experiences? how small our
Comforts?

Let Us reflect back a little, and seriously consider what Opportunities we have
let slip, what Advantages we have lost of doing and receiving good in the
World: Might not we have relieved the Poor, and Christ in the Poor? and visited
the Sick, and Christ in the Sick oftener than we have done? Might we not have
been the happy Instruments of much more good in the Parishes and Places where
we have lived? in composing Differences, and making Peace among our Neighbors;
in warning the unruly, in awakening, convincing, converting, recovering the
Ungodly? Might we not have been as the Angels to Lot, hastening some out of
Sodom; and have saved some with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire? Might we
not have shined as Lights, as Torches, as Stars in the World? Might we not have
been more useful and serviceable, more exemplary and imitable in our Lives,
more conscientious in our Dealings, more faithful in our Relations, more strict
and holy in our Families than we have been? How well might we have spared Time
to have instructed our Families, to have catechized our Children and Servants,
to have admonished and exhorted one another more frequently than we have done?
How many precious Hours have idly slipped away from us, and run waste, which
might have been well bestowed in reading, Hearing, Prayer, Confession,
Meditation, Self-examination, holy Society and Christian Communion? Yea, many a
Time, when the holy Spirit of God has secretly moved and prompted us to perform
a particular Duty; When we have had sometimes (though in in a more tacit Way)
such an hint as that of Oborta est procella ingens, ferens ingentem imbrem
lachrymarum. -- flebam amarissim a contritione cordis mei. and ecce audio vocem
de vicina domo, cum cantic dicentis and crebro repetent is, quasi pueri an
puellae, nescio: Toll, lege; toll, lege. Sta^inque mutato vultu,
intentissimus cogitari eoepi, utrumnam solerent pueri in aliquo genere ludendi
cantare tale aliquid. nec occurrebat omnino audivisse me uspiam. Depressoque
im^etu lachrymarum surrexi, nihil aliud interpretans, nisi divinitus mihi
juberi, ut apertrem codicem, and legerem, quod primum capitulum invenissem.
Aug. Consel l. 8. c. 12.. 1, 2, 3.
St. Austin's was, Toll, lege; toll, lege; take up the Bible, and read in it;
get into thy Closet, and pray to thy Father in secret; we have sinfully
diverted, and sought an Occasion, and studied an Excuse to turn off from it.

The more we have hitherto neglected golden Opportunities, the better let us
now improve them: Have we been idle formerly? why now let us be so much the more
busily employed. Have we loiter'd away a great Part of the Day in the Lord's
Vineyard? let us now work so much the harder the remaining Part of the Day.
Have we hitherto stood still, or moved but slowly? let us now with the Sun
rejoice to run our Race. Saint Paul had a long time been out of the Way; but
when once he was led into the right Way, he pressed toward the Mark: Phil. 3.24.
(...): the very same Word by which he expresses his former Persecution; Acts.
2 4.
(...): As he eagerly pursued the one, so afterward he as earnestly followed
the other: He was as zealous in the Practice, as he had been before in the
Suppression of Christ's Religion.

It is our Duty to redeem the Time, because much Time is misspent already:
It Is ^ Pet. 4.2, 3.
St. Peter's Argument, that we should no longer live the rest of our Time in
the Flesh, to the Lusts of Men, but to the Will of God: Certe hic acerrimus
stimulus nobis esse debes ad been currendum, dum reputamus nos magnd part
vitae extra viam ^^rasse. Calv. in ^^ c. v. 3.
For the Time past of our Life, says he, may suffice us to have wrought the
Will of the Gentiles, when we walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine,
Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries. We have heretofore done
much for Satan, little for God, and God knows, little enough for our own Souls:
We have lived to very ill, or to very small Purpose in the World, ever since we
came into the World; and are at present lamentably behind-hand: Now then it is
high Time for us to lay out our selves to purpose, to lay out our selves to the
utmost for God, to be zealous and active for God, and to go about doing good:
And it greatly concerns us, to be pious and religious in such Instances, in
which we have formerly been vicious or incurious: and to bestow our Time
especially in the Performance of those Duties, and the Exercise of those
graces, that are contrary to our former sinful Practices, or gross Neglects.

The third Additional Reason.
It concerns us highly to redeem the Time, because the Time that remains is
very short, and uncertain; and our special Opportunities far shorter, and more
uncertain;a nd the Work we have to do, very great.

1. The Time that remains is very short. Our whole Lifetime is but a very
short Space now, in Comparison of what Methus^ lah lived 969. Years: and Enoch,
the shortest lived of the Patriarchs before the Flood, lived 365 Years, as many
Years as there are Days in one Year.

Job 14.1. and 7.6. and 9.25, 26. and8.9. Psalm. 102.11. and 103.15, 16. and
90.5, 6, 9. James 4.14. Psalm. 39.5.


Men lived before the Flood; but a few Dates, and those swifter than a Weaver's
Shuttle, than a Post or Racer on the Land: They pass away as the swift Ship
upon the Sea, as the Eagle that hastes to the Prey. Our Days upon Earth are
like a Shadow that declineth; that changes, and is liker Darkness every
Moment: like Grass, which in the Morning flourishes and grows up, in the
Evening is cut down and withers. We spend our Years like a Tale that is told:
Now, if a Tale be pleasant, you know Time passes away so quickly in the
telling of it, that it is scarce perceived either by Speaker or Hearer. Our
Life is as a Vapor, a Smoke; it is gone presently. Our Days are as an
Handbreadth. The whole of our Life is but a Span; and it may be the Remainder
is but an Inch. Our whole Life is but a Day; and it may be we have past the
greatest Part of it already, and a few Hours or Moments will serve to measure
all that is left behind.

Infinita est velocitas temporis, quae mdgis apparet respicientibus. Sen. ep.
49.
If we look back on our past Years, the longest Life will seem but a short
Space: and why should we reckon the Remainder by any other Measure? which with
many, in the very Course of Nature, is but small and short in Comparison of the
former. The succeeding Part of our Lives will be gone and quite past over ere
we are aware.

It is not so proper to ask, when we shall die? as, when we shall make an End
of dying? for surely, Quotidie mcrimur, quotidie enim demitur aliqua pars vita:
and tunc quoque um crescimus, vita decrescit. -- Hunc ipsum quem agimus diem,
cum morte dividimus. Quem admodum clepsydram non extremum stilliciaium
exhaurit, sed quidquid aute defluxit: sic ultima hora, qua esse desinimus, non
sola mortem facit, sed sola consummat. Sen. ex Lucilio, ep. 24.
we have been dying, ever since we were born: we have been going out of the
World, ever since we came into the World. As not only the Sands that fall last
of all, but all that run out from the very first, do properly empty the
Hourglass: So the last Hour in which we cease to be, does not alone effect,
but only finish our Death. Quicquid aetatis retro est, mors tenet, says Seneca
[ Ep. 1.]: We are dead already to yesterday, and the other Day, and all the
former Days of our Lives: Death is possessed of all that is past.

And how does Death seize, as on our Time, so on our Bodies by Degrees? As it
is in the Decay of an House, there falls down a Window, then a Piece of a Wall,
then a Door: So it is with the House of this earthly Tabernacle: Death seized
upon our teeth, and makes the Eccles. 12.3.
Grinders cease, because they are few: upon our Eyes, and makes us dim-sighted:
upon our Ears, and makes us thick of Hearing: upon our Feet and Hands, our
Limbs and Joints, and makes them weak and feeble, stiff and cold. We decline
and hasten apace to our long Home, and are fitly said to be Psalm. 39.4.
frail, or ceasing. Our Life is If we did seriously think how many of our Years
are spent before we can do any more than a Beast, and how many we cast away
without considering, after we are Men; and how many necessary Refeshments by
Meat, and Drink, and Sleep, will still devour, we would not be so prodigal and
lavish of the small Number that remains, but save them for good Uses and the
Service of our Souls. D. Patrick's Div. Arithm. p. 20.
short.

And, 2. It is uncertain how short it may be. Young ones may be snatched away
in their Childhood or Youth. There were as many Lambs and Kids facriliced under
the Old Law, as Goats and old Sheep. They that have escaped in their Youth, may
be cut off in the midst of their Days. The strongest may go as well as the
weakest, and the lustiest of all may go soonest. Iron and Brass may melt, as
well as Clay molder. Possibly some Fruit may hang on till it is so ripe that it
falls and drops down of it self, but most of the Fruit is violently plucked or
shaken down while it is raw and green. If you go into a Potter's Shop, and see a
great Company of earthen Pots, and should ask the Owner, which of these would
break first? he would tell you, Not that which was first made, but that which
first got a Fall. It Is common for them to go first to the Winding Sheet, who
came last from the Womb. We are earthen Vassels, brittle Ware, and may quickly
get a Knock or Fall, and crack, and break.

How many Persons have lost their Lives by very strange and sad Accidents?
Some, and great ones too, have fallen suddenly by an Ehud's Dagger, a
Ravilliack or Felton's Knife. A poisoned Torch did serve to light the Cardinal
of Lorrain to his long home. Fabius surnamed the Painter (as Bp. Tailor in his
great Exemplar, p. 557, 558. See also Dr. Patrick's Div. Arithm. p. 26, 27.
a learned Bishop has with variety remarked out of History) was choked with an
Hair in a Mess of Milk, Adrian the fourth with a Fly, Anacreon with a Raisin,
Drusus Pompeius with a Pear, Casimir the second, King of Polonia, with a little
Draught of Wine; Tarquinius Priscus with a Fishbone. Lucia, the Sister of
Aurelius the Emperor, playing with her little Son, was wounded in her Breast
with a Needle, and died. The great Lawyer Baldus playing with a little Dog was
bitten upon the Lip, instantly grew mad and perished. So far that great and
excellent Author. A little Bruise on the Toe is said to have killed Aemilius
Lepidus. I have heard of several that have died by the cutting of a Corn upon
their Toe, a Place remote from the Heart: and have read of a Person, who after
sixteen Years Travel, and enduring much Hardness abroad, returning home died of
an Hurt in his Thumb. Mr. Edward Terry, Mr. of Arts, and Student of
Christ's-Church in Oxford in his Voyage to the Eust-Indies, Anno Christi 1615,
else us of a Nobleman in the great Mogul's Court, who fitting in Dalliance with
one of his Women, had an Hair pulled by her from his Breast; This little Wound
made by that small and unexpected Instrument of Death presently festred, and
turning into an incurable Cancer killed him. God needs no bigger a Lance than
an Hair to kill an Atheist, as this dying Lord acknowledged. Purchase Pilgrims,
vol. 2.
The plucking but a single Hair off the Breast of a Nobleman in the Great
Mogul's Court, caused an incurable Cancer in his Flesh, and proved as mortal as
the tearing out his very Heart.

See Instances in the Gr. Exemplar, p. 558.
How many Persons have died in the midst of Sport and Merriment, excessive
Laughter, and too great a Joy? and what a Number have been found unexpectedly
and suddenly dead in their Beds?

We are obnoxious to numerous perilous Diseases, subject to various violent
Passions, and exposed to a thousand Casualties and Contingencies, any one of
which may quickly be the Death of us. We are in Danger of perishing by falling
into the Water, or into the Fire; by the firing, or Fall of some Part of an
House; by the Fall of a Coach, the Fall of an Horse, or a Fall off an Horse. We
know not how soon a Vein may break, and let out our Blood and Life: How soon an
Ague may shake us to Death; as 27. Jan. 1402. Knolles's Hist. of the Turks, p.
235.
it did the great Tamerlane, in the midst of his great Hopes, and greatest
Power, when he was preparing for the utter rooting out of the Othoman Family,
and the Conquest and Overthrow of the Greek Empire. We know not how soon a
Dropsy may drown us, how soon a Fever may burn us up, how soon a Quincy may
stop our Breath, how soon an Apoplexy may bereave us of our Senses and of our
Lives, how soon we may groan under deadly Gripes, how soon the Pestilence may
smite us, and cleave unto us till it has quite consumed us. Every Pore in our
Bodies is a Door at which Death may enter in. If we had as many Hands as Hairs
on our Heads, they would not be able to stop up all those Passages at which
Death may creep in unawares. We know not but that some Disease is now breeding
in our Bodies, which will shortly make an End of us. Blessed be God, we are now
free from Pain, but ere long we may be even distracted with it. To day we are
well, and in good Health; but to morrow we may be sick, heart-sick, sick unto
Death; and the next Day laid in our Coffins, and lodged in our Graves. Many are
gone before us, who were likely enough to ontlive us: and who knows but our
turn may be the very next. This Night, mine, thy Soul may be requied of us; and
to morrow Morning the Bell may give notice of our Death. We are apt to imagine,
that we may continue in the World till we have effected all we design; and yet
we have no Promise of God's, nothing but our own Presumption to secure us of
longer Life. And to be sure, the Greatness and Multitude of our Sins give us
Cause to fear the Fewness of our Days, and Shortness of our Lives: to fear,
lest every Sickness should prove our Death; and lest our Death should prove our
Damnation.

If we consider, how little need God has of us; how many better than our selves
go before us; how useless and worthless, how unprofitable and unserviceable we
are in the World; what an hgih Provocation our heinous Sins are unto God's
infinite Holiness and Justice; and how many Ways there are of snatching us
away and removing us hence; we cannot but confess, that it is a thousand to one
if ever we reach to an old Age.

You that are old indeed, have reason to conclude, that your Time is
sufficiently short: your Pulse can beat comparatively but a few Strokes more:
your Sun draws low, is almost set: your Glass is almost run: your Life is
almost done: you have one Foot in the Grave already: you stand upon the Brink
of Eternity, and tread upon the borders of another World: And will you be
guilty of such prodigious inconsideracy, still San. de brev. vit. cap. 4.
velut ex pleno and abundanti perdere; when you have but a few Days or Hours
remaining, to spend as extravagantly as if you had all your Years before you?

You that are weak and infirm, sickly and crasie, have reason to reckon your
Time uncertain, and not to flatter your selves, and say, that threatened Folk
live long.

You that are more eminently useful and holy, zealous and forward in the
Profession and Practice, Maintenance and Defense of the Christian and Reformed
Religion; your very Religion, which will save your Souls, may possibly cause
you to lose your Lives: For your Activity in your Duty to God and your Country,
you may be Preached on the Lod's-Day after the Discovery of the Murder of Sr.
Edwund Berry Godfrey.
strangled or stabbed by the barbarous Hands of the butcherly bloody Papists.

But especially you that are wilfully wicked and impenitent, have reason to
determine that you have not long to live. How can you hope, that God should put
another Talent, and trust a new Stock of time in the Hands of such Prodigals as
you have been? That he should give such Rebels longer Time to affront and
dishonor him? That he should suffer you to live who know not how to live, and
care not how you live; who do not understand or consider for what it was you
came into the World? That he should allow you one Day more, who never yet knew
how to spend and improve any one Day as ye ought? You have Ground enough to
expect, that the continuing and lengthening out of your Sins will extremely
diminish and lessen, curtail and shorten your Days: You have reason to fear
every Hour the Loss of your Lives, and of all Possibility of Repentance; that
you shall be removed, and room made for worthier Persons to stand up in the
Places which you so unprofitably and perniciously take up in the World.

Our Time is short, and therefore let us lay present hold upon that small
Remnant of Cum celeritate temporis utendi velocitate certandum est: velut ex
torrente rapido, nec semper casuro, cito hauriendum est. Sen. de brev. vit.
cap. 9.
hasty Time which posteth away whether we work or play.

Let Us take with us Words, and say to God with the devout Herbert,

Repentance.
O let thy Height of Mercy then
Compassionate short-breathed Men.
Oh! gently treat
With thy quick Flower, thy moment any Bloom;
Whose Life still pressing
Is one undressing,
A steady aiming at a Tomb.
Let Us daily prepare to die, by earnest importunate Pleading with God for
Pardon of Sin, and Sanctification, and Sense of Pardon, and of our fitness for
Heaven and Happiness, that so we may certainly die safely, and comfortably.

And, by the Help of God, let us double our Diligence and Activity, and
endeavor to do a great deal of Work in a little Time. You know, Nature at the
Approach of Death usually acts a double Part, and puts forth all its Strength.
Bells, when about ceasing, strike thicker than before. A Stone, the nearer it
comes to its Center, the faster it moves. When Night draws on, the Traveller
mends his Pace. Considering we have but a few Days, let us labor to live them
all, to lose none of them: So to lead our Life, that we may be able to enjoy
our past Life, by making sweet and comfortable Reflections upon it; which is in
a manner to Ampliat aetatis spatium sibi vir bonus: hoc est Vivere bis, vita
posse priore frui. Epigrammatograph Latin.
enlarge our Age, and after a Sort to live twice.

Nemo quam been vivat, sed quam diu curat, cum omnibus possit contingere, ut
been vivant; ut diu, nulli. Sen. ep. 22. in fine. Quomodo fabula, sic vita; non
quam diu, sed quam been acta sit refert. Id. ep. 77. Discendum quam been vivas
refrie, non quam diu. Id. ep. 101.
We have but a little while to live, let us therefore study and strive to live
well. Our Life is just like a Comedy (says Seneca) it matters not so much how
long, as how well it is acted.

Let us account that the oldest Life which is most holy. (...) ( Plutarch.
conjol. ad Apollon.) A long Life is not the best, but a good Life. As we do not
commend (says he) him that has play^d a great while on an Instrument, or made
a long Oration, but him that has played and spoken well; and as we account
those Creatures best that give us most profit in a short Time, and every where
we see maturity preferred before length of Age, so it ought to be among our
selves. They are the worthiest Persons and have lived longest in the World, who
have brought the greatest Benefit unto it, and made the greatest Advantage of
their Time to the Service of God and of Men. Let our Conscience therefore be
the Ephemeris or Diary of our Life. Let us not reckon by the Almanac, but by
the Book of God, how much we live. And let us account that he who lives Godly
lives long, and that other Men live not at all. D. Patrick's Div. Arithm. p.
34, 35.
He lives long, that lives well: who in a few Years is very useful and
serviceable unto God, and geatly profitable and beneficial to the World. The
Author of the Book of Wisdom says concerning Enoch, who was the shortest lived
of the Patriarchs before the Flood, but an eminent Pattern of Piety, and a rare
Exemplar of walking with God, that he being perfected or consummated in a short
Time, fulfilled a long Time. (Chap. 4. Verse. 13.) For (as the same Author a
little before does well express it, Verse. 8, 9.) Honorable Age is not that
which stands in length of Time, nor that which is measured by Number of
Years: But Wisdom is the gray Hair unto Men, and an unspotted Life is old Age.

Lucilius having in an Epistle to Seneca sadly lamented the immature untimely
Death of Metronactes the Philosopher, who might, and, in his Conceit, ought to
have lived longer; The grave Moralist seasonably checks his causeless unjust
Complaint of (...). Apud. Poctas Minor. p. 513.
Providence, and takes Occasion in his Answer to discourse usefully and
excellently in this manner; Octoginta annis vixit, nisi forte sic vixisse eum
dicis quomodo dicuntur arbores vivere. -- Quemadmodum in minor^ corporis
habitu, potest homo esse perfect us: sic and in m^nore temporis modo, potest
esse vita perfecta. -- Q^aeris quod sit amplissimum vitae spatium? Vsque
adsapientiam vivere: qui ad^^^m pervenit, attigit non longissimum sinem, sed
maximum. -- Nem tam multis vixit annis, quam potuit. Et paucorum versuum liber
est, and quidem laudandus, atque utilis. S^n. ep. 93.

Multis ille bonis slebilis occidit. Horat. carm. l. 1 Od. 14. de morte
Quintilii.


Our Care should be (says he) not to live long, but to live enough. Life is
long, if it be full. What good do eighty Years do him that spends them all
idly? such a Person did not live, but only linger in Life; nor did he die late,
but was a long Time dead. But you make your moan, that he died young and green:
yet he performed the Offices of a good Citizen, a good Friend, a good Son, he
was deficient in no part that properly belonged to him. Though his Age was
imperfect, his Life was perfect. He lived, yea he was here eighty Years, unless
you will reckon he lived no otherwise than Trees are said to live. I pray thee,
my Lucilius, let us endeavor, says he, that as precious Things, so our Life,
though it be not of any great Extent and Length, yet may be of much Weight and
Worth: Let us measure it by Work, and not by Time. Would thou know the
Difference between him that spent so few, and another that has passed over
many Years? The one lives even after Death, the other perished before Death.
Let us therefore praise him, and place him in the Number of happy Persons, who,
how little Time soever he enjoyed, was careful to bestow it well. Why do you
inquire how long he lived? he lived to the Memory and Benefit of Posterity. As
there may be a perfect Man in a less Habit of Body, so there may be a perfect
Life in a less Measure of Time. Do you demand what is the largest Space of
Life? it is to live till we attain to Wisdom: He that arrives to that, is come
not to the longest End, but the greatest. He lived not so many Years as he
might: why, a Book may contain but a few Verses, and yet be very laudable and
useful.

He that attains the End of Life, though his time be short, yet his Life is
long, because he lives In quantolibet tempore bona aeterna consummant. Sen. Ep.
92.
much in a little: Like him that writes small, thick and close, having much to
write, and but a little Paper to write in. When the Ninivites had but forty
Dvies allowed them, they made use of that Space to exercise a notable
Repentance in.

Our Time is short and very uncertain; let our Improvement therefore be as
speedy, and as great as may be. Let our Care be to live always holily, that we
may never fear dying suddenly, nor dread the Thought of being surprised and
taken unprovided. If we cannot be certain of longer enjoying this present
mortal, transitory Life; Oh let us not be contented to be as uncertain of our
obaining a better being, and an endless Life, when this is concluded and
expired.

3. Our special Particular Opportunities are much shorter than our Time, and
more uncertain. Though the Stalk remain, the Flower may be gone: though
somewhat of Time may be left, yet Opportunity may be slipped. But this I say,
Brethren, the ^ Cor. 7.29.
TIME IS SHORT: the Word is (...) contracted or shortened. It is an Allusion to
Seafaring Men, that have almost done their Voyage, and begin to strike Sail;
are ready to roll and fold up their Sails together, to put into Harbor, and to
go to unlade their Goods.

Our special Seasons are very short, and uncertain Things. We may quickly be
laid upon Sick-Beds, and unfitted by a Disease for the Performance of those
Duties, which now we are free to the Exercise of. We may suddenly fall into so
weak a Condition, that an earnest Care, and working Thoughts about the final
Estate of our Souls, would hinder the Cure and Recovery of our Bodies, and will
be apt to be laid aside upon that Pretense. In a Time of Sickness our Heads may
be distempered, or our Hearts may be straightened, that we cannot pray. We may
possibly lose our Estates, that we cannot hereafter give to the Poor so
liberally as now we may. It may be for the future we may not be excited and
suscitated by such good Motions as now we are. We may never be entrusted with
such rich Talents, nor have such precious Opportunities any more afforded us as
are at present vouchsafed to us: Let Us therefore now improve them to the
utmost: let us make the best of them, and lose none of them: Especially
considering, that as our Time is short and uncertai, and our special
Opportunities shorter, and more uncertain; So,

4. The Work we have to do, is very great. It Is no slight and trifling Work,
above all keepings to keep our Hearts: to prevail with our selves to make a
Covenant with our Eyes, and perform it: to turn away our Eyes from beholding
Vanity, and from gazing on alluring Objects: to learn habitually to govern our
Tongues; to set a Watch over our Lips, that we offend not with our Tongues, nor
speak unadvisedly with our Lips: to take heed unto our Feet, and to make
straight Paths: to walk circumspectly, (...) Ephesians. 5.15.
accurately, exactly: to strive to enter in at the strait Gate, to watch for
our Souls, to work out our Salvation, to make our Calling and Election sure: to
procure, and preserve a Right and Title to the heavenly Kingdom: to get our
Evidences for Heaven sealed, and to keep them so clear from Blots and Blurs
that they may be plainly read.

It is no facile Thing to repent of so many thousand Sins and Follies, to
believe with all our Hearts, to obey the several Laws and Commands of Christ,
and to discharge and perform our particular respective Duties both toward God,
toward our Neighbor, and toward our selves. It Is no such easy matter to
become able to resist the Devil, to tread Satan under our Feet; to get Victory
over the World, to subdue our own Flesh, to deny our selves; To reach and
attain to such a Degree of spiritual Niceness, as not to endure the Impurity of
a Dream, nor to allow our selves in so much Anger as would disorder and disturb
a Child.

Sin is not mortified on a sudden: Our old Man is not crucified in a Moment:
The strong Man is not disarmed and cast out in an instant: The Plague of our
Heart is not so soon cured, our spiritual Leprosy so quickly healed, nor our
Issue of Blood so presently dried up. A corrupt Nature is not so easily
changed: Mala consuetudine obsessis, diu rubigo animorum essricanda est. Sen.
ep. 95.
Ill Habits and Customs are not so readily broken and laid aside: A craving
Appetite is not immediately drawn off from sensual Objects, nor our Inclinations
to the Things below vanquished and conquered with a single and short Conflict:
Strength is not so speedily gotten against Temptations, nor Power over our
Passions, nor Conquest obtained over our Corruptions. It is not a Thing of so
quick a dispatch to six and settle our Resolutions, to remove strong
Prejudices, to resolve our Doubts, to answer Objections, and satisfy many
weighty and difficult Questions which will arise concerning our Souls and
spiritual Estates. It Is a great Work sure, Employment and Business enough for
all our Time, to get a Change of Mind, and Heart, and Life: To get Pardon of
Sin, and Purity of Heart; To recover the Favor and Friendship of God, and to
regain the glorious Image and Likeness of God: To procure the Reconciliation of
our Persons and Natures to God; To get a Participation of the divine Nature, a
Participation of God's Holiness: To attain a blessed Conformity in a Spirit and
Practice to Christ our Head: To get an affective transformative Knowledge of God
and Christ, and a deep Impress of the holy Gospel upon our Hearts and Lives: To
know the Gospel, to know God and Christ so, as to become Gospel-like, God-like,
Christ-like Creatures: To gain a good Measure of grace and Holiness, a rooted
Love to God and Goodness, a good Hope and a settled well-grounded Peace of
Conscience: To learn to be careful for nothing with an anxious, distrustful,
distracting, (...). Phil. 4.6.
dividing Care; but in every Estate and Condition of Life to be humbly and
cheerfully content: To improve and stir up the several Graces of God in us: By
God's Assistance to bring our selves to maintain a daily holy Communion with
God, and a constant Conversation in Heaven: to prepare aright for Death and
Judgment: to arrive to a Weanedness from this present World, to a Desire to
depart and be with Chrit, and to a Love of the appearing, and an earnest
longing for the second Coming of the Lord Jesus.

This hard Task and weighty Work will require all our Labor, and even take up
every Hour. Let Us therefore vigorously redeem the Time, and industriously put
it to this Use, and diligently employ it to this Purpose; and daily say the
Prayer of Moses, Psalm. 90.12.
So teach us to number our Days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom.
Let Us lose none of our little Time upon unfruitful, unprofitable Things, till
we have no more worthy and weighty Things to spend it in; and till we have Time
to spare from more momentous, important Work: But let us lay out our Time in
those necessary Works which will comfort us most when we come to die.

The Work that lies before us is great; let us therefore redeem the whole of our
remaining Time: redeem it perfectly (as far as in us lies) and redeem it
constantly, to the very last; and not purposely make the good Improvement of
one Day an Argumeat of mis-spending and trifling away the next: but lay out
every Day with Labor and Diligence in so very great and good a Work. If we
intend to redeem the Time, we must continue in well-doing: Now a natural
Cessation of the Act, is not a moral Discontinuance; But only our Omission of
any necessary Act, Or our Doing a clean contrary Act: This is that which we
must take Care we do not become guilty of.

Nan exiguum temporis habemus: sed multum perdimus. Satis long a vita, and in
maximarum rerum consummationem large data est, si tota been collocaretur. --
Non accepimus brevem vitam, sed fecimus: nec inopes ejus, sed prodigi sumus.
Sicut amplae and regiae opes, ubi ad malum dominum pervenerunt, momento
dissipantur: at quam vis modica, si bono custodi traditae sunt, usu crescunt:
Ita aetas nestra, been disponenti, multum patet. Quid de rerum natura querimur?
illa se benign gessit. Vita, si scias uts, longa est. Sen. de brevitate vitae,
cap. 1, 2.
We have no reason here to accuse and cast any Blame upon God, for giving so
little Time to us, and expecting so great and weighty a Work from us: for,
though our Time be short of it self, and we have no spare Time to throw away in
vain Pleasures, or unnecessary Employments: Yet, blessed be God, the Time he
gives us is large and long enough to serve all rational spiritual Ends of Life,
to do all our necessary Work and real Business in, by the Help of God, and in
the Strength of Christ. We have in the Days of our Lives Space enough given us
for Repentance, Time sufficient to dispatch the one Thing necessary to work out
our Salvation, to prepare for Eternity.

And for our Comfort and Encouragement, if we be not grossly wanting to our
selves, we may probably yet perform whatever is indispensably required of us,
in the Time that is continued and lengthned out to us; if we take up presently
and lose and squander away no more of it. Life is long enough, says Seneca,
(and let me add, the Resdidue of thy Life may provelong enough) if thou know
but how to spend it well: And therefore be so pradent and provident, as to use
and improve that little, which, if the Fault be not thy own, may happily serve
to do thy main Business, to save thy Soul from perishing everlastingly, and
from miscarrying to all Eternity.

The fourth Additional Reason.
We should redeem the Time while we enjoy it, because we can neither bring Time
back, when once it is past unimprov'd, nor any way prolong and lengthen out the
Days of our Lives, when Death comes to put an End and Period to them.

1. We should redeem the Time while we have it, because we can never recall and
retrieve the Time of this Life, if once we lose and let it slip unimproved. We
can never live one Day of our Lives over again. No Man will restore thy Time
(says Nemo restituet annos, nemo iterum te tibi redder. Sen. d^ brev. vit. c. 8.
Seneca) or return thy lost Opportunities to thee, and make thee Master once
more of those Advantages which heretofore thou had in thy Hands. If we would
give the Fruit of our Bodies for the Redemption of our Time, we can never
purchase it into our Hands again. It is reported to have been the Speech of
Prince Henry upon his Deathbed to a certain Lord, Ah Tom, I now too late wish
for those Hours we have spent in vain Recreations. That of him in the Poet was
a very groundless and fruitless Desire, O mihi praeteritos referat si Jupiter
annos!
Bp. Reynold's Treat. of the Pass.
Oh that Jove would me restore
The Years that I have lived before!


When our Time is just at an End, and we can hardly draw our Breath, 'twill be
a lamentable, desperate Case for us then to cry out with that poor distressed,
afflicted Mrs. Pindar, a Book-feller's Wife in Cambridg.
Woman in Cambridg, Call Time again, call Time again; a Thing impossible to be
effected by any Cares or Endeavors, Prayers or Tears, Money or Price. The Time
of Life, once lost, is irrecoverable and unredeemable; And the sad Apprehension
of the irreparable Loss of Time, will one Day prove an intolerable Torment to
too late considering and awakened Souls. Let Us therefore use that Time well,
which there can be no Revocation of.

2. As we cannot recover the Time that is past, so we cannot make any
Supplement or Addition of new and longer Time to the Days of our Lives, when
once Death comes to put a Finis to them.

As we cannot add one Cubit to our Stature, So we cannot add one Moment to the
Measure and Number of our Days. Hom. sz. in Euang. in verba, Vigilate itaque,
quia neseitis diem neque hordm.
St. Gregory in a certain Homily tells us a sad Story of one Chrisaurius, a
Nobleman, but a had Liver; as full of Wickedness as Wealth: who at last was
struck with Sickness, and the same Hour that he was going out of the World, he
seemed to see a Company of foul and black Spirits standing before him, and
coming to drag him to the Infernal Pit: He began to tremble, to grow pale, to
sweat again, and to call out to his Son Maxim, curre, Maxim, curre, nunquam
tibi aliquid mali feci, in fidem tuam me suscrpe.
Maximus to come quickly to save and help him: When his Son and Servants came,
they could see nothing; but he himself, turn which way he would, could see
nothing else but those evil Spirits which he could not endure to see; and in a
despairing Manner at last cried out, Inducias vel usque mane, inducias vel
ujque mane: Let me have respite but till to morrow, respite but till to morrow
Morning: And in this Perplexity he died immediately. The same Father makes this
Use of it; The Vision did him no good, says he, but let it do good to us, upon
whom God's Patience waits yet a while longer: Nos ergo, sratres chartssimt,
nunc solicit ista cogitemus, ne nobis in vacuum tempora pereant, and tunc
quaeramus ad been agendum vivere, cum jam compellimur de corpore exire.
Let us seriously think upon it, that we may not lose our Time, says he, and
then beg to live that we may do our Duty, when we are forced to die whether we
will or no.

The fifth Additional Reason.
We should diligently redeem the Time, because we shall be certainly called to
an Account for our Time. Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, or,
because thou art young, healthy and strong (the wise Man here speaks
Ironically) and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk in
the Ways of thy Heart, and in the Sight of thine Eyes: take thy Course: do
what thou please: live as thou listest: lay no restraint upon thy self: deny
thy self nothing that Heart can wish: please thy Eye, gratify thy Fancy,
satisfy thy Appetite, and let thy sensual Heart give Law to thy whole Man: take
thy Swing, thy Fill of Lust and Pleasure; get Gain, heap up Riches, acquire
Honor, grow great in the World, enjoy thy self, take thine ease, eat, drink,
and be merry; But take along with thee this sad and severe, yet seasonable
Premonition, Know thou that for all these Things God will bring thee into
Judgment. Know thou, that is, consider an think well of it, till thy Heart be
warmed with the Thoughts of it: Let this so necessary weighty Doctrine not only
enter into, and then slip out of thy Head almost as soon as in it; but let this
Truth take up and dwell in thy Thoughts, and move and stir thy Heart and
Affections, and rule and govern thy Life and Actions: Thus know thou, that for
all these Things, for all the Vanities and Excesses, Follies and Extravagancies
of thy Youth, for all those Things which are now so grateful and delightful to
thy Senses; God, Bp. Reynolds in loc.
whose Word and Fear thou now despisest, from whose Eye thou can not hide thy
Sins, from whose Tribunal thou can not absent thy self, This God will bring
thee; bring thee perforce whether thou will or no; send his Angels to hale and
drag thee, when thou shall in vain call and cry to Mountains and Rocks to hide
and cover thee: Bring thee into Judgment; to a particular Judgment immediately
after Death; and to the general Judgment, the Judgment of the great Day (as St.
Jude speaks) called by St. Paul, the Terror of the Lord. Thou fond and
foolish, thou daring venturous Sinner, know, that there is an After-reckoning,
a Time when thou must come to an Account, when thou must think and hear of what
thou have done, and left undone, and must surely pay very dear for all. They
that live their Time in the Flesh, to the Lusts of Men (says 1 Pet. 4.2, 5.
St. Peter) they shall give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and
the Dead.

Bp. Taylor's Sermon. 1. Vol. p. 294.
We are as sure to account for every considerable Portion of our Time, as for
every Sum of Money we receive. Qus unum capillum capitis non dimittit non
numeratum, unum momentum temporis dimittes non computatum?
If the very Mat. 10.30.
Hairs of our Heads, and Mat. 10.30.
all our Hairs are numbered; then certainly our very Hours and all our Hours
too: And above all, our special Hours, our Sermon-Hours, and all providential
Opportunities, with all our Neglects and Non-improvements, are exactly computed
and reckoned up by God our Judge. God puts down in his Catalogue, this is the
first, this the second, this the third time, that I have warned, that I have
woed such an one. He strictly observes how long he has waited upon us, how
often he has treated with us, by his Mercies, by his Judgments, by his Word, by
his Spirit by his own Ministers, by our own Consciences, or our Christian
Friends. God counts and casts up every Minute of Patience spent upon us; He
reckons and registers every Sand of Long-suffering run out by us: God now takes
special, particular, punctual Notice of all, in order to a future, final, and
full Account.

We must one Day reckon for all those Hours which now we idle and tried away,
and make so little and light of. Time is now a Burden to many of us, and lies
upon our Hands, and we know not almost how to spend it, or which way to get rid
of it: And therefore sometimes we use evil Arts to pass it away: But oh what an
intolerable Burden will the Guilt of m^s-spent Time be, when it shall be
charged home upon a Soul at the great and dreadful Day! What have you done with
all your Time? will God then say: Is it true, that you have spent so much in
Dressing, so much in Revelling, so much in Dressing your self every Day? Were
these the Things I gave you Time for? what will the Sinner be able to answer to
these Things.

When our righteous Lord, who delivered the Talents of Time and manifold
Opportunities to us, shall come to reckon with us, he will require and call for
some answerable good Improvement of every such Talent: And the more of these
Talents were concredited and committed to us, the richer Return and greater
Improvement will be expected and demanded of us: Crescunt dona? crescunt
rations donorum?
Our Reckoning will rise according to the Largeness of our Opportunities and
Receipts.

And the longer it is before God calls us to a Reckoning, our Account will
certainly be the sadder, and our Doom and Punishment much the heavier, if we
have been unfaithful Stewards of our Time and Talents. What Account will the
old Sinner give of three or four-score Years spent in Vanity, Sin and Folly?
What will he be able to say for himself, that his gray Hairs were found in the
Way of Unrighteousness?

It will be a fearful Audit, when God shall call the inconsiderate, careless
Sinner to appear before his great Tribunal: Then he that has but hid his
Talent, shall hear that sad and dismal Voice, Serve nequam Mat. 25.19, 26, 30.
; thou wicked and slothful Servant, and shall find and feel a Retribution
accordingly: 'Twill surely then be said concerning him, Mat. 25. 19, 26, 30.
Cast the unprofitable Servant into outer Darkness, there shall be Wecping and
Gnashing of Teeth.

O let us not put that evil Day far from us; but let that Voice be always
ringing in our Ears, which was ever sounding in Quoties diem tillum considero,
toto corpore contremisco; sive entm comedo, sive bibo, sive aliqutd facio,
semper videtur mihi tuba illa terrtilis sonare in auribus meis; Surgite mortus,
ventte ad judicium. Hieron.
St. Jerome's; Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. Our Time must be strictly
reckoned for, and therefore we should thriftily husband, if possible, every
Minute of it.

The sixth and last Additional Reason.
Sixthly and lastly; We should be sure to redeem the Time, Because this Time is
all we can redeem; and upon this short Moment of Time depends long Eternity.

We shall never have any more Time or Space to redeem, either in this, or in
another World.

1. As we cannot live this same Life over again, so when once we die and leave
this World, we shall never return to this Earth again, to converse in Flesh
with Men any more; nor be suffered to live another Life here in this World, to
mend and correct what we did amiss heretofore. Job 14.14.
If a Man die, shall he live again? says Job: Some understand this
Interrogation as flat denial, an absolute Negation: He shall live a natural
Life on Earth no more. Job 7.9, 10.
As the Cloud is consumed, and vanishes away: So he that goes down to the
Grave, shall come up no more. He shall return no more to his House, neither
shall his Place know him any more. Job 26.22. Job 10. 21.
When a few Years are come, then I shall go the Way whence I shall not return.

2. And as we shall have no new Time in this, So, no Space will be given, or
granted us for Repentance, and Purgation of our Souls; nor will any Offer of
Mercy be made us in the other World: No new Covenant will ever there be tendered
to us; no Ambassadors of Peace be sent to beseech us, to pray us there n
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. God will then be irreconcilable, Sin
unpardonable and unremovable, Heaven unattainable, and lost Souls uncurable and
irrecoverable. If we do not do our best here, we shall have no other Game to
play, nor Part to and in any other Region or Mansion. We shall not be Quoad
animae separatae statum; nun it^rum sit Viator, neque in probationis stain
posita, ad foe scitatein ^ahue acquirendam; sed in statu ponitur hnals:
(resurrections mutationibus expectatis.) Baxter. Methodus Theologiae
Christianae, part. 4. cap. 4.
Probationers in the other World: We shall not be suffered to begin there upon
a new Score. In quo quemque invenerit suus novissimus dies, in hoc eum
compiehendet munds novissmas dies. Quoniam qualis in die isto qutsque moritur,
talis in die illo judicabitur. August. Epist. 80.

Qualis exieris de hac vita, talis redder is illi vitae. August. in Psalm. 36.


Our Souls at Death will enter into a sixed, unchangeable State, and continue
for ever such as they went out of this World. The very same Frame and Temper,
Qualities and Assectious, as we carry with us out of this Life, we shall keep
and retain in the next. Such good Dispositions as were begun here, will indeed
beintended and perfected in Heaven: And such ill Dispositions as took place and
got Root here, will be strongly settled and fully confirmed in the damned
hereafter: But the Sea Dr. Tillotson, 1. vol page 29^. Dr. More's Mystery of
Godliness, page 441. Dr. Dowler's Design of Christianity, page 122.
main State of any, either good or bad, will never be varied or altered in the
other World. As the Tree falls, so it lies: As Time leaves us, so Eternity will
find and continue us.

God will never try us more with Opportunities and Helps of Conversion and
Reformation, with the Means of Grace and Life, in another Place and State: And
therefore let us now improve Providence and Ordinances, Aids and Assistances,
as those that shall never hereafter meet with such Advantages; and do all the
Duties and Offices of Religion, as those that are going to that World where
there is no room for such Performances, no place for Confession, Prayer,
Repentance and Amendment of Life, in order to the Pardon of our Sins, and
Salvation of our Souls: no occasion of running, wrestling, striving, watching,
fighting any more, in order to obtaining of a Prize, and receiving of a Crown:
All that is now left undone, must be undone for ever.

This is the only Space allotted us, and Opportunity afforded us, wherein to
build and prepare our Ark, to get Oil sufficient into our Vessels, and to
provide a competent Measure or Portion of Manna: We can only gather the
spiritual Manna in the six Days of this Temporal Life; there is no finding, no
getting of it on the Sabbath of Eternity. As we must do all our worldly
Business before the weekly Sabbath comes; So we must quite finish our spiritual
Business in the working Days of the Life present; for there is no working on
the eternal Sabbath, when once this earthly Lise is ended: Then we must labor
and work preparatory Work no longer, but receive from our great Lord and Master
the Reward or Punishment of our former Works.

The Life to come, it is no Seed Time, but only a Time of Harvest; We must reap
in the future State the Fruit of our own present Doings, whether good or bad.
As we do use the Time of this Life, so shall we be used, treated, and dealt
with in the other Life. We shall certainly fare happily or miserably to all
Eternity, according to our Carriage and Behavior here. According to our Choice
and Election, Affection and Action in this World, will be our everlasting Lot
in the World to come. So that the right Improving or Misimproving, the well or
ill spending and husbanding of our Time, is of infinite Consequence and
Concernment to us.

Let us therefore in this Time of Life get all Things ready that are necessary
to a joyful Entrance into eternal Life. Let our Work and Business, in
Preparation for an endless Happiness, be dispatched and done before we go
hence, and be no more seen. Eccles. 9.10
Whatsoever our Hand finds to do, let us do it with our Might; for there is
no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave whither we are
going. There is no Hope or Expectation of working out our Salvation in an after
State and Condition. If this Work be not effected before this mortal Life is
ended, it can never be done in the Grave, or Hell, or in any Place of the
separated Soul's abode. What is to be done of this Nature, do now or never: Act
now with the greatest Care and Diligence, Life and Vigor.

As Zeuxis, a famous Painter, once said, Pingo Aeternitati; I limn for
Eternity: So, let us do every Thing now for Eternity; and be sure to be very
exact in our Actions, because they must stand upon Record for ever, and lay the
Foundation of our Happiness or Misery to all Eternity. In Time let us make
Provision for Eternity. We are careful to provide convenient, handsome Lodgings
here: but consider, where shall I dwell to all Eternity? Remember that a
serious Life of Faith and Repentance, Grace and Holiness here, is the only Way
to an happy, heavenly, eternal Life hereafter: That it is in vain, with Number.
23.10.
Balaam, to wish we might die the Death of the Righteous, if we refuse to live
the Life of the Richteous: As Euchrites foolishly desired to be Croesus vivens,
and Socrates mortuus: Croesus while he lived, and Socrates when he was dead.

CHAP. V. The Use and Application of the Doctrine. Ought we to redeem the Time?
Then (1.) Let not the Men of this World think strange, that serious and
conscientious Christians do not lose their Time as desperately as they do. Good
Men know the Worth of Time, and understand the great Consequences and weighty
Concernments of well or ill husbanding of it. (Use 2) Let us all examine our
selves, and see whether we have redeemed our Time, or no; bewail and bemoan our
loss of Time. (3. Use) A seasonable sharp Reproof of several Persons, who are
grossly guilty of mis-spending their Time. (1.) A Reproof of those that
misspend their Time in Idleness and Lasiness. Idleness a Sin against our
Creation, against our Redemption, against our own Souls, against our Neighbor;
and an Inlet to many other Sins. (2.) Such Persons are justly censurable, who
mis-spend their Time in excessive Sleep and Drousiness; which wastes not only
much of our Time, but the best of our Time too. Immoderate sleeping naught on
any Day, but worst of all upon the Lord's Day. (3.) Many mis-spend their Time
in impertinent Employments. (4.) Many lose much precious Time in vain Thoughts.
(5.) In wain Speeches. (6.) In vain Pleasures: in using unlawful, or abusing
lawful Recreations: either using them unseasonably, or else immoderately. (7.)
In excessive, immoderate, worldly Cares. (8.) Some Persons are to be reproved
for mis-spending their Time in Duties. (1.) By performing them unseasonably.
(2.) By doing them formally Time lost in Duties by unseasonable Performance,
two Ways: (1.) When one Duty thrusts and justles out another; and so the Duty
is mis-timed. (2.) When Duty is performed at such a Time when we are most unfit
for it.
I Have done with the Reasons of this Duty, and now proceed to the Use and
Application of this Doctrine. (1.) By way of Caution. (2.) Examination. (3.)
Reproof. And lastly, Exhortation.

The first Use, by way of Caution.
Ought we to redeem the Time? Then let not the Men of this World 1 Pet. 4.4.
think strange, that serious and conscientious Christians do not run with them
into the same Excess of Riot, and lose their Time as desperately as they do.
There Is good Reason why the sober, considerate Christian does not slightly and
carelessly sling away his Time with others; For (as Neque enim quicquam reperit
dignum, quod cum tempore suo permutaret, custos ejus parcissimus. Sen. de brev.
vit. cap. 7.
Seneca speaks of an excellent and eminent good Man) he does not meet with any
Thing worthy to be accepted in exchange for his Time; and therefore he keeps
and reserves it to be employed to useful and prositable Purposes, and is very
saving and sparing of it.

The Children and Servants of God do sufficiently know the Worth of Time, and
plainly understand the gteat Consequences and weighty Concernments of well or
ill husbanding of it. If they were wanting by an early, fore-handed Care to
secure and improve any part of the Time that is past; Their former prodigal
lavishing out their Time is the present Burden of their Spirits, and Sadness
of their Souls: And they are resolved, by a timely Diligence, in a spiritual
Manner to redeem the Time for the future. They often seriously think with
themselves, that to lose the Remainder of their Time, is to lose eternal
Happiness, and to incur eternal, intolerable Misery: Rather follow and imitate
them, than judge and censure them. If you will not forbear reproaching and reviling
them, know that the Time is coming, when you shall give an Account, 1 Pet. 4.3,
4, 5.
not only of your Excess of Riot, but even of your hard Speeches top. If any in
the Family, if any in the Neighborhood be more strict, exact and careful to
redeem the Time than your sevles, take heed you do not speak ill of them for
it: Do not wonder that they do not do as you do: But as you love your Souls,
and as you would give an Account of your Time with Joy and not with Grief;
labor, with the holiest and precisest in the Places where you live, to walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise; redeeming the Time, because the Days
are evil.

The second Use, by way of Examination.
Is it the Duty of a Christian to redeem the Time? Then let us examine our
selves a while, and see whether we have discharged our Duty herein. Let us all
look back on our former Lives, and bewail and bemoan our Loss of Time. Vanitas
est longam vitam optare, and de bonit vita parum curare. A Kempis, l. 1. c. 1.
n. 4.
How vainly have we wished oftentimes for a long Life? and yet always
neglected a good Life. May we not apply that of Exigua pars est vitae, quam nos
vivimus. (ex Ennio) Omne spatium, non vita, sed tempus est. Sen. de brevitate
vitae, cap. 2.

Non est quod quemquam, propter canos aut rugas, putes diu vixisse: non enim
ille diu vixit, sed diu fuit. -- non ille mulium navtagavit, sed multum
jactatus est. ld. de brev. vit. c. 8.

Doce nonesse positum bonum vitae in spatio ejus, sed in usu: posse fieri, imo
saepissime fieri, ut qut diu vixit, parum vixerit. Id. ep. 49.


Seneca to our selves? It is but a small Part of Life, that we live: The Space
we wear out, is not Life, but Time. We have been a long Time in the World, but
can we affirm and prove we have lived long? Can we be said to have sailed much
(to use the Similitude of that most practical Moralist) because we have been
tossed very much in the Sea of this World? Can we be said to have truly lived,
because some Cubits are added to our Stature, because some Hair is grown upon
our Chin, or because we have married Wives, and gotten Children, and it may be
raised good Estates in the World? is not that of the same excellent Philosopher
too true concerning too many of us? Adhuc non pueritia in nobis, sed quod est
gravius, puerilitas remanet: and hoc qui lem pejus est, quod authoritatem
habemus senum, vitia putrorum. Id. ep. 4.
Not Childhood, but, which is more grievous, Childishness remains and continues
still with us: And truly this is yet worse, says he, that we have the Authority
of old Men, and the Vices of very Boys.

If as Alexander counted his Life by Victories, not by Days, or Years; So we
should reckon our several Lives by our spiritual Victories and good Works, and
our answering the Ends, the true Ends and proper Purposes of Life (which is the
justest Account, and the rightest Reckoning of our Living) Should not the most
of us find that we have lived but a few Days, but a few Hours? yea, that many
have hardly lived at all, have scarcely as yet begun to live? that little or
nothing has been done that is truly worthy of a Man or Christian?

Have not we been wretched Scatter-Hours, and desperate Prodigals of our
precious Time? We have some of us lived a great while in the World: but the
question is, Whether yet we have learned to know God and Christ, and to know
our Selves? to be just and honest, to be modest and chaste, to be sober and
temperate; to deny a strong, unruly Appetite; to refuse a superfluous Morsel of
Meat, a forbidden intemperate Cup of Drink? Have we learned in the many Years
of our Lives to master and moderate one Passion? to subdue and mortify Raro
unum vitium perfect vincimus, and ad quotidianum profectnm non accendimur. A
Kempis, l. 1. c. 11. n. 2.
one Lust, to break off one evil Custom, to root out one vicious Habit, to
answer one Objection, to resist one Assault, to defeat one Art of the Devil?
Who of us have been careful all this while to run our Race, to trim our Lamps,
and to dress up our Souls for a blessed Etetnity?

Did not we spend our Youth in Vanity? Which of us was so forward in good, as
to shun and fly youthful Lusts? To how few of us can it be said (as 2 Timothy
3.15.
St. Paul said to Timothy) that from a Child thou have known the holy
Scriptures? Tell me, how have many of you desperately omitted, and lamentably
neglected the Reading of the Scriptures all your Life long, which alone are
able to store your Mind with divine Knowledge, and to make you wise unto
Salvation? What Numbers are there who know but little what is contained in the
Scripture, any otherwise than as they hear a Chapter now and then read in the
Church? and God knows too too many give but little heed to it, and so are but
little the better for it then neither. How few among us, who have lived long
under the Enjoyment of the Means of Grace, are yet so well acquainted with
divine Things, and so well versed and exercised in Religion, as to be able to
put up a pertinent Prayer, and to commend their own, or another's Case and
Condition to God, as Occasion does require? How many Lord's-Daies have we
profaned? How many Sermons have we wilfully missed? How many good Opportunities
have we negligently lost? How careless have we been of our own spiritual Good?
How regardless of the eternal Welfare of those who belong to us? How ignorant
are many of our selves of the Things of God, and of the Duties of Religion? How
far not only from doing, but from understanding our spiritual Business? who,
had we taken Pains, might now have been very knowing Christians. How ignorant,
through our gross Neglect of them, are our Children and Servants, and those
about us, in the very Rudiments of Religion? who might have had a good
Understanding therein, had we done our Duty in first informing our selves, and
then instructing them. Quemadmodum omnibus annis studere honestum est: it a non
omnibus institui. Turpis and ridiculares est, elementatius senex. Juoent
parandum, seni utendum est. Sen. ep. 36.
How ridiculous and uncomely is it to see an Old Man ignorant of his Letters,
or to seek in his Primer? But how much more absurd is it to find so many Old
Men, who Heb. 5.12.
for the Time ought to have been Teachers, yet to have need that one teach them
again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God? Which of us have
ever gone about doing and receiving good in the Places where we have a long
Time lived? Who are we the better for? Who is spiritually the better for us?
How very little Good have we done? nay, how much Hurt have we done in the
World? What Mischief have many Parents and Masters done in their Families by
gross Neglect of Family Duties, such as Reading, Praying, Catechizing; and by
their Looseness and Licentiousness before those that belong unto their Charge,
whose ungoverned Youth had more need to be curbed and restrained by their sober
Counsels and seasonable Reproofs, than desperately misled and hurried headlong
by their ill Examples into Sin and Wickedness. Oh what a sad Consideration is
it, for any of us all to think with our selves, how that for ought we know
there may be some this Day in Hell, who were occasionally brought thither by
our unholy Walking and ungodly Living! It may be some of our Friends and
Companions, some of our Neighbors and Relations, some of our very Children and
Servants are at present in Hell, bitterly exclaiming against us, and cursing
the Days in which they lived with us, and were acquainted with us.

Instead of growing better and better, are not some of us Nemo, inquit
Epicurus, aliter, quam quomodo natus est, exit e vita. Fulsum est, pejores mor
mur, quan nascimur. en. epist. 22.
worse now than we were many Years since? more profane, or worldly; more
sensual, more hardened from the Fear of the Lord, more without God and Christ
in the World, more useless, more unprofitable than ever? more unfit to live,
more unprepared to die now, than we found we were many Years ago? Have not some
of us so ill husbanded our Time, that the older we have grown, the less Hope we
have had of Heaven and Happiness? As Pius Quintus is reported by Cum essem
Religiosus, sperabam been de salute animae meae; Cardmalis sact us, extimui;
nunc Pontifex creatus pene despero. Corn. a Lap. in Numb. l. 1.11.
Cornelius a Lapide to have said, When I was first of a Religious Order, I
hoped well of the Salvation of my Soul: But when I was made Cardinal, I began
to fear it: But since I was created Pope, I almost despair of it. How many may
be found in like manner, who in their Youth have had it may be some reason to
hope well of themselves; but in their Middle Age more cause to fear, and in
their Old Age almost ground enough to despair.

I may here take up the Complaint of the devout Quid prodest din vivere, quando
tam parum emendae nur? Ah long a vita non semper emendat, sed saepe culpam
magis auget. Vtinam per unam diem been essemus conversati in hoc mundo!
multiannos computant conversionis, sed saepe p^rvus est fructus emendationis. A
Kempis, l. 1. c. 23. n. 2.
A Kempis; What does it avail us to live long, when we are so little bettered
by it? Ah long Life, says he, does not always mend our Manners; but does often
the more increase our Crimes. Would we had a alked but one Day well in this
World! Many reckon Years of their Conversion; but there is too often but little
sign of a new Conversation.

Had we not been grossly wanting to our selves, how much might we have known of
God, and of his Mind and Meaning in his Word and Works? How much might we have
done for God, and received from god by this Time? what a Stock of Grace might
we have gotten before now? What a Treasure of Experience might we have heaped
up? What a good Foundation might we have laid of a sound, solid and well-setled
Peace and Comfort, to stand us in stead in a Time of Need? What ground might we
have gotten against our Corruptions? What Growth in Grace? What Strength in the
inner Man? What Skill to discern and avoid the Wiles and Snares of the Devil?
What Love to, and Delight in the Law of God? What Readiness to every good Word
and Work? What Ereedom and Enlargedness might we have attaineed to in God's
Service? How truly might it have been our very Meat and Drink to do the Will of
God; our constant Course, daily Use, and chosen cheerful Exercise, to run the
Ways of God's Commandments? How forward might we have been in the Way to the
spiritual Canaan, who have, it may be, been greatly guilty of many
Retrogradations? How might we have been of another Spirit than we are of at
present? How publick-spirited might we have grown? How zealous for the Glory of
God, and the good of Souls? How active in the Cause of God and Religion? How
careless of the Pleasures that are but for a Season? How spiritual and
heavenly-minded? How ready to die? How ripe for Heaven?

O let this Consideration be laid to Heart by us, and serve deeply to humble
us, that we have had much Time, but have redeemed little or none: that we have
lived long to little, to bad Purpose: that we have trifled and squandred away
those Seasons of grace that can never be enjoyed again, and lost those
Opportunities that can never return back again. Let us put our selves to the
Trial, and bring our selves under Examination, whether we have discharged our
Dutyin Redeeming the Time, yea, or no.

The third Use, by way of Reproof.
Is every Christian bound to redeem the Time? Then here is a Word of
seasonable, serious, sharp Reproof to several Persons, who are grossly guilty of
mis-spending their Time, and diverse Ways do foolishly cut this precious
Commodity to waste: Particularly to these following.

The first Sort of Persons reproved.
To such as mi-spend their Time in Idleness; who lose their Time nihil agendo,
in doing just nothing, or nothing at all worthy the naming: Who live in Neglect
of all honest and Useful Employment, or do not sedulously exercise chemselves
in the Duties of their Place and There dwelled in Belsted, a small Village some
three Miles from Ipswich, a Tanner, who being very busy in tawing of a Hide,
Mr. Carter came by accidentally; and going sostly behind him, being familiarly
acquainted with the good Man, merrily gave him a little Clap on the Back; The
man started, and looking behind him suddenly, blushed, and said; Sir, I am
ashamed that you should find me thus: To whom Mr. Carter replied, Let Christ
when he comes fiad me so dotag. What (said the man) doing thus? Yes (said M.
Carter to him) saithfully performing the Duties of my Calling, The Life of Mr.
John arter inserted among Mr. Clark's Lives of ten Eminent Divines, page 13.
Calling. How sharply may God reprove, and say to many among us, Mat. 20.6.
Why stand ye here all the Day idle? What Cause have Ministers to complain of
their People with the Apostle? and say, 2 Thessalonians 3.11.
There are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all. To how
many may we use the Words of the Wise Man? Prove. 6.6.
Go to the Ant thou Sluggard.

1. Idleness is a Sin against a Man's very Creation. God did not so curiously
work, and accurately frame us, to sit still and fold our Hands, and give our
selves to our ease, and to Desidea somnium vigilantis.
dream when we are awake. Our Maker intended and fitted us for work. To what
End did God furnish us with so many useful instruments as the several members
of our Bodies, and endow us with those nimble and active Faculties of our
Souls, but that we might up and be doing, and vigorously prosecute and pursue
some worthy and good End in the diligent Use of sit and proper Means? Adam even
in Paradise was not allowed to be idle; but, before he feil, we appointed and
ordered to Genesis 2.15.
dress the Garden, and to keep the Ground: in which Employment he should have
Oberatus fuisser agrievltura, non laboriosd, sed deliciosa, ad voluptatem and
experientiam. Synops. Crit.
taken Delight, and gained Experience.

And afterward when he had sinned; not light and case, but hard and painful,
tedious and wearisome Labor was enjoined him, as a perpetual Penance for his
Transgression and Offense; and imposed as a Andr. River. Exercit. in Genesis p.
157.
Bridle to rest rain the Flesh, which by reason of Sin is now become wanton and
rebellious against the Spirit: Genesis 3.17, 19.
In sorrow shall thou eat all the Days of thy Life: In the Sweat of thy Face,
shall thou eat thy Bread. Job 5.7.
Man, says Eliphaz, is born unto Labor, troublesome Labor. Psalm. 104.23.
Man, says David, goes forth to his Work, and to his Labor until the Evening:
This is the Course which God has set him. But by their Idleness Men attempt to
overthrow the Purpose and Design of God, and to frustrate the End whereto Man
was created; and plainly thwart and contradict, cross and control God's Curse,
while only in the Sweat of others Brows they eat their Bread; and cast off the
Means which God has ordained for repressing and taming the petulant and unruly
Flesh.

Were these so wise as to accept of the Punishment threatened and inflicted, and
to become painful and laborious in their Places and Employments; the Curse of
God would, by a Miracle of the divine Mercy, be turned into a The Labor and
Sweat of our Brows is so far from being a Curse, that without it our very bread
would not be so great a Blessing. -- If it were not for Labor, men neither
could cat so much, nor relish so pleasantly, nor sleep so soundly, nor he so he
althful, nor so useful, so strong nor so patient so noble, or so untempted: And
as God has made us beholding to labor for the purchase of many good Things, so
the Thing it self ows to labor many Degrees of its Worth and Valne. -- Labor
is necessary, not only because we need it, for making Provision of out Life,
but even to ease the Labor of our Rest; there being no greater Tediousness of
Spirit in the World than want of Employment, and an unactive Life: And the lasy
man is not only unprofitable, but also accursed, and he groans under the Load
of his Time, which yet passes over the active man light, -- while the
Disemployed is a Disease, and like a long sleepless Night to himself, and a
load unto his Country. Bp. Taylor's Sermon. 2. V. Ser. 25. p. 322. Vt desidtam
Deus prohibet and execratur.; sic opedrentibus and morigeris in benedictiouem
convertit, quod homini init to tanquam pana impositum futt: Psalm. 128, 2. Labor
om manuum tugrum comedes: beatius er, and been tibi erit. Andr. River. loc.
cirat.
Blessing: For, ordinarily no Bread tastes so sweet, as that which is earned
with hard Labor and Sweat.

2. Again; Idleness is a Sin against our very Redemption. 1 Pet. 1.17, 18.
Pass the Time of your Sojourning here in Fear: for as much as ye know that ye
were not redeemed with corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain
Conversation, but with the precious Blood of Christ, etc. This should engage
you to walk reverently, strictly and watchfully all your Time. 1 Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a Price: God has pai'd dear, given his Son out of his
Bosom, for the Purchase of you: Therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your
Spirit, which are God's. And let us remember Christ Tit, 2.14.
gave himself, for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purisy
unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works: Hammond's Par.
He delivered himself up to a shameful Death, on purpose that he might ransom
us out of the Power of Satan, from that Course of vicious living in which Men
were before engaged, and cleanse us in an eminent Manner to be an holy pious
People, most diligent to advance to the nighest pitch of all Virtue. Christ
has redeemed us to this End, that we might redeem Time for his Service. Why
then do thou stand lasing and loitering, when thou art made and born for
Work, and redeemed for Work, and called to Work?

3. Farther; Idleness is a Sin against our very Bodies and Souls. It is in a
Manner the Murder of the Body: for, as the Air and Water, so Man's Body is apt
to corrupt and putrify without Motion. Ease destroys the Health of the Body;
breeds the Gout and other Diseases. And it hurts and taints the Soul too; and
produces that Indisposition in it, which one fitly calls Podagram animi, the
Gout of the Soul: and another terms it the Scurvy of the Mind. It Is highly
prejudicial both to our temporal and spiritual Estate. The Man that neglects
the Means of a temporal Provision, and of his eternal Salvation, through
Lasiness and Idleness, starves and kills both his Body and Soul, and every way
beggareth and impoverisheth himself, in respect to the inward spiritual true
Riches of Grace, as well as in reference to outward Enjoyments and worldly good
Things. Without Labor, Industry and diligent Husbandry, we can neither
increase the natural, nor improve the divine Riches of our Souls. There is
nothing to be gotten by Idleness but Misery here, and Hell hereaster. The Matt.
25.30.
idle and slothful Servant is condemned to be cast into outer Darkness.

4. Farther yet; Idleness is a Sin against our Neighbor. How do they offend
against their Neighbors who are wholly unfruitful in their Places, and live as
unprofitably in their Health, as if by Sickness they were utterly disabled for
any Service? Idle Persons are superfluous Creatures, of no Advantage or Benefit
to the Body Politic where they live; and (as Cicero says of the Swine) Animam
pro sale habent.
have their Souls only instead of Salt, to keep their Bodies sweet. They are an
unnecessary, intolerable Burden to any Kingdom or Commonwealth. It was a
pertinent and prudent Question put by Pharaoh to Joseph's Brethren, Genesis 47.3.
What is your Occupation? An Interrogation (says the learned E^ercir in Genesis p
650. vide Pareum in loc.
Andrew Rivet) worthy of a Prince, who ought not rashly to receive any
Strangers into his Dominion, Without first examining whether they be sit for
any good Thing, and know how by some honest Labor to make Provision for
themselves and theirs; that they may neither be burdensome to others, nor
living idly take Occasion of doing ill. Hence wise Politicians (as he well
urges there) have expressly prohibited Idleness by severe Laws. The Judges of
Areopagus took particular notice of the several Citizens at Athens, and
strictly enquired in what way of Business every one lived, and whether any
addicted himself to base and sluggish Idleness. The idle Person was made liable
to an Ea nominabatur act to (...), etc. Rivet. loc. citat. page 650. vid. and
p. 157.
Action qt Law: and he that was once found guilty of Idleness, was, according
to Draco's old Law, presently branded with Infamy: But Solon afterward somewhat
mitigated that Law, and only pronounced him an infamous Person who was a third
Time condemned of Idleness. The Massilienses of old denied such Persons
Entrance into their City, as were not skilled and versed in some Art whereby to
get a livelihood: Nor did they admit or allow of Players, Dancers, Jesters,
Juglers; because these Arts do nourish the Idleness o^such Spectators, as
commonly They call and draw to themselves who Waste their Time in Toies. And it
was ordained by Law among the Persians (as the forecited Author notes out of
Herodotus) that at the End of every Year every Sabject should go to the
Magistrate to give an Account of their Employment.

An idle Body is plainly guilty of Injustice and (...), Phocylid.
Theft, for he takes and uses the Creatures he has no right to, and lives upon
others Labor and Industry. The Apostle commands, 2 Thessalonians 3.10, 12.
that If any would not work, neither should he eat; that is, at the public
Charge, or at the Cost of any other. And he commands and exhorts such as are
idle, that they work, and eat their own Bread: As if it were not their own
Bread, if not gotten with the Work of their own Hands, and the Sweat of their
own Faces.

So far as we are idle we are Idleness is the Burial of a living Man, an idle
Person being so useless to any Purp ses of God and Man, that he is like one
that is dead, unconcerned in the Changes and Necessities of the World: and he
only lives to spend this Time, and eat the Fruits of the Earth, like a Vermin
or a Wolf; when their Time comes they die and perish, and in the mean Time do
no good; they neither plow nor carry Burdens: all that they do, either is
unprositable, or mischievous. Bp. Taylor's Rule and Exercise of hol. Live c. 1..
1. Otium sine literis mors est, and hominis vivi sepultura. Sen. ep. 82.
useless and grievous to others, who yet were born for the Good and Service of
others.

If we would spend our Spare-time in visiting the Sick, in reading to them, and
conferring with them; in reproving open, bold Sinners; in comforting afflicted,
distrened Consciences; in succouring and assisting tempted Persons; in
catechizing, and instructing, and praying with and for our several Families;
how many would rise up and call us blessed, and praise God for us, and pray for
us?

5. Once more; Idleness is an Nihil agendo male agere disces, Catonis oraculum,
quo nihil verius. Colum. deterust.

Fugiendum est otium: nam qui nihil agunt male agere discunt: cum animus sit
irrequietus, and ubi ad honesta non ducitur in mala sertur. Ciell. Eth.
Aristorel. p. 27.


Inlet to many other Sins. The Son of Ecclus. 33.27.
Syrach informs us that Idleness teaches much Evil. It is well observed by
Pareus, Comment, in Genesis 2.15.
Pareus, that if our first Parents had been employed in dressing the Garden
according to God's Command, instead of talking idly with the Serpent, they had
not then been seduced unhappily into Sin. How much more, says he, is Idleness
now to be shunned and avoided by Man! since, out of Paradise, he is every way
exposed to the Snares of the Devil, and is by nothing deceived more easily and
dangerously than by sluggish Idleness.

1. Sam. 11.2.
When David was Quaeritur, Aegysthus quare sit factus adulter?
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.

idly walking upon the Roof of his House, Lust quickly kindleed at first Sight
of a pleasing beautiful Object. An idle Person lies open and exposed to all the
Temptations of Satan: Nay he is not only tempted by him, but a Tempter of him.
What we bnd spoken in Ezekiel. 38.11.
another Case, the same may Satan say of idle Persons, I will go to them that
are at rest. When the Bird sits still, then the Fowler takes his aim, and
shoots; but the flying Bird is seldom hurt. Indulge not thy self in Idleness,
lest Satan take Advantage against thee. It Is good Advice that Facito aliquid
operis, ut te semper Diabolus inveniat occupatum. Hieron. ad Rusticum, ep. 4.
St. Jerome gives thee; Still be doing some warrantable Work, that the Devil may
always find thee well employed. If thou can find nothing to do thy self, sure
enough the Devil will quickly find thee somewhat to do: If thou be once
idle, he will presently employ thee, and set thee a-work. The idle Person has no
Defense and Safeguard against Satan: But he that is lawfully busied is not at
leisure to attend and listen to Satan's Temptations. If Men be (...), such as
work not at all, they quickly become 2 Thessalonians 3.11.
Wanderers about from House to House, Tatlers also and Busy-Bodies, speaking
Things which they ought not; meddling out of their Calling, and enquiring into
Things that concern them not: Which Courses and Carriages are the Bp. Taylor's
Rule and Exerc. of Hol. Live. chap. 1.. 1. Rule 1^.
Canker and Pust of Idleness, as Idleness is the Rust of Time. Well then, take
this short Lesson from A Kempis, l. 1. c. 19. n. 4.
a devout Person; Be never altogether i would, but still either reading, or
writing, or praying, or meditating, or laboring and endeavoring to do
somewhat that may be useful and profitable, conducive and ordinable to common
Good and Benefit. Take Example from the heathen Nullue mthi per otium dies
exit, etc. Sen. ep. Quid in otio facio? ulcus meum curo. ld. ep. 68.
Moralist; I pass not away one Day in Idleness, says he. When so much Work is
necessary to be done in so little a Time, or you are for ever certainly undone,
will you stand as Men that cannot find their Hands?

You that are rich have of all People the least Cause to be idle: See Mr.
Baxter's Preface to Mr. Whately's Redemption of Time.
God gives you more than others, and is there any Reason then that you should
do less for God than others, and make your whole Lives only a long Vacation?
Would you think your selves well fitted, if those very Servants should presume
to do you the least Work, to whom you give the largest Wages?

Hearken diligently to that sober Counsel and seasonable Reproof which the holy
Church Porch, p. 3,4.
Mr. Hethere gives you; Fly Idleness, which yet thou can not fly
By dressing, mistressing, and Complement.
If those take up thy Day, the Sun will cry
Against thee: for his Light was only lent.
O England full of Sin, but most of Sloth!
Spit out thy Phlegm, and fill thy Breast with Glory:
I sind that in our old Saxon Language, a Gentleman was called an Idle-man;
perhaps because those who are born to fair Estates are free from those Toils
and hard Labors which others are forced to undergo. I with the Name were not
too proper to over-many in these Days, wherein it is commonly seen that those
of the better rank who are born to a fair Inheritance so carry themselves as if
they thought themselves privileged to do nothing, and made for mere Disport
and Pleasere. Bp. Hall's Remaining Works, p. 227. See Bp. Taylor's Rule and
Exerc. of Hol. Live. c. 1 1. the 11th, and 12th Rules for employing our Time.

Such Gallants as live in no settled Course of Life, -- nor do any Thing for the
good of humane Society; let them know, there is not the poorest contemptible
Creature, that cries Oysters and Kitchin-stuff in the Streets, but deserves
his Bread better than they; and his Course of Life is of better Esteem with God
and every sobert wise man, than theirs. Bp. Sanderson's Sermon. 1 V. p 196.


Thy Gentry bleats, as if thy native Cloth
Transfused a Sheepishness into thy Story:
Not that they all are so; but that the most
Are gone to Grass, and in the Pasture lost.


Don't they deserve to be reproved who squander away their Time in a soft and
delicate Lasiness? And they too, who though they seem to be full of Employment,
yet do nothing at all of the Work of a Man of Christian; but spend their Time
in an Quorundam non otiosa vita est dicenda, sed desidiosa occupatio. Sen. de
brev. vit. c. 11. Non habent iste otium, sed iners negotium. Ib. c. 12. Oterose
nihil agunt. lb. c. 13.
idle Employment, or in a serious Idleness, a painful Playing, a laborious
Loitering, and a Quorundam non otiosa vita est dicenda, sed desidiosa
occupatio. Sen. de brev. vit. c. 11. Non habent iste otium, sed iners negotium.
Ib. c. 12. Oterose nihil agunt. lb. c. 13.
busy doing nothing.

But surely of all Persons they deserve a severe and cutting Reproof who idle
away their Time on the Lord's Day: Who usually spend that holy Day as if the
rest of the Ox and Ass were the only worthy and acceptable Observation of it:
When as the Lord's Day (as a The whole Duty of Man, partit. 2. 17.
great and excellent Author says well) was never ordained to give us a Pretense
for Idleness, but only to change our Employment from worldly to heavenly, to
take us off from out worldly Business, and to give us Time to attend the
Servioe of God and the Need of our Souls. A Reit from all worldly Buhness is
commanded, that we may be at Leisure for the public Worship and Service of
God, and for the Duties or private Instructing and Praying with our Families,
and of secret Closet-Prayer, Reading, Meditating, and the like. A mere
Cessation from Labor is not all that is required of us on the Lord's Day; but
the Time which Men save from the Works of their Callings they are to lay out on
those spiritual Duties.

The second Sort of Persons reproved.
Such Persons are justly censurable who spend their Time in excessive Sleep and
Drousiness; which fills the Body full of Diseases and ill Humors, and
strangely dulls the Faculties of the Soul, and crosses the End of Man's
Creation, which was to serve God in an active Obedience; and disposes a Person
to Lust and (...), Wantonness is joined with (...), which we translate
chambering, but signifies properly lying long in Bed. Romans 13.13. Bp. Andrew's
Ex os. of the 7th Com. chap. 4.
Wantonness; and wickedly wastes the most precious Talent of Time; and not only
consumes much of our Time, but devoures the best of our Time too, See Whately's
Sermon. of Redempt. of Time.
eats up the Flower of the Day, the very first Fruits of our Hoursw, even the
Morning-season, that very Time which of all other is the fittest for holy
Duties and religious Exercises. Remember and connder what is suggested by the
divine Herbert,

Church Porch.
God gave thy Soul brave Wings; put not those Feathers
Into a Bed, to sleep out all ill Weathers.
This immoderate Sleeping is naught on any Day, but worst of an upon the
Lord's Day. It must needs be much out of any man's Way to sleep in Harvest, and
drouse away the Market Day: and such is the Lord's Day in respect of spiritual
and Soul-Advantages. How many Persons are there, that have enough to do, and by
ill Custom make it a difficult Thing to get themselves ready by Church-time,
and take no Time on the Lord's-Day-Morning to pray in private, or to pray with
their Families; and so never prepare themselves to meet their God in his
public Ordinances, and beg no Blessing upon the Word they go to hear; and
therefore God suffers them from Time to Time to go back from the Word without
any Blessing.

Never use to take any more Sleep than is necessary for the strengthening and
refreshing of your frail Natures, the relieving and supporting of your tired
and wearied Bodies, and the recruiting and repairing of those Spirits that were
wasted and weakened by Labor, that so you may be the better enabled for
continued Action and Employment, and sitted for daily Use and Service; which is
the true and proper End for which Sleep was appointed and ordained.

Pay no more than needs must to that craving greedy Publican of Time: never
yield to its unreasonable Exactions: The more you yield to it, the more it will
grow upon you: the more Hours you give to Sleep, the more you may. ^^ you keep
too much upon the Working-Day, you will be prone to sleep upon the Lord's Day,
too, and that in the Time of the very public Ordinance; to sleep when you
should be at it, or to sleep even when you are at it, and should be wakeful and
attentive under it. How sluggishly and shame urry do many neep and slumber away
Church-Time, lie drowning and dreaming in Bed in the Morning, folding their
Hands to sleep, or stretching themselves upon their Beds, when they should be
lifting up holy Hands, and humbly bowing their Knees, and striving together
with their Fellow Christians in the joint Prayers of the public Assembly. And
if they make not some trivial Excuse to stay at home in the Afternoon, they lit
nodding and halt a sleep at Church, when they should have their Ears and Hearts
open to what is publicly read or said. Consider and think thus much with your
selves, that if here you spend the greatest Part of your Life in Sleep, and
make the most of your Time nothing but Night; a dark, black and eternal Night,
without one Moment or Minute of Ease or Rest is reserved for you in another
World.

Athird Sort of Persons reproved.
Many mis-spend their Time in impertinent Employments: A Person may throw away
his Time as much Magna vttae pars elabitur male agentibus, max. ma nihil
agentibus, tot a aliud agentis us. Sen. ep. 1.
aliud agendo, as nihil agendo; in doing that which nothing concerns him, as by
doing nothing at all. A Man may lose his time by basely employing it in mean
Affairs and sordid Business, Domittan was busy in catching Flies. Nero went up
and down Greece, and challenged the Fiddlers at their Trade. Aeropus a
Macedonian King made Lanterns. Harcatius the King of Parthia was a
Mole-catcher. Biantes the Tydian filed Needles: and Theophylact the Patriarch
of CP. spent his Tim: in his Stable of Horses, when he should have been in his
Study, or the Pulpit, or saying his holy Offices. BP. Taylor's Ruse and Exerc.
of hol. Live. c. 1.. 1. rule 9th.
extremely below the Dignity of his Person, or in acting contrary to his own
particular Admodum tuenda sunt sua cuique, non vitiosa, sed tamen propria, etc.
Nihil Aecet invita. -- Aequalitatem vitae conservare non possis, si aliorum
naturam imiteris, omittas tuant. -- Id maxim quenique decet, quod est cujusque
suum maxi^ e. -- Histrto hoc videbit in seena, quod non villebit sapiens in
vita? Cic. l. 1. de Ossic.
Nature and Genius; or by indiscretely engaging in another Calling. For
Tradesmen to exercise the sacred Offices of the Ministry, or for Ministers to
involve and immerse themselves in worldly Businesses without Necessity, is mere
Mis-spence and Loss of Time, because it is going out of their particular
Calling, and doing that which nothing belongs to them. A Merchant lays out his
Time in the Way of his Prosession, and for those Goods which are his
particular Merchandise. We must not be Busy-bodies in other Men's Matters: St.
Peter expressly forbids that. We must abide, and be diligent, and aly out our
selves in our own proper and particular Callings, or else we squander away our
Time let us be as busy as we will, and the more busy we are the more we lavish
out our time.

A fourth Sort of Persons reproved.
How many lose much precious Time in vain and sinful Thoughts? These are they
that swallow up most of our solitary Hours. When we are sitting, or walking,
or riding alone in the Daytime, or waking in the Night or early in the
Morning; then See Dr. Tho. Goodwin of the Van. of Thoughts.
do our Minds talk idly with themselves; then do Men wilder away their Time in
unsettled independent Thoughts; mis-spend their Time in vain unprofitable
Musing, proud self reflecting, self-admiring and self-applauding, strange and
unreasonable Projecting; in mere imaginary Suppositions of what they would both
be and do; in fond self-slattering Presumptions, and foolish Expectations of
Things; in fretting and fuming Thoughts at cross Accidents; in curious
searching into other Men's Actions and secret Ends, and studying Things that do
not at all concern themselves, and would do them no good at all to know; in
evil Surmisings and causeless jealous Working; in angry revengeful Thoughts and
Psalm. 36.4.
devising Mischief upon their Beds; in lustful wanton, profane and dissolute
Thoughts; in speculative Wickedness, in representing and acting those Sins in
their Thoughts which they want Power or Opportunity to put into outward Act, in
reaclling, revolving and reviewing in their Thoughts past sinful Actions with a
tickling Pleasure and Delight.

If a Man should write down his thoughts but of one Day, and read them at
Night, he would reckon himself: And many a Person would even blusly, and be
quite a shamed to speak out what he loved to imagine and must upon.

These idle and evil Thoughts are they that justle and shut out serious and
savoury Thoughts and Meditations, and hinder the divine Law and Testimony from
being our Psalm. 119 97, 99.
Meditation all the Day. Vain Thoughts too commonly Per. 4.14.
lodge with us: They come into our Minds just as Travelers go into an Inn, who
boldly take up their Chamber there, and command and call for what they would
have: Whereas Thoughts should be suffered to come into our Minds only as Men
are permitted to go into a Garri2on, who are first strictly examined, who they
are, whence they come, and what is their Business. We should, with David, Psalm
119.113.
hate vain Thoughts, call in our vagabond wandering Thoughts and Imaginations,
and fix them upon solid and serious Things. Think nothing (says Contra saiutem
proprtam cognes n^bd; minus dixi contra: Prater dixisse debueram. Bern. de
consid. unge.
St. Bernard) that may make against thy Salvation: 'Twas too little to say
against it; I should have said, says he, think of nothing beside it.

A fifth Sort of Persons reproved.
How very many merely lose much of their Time in Words; in pouring out great
Floods of Talk, an Ocean of Words without one Drop of Understanding? Many lose
their Words, and lose their Time in vain Speeches, unprofitable Prattling, fro
thy Discoursing, Prove. 15.2, 14.
foolish Babbling, toyish and trifling Talking and twatling, that tends to no
real good in the World. This empty Chat does cheat and cozen us of much of our
Time, and is a careless throwing away every Day, and almost every Hour of the
Day, something of that which ought to be expended for Eternity. How many idly
spend their Time in questioning and talking about the Change of the Moon, the
Alteration or Quality of the Weather: or in curious and busy Enquiries about
News, only out of an Itch to know somewhat new, or merely to find matter of
Discourse; and not out of a sincere and earnest Desire to understand how it
goes with the Church of God, that they may order their Prayers and Praises
suitably to God's Providence and Appearances in the World toward his People?
How many waste the Winter Evenings in telling of Tales, and old Wives Fables,
and little insignificant Stories to their Children and Families? when they
should employ those precious Hours in well acquainting them with the Corruption
of their Nature, and the absolute Necessity of real Regeneration, of being born
again, born from above: in often informing them of their Sin and Misery, and
instructing them in the only Way of Salvation by the meritorious bloody Death
and Passion, and the Illuminating sanctifying Spirit, and the healing
recovering Grace of Christ.

How many lose their Time by venturing weakly to talk of those Things which
they are not in habitu to discourse of, which they have not well weighed and
studied, and are unable to manage a pertinent proper Discourse about? And how
do some lose very much of what they speak and take up Time in talking of, for
want of Observation and Accommodation of their Discourses to Lukin's Practice
of Godliness, p. 58.
the several Tempers, Faculties, Abilities, Capacities, Conditions of those
with whom they have to do? by which Men's Society might easily be rendered more
acceptable to others, and become more profitable both to others and themselves
By observing men's Tempers we may the more easily insinuate what we please into
them: by observing their Paculties and Abilities we may both please them and
profit our selves; because men love to discourse of things belonging to their
own Faculties, or wherein their Abilities chiefly ly; and about those things we
may expect the most satisfying Answers from them, if they be such things as may
be any Advantage to us to know. If we suit our Discourses to men's Conditions,
it will add much Grace and Comeliness to our Speech; but if we do not in all
things apply our selves to men's Capacities, we shall but weary them, and what
we labor to pour into them will run beside. Idem ibidem page 59.
. How many lose their Time and Breath in Multum illis temporis verborum
cavillatio ertpuit, and capliosae disputationes, quae acumen irritum exercent.
Tantum nobis vavat? jam vivere, jam moriscimus? Seneca ep. 45.

Malint disputare quam vivtre. Sen.


Disputing and wrangling about endless and fruitless Controversies, and
unprofitable contending about mere Speculations, or such Practices as have no
influence into the bettering or depraving the Souls of Men? How many lavish out
their time and Discourse in meddling pragmatically with other Men's Matters that
nothing concern them? How many grossly abuse their Time in speaking too freely
of Persons, when they should only speak of Things?

And here particularly, such Persons deserve to be found fault with, who spend
their Time in slandering, detracting, whispering, tale-bearing, speaking In
primis provideat, nesirmo vitium aliquod indicetinesse morst us. Quod maxtme
tum solet evenive, cum stu^tose de absentibus detrahendt causa, aut per
ridiculum, aut severe, aut maledice, contumel oseque dicitur. Dicero l. 1 de
Offic
Evil of others when they have no lawful Call to do it: in talking
uncharitably of others De alterius vtta, de alterius morte disputatis. Seneca
de vita beata c. 19.
Lives and Deaths, in private caracterizing, judging, censuring, backbiting of
others. These are as perfect in the Enumeration of others Faults, Dr.
Allestry's Sermons p. 35.
as if their Memories were the Books that shall be opened at the Day of
Judgment. This is in it self a base Temper wherever it is; with the Fly to
fasten now here but upon a Sore; like a Cupping-Glass to draw nothing but
corrupt Blood. This is an ungodly Humor for any to suffer their Tongues to be
busily meddling with those Sins and Miscarriages, Failings or Faults of other
Persons, which never grieved and troubled, touched or came near their own
Hearts; and which they never secretly bewailed, and sadly bemoaned before God:
To be continually judging and censuring those that were never privately and
personally reproved, lovingly and compassionately admonished, nor once
earnestly and heartily prayed for by them. This censorious Spirit is a
Christless Spirit. Jesus Christ is an Advocate with the Father: he excuses, he
pleads for Sinners: he makes the best of every Thing: he covers a Multitude of
Sins. Now when we do nothing but rip open, and aggravate others Faults behind
their backs, we are far from an Imitation of Christ: This is so far from being
a Christ-like, that it is too evidently a Diabolical Spirit: The Devil, he is
called an Accuser; and we plainly play Satan's Part, and act him to the Life,
and spend our Time just as the Devil does, if we make it our Business to be
ever prying and finding of Faults, to be always bringing Charges against, and
framing Accusations of others. And the employing our Time thus is far from
redeeming it. Might not we spend our Time far better in meekly admonishing of
others, and in heartily praying for others, than in rashly judging and
censuring of others? Let me tell you, while we are always pleading others
guilty, we do but make our selves more guilty: and thus to lose our own
Innocence, is this to redeem our Time? To render our selves incapable of
Heaven, is this to work out our own Salvation? Psalm 15.1, 3.
Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? he
that back-biteth not with his Tongue, nor does Evil [Wrong, Hurt or Injury] to
his Neighbor, [in this way of backbiting] nor takes up [that is, with his
Mouth; that utters not] a Reproach against his Neighbor: that does not
curiously pry into the Businesses, Affairs, Infirmities, secrets of others, and
then busily divulge and tell them abroad to other Persons; thereby defaming,
disgracing, disparaging, and rendering Men contemptible one to another; and
stirring up Strife, Hatred, Enmity, Division and Quarrels among Men. Where
shall we now find the Christian who deserves the Commendation that once Hieron.
ad Marcellam de laudibus Asellae.
St. Jerome gave of Asella, of whom he says, Sermo silens, and silentium
loquens; she was silent when she spoke, for she spoke only of religious and
necessary things, not meddling with other Persons, or Fame. How do many
mis-spend their Time and talk in vain and ridiculous Self-gloriation, and in
uncomely affected, if not false and ungrounded Commendation of themselves? in
complementing and flattering great Sinners to their very Faces? And some very
vile and wicked Wretches abuse their Time and Tongues in speaking a Multitude
of Lies, in frequent taking God's Name in vain, in common and customary
Swearing, in Dr. Allestry's Sermons, p. 154.
mingling horrid and bitter Imprecations with their sportive Talk, and making
the Wounds and Blood of God, and other such sad Words their foolish or peevish
Modes of speaking?

Many Men's Mouths run, like an Issue, nothing but Putrefaction: They vent and
pour out (...). Ephesians. 4.29.
putrid, unsavory, rotten, (...) Coloss. 3.8.
filthy Discourse, apt only to minister to a Vice, instead of ministering Grace
unto the Hearers: Corrupt it self, and tending to corrupt good Manners, and to
infect the Fancies and defile the Minds of those that hear it. They pass the
Time in uttering The Apostle charge that Fornication should not be once named
among them, as becomes Saints; ( Ephesians. 5.3.) not meaning that the Vice should
not have its Name and filthy Character, but that nothing of it be named, in
which it can be tempting or offensive; nothing tending to it, or teaching of
it, should be named. Bishop Taylor's Sermons, 1 Vol. p. 288.
wanton, loose, lascivious Words; in singing amorous and obscene Songs; whereas
he that is James 5.13 Private Christian^ are to teach and admonish one another
in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Coloss. 3 16 Etia^n cun htlaritati
inser vimus, addification is and ut^i^at is mutuae memores esse debemus. Dav.
in loc.
merry should sing Psalms.

Many mis-spend their Hours in Ephesians. 5.4.
inconvenient, Ipsum genus jocandi non profusum, nec immodestum, sed ingenuum
and facetum esse debet. Vt enim puer is non omnem licentiam ludendi damus, sed
eam, quae ab honest is actionibus non sit aliena: sic in ipso joco aliquod
probi ingenit lumen eluceat. Cicero l. 1. de Office.
scurrilous, immodest; yea, many mis-spend them in impious and profane Jesting:
in openly Scossing at good Men, and making merry with their Imperfections, and
their own Slanders; and in jeering the holy Ways, and playing with the holy
Word of God. He that makes a Jest of the Words of Scripture, or of holy things,
(as a Bishop Taylor's Sermons, 1 V. p. 305.
learned Pen richly expresses it) plays with Thunder, and kisses the Mouth of
a Canon, just as it belches Fire and Death; he stakes Heaven at spurn-point,
and trips Cross and pile whether ever he shall see the Face of God or no; he
laughs at Damnation, while he had rather lose Goal, than lose his Jest; nay
(which is the Horror of all) he makes a Jest of God himself; and the Spirit of
the Father and the Son to become ridiculous. And is not this a monstrous cursed
Improvement of precious Time, to use and employ it in profanely deriding, and
desperately abusing the Word and Spirit of God that gave it? It Is a good Saying
of the Detestanda illorum insania, qui hilares esse non p^ssunt sine Christi
contumelia and religionis ludibrio. Dav. in Coloss 3.16. These, if any, do
hilarem insaniam insanire, ac per risum furere. Seneca de vita beata c. 12.
Reverend Bp. Davenant, Their Mandness is to be detested and abominated, who
know not how to be cheerful and merry, without doing Disgrace and Dishonor to
Christ, anal putting a Mock and Scorn on Religion. Mr. Herbert Church Porch, p.
16.
plainly tells you their Doom;

None shall in Hell such bitter Pangs endure
As those who mock at God's way of Salvation.
Whom Oil and Balsams kill, what Salve can cure?
They drink with Greediness a full Damnation.
How few of us all have ordinarily been considerate and watchful, wise and
material, useful and prudent in our Discourses; and have frequently used our
Tongues as Instruments of Piety, and spiritual Charity; of the Glorisication of
our Creator and Redeemer, and the It must be (...), good Speech, such as is
(...), for the Edification of Necessity, Ephesians. 4.29 The P^r^se is an Hebraism,
where the genitive Case of a Substantive is pur for the Adjective; and means,
that our Speech be apted to necessary Edification, or such Edification as is
needful to every man's particular Case. Bishop Taylor's Sermons, 1 V. p. 324.
necessary Edification, and Soul-advantage of our Brethren? How seldom has our
Speech been designed and directed to the real Profit, and best benefit of our
Neighbor? and our Communication been so ordered and managed by us, that it
might be Id^m ibid.
apt to instruct the Ignorant, to strengthen the Weak, to recall the Wanderer,
to restrain the Vicious, to comfort the Disconsolate, and to afford a
seasonable Word to every Man's Necessity?

Where is the Man, whose Tongue is as Prove. 10.20.
choice Silver? whose Words are of real Worth and great Price: in whose Lips
Ibidem 10.13.
Wisdom is found, whose Lips Prove. 14.7.
of Knowledge Ibidem 15.7.
disperse Knowledge, and Ib. 10.21.
feed many; the Words of whose Mouth are Eccles. 10.12.
gracious, Prove. 10.32.
whose Lips know what is acceptable, whose Tongue is Ib. 12.18.
Health, whose Mouth is a Ib. 10.11.
Well of Lite, whose wholesome Tongue is a Ib. 15.4.
Tree of Life; whose instructive Speeches, and edifying Discourses, and warm
affectionate Converses have happily helped others to Life? Where is the Man who
speaks Words Ib. 15.23.
in due Season, whose Words are, ib. 15.26.
pleasant Words, grateful to God and good Men? Where is the Woman that Ib.
31.26.
opens her Mouth with Wisdom, and in whose Tongue is the Law of Kindness; or,
gracious Instruction; or, Vide Catwright in loc.
serious Discourse to Children and Servants of the Word of God and holy Things?
Oh how many Men and Women are there who have not a savoury gracious Speech in
the whole Day, or Week, or Month, or Year, no not in their whole Lives! We may
complain of the constant Discourses of most Persons in the Words of Nihil de
Scriptur is, nibil de salute agitur animarum, sed nugae and risus and verba
proferuntur in ventum. Inter prandendum quantum fauces dapibus, tantum aures
pascuntur rumoribus. Bernardi Apologia ad Guilhelm^m Abbatem, cap. 8.
St. Bernard; Not q Word of Scripture drops from them: nothing relating to the
eternal Salvation of Men's Souls can be heard among them: nothing but toying and
laughing, and light and frothy talking takes up their Time.

Men's Communications are generally so unprositable, and so corrupt, that the
Consideration hereof made a contemplative Person cry out, Dixit quidam: Quoties
inter homines fui, minor home redis. Hoc saepius experimur, quando diu
confabulamur. Facilius est omnino tacere, quam verbo non excedere. A Kempis de
imitatione Christi, l. 1. c. 20. n. 2.
As often as I have gone among Men, I have returned the less Man: And drew
these Words from another devout Person, Vellem me pluries tacutsse, and inter
homines non fuisse. Sed quare tam libenter loquimur, and invicem fabulamur: cum
tamenraro, sine laesione conscientrae, ad silentium redimus? Ibidem, c. 10. n.
1.
I wish I had oftener held my Tongue, would I had not so frequently gone into
Company! But why do we so willingly talk and converse together, says he, when,
if we talk any thing long, we rarely come off without loss, and seldom give
over communing together without some Hurt first done to our own Consciences.

We have all of us often offended in Word; not remembering and considering
that even Mat. 12.36.
of every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give Account in the Day of
Judgment: And that (as a learned Bishop Taylor's Sermons, 1 V. p. 292.
Bishop clears the Text) the Judgment then shall fall upon our Words, if not
upon our Persons; the Fire shall consume such Hay and Stubble; and though the
Person himself escape, he shall sustain and suffer that Loss: We shall have no
Honor, no fair Return for idle, useless, unprofitable Discourses, but they
shall with Loss and Prejudice be rejected and cast away.

And therefore take Nemo parvi aestimet tempus quod in verbis consumitur
otiosis. Bernardus sermon de triplici custodia.
St. Bernard's Caution, Let no Man count it a light Matter to spend valuable
Portions of his precious Time in idle Words: And labor to imitate the ancient
Christians, of whom Tertullian gives this Character, It a fabulantur ut qui
sciant Dominum audire. Tertulliani Apologia, c. 39.
They discourse as those that well know that God hears every Word they say.

Henceforth let us have a care of our Words: let us give our Tongues to
Wisdom, ever speak to some Useful profitable Purposes, and on all just and fit
Occasions, open our Mouths with boldness in the Cause of God and Goodness; and
spend as much of our Time, and Mr. John Carter (Pastor of Brainford in Suffolk)
did much addict himself to savory Speeches and heavenly Discourses; in which
God did so own and bless him, that by the holy Discourse that dropped from his
mouth a godly woman was first won to Christ, while she was waiting on him in
his Chamber, and warming his Bed. In his Life written by his Son Mr. John
Carter inferted in Mr. Clark's Collection of the Lives of ten Eminent Divines,
p. 13
as many of our Words as prudently may be, in matters of Religion, in Prayers
and Praises and pious Discourses, in aptly accommodating and seasonably
producing the wise and weighty Sayings of Scripture and holy Men, and in taking
Occasion from ordinary Occurrences to raise and promote spiritual Discourses.

A sixth Sort of Persons reproved.
Such do justly fall under severe Censure, who Profusely spend their Time in
vain Pleasures.

1. In Vbi magna corpor is cura, ibi magna meant is incuria, Dictum Catonis.
Curiosity about dressing and trimming the Body. 2. In making dainty Provision
for the Belly. 3. In Play and Sport and vain Recreations.
1. How do the brave Gallants and gaudy People of the Times, sordidly use their
Souls as so many tailors, setting them to mind every new Fashion; and very
unmanly spend their Time in over-nice and too curious decking and dressing of
the Body, and poudering of the Hair? (the When the Hair is sweet through pride
or lust,

The Powder does forget the Dust. Herbert's Poems, Charms and Knots.


Powder quite forgetting the Dust) losing their Time inter pectinem speculumque
occupati (to use De brevitate vitae, c. 12. Quomodo trascuntur, si tonsor paulo
negligence or fuit? tanquam virum tonderet. Quomodo excandeseunt, --
siquidextra ordinem jacuit, nisi omnia in anulos suos recider unt? quis est
istorum qui non malit Rempub icam s^am turbart, q an comam? qui non solicitior
sit de capitis sut d core, quam de salute? qui non comptor esse malit, quam
gnus ornatus. -- Adhibendaest munditia, non odiosa, neque exquisita nimis, ^an
u n quae sugiat agrestem and inhumanam neg^tgentiam, Cicero l 1. de Offic.
Seneca's Exprellion) by being wholly taken up between the Comb and the Glass.
These are so exceedingly concerned for their Heads of Hair, or for the Periwigs
they wear, that (to speak in the Words of the forementioned Philosopher) they
had rather that a whole Commonwealth should be troubled and distrubed, than
that their well-set Hair should be disordered and discomposed: and more affect
to be neat and fine, spruce and trim, than to be truly good and honest.

And how do too many of the other Sex, instead of early looking up to Heaven in
Prayer, and looking diligently into the perfect Law of Liberty, list up their
Doctor Alle^^ry's Sermons, page 226.
Morning-Eyes to nothing but a Looking-glass, and there contemplate their
Faces, and garish wanton Dresses, for several Hours together, and even worship
their own Image, and fall in Love with their own Shadow; and please themselves
to think, how the Eyes of others will be drawn to gaze, and be pleased with
looking upon them? These gentile Sinners ordinarily spend the most of their
Time before Dinner in the Arts and Tanquam famae diserimen agatur
Aut animae: Tantiest quaerendi cura decer is.
Juvenalis satyra 6.
Labors of Attire, in putting on their Bulls and Towers; many in patching, and
too many in painting their Faces, and giving themselves another Color and
Complexion than ever their Maker thought good to give them; in making
themselves a new Face, instead of making themselves a new Heart: Whenas these
idly busy Persons might spend their Hours a great deal better in the trimming
of their Souls, and 1 Pet. 3.4.
adorning their inner, hidden Man, and making themselves all glorious within;
in putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, in putting on Christian Charity, and
clothing themselves with Gospel-Humility, and with the Ornament of a meek and
quiet Spirit, and in beautifying themselves with all the Graces of the holy
Spirit.

2. How much Time do many spend in contriving how to furnish their Tables, to
Cibus per artem voluptatemque corruptus. Non ad tollendam, sed ad irritandam
fame in quaeritur, and inventae sunt mill conditurae quibus aviditas
excitaretur. -- M^ltos morbos multa fercula secerunt. Vide quantum rerum per
unam gulam transiturarun ermisceat luxurta, terrarum marisque vastatrix!
necesse est it aque inter se tam diversa dissideant, and hausta male drger
antur, altis alio nitentibus. -- Dii boui, quantum hominum unus venture exercet!
-- Coguntur in unum sapores. In coena sit, quod fires debet saturo in ventre.
-- Non esset confusior vomentium cibus. Seneca ep. 95.
mix their Meats, to fill and garnish out variety of Dishes, to prepare and
order their several Sauces; in the pleasing of their -- Qutbus in solo vivendi
causa palato est.
Juvenalis satyra 11.
Palates, the pampering of their Flesh, and the strengthening of their Lusts; in
immoderate Eating, riotous Aspice quantum occupent conviva, quae jam ipsa
officia sunt Seneca de brevitate vi^ae, c. 6.
Feasting, frequen Junketing; in excessive Drinking, tarrying long; at the
Wine, or sitting long Tippling at the Alehouse? How many suffer Sensuality and
Luxury to eat up their Time, and make no greater Improvement of their Years
than to become accomplished Epicures?

How do such voluptuaries make their Souls Cooks to look out Provisions for
their Bodies, employing their Minds in studying and devising Meats for their
Bellies? How do these live Quiderat cur in numero viventium me positum esse
gauderem? an ut cibos and potiones percolarem? ut hoc corpus causarium ac
staidum, peritu^u nque nisi subinde impleatur, farcirem, and viverem aegri
minister? Idem praef. not. quaest.

Fateer insit am esse nobis cor poris nostri caritatem: fateor nos hisjus
gerere tutelam: non engo indulgendum illi, sed serviendum nego. -- Sie gerere
nos debemus, non tanquam propter corpus vivere debeamus, sed tanquam non
possimus sieve corpore. -- Honestum ei vile eit, cui cor us nimis carum est.
Idem ep. 14.


as if the Business of their Lives were to please and serve, to gratify and
satisfy the Flesh? as if they were made for no higher than the mere animal
Life? as if they received their rational Souls only to procure for, and to
animate the Organs of their Sensuality? as if they were born for nothing else
but to cloth and feed, to purvey and provide, to cark and care for this vile
Body, and were capable of enjoying no nobler Pleasures or higher Satisfaction
than the Entertainment of their Senses? Though the Truth of it is, that Quid
mihi voluptatem nominas? Hominis bonum quaero, non ventris, qui pecudibus ac
belluis laxior est. Sen. de vita beata c. 9.

Hunc tu numeras inter homines, cujus summum bonum saporibus, ac coloribus, ac
sonis constat? Idem ep. 92.

St quae men's est paulo ad voluptmates propensior, modo ne sit ex pecudum
genere, (sunt enim quidam homines non re, sed nomine) sed si quis est paulo
erectior, quamvis voluptate capiatur, occultat and dissimulat appetitum
voluptatis, propter verecundiam. Ex quo intelligitur, corporis voluptatem non
satis esse dignam hominis prastantia eanque contemni and rejict oportere. -- Si
considerare volumus, quae sit naturae excellentia and dignitas, intelligemus,
quan sit turpe difftuere luxuria, and delicaie, ac molliter vivere, quamque
honestum, parce, continenter, severe, sobrie. Cicero l. 1. de Offic.


sensual Pleasure (as Seneca well discourses) is but the Good of a Beast. Can
thou reckon him, I will not say among Men, but Mankind, says he, whose Life too
plainly shows that he places his Happiness and Chief Good in Tastes, and
Colors, and Sounds? Let him depart out of this goodly Rank and Order of
Creatures that are next unto the Gods themselves; let him even go among the
brute Beasts, who is a Creature so much pleased and delighted in the Enjoyment
of his Food.

How few do eat and drink, not merely with an Intention to preserve the Body in
Health and Strength; but with such Prudence, Care and Caution, as not to
over-cherish and pamper, to embolden and enrage their Bodies; to soften and
weaken, to clog and enslave their Minds to Sense; and to inflame and provoke
themselves to Lust and Wantonness? How few do use the Creatures in such sober
and moderate Measures, as may render their Bodies tame and governable,
morigerous and obsequious to their Souls, and cheerful and ready in the
Exercise of any religious Duty? which is certainly the true Notion of See Mr.
Lucas's practical Christianity, part. 1. cap. 4. sec. 3.
Gospel-Temperance.

3. they also are here to be reproved, who not only consume much of their Time
in Dressing and Tiring, Eating and Drinking, but lavish out a considerable
Portion of it in pleasurable Sports and Recreations. These are they, who
Bellerophon-like hotly spur on a flying Horse; study to drive away that Time,
which hastes, and posteth, and flies away too fast of it self: And are of a
like Mind with that Aeliani variae Hist.
Persian King, who proposed a great Reward to any that could invent and find
out any new Pas-time.

These Men waste and wear out their Time, either

(1.) By using Virtus voluptates aestimat, antequam admittat; nec quai
probavit, magni pendit: nec usu earum, sed temperantid laeta est. -- Tu
voluptatem complecteris: ego compesco. Tu voluptate frueris: ego utor. Tu illam
Summum Bonum putas: ego nec bonum. Tu omnia voluptatis causa facis: ego nibil.
Seneca de vita beata, c. 10.
unlawful Recreations, which have somewhat of Sin in them, something or other
dishonorable to God, or injurious to their Neighbor.

Or else, (2.) By Vide page praeced. sub litera [n]
abusing lawful Recreations; either using them unseasonably, or else
immoderately.

(1.) Unseasonably. We should never take any Diversion at such a Time, when any
necessary Duty toward god, that we are capable of, will be neglected by so
doing. Again; We should never use any Recreation, but only to fit and whet our
selves for Business and Employment. We should not begin to play, till need of
Body or Mind require it: And therefore labor must ordinarily go before
Recreation, and Recreation must follow after it, as a needful Refreshment of
weak Nature after Weariness, to fit and enable any Person for fresh and future
Employment, and a cheerful returning to farther Labor and Pains-taking in his
particular lawful Calling. Ludo and joco, uti illis quidem licet, sed sicut
somno and quietibus caeteris, tum cum gravibus, seri sque rebus satasfecertmus.
Cicero l. 1. de Offic.
Cicero says well, We may use Recreation and Play, as we do Sleep and other
Kinds of Rest, when first we have given due Attendance to weighty and serious
Things.

Farther, (2.) As Time is lost by unseasonable, so, by immoderate Recreation.
The Earth is a Place for Labor and Industry; Neque enim it a generati a natura
sumus, ut ad ludum and jocum facti esse vide amur: sed ad severuatem potius,
and ad quaedam studia gravora atque majora. Idem ibid.
We were not put here as the Leviathan into the Sea, to take our Fill of
Pleasure and Sport.

But how many spend their Time immeasurably in Job 21.13.
Mirth and Music, Singing and Dancing, Frolicking and Sporting, Gaming and
Playing at Cards and Dice, or in frequent going and long sitting to see
Stage-Plaies? Dr. Patrick's Divine Arithm p. 7.
A learned Doctor expresses himself excellently well to this Purpose: Men
reckon, says he, that there are none but Play-Daies ion their Life, and they
can find never a Working-Day among them. All their Days in their Calendar are
Festivals: And they are so far from minding the Business of Life, viz. dressing
up their Souls for God in a blessed Eternity by Religion and Holiness, that a
Saint should have no Respect from many that pretend to honor him, were it not
that he gets them Leave to play more freely. The whole Course of their Lives is
but a sporting Business, and when they lay aside their worldly Affairs, it is
but to obtain Leisure to be more frolic.

To plead that such and such Recreations as you use immoderately, are in
themselves simply lawful, is an Excuse that will never be admitted and accepted
by God, when in the mean Time you neglect your necessary weighty work and
Employment. Surely you would never suffer your own If your Servants leave most
of their Work undone, and spend the Day in Cards and Stage-plaies, and
Feasting, and in merry Chat, and then say, Madam, are not Cards and Plays and
Jesting lawful, will you take it for a satisfactory Answer? And is it not worse
that you deal with God, Mr. Baxter's Pref. to Mr. Whately's sermon of
Redemption of Time.

If a poor man had but sixpence in his purse, to buy Bread for himself and his
Family, and would give a Groat of it to s?e a Poppet-play, and then dispute
that. Poppet-plaies are lawful, how would you judge of his understanding and his
practice? O how much worse is it in you, when you have but a little uncertain
Time, to do so much, so great, so necessary Work in, to leave it almost all
undone, and throw away that time on Cards, and Plays, and sensuality, and
idleness! Idem ibid.


Servants so to put off their gross Carelessness of important Business that
requires greatest Haste and Speed.

It Is a notable Saying of Quis est dignus nomines hominis, qui unum diem totum
velit esse in isto genere voluptatis? Cicero l. 2 de Finibus. And Seneca has a
sentence very like it; Quis mortalium, cui ullum superest hominis vestigium,
per diem noctemque titillari ve it, and deserto animo, corpori operam dare? De
vita beata, cap. 5.

Nulla major voluptas quam voluptat is fastidium.


Cicero, He is not worthy the Name of a Man, that would choose to spend one
whole Day in sensual corporeal Pleasure: surely then he less deserves the Name
of a Christian, who by his good Will would live all his Days, and spend all
his Years in taking his Pleasure and Recreation; preferring the Pleasures of
Sense, the Entertainments of the Fancy, and the Recreations of the Body,
before the rational manly Pleasures, the delightful Exercises, and the solid
Refreshment and Satisfaction of the Mind: Whereas in the Judgment and
Experience of the wisest and best Men, there is no greater Pleasure in the
World than a generous holy Contempt, and rational religious Disdain of
excessive sensual Pleasures.

A Life of Recreation is an absurd and ridiculous Thing; to make that our
constant Business, which should only fit us for Business. For a Man to make
mere Recreations his main Actions and grand Employments, is full as foolish and
unreasonable, as if he should make all his Diet of Physic or Sauces, and his
whole Garment of nothing but Fringes.

As we must not begin with Recreation in the first Place, so, when we take it,
we must not hold and continue it Sunt exercitationes and faciles and breves,
quae corpus and sine morae laxent, and tempori parcant: cujus raecipua ratio
habenda 1st. -- Quicquid facies, cito redi a corpore ad animum, illum dicbus ac
noctibus exerce. -- Dandum and aliquod intervallum antrno: it a tamen ut non
resolvatur, sed remittartur. Sen. op 15.
too long.

It may seem a severe Rule, but well deserves our very serious Consideration,
that the In his sermon. of Red. of Time, p. 20, 21.
Worthy Mr. Whately has given us to direct us in this Particular: It Is not
lawful for man, says he, in an ordinary Course, to spend more Time in any
Recreation, than he has or shall that very Day spend and employ in some Godly,
and chiefly private religious Exercise. The Reason he gives is this; We must
Mat. 6.33.
first seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness [first] in respect of
Time, and first in respect of Affection; primarily, and principally.] Now he
that does so, can never use to bellow more Time in any Recreation whatsoever,
than in those Things which do directly make for the obtaining of eternal Life,
and that Righteousness which will certainly bring one thereunto. -- And surely
this is a most equal Thing, that the most needful Duty should have the most
Time bestowed upon it. How very faulty then are many, that spend whole Days
and Nights at Cards and Dice, and in idle Pas-times, who never allotted one
Hour of any one Day, to be spent in secret, in that main Work and principal
Employment, for which all their Lifetime was allowed them?

Take need of giving too much of your Time to any Recreations: You may quickly
lose, not only your Time, but your Hearts too, in immoderate Recreations; and
may thereby so hugely unfit and indispose your selves for Duty, that you may
find it an hard Task and difficult Work, to bring back your Hearts to their
usual Temper and wonted Frame again: As Schoolboys, after a Breaking up or
Time of any extraordinary Play, have much ado to settle, and fall hard and
close to their Books again.

Some good men have been so tender, that they have blamed themselves for the
Use of those Recreations, which are apt to consume and devour, to eat and
swallow up too much Time: And the Remembrance of Time misspent in immoderate
Recreations, has been no small Trouble nor light Burden to the considering
Minds and sensible Spirits of some very holy and eminent Christians. I find in
Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, that John Huss, a famous Reformer and worthy
Martyr, in his last Letter wrote in his Imprisonment to one Mr. Martin, has
these Words; You know how before my Priesthood (which grieveth me now) I have
delighted to play oftentimes at Chess, and have neglected my Time, and
unhappily provoked both my self and others to Anger many Times by that Play:
wherefore besides other my innumerable Faults, for this also I desire you to
invocate the Mercy of the Lord, that he will pardon me.

If the Recreation you use be lawful, seasonable, moderate, then you are
certainly well employed, and never trouble and torment your selves with the
Thoughts that you might be better employed; for (as one says truly) if we were
always bound to do that which is best, we could never tell whether we pleased
God or no; but should be engaged and involved in needless Jealousies, perpetual
Fears and endless Doubts.

And here moreover, without making it a distinct Head of Discourse, I think
among vain Recreations I may well reckon idle and needless, fruitless and
unprofitable Visits. Man indeed is a sociable Creature, made and fitted for
Converse; And the Comfort and Pleasure of humane Life does much consist in the
desirable Enjoyment of the Familiarity and Society of prudent, discreet,
Christian Friends; And great Advantages are to be given and gotten by wise and
good Discourses; And due Respects, and civil Kindnesses are to be paid to
Friends and Neighbors; and all Occasions and Oportunities to be taken and
chosen of doing any considerable good Offices to them, either in respect of
their Souls, or Bodies or Estates. But (as Nemo se sibi vendicat, etc. de brev.
vit. c. 2
Seneca complains) we vainly spend and wear one our selves one upon another:
This Man waits upon one, that Man upon another; but no Man gives diligent and
due Attendance upon himself.

and I fear there are too many to be met with, whose Nemiuem ex omnibus
difficilius domi, quamse, convenit. Ex hoc malo depender illud teterrimum
vitium, anscultatio, and publicorum secretorumque inquisitio, and multarum
verum scientia, qua nec tuto narrantur, nec tuto audiuutur. Sen. de tranquil.
animi, c. 12.
Feet abide not in their own House (as the Prove. 7.11.
wise Man speaks) that wander about from House to House, being Tatlers, and
Busybodies, speaking Things which they ought not (which is the Character the
1 Timothy 5.13.
Apostle gives of them) who go from Place to Place to spread any flying Report
or Rumor, to carry any uncertain and unconcerning News, and (if they may be so
happy) to tell the first Story of some little Accidents and petty Circumstances
of Things: who run here and there out of a gossiping tatling Temper, or a
pragmatical prying Humor, and a greedy Desire to make Observations of the
Affairs and Concerns of other Folks Families; Or to show their own Dresses and
Tires, and to see the new Fashions of others; Or to drink, or game and play
away several Hours of the Day. There are too many that are weary of their Time,
and weary of themselves, and hate the Work and Employment they are called to in
their Families, and the Exercises of Devotion that should be used in their
private Closets; and gad abroad for a Diversion from Duty, for the Prevention
of melancholic Self-reflection, and for avoiding or drowning the disquicting
Clamours, and troublesome Noises of their own guilty and stirring Consciences:
These weary and tire out their Neighbors, that they may not be a Burden at
home to themselves: never remembering, or not considering that sober Advice and
solid Counsel of the Prove. 25.17.
wise Man, Docet vitandam (...), non amici consuetudinem.
Withdraw thy Foot from thy Neighbor's House: lest he be Cato Munatio
scripsit, se vereri, ne nimia amicitia causam altquando daret odio. Huc
proverbium Persicum, Homines invisere indecorum non est; modo toties non fiat
ut dicant, Sat est. Et Arabes dicunt, Visita raro, and angebis amcrem. Et
Martialis, Nulli te facias nimis sodalem. Quanto meltor ergo est Dei quam
hominum amicitia? Deo tanto sumus gratiores, quanto saepius ad eum accedimus.
Syn. Crit. in loc.
weary of thee, and so hate thee.

But alas how few among us are to be found, who make their Visits to these
better Purposes, to help and assist, counsel and comfort sick Persons; to
exercise Charity to the Souls and Bodies of poor Neighbors, to minister
suitable and seasonable Relief to such as are in real and great Want and Need;
to further the Edification, and promote the Salvation of all about them; to
labor and endeavor to bring some off from their Errors or Sins; to mind one
another of their latter End; in a serious and savoury Manner to talk of the
Kingdom, and the Way to the Kingdom, and to help one another Heavenward; to
add to one another's spiritual Knowledge, to increase and stir up one another's
Graces, to comfort and warm and strengthen one another's Hearts; to affect one
another with the Remembrance of God's Ordinances, and with the Consideration of
his Providence, to their Persons, Families, Relations, more particularly; r to
the Land of our Nativity, and the People of God and Church of Christ, more
generally; To bring one another to a due Sense of the Divine Mercies, and to a
dread of the Divine Judgments; to pray with one another, and to quicken one
another to a Reformation of their Hearts and Lives, and a well ordering of
themselves and Families, and the Redemption of their Time in these evil Days,
and to a speedy and sound Preparation of themselves to suffer for the Gospel,
and for the Purity of the Reformed Religion, if God shall please to call them
to it?

That Prodigy of early youthful Piety, and spiritual divine Proficiency; In his
Life written by his Brother Jam. Janew. p. 72, 73.
Mr. John Janeway, Fellow of King's College in Cambridg, once in Company sat
down silent, took out his Pen and Ink, and wrote down in Shorthand the
Discourses that passed for some Time together, among those that pretended to
more than common Understanding in the Things of God; and after a while he took
his Paper and read it to them, and asked them, Whether that Talk was such as
they would be willing God should record? Is not this a brave rational divine
Discourse? (says he) Where Is our Love to God, and Souls, all this while?
Where Is our Sense of the Preciousness of Time, and of the Greatness of our
Account? Did Saints in former Times use their Tongues to no better Purpose?
Would Enoch, David, or Paul have talked thus? Is this the sweetest Communion of
Saints upon Earth? How shall we do to spend Eternity in the Praises of God, if
we cannot find some good Matter for an Hour's Discourse? This he did to
convince, and shame them out of their barren Discourse, and empty Converse, and
foolish fruitless Communication, and to quicken and provoke them to a more
profitable Improvement of their Society.

A seventh Sort of Persons reproved.
They also are justly blameworthy, who cast away their Time in excessive,
immoderate, worldly Cares for superfluous Things? Who (as the Magno temporit
impendio quaeruntur supervacua; and multi transcunt vitam, dum vitae
instrumenta conquirunt. Seneca ep. 45.
Philosopher describes them) do wholly pass their Life in seeking and procuring
the Instruments of Life; and are Seneca de brevitate vitae, cap. 20.

Facile est occupationes evadere, si occupationum pretia contempseris. --
Mercedem miseriarum amant, ipsas exccrantur. Idem ep. 22.

Rebus non me trado, sed commodo: nec consector perdendi temporis causas. Idem
ep. 62.


sooner weary of living, than of laboring; whose desire lasts longer than
their Ability, and Power to labor for this World; who reckon Old Age grievous
only on this Account, that it lays them aside, and hinders their lively and
vigorous Pursuit of the Things of the World; Who complain sometimes of the
Trouble of Businesses, of the Weight of great and full Employments, but cannot
find in their Hearts to leave them, because though they hate the Miseries of
their Labors, yet they love the Gain and Profit, the Price and Reward of them.

Who bestow a great Deal of Pains about that they never intend to use; who toil
and sweat, tire and weary out themselves to heap up much thick Clay, to
treasure up Silver and Gold, to Isa. 5.8.
join House to House, and lay Field to Field, all which they must shortly
exchange for a Turf in the Churchyard: Who anxiously labor to raise and
gather, to clear and secure an Estate, which they must, every Man of them,
Eccles. 2.18, 19.
leave unto the Man that shall be after them, and none knows whether he shall
be a Wise Man or a Fool; and take no pains in the mean Time to try and confirm
their Title to Heaven: Who are so solicitous about plowing their Grounds, that
they cannot Jer. 4.3. Hos. 10.12.
break up the Fallow-Ground of their own Hearts: who are so busy in making up
their Accounts with Men, that they mind not the making even their Accounts with
God; So over-careful to improve their temporal, that they neglect the
Improvement of their spiritual Estates: Who are, Luke 10.40, 41, 42.
like Martha, so cumbred and troubled about many Things, that they are ready to
forget the one only Thing which is absolutely necessary, the happy Choice of
that good Part or Portion, which would be a Thing very acceptable to God, and
the Advantage of which would continue to themselves to all Eternity: Who are so
taken up with worldly Dealings, that they have little or none of their
Conversation in Heaven: Who say in their Hearts, what Duke de Alva once replied
to the King, who asked him whether he had seen the Eclipse of the Sun; that he
had so much Business to do upon Earth, that he had no Time to look up to
Heaven: Who are more studious and industrious to get a good earthly Bargain,
than to obtain a Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Life and Glory, and to make
sure of an heavenly and everlasting Kingdom: Who have their Hearts as full of
the World as their Hands, and are so covetous and greedy of it, that they will
lose their Time, and let go God and a god Conscience for it: Who suffer their
worldly Employments too often and easily to steal away their set and stated
Times for Reading, Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving, Meditation,
Self-Examination; to rob their Duties of their allotted Hours, or to borrow of
their Duties their appointed Seasons, without ever making any Payment of them.

The learned and judicious Bp. Sanderson, in a Sermon Bp. Sanderson on 1 Cor.
7.14. p. 214, 215.
preached to the People, gives them this wholesome good Instruction, not to
ingulf themselves so wholly into the Businesses of their particular Callings,
as to abridg themselves of convenient Opportunities for the Exercise of those
religious Duties, which they are bound to perform by virtue of their general
Calling. This (says he) is a point of Duty; Men being commanded in their
Callings to abide with God: A point of Wisdom also; it being a means to procure
a Blessing upon their Labors, from his Hands; who never fails to serve them,
that never fail to serve him. And a Point of Justice too, as due by way of
Restitution: of which he gives this both ingenious and solid Proof; We make
bold with God's Day, says he, and dispense with some of that Time which he has
sanctified unto his Service, for our own Necessities. It is equal, we should
allow him at least as much of ours, as we borrow of his; though it be for our
Necessities, or lawful Comforts. But if we rob him of some of his Time (as too
often we do) employing it in our own Businesses, without the Warrant of a just
Necessity: we are to know that it is Theft, yea Theft in the highest Degree,
Sacriledg; and that therefore we are bound, at least as far as petty Thieves
were in the Law, to a Exodus 22.1. 2 Samuel 12.6.
fourfold Restitution.

But how very many so overload and overburthen themselves and their Families
with ordinary worldly Businesses, that either they quite neglect their Duties,
or put God off with slight and short and hasty Duties; and neither afford
themselves sufficient Time, nor allow their Servants convenient Opportunities
of remembering their God, and minding their Souls Necessities.

These have no leisure to consider, that the Soul is more worth than the Body,
and Heaven more valuable than the Earth: and therefore that the Things that
necessarily conduce to the saving of the Soul, and securing of Heaven, must not
wholly be neglected for any bodily Concernments, or worldly Interests
whatsoever. We must first seek the Kingdom of God, and chiefly lay up a
Treasure in Heaven: and therefore we must not suffer worldly Cares to take up
an undue Proportion of our Time.

We must not engage in so many Businesses, nor so eagerly pursue and follow
any, as that our ordinary worldly Affairs should hinder our selves, or our
Families from the Performance of ordinary religious Exercises. Toward the end
of his Life before his Remains.
It is reported of the famous Mr. George Herbert, sometime Orator of the
University of Cambridg, that when he came to have a Family, he was eminent and
exemplary for his spiritual Love and Care of his Servants: by his own Practice
teaching Masters this Duty, to allow their Servants daily Time, wherein to pray
privately, and to enjoin them to do it: holding this for true generally, That
public Prayer alone to such Persons, is no Prayer at all. Our Love and Care
even of our Servants spiritual Welfare, ought to be greater than our Love and
Care of the Things of this World.

As many so deeply plunge themselves into unnecessary Businesses, that they
have no Leisure for religious Performances: So some so mainly mind earthly
Things, that they make Religion subservient to their worldly Employment, take
up a specious Profession of Religion, and fair Form of Godliness, chiefly to
invite and draw Customers to their Shops; and that they may deal falsely and
Totius injustitia nulla capitalior est quam eorum, qui tum, cum maxim fallent,
id tamen agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur. Cicero l. 1. de Offic.
unjustly, without Question or Suspicion; and gain unreasonably and
unconscionably, by a dissembled Sanctity and sictitious Piety.

The last Sort of Persons reproved.
And lastly; Some Persons are to be reproved for mis-spending their Time in
their Duties. You may think this strange, that Time should be thrown away in
Duties. But I would have you to understand it may; for you may lose your Time
in Duties, these two ways;

1. By performing them unseasonably. 2. By doing them formally.
1. You lose Time in Duty, if you perform it unseasonably. And that may be done
these two Ways.

(1.) When one Duty thrusts and justles out another, and so the Duty is
mistimed: As if a Man do spend that Time in his Closet, and in religious
Devotion, which God does require him to employ in his Shop, and in following
his Vocation. So again; if you read and pray privately at home, when you should
attend on the public Ordinance: Or, read in your Bible, or Prayer Book, at
Church, when you should hearken to the Sermon there: Or, if you do nothing but
read, when you should meditate sometimes, and confer sometimes: Or, if you
give way to such good Thoughts, as in Prayer, or hearing the Word at any Time,
come into your Mind, but are impertinent and irrelative to the Matter in hand:
Such Thoughts, though they be materially good, yet are formally evil; though
good in themselves, yet are sinful to thee, at such unfit and inconvenient
Times; and will at least taint and fly-blow thy necessary present Duty. To do
any Duty whatever, when you should rather do another, is to misspend Time about
such a Duty, which is to you unseasonable.

(2.) When Duty is performed at such a Time, when we are most unfit for it,
then it is unseasonable, and Time is lost in it: As when we go to Prayer, when
we are fitter to go to sleep; and kneel upon the Cushion, when we are fitter to
lay our Head upon the Pillow; and hold up our Hands then, when we are scarce
able to hold open our Eyes; and speak to God then, when we hardly hear our
selves speak.

When Luther during his retirement in the Castle at Coburga, for his Safety,
enjoyed more leisure than ordinary; one Vitus Theodorus, who then lived with
him, informed Melancthon concerning him, that he spent in Prayer every Day
Nullus abit dits, quin ut minimum tres horas, edsque fludiis aptissimas in
orationem ponat. Melch. Adam. in vit. Luther, p. 138, 142.
three Hours at least, and those that were fittest and properest for his
Studies.

And it is commendable in some Masters of Families, that as often as they can
do it with any convenience, they perform Evening-Prayer in their Families
before Bedtime, yea before Supper-Time, when they are not clogged with Meat,
nor heavy with Sleep; but are every way freest and fittest for Duty. Will you
set your selves and your Household to do God's Work, when you are wholly unfit
to do your own? You lose Time in Duty, by performing it unseasonably. That Is
the first.

2. You lose Time in Duty, if you perform Duty no otherwise than formally,
customarily, slightly and superficially. If you handle holy Things without any
Feeling; If you do the Duty, for the Matter of it, but fail in the Principle
and Manner of the Duty, and never look to the The end of all Exercises of Piety
and Devotion, is more and mine to dispose our Hearts to the Love, and our Wills
to the Obedience of our blessed Creator and Redeemer. And busying our selves
in any of them without this Design, may well be counted in the Number of the
fruitless and unaccountable Actions of our Lives. Thus to do is prodigally to
waste and misspend our Time; as the Jews were upbraided by one of their
Adversaries, with doing, upon the account of their Sabbath, saying, They they
lost one Day in seven. Dr. Fowler's Design of Christianity, page 186.
End of the Duty; have no real Design, and hearty Intention to please and
glorify God thereby, and to gain and increase in true Holiness of Heart and
Life.

If you act, not out of a Principle of Love, and inward Life and Liking, but
only out of some external respect; If you perform your Services, not out of a
filial ingenuous Disposition, but merely out of a Slavish Fear of being beaten,
or of losing the Wages you expect for your Work: If you use only a careless and
supine Devotion: If you matter not at all how little you do for God, or what is
the Frame of your Minds and Hearts in what you do: If you give way to vain
Thoughts in holy Duties: If you be not intent in your religious Services, but
instead of using the World, as if you used it not, you use good Duties as if
you did not use them; observe the Lord's Day, as if you observed it not;
confess and repent, as if you did no such thing; hear, as if you heard not; and
pray, as if you prayed not: If you pray only out of Custom, and do not mind and
well consider what you say, nor are affected with what you speak, nor desire
what you ask: If you pray, and read, and hear, only because you are brought up
so to do, and have taken up such a Practice, or because you would satisfy
natural Conscience, and have the good Opinion and Word of all in your Families,
and be commended by your Neighbors for religious Persons; and do not pray to
this necessary End, that so you may enjoy Communion with God, and get and
obtain Pardon, and Grace, and Strength from God; nor read the Scripture and
good Books, and hear the Word preached, that so you may know your Duty in Order
to the Practice and Performance of it; all the Time that is thus spent in Duty,
is in a manner Time lost and misspent: in so doing you lose your Duties, and
you lose your Time too.

But especially, if any shall dare to do nothing but whisper, and talk, and
laugh; to mock and jeer at the Word, and the Minister of it; to be undecent,
and rude, and profane in their Carriage and Behavior, in a Christian Assembly,
in the Time of Divine Worship, in the Vae mihi quia ibi pecco, ubi peccata
emendare debeo. Bernard. de interior. Domo, c. 33.
Presence of the great God, and in the Sight of the holy 1 Cor. 11.10.
Angels; This is to lose the Time of public Duty, if it be to be lost at all;
This is to lose the Time of Duty, with a Witness.

And so I have done with the third Use, namely of Reproof and Rebuke to several
Sorts of Persons, who are guilty of the Loss, the lamentable Loss of their
precious Time, and unvaluable Opportunities.

CHAP. VI. The fourth and last Use is of Exhortation, to Magistrates,
Ministers, the People in general. Six quickening Motives to press the Duty of
Redemption of Time. (1.) Consider how notably Jesus Christ redeemed the Time,
when he was here in the World. 1. He redeemed the Time, to save us. 2. He
redeemed the Time, to be an Example to us. (2.) Consider further, that as
Christ did once redeem the Time, to save us; So the Devil does daily redeem the
Time, to destroy us. (3.) Consider, how very notably many of the Saints and
Servants of God have improved and redeemed their Time. (4.) Consider, that it
is an Act of spiritual Wisdom to rodeem the Time, and mere Madness and gross
Folly not to redeem the Time. (5.) Consider, that if now thou losest and
squanderest away thy Time, thou will at last be forced thy self to condemn thy
foolish Neghgence, and to justify the Care and Diligence of others, that were
wiser for their own Souls then thy self. (6.) Consider, that do what we can to
redeem our Time, we shall never repent at last of any Care we have had to
redeem it, but shall certainly blame and find fault with our selves for being
so careless of our Time, so negligent of good Opportunities as we have been.
Serious considerative Christians do blame themselves for their Loss of Time,
even in their Lifetime: but they are especially sensible of it, and
exceedingly ashamed of themselves for it, at their Death.
THe fourth and last use shall be of Exhortation, to put you upon the Duty of
Redeeming Time.

Let Magistrates vigorously redeem the Time, in the faithful Execution, and
impartial Administration of governing Justice; and in being active and zealous,
bold and courageous in the Cause of God and Goodness: Rem 13.3.
in being a Terror to Evil, and not to good Works; and in acting for the i
Pet. 2.14.
Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well: in
repressing Vice, and checking Profaneness, and daily dashing Sin out of
Countenance; and in countenancing and encouraging, nourishing and cherishing
Sobriety and Temperance, Virtue and Godliness, Holiness and Religion.

Let Ministers industriously redeem the Time, in Acts 20.27.
not shunning to declare to the People all the Counsel of God; in urging Truths
upon their own Hearts, and pressing and enforcing them upon others Souls; in
laboring abundantly in the Lord's Vineyard; in Verse 28.
taking heed unto themselves, and 1 Timothy 4.16.
to their Doctrine, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made
them Overseers; in feeding the Church of God with the wholesome Food of sound
Words; in Heb. 13.17.
watching for Souls, as they that must give Account; in Acts 20.31.
daily warning Sinners with Tears; in persuading Men with Earnestness and
Importunity, as those that well 2 Cor. 5.11.
know the Terror of the Lord; in endeavoring to 1 Timothy 4.16.
save themselves and them that hear them, to Jude 23.
save some with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire; in taking all possible
Care, lest they 1 Cor. 9.26.
beat the Air, and Gal. 2.2. Phil. 2.16.
run in vain, and labor in vain; left their Peoples Ezekiel. 3.18.
Blood be required at their Hands, and lest when they have preached to others,
they themselves should become 1 Cor. 9.27.
Cast-aways; in discharging their Duty so painfully and faithfully, that though
Isa. 49.5.
Israel be not gathered, though the straying and straggling Sheep be not
reclaimed and brought home to God, yet they may be glorious in the Eyes of the
Lord, and their God may be their Strength: That the may be Acts 20.26.
pure from the Blood of all Men, and may Verse 24.
finish their Course with Joy; and be able to say, as the most laborious and
indefatigable Apostle, St. Paul, expressed himself, with an Heart full of
Comfort, when the Time of his Departure was at hand; 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have fought a good Fight, as a faithful Soldier; I have finished my Course,
as a strenuous Runner; I have kept the Faith, as a trusty Depositary:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day.

Yea, let People in general give all serious constant Diligence to redeem the
Time, and to make their Calling and Election sure: Believing, and considering,
that we were not sent into this World to eat, and drink, and sleep, and sport,
and play; to take our Pas-time and Recreation, and to enjoy a little short
carnal Mirth, some sensual sinful Pleasure, or worldly Profit, or earthly
Honor, for a season; but to live in the constant Exercise of Reason, and
Virtue, and true Goodness: To study the Nature and Attributes, the Mind and
Will, the Word and Works, the Laws and Ways of God: To Rev. 14.12.
keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus: To worship and serve our
Creator, Redeemer, Sanctisier and Comforter: To prepare and provide for
Eternity; and to do good to all, while we have Opportunity.

And here, to proceed particularly, I shall

I. Propound some Motives, to quicken you; And then, II. I shall give you some
Directions, to help you to gain the Time, and redeem the Opportunity.
To press you to the Duty, besides the several Reasons of the Doctrine (which
are also so many Motives to the Duty) I shall farther lay you down a six-fold
Motive.

The first Motive.
First consider, how notably Christ redeemed the Time, when he was here in the
World. Mat 3.15.
It becomes us to fulfill and Righteousness, says he. Luke 2.49.
Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's Business? John 9.4.
I must work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day: the Night comes
when no Man can work.

1. He redeemed the Time to save us. 2. To be an Example to us.
1. He redeemed the Time, to save us. His whole Life, to his very Death; yea,
his Life and Death were nothing else but a continual Course of doing and
suffering for our Salvation. Did Christ spend his Time, his Labor, his Blood,
to save us? and shall we be backward to spend our Days, our Pains, our
Strength to serve him? Did Christ redeem the Time, to accomplish and work out
our Redemption? and shall not we redeem the Time, to secure and work out our
own Salvation?

2. Christ redeemed the Time, to be an Example to us. Not an idle Word ever
came out of his Mouth. He speak as never Man spoke, and did as never Man did.
He was serious and favory, holy and heavenly in his private Converses, and took
all Occasions to spiritualize his Discourses. He redeemed Time for secret
Prayer; He Acts 10.38.
went about doing good: He neglected his bodily Food, to gain an Occasion of
spiritual Converse, and to feed a Soul: He professes, it was John 4.34.
his Meat to do the Will of him that sent him, and to finish his Work; Psalm.
40.8.
his Delight to do the Will of God. This he did, 1 Pet. 2.21.
leaveing us an Example, that we should follow his Steps; an eminent Example to
be transcribed and copied out by us; that we likewise should redeem the Time,
in Imitation of him, and Conformity to him.

Now where are the Men that seriously consider, Thus, thus Jesus Christ lived
in the World? and are ready to say within themselves, I will do nothing but
what I would do if Jesus Christ were by: I would act now, as if I followed
Christ at the Heels. How very many have lived already the full Age of our
blessed Savior? nay, how many have doubled our Savior's Age? and yet how few
have lived after the manner of the Life of Christ, one Day or Hour? or, in
conformity to our Pattern and Exemplar, in any Measure done the Will, and
wrought the Work of our heavenly Father? I may very fitly here take up the
Words of a Religious Person, Been ver ecundari potes, inspecta vita Jesu
Christi; quia necdum magis illi te conformare studuisti, licet diu in via Dei
faisti. A Rempis l. 1. c. 25. n. 6.
Thou may well blush to behold the Life of Jesus Christ, because as yet thou
have studied no more to conform thy self to him, though thou have been long in
the Way of God.

Let us hence forward daily eye the Life of Christ, as that which is an Example
to us in all our Actions and Motions in the World; in the midst of all the
Passions to which we are subject, and Temptations to which we are exposed.
Let Us frequently reflect upon our selves, and seriously say, Did Christ live
thus? In all our Actings and Undertakings let us say continually, Would Christ
do thus? If not, how dare I, who profess my self a Christian, venture upon it?
If Christ were now upon the Earth, would he be wasteful and prodigal of his
Hours? would he be loose and wanton, vain and profane in his Life? would Christ
swear, and curse, or by any means be tempted to Perjury or false Testimony?
would he be drunk himself, and delight to make others drunk? would Christ scoff
and mock at Religion and Holiness, and jear and deride the strictest Professors
and Practisers of it? would he that once wept over Jerusalem, be now jovial and
merry, when public Misery and common Calamity hangs over he Heads of a People
laden with Iniquity? could he find in his Heart to laugh and sport over a
tottering, sinking, fainting, dying Nation?

Take care 1 John 2.6.
to walk, even as Christ walked: Aim and endeavor 1 John 4.17.
to be in the World, as he was in the World. When you rise in the Morning,
resolve thus with thy self; I will this Day study to behave my self as Christ
did: I will labor to exercise those Virtues, and to act those Graces, which
Jesus Christ, when he was here on Earth, was eminent in and exemplary for: I
will this Day strive to be as meek and humble, as free from pride and passion,
malice and revenge; as clear from covetousness and earthly-mindedness,
discontent and impatience, as Christ himself was: To be as watchful against the
World and the Devil, as resolved against Temptation, as sober and temperate, as
just and righteous, as kind and merciful, as useful and beneficial to all about
me, according to my measure and capacity, as Christ himself was: To do every
Thing so, even as Christ himself, were he placed in such circumstances as I am,
and stood in the same relations as I do, would do and act.

What Christ has done in our Flesh before us, is very possible to be done by
us, in the strength of God and Christ. And it is a Thing not only fecible, but
very reasonable, that we the Disciples and Servants of Christ should improve
our Time to the best advantage; when he our great Lord and Master lost not an
Hour, misspent not a Minute of all the Time of his whole Life lead here upon
Earth.

It is true, we can never exactly answer our Copy, nor fully come up to our
Example; But let us endeavor to come as near as we can: for (as Lent.
Mr. Herbert excellently) let this encourage you; Who goes in the Way which
Christ has gone,
Is much more sure to meet with him, than one
That travelleth by-waies.
Perhaps my God, though he be far before,
May turn, and take me by the hand, and more
May strengthen my decays.


The second Motive.
Consider in the second Place, That as Christ did redeem the Time, to save us;
so the Devil does daily redeem the Time, to destroy us. As there is a good
Spirit active in the World, inviting and alluring Men to Virtue and Goodness,
and endeavoring to bring them to a participation of Holiness and Happiness
with himself; So there is an evil, impure, unbodied Spirit, perpetually
soliciting and enticing Men to Sin and Wickedness, and laboring continually to
hurry and precipitate them, or gradually and insensiby to draw them, into the
same condition of Perdition and Destruction, into which he himself is fallen
and sunk, without hope of Remedy, or possibility of Recovery. The Devil was
John 8.44.
a Murderer from the beginning. He set upon Adam in Paradise, who was in his
full strength: He 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
provoked David to number the People: yea, he Mat. 4.
assaulted Christ himself, who was not only the Son of David, but the Son of
God, and had nothing in him to give advantage to him. And when Satan left him,
being overcome by him, he departed from him but Luke 4.13.
for a season, as if resolving to take a fit opportunity to return again to
him, and have another bout with him. And he Neque enim membris parcet, qui cum
capite praeliatur. Calv. in 1 Pet. 5.8.
that takes heart to fight with the Head, will never spare the Members: He
daily follows the Disciples of Christ, designing to draw them from Luke 22.31.
God and their Duty: He desired to have the sifting and shaking of Peter,
liberty to do his worst to drive him from the Faith of Christ. He studies to 2
Cor. 2.11.
get advant age of us. The Head of this old malicious subtle Serpent is always
plotting and contriving our Sin and Misery, Fall and Ruin. We are not ignorant
of his (...) 2 Cor. 2.11.
Devices, or sophistical Reasonings. He continually uses his (...) Ephesians. 6.11.
Methods, or Wiles. The Tempter will tempt by 1 Thessalonians. 3.5.
some means or other: usually Dr. Sclater in loc. p. 216.
by suggestion, prompting and casting of evil Thoughts into our Minds: And
often by Persuasion, or pressing the Suggestion, with such Reasons and
Arguments as may move our Minds to approve, and incline our Wills to consent to
some Evil as good. He labors to persuade us, either by promising some good, or
threatening some evil to us. And sometimes he tempts us by instigation and
provocation, or restless and importunate urging of the Suggestion, till, if it
be possible, he has gain' our Consent. He makes it his business to tempt us
either immediately, or mediatly, by his Agents and Instruments; making use of
the choicest and most likely Instruments to work with us, and prevail upon us.
He suits his Temptations to our Tempers, and observes and takes the most
convenient Seasons of dealing successfully and effectually with us: He is still
laying his Traps and 1 Timothy 6.9. 2 Timothy 2.26.
Snares, to take us captive at his will. He is ready to assault us with his
Ephesians. 6.16.
fiery Darts; to propose such sensual Baits, which, like Poisoned Darts are
wont to inflame the parts that are wounded with them, and therefore are called
fiery Darts, as the Serpents with poisonous Stings are called fiery Serpents.
Dr. Hammond's Par in loc.
poisoned Darts, will wound us to Death, if the consideration of our Duty, the
Promises and Terrors of Christ, received by our Faith, do not help to quench
them.

The Devil loses no Moment of time, that may serve his Design, and further his
Endeavor to undo us: He lets no Opportunity flip of doing us any Mischief. He
is a nimble, stirring, busy Being. He goes to and fro in the Earth, and walks
up and down in it. St. Peter tells us from his Luke 22.31.
own experience, and with some reference to Job 1.7.
Satan's Confession and Acknowledgment, that 1 Pet. 5.8.
our Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour. He Is an Adversary in Law (as the (...), an opposite in forensal
Proceeding. So (...), Rev. 12.10. a word most opposite to (...), an Advocate,
which Christ is said to be.
word here used imports) a cunning Plaintiff, whose work it is upon all
occasions to indict and accuse us before God. He is also an Enemy in War: A
subtle, and strong Enemy, like a Lion: A fierce and furious Enemy, like a Lion
roaring through Syn. Crit.
Anger, or impatient Hunger, to fright and amaze, and so catch his Prey: A
venturous daring Enemy; like a roaring Lion pinched with Hunger, ready to set
upon any thing as his Prey: An indefatigably restless and industrious Enemy;
like a Lion walking up and down, as intent as may be to take and pursue every
occasion and opportunity that offers and presents it self to him; always
watching how to get us into his power and reach: And lastly, as mischievous and
pernicious, as mortal and deadly an Enemy as can be; earnestly seeking, not
whom he may bite, or lightly hurt and wound, but whom he may devour, undo and
destroy, Soul and Body; swallow down at one draught, as the word (...)
signifies; and by swallowing him down, as it were Sicut id pot us and cibi,
quod quis devoravit, in substantiam suam vertitur; and qui Christum per fidem
comedunt siunt divinae naturae participes; ita si quem satanas deglutiit,
participat naturam diabolicam. Dr. Arrowsmith Tact. sacr. l. 1. c. 3.. 3.
turn him into his own Nature, make him Partaker of a diabolical Temper.

As God is (...), a Lover of all Men; so the Devil is (...), an Hater of all
Men: And as God loves the Faithful peculiarly, so the Devil is an Enemy to them
especially: [your] Adversary, says St. Peter here emphatically; Above all, he
desires Pro ea, qua pollet, malitia, quo quis Deo charior est, eo Satanae
invisior. Latro ille viatores praecipue locupletes, iste praedo naves pretiosis
mercibus onustas prae aliis adoritur. Pantheram ajunt usque adeo (...) esse, ut
in hominis statuam, vel picturam incurrere soleat; ita cum nequeant daemones
Deum ipsum invadere, impetunt illius imaginem, quae in sanctis elucet, and in
pios praesertim magistratus, and ministros verbi summa feruntur violentia. Idem
ibidem, illustrans hunc locum Petri.
[your] Destruction, with an insatiable Appetite.

Now what is the Apostle's Inference from all this? Why since the Devil is
sedulous and watchful, do not you become sluggish and secure, but be sober and
vigilant: Be sober, that you may be vigilant: Be vigilant; (...); Let every
Christian be a Gregory, a Vigilantius, not only awake, but watchful;
considerative, and active; recollect and attend to Principles of Action, and
reduce and improve good Principles to seasonable Christian Practice: be
habitually careful and diligent, and very industriously use and exercise all
appointed approved means, whereby he may be suitably provided and prepared, and
may not be unhappily surpised and foiled by any sudden Assault of his
spiritual Enemy. Because the Devil is so vigilant to work out your Damnation,
be you therefore vigilant to work out your Salvation.

The Devil is said to have Rev. 12.12.
great wrath, because he knows he has but a short Time: He is so much the
hotter and more eager, because his Time is contracted, and draws to an end. He
redeems Time most at last; and yet he was always busy enough, ever over-busy;
He never lost any of his Time, in the way of Temptation: He never neglected any
Occasion of gaining Experience, and perfecting himself in his Arts and
Stratagems of soliciting and seducing unwary and inconsiderate Sinners. Let us
learn here of the very Devil himself: Let us, who have lost much of our Time,
be as laborious to redeem it to our benefit and advantage; as the Devil
himself, who never omitted any Opportunity, considered as a Tempter, is
industrious to improve it to our greatest damage and disadvantage.

The third Motive.
Consider thirdly, how very notably many of the Saints and Servants of God have
improved and redeemed their Time. Enoch Genesis 5.21, 24.
walked with God, and persevered in the Ways of God: Heb. 11.5.
Before his Translation he had this Testimony, that he pleased God. Genesis 6.9,
11, 12.
Noah was a just Man, and perfect in his Generations, and walked with God, in a
very vicious and corrupt Age: was a pattern of Piety and Probity, and a 2 Pet.
2.5.
Preacher of Righteousness to a World of Sinners, warning them to amend their
abominable Lives, or else that Vengeance would befall them: And he Heb. 11.7.
prepared an Ark, and by his Obedience out of a principle of Faith and pious
Fear, condemned the World of the Ungodly. Abraham was Romans 4 16.
the Father of all the Faithful, the great Example of Faith: He believed Verse
18.
in Hope against Hope, having no natural grounds of Hope: And not only believed
God's Promises, but performed very high acts of Obedience to God: When God
called him to his Mr. Gataker supposes this place to be meant of Cyrus.
Isa. 41.2.
Foot, to go to and fro at his command, and as he should appoint him; Genesis
12.1, 4.
he obeyed, and went out of his Country, not knowing whither he went: And when
he was tried, was Heb. 11.8.
ready to offer up his only Son, in whom the Promises were made to him;
accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the Dead. Verse 17, 19.
I know Abraham, says God, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord. Lot was a Genesis 18.19.
just and righteous Man among a People monstrously wicked, and laid to heart
the provoking 2 Pet 2.7, 8.
Sins of the time and place in which he lived; and believed that Judgment
lingered not, but that the Judge stood before the door; and he took the
Opportunity to warn his Sons-in-law presently to flee from the Wrath
approaching, though he Genesis 19.14.
seemed to them as one that mocked. Job was Job 1.1, 5.
perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed Evil. He was not
carried away with the Idolatry and unjust dealing of the Edomites, among whom
he lived. As occasion required, he continually offered Sacrifices to God for
his Children, out of fatherly Care of their spiritual Good, and as a means to
keep them in the Favor of God: being jealous over them with a Godly Jealousy,
lest at any time when they had feasted together, they should have forgotten
themselves, and offended God, in their feasting and mirth. And he improved his
afflictions as an opportunity of exercising an exemplary Verse 22. Jam. 5.11.
Patience. David was Acts 13.22.
a Man after God's own heart, and in ruling the People he did fulfill all God's
Will: Verse 36.
He served his own Generation by the Will of God, or, the Will of God in his
own Generation. Holy Daniel was a Person devoted to God's true Worship and
Fear, and given to Prayer. He could not content himself with a mental Devotion
for a Month together, but when Dan. 6.10.
he knew the Writing was signed, instead of restraining vocal Prayer for thirty
Days, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day; and his Windows being open
in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he glorified God with his Tongue, he prayed
and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime: This righteous Man was
Prove. 28.1.
bolder than any Lion in the Den, which he was by his Enemies Envy and Malice,
and the King's established Decree, in apparent Danger to be speedily cast into,
for his Constancy in his Religion, and the Integrity of his Devotion. Zachary
Luke 1.6.
and Elizabeth were both sincerely righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless; So, as their Obedience to
God's Will, with God's merciful Allowance to human frailties, was sure to be
acceptable in God's sight. The devout Cornelius feared God with all his House,
and took every Occasion and good Opportunity of making Prayer, and giving Alms.
( Acts 10.2.) The twelve Tribes are said to have served God instantly day and
night; to have spent their Time in Piety and Obedience to God. ( Acts 26.7.)
Acts 24.16.
And herein did St. Paul exercise himself, to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God, and toward Men. He who before was a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, and injurious, yet when the Grace of God was bestowed upon him, 1
Cor. 15.10.
labored more abundantly than all the Apostles. Diem totum precationibus,
sacrificio, doctrinae, disputationibus, audiendis causis, componendis litibus,
confutandis haereticis dabat: noctis bonam partem sacris lucubrationibus
decidebat. -- Ad docendum semper erat paratus, non aliter quam avidus
negotiator ad lucrum. Erasm. epist. ad Archiep. Toletan. ante Opera Augustini.

Atque Episcopatu suscrpto multo instantius ac ferventius ubicunque rogatus,
verbum salutis aeternae alacriter praedicabat. Possidon. in vita August.


St. Austin made much of his precious Time after his Conversion: he spent it
ever after in reading, meditating, disputing, writing, watching, fasting,
prayer, and diligent preaching, in which he was more instant and fervent after
he had taken the Office of a Bishop than ever he was before. 'Twas his usual
wish, that Christ, when he came, might find him aut precantem, aut
praedicantem, either praying, or preaching. The laborious Calvin did husband
his time, and improve his hours to admiration. The learned Tantos labores
sustinuit, ut sane mirandum sit, homulum unum tam multis rebus potuisse
sufficere, etc. Whitak. Controvers. 2. q. 5 de notis Eccl c. 15. p. 536.
Whitaker gives this testimony of him; How much he wrote is known to all, says
he; But every Year he preached 286 Sermons, and read 186 Lectures, besides
innumerable other Businesses and Employments. Even in the time of his Illness,
no Saying was oftener in his Mouth than this, Acerbam sibi esse vitam otiosam;
cum fratres interim valentes prae illo otiosi videri possent. Melchior Adam in
vita Calv. p. 96
That an idle Life was very grievous to him; when (as Melchior Adam speaks) his
Brethren in the Ministry, even in their Health and Strength, might scem to be
idle, compared with Calvin in his Sickness and Weakness. And when his Friends
entreated him to abstain from dictating, especially from writing himself in his
Sickness; he returned them this Answer, Quid ergo, vultis me otiosum a Domino
deprehendi? Id. 10. p. 100.
What, would you have the Lord to find me idle at his Coming? Yea, so saving
was he of that time which might be laid out for the good of the Church, that
though the very Sight of Beza was always pleasing and refreshing to him, yet
when he came to visit him in his last Sickness, he would often signify to him,
[o] Sibi religionem esse, vel tantillum occupationes ejus remorars. Id. ib. p.
107.
that he could not in Conscience detain and hinder him from his more weighty
Businesses and useful Employments. It is said of Beza the Phoenix of his Age,
that Scrisserit legenda, and fecerit scribends. Melch. Adam in ejus vit. p. 538.
he wrote Things worthy to be read, and did Things worthy to be written. Mr.
Fox gives this notable Character of Mr. John Hooper the Martyr, that [p] Acts
and Mon. 2. V. p. 1366.
he was spare of Diet, sparer of Words, and sparest of Time. Holy Mr. John
Bradford [q] Idem ib. p. 1457.
slept not commonly above four Hours in the Night: and in his Bed, till sleep
came, his Book went not out of his Hand. His chief Recreation was in no gaming
or other pastime, but only in honest Company, and comely talk, wherein he would
spend a little time after Dinner at the Board, and so to Prayer and his Book
again. He counted that Hour not well spent, wherein he did not some good,
either with his Pen, Study, or in exhorting of others. Preaching, reading and
praying was all his whole Life. Many prosited in Piety by his Society. Bp.
Ridly, when a Prisoner in Oxford, in a Letter to Bradford breaks out into these
pathetical Expressions; * 1567.
O Good Brother, blessed be God in thee, and blessed be the time that ever I
knew thee! Id. ib. p. 1579.

Commendo vobis veteranum illum Christ's and nostrae gentis Anglicanae verum
Apostolum Hugonem Latimer^m. Bp. Ridlye's Letter to Mr. Grindal at Frankford,
Id. ib. p. 1579.


Mr. Hugh Latimer was so far from idling and loytering, that all King Edward's
Days he preached for the most part every Sunday twice. And this was so much
the more remarkable in him (as Mr. Fox observes) that he being a sore bruised
Man by the Fall of a Tree, and above 67 Years of Age, took so little ease, and
care of sparing himself, to do the People good. He used indesatigable Travel
and Diligence in his own private Studies, who notwithstanding both his Years
and other pains in Preaching, every Morning ordinarily, Winter and Summer,
about two of the clock in the Morning, was at his Book most diligently. The
learned Bishop Ridley usually [s] Id. ib. 1559.
every Holy Day and Sunday preached in some one Place or other, except he were
otherwise hindered by weighty Assairs and Business. He used all kinds of ways
to mortify himself, and was given to much Prayer and Contemplation: Duly every
Morning, as soon as he had put on his Apparel, he prayed upon his Knees in his
Bedchamber the space of half an Hour: from which, if Business did not
interrupt him, he immediately went to his Study, where he continued till ten of
the clock, the Hour of Common Prayer with his Household. An Hour after Dinner
he returned to his Study, and there continued, except Suitors or Business
abroad were occasion of the contrary, until five of the clock at night, the
time of Evening-Prayer with his Family. An Hour after Supper he returned again
to his Study, continuing there till eleven of the clock at Night: and then
closed the Day with Prayer upon his Knees, before he lawy down to take his
rest. Being at his Manor of fulham, as diverse Times he used to be, he read
daily a Lecture to his Family at the Common Prayer, beginning at the Acts of
the Apostles, and so going throughout all the Epistles of St. Paul, giving to
every Man that could read a New Testament, hiring them besides with Money to
learn certain principal Chapters by heart: reading also to his Household
oftentimes the 101 Psalm; beng mavelous careful over his Family, that they
might be a Spectacle of all Virtue and Honesty to others. As he was Godly and
virtuous himself, so nothing but Virtue and Godiness reigned in his House. He
gave this as a general Rule to his Kinsfolk, yea, to his own Brother and
Sister, that the doing evil, should seek or look for nothing at his hand, but
should be as Strangers and Aliens unto him: and that they should be his Brother
or Siller, which used Honesty, and a good trade of Life. [t] Id. lib. p. 1690.
When Dr. Cranmer was made Archbishop of Canterbury, he evermore gave himself
to continual Study, not breaking the order that in the University he commonly
used: that is, by five of the clock in the Morning he was at his Book, and
spent his Time in Study and Prayer till nine of the clock: By reason of other
private Studies, and by means of useful proper Employments he was never idle,
no Hour of the Day was spent in vain by him, but was so bestowed as tended to
the Glory of God, the Service of his Prince, or the Commodity of the Church.
The excellent Bp. Juel read much, and wrote much, besides his public
Employments: Scarce any Year in all the Time of his Bishopric passed, wherein
he published not some famous Work or other. At nine a clock at Night, he used
to call all his Servants to an Account how they had spent that Day, and after
Prayer to admonish them accordingly: Then he returned to his Study, where often
he sat till after Midnight. * Dr. Humphr. in the Life of Bp. Jewel.
When he was very weak, a Gentleman meeting him as he was riding to preach at
Lacock in Wiltshire, earnestly desired him to return home for his health's
sake, telling him that it was better the People should want one Sermon, than be
altogether deprived of such a Preacher: To whom he replied, Oportet Episcopum
concionantem mori.
That it best became a Bishop to die Preaching: alluding to that of Vespasian,
Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori.
It becomes an Emperor to die standing: and thinking upon his Master's Saying,
Mat 24.46.
Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.
And presently after that very On Gal. 5 16. Walk in the Spirit.
Sermon, by reason of his Sickness increasing upon him, he was forced to take
his Bed, from which he never came off till his Soul quitted his frail Body, and
was translated to everlasting Glory. He said in his last Sickness, That seeing
God had not granted his Desire to glorify him by sacrificing his Life for the
Defense of his Truth, yet he rejoiced that his Body was exhausted and worn away
in the Labors of his holy Calling. It was the Motto of the pious and painful
Mr. Perkins, that which he used to write in the Frontispiece of all his Books,
Minister verbi es, hoc age; Thou art a Minister of God's Word, mind thy Work,
and attend thy Business. It was also the Motto of His Life among Mr. Clark's
Lives of 10 Eminent Divines.
Mr. Samuel Crook, Impendam and expendar: I will spend and be spent. It was
moreover the Motto of Bp. Usher's Life written by Dr. Bernard, p. 52.
Bp. Usher's Episcopal Seal, when he was Bishop of Mead, which he continued in
the Seal of his Primacy also, Vae mihi si non euangelizavero: Woe is unto me if
I preach not the Gospel: All which they severally answered and made good in an
eminent and very exemplary Manner. The learned and religious Dr. John Rainolds
was so very careful to redeem the Time, that when the Heads of the Houses in
Oxford came to visit him in his last Sickness, which he had contracted merely
by excessive Pains in his Study (whereby he brought his Body to be a very
Sceleton) and earnestly persuaded him that he would not Perdere substa etiam
propter accidentia.
lose the Substance for the Accidents, not lose his Life for Learning: He
smiling answered with those excellent Words of the Prince of Satyrists, Nec
propter vitam vivendi perdere causas. Juv. sat. 8.
That to save his Life, he would not lose the Ends of living. I may well apply
to Read the Lives of Mr. Joseph Allein, and Mr. John Janeway.
these Worthies those words of A Kempis, Dati sunt in exemplum omnibus
Religiosis: and plus provocare nos debent ad been prosi^tendum, quam tepidorum
numerus ad relaxandum. T. a Kempis, l. 1. c. 18, n. 4.
These are given for an Example to all pious Persons, and should be more
powerful to provoke us to profit well, than a number of lazy lukewarm Persons
to draw us to Slackness and Remisness. Let us follow these fair and bright
Exemplars, in the main of their tendency to teach us to live serviceably to
God, and usefully and profitably to our selves and others.

We have hitherto been ingentium Exemplorum parvi Imitatores (to use Salvian's
Expression) small Imitators of great Examples. O how short do we come of many
of the eminent Saints and faithful Servants of God, who redeemed their Time,
and served their Generation by the Will of God, in former Ages! Yea, may not
our own personal Knowledge, and particular Observation of the Labor and
Diligence, Improvement and Growth of other Christians, put our selves to the
blush? Many that have lived in the same Times and Places, in the same Parishes
and Families with our selves; Many that have sat under the same Ordinances,
enjoyed no better Means, received no greater Helps than our selves, have yet
surpassed and excelled us in the gracious Frame of their Hearts, out-strip'd
and out-shined us in the Holiness and Exemplariness of their Lives. To what a
pitch are others gotten? to what an height have they arrived and attained? What
right apprehensions have they gotten of the Nature of God, and Undertaking of
Christ, for the promoting of Holiness? What a good Understanding of the Word of
God? What Insight into the various Providence of God? What warm and good
Affections, suited to true Notions of Things? How have they proceeded in
Knowledge, grown in Grace, profited in Experience, increased in Strength,
abounded in Comfort? What Power have they gotten over their Corruptions, what
Strength against Temptations? What Government of their Senses? What Command of
their Passions? What Freedom and Enlargement, and Delight in Duties? How useful
are they in their Places? How serviceable to God and their Generations? What
Evidence have they gotten of the Goodness of their State, of the Truth and
Sincerity of their Love to God, and of the special Love and Favor of God to
them? What good grounds for their Hopes of Heaven and Happiness? How sit are
they to live? How ready and prepared to die? How meet to be Partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light?

Alas! how far do we fall short of them, and come behind them? What Fools have
we been, when others have been wise for their own Souls? When others shine as
Lights, and as bright Stars in the World; are not we as dark as a Coal, or as
dim as a Glowworm? Are not we, who are planted in the same Soil, dressed and
cultivated with the same Hand, watered with the same River of God, wetted with
the same heavenly Dew, and refreshed with the same Droppings of the Sanctuary;
yet notwithstanding as barren and as unfruitful as may be? when others of our
Neighbors and Fellow Christians do bear not only Leaves, but Fruit; bring
forth Fruit in due Season, Fruit meet for the Dresser, much Fruit, Fruit which
will abound to their own account. We have been brought up in the same House, we
have sucked at the same Breasts, and sat at the same Table; We have eaten the
same Milk, the same Meat; But we have not grown by the sincere Milk of the
Word, we have not rellish'd and concocted the spiritual Food of our Souls as
others have done: The Word of God's Grace has not been sweet unto our Taste, as
it has been to others; We have not desired it, delighted in it, and received it
in the Love of it, as others have done; and therefore we have not profited by
the Word, we have not been nourished and strengthened by it, as others have
been. Oh how much Leanness may be found in our Souls, when others are thriving
and well-liking in the Eye of God and good Men? Others have excelled and
exceeded us: Our Fellow Christians have out-shot us, out-grown us, outrun us,
outdone us.

Themistocles professed he could not (...). Plutarch. in vic. These. p. 3.
sleep for thinking of the Trophies of Miltiades: And when Julius Caesar was
employed in Spain in the Office of a Quaestor, or Judge in matters of Law, and
coming to Cales beheld there the Image or Portraiture of Alexander the Great in
the Temple of Hercules, Ingemuit: and quasi pertaesus ignaviam suam, quod nihil
dum a se memorabile act^m esset ia aetate qua jam Alexander orbem terrarum
subegisset, missionem contmuo esslaguavit, ad captandas quam primum majorum
rerum occasiones in urbe. Sueton. in vit. sul. Caesaris,. 7.
he was ashamed to think of his own Sloth, and sighed to consider, that as yet
he had performed no memorable Act at those Years wherein Alexander had
conquered the whole World: and presently craved leave to depart, that so he
might take the first Occasions of greater Actions in the City. So when we see
and consider what others have acted at our Years, how others have done more
good to their own Souls, more good to the Souls of their Relations, more
spiritual good in their Families and Places of abode; have conquered their own
Passions, subdued Temptations and Lusts, and been the means of bringing others
into Subjection and Obedience to the Lord Christ; it may cause a more than
ordinary Blush to arise in our Faces, if there be any Christian Blood in them.

O let others considerable Improvement and Proficiency quite shame us out of
our Idleness, Negligence and Indiligence; and quicken and provoke us to
Activity and Industry, in working the Work of God, and working out our
Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

The fourth Motive.
Consider farther, That it is an Act of spiritual Wisdom to redeem the Time.
Redeeming the Time is called a Coloss. 4.5.
walking in Wisdom; a walking Ephesians. 5.15.
not as Fools, but as Wise, in the Verse before my Text. they are commended for
Mat. 25.4.
wise Virgins, who took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps.

And on the contrary, it is mere Madness, and gross Folly, not to redeem the
Time. They are noted for Verse 3.
foolish Virgins, who took their Lamps, and took no Oil with them. It Is Folly
for a Merchant to trifle away the Time of his Trade. Solomon marks him for a
Prove. 17.16.
Fool, who has a Price in his Hand to get Wisdom, and has no heart no use it.

What an odd and foolish Humor, what a weak and childish Carriage and
Behavior, what a vain and fruitless Practice and Employment was that of the
Emperor Inter initia principatus, quo^^^e secretum sibi horarium sumere
solebat: nec quicquam amplius quam muscas captare, ac stylo praeacuto
configere: ut cuidam interroganti, Essetne quis intus cum Caesare? non absurd
responsum sit a Vibio Crispo, Ne musca quidem. Id. in vit. Domitiani, 2.
Domitian, to spend so many Hours in catching and killing Flies, when he should
have been in the Senate House, consulting for the good of the Commonwealth?
Which occasioned Vibius Crispus, when a certain Person asked whether any one
were within with Caesar? to return this smart Answer, There is not so much as a
Fly with him.

And how has the World scorned and laughed at Repent ut conchas legerent,
ga^asque and sinus replerent, imperavit: Spolia Oceani vocans, Capitolio
Palatioque debita. Id, in vit. Caligulae, 46.
Caligula? who when he drew out his Army on the Seashore, and made a Show of
War, on a sudden he only commanded his Soldiers to gather a company of
Cockle-Shells, and to fill their Shields and Bosoms with them; affirming that
they were the Spoils of the Sea, and were due to the Capitol and Palace. So how
contemptible in the Eyes of God and good Men do many Christians render
themselves, by their toyish trissing Actions, and petty inconsiderable
Employments, who were sent into the World about matters and Businesses of the
greatest weight and moment?

When a certain Dr. Lightfoot, sermon. on Psalm. 4.4. p. 20.
Epicure made his Will, he bequeathed to his Player, to his Cook, to his
Jester, Talents and Pounds, but Philosopho obolum, an Halfpenny only to him
that would have taught him Wisdom. And is not the Distribution of most Men's
Time much after the same absurd Measure, and foolish proportion? What vast
Portions of the rich Treasure of Time do they give and allow to sensual
Pleasures and carnal Delights, and freely bestow and lavish out upon secular
Affairs and worldly Employments? But if they part with any at all, alas how few
Minutes, how very small and poor a pittance of Time is it, that they find in
their Hearts to spare in a Day, a Week, a Month, a Year, yea, in a whole
Lifetime, to God and Religion, and the Needs and Concerns of their own Souls?

The Reverend Bp. Hall's Remains, or, Shaking of the Olive Tree, Sermon. on 1
Pet. 1.17. p. 226.
Bp. Joseph Hall relates a very remarkable Story out of Summa Praedicantium.
Bromiard, of a certain Lord in his Time that had a Fool in his House, to whom
the Lord gave a Staff, and charged him to keep it till he should meet with one
that was more Fool than himself; and if he met with such an one, to deliver it
over to him. Not many Years after this Lord falling sick even unto Death, his
Fool came to see him, and was told by his sick Lord that he must now shortly
leave him: And whither will thou go said the Fool? Into another World, said his
Lord: And when will thou come again? within a Month? No: Within a Year? No:
When then? Never: Never? And what Provision have thou made for thy
Entertainment there whither thou go? None at all: No, said the Fool, none at
all? Here, take my Staff: Art thou going away for ever, and have taken no order
nor care how thou shall speed in that other World whence thou shall never
return? Take my Staff, for I am not guilty of any such Folly as this.

And truly they that here neglect to provide for hereafter, to lay up a durable
Treasure in Heaven, to make sure of a Building of God, an House not made with
Hands, eternal in the Heavens; of an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in the Heavens; shall certainly be branded
and upbraided for their Folly to all Eternity.

What Folly is it to count the one thing needful the only needless thing? What
Folly and Madness to part with Heaven for uncertain Riches, and corruptible
Wealth, or a few merry Hours here on Earth?

What a shameful Folly is it, when the Jer. 8.7.
Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed Times, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the Time of their coming; for Men and Christians
not to discern and understand the gracious Seasons and special Opportunities of
their particular Duties?

What grand and gross Folly is it, for Men to have but one Life's Time of
necessary Preparation for eternal Life, and to live and die in a total, wilful,
desperate Neglect of it?

Yea, to have but one small part of Time to do all that ever they can do for
their own and others eternal Weal, and to spend this little Portion of Time in
increasing their own and others Sins, and in destroying their own and others
Souls? What prodigious, stupendous Folly is it, to be weary of that which
flies away too fast, and cannot be recalled; and to use Arts and Devices to
pass that Time away in Vanity, which can only be spent profitably and
comfortably in a daily diligent Provision for Eternity? What absurd and
ridiculous Folly is it (a very heathen Sen. de brev. vit. c. 3.
Philosopher being Judge in the Case) for Men to be so far from suffering others
to possess themselves of their Manours or Farms, or in the least to encroach
and gain upon their Bounds; and yet to permit them to enter upon their Time,
nay themselves to induct them into the Possession of it? For those that are so
wary, as never to divide their Money among any, yet to be so ready to
distribute their Time to so very many? For those that are very strait and hard
in keeping of their Patrimony, when once it comes to the spending of their Time
to be extremely lavish and Profusissims in eo, cujus unius honesta avaritia
est. Id. ibidem.
wasteful of that, of which only we can be honestly covetous?

Once more, What miserable unhappy Folly is it in the most of Men, to throw
away their Time slightly and carelessly, profusely and prodigally, and yet to
be impatiently troubled, and even distracted and tormented when all is gone?
Which aptly leads me to the fifth Motive.

The fifth Motive.
Consider moreover, that if now thou losest and squanderest away thy Time, thou will at last be forced thy self to condemn thy foolish Negligence, and to
justify the Care and Diligence of others, that were wiser for their own Souls
than thy self; though here thou did nothing but jeer and deride them, scorn
and scoff at them.

As Dionysius on his Deathbed, when he heard Thales discoursing notably about
the Nature and Excellency of Moral Philosophy, Virtutem videant, intabescant
que relicta. Pers. sat. 3.
cursed his Pastimes, Sports and Pleasures that had taken him off and diverted
him from the Study of so worthy a Subject; So will careless Sinners and loose
Livers, when Death approaches, and Conscience accuses, loudly exclaim against
all their foolish sensual Delights, which turned off their Minds from weightier
Matters, and hindered their Acquaintance with better Things, and their living to
higher and nobler Purposes in the World.

The Heathen Moralist could observe thus much, That Persons prodigal of their
Time at present, at last stultos se fuisse, quod non vixerint, cla^^tant. Sen.
de brev. vit. c. 11.
cry out upon themselves for Fools, that they have not lived any part of the
Time they have been in the World.

And it is a notable Place, and remarkable Passage to this purpose, which we
find in the fifth Chapter of the Book of Wisdom, the third and fourth Verses;
They repenting and groaning for anguish of Spirit, shall say within themselves,
This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a Proverb of reproach. We
Fools accounted his Life Madness, and his end to be without Honor. How is he
numbered among the Children of God, and his Lot is among the Saints? And in the
seventh and eighth Verses; We wearied our selves in the way of Wickedness, and
Destruction: -- But as for the way of the Lord, we have not known it. What has
Pride profited us? or what good has Riches with our vaunting brought us?

It Is therefore a seasonable good Premonition that is given by a pious Person,
Quando illa extrema hera vene^it, multum aliter sentire incipies de tota vita
tua praeterita: and valde dolebs, quia tam negligens and remissus suisti. Thom,
a Kempis, l. 1. c. 23. n. 3.
When thy last Hour shall draw near, thou will then begin to have quite other
sentiments, and vastly different Apprehensions of thy whole Life past; and wilt
grieve a nd mourn exceedingly that thou have continually been so remiss and
negligent.

When you come to die, you will be ready to cry out with Croesus, Solon, Solon,
who had before time taught him of Blessedness without regard: You will then be
apt in like manner to say, Such and such a Minister did frequently and
faithfully tell me my Duty and my Danger; Such and such a Friend dealt plainly
with me, and well advised and counseled me; but, Fool that I was, I would hear
no Instruction, I would receive no Admonition, I would bear no Reproof, I would
take no warning.

How strangely will you shortly be astonished at the impartial Review of your
unexcusable Ill-husbandry of all the Time in this World allotted you? What
wounding, heart-renting, revengeful Self-reflections will you suffer? What
passionate violent Rage against your selves will you be forced to feel within
your selves? What bitter Anguish, and desperate Horror will you unavoidably
and irresistibly fall under, when you sadly recount, and too late remember, how
inconsiderately and unwarsly, loosly and vainly you have passed your Time, and
spent your Years here on Earth; what golden Seasons of Grace you have lost; and
scorned, and dishonored, and abused all that would not act the Parts of Fools
and Madmen, like your selves? When you have utterly lost, and fully and
finally undone your selves, with what Gripes and Groans will you then look back
upon all the Means and Mercies, Helps and Assistances, Opportunities and
Advantages which here you enjoyed, but slighted and undervalued, dreamed, and
fooled, played, and sinned away; being only concerned for things of naught, and
busy in doing worse than nothing? What a pain and torture will it be to
consider, that when you know you have had sufficient Discretion and exceeding
Care, Prudence and Providence enough, and more than enough, in other Matters,
you should be dull and listless, sluggish and sottish, wanting and defective in
the only commendable necessary point of Wisdom? A Man's falling out with
himself for ever, the sharp Rebukes and cutting Upbraidings of a Man's own
Conscience, and Self-condemnation for former Folly and Madness, will certainly
be no small part of the dreadful intolerble Torments of Hell.

The sixth Motive.
Sixthly and lastly; Consider once more; That do what we can to redeem our
Time, we shall never repent at last of any Care we have had to redeem it; but
shall certainly blame and find fault with our selves for being so careless of
our Time, so negligent of good Opportunities as we have been.

1. Good Men do often in their Lifetime confess and condemn their Loss and
Neglect of their precious Time.

That it was so long before they began to redeem it. St. Austin very much
laments his coming in to Christ no sooner. Sero te cognovi lumen verum, sero te
cognovi. -- Vae vae praeteritae ignorantiae n^eae, quando non cognoscebam te,
Domine. -- Sero cognovi te veritas antiqua, sero te cognovi veritas aeterna,
Aug Soliloq. c. 33.
'Twas late, Lord, before I knew thee, the true Light, (says he) alas! I knew
thee but late.

And that they have redeemed it no better, since first they went about it. The
devout St. Bernard, who was so rarely pious a Person, and so continually given
to divine Meditation, yeet bewails most sadly, and complains most passionately
of his spiritual Backwardness and Unproficiency: Terret me tota vita mea Deus
meus, quoniam diligenter discussa apparet mihi aut peccatum, aut sterilitas: --
Sic comedo, bibo, and dormio securus, quasi jam transierim diem mortu, and
evaserim diem judicii, and tormenta inferni. Sic ludo and rideo, quasi jam
regnem tecum in regno tuo. Bernard. de interiori domo, c. 33.

Tanquam arbor sterilis terram occupo, and velut jumentum vile plus consumo
quam proficio. Vivere erubesco, quia parum proficio; mori timeo, quoniam non
sum paratus. Id. ib. c. 35.


O my God, my whole Life makes me afraid, says he, for if I diligently examine
it, that which appears to me in it is either Sin or Barrenness. And again; I
cumber the Ground as a barren Tree, says he, and as a base Beast I waste and
consume more than I profit. I am ashamed to live, because I profit so little,
and I Am afraid to die, because I am unprovided. Erasmus professed concerning
himself, Accusant quo l nimium f^cerim; ^^ru c^nscientia mea me accusat quo l
minus secerim, q o lque lentior fuerim.
They accuse me for doing too much, but my own Conscience accuses me for doing
too little, and being too slow. It is His Life in Mr. Clark's Collect. of the
Lives of ten Em. Div. p. 37.
reported of Mr. Samuel Crook, that whenever his Preaching-day happened upon
Januar. 17. (which was his Birthday) he still noted his Years complete, with
this Birthday) he still noted his Years complete, with this Penitential
Epiphonema, (...), God be merciful to me a Sinner.

An Eminent Divine of our own, yet living, who has labored I refer to the
better Works of him that labors more abundantly than us all. [Mr. Baxter] in
the Margin of Dr. Patrick's Aqua Genitalis, p. 75, in 12.
more abundantly than the most of his Brethren in the Ministry, yet expresses
himself in such humble Self-reflections as these; For Mr. Baxter's Now or
Never, p. 181, 182.
my own part, says he, though I have long lived in a sense of the Preciousness
of Time, and have not been wholly idle in the World; yet when I have the
deepest Thoughts of the great everlasting Consequents of my Work, and of the
Uncertainty and Shortness of my Time, I am even amazed to think that my Heart
can be so slow and senseless, as to do no more in such a case. The Lord knows,
and my accusing wounded Conscience knows, that my Slothfulness is so much my
shame and admiration, that I am astonished to think that my Resolutions are no
stronger, my Affections no livelier, and my Labor and Diligence no greater,
when God is the Commander, and his Love the Encourager, and his Wrath the Spur,
and Heaven or Hell must be the Issue. -- Let who will speak against such a
Life, it shall be my daily grief and moan, that I am so dull, and do so little.
And in another Making light of Christ and Salvation, Consideration 3.
Discourse he makes this free and open acknowledgment; For my self, says he, as
I am ashamed of my dull and careless Heart, and of my slow and unprofitable
course of Life; so the Lord knows, I am ashamed of every Sermon that I preach:
When I think what I have been speaking of, and who sent me, and that Men's
Salvation or Damnation is so much concerned in it; I am ready to tremble, lest
God should judge me as a Slighter of his Truth, and the Souls of Men, and lest
in the best Sermon I should be guilty of their Blood.

The Trees of Righteousness are apprehensive of their own Vnfruitfulness,
troubled at it, mourn under it, and use themselves to such holy Breathings as
that of Employment.
Mr. Herbert, O That I were an Orange-tree,
That busy Plant!
Then should I ever laden be,
And never want
Some Fruit for him that dressed me.


Serious, considerative Christians do blame themselves for their Loss of Time
even in their Lifetime: But,

2. They are especially sensible of it, and exceedingly ashamed of themselves
for it at their Death.

They that have been the most busy stirring Christians all their Lifetime,
when they come to die do repent of their Lasiness, blush to think of their
spiritual Slothfulness, bewail and lament their Carelessness and Negligence.
They that have been the Wonders of the World for Strictness and Preciseness,
Singularity and Severity of holy Living; that have been admired for their
Usefulness, Industry, Diligence and Activity, yet when they lay a dying, have
condemned themselves, censured their past Lives, and earnestly wished, O! that
they had been a thousand times more holy and religious, more painful and
laborious for God, and their own and others Souls. Melchior Adam relates in
Page 235.
The Life of the Learned and holy Theodore Beza, that when he was very aged,
and plainly perceived his approaching End, he often used that Saying of St.
Austin, Diu vixi, diu peccavi: I have lived long, I have sinned long. The
excellent and useful Philip de Mornay, in his last Sickness said to the
Minister that assisted him, In his Life centracted and translated out of French
by Mr. Edward Stern Fellow of P. Hall in Cambridg: among Mr. Clark's Lives, p.
74. fol.
I have a great Account to make, having received much, and profited little. So
the painful and pious Dr. Robert Harris, when a Friend told him in his
Sickness, Sir, you may take much comfort in your Labors, you have done much
good: His Answer was; In his Life written by Mr. W. Durham. p. 55, 56.
Oh! I am an unprofitable Servant, I have not done any thing for God as I
ought: Loss of Time sits heavy upon my Spirit: Work, work apace; Assure your
selves nothing will more trouble you when you come to die, than that you have
done no more for God, who has done so much for you. Yea, the Reverend and holy
Bp. Usher, a most laborious and sedulous Servant of God, a Prodigy of Industry,
a Person that never was known to lose an Hour, by was ever employed in his
Master's Business, either praying, preaching, studying, writing, reading, or
hearing others read to him; either resolving of Doubts, or exhorting,
instructing, giving good, wholesome and holy Counsel to such as came to visit
him: yet (as Page 110.
Dr. Bernard relates in his Life) the very last Words that ever he was heard to
utter in praying for Forgiveness of Sins, were these; But, Lord, in special
forgive my Sins of Omission.

If the choicest Saints on Earth, the faithfullest Servants of God in the
World, who have surpassed and transcended us by many Degrees, do close and end
their Lives with an humble Confession, and earnest Petition for Forgiveness and
Pardon of their Sins of Omission; Surely then we have reason to conclude, that
we our selves, do what we can, shall repent at last of doing too little, and
not repent and complain of having done too much.

And if those that have well redeemed their Time complain, especially at the
Hour of Death, that they have lost too much of it; What a case then will the
careless negligent World be in, when their sleepy Consciences shall be roused
and awakened, and they be hastened and hurried out of this world, and their
Souls and Bodies shall be just a parting, and they shall look behind them upon
an idle, loose and lazy Life, and look before them upon a dreadful, horrible,
terrible Judgment?

I have done with the Motives to press you to the Duty: In the next place I
shall give you some Directions, which may be so many Means to help you to
regain the Time, and redeem the Opportunity. Take these twelve following.

CHAP. VII. Direction (1.) If ever we would redeem the Time, we must endeavor
to be thoroughly convinced of the great value and real worth of Time; In respect
of the Price paid for it: In regard of the use and end to which it serves:
Considering what precious Thoughts the more improved Heathens had of Time: And
what damned Spirits, and dying Persons who have not made their Peace with God,
think of Time. Direct. (2.) If we would well redeem the Time, we must often
examine our selves, and call our selves to a serious strict Account for the
spending of our Time. This was the Precept of Pythagoras, and Cicero; and the
Practice of Sextius, Seneca, and Titus Vespasian. Direct. (3.) That we may
rightly redeem our Time, let Conscience have some Authority with us, and
procure some reverence from us. Stand much in aw of thy own Conscience, which
will either acquit and absolve thee, or surely judge and condemn thee. Direct.
(4.) If ever we would redeem the Time, we must live and act, and do every thing
as in the sight and presence, and under the eye and inspection of God. The
apprehension of God's all-seeing, all-searching Eye, will be of excellent Use
and Advantage to us at 4 times especially; 1. Actually consider that God sees
you, when you ordinarily visit one another, and at any time feast and make
merry together. 2. When Buying or Selling, remember you are manifest in God's
Sight, that God stands by and sees your dealings. 3. Consider this in your
secret Retirements, and in your private Families. 4. Whenever we come to the
public Worship of God, let us seriously consider, that we stand in his
Presence, and are in his eye. Direct. (5.) That we may wisely redeem the Time,
let us be sure to propound a good end to our selves in all our Actions; and do
nothing deliberately, but what we can safely and freely, warrantably and
comfortably ask God's Assistance in, and Blessing upon, when we go about it.
Direct. (6.) We must be sure to give our selves to Prayer, as a special way in
which, and principal means and help by which we may redeem and improve our Time
aright. And here 1. Be careful to keep up set and stated times of Prayer: of
secret Prayer, and Family Prayer. 2. Be ready to betake thy self to Prayer,
upon special, extraordinary, emergent Occasions. 3. Use thy self to frequent,
sudden, ejaculatory Prayers to God. This is the Privilege of Ejaculation, that
it is a gaining of Time for the Exercise of Religion, without any prejudice or
hindrance to your Calling. Direct. (7.) We must set our selves to the frequent
diligent reading, and serious studying of the sacred Scriptures. For 1. This is
a gaining and making advantage of all that Time past which the Scripture gives
us the History and Account of. 2. Our reading the holy Books of Scripture, is a
well improving the present time that is employed in this religious Duty: for,
it is an honoring of God; and a means of attaining divine Knowledge, heavenly
Grace, and spiritual Comfort. 3. It is moreover a means and help to the right
redeeming of our Time for the future. Direct. (8.) If we would effectually
redeem the Time, we must give our selves to frequent and serious Meditation.
Set some Time apart for this Duty. Think of the 4 last things especially; 1. Of
Death; of the Day of thy own particular Death, and of the Time of the General
Dissolution of this World. 2. Of the Day of Judgment. 3. Of the Joys of Heaven,
4. Of the Torments of Hell. Direct. (9.) If you would redeem the Time, you must
labor to spiritualize even your ordinary worldly Employments; and must take
care that your natural, as well as civil, Actions partake of Religion. Direct.
(10.) if we would wisely redeem the Time, we must make a good Choice of our
Friends and Acquaintance, and a good Improvement of our Company and Society
with them. Direct. (11.) We must remember and consider, perform and answer our
solemn Sacramental Vows, and Sick-bed-Promises and Resolutions. Direct. (12.)
Lastly; If we would redeem the Time, we must not give way to any Delay, but
strengthen and settle our Resolution against any farther procrastination.
The First Direction.
IF ever we would redeem the Time, we must endeavor to be thoroughly convinced
of the great Value, and real Worth of Time. Consider,

1. How precious Time is in respect of the Price paid for it: That our Time was
bought into our Hands, not with corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold, but
with the precious Blood of Christ: for, we had forfeited our very Lives; and
space for Repentance is the Fruit of the Death of Christ. Consider,

2. How precious Time is in regard of the Use and End to which it serves: how
Time brings Advantages with it, for the compassing of the greatest
Undertakings, and for the perfecting of those that are most imperfect. Time is
not an empty Duration: God has filled Time with Helps to Eternity, and with
Means sufficient to know him the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, whom to know is Life eternal. Consider,

3. What precious Thoughts the more improved Heathens had of Time. Poteras
hasce horas non perdidisse.
Pliny seeing his Nephew walk for his Pleasure, called to him, and said, You
might have found somewhat else to do, you needed not have lost your Hours thus.
It is the Commendation given by Aelian of the old Lacedamonians, that they
(...), etc.
were exceeding frugal and parsimonious of their Time, taking care to employ it
in serious urgent Businesses, not allow or permitting any Citizen to waste and
consume it in Idleness and Sloth; or vainly to throw it away, by spending it on
such Things as did not at all appear to minister to any Virtue: For a Testimony
of which the Historian gives this Instance; That when it was told the Ephori,
that the People of Decelia did use to walk in the Afternoons; those vigilant,
diligent Magistrates presently sent to them, to prohibit their customary
Walking merely to take their Pleasure: For they reckoned, (...) Aelian. var.
Hist. l. 2.9.5.
it became the Lacedaemonians to get and preserve good Health, not by taking
such idle Recreations, but by giving themselves to some profitable Exercises,
which might train and fit them for public Use and Service. Were they so
thrifty only for the Profit and Commodity of their City? And shall not we make
much of our Time, be sparing and saving of our Hours, that we may employ them
in the Worship and Service, to the Honor and Glory of our God; for the Safety
and Welfare of our immortal Souls, and the securing to our selves a celestial
City, and an heavenly Country? The judicious Plutarch acknowledges, that (...).
Plut.
Time is of all the most costly Expense. The considering and understanding
Seneca was more sensible than many of the Worth of Time; had himself
appretiating Thoughts of it, and reproves the common Sort of Men of their great
Ignorance of the Preciousness and Usefulness of it. I am apt to wonder, says
he, when I hear some Men ask others to spend their Time, and bestow their Hours
on them; and observe those that are thus asked to be so easy to part with these
Time to them: Quasi nihil petitur, quasi (...) datur: re omnium pretiosi^ma
luditur. etc de brev. vit. c. 8.
It Is asked as a very small matter, and given away as if it were worth nothing:
Men plainly play with the most precious Thing that is: But this deceives them,
says he, That Time is an incorporeal Thing, nd cannot be perceived with bodily
Eyes, and is therefore made of little reckoning, or no account with them. And
in his first Epistle he thus complains to his Friend Lucilius; Qu^m mihi dabis,
qui aliquod pretium te^ ori ponat? qui diem ^stimet? Sen. ep. 1.
Where will you find me a Man, says he, that sets a due Price, a right and true
Estimate and Value upon his Time?

Most Men are careful of an Hourglass, but careless of their Hours. Men throw
away their Time, because they have mean and low Thoughts of it: They know not
the Worth of this Jewel, and therefore they are easily cheated of it, and are
ready to part with it upon the cheapest terms. Many Christians may learn of
some of the wisest Heathens not to make light of their precious Hours, but to
value their Time at an higher Rate.

4. Let those that yet have Time in their hands, learn to prize it, by
considering, how those that want it judge of it. They that have quite lost their
Time, Oh! what would they give to redeem it? Men too commonly little think that
Time is of any great Value: I am sure the most of us live as if we did not
believe so. But I pray consider, what damned Spirits, and dying Persons, who
have not made their peace with God, think of Time. Consider,

(1.) What precious Thoughts lost damned Souls have of Time, who suffer such
extremity of Misery for slighting and abusing it. What would not they give, if
it were possible, for our Time and Opportunities, and those Seasons of Grace
which we enjoy, but do not improve; which God indulgeth to us, but we are not
thankful for, nor careful of? What would not they offer, or yield to, to have a
new Price put into their hands, to have farther advantages of redeeming Time?
Could they be admitted to live in this World again, and to act here another
Part; would they ever grudg to do any spiritual Duty? would they ever think any
religious Exercise tedious? would they be tired at a Sermon, or weary of a
Prayer? would not they be willing to pray every Day; till they were even hoarse
again; to pray till their Knees were as hard as the Boards upon which they
kneeled? Would not their Heads be Fountains of Waters, and would not they be
ready to weep out their very Eyes in the Confession of their Sins? Could they
be released and restored, would they be any more afraid to resist the
Temptations of a carnal Friend, to refuse an ensnaring Invitation, to deny a
Cup immodestly pressed, and unseasonably urged; to reprove a bold and daring
Sinner, and to own and side with God and Religion in any Company whatsoever?
With what undaunted Courage and Resolution would they be forward to bear
Witness against the reigning Sins, and common Vices of the World? With what
Force and Violence would they endeavor to take the Kingdom of Heaven? and how
would they labor to lead others into, and to help them on in the Way to
Heaven? How would they speak with yearning Bowels of tenderest Compassions to
the Souls of their sinful Friends and Relations, and seek the Conviction,
Conversion, and Salvation of the sensual, worldly, careless, ungodly
Neighborhood round about them? How would every Word that proceeded out of
their Mouths be Heart-deep? How patiently would they conti nue in well doing,
to make sure of an endless glorious Happiness? And how contentedly would they
endure, and cheerfully suffer any thing here, to escape the intolerable eternal
Torments of Hell, and to fly from the Wrath to come? Consider further,

(2.) What high and precious Thoughts a dying Man, who has not made his Peace
with God, has of Time?

The forementioned raised Philosopher well observes the different Judgments
and Affections of Men, in the course of a pleasurable Life, and under
apprehensions of the Nearness of Death. When Men think they have Time enough,
they have no regard of Time, but are extremely prodigal of it: At eosdem aegros
vide, si mortis periculum admotum est propius, medicorum genua tangentes. Sen.
de brev. vit c 8.
But look on these Men when they are sick, says he; If they appear in any
danger of Death, you shall find them courting and crouching to Physicians, and
bowing down to their very Knees, begging the Use of their Art and Skill, to
prolong their Days, and lengthen out their Lives. Or if they fear they shall
suffer capital Punishment, you shall see them ready to lay out all to save
their Lives. But if, as the Number of every ones past Years may be reckoned,
so, the Number of those that are to come could be assigned, Quemodo illi ui
paucos viderent superesse, trepidarent, quomodo illis parcerent? Id. Ib.
How would they tremble, says he, that should see but a few remaining, and how
apt would they be to be sparing of them.

Surely they, that have all their Lives made it their Business to drive away
their Time, would at their Deaths give all the World to redeem it. What would
the dying Husband give for Time to spend more spiritually with his Wife? the
dying Wife for Time to spend more holily with her Husband? the dying Master,
for Time to spend more godlily with his Family? the dying Parent, for Time to
spend in a more religious Institution, and conscientious Education of his
Children? a dying Neighbor, for Time to spend in more profitable Converse with
those about him? Would he intend to spend his Time, if he could live longer, in
tempting his Neighbor to the Tavern or Ale house, to drinking, or gaming, or
the like?

If God would but lengthen out such a Person's Days, and afford him but a
little more Space to amend his Life, and to lay hold on eternal Life; he would
thankfully accept of it upon the hardest Conditions: He would be content to be
the poorest Beggar in the Street, and to live a mean and outwardly miserable
Life as long as he lived. He is just now departing out of this World, and
immediately going to his own Place; and if Time were now to be redeemed, what
would not the most voluptuous Man be willing to do or suffer? What would not
the most covetous Man be ready to part with for the purchasing of it? What
would not he give for Considera quam multi modo m^riuntur: quibus si haec hora
ad agendum p^nitentiam: one^^er^tur, quae tibi concessa est, quomodo per
a^taria, and qua a f^stinanter currerent, and ibi sle^^s genibus, vel cere toto
corpore in terram prestrato, tamdiu suspirerent plorarent and orare t^, donec
pleniss^^am peccatorum ven^am a Deo consequi mer^^entur? Tu vero comedendo,
bibendo, jocan^o, and ridendo, tempus oc^ose vivendo perdis, quod tibi
indulserat Deus ad acquirendam gratiam, and ad promerenda^ gloriam. Bernard. de
interiori domo, c. 63.
that Time, which some of you, it may be, spend and throw away in Drinking,
Gaming, Carding, Diceing, in Romances and Stage-Plaies, in idle foolish
Pastimes, in Jeering and Jesting, and carnal sinful Merry-making? To what
excellent Uses would he resolve to put his Hours, if he could enjoy any more of
them? If God would grant him but one Year of Trial more, how little would he
design to give to the World, and the Flesh; and how much to God, and Godliness,
and the Offices and Exercises of pure Religion and undefiled? How would such an
one purpose and promise to resist Temptations, to shun all Occasions and
Appearances of Evil, carefully to provide for his immortal Soul, diligently to
study the sacred Scriptures, strictly to observe the whole Lord's Day,
attentively to hear the Word preached, both in Season, and out of Season;
frequently to meditate of it, and constantly to frame and order his Life
according to it; to pray with his Family devoutly and fervently, morning and
evening; to spend some Time every Day with God, and himself, in secret: to make
the purest and precisest Christians his constant Patterns and Examples; and for
the future to follow and imitate those, whom heretofore he hated and derided,
nicknamed and abused.

When once Men ly a dying, and the near Approach of their latter End does
awaken their sleepy secure Consciences, and make the most stupid sottish Sinner
begin now to be truly sensible and serious; with what aestuations and
perturbations of Mind, with what anguish and akings of Heart, with what Pangs
and Agonies, and fearful Tremblings; with what doleful Accents, and passionate,
piercing, moving, melting Expressions, do they lament and be^ail their wa^teful
Mis-spence, and miserable Loss of all the Time of God's most patient Trial of
them, and of all their special golden Seasons, and rare Advantages and
Opportunities? When they take their leave of all about them, how earnestly and
importunately do they exhort and urge them to be better husbands of their Time
and Talents? How pathetically and feelingly do they then advise and counsel
their Children and Servants, Friends and Relations, Neighbors and
Acquaintance, to number their Days, to lead good Lives, to improve their
Health and Strength for God, and their own and others Souls; and timely to
prepare for Death and Judgment?

Let Us consider, some of us, who have thought sometimes that the Sentence of
Death has past upon us, and have looked on such or such a Sickness as our last
Arrest and Summons, what would we then have disbursed for a Reprieve? Would we
not have given, with Hand and Heart, an House full of Silver and Gold, if we
had had it, to have been sure to have lived another Year, for the proving and
evidencing the Truth and Sincerity of our Faith and Repentance, by a course of
Obedience, and our making a larger and surer provision for our comfortable
Reception and happy Entertainment in the other World? Friends, we shall ere
long be all of us placed upon our Deathbeds: and if we make no matter of Time
now, if we will not value and prize it now, we shall then sure enough highly prize
it, when alas! it will be too late. And if we now have worthy thoughts of it,
we shall suffer nothing to rob and deprive us of it. Quam felix and prudent,
qui talis nunc nititur esse in vita, qualis optat inveniri in morte. Thomas a
Rempis, lib. 1. c. 23. n. 4.

Hic est apex summae sapientiae, ea viventem facere, quae morienti essent
appetenda.


Let Us be of the same mind and judgment now in our Health and Strength, that we
shall certainly be of in Sickness and Weakness; and not contemn and vilify that
in our Life time, which we shall wish we had worthily esteemed, and
well-improved, at the Hour of Death.

The second Direction.
If we would well redeem the Time, we must often Vide Ludov. Crocii Syntagm. a
p. 1207, ad 1212.
examine our selves, and call our selves to a serious strict Account for the
spending of our Time.

Alas! too many earnestly study to know and understand all things but
themselves: They observe and take notice of other Men's Tempers and Humors,
search and enquire into other Men's Actions, and read the Histories of other
Men's Lives; and Quando omnia percur visti, quid te neglecto profecisti? A
Kempis, l. 2. c. 5. n. 2.
yet are ignorant of their own Hearts and spiritual Estates, unobservant of the
Passages, and unacquainted with the particulars of their own Conversations. We
can easily pass away the Day and the Night, the Week and the Year, in musing on
a thousand Matters; Vt nemo in seso tentat descendere, nemo. Pers. Sat. 4.
But where is the Man that bestows any serious Thoughts on himself, that
questions and interrogates his own Heart, and takes due notice of his own Life;
or is at all concerned how his Soul is improved, and his Hours employed?

Certainly some of the very Heathens will rise up in Judgment against most
Christians; for we find that they have been very famous for this Practice, of
being severe in taking Account of themselves, and of their Time. Suetonius
relates of Titus Vespasian, the Heathen Emperor, that remembering on an
Evening, as he was at Supper, that he had done no good that Day to any one,
Memorabilem illam, meritoque landatam vocem edidit: Annci, diem perdidi, Suet
in vit. Vesp.. 8.
he uttered that memorable and deservedly commended Saying, Alas! my Friends, I
have lost this Day.

St. Jerome tells us of a wise Saying of the Pythagoreans, Pythago teum and
illud praeceptum est, ducrum temporum maxim habondam curam, mane and vespert;
id est, eorum quae acturi sumus. and eorum quae gesserimus. Apolog. Hieron.
advers. Russi um. l. 3.

Moan prepone, vespere discute mores tuos, qualis hodie suists in verbo, opere,
and cogit ^^^one: quia ia his saepius s^itan offendssti Deum and proximum. A
Kemp. l 1 c. 19. n 4

Quid quoqu die dixerim, audiverim, egerim, commemoro vespers. Caro apud Cic de
Senect.


That a special Care is to be had of two portions of our Time, of the Morning,
and of the Evening: Of the Morning, to consider, and resolve to do what ought
to be done; and of the Evening, to examine whether we have done what we ought.

And it is one of Pythagoras's golden Precepts, Never offer to give sleep to
your Eyes before you have thrice run over in your Mind the several Particulars
of that Day's Actions, and put such Questions as these to your self, Examen
Pythagoricum.

(...).


Where have I transgressed? what have I well done? what have I left undone,
which it became me to have done? And if thou have done any thing, says he,
that is base and unworthy, charge thy self with it, and chide thy self for it:
But if thou have done any thing that is good and virtuous, rejoice and delight
in it. Hoc nos pessimos facit, quod nemo vitans saam respicit, etc. Sen. ep. 83.
This makes us so very bad, says Seneca, because no man reflects upon his own
Life. It may be sometimes, though seldom, we think what we are to do, says he;
but what we have done, we do not think: But we are to deliberate what to do for
the future, from the consideration of what we have done already. And in his
third Book de Ira, he has an excellent Discourse to this Purpose: He says
there, That the Soul is daily to be called to give an Account. And he tells us
of one Sextius, whose constant Course it was to do thus; That, when the Day was
spont, and he went to take his rest at Night, he would demand of himself; What
evil of yours have you healed this Day? what Vice have you resisted? in what
part are you better? Anger and Passion (says the Philosopher there) will be
moderated and abated, when it knows it must daily come before a Judge: And
therefore, says he, what is more excellent than this Custom of examining the
whole Day past? O Qualis ille somnus p^st recog itionem sui sequitur? etc. Sen.
de Ira, l. 3. c. 36.
what a sweet Sleep is that which follows after the Recognition of a Man's
self? How quiet and free is a Man's Mind, when it is either commended or
admonished, and a Man does secretly review and censure his own Manners? I use
this Liberty with my self (says Sencea there in the same Place) I have a daily
Trial within my self, says he; When at Night the Candle is taken away, and all
is still and silent; then I search and enquire into the whole Day, I measure
and run over, I scan and consider all my Words and Deeds; I hide nothing from
my self, I overlook and pass by nothing: I say to my self, you have done so and
so, see you do so no more.

You see how some of the wisest and best of the very Heathen did accustom
themselves to this Self-scrutiny, and took an Account of their Lives and
Actions.

And many eminent and Godly Christians to this Purpose do use Diaries, and
daily set down in Journals or Day-books the observable remarkable Passages of
their Lives. And we must do at least somewhat like it. Before we sleep every
Night, let us be sure to make such a Recollection and Examination of the Actions
of that Day, as may represent any thing that is remarkable to be matter either
of Humiliation, or of Thanksgiving.

Accustom thy self, before thou take thy Rest and Repose, to have some
private Talk, some secret Conference with thy selt, to ask thy self such
Questions as these, and to use such Language as this; What has been the Frame
and Temper of my Heart? what my Carriage and Behavior this Day? what the
Principles of my Practice? what the Ends of this Day's Actions? Did my Mind
awake with my Body in the Morning? did I then exercise the Consideration of a
Man and Christian; and deliberately renew, and six and settle my Resolution for
the purifying and right ordering my Conversation? Did I early go to God by
Prayer, and in the Matthew. 6.33.
first place seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness? Wherein have I
offended or angered my good God this Day? wherein have I injured or provoked my
Neighbor, or hurt his Soul, Body, Estate, or good Name? wherein have I
wronged, or any way prejudiced my own Soul? what proud, discontented, covetous,
ambitious, malicious, revengeful Thought? what silthy, or angry, vainglorious,
or idle Word? what inconvenient, abusive, offensive Jest? what ungodly Deed, or
unbecoming unseemly Action have I this Day been guilty of? In what has Satan
this Day taken Advantage against me? or how has my own deceitful Heart turned
me aside? What Degrees of Intemperance have I admitted in Meats or Drinks? what
worldly Cares have I been distracted with? what carnal Fears have I been ready
to sink under? To what have I my self been effectually tempted? or, wherein
have I offered to be a Tempter of any other? What Solicitation to Evil have I
resisted? What Sin and Corruption have I striven against? What open, careless
or wilful Sinner have I seasonably and prudently reproved? What Duty have I
performed? What Grace have I exercised? What Time have I employed in
Closet-Devotion, in Family-Religion, in diligent following the Business of my
Calling? What Company have I run into, or kept? What Hours have I spent in such
Company? and to what profit or benefit to my self or others? What was my
Omission and Neglect? what my Sin and Vanity, committed and repeated in such
Society? have I not closed this Day with a drousy sleepy Prayer this Night? Am
I grown any better this Week, this Day, than I was the last?

You know, at Night, and at the End of the Week, we usually call our Servants
to Account: Let us use the same Method, and take the same Course, for a Daily,
weekly Reckoning with our selves. In the Close of the Day, at the End of the
Week, let us commune with, and reflect upon our selves, and take our solves to
task. Let Us take a view, and make a surveigh of our past Lives; observe how our
Time goes, watch what becomes of it, see how it is laid out, that so beholding
how useless and unfruitful we have been, we may even be ashamed of our selves,
and labor to grow more useful and fruitful for the future: As, Rev. 2.5.
remembering from whence she was fallen, was prescribed to the Church of Ephesus
as a means of her repenting. And on the contrary, because ser. 8.6.
no Man said, What have I done? therefore every one turned to his Course, as
the Horse rusheth into the Battle.

By daily observing, examining, taking account of our selves and Ways, we
shall come to Repentance more speedily and easily; and recover the Favor of
God immediately: The Candle that is presently blown in again, offends not: We
shall have the Advantage of making to God Mr. Hildersam on Ps. 51. p. 183.
a fuller Confession of our Sins, while our Sins with their Circumstances are
fresh and recent in our Memories. And shall be more effectually restrained from
Sin for the future, by thinking thus with our selves, This I must account with
God, and my own Conscience for before I sleep. And by this means we shall be
freed from the Fear of sudden Death, and be in a constant good Preparation for
it: because though our Master come suddenly, he will not find us sleeping, nor
surprise us in unrepented Sin. When in this manner we make all even every Night
between God and our own Consciences, we may lie down in Peace, and take a quiet
Rest and Sleep, without any perplexing amazing Fears of our awaking the next
Morning in the other World.

Hold and maintain this Practice of Calling thy self to a daily strict Account,
and you shall certainly find and happily experience that of A Kempis to be a
great Truth, Suaviter requiesees, si cor tuum te non reprehenderit. Noli
laetari, nisi cum been feceris. A Kemp. l. c. 6 n 1.

Gaudebis semper vespere, si diem expendas fructuose. Idem l. 1. c. 25. n. 11.


Thou shall sweetly rest, if thy own Heart reprehend thee not: Thou shall
rejoice and be glad at heart every Night, if thou have not lost, but fruitfully
spent the Day past.

De perfectione.
Rodericus relates of Suarez, that he was wont to say, he esteemed that little
Pittance of Time, which constantly every Day he set apart for the private
Examination of his own Conscience, more than all the other Part of the Day,
which he spent in his voluminous Controversies. And it is reported of that
learned Professor of Divinity, Dr. Samuel Ward, that when he lay upon his
Deathbed, he professed he had read many Books, but had no such comfort from
his reading any, as from his reading, and studying the Book of his own Heart
and Life.

That is the second Direction; Frequently call yourselves to an Account. Often
Reckonings make long Friends: It holds most true between God and our Souls,
between our Consciences and our selves. Reckon with God and your selves every
Evening, how you have spent the Day foregoing, and this will provoke you
humbly to beg the Pardon of your Sins at God's Hands, and Power against them;
to judge, and punish, and take an holy Revenge upon your selves; to exercise
Repentance for your past Failings, and strict Watchfulness for the future.

The third Direction.
That we may rightly redeem our Time, let Reason and Conscience have some
Authority with us, and not be despised and disregarded by us. They are most
brave generous Rules and Precepts that are given by Pythagoras in his golden
Verses; (...)
Never accustom thy self in any Thing to act and carry thy self irrationally,
and below a Man. And, of all things, see, says he, that you (...).

Cum jam pr^fec^ris tantum, ut sit tibi etiam tui reverentia. dum te efficis
eum, coram quo peccare non audeas; and aliqua coeperit apud te tui esse
dignatio. Sen. ep. 25.


reverence, and use good Manners to your self. Let Reason rule and govern thy
Passions and Affections, and Conscience withhold thee from being guilty of any
Impiety or Impurity, Absurdity or Undecency. Do nothing to put thy self to the
blush, to sill thy self with secret Shame and Sorrow, and sinking Fear, for the
Turpitude or Folly of thy Own Actions. Take the wholesome Counsel and good
Advice that Ausonius gives thee, Turpe quid ausurus, te sine test time.
When thou art about to do any vile and vicious Thing, be afraid of thy self,
though no body else be near thee, to be a Witness of thy Wickedness. Si turpia
sunt, quae facis, quid refert neminem scire, cum tu seias? O te miserum, si
contemnis hunc testem! Sen. ep. 43. i. sine.
If the Things thou do (says Seneca excellently) be unseemly and uncomely,
what does it avail thee that none in the World knows it, when thou thy self
know it? O miserable Man, says he, if thou contemnest this Witness within
thee. And I find Lactantius citing these admirable Sayings out of him; Demens,
quid prodest non habere conscium habence conseientiam? -- Custos te tuus
sequitur. -- Haeret hic, quo carere nunquam potes. Lactant, de vero cultu, 1.
6. 24.
Thous very mad Man, what will it profit thee to have no other conscious of thy
Crime, so long as thou do carry a Conscience within thee? And again; What
do thou do? what do thou devise? what do thou go about to conceal? thy
Keeper closely follows thee. One is absent from thee by reason of a Voyage or
Journey, that he cannot observe thee: another is removed by Death, that used to
look narrowly to thee: another is kept away from thee by Sickness: but
Conscience sticks at all Times to thee: you can never shake off, or get rid of
that.

Put not a Slight, much less a Force upon Conscience: never use any Violence to
it: never offer to baffle, and stisle, and top the Mouth of it: Cast not this
good Micaiah into Prison, make it not weary of its Office of warning thee; but
show all due respect to it, and hear and obey the Voice of it.

Stand much in aw of the Spy, the Register, the faithful Momtor in thy Breast
and Bosom. Let Conscience so far prevail with thee, as to restrain and deter
thee from a loose and wicked, a slothful or idle mis-spending thy Time; and to
spur and quicken thee powerfully and effectually to a wise and prudent, a
faithful and good Improvement of it.

Do nothing but what is fairly accountable to thy considering self: follow the
Guidance of thy best REason: attend to the Dictates and Commands, and regard
the Checks and controls of a well-informed and enlightened Conscience. Timely
take notice of its softer and gentler Whispers, lest you be disturbed,
affrighted and terrified with its louder Clamours.

Be careful to approve your self to Conscience: fear the After-reckonings of
Conscience: and labor to prevent and hinder the Accusation and Condemnation of
an Evil Conscience, and the Execution that will be done, the Punishment that
will be inflicted, and the Vengeance that will be taken sooner or later by it.
Dread the Thoughts of falling out with thy self; of being gnawn by a Vultur,
and haunted by a Fury within thee; of suffering the little Ease, the sharp and
severe Bridewel, the Reproaches and Upbraidings, the Pangs and Gripings, the
Tearings and Rendings, the Lashes and Stingings, the Racks and Strappados of a
guilty Conscience: and value the Testimony and Approbation of the Witness
within thee, the Acquitment and Absolution of the Deputy-Judg within thee; and
study to do every thing to gain and obtain the Euge's and Applanses, the
Justification and Commendation, the Gratulation and Consolation of an honest,
clear and good Conscience.

That is the third Direction in order to the better redeeming of our Time; Let
Reason and Conscience have some Authority with us, and procure some Reverence
from us.

The fourth direction.
If ever we would redeem the Time, we must live and act, and do every thing as
in the Sight and Presence, and under the Eye and Inspection of God our Judge.

Wherever thou art, and whatever thou do, remember and consider, that not
only Conscience, but God is by: and 1 John 3.20.
if our Heart condemn us, that God is greater than our Heart, and knows all
things: that if Conscience be as a thousand Witnesses, God is as a thousand
Consciences; both for Intimacy of Presence, and Perspicacity in discerning. If
we have made any proficiency in Philosophy (says Tully excellently) we must be
persuaded sufficiently, that if we could Si omnes deos hominesque celare
possimus, etc. Cice. o de Offic. l. 3.
conceal all our Actions from all the Gods, and from all Men, so that they
should be always ignorant of them, yet we ought to do nothing covetously,
unjustly, wantonly, incontinently. If a Wise Man had Gyges 's Ring, says he,
which (according to Plato's Fable) would render him invisible; he should not
reckon that he had gotten the least license to sin the more by it: for Honesta
enim bonis viris, non occulta quaer untur. Idem ibidem.
good Men seek to act with Honesty, not with Secrecy.

But though that which is good to be followed for it self, for the Bonity, and
Beauty of it; and that which is evil, to be avoided for the intrinsic
Turpitude of it: yet the Knowledge that others may be supposed to have of our
Actions, is apt to increase our Care, and quicken our Diligence, to order and
compose our Lives and Manners, without just Blame or Exception of others.

It is profitable, says Seneca, to set some Keeper over one's self; to have
some body in our Eye, whom we may suppose to be present and privy to our very
thoughts: to do every thing we do, as if some body looked on, and were a
Spectator and an Eyewitness of all we did. Privacy and Secrecy tempts and
persuades Men to all Evil. A great part of Offenses would be removed, says he,
if there did but one stand by as a ready Witnesss against the Offender. But it
is more awful, says he, Te aliquorum authoritate custods. -- Nemo est, eui non
satius sit cum quolibet esse, quam se^um. -- In turbam tibi a te recedendum
est. Istic enim malo viro proprus es. Seneca, epi f. 25.

Aliquem habeat animus, quem vereatur, cujus authoritate etiam secretum saum
sanctius facit. O felicem illum, qui non aspectus tantum, sed etiam cogitatus
emendat! O selicem, qui sic aliq tem verert potest, ut ad memoriam quoque ejus
se componat, atque ordinet! Qui sic aliquem vereri potest, cito erit verenases.
Id. ep. 11.


to live and act as under the Eye, and in the Presence of some excellent
Person, and eminent good Man. Set Cato, Scipio, Laelius before you, or some
such Person, says he, upon whose appearing the most wicked Persons would
forbear their Vices: and let the Authority of these restrain you, and have
Influence upon you, until you have made your self such an one that you begin to
reverence your self, and dare not to do evil before your self. Nay that heathen
Philosopher goes yet farther, Sic vive cum hominibus, tanquam Deus videat.
Idem, Epist. 10.
So live with Men, says he, as if God himself saw you, and took special notice
of you. And again in another Epistle; Sic certe vivendum est, tanquam in
conspectu vivamus: sic cogitandum, tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum inspicere
possit: and potest Quid enim prodest ab homine aliquid esse secretum? nihil Deo
cousum est Iuterest animis nostris, and cogitationibus mediis intervenit. Id.
ep. 83.

Zwinglius citing these Words of Seneca, expresses himself too highly
concerning him: Senecae virt sanctissimi sidem, quam Epistola ad Lucilium 83
prodit, quis non admiretur? Zuinglius Oper. Tom. 2. de Peccat. Original.
Declarat. p. 118.


What will it avail you to hide any thing from man, there is nothing concealed
and kept close from God: He looks into our Breasts, and is present in our very
Minds and Hearts.

And let me moreover add what Lactantius produces out of Seneca's Exhortations,
Nihil prodest inclusa conscientia, patemus Deo. Huic nos approbemus. Sen apud.
Lactant. de vero cultu, l. 6.. 24.
It nothing profits us to have a Conscience shut up within us, we are open to
God: Let Us approve our selves to him.

What rare Lectures are these from a mere Pagan Philosopher? how consonant and
agreeable to the sacred Scripture? That ancient Father much admiring the high
and raised Expressions falling from that incomparable Stoic, professes
concerning him; Potuit esse verus Dei cultor, si quis illi monstrasset
accontempsisset profecto Zenonem, and magistrum suum Socionem, si verae
sapientiae Ducem mactus essit. Lactant. loc. cit.
He might have been a true Worshipper of God, if any one had but shown him the
right Way: and surely he would have contemned Zeno, and his Master Socion, if
he had but met with a ready Guide to true Wisdom. And Erasmus before his Notes
on Seneca's Works, gives this Judgment of his Writings; D. Hieronymus Senecam
recensuit in catalogo Sanctorum. -- Si legas illum ut paganum, scripsit
Christian: si ut Christianum, scripsit paganice. Erasmi de Sen. judicium, ante
Comment. in Sen. Oper.
If you read him as an Heathen, he wrote like a Christian; if you read him as
a Christian, he wrote like an Heathen.

But to return to the Matter in hand: To live as under God's Eye, is more than
to live as in the presence of all the good Men in the World: more than to live
as in the Sight of all good Men and Angels. Well then with holy Psalm. 16.8.
David, let us set the Lord always before us. The Lord sets us always before
himself; let us therefore set the Lord always before our selves: for then if
ever we shall work strenuously, follow our Business closely, bestir our selves
to purpose, and carefully look about us, when we really believe that our Lord
and Master stands by us, and looks upon us. Did we but consider, that God Job
31.4.
sees all our goings, that he Job 34.21.
counts all our Steps, that he knows all our Ways, our crooked winding Ways
wherein we live, wherein we die, not live: and is more far above Deceit, than
Deceit seems above Simplicity: (as Mr. Sict. Po^m. A Wreath.
Herbert expresses it) This Consideration would cause us to make straight
Paths, and to order our Conversations aright.

If a Reverend grave Divine, a severe Magistrate, a Parent, a Rp. Andrews as if
he had made Mr. Mulcaster (formerly his School^^after) his Tutor or Supervisor,
placed his Picture over the door of his Study: whereas in all the rest of his
House, you could scaurly see a P^^ture. His funeral Sermon, at the end of his
Sermons, p. 18.
Master, an Husband, a Wife, a Servant, a Child, a Friend, or an Enemy stood
by, beheld, and heard; you would often forbear many an unhandsome, uncomely,
unseemly Word and Action. If you were always placed under Men's Observation, you
would study to do every thing to their Approbation and Satisfaction. And could
you spend your Time in immoderate Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Attiring, in
Swearing, Swaggering, Gaming, Sporting, Playing; vain, and srothy, and wanton
Discoursing; in any idle, unworthy, ungodly Action; if you did but imagine at
such a Time, and in such a Place, that God was by, and saw or heard whatever
was said or done? Pray do but actually and seriously consider, that wherever
you are, the omniscient and omnipresent God is always one of the Company, and
ever beholds whatever you do: and this will restrain you from doing Evil, and
powerfully constrain and effectually engage you with Care and Diligence to do
your Duty, to embrace and improve every Opportunity, and to make a Benefit and
Advantage of it.

The Apprehension of God's all-seeing, all-searching Eye, will be of excellent
Use and Advantage to us, at four Times especially.

1. Actually consider that God sees you, when you ordinarily visit one another,
and at any Time feast and make merry together. Whenever you go to see one
another, remember and consider that God sees how you spend your Time together:
that whenever you meet together, God is present in your Company; he hears your
Discourses, and writes down your Words; he observes and registers your Actions:
He takes exact and strict Notice, how much Time you spend idly and
unprofitably; how far you exceed in your Recreations, what Gluttony and
Drunkenness mingle with your Feastings. Still therefore meet together as those
that can never steal or step out of God's Presence: Say and do nothing
together, but what you are willing that God should see and hear. Whenever you
feast, feast as before the Lord: and when you eat and drink together, eat and
drink as before the Lord.

2. When buying or selling, remember you are manifest in God's Sight: that all
you do is naked, (...). Heb. 4 1^.
ripped open, unbowell'd, anatomized, turned inside outward in the Eye of God.
Consider, that God stands by, and sees your Dealings, hears the making of every
Contract, is a faithful Witness to every Bargain, and is privy to your Carriage
in your particular Calling, to all your Breaches and Violations of commutative
Justice.

Never offer to deceive Man, because it is impossible to deceive God. The
Tradesman may secretly falsify his Weights, and mingle his Wares, and lie and
dissemble to get them off the better: But God understands his false Dealings,
and discovers his deceitful Heart and Hand. Men may cunningly cheat and cozen
their Neighbors, but they cannot blind and impose upon God. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
Let no Man go beyond and defraud, or overreach his Brother in any Matter,
because the Lord is the Avenger of all such. Let not the Seller abuse the
Ignorance, or Credulity of the Buyer: nor the Buyer work upon the Simplicity,
or Necessity of the Seller: let him not say, Prove. 20.14.
It is naught, it is naught; and when he is gone his way, then boast of his
Pennyworth: Though such may promise themselves Impunity among Men, yet God is
the Beholder and Avenger of all such.

3. Consider this in your secret Retirements, and private Families.

(1.) Consider this in your secret Recesses and Retirements, That God is
present, looks on, and weighs and ponders all your Doings: That God sees the
very Meminerit Deum se habere testem: -- Itaque vir bonus non modo facere, sed
ne cogitare quidem quiequam audebit, quod non andeat praedicare. Tullius apud
Lactant. de vero cultu, l. 6. c. 24.
hidden Motions, and vain Imaginations of your Hearts. He knows all your secret
Designs and Projects, he beholds the most private unseemly Carriages, and
filthy Deeds. He sees within thy close-drawn Curtains, though they be of Cloth,
where never yet came Moth; (to use again the ingenious Words of the holy Sacr.
Poem. Misery.
Mr. Herbert) Psalm. 90.8.
Our secret Sins are set in the Light of God's Countenance: Psalm. 139 12.
The Darkness hides not from him; but the Night shines as the Day: the
Darkness and the Light are both alike to him. And therefore let the serious
Thoughts of God's Omniscience restrain and deter us from secret Sins.

When Paphnutius the Monk was solicited by an Harlot to impure Embraces, and
she led him out of one Room into another, he still complained they were not yet
private enough: At last she brought him into an inner Room, which was quite
dark: and here, said she, none can see us, but God, and the Devil. What, said
he, do you make a but at that? come, carry me where neither God, nor the Devil
can see me.

And so the holy Ephrem Syrus being enticed by a Harlot to commit Lewdness with
her, only desired that he might choose the Place; which she agreeing to, he
presently pitched upon the common and open Marketplace: And when she told him,
for shame they must forbear to do it there, in the eye and view of all; he
demanded of her, how she durst do that in God's Sight, which she would never
offer to do in Men's. The wise Discourses of these two religious Persons,
seasonably and seriously urging and presling the Consideration of God's
Omniscience, not only repressed, but reclaimed; seriously convinced, and
effectually converted; changed the Minds, and mended the Manners of those
notoriously impudent Harlots.

If Satan, or his Instruments, or thy own corrupt deceitful Heart tell thee at
any Time, or suggest to thee, that no Eye sees thee, thou may commit it
safely: ask, whether they can pluck out God's all-seeing Eye, or search out any
Place that is not filled with the Divine Presence, or can expunge and dash the
Items out of the Book of God's Remembrance?

(2.) Consider this in your private Families: Then count thy self an happy Man,
(says Seneca to Lucilius) when thou art able to live as it were in public;
when thy own Walls shall cover thee, not conceal thee; which for the most part
we reckon our selves enclosed with, not Non ut tut. us vivamus, sed ut peccemus
occuli. us. Sen. ep. 43.
that we may live more safely, but that we may sin more secretly and securely.
Thou shall hardly find any one, says he, that is able to live with his Door
open. Janitores conscientia nestra, non super bia opposuit. Sic vivimus, ut
desrehends sit, subito assici. Sen. ep. 43.
Not our Pride, but our Conscience, which is afraid lest any discovery should
be made, has set Porters at our Gates. We live so, says he, that to be
suddenly seen, is to be taken in a Fault or Crime.

And therefore, methinks, it was an excellent Speech, which Velleius
Paterculus relates of Livius Drusus; who, when he was about to build an House,
and the Workman offered him so to contrive it, that it should be every way
private, and no body should be able to look into it: No, says he, but Si quid
in te artis est, ita compore domum meam, ^^, quicquid ag^m, ab omnibus perspics
poss^. Vell. ^ aterculu^, lib. 2.. 14.
if you have any Art at all, so frame and contrive my House, that whatever I do
may be seen by all.

O Christian, live in thy Family, as if the Eyes of all the World were upon
thee; But especially walk within thy House, as having God's all-seeing Eye
continually fixed and intent upon thee. Think, O my Friends, yea, often think
with your selves, that God beholds your Family-neglects and Omissions, your
Family-Irregularities and Transgressions, your Family-Contentions and
Divitions: That he observes your Walking disorderly in your House and Family:
That God sees how ill you discharge your Care of Souls: that he knows in what
Families Religion is laid aside, disrelish'd, discountenanced, derided: that he
everywhere looks narrowly, whether Men pray in their Closets and Families, and
read the Scriptures and good Books, and catechize and instruct their Children
and Servants, and give them wholesome Counsel, and a good Example; or behave
themselves with Neglect and Contempt of these Things. There is not a Family
that goes without Prayer from Day to Day, and breaks the Lord's Day every Week,
but God knows them, and takes particular notice of them. Did Men consider this,
they would not suffer Profaneness and Atheism, Contention and Strife to abound
in their Families, as they do.

4. And Lastly; Whenever we come to the public Worship of God, let us
seriously consider that we stand in his Presence, and are in his Eye. Many that
come to Church out of Custom and Formality, and are not sensible of God's
Omniscience and Omnipresence, may say with Genesis 28.16.
Jacob, when they come to be awakened; Surely the Lord is in this Place, and we
knew it not.

Let Us all consider, That when we join together in Prayer, God knows our
Preparations, our Affections, our Motives to the Duty, our Carriages in it. He
beholds the Rovings and Wanderings of our Minds and Thoughts, and the Deadness
and Straitness of our Hearts and affections. Consider in like manner, that when
we hear the Word read, or preached; God well understands why we hear, and how
we hear: He plainly discerns how our Hearts work under the Word: He takes
notice, that when you come, and sit, and make as if you heard his Word, Ezekiel.
33 31.
your Heart goes after your Covetousness: He views all your negligent
irreverent Carriages, and undecent unseasonable Whisperings. God looks upon
you, when under an Ordinance you nothing but look about you, to see who are
there, and what they wear.

If Men would really believe, and seriously consider this, that when they are
in public, they are in a solemn manner before God; they would not then be
mindless and heartless, cold and formal in Prayer: they would not be critical,
careless, scornful Hearers of the Word: but they would be lively and fervent in
praying, and as diligent and attentive as could be in hearing, in order to
their spiritual prositing and well-living. It Is good, when we have so solemnly
to do with God, to think of the Eye of that God with whom we have to do: This
would possess us with more Reverence, and Godly Fear, in the Duties of God's
Worship. If the Apprehension of the Presence of 1 Cor 11.10.
Angels in public Christian Assemblies, be apt to compose Men to a reverent
Behavior; much more will the Consideration of the Presence of God be able to
effect it.

The fifth Direction.
That we may wisely redeem the Time, let us be sure to propound a good End to
our selves in all our Actions: and to do nothing deliberately, but what we can
ask God's Assistance in, and Blessing upon, when we go about. it.

1. Let Us be sure to propound a good End to our selves in all our Actions. Let
every Action be as an Est aliquid quo tendis, and in quod dirigis arcum? --
Atque ex tempore vivis?

Pers. sat. 3.


Arrow shot at a Mark. Proponamus oporter sinem Summi Boni, ad quem nitamur, ad
quem omue factum nostrum dictumque respictat: veluti navigantibus ad aliquod
sidus dirigendus est cu sas. Vita sine proposito vaga est. sea. ep. 95.
As they that sail, we must steer and direct our Course to some Star. Seneca
reproves a Sort of Persons, that acted without an End in their Eye: If you ask
any one of these, says he, when they go out of Doors, Where are you going?
what are you thinking of? He Will answer, and tell you, Truly I don't know; but I
will see some Body or other, I will do somewhat or other. They wander about
without any set Purpose, and do things, not which they designed to do, but
which they lightly fell into. They lead an inconsiderate vain Course of Lise,
like so many creeping Ants. Quorum non immerito quis inquietam inertiam
dixerit, Id^^^e Tranq. An. c. 12.
One may not unfitly call their Life an unquiet Idleness. And then returning
home with an empty Weariness, they swear they knew not why they went out, nor
know they well where they have been, being ready to ramble and wander the Day
following in the same manner: and therefore let all Labor be referred to
somewhat, says he, respect somewhat.

Now, as it becomes both Men and Christians, let our great End and Study, our
main Scope and Intention be to please, and glorify God, in the whole Course of
our Conversation. These. 4.1.
Ye have received of us, says the Apostle, how you ought to walk, and to
please God. We desire Col 1.10.
that ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all Vocab^l^m (...) sumendum
arbitror hoc in loco, nen tam pro eventu placends, quam pro studio and
intention placend^. Davenant. in Col. 1.10.
pleasing. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. Let all our Actions have their
ultimate tendency to God's Glory: That God may be honored and glorified by our
selves, while our Actions, done in Imitation of God, show forth his (...), 1
Pet. 2.9.
Virtues, represent and recommend God lovely to the World, and are apt to
procure that God be better thought of, loved and served. And that God may be
also glorified by others, by means of our Lives and Conversations, while others
are actually and effectually led thereby to high and excellent Thoughts of God,
and to an Admiration and Approbation of the divine Law and Holiness.

What a rare Commendation is it of those Brethren, who are styled by the
Apostle the 2 Cor. 8.23.
Glory of Christ! Sicuti solus Christus fidelium gloria est, ita debet viciss^m
ab ^^sis gi^rificari. Calv. in loc.
As Christ alone is the Glory of the Faithful, so they ought to be the Glory of
Christ; to (...) Christi, i. e. qui singulari e^rum side, pietate, scientia,
vita and m^rthus, promovent g^ortam Christ's; vet instrumenta sunt glorae
Christ's. Syn. Cri^. in loc.
promote and advance, and be the Instruments of his Glory, by their singular
Knowledge, Faith, Piety, and excellent good Life and Manners.

It is not strictly required, that in every Good Work of ours there should be
an actual Intention of pleasing and glorifying God: It suffices that such an
Intention go before in the general, and be preserved and retained in the Habit:
And though it be not thought on in every Action, yet the Action may be rightly
performed Quemadm^dum sagitta unica jaculantis impul^^ per inte^m^diunt spatmm
and scopum sertus, q^am^is i^e nec de spatio, nec ^'e scopo cogit^: sic untco
impu^^ voluntatis procedit bon ^ ^pera in ad metam suam, c^^m operans non
amplin cogetat de meta, and prima su^^ intention. Idem ^^usirart poss^ simis^
^^dine it mer^ant is, -- Davenant, in ^ad Ceicss. 10. p. 53.
in the Virtue of the good Intention that went before: As one in a Journey goes
very right by virtue of his first Intention, though he does not, every step he
takes, actually think of the Place, which, when he first set out, he intended
to go to. It is absolutely necessary, that we should always preserve an
habitual Intention of pleasing and glorifying God in every thing: yea, (as the
Reverend and learned Ibid.
Davenant counsels and cautions well) we should always endeavor these two
things; (1.) That our actual Intention of pleasing and glorifying God, should,
as far as may be, be retained or renewed in every particular Work we do. (2.)
That after our first good Intention, no evil and inordinate Intention do arise;
for this will not be rectified by the first, but the former will be blemished,
stained, and corrupted by this.

Let Us propose to our selves the Glory of God, as the highest End of all our
Undertakings: and let all our lesser and subordinate Ends be plainly reducible
to the main and great End of our living. Let Us still be putting this Question
to our selves in what we are doing, Is this the Way to please and glorify God?
If not, how dare I take so ungodly a Course, or do so unreasonable a Deed? This
is the way to redeem the Time, and a Means to make our Actions able to bear the
Trial, and apt to turn to a good Account.

2. Let Us do nothing deliberately, but what we can freely and safely,
warrantably and comfortably crave God's Assistance in, and look up to Heaven
for a Blessing upon, when we go about it. Non magni pendas quis pro se vel
contra te sit; sed hoc age and cura, ut Deus tecum sit in omut re quam faris. A
Kemp. l. 2. c. 2. n. 1.
Do not much matter, says A Kempis, who is for thee, or against thee; but take
great heed and care of this, that God be with thee in every thing thou do.
Upon every Occasion think thus with thy self; If I cannot take God along with
me in what I undertake; If I cannot own God, nor expect that God should own me,
guide and direct me, assist and enable, bless and prosper me in what I am
about; surely this is not the way for me to redeem and improve my Time aright:
I cannot spend it profitably and comfortably in such Employment.

Such a Course and Practice as this, would surely prevent the Rashness and
Unadvisedness, the Imprudence and Folly, the Injustice and Impiety of many
Actions. If thou would never venture to engage in any Action, but what thou
could own before God in Prayer, without Shame and Blushing; and durst implore
the Help and Assistance of God for the Performance of, thou would certainly
walk more accurately and exactly than formerly. When thou art going to a
drinking Meeting, can thou beg God's Blessing upon thy jovial intemperate
Company-keeping? when thou art hastening to a silthy Whore-house, or going to
an obscene and prosane Playhouse, can thou look that God with a Blessing
should go with thee? When thou art hunting after unjust Gain, and hotly
pursuing it all the Day long; or using unlawful and indirect Courses to provide
for thy self or Family, can thou expect that God should command a Blessing
upon it? Would the intemperate, lustful, covetous, unrighteous Person proceed
according to this Direction, he would soon desist from his vicious Courses, and
unwarrantable Practices. As the Lukin's Pract. of Godliness, p. 35.
poor Man, when he had stolen a Lamb, to satisfy the hungry Bellies of his
Family, and having dressed it, came, of course, to crave a Blessing upon it; he
was so disturbed and troubled about it, that he could find no Rest and Quiet in
his Mind, till he went and confessed his Fault, and promiss'd to make
Satisfaction for the wrong he had done.

The Sixth Direction.
We must be sure to give our selves to Prayer, as a special Way in which, and
principal Means and Help by which we may redeem and improve our Time a right.
And here,

1. Be careful to keep up set and stated Times of ordinary Prayer. 2. Be ready
to betake thy self to Prayer, upon special, extraordinary emergent Occasions.
3. Use thy self to frequent sudden ejaculatory Prayers to God.
These three Particulars give the proper Sense and Meaning of those Scriptures;
Ephesians. 6 18. (...).
Praying always; in all Time, or, Opportunity, as the Word is: 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
(...).
Pray without ceasing: Heb. 13.15. (...)
Pray continually.

1. If we would well redeem the Time, we must keep and observe our daily set
and stated Times of earnest fervent Prayer to God, and solemn serious
Supplication. Thus it is our Duty to pray continually; not to employ the Whole
of our Time in Prayer, (as of old the Euchites dreamed) but to pray
continually, in the same Sense as Ames. de Conse. cas. l. 4. c. 14. q. 5.
Mephibosheth was commanded to eat Bread at David's Table 2 Samuel 9.7. (...), 70.
continually; that is, not to cram, and load himself with Meat and Drink day
and night, but to refresh himself there at the set and customary Hours of
Dinner and Supper.

It Is a general Duty incumbent on us, to Luke 1.75.
serve God all the Days of our Life; and therefore with the Worship and
Service of Prayer in particular, which may be conveniently performed daily. We
are directed in the Lord's Prayer, to pray every Day for our Mat. 6.11.
daily Bread; and therefore we ought more earnestly to Verse 33.
seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, every Day. Exodus 29.38, 39.
The Morning and Evening Sacrifice, strictly Matutino hoc and vespertino
sacrisicio agnoscitur Deus, noctis and diei Creator. Grot. in loc.

Bis de die sacrisicium illud volunt repeti Deus, ut populus assidue in memoria
future per Christum reconciliatiouis se exerceret. -- Voluit Deus hoc victimae
genus bis de die pom ante oculos, ut populus reputaret, sibi opus esse
identidem reconciliari Deo; and rea^^s ac damnationis suae admonitus, a
principio usque ad finem diet ad ejus misericordiam confugeret. Rivetus in
locum.


enjoined under the Law to be publicly celebrated every Day, is a plain
Pattern and apparent Direction for double Devotion every Day: for, the legal
Sacrifice, as also the Incense joined with it, was a Type of Prayer. Psalm.
144.2. Heb. 13.15.

The Jews had their Acts 3.1. and 10.2, 3.
set Hours of Prayer. Our blessed Savior has not only given us a plain Precept
for Mat. 6.6.
Closet-Prayer, but has afforded us his own Example, to lead us to the
Performance of solitary secret Prayer, both Morning and sEvening. Mark 1 35.
St. Mark Informs us, that in the Morning rising up a great while before Day,
or, in the first Twilight, he went out and departed into a solitary Place, and
there prayed. And Mat. 14.23.
St. Matthew acquaints us, that when he had sent the Multitudes away, he went up
into a Mountain apart to pray: and when the Evening was come, he was there
alone. Col. 4.1, 2.
Masters of Servants, as such, are required and charged by the Apostle to
continue in Prayer, and to watch in the same with Thanksgiving: Which Words
(considering the Context, which is wholly taken up in settling and setting forth
the Christian Economy) may well be interpreted and understood of performing
daily Family Prayer. Dr. Arrowsm. Tact. Sacr. p. 247, 248.
Let Governors of Families, who assume and exercise a kind of Kingly Authority
in their own Families, understand and consider, that their Master in Heaven
expects that they should execute the Offices, and act the Parts of so many
Priests in their own Families, by offering before them the Sacrifices of
Prayers and Praises to God day by day.

There are daily Personal and Family Sins to be confessed and prayed against:
daily Personal and Family Wants to be spread before God, in order to a Supply
thereof: Personal and Family Mercies daily received, and duly to be
acknowledged every Day Morning and Evening.

We generally find, that they that have any show of Religion, are very
observant of stated Times of Devotion: so are the Papists, and so are the
Mahometans: Nay the very Heathen, guided by the dim Light of Nature, have
approved and recommended this Practice: Hesiod in particular gives this as a
necessary Rule, (...).
To the utmost of your Power perform your sacred Offices to the immortal Gods,
both when you go to Bed at Night, and when the Morning-Light appears; that they
may bear a propitious Mind, and carry a kind and loving Heart toward you.

And it is not unworthy of some remark, that the Precepts of continuing in
Prayer, and redeeming the Time, are so Col 4.2, 3, 5.
nearly and closely joined together in Scripture. To pretermit and neglect, to
lay aside and cast off fixed determined Times, and certain appointed Seasons of
Prayer, would be to lose our Time, and quickly to lose our Religion too. If you
will not admit so much of the Form, you are not likely to maintain the Power of
Godliness. If you reckon you have no call to pray, but only when you find and
feel a present inward strong Impulse, and secret powerful Inclination to it;
you take a course to chase and drive away the Spirit from you, and to deprive
your selves of the holy and spiritual, the sweet and seasonable Motions of it.
When the usual Times of Duty return, pray, though thou have no present sensible
Motion to perform it: and pray till thou find God's good Spirit sweetly and
powerfully moving upon thee, and working in thee; enlivening and enlarging thy
Heart in Prayer, and enabling thee to enjoy some singular, sensible, joyful and
delightful Communion with God; to exercise thy Graces in this holy Duty, and to
feel thy Heart warmed and inflamed, and thy Soul refreshed and repaired, before
thou departest out of God's Presence.

To Oration clavis diei and sera n^ctis.
begin and end with God every Day, to be with the Lord first and last, to call
upon God Morning and Evening; In the Morning to praise him for the Mercies of
the Night past, to ask Wisdom of God to order our Conversation aright; to beg
his Favor, Presence, Guidance, Spirit, Grace, and Strength; his Protection of
us, his Psalm. 90 17.
Beauty, on glorious Blessing upon us, and his establishing and (...). Pythag.
Aur. Came.
prospering the Works both of our Heads and Hands the whole Day following: And
in the Evening to bless and praise God for the Mercies and Favors of the Day
past, to confess our Faults and Failings in it, and so to lie down with no
heavy Guilt of any unrepented Sin lying upon us: To pray for the hPardon and
Healing of the Miscarriages of that Day, and to commit our selves and ours to
the Divine Keeping the Night following; beseeching God to prevent any sinful
Dreams, which might proceed from the Corruption of our Natures and
Constitutions, Hearts and Imaginations, Conversations and Actions; and to
spiritualize and sanctify our Thoughts and Cogitations, in the vacant Spaces
and broken Hours of our Sleep: To keep and maintain the set Times of personal
secret Closet-Prayer, and the stated Times of Oeconomical Household
Family Prayer; this is a well-spending so much of our Time as is employed in
that Duty; and this is the right and ready way to redeem and improve every Day,
to the Honor and Glory of God, and to our own and others Profit and Benefit,
Satisfaction and Comfort: This is a likely hopeful good way to prevent or
remove Miscarriages in our selves, and Disorders in our Families; to keep every
Member of our Family in their Station and Duty; to season them all with a
religious Fear, and high Respect to God and his Ways; and to train and bring
up Children and Servants, to a competent Ability to express their Desires in
Prayer to God, for themselves and others: to teach our Servants, with Genesis
24.12.
Eliezar Abraham's good oand faithful Servant, to follow their earthly Master's
Business, with hearty Prayers to their heavenly Master for a Blessing upon it.

Be careful and diligent, wise and prudent to redeem Time for Prayer, that you
may redeem Time by Prayer. Find Time sufficient to work this Work of God, and
so to workout your own Salvation, as well as to follow the Works and Businesses
of your particular Callings: to attend and wait upon God in Prayer, as well as
to wait upon your Customers, and to attend your secular Occasions and Concerns.

Let not worldly Cares, and civil or domestic Affairs hinder and divert thee
from due Performance of Prayer in thy Family, and in thy private Closet. Though
David had the Care of the Kingly Government upon him, yet his usual Course and
Practice was, to pray to God Psalm. 55.17.
Evening, and Morning, and at Noon; yea, and 119.154.
seven times a day did he praise God, as he himself professes: If he did not
exactly and punctually observe so many Hours, but a certain Number is put here
for an uncertain, yet the meaning must be, that he did it very often: Love
sweetened the Duty to him, and caused him to praise God Ps. 71.14.
more and more; to be nover weary of praising him here, as knowing that it
would be his sole Employment to praise him hereafter for evermore. Though
Daniel was deeply engaged in Public Business and State Affairs, yet he took
not any Occasion from these to neglect his daily Duty and wonted Service to his
God: He kept his former Course and Order; for, every day, and constantly Dan.
6.10.
three Times a Day, he kneeled upon his Knees, and prayed, and gave thanks
before his God; though he knew he hazarded his high Preferment, and endangered
his very Life by it.

So Cornelius a Centurion, taken up with many Martial Occasions, yet suffered
not himself to be taken off from his Devotion thereby, but Acts 10.2.
prayed to God always: He did not do it only by fits, but daily and constantly
observed his usual Seasons. It is reported of the famous In the Sermon. preached
at his Fun. at the end of his Sermons, p. 21.
Bp. Andrews, that though he had many weighty Employments as Bishop of
Winchester and Privy Counselor; yet, his Life was a Life of Prayer, and a
great part of five Hours every day, did he spend in Prayer and Devotion to God.
The holy and excellent His Life written by Dr. Bernard, p. 58.
Bp. Usher had Prayer in his Family four times a day, In the Morning at six, in
the Evening at eight, and before Dinner and Supper in the Chapel, at each of
which he was always present. His Life written by Mr. Clark.
Mr. William Whately, Minister of Banbury, had much Work lying upon him
continually; catechizing and preaching twice every Lord's Day, and a weekly
Lecture besides; well studying, and usually penning his Sermons at large; and
yet his constant Practice was, besides Family Prayer twice a day, and sometimes
catechizing, to pray also with his Wife, and alone, both Morning and Evening.

And with what show of Reason can any of you excuse your selves? Have you Time
to eat and drink and sleep; and not only to labor and works, but to play and
sport; Leisure to recreate your selves, and visit your Friends, and take your
pleasure; a Spare-Hour to spend in discourse, and it may be to waste in empty
and idle talk with another? Have you Time to do nothing? Time to do Evil? and
have you no Time to serve and worship God in your Families? no Time for
religious Retirements, and hidden Repairs to God, in your privy Chambers, and
secret Closets? Have you so many Sins, and Wants, Corruptions, and Temptations?
and can no Time be spared and set apart to seek God for the Pardon of your
Sins, and the Supply of all your spiritual Wants; and to pray to him for
Strength and Power, to mortify the Corruptious with which you are infested, and
to resist the Temptations with which you are assaulted?

2. We should moreover betake our selves to solemn continued Prayer, when we
have Place and Space for such a Duty, upon the Emergency of any weighty
important Business, or on any special extraordinary occurrent and urgent
Occasion; to beg of God the prudent Conduct of our Affairs, Success in, and a
Blessing upon our lawful and honest Undertakings; Strength to go through
Trials, Afflictions, and Temptations; Freedom and Deliverance from Evils and
Sufferings, felt or feared; or to return God thanks for the receipt of his
Mercies in any such particulars, and to engage our selves to walk answerably,
and to render suitably to the Lord, for such undeserved, and it may be
unexpected Blessings and Benefits.

We read of Abraham's Servant, that when his Master sent him to take a Wife
for his Son Isaac, he sought God, and said, Genesis 24.12.
O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this Day, and
show Kindness unto my Master Abraham. And when God had given him good Success,
Verse. 26, 27, 48.
he worshipped and blessed God which had led him in the right Way. When Jacob
was greatly afraid of Esau's coming, Genesis 32 9, 10, 11.
he prayed to God to deliver him from the Hand of his Brother. When Nehemiah
understood the Misery of Jerusalem, he 1 Neh. 4.11.
fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven, and entreated God to proper him
that Day, and to grant him Mercy in the Sight of the King. So when Esther was
to make an extraordinary Suit to King Ahasuerus, Esth. 4.16.
she and her Maidens fasted and prayed for an happy Issue and good Event. When
David was troubled with slanderous Enemies, Ps. 109.4.
he gave himself unto Prayer. And upon the Receipt of Sennacherib's blasphemous
Letter, Isa. 37.14, 15, 21.
Hezekiah went up unto the House of the Lord, and spread it before the Lord,
and prayed against Sennacherib King of Assyria. Christ upon his approaching
Passion Matt. 26.39, 42, 44.
prayed thrice in the Garden. St. Paul likewise, when there was given to him a
Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
for this thing he besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from him.

How eminent have many pious Persons been for gaining Opportunities of
Religious Addresses, and for their Care to improve much Time in Prayer, whether
upon ordinary, or extraordinary Occasions? It is the worthy Commendation of
Knolles's Hist. of the Turks, p. 580.
Philippus Villerius, the Great Master of the Rhodes, that all the Time he
could spare from the necessary Cares of his weighty Charge, from Assaults, and
the natural Refreshing of his Body, he bestowed in Prayer and Serving of God;
He oftentimes spent the greatest Part of the Night in the Church alone praying,
his Headpiece, Gorget, and Gantlets lying by him: so that it was often said,
that his devout Prayers and Carefulness would make the City invincible.
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, would pray a Shipboard, a Shore, in the
Field, in the midst of a Battle. It Is a memorable Passage in the Fox Acts and
Mon. 2 vol. p. 1457.
Life of Mr. John Bradford, that his continual Study was upon his Knees: and no
doubt he mingled many holy Prayers with his hard Studies. Id. ib. p. 1579.
Mr. Hugh Latimer, in the latter Time of his Imprisonment, which was at Oxford,
from April to October, did oftentimes continue so long in fervent Prayer
kneeling, that he was not able to rise without Help: And three special
principal Matters, which he ever mentioned in his Prayers at that Season, were
these; That God would give him Grace to stand to his Doctrine until his Death,
that he might give and shed his Heartblood in the Defense of the Gospel: That
God of his Mercy would restore his Gospel to England once again, once again: He
also desired with Tears, that God would preserve the Princess Elizabeth, and
make her a Comfort to his comfortless Realm of England: All which Requests God
graciously granted: and in Answer to his first particular Desire, it was very
remarkable, that his Body being opened by the Force of the Fire, his Blood,
which gathered much to his Heart, gushed out of his Heart with Violence, and
ran out in Abundance. Eccl Hist. l 2. c. 23.
Eusebius, out of Aegesippus, tells us of James called Justus, that his Knees
were grown very callous, hard and brawny, benumbed and berest of the Sense of
Feeling, by reason of his continual kneeling in Supplication to God, and
Petition for the People. So, Gregory relates of his Aunt Trucilla, that her
Elbows were as hard as an Horn, by often learning on a Desk when she prayed.
And St. Jerome, in an Epistle to Marcella, mentions this in the Praises of
Asella, that by her frequent kneeling in Prayer, she had contracted such an
Hardness on her Knees, as is to be found on the Durities de genubus camelorum
in illo sancto corpusculo prae orandi frequentia obcaluisse perspecta est.
Hier. ad Marcell. de laudib. Asellae.
Knees of Camels. The same Father writes in the Life of Paul the Hermit, that
Ac primum and i^se, vivere eum credens, pariter orabat. Postquam vero nulla, ut
solebat, suspiria precantis at divit, in flebile osculum ruens, intellexit quod
etiam cadaver Sancti, Deum, cui omnia vivunt, officioso gestu precabatur. Hier.
in vit. Pauli Eremitae.
Anthony entering into the Cave, found there the dead Body of that Saint in a
praying Posture, upon its bended folded Knees, with its Head listed up, and its
Hands stretched out on high. O ter belitam il'ius animam sine corpore, cujus
ad^o venerabundum corpus sine anima! Arrows. Tact. sacr. p. 273.
How happy now is his Soul without his Body, whose Body was in a worshipping
Gesture without his Soul!

3. If we would redeem the Time, we must give our selves to frequent holy
Ejaculation, either mental, or vocal; inwardly lifting and darting up our
Petitions and Heart's Desires, or orally uttering them in some very short yet
pithy Expressions: of both which we have several Instances in Sacred Writ: Exodus
14.15.
Wherefore In Dei auribus desiderium vehemens, clamor magnus: (...) regione
autem remissa iniontio, vox submissa. Bern s^rm. 16. in Ps. 90.
criest thou unto me? said God to Moses; when Moses uttered not a Word, that we
do read of; but only used strong Ejaculations, inward ardent Desires and
Groans. Nehem. 2.4.
So I prayed to the God of Heaven, said holy Nehemiah; that is, he dispatched
and sent up some short Heart-prayers to Heaven, that God would direct his
Tongue, and bend and Qui preces ad Regem perferre vult, prius ad Deum perserat,
cujus in manu corda sunt Regum. Grot. in loc.
incline the Heart of the King; the King's Heart being in the Lord's Hand: He
could pray no otherwise at that Time, for he was then in the Presence of the
King, and in Discourse with him. And Nehemiah, Nehem. 13.14, 21, 31.
and Mat. 11.25. John 12 27, 28.
our Savior, and others, did use by an holy Apostrophe to turn their Speech to
God in vocal Ejaculations.

The true Christian (as a solid Shaw's Immanuel, p. 73.
Divine says well) does not limit himself penuriously to a Morning and Evening
Sacrifice and Solemnity, as unto certain Rentseasons, wherein to pay an Homage
of dry Devotion; but his loving and longing Soul disdaining to be confined
within Canonical Hours, is frequently soaring in some heavenly Raptures or
other, and sallying forth in holy Ejaculations.

If thou be a truly regenerate Person, such Ejaculation was thy first, and
will be thy last Breathing: O see that it be the most usual Exercise of thy
Life.

Great is the Benefit of holy and heavenly Ejaculation; which is like the
keeping alive, and quickening the Fire for the Use and Service of the daily
Sacrifice: If by neglect of this spiritual Exercise, we unhappily suffer the
holy Fire to go out, we cannot expect that God should kindle it anew, when we go
to offer the Sacrifice of solemn Prayer to God. By our much using Ejaculatory
Prayer, and familiarizing our selves to praying Thoughts and Desires, and
exercising our selves in spiritual Pleadings with God, our Hearts will be
generally Such as will be ever and anon thus whetting their praying Spirits and
Graces, will make Work of it when they come to it. They that are good at these
running Pulls, and Trips, are surely good Wrastlers with God. Cobbet of Prayer,
p. 47.
framed and sitted; and by immediately previous Ejaculatory Prayer, our Hearts
will be particularly disposed and prepared for performance of set and solemn
Prayer.

We shall also All the Prayers of a gracious Suppliant are not ended with his
continued Speech in Prayer; no, his heart is lifting and lifting; as you see a
Bell-rope often hoysing up after you have done ringing the Bell. -- When a
gracious Person's Heart is left in Heaven, uttering its after Requests, now
Prayer was well carried on. These shorter Post-scripts written after the other
longer Letter, -- have ever something of note and worth. Id. ib p. 33, 34.

When men part with men, they use to give one another a Fa^ewell, and not
bluntly deliver their Mind one to another, and so turn their backs one upon
another. -- Neither may a man, when a Duty is done, go away bluntly from God,
but give him a Farewell by holy Meditation. It Is an unseemly kicking of a Duty,
as most men do when they are come to the end of their Prayers, to whom with the
Father and Holy Spirit be ascribed all Praise and Glory, Amen; Come is Dinner
ready? or, What news do you hear? This is unmannerliness toward the Ordinances
of God. Fenner of the Use and Ben. of Divine Medit. p. 25. fol


close and come off well from continued Prayer, with the greater Spirituality
and Ardency of Devotion, by following at last our larger and longer Prayers
with several short strong Desires, earnest and affectionate good Wishes, lively
and vigorous Heart-lifts; such like as these; Lord, forgive the Iniquity of my
holy Things. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, defer not, for
thine own sake, O my God. Let the Words of my Mouth, and the Meditation of my
Heart be acceptable in thy Sight, O Lord my Strength and my Redeemer. Good
Lord, help me to live over my Prayers, and let me not destroy my Prayers by a
careless, Christless, wicked, loose and ungodly Life: Amen, Amen.

Yea, often retire, address and apply thy self to God in short Prayers and
cordial Ejaculations, and these may Bp. Taylor's Rule and Exerc. of Holy
Living, c. 1.. 1. Rule 7.

The want of the solemn Morning-Prayer (in case that some necessary work of
Charity do hinder us) may be supplied by some frequent Ejaculatory Prayers, and
frequent inward spiritual Admirings and Adorings of God; but the want of these
cannot be supplied by the other. White's Power of Godl. p. 97.

If the case were so, that we must omit one of them, it were better to omit our
solemn Prayer in the Morning, and to have our Heart sending up continually
Ejaculatory Prayers and Breathings after God, than to spend an Hour in the
Morning in solemn Prayer, and Meditation, and all the rest of the Day not to
have so much as one Thought of God. Id Ib. p. 202.

You must not leave off solemn Duties, and think to supply the want thereof by
Ejaculatory Prayers, for they are not to justle out, but help one another: This
is, as if the Priests should content themselves with keeping the Fire burning
always on the Altar, and neglect their Morning and Evening Sacrifice. Id. ib.
p. 2 9.


supply the Lack of those larger Portions of Time, which thou desire and
covetest for thy Devotion, and in which it may be thou think others have
advantage of thee.

Again; This is the readiest surest way to improve any spiritual Warmth, holy
Affection or good Motion, wrought in thy Heart in the Use of Christian
Conference, in Hearing, Reading, Meditation, or the like; To send up sudden
suitable, seasonable Ejaculatory Prayers or Praises, while thou art under such
a lively Sense, and in such a Godly Frame.

Farther; Our often using and daily maintaining a frequent Converse with God,
in the way of these holy devout Ejaculations, these Aspirations and Emigrations
of Soul after God, this will prove a special Help to keep our Hearts very
spiritual and savoury, and close with God, and to get more intimate
Acquaintance with him, and to secure the continuance of his gracious friendly
Presence with us.

This moreover is a sit and proper Means to call in and engage Divine
Assistance, to enable us meetly to manage any temporal or spiritual Employment,
and rightly to improve any Ordinance or Providence; a direct Means to procure
from God Wisdom and Grace, suitably to entertain any notable Mercy newly
received; to get Ease and Relief in any sudden strait or want; Patience under,
and the Sanctification of a surprising and unexpected Affliction; a present and
approved Means to throw out the Injections, and to repel the fiery Darts of the
Devil; to gain Help from Heaven against any sudden strong Temptation, or rising
and working of any Corruption, and Strength against our Bosom Master Sin, which
is so apt so easily to beset us; A Means to prevent our being unwarily ensnared
and entangled in the Use and Exercise of our lawful Labors or Recreations; To
be preserved effectually from Sin and Folly, when cast unawares into profane or
carnal Company; to obtain Mercy and Pardon speedily, upon apprehension of any
Insirmities, Slips or Failings; To lift up our Hearts in such Cases in the Way
of sudden Ejaculatory Prayer to God. This will save our solitary Hours in the
Daytime, and well improve our wakeful Hours in the Night-season; when we
cannot take our natural Rest and Sleep, then to awaken and call upon our Souls
to return unto their spiritual Rest; to raise and lift up our Hearts to Heaven,
and to present the Desires of our Souls to God. In hard Havens so choked up
with the envious Sands: that great Ships drawing many Foot Water, cannot come
near, lighter and lesser Pinnaces may freely and safely arrive. When we are
Time-bound, Place-bound, or Person-bound, so that we cannot compose our selves
to make a large and solemn-Prayer, this is the right instant for Ejaculations,
whether orally uttered, or only poured forth inwardly in the Heart. Fuller's
Medit. on all kind of Prayers, p. 77.
This is an excellent way to redeem the Time, in the want of a proper Place for
larger Prayer: Wherever thou art, though never so far from a Church or Oratory;
yet as to the Use of this kind of Prayer, thou may be the Temple of God thy
self, and pray within thy self. Yea, once more; This is an admirable way to
redeem the Time, in the greatest straits of Time, in the midst of much Company,
in the Multiplicity, Crowd, and Hurry of worldly Businesses and Employments:
For this is the Advantage and rare Privilege of Ejaculation, that the Work of
God is performed in it, and -- Media inter praelia semper
Stetlarum coe. ique plagis superisque vacavi.
Caesar apud Lucan. l. 10. v. 185.
no secular Affair or worldly Occasion hindered or retarded, impeded or
interrupted by it: It is a gaining of Time for the Exercise of Religion,
without any Prejudice, Let or Hindrance to your Calling: It is a taking Time
for a spiritual Duty, without taking it away from your civil Employment. The
Field wherein Bees feed is no whit the barer for their biting; when they have
took their full repast on Flower or Grass, the Or may feed, the Sheep fat on
their Reversions. The reason is, because those little Chemists distill only the
refined part of the Flower, leaving the grosser Substance thereof. So
Ejaculations bind not men to any bodily Observance, only busy the spiritual
half, which makes them consistent with the prosecution of any other
Employment. Fuller loc cit p 78.

We should make some improvement of that Time in which we do the works of our
particular Callings to some spiritual Advantage, (if our Employments be such as
exercise the Hand and not the Head) by some useful Meditations; as some will
plant their Hedg-^owes with fruit trees, reckoning that what they get thereby
is clear Gain, because they take up no room which might be put to any other
Use; so what we get by such Meditations is clearly gained, because it does not
hinder any other Employment. Lukins Pract. of Godl. p. 53, 54.

Art thou as much against this, that worldly thoughts should mingle themselves
with thy solemn Prayers, as that holy thoughts should be mingled with thy
worldly Business? This shows the rottenness of thy Heart, that thou will admit
the World to come and speak with thee in the midst of thy solemn Duties, or
converse with God, but wilt not afford God a word, or a look, while thou art
conversing with the World. White's Power of Godl. p 214.


You may at the same instant follow your particular proper Vocation, and send
up an holy Ejaculation. The Husbandman may dart forth an Ejaculation, and not
make a Balk the more. The Tradesman may mind his Shop never the less, for
minding God in such a way as this. Thy Ejaculatory Prayers will sanctify,
instead of hindering thy Employments; will influence thy Conscience, and keep
thee from sinning in thy Calling, and will draw down a Blessing upon every
Business and Undertaking.

In a Word, To give our selves to holy and heavenly Ejaculation, this is the
way 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
to pray without ceasing. And surely the Frequency and Number of Ejaculatory
Prayers, will bring us in very great and large spiritual Gains, and notable
rich Returns.

It Is a noted and approved Saying, That much Meditation, short Prayers and
often, make an excellent Christian. The eminently learned and holy Andrew Rivet
did much accustom and inure himself to these short Prayers: He used in his old
Age (as he himself declares Ego sane, mi srater, a multis annis hanc orationem
singults diebus, and saepe hor is, repoto, qui sentio mihi haec eadem
convenire, -- Andr. Rivet. ep. ad Guil. Fratr. De Senect. bon. p. 1260.
in an Epistle to his Brother) for many Years every Day, and often every Hour,
to repeat Psalm. 71.17, 18.
those Words of the divine Psalmist, which were suitable to the Circumstances
of his own Condition; O God, thou have taught me from my Youth: and hitherto
have I declared thy wondrous Works. Now also when I am old and gray headed, O
God, forsake me not: until I have showed thy Strength unto this Generation, and
thy Power to every one that is to come.

The seventh Direction.
If we would redeem the Time, we must set our selves to the daily, frequent,
diligent Reading, and serious studying of the sacred Scriptures: for,

1. This is a gaining and making Advantage of all that Time past, which the
Scripture gives you the History and Account of.

Seneca advises his Friend Lucilius by the Peregrination of his Mind to go to
the ancient Worthies, and renowned great Men, and by Cogitation to behold them,
in order to an Imitation of them: This he proposes to him, as a prudent way to
get Vice extirpated, and Virtue farther planted in him. He would have him by
Contemplation go live and converse with the Cato's, with Laelius, Tubero,
Socrates, Zeno, Chrysippus, Posidonius: These will instruct you, says Hi tibi
tralent divinorum humanor ^^mque netiti^^m; Hi ju^tbunt in opere esse. Sen. ep.
104.
he, in the knowledge of things divine and humane, and will command and enjoin
you to be busied and employed in some good Action. Let me advise and counsel
you that are Christians, to travel srequently through the holy Scriptures; to
keep a constant Course of attentive reading those sacred Writings, and they
will give you the happy Advantage of spiritual and fruitful Converse with the
Patriarchs and Prophets, with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; with Moses and
Elias; with Noah, Job, and Daniel; with David and Solomon; with St. Peter, and
Paul, and James, and John; with Christ, and his Apostles, and the Primitive
Christians: There you may get Acquaintance with, and make use of those rare
Persons, that have been most exemplary and serviceable in their Generations,
and most deservedly famous in the several Ages of the Church of God and Christ;
and may take the Benefit of their holy Discourses, their excellent Lives and
virtuous Actions.

And what the same Philosopher wisely Discourses in his excellent Book of the
Brevity of Life, encouraging Persons to a daily familiar Acquaintance with
Zeno, Pythagoras, Democritus, Aristotle, Theophrastus; What he says there to
invite and engage Men to read the Writings of such as excess in useful
Philosophical Learning, and good Arts, is more truly applicable, by way of
Motive, to prevail with Men to give themselves to the reading of the Penmen of
the sacred Scriptures, and of the Sayings of those wise and holy Persons that
are introduced discoursing therein: Nemo horum nen vocabit, nemo non venientem
ad se beatiorem, ama (...) emque sui dimittit, -- Hi tibi dabunt ad
aeternitatem iter, and te in i^um iocum, ex quo nemo te eji i^t, sub evabunt.
Sen. de brev. vit. c. 14, 15.
There is not one of these but will call thee to hear them speaking to thee;
not any one of them, but, if you come to them, will send you away more happy,
and more in love with them: none of them will suffer you to go empty-handed
away from them. They may be met and spoken with, visited and conversed with by
all both Day and Night. None of these will press you to die presently, but all
will teach you to die well at last: None of these will waste your Years, but
will readily contribute and give their own to you, for your Use and Service,
Profit and Benefit: None of their Discourse will ever be dangerous, none of
their Friendship will prove pernicious, your Acquaintance with them, and
Observance of them will not be costly and chargeable to you. You may receive
what you want, and carry away what you will from them: They will never hinder
you from drawing as much out of them, as you are capable of containing. What an
happy and lovely old Age is like to befall him, who has given himself into their
Tuition? He will have those continually at hand, with whom he may deliberate
both of the smallest and greatest Matters, whom he may daily advise with about
himself, from whom he may hear the Truth without Reproach, by whom he may be
commended without Flattery, and after whose Similitude he may form and fashion
himself. -- These will set you in the way, that will surely bring you to an
happy Eternity, and will mount you up into that Place, out of which none shall
be able to eject you.

This is, in a sense, a gaining of a great deal of Time that is past, and an
happy converting it to our own spiritual Profit and Use. Our perusing the
notable useful Histories, and instructive Passages of the sacred Pages, will,
after a sort, make all that Time Animus humanus arctam aetatem sibi dari non
sinit. Omnes, inquit, anni mei sunt. nulium saecalum magnis ingentis clusam
est, nullum non cogitationi pervium tempus. Seneca epist. 102.
ours, and serve in a manner as much to our advantage, as if we our selves had
lived in the several Ages, in which those eminently pious Persons appeared and
acted, that are recorded in sacred Writ.

2. Our Reading the holy Books of scripture, is a proper redeeming that Time in
particular, which is denied to worldly Profit or Pleasure, and applied to such
a spiritual Use: It is a good husbanding, and well improving the present Time,
that is spent and employed in this religious Duty: for this is our Attendance
on an Ordinance of God, and in that respect an honoring of God. It is also a
Means of attaining divine Knowledge, heavenly Grace, and spiritual Comfort.

(1.) Divine Knowledge. By reading the Scripture we may be taught of God, and
come to be acquainted with the Mind and Will of our supreme Ruler and
Governor, with the righteous Laws of our Creator and Redeemer: There we may
sind Ps. 119.105.
a Light unto our Feet, and a Lanthorn unto our Paths; a Pillar of Fire by
Night, to conduct us through the Wilderness unto Canaan; a Star still before
us, to lead us unto Christ. From thence we may receive suitable and seasonable
Information, Resolution, Direction, if, with holy David, we take God's
Testimonies for our Ps. 119.24.
Counselors. The Scriptures are apt to preserve, and powerful to reduce Men
from erroneous Opinions: as Junius was mightily wrought upon, and with clear
Conviction and full Satisfaction recovered out of Atheism, and converted to the
Truth, by reading the Beginning of Lego partem capitis, and ita commoveor
legens; ut repent divinitatem argum nti, and ser pti majest tem
authoritatemque senserim longo intervabo omnibus eloquentiae humanae sluminilus
praeeantem, etc. Junius ipse in descript. vit. suae.
St. John's Gospel. The Scriptures are 2 Timothy 3.15.
able to make us wise unto Salvation; to make us so wise, as to become truly
good. For,

(2.) Our reading the Scripture, is a means of obtaining heavenly Grace. The
holy Scripture is apt to terrify and affright the Sinner out of the Way of Sin.
The pure and clean Word of God is able to make thee pure and clean. The holy,
just, and good Law of God, is able to make thee holy, just, and good. St.
Austin, in his younger Years, was an incontinent Person; but being at length
admonished by this Voice, Toll, lege; toll, lege; take up the Book and read;
he presently caught up and opened Cod. cem Apestols.
St. Paul's Epistles, and happily first cast his Eyes upon those Words in the
thirteenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, Romans 13.13, 14.
Not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in
Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision
for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof: With which his Heart was
powerfully affected, and touched to purpose. Nec ultra volui legere, nec epus
erat, etc. -- Jam liber erat animus meus a curis mordacibus ambiends, and
acquirendi, and volutandi, atque scalpendi scabiem libidinum. Aug. Conf. l. 8.
c. 12.. 3. and l. 9 c. 1.. 2.
I had no need to read any further, says he; How sweet and pleasant did I
presently find it to want those trifling Pleasures of Sin? How glad was I now
to let go quite, what a little before I was so much afraid to lose? Thou did
make those seeming Sweetnesses vanish, O Christ Jesus, who art the true and
highest Sweetness, and did come thy self in their Room and Stead, sweeter
than all the Pleasures in the World.

The Word of God's Grace, is that holy 1 Pet. 1.23.
Seed of which you may be born again; and is able, when once you are truly
converted from Sin and the World to God, to Acts 20.32.
build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them which are
sanctified.

(3.) Out reading the Scripture, is a ready Way, and proper Means of finding
spiritual Peace and Comfort. Locus ille Pauli suit mihi vere porta Paradisi.
That Place of Paul, was truly to me the Gate of Paradise: So said Luther of
the 17th Verse of the first Chapter to the Romans, The Righteousness of God is
revealed in the Gospel from Faith to Faith: as it is written, The Just shall
live by Faith. Mr. Bilney, or rather St. Bilney (as In his first Sermon before
the Duchess of Suffolk fol. 5. Fox Act. and Mon. 2 v. p. 919.
Father Latimer did not stick to style him) that holy and blessed Martyr of
God, that suffered Death for God's Word's sake, was raised and revived, cheered
and refreshed by the 15th Verse of the first Chapter of the first to Timothy:
He confesses of himself, that when the New Testament was first set forth by
Erasmus, he was drawn to buy it, more in consideration of the good Latin of
that Edition, than out of any regard to the Word of God, (of which he was
utterly ignorant at that Time) And, by the Providence of God, he fell at first
reading on this Sentence, This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners; of whom I
am chief. O mihi suavissimam Pauli sententiam. -- Haec una ser^^^ntia, Deo
iatus in cord meo docente, sic exhilaravit pectus meum, etc. Biln. ep. ad
Cutb. Tonstallum Land. Episc. Fox Act. and Mon 2 v. p. 915.
O this Saying of Paul, was a sweet and comfortable Saying to me, says he:
This one Sentence, God inwardly teaching and instructing me, did so exhilarate
and comfort my Heart, which before was wounded and ready to despair, through
the Conviction and Sense I had of my Sins; that I felt immediately such a
mavelous Tranquillity and Gladness within me, that the Bones which had been
broken did rejoice: and from this Time the Scripture began to be sweeter to me
than the Honey and the Honeycomb. As Adam and Eve went about in vain to cover
their Nakedness with their Fig Leaves, and were never quieted till they had
believed the Promise of God, that the Seed of the Woman should break the
Serpents Head, so neither could I be healed, says he, of the Stings and
Bitings of my Sins, before I was taught of God that Lesson of which Christ
speaks, Joh. 3.14, 15. As Moses listed up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even
so must the Son of Man be lifted up: That whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have eternal Life.

Thomas a Kempis is said to have uttered, and to have written this Sentence in
his Books, In omnibus requiem quaesivi, sed nusquam inveni praeterquam in
angulo cum libello. S. Torshel exercit. in Malach.
I have sought for Rest every where, but have found it no where except in a
Corner alone with a little Book. The Bible is that blessed Book, which will
either alone, or above all other Books afford a suitable seasonable Rest unto
our Souls.

And now these Things considered, is it not well worth the while to bestow your
Time and Pains in reading and studying the sacred Scriptures?

3. It is moreover a Means and Help to the right redceming of our Time for the
future: For, here in the Scripture we have the plainest Precepts given us, to
oblige us to take due Care of our Time; the best Examples and worthiest
Patterns of Redemption of Time set before us, in the Servants of God, and in
the Son of God; and have here afforded us the strongest Motives and
Encouragements to it, and the most prudent Instructions and proper Directions
about it: For, all that has been hitherto discoursed concerning it, has chiefly
been fetched from, and drawn out of the holy Scriptures.

And these divine and sacred Writings, will not only teach and instruct you,
but also inwardly dispose and qualify, sit and enable you to make the best
Improvement of your remaining Time, by converting and transforming,
regenerating and renewing, purifying and sanctifying you: By giving you a new
Nature, they will enable you to lead a new Life.

And therefore be sure to redeem some competent Time for reading of the
Scripture, that you may the better redeem the Remainder of your Time by reading
of the Scripture. The noble Ethiopian Acts 8.28.
Eunuch would lose no Time, but as he was traveling, and sitting in his
Chariot, he read Esaias the Prophet: And (as St. Chrysostom well notes) if he
was so religiously employed in a Journey, what a diligent Student of the
Scripture was he at home? yea though he found what he then read to be to him
difficult and Quae aperta sunt, and in quibus mentem suam Deus aperit, avide
and prompto animo sus^ipere decet: quae adhuc nobis obscura sunt, praeterire
couvenit, donec plentor lux affulgeat. Quod si legendo non satigabimur, fiet
tandem, ut scriptura assiduo usu familiaris nobis reddatur. Calv. in loc.
obscure, yet he would not lay that holy Book away, which he did not at present
well understand. We must esteem reverently of the Word (says the judicious Mr.
Arthur Hildersam Lecture 1. on the Title of Psalm. 51. page 2.

The obscurity of any Place should increase our Diligence in searching the
meaning of it: and teach us to acknowledge the necessity of a learned Ministry,
and of that Gift of Interpretation God has given unto his Servants: Act. 8.31.
And to see the Necessity of joining with our reading humble Prayer unto God,
that he would open our Understanding: Ps. 119. 18. And cause us to come to the
reading of the Word with an Heart that is humbled and fearful to offend God:
For the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will show them
his Covenant, Ps. 25.14. And this should move us to mark, and lay up in our
Hearts, even those things which we understand not, because they may do us good
hereafter, Luke 2.50, 51. Joh. 2.22, Id. ib. page 2, 3.


Hildersam) though we cannot at the first reading or hearing of it profit by
it, or discern what use it may serve us unto. The Jews were so exactly versed
in the Old Testament, that Contr. Appion. l. 2.
Josephus gives this Testimony of them, Every one of our Nation being demanded
of our Laws, can answer as readily as he can tell his own Name. Acts 17.11.
The Bereans are commended for spending their Time every Day in searching the
Scriptures. It is the honorable Character of Apollos, that he was Acts 18.24.
mighty in the Scriptures, one that had a great Insight and Skill in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament: But Verse 26.
Aquila and Priscilla ordinary Tent-makers, had attained to such a measure of
Knowledge in the Gospel, that they were able to instruct an eloquent Apollos,
and to expound unto him the Way of God more perfectly. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Timothy had known the holy Scriptures from a Child. Tertullian after his
Conversion was taken up night and day in reading of the Scriptures, and did
with great Pains get much of them by heart, and that so exactly, that he knew
each Period. Origin having this daily Task set him by his Father, to rehearse
unto him some Portion of Scripture; He, though a Child, not only committed the
Words unto his Memory, but inquired into the Sense and Meaning of them; and
diverse Times would gravel his Father with the Questions which he propounded to
him: And when he was grown to riper Years, he spent much of the Night in
meditating on the holy Scriptures. Quis sic universam divinam Scripturam
edidicit, imbibit, concoxit, versavit, meditatus est? Erasm. ep. Nuncupat. ad
G. Varam praesix. Epist. D. Hieron.
Erasmus gives this notable Testimony of St. Jerome, Who, says he, did ever
learn by heart the whole Scripture, imbibe, concoct, handle it, meditate upon
it as he did? This very learned, and holy Father did moreover Has omnes
Hierontmus ad divinae Scripturae studium inflammavit, inflammatas sua doctrina
provexit. Hieron. vita per Erasm. contexta.
inflame and stir up diverse noble Matrons of his Acquaintance at Rome to an
earnest and constant Study of the divine Scriptures, exhorting and urging those
holy Women not to lay the Bible out of their Hands, until being overcome with
Sleep, and not able any longer to hold up their Heads, they bowed them down, as
it were to salute the Leaves below them with a Kiss: And by his instruction of
them, and interpretation of the Scriptures to them, he assisted and promoted
their pious Endeavors in those sacred Studies, Quo saedius ess^t ab ipsis
Episcopis sacros libros negligi, quos sexus insirmtor amplecteretur. Id. ib.
that it might be the greater shame for any Bishops in any wise to neglect
those sacred Books, which were so often read and so well understood by the
weaker Sex. And he attests particularly Marcella's Industry, and great
Proficiency, in his Epitaph of her, expressing himself in these Words
concerning her; Because I was at that Time of some Repute and Note, says he,
for the Study of the Scriptures, Nunquam me convenit quin de Scripturis aliquid
interrogaret. Id. ib.
she never met with me but still she would be putting some Questions to me
about the Scriptures: And he further adds there; Quicquid in nobis longo fuit
studio congregatum, and meditatione diuturna quasi in naturam versum, hoc illa
libavit, didicit, atque possedit: ita ut post profectionem nostram, si in
aliquo testimonio Scripturarum esset oborta contentio, ad illam pidicem
pergeretur. Id. ib.

Inserant in aures margaritas verbi. Tertullian. de cultu foemin.


Whatever by long Study was gathered by me, and turned as it were into my
Nature by continual Meditation, all that she picked out, tasted, learned, and
possessed: So that after my departure, if any Controversy arose about the
Testimony of the Scripture in any Matter, they had recourse to her as a Judge
therein. Prosper was assiduous in reading the Scripture, and usually had the
four Evangelists in his Hands. Venerable Bede read the Scripture with such
Devotion and Affection, that he would often weep in the reading of it, and
would conclude his reading of Scripture with Prayer. The good Emperor,
Theodosius Senior wrote out the whole new Testament with his own Hand, and read
some Part of it every Day; (...). Niceph. Acclehast. Historia, l. 14 c. 3.
Theodosius the second dedicated and consecrated a good Part of the Night to
the Study of the Scriptures: to which end he had (as Nicephorus relates) a Lamp
so artificially made that it constantly supplied it self with Oil; that none of
his Servants might suffer any Trouble upon those Occasions. He learned much of
the holy Scriptures without Book, and when he met and conferred with the Bishops
he expounded and explained obscure and knotty Places of Scripture, as if he
himself had been a Person in holy Orders. Maccovius reports of George Prince of
Transylvania, that he had read over the Bible seven and twenty times. And it is
storied of Alphonsus King of Arragon, that (notwithstanding all his Princely
Affairs) he read over the Bible with a large Comment, some say, ten, others
affirm, fourteen times. Bonaventure wrote out the Bible twice with his own
Hand, and had most of it by heart. Antonius Walaeus in his younger Years
imprinted much of the Scripture in his Mind, and when he was Vit. Ant. VValaei
ante Oper. Tom. 1.
old could repeat without Book the Epistle to the Romans, the second to the
Corinthians, to the Galatians, Ephesians, and Philippians. Zuinglius wrote out
St. Paul's Epistles, and got them by heart. Fox Act. and Mon. 2 v. p. 1075.
Thomas Cromwell (afterward Earl of Essex) in his Journey going and coming from
Rome, learned the Text of the whole New Testament of Erasmus's Translation
without Book; which was a Means of bringing him to the Knowledge, and Savor,
and Love of the Truth. Id. ib. p. 1609, 1610.
Bishop Ridley, in his Letter of Farewell to his Friends, bidding farewell to
Pembroke-Hall, does thus attest his own Practice, with the comfortable Fruit
and Effect of it: In thy Orchard, says he, (the Walls, Buts, and Trees, if
they could speak, would bear me witness) I learned without Book almost all Paul
's Epistles, yea, and all the Canonical Epistles, save only the Apocalypse: of
which study although in time a great part did depart from me, yet the sweet
smell thereof I trust I shall carry with me into Heaven: for the Profit thereof
I think I have felt in all my Lifetime ever after. His Life, inserted among
Mr. Clark's Lives of so em. Div. p. 97, 98.
Dr. Gouge did tie himself to read every Day fifteen Chapters in English out
of the Bible, five in the Morning, five after Dinner before he fell upon his
other Studies, and five before he went to bed; which course he first took up
when he was a young Student in King's College in Cambridg. He was often heard
to say, that when he could not sleep in the Night time, he used in his Thoughts
to run through diverse Chapters of the Scripture in order, as if he had heard
them read to him. The like Practice he used in the Day time when he was alone,
whether within Doors, or abroad; for which end, he wrote in a little Book,
which he always carried about him, the distinct Heads of every Particular
Passage in every Chapter of the Bible, that so, when in any Place he meditated
on the Word of God, and was at a loss, he might presently find help by that
little Book. By this means he made himself so expert in the Text, that if he
heard any Phrase of Scripture, he could presently tell where it was to be
found. And besides all this, he had his set Times of Study for understanding
the meaning of the more difficult Places of Scripture. His Life, ib. p. 163.
Mr. Jeremy Whitaker usually read all the Epistles in the Greek Testament twice
every fortnight. He had read that voluminous Book of the Acts and Monuments of
the Church seven times over. In his Life among Mr. Clark's Lives in 4.
Mr. Ignatius Jurdain read the Bible above twenty Times over, and that with
special Observation (as appeared by the Asterisks, and Marks in the Bible which
he used) making particular Application to himself. His Life written by Dr.
Bernard, p. 22.
Bp. Usher had two Aunts, who, by reason of their blindness from their Cradles,
never saw Letters, and yet taught him first to read. Dr. Bernard tells us,
that their readiness in the Scripture was mavelous, being able suddenly to
have repeated any part of the Bible. I have read of one, who was so
conscientiously covetous of redeeming Time for reading of the Scripture, that
Fox's Time and the end of Time. p. 7.
being a Prisoner in a dark Dungeon, when a Light was brought to him for a
little Time to eat his Diet, he would pull out his Bible, and read a Chapter,
saying, he could find his Month in the dark, but not read in the dark.

O mind the Scriptures, in imitation of these and the like excellent Examples.
1 Timothy 4 13.
Give attendance to reading. Joh. 5.39. (...).
Search the Scriptrres, as Christ commands. As Diggers in A Lapide in loc.
Mines, with much Labor and Pains do search for Veins of Gold and Silver in
the Bowels of the Earth; So labor diligently to dig deep in the rich and
golden Mines of Scripture for hidden Treasures of saving Truth. Can you use
your Eyes, exercise your Reason, improve your Hours in a better Employment?
Content not thy self with a slight and cursory reading, but get a right and
good understanding of these sacred Oracles. Read them with Prayer to God,
before and after the reading of them. Read them with the Quo Spiritu factae
sunt Scripturae, eo Spiritu legi desiderant, ipsoetiam intelligendae sunt.
Bern. ep. ad Fratres de monte Dei.
Help of the same Spirit that wrote them: Read them, and hear the Voice of the
blessed Spirit speaking in them. Read, receive, and keep the Word in an honest
and good Heart: (Luke 8.15.) Hide the Word of God in thy Heart, with David,
(Ps. 119.11.) as a precious Jewel and Treasure; as the Law was kept in a Chest
or Ark: (Exodus 25.21.) Let the Word of Christ dwell richly, copiously,
plentifully in thee; (Coloss. 3.16.) and in this manner make thy Heart
Bibliothecam Christi, the Library of Christ; as Lectione assidua, and
meditatione diuturna, pectus suum bibliothecam fecerat Christi. Hier. ep. ad
Heliod. Epitaph. Nepetiani.
St. Jerome tells us Nepotian did, by his constant reading, and daily
Meditation.

Read the Scriptures, and fully assent to the Truth and Goodness of them:
Read them, and feed and feast upon them: With the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel 3.1, 3.
eat, and fill thy Belly with this Roll; 'twill be in thy Mouth as Honey for
Sweetness. Do not only take the Scriptures into thine Hand, and get them into
thine Head, but let them be deeply rooted in, and fairly printed upon thy
Heart: Read them, Alimenta quae accepimus, quamdiu in sua qualitate perdurant,
and solida innatant stomacho, onera sunt: at cum ex eo quod erant, mutata sunt,
tunc demum in vires and in sanguinem transeunt. Idem in his, quibus aluntur
ingenia, praestemus: ut quaecunque hausimus, non patiamur integra esse, ne
aliena sint. Concoquamus illa: altoquin in memoriam ibunt, non in ingenium.
Assentiamur illis fideliter, and nostra faciamus, ut unum quiddam siat ex
multis. Sen. ep. 84.
concoct and inwardly digest them; do not only retain them in thy Memory, but
turn them into a new Nature.

Do not offer to deal with the Scriptures, as little Culpands sunt, qui in
lectione quidem Bibliorum versantur, non tamen eum sibs proponunt scepum ut
conscientiam suam aedisicent and in pietate proficiant, sed tantum at scientiam
aliquam sibi comparent, qua velut artificio quodam apud alios se ostentent, ibi
Spiritum minime quaerentes, ubi maxim loquitur Spiritus. non dissimiles
pueris, qui nuces ad ludendum quaerunt, nucleo nec gustato, nec aperto. Andr.
Rivet. Isagog. ad S. Script. c. 30.. 16.
Schoolboys do with their Nuts, who often get them only to play with them,
having no mind or intention at all to crack the Shell, and to taste the Kernel
of any of them. Read and regard the Scriptures, not only to get a notional
Knowledge of them, and merely to make them matter of Discourse, and of Dispute,
but with an honest Purpose to profit in Piety, and practical Knowledge, by the
frequent reading, and constant studying of them.

Read, and receive the Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
not as the Word of Men, but (as it is in truth) the Word of God: This will
make all its Commands more strong and powerful, more sweet and acceptable, to
think very seriously with thy self, that they are the Commands of God, who has
Authority to command us; and of a good God, who shows as much Love in his
Commands, as he does in his Promises; who gave his Son to die for us, and
therefore we may be sure, will command us nothing, but out of Love, and for our
good; nothing but what will some way serve to sit us for, and bring us to that
Glory and Happiness, which his Son has dearly purchased for us. This also will
mightily strengthen your Faith in Scripture- Promises, to consider that they
are God's Promises, who understands what he promises, is true and faithful, and
cannot lie, and is able to perform whatever he promises, be his Promises never
so large and great. And this will render Scripture- Threatenings very terrible,
and cause you to tremble at them, and stand in aw of them; to believe and
consider that they are God's Threatenings, who is armed with Omnipotency, and
able to execute to the utmost the most dreadful Threatenings that are denounced
in his Word.

O bless and praise the good and holy Name of God, that you are not left to the
conduct of your purblind short-sighted Reason, to the faint Light of the Candle
within you, to the natural Darkness and Blindness of your carnal Minds, and
corrupt Hearts; that you are not guided with the Turks by a ridiculous Alcoran,
nor with the Jews directed to follow a few curious Rabbines, nor with the
Papists enslaved to humane, unwritten, uncertain Traditions; But that you have
the Bible open and intelligible in the English Tongue.

Highly prize and value the Scriptures, and read them with Thankfulness, Love,
Joy and Delight, as the best Book you can possibly read in the whole World,
the most incomparable Writings, which clearly and certainly declare the
insinite Love of God, and seasonably bring the glad Tidings of a Savior to
lost and undone Mankind; which show and discover to a miserable Sinner the only
happy way and means of firm Reconciliation to an offended Deity, and bring Life
and Immortality to light; which are God's public Act of Indemnity; and his
free Grant of a full Pardon, and of eternal Salvation to the penitent Believer.
Will you not prize and use the Word of God, that incorruptible Seed, of which
you are, or may be born again? and have frequent recourse to that Word, which
is the sincere Milk, and strong Meat, by which you may grow and be daily
nourished; the Wine, with which you may be refreshed when weak; the Physic,
with which you may be cured when sick^; the Sword of the Spirit, with which you
may defend your selves when assaulted, and resist and repel your spiritual
Enemies? Will you not readily and gladly repair to the Precepts which counsel
you in all your Doubts, and quicken you in all your Deadness? and get and keep
a spiritual Acqu^l^tance with those exceeding great and precious Pron^^ses,
that strengthen and stay, relieve and refresh, support and comfort you, in all
your Sorrow and Afflictions, Troubles and Trials, Dejection and
Heart-breakings, Disquietments and Discouragements?

Methinks, a Man should never take up the Bible, when he reads in private, but
with the greatest Comfort and Joy that can be, and should say within himself,
Here Is that which very plainly proposes the most excellent End, and withal the
most proper and sure Means to reach and attain it; which clearly holds forth a
sufficient Rule of Faith and Life; which plentifully affords me most admirable
Precepts, and most select exact Patterns of exercising Graces and performing
Duties, most rare Exemplars of strong believing and holy Living! Here Is that
which contains the grand Charter of all my Spiritual and Heavenly Privileges!
Here Is that that keeps me from Horror and Despair, notwithstanding all my Sin
and Guilt! Here Is that that teaches me how to live, and that makes me able to
think of Death, without sinking and dying at the Thoughts of it! Here Is that
that makes me hold my Head above Water, in the blackest Hour, and saddest
Condition that can befall me!

Love and delight in the Scriptures, chiefly and especially for their Sanctity
and Purity, because they reveal and discover the holy Nature and Law of God,
the Necessity and Beauty of Holiness, the Evil and Folly and Danger of Sin, and
are apt to win and draw us off from Sin, and to bring us to a real universal
Conformity to the Will of God, and to a Participation of the Divine Nature, an
happy Participation of God's Holiness. And apply thy self to the daily reading
and diligent studying of the holy Scriptures, with a sincere Desire to This is
the thankful Glass that mends the Lookers Eyes: this is the Well that washes
what it shows. Herb. Poem. H. Script.
be made really holy in Heart and Life by them; to be transformed and renewed,
assimilated and made like to God by them; to be conformed to Scripture-Precepts
and Examples; and to gain a Frame of Heart, and a Conversation and Course of
Life every way becoming the Gospel of Christ. Whenever thou take the Bible
into thy Hand, to read a Chapter, or any Portion of Scripture, lift up thy
Heart to God, and say, Now let me be made Jo. 15.3.
clean through the Word which thou shall speak unto me: Now let me be and 17.17.
sanctified through thy Word of Truth and Holiness: Now let me gain some Degree
of Grace, and make some Improvement and Proficiency in Holiness, by thy holy
Word, by this sacred Writ.

Allot and allow, and ordinarily employ some Portion of Time every day for
reading and considering the holy Scriptures. If we don't in a manner task our
selves usually to observe some certain set Times for this Use and Purpose, our
slothful Hearts will easily admit, yea, catch at any trifling Excuse to put by
the Performance of this Duty; and by Degrees we shall be drawn to an habitual
Neglect of it: We should therefore charge and enjoin our selves, not to
dispense with our stated Hours, but upon very necessary and just Occasions; and
in such Cases be very careful, that what we were forced to omit at such a Time,
we faithfully and honestly endeavor to supply and make up another.

It is convenient to read, commonly, if it may be, some portion of Scripture,
every Morning and every Evening. Luxin's Introduct. to the holy Script. p. 28.
A worthy Divine well observes, that our reading some Scripture in the Morning,
will be a good Antidote against the Infection of those Corruptions, which we
live amongst, and is apt to fortify us against the Temptations of the ensuing
Day; as those who live where there is any Contagion, do usually drink something
in the Morning to prevent Infection. And our reading Scripture in the Evening,
will be a means to compose our Minds, and furnish us with matter of Meditation
for the Night-season; as Cattle feed toward the Evening, that they may have
something to ruminate or chew over again, when they lie down to take their Rest.

That nothing may prove an Hindrance and impediment in this Employment,

1. Redeem the Time from unnecessary wordly Businesses; Nay, let no ordinary
Occasions of your Calling make you generally careless and negligent of the
sacred Scriptures. Do not idly pretend want of Leisure to read the weightiest
Matters in the World, things of greatest Importance and nearest Concernment to
your immortal Souls. They that enjoy much Leisure from worldly Assairs, God
expects that such should employ and bestow more of their Time in this spiritual
Exercise: Yet they that have fullest Business, and fewect Spare-hours, cannot
wholly be exempted from this Duty. It Is very remarkable, that the Deuteronomy. 17.18,
19, 20.
King himself was expressly commanded to write him a Copy of the Law in a Book;
to write out the Book of Deuteronomy, which is a Compendium of the Law; yea, to
write out the whole Pentateuch, says Totum Pentateuchum tenebatur describere,
primum ut Israel. ta quivis, deinde, iterum, ut Rex: ut sciret and in privatis
and in publicis negotiis Legem sibi sequendam. Sic and legere eam debebat, and
sibi peivatim, and in Templo, audiente populo; ut sciret populus neminem a lege
excipi. Grot. in loc.
Grotius; to write it with his own Hand, says Philo, that the divine Precepts
might be the better imprinted and fastened in his Mind: It was to be with him,
and he was to read therein all the Days of his Life; notwithstanding the
Multiplicity and Greatness of the Affairs of his Kingly Office.

2. Redeem the Time from fruitless Pleasures, from Play-Books, Romances,
Fansyful Poems, feigned Stories, common Histories, witty or elegant Speeches:
Never suffer these, or the like, to fill your Hands, to entertain your Eyes, to
please your Phansies, to get into your Hearts, so as to keep the sacred
Scriptures and divine Oracles out of your Hands and Hearts. Alexander would
find Time to read Homer, even in the Camp; and chose to lay up Homer's Poems
in a most precious Casket taken out of the Spoils of Darius. And the Emperor
Aelius Verus was so in love with Ovid de art amandi, as to read it in his
Bed, and to lay it under his Pillow, when he went to sleep: But these were
utterly ignorant of the Scriptures: O let not us Christians have such strong
Affections for any profane Writings, as by means of them to be taken off from
perusing and studying the Scriptures, which were given by Inspiration of God,
and are every way profitable to the Edification and Salvation of our Souls.
Scriptura visa mihi est indigna quam Tullianae dignitati compar arem. Aug Conf.
l, 3. c. 5.
St. Austin confesses it as his great Folly and Fault, that in his unconverted
State, the Scripture-stile was a mean and contemptible thing in his Eye, and
not to be compared for Dignity with the Eloquence of Tully. And The Life of Bp.
Usher, p. 27.
Dr. Bernard relates of Bp. Usher, that in his younger Years, in the Times of
his private Sequestration and strict Examination of himself, he lamented his
too much love of his Book and humane Learning, that he should be as glad of
Monday to go to that, as of the Lord's Day for his Service.

3. We should take care to redeem the Time from the most plausible taking
Treatises of moral Philosophers, whose Precepts commonly make Men grow more in
Knowledge than in Goodness: We have an Account indeed of one (...). Origin.
contra Cells. l. 1. p. 50.
Phaedon, and one Polemon, that were famous Converts to Philosophy, and were
reclaimed and reduced from a very luxurious and impure Life by Socrates and
Xenocrates: But what vast Numbers, and great Multitudes, have not only been
brought to alter their Opinions, but have been really recovered from the inward
Love and Liking, as well as the outward gross Practice of Sin and Vice, by
reading and ruminating on the Writings of the Old and New Testament? St. Austin
declares, that Plato's Writings have not the Non habent illae paginae visltum
pietatis hujus. August. Conf. l. 7. c. 21. 2.
Visage and Color of that Piety, that is apparent in the sacred Scriptures.
The heathen Philosophy has nothing of that holy Nature, and transforming Power,
which is to be found in Scripture-truth; which has a rare Efficacy, not only to
civilize, but to sanctify. Sapientia eorum non excindit vitia, sed abscondit.
Pauca vero Dei praecepta sic totum hominem immutant, and exposito vetere novum
reddunt, ut non cognoscas eundem esse. Lactant. l. 3.. 25.

Da mihi virum, qui sit iraeundus, maledicus, effrenatus: paucissimis Des
verbis tam placidum, quam ovem, reddam, etc. -- Number quis haec Philosophorum aut
unquam prastitit, aut praestare, si velit, potest? qui cum atates suas in
studio Philosophiae conterant; neque alium quemquam, neque seipsos (si natura
paululum obstitit) possunt facere meliores. Id. ib.


The Wisdom of Philosophers (says Lactantius) it does not cut up Vices, but
only cover them: But a few divine Precepts, says he, do so change the whole
Man, and putting off the old make him every way such a new Man, that you would
not know him to be the same Person.

The most improved Discourses of heathen Moralists are also short in the relief
and comforts which they offer to afford to troubled Minds. If you peruse the
Writings of all the Platonic Philosophers, St. Austin will tell you, you can
never find such strong Cordials in any of them, as those which the Gospel
exhibits and holds forth to you: you Nemo ibi audit vocantem: Venite ad me, qui
laboratis. Aug. Conf. l. 7. c. 21.. 3.
can never hear there any calling and crying to you, Come unto me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Nor do the Writings of the most raised sublime Philosophers, furnish and
fortify a Person with any Motives and Arguments, to help him quietly and
contentedly to bear the Afflictions and Calamities of this Life, like those of
the perfect Pattern of Christ's patient, though undeserved, Sufferings; and the
great and gainful Reward in Heaven, that 2 Cor. 4.17.
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, proposed and promised in the Gospel of
Christ, to those that endure the Evils and Sufferings of this present Life with
Christian Patience. Feci ego persaepe periculum. -- fugi semper od Codices
sacros. -- and quod in iis quaerebatur levamen inveni; nec a spe, nec a
desiderio meo fraudatus. Baptist. Mantuan. de patientia, l. 3. cap. 32.
Baptista Mantuanus declares it as his comfortable and constant Experience,
that his recourse to the Scripture was on all Occasions a present happy Remedy
against all Griess of Body, Anxiety of Mind, and Sadness of Soul, and that he
never failed of Ease, in taking this course, and using this means. Once more;

4. We should religiously redeem the Time, not only from mere Philosophical
Writings, but from the Ecclesiastical, Theological Writings of Men not
immediately inspired, to spend in reading over the Bible; which is the
infallible Word of God, and is peculiarly accompanied with the special
Operation of the Spirit; the Word of God being vehiculum Spiritus, the Charet
in which the Spirit of God rides in Triumph. This made Luther solemnly profess,
Ego ipse eam ob causam odi m^os libros, and saepe opto eos interire, quod metuo
ne morentur lectores and abducant a lectione i^sius Scriptarae, quae sola omnis
sapientiae fons est. Ac terreor exemplo superioris aetatis, etc. Luth. Loc.
Com. collect. a Fabricio, prim. Class. cap. 24. page 70. ex Tom. 2do in
Genesin, in cap. 19. p. 143.
that he hated the Books set forth by himself, and often wished them perished
and utterly abolished, lest they should be a means to divert and withdraw Men
from the reading of the Scripture, which alone is the Fountain of all
spiritual, divine and heavenly Wisdom: for fear of this, he could (like
Saturn) have eaten up his own Children; destroyed his own Works, the Fruit and
Issue of his Mind.

Thus, thus redeem and gain the Time from other Things, to apply it to the
busy study of the Scriptures: Let the Scriptures have the Preeminence above
all Books and Writings in the World. Keep a constant course of serious reading
those divine Writings: read them frequently, read them unweariedly. Septies
ter, imo septuagies septies, seu ut plus dicam infinities, legendae sunt, vel
milties relegendae sunt. Idem ibidem, page 70, 71.
It is a common proverbial Speech, says Luther, that the Letters of Princes
are to be read three times over; Surely then the Divine Letters, God's Epistles
( as Gregory calls the Scriptures) are to be read seven times thrice, yea,
seventy times seven; they are to be read even a thousand times over; they are
to be read infinitely, because they are the divine Wisdom, which cannot be
comprehended presently at first sight. If any one read them by the by as
things known and easy, he deceives himself.

Is not Time well spent in often and narrow searching into those things, which
are of so strange and weighty an importance, that the 1 Pet. 1.1^.
Angels themselves desire (...). It Is an Allusion to the Cherubims, which were
made with their Eyes looking down toward the Mercy-Seat.
slooping down to look, to peep and pry into them? In gaining Knowledge and
Understanding of the Wisdom, Counsel, Mind and Will of God? In acquainting our
selves with the Rule of our Lives, in learning the Laws of the Kingdom, and
studying the Statutes of Heaven? in using the Means of getting and growing in
saving Grace; in opening and reading our Elder Brother's Will and Testament; in
sucking those full Breasts of strong Consolation, and in drawing the refreshing
Water of Life out of those Wells of Salvation?

Let it be the shame and sorrow and trouble of our Souls, that we have been
careless of the Scriptures in any part of our whole Lives. In his Life written
by Mr. W. Durham, p. 2.
Dr. Robert Harris, President of Trinity-Colledg in Oxford, was not a little
afflicted to his dying day, that even in his Childhood he was more willing of
play, than of reading the Scriptures to his pious Parents at their Call.

And let us lament, and sadly lay to heart the slight Thoughts that too many
have of the holy Scriptures, and their gross neglect and great disregard of the
precious and venerable Book of God. Mr. Fuller, in his Page 148.
History of the University of Cambridge, does give us a Relation of an
excellent Meditation of the Reverend Dr. Richard Holdesworth, which the Relater
himself heard drop from him a little before his expiring: I admire, says he,
at David 's gracious Heart, who so often in Scripture, but especially in the
119th Psalm extolleth the Worth and Value of the Word of God; and yet
Quantillum Scripturae, how little of the Word had they in that Age? the
Pentateuch, [or five Books of Moses] the Book of Job, and some of the
Hagiography [a little of other holy Writ.] How much have we now thereof since
the accession of the Prophets, but especially of the New Testament? and yet,
alas! the more we have of the Word of God, the less it is generally regarded.

Lastly; let us do our honest and utmost endeavor to win and draw others on to
the Love and Liking, to the Reading and Studying of the sacred Scriptures:
Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
Let them be in thine Heart, and teach them diligently unto thy Children, and
talk of them when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thon risest up. and 4.9.
Teach them, thy Sons, and thy Son's Sons. Genesis 18.19.
Command thy Children, and engage thy Household and Servants to read the
Scriptures, and to mind what they read, and allow them Time for so necessary a
Duty; and let not any in thy Family want a Bible for their Use and Benefit. The
Life of Dr. Rob. Harris written by Mr. W. Durham, page 57.
In all the Wills made by the forementioned Dr. Robert Harris, this Legaey was
always renewed, Item, I bequeath to all my Children, and their Childrens
Children, to each of them a Bible, with this Inscription, None but Christ.

The eighth Direction.
If we would effectually redeem the Time, we must give our selves to frequent
and serious Meditatio soror lectionis, nutrix orationis, directrix oporis,
emntumque pariter perfectio and consummatrix. Gerson.
Meditation.

Meditation is more excellent than mere Study; for the End of Meditation is not
the filling our Heads with Notions, but the quickening of our Affections, and
strengthening of our Resolutions; the warming of our Hearts, and putting them
upon Duty; the bringing them to an inward lively Sense of God, to the Love and
Fear of God, to Thankfulness and Obedience to him, to the Enjoyment of him, and
Fellowship and Communion with him.

Let Us use and inure our selves See Dr. T. Goodwin of the Vanity of Thoughts,
page 8, 9, 10.
to raise and extract holy Observations, and spiritual Considerations, from all
ordinary Occurrences and Occasions; and as the Be sucks Honey out of every
Flower, let us endeavor to distill heavenly and savory, sweet and useful
Meditations, out of all God's Dealings with us and Dispensations toward us;
out of all Accidents that befall us, or any about us; out of the Things we see,
hear, or hear of, and out of all the Objects that any way come into our
Thoughts. This was the Practice of our blessed Savior; when he came to Joh. 4.
a Well, he took occasion to discourse of the Water of Life. And this has
likewise been the Usage of the most eminent practical Christians. The Reverend
and holy His Life among Clark's Lives of ten em, Div. p. 166, 167.
Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, as he was riding with one of his intimate Friends by
Tiburn, (which he had not seen, or not observed before) he asked what that was,
and being answered that it was Tiburn, where so many Malefactors had lost their
Lives, he stopped his Horse, and uttered these Words with much Affection; O what
a shame is it, that so many thousands should die for the Satisfaction of their
Lusts, and so few be found willing to lay down their Lives for Christ! Why
should not we, in a good Cause, and upon a good Call, be ready to be hanged for
Jesus Christ? It would be an everlasting Honor, and it is a thousand times
better to die for Christ, to be hanged, or to be burned for Christ, than to die
in our Beds.

When we are riding, walking, sitting alone in the day time; or when we are
awake in the night season; let us commune with our own Hearts, and fill up such
spaces of Time, and employ such Spare-Hours in holy Thoughts of the best
Things: yea, let us set some Time apart for the solemn Duty of Meditation.

That which comes into our Souls by Meditation, is like a Shower of Snow, which
falls soft, and sinks deep. It Is a good Saying of St. Austin, Intellectus
cogitabundus principium omnis boni; A thinking Mind is a Principle productive
of all good Dr. Annesly, M. E. Sermon. i. p. 9.
The Father of a Prodigal lying on his Sick and Deathbed, straightly charged his
only Son, that he would spend a Quarter of an Hour every day in serious
solitary Thoughts; leaving to himself the particular Subject of his retired
Meditation: The Son accordingly following this Advice, at last cast in his
Thoughts what might be his Father's Intention in such Injunction: He concluded,
that his Father, being a wise and a good Man, designed to direct and lead his
Thoughts to the consideration of somewhat of Religion; which did so mightily
operate upon him, that he quickly became rationally religious.

Upon all Occasions, particularly and especially often meditate, and frequently
think of the four last Things, Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; the serious
Thoughts of which will have a mighty Influence upon the whole Course of our
Lives and Actions.

The first of the four last Things proposed as the subject Matter of Meditation
in order to the right Redemption of Time. I. USE.
I. Use in thy Life time to think much of the Day of thy own particular Death,
and of the general Dissolution of all Things.

1. Mortem ut nunquam timeas, semper cogita.
Sen. ep. 30. in fine. Vive me nor lethi: fugit hora: hoc quod loquor, inde est.
Pers. sat. 5. Dum loquimue, sugerit invida aetas.
Horat. carm. l. 1. Od. 11.
To think much of the Day of thy own particular Death.

Be not thou of Lewis the eleventh's Mind, who strictly charged all about him,
that they sold not so much as name the terrible Word Death: Do not only
patiently hear of it, but choose to think, and often to think of it.

Men are too commonly regardless of their End, and unmindful of their own
Mortality and Frailty. The very Heathen have acknowledged Man's natural
Proneness to forget his End; and therefore they used several Arts to mind
themselves and others of it. Some Emperors, on the Day of their Coronation,
have had several sorts of Marble presented to them, out of which to choose their
Tombs. Philosophers have had their Sepulchers before their Gates, that they
might neither go out nor in, but they might still be put in mind of their
Mortality: And many great Men have had them in their Places of Pleasure: And
dead Men's Skulls have been served up in delicious Banquets: And Philip King of
Macedon had a young Monitor, that came every Day, and rubbed up his Memory with
a (...), Remember thou art but a Mortal Man. And we plainly find in Scripture,
that this is naturally Man's Temper: The Fool in the Gospel is a clear Instance
of this; who Luke 12.19.
said to his Soul, Soul, thou have much Goods laid up for many Years, take
thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry: He never dreamed of a Stulte, hac nocte,
Thou Fool, this Night -- That was the farthest Thing off his Thoughts. Jam.
4.13, 14.
St. James reproves those who promise themselves to morrow, and build upon the
next Year, for the driving of their Trade, and getting of Gain.

Men in their Health, think not of Sickness; and in Sickness, seldom reckon of
Death. Even dying Men often times think of nothing but recovering, and living
longer in the World. Men are apt to look upon Death as afar off; and when in
all probability they have but a few Sands in their Glass to run, they are ready
to say, that they Job 29 18.
shall multiply their Days as the Sand.

Men can willingly measure their Lands and Grounds, and number their Herds and
Droves of Cattle, and count the Revenues of their Manours and Farms, and reckon
their daily or yearly Incomes: but who is willing to measure and number his
Days?

Yea, we can willingly measure other Men's Days, and learn to know their End,
and take great Notice how frail they are: We can point at an old Man, and cry
he is thus or thus old; his Days cannot be many; he is past his best; he has
one Foot in the Grave. Upon sight of one sick, or in a Consumption, we are apt
to say, Such a one is near his End, he cannot live long sure: But we take little
notice of our selves; we make little Reckoning of our own End; we little
consider what may become of us to morrow.

We do not actually think we shall not die; yet the most of us do not actually
think we shall die. God frequently reads Lectures of Mortality to us, and yet
we will not learn to remember them. The Arrows of the Almighty have flown thick
on every side of us, and yet we live as if we thought to escape always. Though
others have fallen round about us, we are ready to count our standing sure. We
securely lie in a dead Sleep amidst many awakening providence. I am afraid
many of us are too like your common Grave-makers, who often handle Skulls and
dead Men's Bones, but are so daily used to them, that they are not at all moved
or affected with them. What senseless silly Creatures are we, that we will not
believe we are mortal, till we feel it; that we will not be persuaded we shall
die, till we our selves are struck with Death? Ah Friends, we do not live as if
we believed it, and were truly and really convinced, fully and thoroughly
persuaded of it.

We are apt to overmeasure our Days, to put more in than we should, to promise
our selves what God never promised us, and to count those Days ours which are
wholly in God's Hand, and quite out of ours.

We are ready to measure by Read Dr. Patrick's Div. Arithm.
false Rules; to reckon, that because we are young, we shall not die till we
are old: That because we are strong, we shall last it out, and endure long:
That because we are temperate, we need not fear Diseases and Death: That
because some live much longer than others, that we may live as long as the
longest.

The Guilt of Sin, makes many afraid to take a true Measure of their Days. The
want of a good and well-grounded Hope of a better Life, makes Men unwilling to
know the End of this. And the inordinate Love of the World, makes Men loath to
know their End, and to think of leaving what they love. Haec faciunt invitos
mori; These are the Things that make us unwilling to die; was a discreet Answer
given by the Emperor Charles the fifth to a certain Duke of Venice.

You are naturally backward and disinclin'd to the consideration of your latter
End; and therefore pray to God to enable you to it, and help you in it. Say
with David, Psalm. 39.4.
Lord, make me to know my End, and the Measure of my Days, what it is: that I
may know how frail I am. And with Moses likewise; and 90.12.
So teach me to number my Days, that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom. We need
but a little Arithmetic to number our Days (as Caryl on Job 4.21.
one says well) but we need a great deal of Grace to number them. A Child may
be wise enough to number the Days of an old Man; and yet that old Man a Child
in numbering his own Days so as to apply his Heart to Wisdom. Well then,
heartily beg of God, that he would make you to know your End; to know it so, as
to have your Heart touched and affected with the Knowledge of it: To know your
End, and to live suitably and answerably to the Knowledge of it: To know your
End, so as to make a good End of it

Now give me leave to direct and assist you in this necessary Duty: Suffer me
to serve in a Death's Head, and to put a Turf of fresh Earth into your Hands;
it is counted very wholesome to smell of.

Remember and consider, (1.) That Death, thy Death, is certain. (2.) That the
Time of thy Death is very uncertain. (3.) That when Death comes, a great change
will be made by it. (4.) and lastly; Consider seriously, what a sad and
uncomfortable Thing it will be, to be found unprepared to die, at the Point of
Death: And how sweet and happy a Thing it will be, to be in a readiness and
preparation at the Hour of Death. Consider,


(1.) It is sure and certain, thou must die at last.

Death entered into the World by Sin: The Wages of thy Sin, is thy Death. It is
now appointed unto Men, to all Men, once to die. Death is the way of all the
Earth. Every Thing plainly points thee to it. Thy very Sleep is an Image of thy
Death. The very Meat thou eatest, as it breeds thy Nourishment, so, it breeds
thy Diseases. Thou have apparently died already in thy Friends and Relations,
Neighbors and Acquaintance: Thou have lost thy Parents, or Husband, or Wife,
or Children, or Servants; and therefore thou have reason to think thou shall
one Day lose thy own Life, and certainly die in thy own Person. Some one, it
may be, that lately lay in thy Bed, and lay in thy Bosom, is now laid out of
thy Sight, laid in the Grave: and Time will come, when, as lively and brisk as
thou art, thou shall lie by them, and be gathered to them. Surely every
Sickness, every Disease, every Toothach, Headache, every Pain, and Distemper,
and bodily Weakness, is an Harbinger and Forerunner of thy Death, and a plain
Remembrancer to thee of thy latter End. Thou see enough in others, thou
find enough in thy self, to make thee to know thy own Frame, and to cause
thee to remember that thou thy self art but Dust.

Xerxes viewing his vast Army, wept over them, to think how within a few
Lustres of Years there would be none of them all remaining. Be affected to
think, how a few Years will wear out, and carry off thy self, and all thy
Family, the numerous Company of thy Friends and Relations, Neighbors and
Acquaintance.

The close Meditation of the Certainty of thy own Dissolution, this will keep
thee from living here as if thou were to live here always; which is a common
Fault among Men, reproved and censured of old by Tanquam semper victuri
vivitis. Seneca de brev. vit. cap. 4.
Seneca: And from building here, as if thou should here continue for ever, as
Diogenis dictum est, Megarenses obsonant, quasi crastina die morituri;
aedificant vero, quasi nui quam morituri. Tert. Apolog. c. 39.
Diogenes once severely charged the Megarenses. When thou rearest thy Building,
this Course will cause thee to think of thy own Tomb and Grave, and that thy
earthly House of this Tabernacle must be dissolved. And this will enable thee
to live loose from the temporary Enjoyments of this present World, and to have
lower Thoughts of all earthly Pleasures, which are but for a Season; and would
engage you to be Vivere tota vita discendum est: and quod magis fortasse
miraberis, tota vita discendum est mori. Seneca de brev. vit. cap. 7.
learning to die, as long as you live.

The frequent Thoughts of thy latter End would prompt thee to say thus to thy
self; How shall I dare to live in Jest, who am sure I must die in Earnest? Am I
afraid to die, and yet shall I use all Means I can to make Death dangerous and
terrible to me? Shall I venture St. Jerome said well, He deserves not the Name
of a Christian, who will live in that State of Life in which he will not die.
Bp. Taylor's great Exemplar, p. 558.
to live in that State of Life, in which I would not die?

(2.) Consider farther; That the Day and Means of thy Death is as Ah stulte,
quid cogitas te diu victurum, cum nullum diem habeas securum? Quam multi
decepti sunt, and irsperate de cerpore extracti? Quoties audisti a dicentibus,
quia ille gladio cecidit, ille submersus est, ille ab alto ruens cervicem
fregit, ille manducando obriguit, ille ludendo finem fecit? Alius igne, alius
far, alius peste, alius latrocinto interiit. and sic omnium finis mors est,
and vita hominum tanquam umbra subito pertransit. A Kempis, l. 1. c. 23. n. 7.
uncertain, as thy Death it self is certain.

Think when thou art eating, that then thou may be digging thy Grave with
thy Teeth: and when thou art drinking, that then thou may find and meet with
Death in the Cup or Pot. When thou art ready to take thy Rest, consider, that
God this Night may require thy Soul of thee, and before Morning may take away
the Vine's Essex's Hearse, p. 12.
diry Difference between Sleep and Death. Here practice according to Seneca's
Direction; Dic tibi dormituro, possum non expergisci. Dic experrecto, possum
non dormire amplius. Dic exeunti, possum non reverti: dic redeunti, possum non
exire. Sen. ep. 49.

Cum mane fuerit, putate ad vesperum non perventurum; vespere autem facto, mane
non audeas tibi polliceri. Semper ergo paratus esto, and taliter vive, ut
nunquam te imparatum mors inveniat. A Kempis, l. 3. c. 23. n 3.


Say to thy self when thou go to sleep, it may be I shall never wake again:
and when thou risest, it may be I shall never sleep again. Say to thy self when
thou go out, it may be I shall never return home and come in alive again:
And when thou come in at any Time, say to thy self, It may be I shall never
go out of doors again. Consider, when thou art going a Journey, that thou
may be going to thy long home: When thou art riding upon the Road, that thou
may be posting unto thy Grave; that the Horse thou ridest on may be the pale
Horse, and his Name that sits upon him, though unseen, may be Death. Conclude
with thy self, I must die shortly, I may die instantly: This Day may be the
last that I shall see; this Hour the last that I shall spend; this Word the
last that I shall speak; this Deed the last that I shall persform; this Place
the last that I shall breath in. When thou go into any Company, consider,
that it may be the last time that ever thou shall come in the Company of those
Persons; that therefore it behooves thee to behave thy self among them, and to
spend thy Time, and bestow thy Hours with them, like a Man, and a Christian;
not like a Beast, or an Heathen: to demean thy self there soberly and
temperately, and with good Government of thy Appetite and Passions, and with
the Exercise and Improvement of thy Reason and of Grace, in some useful
Discourse and profitable Converse; not childishly and unmanly, intemperately
and luxuriously, rudely and uncivilly, wildly, and extravagantly.

The often renewed Meditation of the great Uncertainty of the Time of the
Departure. This will be a Means to hasten thy Repentance, which, if deferred,
may prove too late: And will surely help thee so to carry thy self continually,
Id ago, ut mihi instar totius vitae sit dies. Sen. ep.

Ille qui nullum non tempus in usus suos comfert, quiomnes dies tanquam vitam
suam ordmat, nec optat crastinum, nec timet. Idem de brev. vit c 7.


as one that reckons and uses a single Day, as if it were a whole Life: To live
every day, as if it were (...). Musonius apud Stob Sermon. 1.

^ic ordinandus est aies omnis, tamquam cogat agmen, and consummet atque
expleat vitam. -- In somnum ituri, loeti, hilar esque dicamus,

Vi^i, and quem dederat cursum fortuna, peregi.


thy very last: Not to promise thy self a Morrow, and to neglect thy present
Work in Hope and Expectation of it; but to order thy self immediately, as if
thou did never look to see and enjoy it: and to count it as Crastinum si
adjecerit Deus, laeti reciptamus. Ille beatissimus est and securus sai
possessor, qui crastinum sine solicitudine expectat. Qussquis dixit, vixi,
quotidie ad lucrum surgit. Sen. ep. 12.
pure Gain as may be, if God shall be pleased to afford thee the Light and
Benefit of a new Day.

As the Bird guides her Flight with her Train, and the Ship is governed at the
Stern, or hindermost Part; so the Life of Man is directed and ordered by
frequent Meditation of his latter End.

(3.) Think moreover of the great Change that will at last be made by Death:
which is lively represented in a Story, related by a learned Bishop Tailor, in
his rule and Exercise of holy Dying, c. 1.. 3.
Doctor, of a fair young German Gentleman, who, while he lived, often refused
to be pictured, but put off the importunity of his Friends Desire, by giving
way that after a few Days Burial they might send a Painter to his Vault, and
if they saw cause fo rit, draw the Image of his Death unto the Life. They did
so, and found his Face half eaten, and his Midriff and Backbone full of
Serpents, and so he stands pictured among his armed Ancestors. Think how the
Case will shortly be much alike with thee; that Death in a Moment will turn thy
Color into Paleness, thy Heat into Coldness, thy Beauty into Lothsomness; and
will so alter and disfigure thee, that thy ver Husband, or Wife, or Child, will
stand afraid, and start at thee: That thy nearest, dearest, kindest Friends,
who delighted in thy Company whilst thou livedst, took thee to their Board,
took thee to their Bed, and put thee in their Bosom; will, as soon as thou art
dead, take a speedy Course to remove thee out of their Sight, yea, to put thee
under Ground, because by Death thou will become not only useless, but offensive
to them: And what a frightful Spectacle thou would be, if thy Body should be
viewed, when once the Vermin have bred in it, and shall have devoured and
consumed some Parts of it.

Think, how Death will make a Change in thy Body, a change in thy Mansion,
Habitation, Companions: That when thou art dead, thou shall quickly change thy
Bed for a winding Sheet, thy Chamber for a Coffin, thy House for a Grave, thy
Friends for Worms.

This Consideration will be hugely instrumental to beat down Pride of any
beauty, Health, Strength, or Ornaments of the Body; and be useful to cause thee
to walk humbly, and soberly; and will instruct thee to say to thy self, Why
should I glory in any such transitory Enjoyment? As fair and fine as I may be
apt to think my self, I know I shall be but a sorry Creature when Death comes.
Why should I delight to stand long at the Glass, and there to view my own Face,
and Features, and Dresses now, since Death will one Day so change me, that my
most intimate loving familiar Friends will hardly endure to behold me? Why
should I pride my self in any rich Attire and brave Apparel, who must ere long
be stripped to a winding Sheet? Why should I bestow so much cost upon that
Tenement, which I shall dwell but a while in, and which will decay and fall to
utter Ruin, when I have done all I can? Why should I make my Belly my God,
which must be destroyed, and be Meat for Worms? Why should I be so high and
stately, as to think no House good enough, no Room fine enough, no Fair dainty
enough for me, who must quickly be brought as low as the Grave, and be forced
to make my Bed in the dark, and to lay my Head in the Dust; to lodge, yea dwell
in a black lonely desolate Hole of Earth; to say to the Grave, Thou art mine
House; to say to Corruption, Thou art my Father; and to the Worm, Thou art my
Mother, and my Sister? Why should I spend all my time in pleasing and pampering
this base Flesh, and in over-caring for this changeable vile Body, which must
shortly suffer Rottenness and Corruption? Shall I not rather take care to
beautify and adorn my inner Man; to get a Change wrought in my Soul by the good
Spirit and Grace of God, before I suffer a Change in my Body, a Change by
Sickness, a Change by Death? and so to live, that when I am dead, it may not be
said of me, Here lies one that was dead while he lived, and whose Soul then
stank worse by sinful Corruption, than his Body now stinks by Putrefaction?

(4.) Consider once more; What a sad and uncomfortable Thing it will be, to be
found unprepared to die, at the point of Death: and how happy a Thing it will
be, to be in a readiness and preparation, at the Hour of Death.

[1.] Think well with thy self, how miserable a Thing it will be, to be wholly
unprepared for Death, when you come to die indeed: Cu a illos aliqua
imbecillitas mortalitatis admonuit, quemadmodum paventes moriuntur, non tanquam
exeant de vita, sed tanquam extrahantur? Seneca de brevitate vitae, cap. 11.
to be driven away in thy Wickedness (as the Prove. 14.32.
Wise Man speaks) and forced to go to thy own Place, whether thou will or no.

To say as Theophrastus of old, Dii boni nunc? Good God, must I go now? How
discomposed and disordered, amazed and terrified will thou be, when thou art
surpised? What a disconsolate Condition was that of Caesar Borgia? who, when
through the Error of a Servant, he had unawares drunk of the poisoned Wine,
which he and his Father Pope Alexander the sixth had mingled and prepared for
some rich Cardinals, and verily expected it would prove his Death, is said to
have broke out into this or the like Expression; I had made Provision against
all possible Disasters, but only Death, for I did not think I should have died
so soon.

How troublesome will it be to thee, when thy Soul is about to be divorced from
thy Body, to be at best uncertain then what will become of thee? To express thy
self with dying Aristotle, Dubious morior quo vadam nescio.
I die doubtful, not well knowing whither I am going. Or, with the Emperor
Adrian; Animula, vagula, blandula,
Hospes com esque corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca,
Pallsdula, frigidula, nudula
Nec, ut soles, dabis jocos.

Ah dear departing wandering Soul, the old and sweet Companion of my Body, into
what Region art thou now going? surely thou will never be so merry and pleasant
as thou have been.

How intolerably vexatious will it be, to change for Uncertainties; or to make
a certain Change for the worse? To die unsatisfied what will become of thee, as
to thy future unchangeable State; Or, sure and certain that thou shall enter
into a worse State and Place, and shall be miserable to all Eternity? To see
then but a Step, but a Breath between thee and everlasting Death: To have all
the horrid and heinous sins of a whole misled and misspent Life fiercely fly in
thy very Face, and thy enraged furious guilty Conscience to be then most active
to torment thee, the nearer thou apprehendest thy self approaching to the End
of thy mortal Life: As usually bodily Aches and Wounds, do prick and pain and
shoot most, the nearer it draws unto Night.

What a lamentable sad Case was that of Cardinal Wolsey, to cry out in his
extreme unhappy Circumstances, Had I been as careful and diligeut to please and
serve the God of Heaven, as I have been to comply with the Will of my earthly
King, he would not have left and for saken me now in my gray Hairs and old Age,
as the other has done? So think what a doleful Case it will be, for thee in thy
last Hours to pour forth thy Soul in such Words as these; If I had served my
God as earnestly and unweariedly, as I have constantly served the world, served
diverse Lusts and Pleasures, served the Devil himself; Had I been at Church,
when I was in Bed; been in my Closet upon my Knees, when I was sitting tippling
upon the Ale-bench, or was quaffing at Tavern, and drinking of Healths upon my
Knees; Had I satisfied the Reason of a Man, as I gratified my brutish Appetite
and sensual Desire; Had I done the Will of God, and of my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, as I have done the Will of the Devil, the Will of the Flesh, and
fulfilled my own carnal corrupt Will; I had then been owned by God, and
approved by my own Conscience, inwardly strengthened and supported, and sweetly
comforted and refreshed; who now am deserted and rejected by God, and miserably
perplexed and disquieted, rent and racked, torn and tormented in my own
Conscience. Then thou will certainly count and call thy self unhappy, and him
the only happy Man, who (as dying Beatus es, Abba Arseni, qui semper hanc horam
ante oculos habuisti. Bibl. Patr.
Theophilus said of devout Arsenius) has had the Hour of his Departure ever
before his Eyes.

That is the first; Conider what a dreadful Thing it is, to be found unprovided
at the Hou^ of Death. When Friends and Physicians cannot keep thee, and God and
his good Angels will not take thee, O then, O then what will become of thee!

[2.] Seriously think on the other hand, what Considera, quan pulchra res sit
consummare vitam ante mortom, deinde expectare securum reliquam tempor is sui
part m^, Sen. ep. 32.
an happy and comfortable Thing it will be, to find your Time well improved,
and your self prepared to die before you die.

It Is a true Saying of the Wise Man, that to a good man the Eccl. 7.1.
Day of Death is better than the Day of his Birth: For, is not that Day which
perfectly frees, and fully delivers a good Man from the many Vanities, and
great Vexations, which the Life of Man is obnoxious to, and the Troubles and
Sufferings which the Life of a Christian is exposed to, far better than that
Day which let us him into the Possession of them? Again, The Time when a Person
has attained the End of his Being, made good the Hopes of others, answered
god's and Man's expectation concerning him, walked himself in the Fear of the
Lord, brought up Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, walked
worthy of his Vocation, filled up every Relation with suitable Duties and
Graces, served his Generation according to the Will of God, lived and acted
with reference to Eternity; The Time when he most willingly leaves this wicked
World, and leaves an holy Seed to stand up in his room and stead; leaves a good
Name, and a good Example behind him, and goes to Heaven, to the Spirits of just
Men made perfect; goes to God his heavenly Father, and to Christ his Redeemer,
to receive the gracious and glorious Reward of all his Works and Labors, and
the Crown he has striven and contended for; Surely the Day when this falls out,
which is the Day of his Death, gives cause of more abundant Comfort, than can
the Day of his Birth, together with all the Days of his Life. Is not that Day
better, wherein a Man has truly and really answered the Ends of Life, than that
in which he only began at first to live? Is not that Day better, in which he
has fully and completely acted his Part well, quitted and behaved himself like
a Man and Christian, and is gone off the Stage of this lower world with Credit
and Esteem, Approbation and Applause of God himself, good Angels, and Men; than
the Day of his first appearing upon the Stage or Theater of this World, in a
way of Probation and Trial, and in Hope of his future good Performance? Is not
the Day of his actual Admission, and honorable Reception into a blissful
Condition and happy Mansion, far better than the Day of his Entrance into a
State of Preparation for it?

Think well with thy self, what a joyful Day, what a Cum ecquid lumen molestiae
afferret? rogarent: pectus tangens Oecolampadius, abunde lucis est, inquit.
Melch. Adam. in vita Oecolamp. p. 56.
lightsome Hour, what a Time of refreshing it will be to thee, to be able to
say with thy Savior, a little before thy Departure, Joh. 17.4.
Father, I have glorified thee on Earth, I have finished the Work which thou
have given me to do: And with the Apostle St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4 6, 7.
The Time of my Departure is at hand. I have fought a good Fight, Vixi, and
quem dederat cursum fortuna peregi.
I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith. 2 Cor. 1.12.
My rejoicing is this, the Testimony of my Conscience, that in Simplicity and
Godly Sincerity, I have had my Conversation in the World: To say with Hilarion,
(as St. Jerome reports in his Egredere anima, quid times? Egredere, quid
dubitas? Septuaginta prope annis servisti Christo, and mortem times? Hier. in
vita Hilar.
Life) Go out my Soul, why art thou afraid? go out, why lingrest thou? thou
have served Christ well nigh these seventy Years, and do thou now fear Death?

To see, that it has been to thee Phil. 1.21.
to live Christ, and to be able to look on thy Death as thy Gain: And, with
good old His Life inserted among Mr. Clark's Lives of ten emin. Div. p. 123.

When his good Sister said to him in his Sickness, Brother, I am afraid to
leave you alone; Why, Sister, (said be) I shall, I am sure, be with Jesus
Christ when I die. Ib. p. 123, 124.


Dr. Gouge, in thy last Sickness to term Death, thy best Friend next to Jesus
Christ: With Phil. 1.23.
St. Paul, to desire to depart; and to be ready to utter such Language as this,

Oh loose this Frame, this Knot of Man unty!
That my free Soul may use her Wing,
Which is now pinioned with Mortality,
As an entangled hampered Thing.
As the pious Home.
Mr. Herbert pathetically expresses it in one of his sacred Poems.

Dwell upon these Considerations, That the Loss and Misimprovement of Time will
make a Deathbed uneasy to you, and that the right redeeming of time will
render a Deathbed comfortable to you; And this will be very apt to move you to
prepare for Death, by dying to Sin, dying to the World, and living to
Righteousness, before you die: 'Twill help you to live every Day so indeed, as
others wish that they had lived, when they come to lie upon a Deathbed: To
live so now, that you may with comfort think of dying, and may be freed from
the slavish Fear of Death, and be held no longer Heb. 2.15.
in bondage by it? 'Twill cause you to live the Life of the Righteous, that so
you may die the Death of the Righteous; die safely, and die comfortably: 'Twill
make you careful to set, not only your House, but your Heart in order, your
Life in order; and so to dispatch your work and Business, that when you come to
die, you may have nothing to do but to die, and freely and cheerfully to resign
your Spirit to the Father of Spirits, and to surrender your Soul to your
faithful Creator, and gracious loving Lord Redeemer. In a Word, it will enable
you so to live, that you may have Prove. 14.32.
Hope in your own Death; and that when Friends shall mourn for your Departure,
they may not sorrow without 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
Hope.

And so much shall suffice for your Direction as to your Meditation of Death,
your own particular Death, in order to your Redemption of Time.

2. Meditate here moreover of the general Dissolution of all Things, at least
in this inferior World.

Think well of what 2 Pet. 3.11.
St. Peter informs you, that all these Things shall be dissolved. Consider,
that the Description which is there given of this Dissolution, is too august
and Dr. ore's yst. of Godl p 214.
big by far for so small a Work as Of which Dr. Hammend in e^prets it.
the Destruction of the City of Jerusalem: That the Scoffers arguing there
against the Promise of christ's coming, (that Verse 4.
all Things continue as they were from the Beginning of the Creation) does
clearly show, that this Coming of Christ was not understood by them (and
consequently not by St. Peter) of the Burning of a City by War; a Thing, which
might as probably and easily happen to Jerusalem, as it had already fallen out
in many other Places of the World: But of the final glorious Coming of Christ
to judge the World; which Superest i'e ultimus and perpetuus judicis di s; ille
nationibus insperatus, ille derisus, cum tanta secult vetusta, and tot ejus
nativitates uno ignt haurientur. Tertull. lib de Spectae, cap 30.
Judgment the Conflagration of the Earth is to attend.

Think very seriously with thy self, that Verse 7.
the Heavens and the Earth which are now, are reserved unto Fire: How Verse 10.
the Heavens shall one Day pass away with a great Noise, and Verse 12.
being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Verse 10, 12.
Elements, or (...) from (...), ordine mitiari incedo. The host of the
Ethereal Heavgens are the Stars and Planets: The Host of the Aereal Heavens
are Clouds and Meteors, Fowls and flying Creatures.
Hosts, shall melt with fervent Heat; the Earth also and the Works of Nature,
or Art, that are therein shall be burnt up. That though the superior,
Ethereal, starry Heavens may be exempted, (as He that considers both the
super-eminent Nature and Immensity of the Ethereal Heaven, and of those innum
rabble Bodies therein, in regard of which the whole Sublunary World is but a
Point or Center; and that it no way can be proved that ever those Bodies
received any Curse for Man's Sin, or Contagion by the World's Deluge, or that
any Enemies of God dwell in them to pollute them; He that considers this will
not easily be induced to believe that the Fire of the Day of Judgment shall
burn them. It remains therefore that the Sublunary Heavens only with their
(...) are to be the Subject of this Conflagration, Mr. Mede's Works, p. 614,
615.
some with probable Reason conceive) yet, that without dispute or doubt, Dr.
More's Mist. of Godl. p. 231.
the Globe of the Earth, and the circumjacent Air, with all the Garnishings of
them, shall be burnt up: That this Air and Earth shall be strangely and
wonderfully altered, though not annihilated: That the present Order, and comely
Beauty of the Compages and Frame of this visible lower World shall be
dissolved: That this great House, and goodly Building, made for Man to dwell
in, shall be taken down, and all the Furniture wherewith it was fitted for his
Use and Service shall be destroyed.

That it will be an Act of Wisdom for God to abolish these Things, when the
Time appointed for Probation and Trial of immortal Spirits clothed with Flesh
is ended and expired; and Men shall enter into so different a State, in which
there will be no need of any Thing that serves and ministers to this terrene
and animal Life.

And though God think good to continue this World for a while, that it may be a
Theater whereon his Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Patience, and other his glorious
Attributes may be displayed and made conspicuous; yet it is convenient and
reasonable, that this Stage of God's Acts and Works of Providence, when all is
finished, should be taken down.

And think yet farther; That it will be an Act of Justice for God to do this:
That though he Sin, yet he does not revoke the Sentence; but in due Time will
execute Judgment and Vengeance upon it, for the first Sin that Man committed,
and for all the rest that have been acted in it: That Man, not only being a
Tenant at will, but having unworthily broken his Covenant, and forfeited his
Possession by breaking the Articles of his Lease; his Lord at last will turn
him out of Doors, or rather pull down his House about his Ears, and not suffer
it to be always a Nest of Rebels and Covenant-breakers:

That this World, the Creature, made for the Use of Man, being defiled and
abused by him to serve him in his Sin; when the Sins of the Inhabitants of the
Earth (as of the Genesis 15.16.
Amorites of old) shall arrive to a Genesis 15.16.
Fullness, when once the rebellious Generations of Adam shall have filled up the
Measure of their Iniquities, and are ripe for Judgment; the Day of Dissolution
will then certainly come, called expressly 2 Pet. 3 7.
the Day of Judgment and Perdition of ungodly Men: That then the wicked, and
abominable Men, shall be burnt in the Place of their Wickedness, and the
Objects and Instruments of their Sin shall be destroyed with them, and become
the Instruments of their Punishment: For so, the Garden of Eden, wherein Man
was at first placed, was destroyed and defaced, when once he had sinned in it.
And what more usual even among Men, than to order the Execution of notorious
Malefactors, in the Places where they have committed their Wickedness; and to
sentence the Houses wherein themselves and their Families lived, to be
demolished? Dan. 3.29.
Their Houses shall be made a Dunghill.

You have heard of great and terrible Fires in the World, and of famous Cities
consumed thereby; and have seen not many Years since the devouring desolating
Flames of London, the Metropolis and chief City of our Nation: But think with
thy self, that all this is nothing at all to that great Fire, which one Day God
will kindle, at once setting Heaven and Earth in a Flame together.

Let me here assist your Meditation, by proposing and presenting to you a
notable Description, given by a very learned Dr. More's Mist, of Godl. p. 238.

Concerning the Partibility of the Conflagration of the Earth, See there Book
6, c. 7, 8.


Doctor, of the general and final Conflagration of the Earth: Christ will
cause, says he, such an universal Thunder and Lightning, that it shall rattle
over all the Quarters of the Earth, rain down burning Comets and falling Stars,
and discharge such Claps of unextinguishable Fry, that it will do sure
Execution wherever it falls; so that the Ground being excessively heated, those
subterraneous Mines of combustible Matter will also take Fire: which inflaming
the inward Exhalations of the Earth will cause a terrible Murmur under Ground,
so that the Earth will seem to thunder against the tearing and rattling of the
Heavens, and all will be filled with sad remugient Echo's: Earthquakes and
Eruptions of Fire there will be every where, and whole Cities and Countries
swallowed down by the vast gapings and wide Divulsions of the Ground. -- And
this fiery Vengeance shall be so thirsty, that it shall drink deep of the very
Sea; nor shall the Water quench her devouring Appetite, but excite it. --
Wherefore the great Channel of the Sea shall be left dry, and all Rivers shall
be turned into Smoke and Vapor; so that the whole Earth shall be inveloped in
one entire Cloud of an unspeakable Thickness, which shall cause more than an
Egyptian Darkness, clammy and palpable to be felt, which added to this choking
Heat and Stench will complete this External Hell.

Consider, how the Scripture testifies that God will do this; and the Power of
God assures us that he can do it; for nothing is hard or difficult to him, much
less impossible. Think of the Creation, God's raising and building this Frame
of the World out of nothing; and reason thus with thy self; Cannot he that made
it by the Word of his Power, easily dissolve it? And argue further in this
manner; Cannot he that destroyed the old World by a Flood of Waters, destroy
this by Fire, and cause this to die of a Fever, as the did of a Dropsy? Cannot
he that turned Sodom and Gomorrah into Ashes, do the like with the World it
self also? Is not he that made Mount Sinai shake and smoke, at the giving of
the Law, able to dissolve all these Things?

The close and intent Meditation of this general Dissolution, will clearly
convince thee, that Sin is an evil and a bitter Thing; and will move thee to
hate and abhor, to shun and avoid Sin, which is of a Nature so mischievous and
destructive, which is the meritorious procuring Cause of so dreadful a
Judgment; which not only of old brought the Flood of Water upon the World of
the Ungodly, and forced down Gehennam de Coelo, (as Salvian speaks) caused God
to rain Hell-sire and Brimstone from Heaven Jude 7. 2 Pet. 2.5, 6.
upon Sodom and Gamorrah, and miserably destroyed Jerusalem, and the Temple,
and turned their fruitful Land into a barren Wilderness; but will one Day set
this World on fire, and put it in a flame, and turn this stately Structure and
beautiful Frame into a rude confused Chaos.

The deep and earnest Thoughts of this will affect and influence thy Heart and
Life, and quicken thee exceedingly to all Sincerity, Diligence, and Zeal in the
Exercise of Godliness; to an holy Fear and Aw of him who can and will destroy
the World: 'Twill constrain thee to use the Words of the Apostle, and to say in
good Sadness, 2 Pet. 3.11.
Seeing then that all these Things shall be dissolved, what manner of Person
ought I to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness? Seeing this Destruction
shall thus involve all, what an engagement does this lay upon me to live the
most pure strict Life that ever Man lived? It will incite thee, by a constant
course of true Piety, wisely to provide for thy Escape in that Day, to save and
secure thy self from the Evil and Danger of it, that thou may not be undone
by this general Dissolution, nor suffer Loss in this Conflagration, nor perish
in this Burning: 'Twill put thee in mind to sit thy self for this Day of
Dissolution of all Things, by getting the Works of the Devil thoroughly
dissolved in thee, and the Kingdom of God set up and established in thy Soul.

The due Consideration of this general Dissolution, and final Conflagration,
will certainly keep thee from setting thy Heart inordinately upon any outward
earthly Things, from heaping up Treasure to thy self here, from dreaming that
any of thy Houses here shall continue for ever, from having unlimited
everlasting Affections for flitting, fugitive, transitory Things; for the
World, the 1 Cor. 7.31.
Fashion of which passes away; or, for the Things of the World, which either
Col. 2.22.
perish with the present using, or must at last be burnt up in the general
Conflagration. It will preserve thee from placing thy Heaven and Happiness in
any Thing here below; from being transported, and infinitely pleased with thy
convenient Situation, thy well built House, thy pleasant Gardens, fruitful
Grounds, rich Furniture, gorgeous Apparel, store of Provisions, and all manner
of Accommodations as to earthly Possessions, and outward Enjoyments; since all
those Things, which sensual and voluptuous Persons now take excessive Delight
in, shall be demolished at the great Day; and they themselves shall then like
Bees be smothered in their own Hives.

This Meditation will enforce thee to make this Inference and Conclusion; Shall
all this Frame be certainly dissolved? then surely this is not the Place of my
Rest: I will be wiser hereafter than to take this World for my Dwelling House;
I will only look upon it as my Cottage, my Tent and Tabernacle, wherein as a
Pilgrim I am to sojourn for a Time: Nor will I reckon the Things of this World
my Goods, but only my Lumber, which I can easily bear the Loss of: I will
presently put my self in a Mundus ecce nutat and lab tur, and ruinam sui non
jam senecture rerum, sed fine testatur: and tu non Deo gratias agis, non tibi
gratutaris, quod exitu maturtore subtractus rutuis, and manufragtis, and plagis
imminentibus extaris? Cypr. Sermon 4. de Mortai.
readiness to leave and forsake this Place which is so near to ruin, and
shortly will surely be burnt up. I have no continuing City here; I will
therefore seek one to come, look after an heavenly Country, set my Affections
on Things above, make sure of an enduring Substance, of something much more
certain and lasting than any of the Enjoyments of this World: I will labor by
charitable laying out, to lay up a Treasure in Heaven, quite out of the reach
of this terrible Burning; To store up such durable Riches, as neither Moth nor
Rust can now corrupt, nor Thieves break through and steal, nor this flaming
raging Fire be ever able to devour: I will make it my constant Care to provide,
that as when the little House of my earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved; so
when this great House of the World, and its fair Furniture shall be destroyed,
I may have another, a better House to receive me, 2 Cor. 5.1.
an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens.

I find Homil. 7. de Poenit.
St. Chrysostom discoursing much to this Sense and Purpose; If some body
should give notice to thee, that this City in which thou live would all fall
down within a Year, or should very quickly be destroyed; and that it and all
Things in it should utterly be consumed with Fire, and nothing at all be lest
unburnt; and that of necessity thou must depart hence, and go into another
City, in which thou should spend thy whole Life; and in which thou should
have nothing at all to sustain and relieve thee, but such Goods only as thou
should send from hence thither; If thou should undoubtedly believe this, no
reason certainly could ever induce thee to hord up Treasures in this City, to
begin to build a great House here, to plant a Vineyard, to set Gardens and
Groves: but thou would bend and turn all thy Thoughts, and use and apply all
thy Endeavors, to transmit all into that City, into which thou knew thou
should thy self be forced to remove.

The second of the four last Things proposed as the subject Matter of
Meditation in order to the right Redemption of Time.
II. Proceed to meditate of a future and final Judgment.

Think,

1. That such a Thing will certainly be. 2. That the Time of it is to us as
uncertain as can be.
1. Consider seriously of the Certainty and Necessity of a Judgment to come in
another Life. Think how the common universal Consent of all Ages of the World
avouches and declares it: That the very Heathens had natural express Notions of
a final Judgment, and a future Reward or Punishment See Dr. Jackson 3 vol p.
379, 384, 385, 389.
which made some among them prefer the Exercise of Virtue and Goodness before
the Enjoyment of this mortal Life, and the outward Comforts of it; and abhor
the Practice of any Dishonesty more than Death.

And do but give Audience to your own Conscience, and you will find internal
Experiments, sufficient to convince you of a Judgment to be looked for after
this Life; to cause you to conclude, that the private Session kept in the
Conscience of a Sinner here, is but the Antecedent and Forerunner of a public
and general Assize: That Conscience (which is God's Deputy, and keeps Court
for him here) does but begin now, what God hereafter at the great Audit will
himself complete and finish. Look upon the secret Checks and Rebukes of thy own
Conscience, upon thy Commission of any base or unworthy Action; and upon the
inward Applauses and Gratulations, the hidden Joys and Exultations of thy
Conscience, upon the Performance of any laudable virtuous Action, to be so many
Tastes and Pledges, Earnests and Assurances of a twofold Sentence or Award, that
shall be given at the Last Day; and some Suggestion and Intimation of that
Horror and Confusion that shall seize upon the Wicked, and of that Peace and
Comfort which the Righteous shall be filled with at the general Day of
Judgment. Consider, how thy Conscience reflecting upon thy past Actions, does
not only allow and approve thy good Actions, but does also create a wonderful
Boldness and Confidence in thee; and does not only disapprove thy evil Actions,
but does also breed a strange Dread, beget a fearful Expectation and Terror in
thee; and all this without relation to any Thing either to be suffered or
enjoyed in this Life: and therefore that Conscience is not only a Judge in this
Life, but is also a Witness, bound over to give Testimony for or against thee,
at some Judgment after this Life to pass upon thee.

Consider moreover, That the many remarkable particular Judgments, inflicted by
God either upon Nations, or Cities, or Persons here in this World, do not
obscurely seem to signify and foroshew, that a general Judgment shall surely
come and certainly pass upon the whole World, and that Justice shall be
infallibly executed upon all final impenitent Rebels hereafter.

And consider yet farther, That in reason there must be a future final
Judgment, that God at present may The necessity of this Principle to the
Government of Men's Lives and Actions, is the ground of that Saying amongst the
Rabbis, that Paradise and Hell are two of the seven Pillars upon which [God is
said to have founded the World. As if it could not be upheld without such a
support. Bp. Wilkins Princip. and Dut of Not. Rel. p. 170.
rule and govern the rational World, by giving notices of future Rewards or
Punishments, which all must unavoidably be adjudged to: And that God may one
day salve the Honor of his own Attributes; that though Things seem to be
carried very unequally here in this World, and Judgment be never fully executed
here; but the Wicked are often suffered to escape, and the Good and Upright are
frequently afflicted and evil-intreated; yet all may be rectified and regulated
at last; and God may openly and evidently appear to be just in punishing the
Wicked and Ungodly, and good in owning and rewarding every truly virtuous and
righteous Person: And so, may not only vindicate and right himself, but justify
and right his People too, in the Eye and Face of all the World.

And then go on to think of Scripture-evidences and Testimonies; That Heb. 9.27.
after Death the Judgment: immediately after Death, a particular Judgment. Think
of that awakening, startling Summons, Luke 16.2.
Give an Account of thy Stewardship: for thou may be no longer Steward.
Alcibiades in Plutarch coming to Pericles his Door, and hearing that he was
busy and solicitous about making his Accounts to the Athenians, (...). Plut.
Apophthegm. p. 180.
said, It rather concer'd him to study how he might best put by his Accounts,
and avoid the giving of them up: But assure thy self, there is no declining of
it here. Consider, that God has Acts 17.31.
appointed a Day, a Day of general Judgment, in the which he will judge the
World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained: And that we 2 Cor,
5.10.
must all appear and Romans 14.10.
stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ: not only appear in Person (as those
do that are cited into a Court) but be laid open and made manifest, as the Word
(...) signifies: have our Heart and Life ripped up, and all our Thoughts, Words
and Works presented to our own view, and exposed to the view of others;
disclosed and discovered before Men and Angels. That Rev. 20.12.
the Books shall then be opened: the Book of God's Omniscience, and the Book of
every Man's particular Conscience: That the Rolls or Records of all our Actions
shall be produced, and we shall be judged out of those Things that are written
in the Books. That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the Things done in his Body, that is, the due Reward of
the Works done in his Body, or in the State of Conjunction with the Body,
according to, or by way of Retribution to, what he has done, whether it be
good or bad.

The sober serious Consideration of a most impartial Judicature and Tribunal,
will mightily awe thy Soul. Felix himself trembled, when St. Paul reasoned Acts
24.25.
of a Judgment to come. I have read a M., Marshal's Sermon. on 2 Kings 23, 25,
26. p. 20, 21.
Story of a certain King of Hungary, who being on a Time mavelous sad and
heavy, his Brother would needs know of him what he ailed: Oh Brother, says he,
I have been a great Sinner against God, and I know not how I shall appear
before him, when he comes to Judgment. His Brother told him, they were but
melancholy Thoughts, and made light of them. The King replied nothing at the
present, but in the dead Time of the Night sent an Executioner of Justice, and
caused him to sound a Trumpet before his Brother's Door, which according to the
Custom of that Country was a Sign of present Execution: This Royal Person
hearing and seeing the Messenger of Death, sprang pale and trembling into his
Brother's Presence, beseeching the King to let him know wherein he had
offended. O Brother, replied the King, thou have loved me, and never offended
me; and is the sight of my Executioner so dreadful to thee? and shall not I so
great a Sinner, fear to be brought to Judgment before Jesus Christ?

The frequent Meditation of a Judgment to come, will exceedingly move and
affect thee, and cause thee to live and act suitably and answerably to thy
belief of it: 'Twill keep thee from spending thy Time and talk in rashly
judging others, Mat. 7.1.
lest God severely enter into Judgment with thee: 'Twill awaken thee to
endeavor to do every Thing, as one that is Semper it a vivamus, ut rationem
reddendam nobis arbitiemur. Tussius apud Lactant. de veto coltu, l. 6.. 24.
accountable for all he does: 'Twill put thee upon examining and calling thy
self to an Account: and cause thee to get all thy Accounts ready against the
great Audit: 'Twill help thee to judge thy self here, that thou may not be
judged and condemned hereafter at the great and last Day: It will excite and
stir thee up to Repentance, and provoke thee to the Performance of a course of
new and sincere Obedience; to make that Law the Rule of thy Life, which God
will make the Rule of his Judgment.

The Wise Man makes this an Argument to induce Men to Eccl. 12.13.
fear God, and keep his Commandments, that God will bring every Work into
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
St. Paul very earnestly pressed the Athenians to Repentance, by this most
powerful and cogent Argument, drawn from the Certainty of a future Judgment;
Acts 17.30, 31.
God now commands all Men every where to repent: because he has appointed a
Day in the which he will judge the World in Rigteousness. And this was the
Reason of the Apostles Labor, of all his Ambition and Design to be 2 Cor. 5.9,
10, 11.
acceptable to God, whether living or dying; because we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ: Yea, this was the Ground of all his Industry and
Painfulness in the Ministry; Knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we
persuade Men, says he; Considering the Dreadfulness of this Appearance of God,
we strive to bring Men to embrace the Truth, and to live as those that are thus
to be judged. And in Hope of a Resurrection to a Judgment of Absolution, Acts
24.15, 16.
herein did he exercise himself to have always a Conscience void of Offense
toward God, and toward Men: he knew, if Conscience absolved him in this Life,
it would also under God acquit him in the other. Thy Tit. 2.12, 13.
earnest looking for the glorious Appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, is apt to engage and prevail with thee to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Nec me revoeabat a profundiore voluptatum carnalium gurgtte, nisi metus
mortis and futuri judicit tut; qut per varias quidem opiniones, nunquam tamen
recessit de pectore meo. Aug. Conf. l. 6. c. 16. 1.
Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present World.

Thy thinking of Judgment, will make thee careful of thy Thoughts, because God
will judge the Secrets Romans 2.16.
of Men, and 1 Cor. 4.5.
manifest the Counsels of the Hearts. And render thee watchful over thy Words,
because of all thy Jude 15.
hard Speeches, and of every Jude 15.
idle Word thou must give an account; and Jude 15.
by thy Words thou shall be justified or condemned: And will cause thee to be
circumspect in all thy Ways, and narrowly observant of all thy Actions;
because Christ will come to Ibid.
convince Men of all their ungodly Deeds; and thou must be judged according to
thy Works.

Did thou faithfully mind thy self of a future Judgment, thou would not be
so frothy and foolish in thy Speeches, so vain and profane in thy Merriments,
so deceitful in thy Trade, so formal in thy Duties: thou would not sottishly
sleep, or impertinently muse, or irreverently talk out Sermons, nor mumble and
huddle over thy Prayers like so many Ave-Marie's: Thou would certainly think,
and speak, and act; buy and sell, hear and pray, carry thy self in thy Dealings
with Men, and in thy Devotions to God, as one that must give an account of thy
self to God.

O think and say at the End and Close of every Day, Now I have one Day less to
live, and one Day more to reckon for. It is Apophthegms collected by George
Herbert in his Remains.
reported of Ignatius Loyola, that he used to say, when he heard a Clock
strike, There Is one Hour more that I have to answer to God for. Such a good
Meditation concerning the past Hour, would surely quicken thee to spend the
following and succeeding Hour much better.

To conclude this particular; Consider thou art to be judged by Christ; and
surely then thou will not be ashamed of him now, lest he be ashamed of thee
another Day: Thou will wisely labor for an Interest in him, who is to be thy
Judge; that when the Devil shall accuse thee, thou may have an Advocate to
plead for thee, and the Judge himself to befriend thee, and to deal according to
the Mildness of the Gospel with thee: Thou will hear and receive his Commands
now, that thou may hereafter hear the Sentence of Absolution from him: Thou will endeavor so to live, that thou may look upon the Day of Judgment as
the Time of thy Refreshment, and may 2 Timothy 4.8.
love the appearing of thy Lord and Judge.

The eminently holy In his Life written by his Brother Mr. James Janeway, p.
95, 96.
Mr. John Janeway, sometime Fellow of King's College in Cambridg, had very At
about 20, for he died between 23 and 24, and this was his Condition for about 3
Years before he died, p. 97, 120.
early arrived and attained to such an high pitch and great measure of
spiritual Readiness, and heavenly Preparedness, that when once there was much
Talk, that one had foretold that Doom's-Day should be upon such a Day;
although he blamed the presumptuous Folly of the false Prophet, yet supposing
it were true, What then, said he? What if the Day of Judgment were come, as it
will most certainly come shortly? If I were sure the Day of Judgment were to
begin within an Hour, I should be glad with all my heart. If at this very
instant I should hear such Thundrings, and see such Lightnings, as Israel did
at Mount Sinai, I am persuaded my very Heart would leap for joy. But this I am
confident of, through infinite Mercy, that the very Meditation of the Day has
even ravished my Soul, and the Thought of the Certainty and Nearness of it is
more refreshing to me than the Comforts of the whole World. Surely nothing can
more revive my Spirits than to behold the blessed Jesus, the Joy, Life and
Beauty of my Soul. Would it not more rejoice me than Joseph 's Wagons did old
Jacob?

O let us labor to be like him. Let Us love Christ's Laws, that we may not
dread, but love his appearing, when he shall come to reckon and call to an
account for our Observation or Violation of them. Let us love the Appearing and
Manifestation of Christ in his Ordinances, his Word and Sacraments: love the
Appearing, Enlargement and Increasing of his spiritual Kingdom in the World:
love his Appearing in the Hearts and Lives of his most saithful and obedient
People: love his Appearing in our Houses and Families, and his being formed and
inthroned in our own Hearts, and in the Hearts of our nearest and dearest
Friends and Relations; and by earnest and ardent Desire even hasten the coming
of the Day of God, long for the second coming of the Lord Christ, when he shall
appear without Sin unto Salvation, and very heartily pray and say, Rev. 22.17,
20.
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly: When will thou Joh. 14.3.
come again, and receive us unto thy self, that where thou art, there we may be
also?

Thus I have offered to your best Consideration the Certainty and Necessity of
a future and final Judgment.

2. I come now to lead you to the Meditation of the great Uncertainty, as to
us, of the Time and Season of this Judgment. O think with thy self, that the
Son of Man Luke 12.40.
comes at an Hour when you think not: That Christ says, Rev. 16.15.
Behold I come as a Thief: That thou Mark 13.33.
know not when the Time is: That Mat. 24.42. and 25.13.
thou know neither the Day nor the Hour wherein Mat. 24.42. and 25.13.
your Lord, Mat. 24.42. and 25.13.
the Son of Man comes; to particular Judgment, at the Day of Death; or to
general Judgment, at the End of the World. That there are indeed Signs of the
Times, which show when it is near; which the Faithful are to observe and take
notice of, to be instructed by, and to gather comfort from; But that the
punctual and precise Time is hid from us: And that a considerable Latitude
being to be allowed in the Accounts of Time, both as to the Beginning and
Ending of them; we can therefore take no exact Measures, nor six directly upon
the very Time and Day, that God has set in his own purpose to judge the World
in.

And here 'twill be useful to thee to consider, that (as St. Austin speaks)
Ideo later ultimus dies ut abserventur omnes dies.
The last Day is concealed and kept secret from thee, that all other Days may
be observed, well-spent and improved by thee; and that there may be a due Trial
of thy Faith, and Patience and Obedience, by a Course of holy Living: Whereas
if thou knew certainly the just Term of thy Life, and how long it would be
before thou should be called to be judged; thou might too probably take
Occasion from it, to defer and put off thy Conversion and Repentance to a few
Days before Death and Judgment, and to live idly, loosly and voluptuously, all
the Days of thy Life, till the very last.

But surely thou will reckon now, That the great Uncertainty of Christ's coming
is a notable Spur to Vigilance and Watchfulness: That now not being secure any
one Moment, it is thy Wisdom to stand upon thy Watch continually, lest Christ
come at a Time when thou do least expect him, and find thee in a Posture
incapable of Mercy from him, unqualitied to receive Benefit by his Coming.

Frequently and intently think, that the Time of thy Death and particular
Judgment is very uncertain; That thou Mark 13.35.
know not when the Master of the House comes; at Even, or at Midnight, or
at the Cock-crowing, or in the Morning: whether he will call thee in the Days
of thy Youth, or in the Midst of thy Days, or in elder Years; -- Whether he
will take thee in thy Bed, or at thy Table, or in a Journey; At what Time, or
by what Means he will cite and summon thee to leave this World, and to come to
Judgment. Consider, that thou may drop into thy Grave before the fall of the
Leaf from the Tree; Yea, that though now in perfect Health, thou may be
dead, Qend in die judicii futurum est omnibus, hoc in singulis die mortis
impleter. Hier. in c. 2 Joelis.

Tunc unicuique veniet dies ille, don venerit ei dies ut talis hinc exeat,
qualis judicandus est illo die. Aug. ep. 80.


and doomed and damned before the next Lord's Day: that this very Day, this
Hour thy Soul may be required of thee, and be presently judged to Heaven, or
Hell, and pass immediately into an unchangeable State and Condition; And that
the particular Judgment will consign thee over to the general Judgment, which
will be conform to, and a Confirmation of the former for ever: And this will
raise and quicken thee to watch always, lest coming suddenly he find thee
sleeping, secure in thy Sins; lest that Day come as a Luke 21.35.
Snare upon thee; and when thon shall 1 Tless 5.3.
say, Peace and Safety; then sudden Destruction come upon thee, as Travail upon
a Woman with Child, and thou can not escape. This will cause thee to take
heed to thy self, lest at any Time thy Heart be over-charg'd with Surfeiting
and Drunkenness, and the Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon thee
unawares: To dread the Thoughts of being surprised and taken unprovided by the
great and just Judge of Angels and Men. This will help thee to be constantly
careful, as to thy Person, that it be such as may find acceptance in that Day;
and careful as to thy Employment, that it be such as is suitable to thy
Expectation of Christ's Coming, and sit to be approved by thy Lord: To be
always in a readiness to receive thy Summons, and give up thy Accounts: To
reason and argue thus with thy self; It Christ's Coming should surprise me in
such a Course of Sin, what a woeful Case should I then be in? Shall I dare to
live in that State, which I shall tremble to be found in at the Day of
Judgment? Represent thy Judge as standing at the Door, and this will excite thee
to watch and pray always, that thou may be Luke 21.36.
accounted worthy to escape the Sentence of Condemnation, and to stand before
the Son of Man: To pray God to make thee such a wise Virgin, as may timely take
care to trim thy Lamp, to furnish thy Vessel with the Oil of Grace, to put on
the Wedding Garment, and to get thy self arraied with that fine Linen, which is
the Righteousness of the Saints; that so thou may gladly go out to meet the
Bridegroom; and when others are unprovided and miserably excluded, thou being
ready may be admitted by him, and enter with him into the Marriage-Chamber.

The third of the four last Things, proposed as the subject Matter of
Meditation, in order to the right Redemption of Time.
III. Let Heaven and its Joys be the subject Matter of thy Meditation. And here,

1. Think of the happy Condition of a pious Soul in the State of Separation.
Consider seriously, that Christ has 2 Timothy 1.10.
brought Life and Immortality to Light, through the Gospel: Hodie experiar an
anima sit immortalis; said Paulus Quintus when he was about to die: A brave
infallible judge indeed, that doubted of the Soul's Immortality!

Nonne vobis videtur animus is, qui plus cernat, and longius, vid^rese ad
meliora proficisci: ille autem, cujus obtusior sit acies, non videre? Cie. de
sen.


That thy Soul will subsist after the Shipwreck of this Body; and that in the
State of Separation it shall not droop in an unactive Lethargy, nor be numm
without Sense, void of all Apprehension and Operation, and in a drousy, sleepy,
joyless, comfortless Condition till the Resurrection: An erroneous Opinion,
which Pope John the 22th was so stiff and peremptory in, that he not only
taught it himself, but procured an Order in the University of Paris, that none
should take his Degree in Divinity, unless he held it. Do thou believe, and
consider, that if thou be a faithful Person, thy Soul at its Departure shall
change its State for the better, and have a delightful Sense and joyful
perception of its good Condition; be (...), Luke 23.43.
quickly with Christ in Paradise, 2 Cor. 5.8.
immediately present with the Lord, and (...), Rev. 14.13.
forthwith blessed; be Luke 16.22.
carried by a Convoy of Angels into Abraham's Bosom, received to him, and
entertained with him: That as Ambassadors, when they arrive at foreign
Courts, are conducted thither by the Masters of Ceremonies, so thy holy Soul
shall be translated by good Angels into a blessed Mansion, and with Lazarus be
Verse 25.
comforted in that Condition: That if thou art a just Person, thy Heb. 11.23.
Spirit shall then be made perfect: thy Understanding be cleared from Ignorance
and Error, enlarged and illustrated at thy Departure; thy Will be endowed with
exact Conformity to the Will of God, and with perfect Liberty from all
Servitude of Sin, and be troubled no more with doubtful Choice, but fully
embrace the Chief Good; thy Affections be duly and firmly placed; thy Spirit
be The Oracle told Amelius, enquiring what was become of Polinus 's Soul, that
he was gone to Pythagoras, and Socrates, and Plato, -- 'Twas a comfort to
Socrates, that after Death he hoped to see Homer, Hesiod, -- O praeclarum diew,
cum ad illud animor um concilium, (...) sear, and cum ex hac taroa and
colluvione discedam! (...) seu de S^n.

Socrates Critoni -- Amicos, inquit, hinc diseedens in eniam, vobis aut similes
aut e^^am meliores, ne vestra quid m (...) diu curiturus, quandoquidem ros
(...) estis (...), E^asm. Apophth. l. 3.


gathered to blessed and perfected Spirits, and be made it Welf equal to the
Angels, and so become sit Company for them: That thy Soul shall be in an happy
Condition, and be secure, and certain that it shall never be dispossessed and
ejected out of it, deprived or bereaved of it.

Such Thoughts as these will never suffer thee to let thy Soul sleep in thy
Body, which will surely wake when it is out of it. This Meditation is likely to
preserve thee from living and acting sensually and brutishly, as if thy Soul
were material and mortal, and capable of no greater Happiness, or higher
Preserment than to be imprisoned and buried in this gross dull Flesh. This will
cause thee to take care, that thy Soul may exercise and maintain a due
Superiority over thy Body; that thy Soul may 1 Cor. 9.27.
keep under thy Body, and bring it into subjection, and not be servilely and
sordidly subject to it; since thy Soul is able to live without it, and shall
from the Day of Death till the Day of Resurrection live better without it than
ever here it lived with it. This will mind thee to bring thy Soul, which is a
Spirit, to converse now with the Father of Spirits, and help thee to live like
an Angel here on Earth, who after Death shall be as an Angel of God in Heaven.
Farther; the Consideration or a State of Bliss to departed Souls, will make
thee labor to become fit for this State, by getting thy Soul made like to God
by true Holiness, that God may love his own Image and Likeness in thee, and
delight to do good to the Soul he loves: By striving to lead a good and holy
Life here, which is by the Ordination of God the direct and ready Way to an
happy and eternal Life hereafter: By looking that every Action and Carriage of
thy Life, be worthy of thy Hope of eternal Life.

See to this purpose Mr. Baxter's Reas. of the Christ. Rd. 1 part. p. 138, 139.
If a State of glorious Immortality were but a Likely hood and Probability, you
would notwithstanding, in all reason, do any thing, suffer any thing, part with
any thing, that if at last it should prove a reality, you might make sure of
it, and render your self capable of obtaining and enjoying it: because if it
should prove true, and you should miss of it, no present Enjoyment could any
way countervail the Loss of an eternal State of Bliss. And if it should not
prove true, the denying thy self these earthly sensual Pleasures would be no
considerable Loss, or great Unhappiness to thee: 'twould be but the Loss of a
transitory, short, impure, imperfect Pleasure, which even in this World has
Pain and Torment mixed with it, and has often sad Rellishes, and a bitter
Farewell at the End of it. If there were but a bare Probability of such a State,
the most obscure Notices, and thy uncertain Hopes of it, were enough to make
thee diligently look after it: Surely then thou will much more seek and press
after it, when God has given thee an absolute Certainty of the Thing, and the
highest Satisfaction that can rationally be desired of the Truth of it.

And this Meditation will be a Means, as to fit thee for thy Translation, so to
make thee, with Phil. 1.21, 23
St. Paul, have an earnest Desire to depart, to go hence, to go home, To
breadth out Melch. Adam in vit. Calv. p. 100.
Calvin's Ejaculaton, Vsquequo Domine! How long, Lord! To cry out as holy Aug.
Cons. l. 9. c. 19. 4.
Monica did, when she had newly been largely discoursing with her Son St.
AUstin of the heavenly Kingdom, Son, as for me, I now take no delight in any
thing in this Life: Quid hic facio? What do I here? And to use such Words as
those of Mr. Herbert,

Home.
What have I left, that I should stay and groan?
The most of me to Heaven is fled:
My Thoughts and Joies are all packt up and gone,
And for their old Acquaintance plead.
2. Bend thy Mind to think of the Resurrection of the Body to a State of Glory.
Consider, that as thy Soul at Death is not extinguished, so that thy dead and
buried Body shall not finally perish, and be quite lost, but at last be
reproduc'd and restored again to thee, by the Agency of an omniscient and
omnipotent God: That if thou Joh. 5.29.
have done good, thou shall come forth to the Resurrection of Life; come out of
thy Grave, as Jonah out of the Whale's Belly; as Daniel out of the Lions Den;
as Pharaoh's chief Butler, yea, as the innocent honest Joseph, out of Prison,
to an high and honourale Condition.

Think, how the very same Body that fell by Death, shall be raised again at the
last Day; as Lazarus rose with the same Body which had lien in the Grave four
Days; and as Christ rose with the same Body that was crucified and buried: How
congruous it is to the Wisdom and Goodness and governing Justice of God, that
the same Body, which was Partner with the Soul in good Actions, should be a
Sharer with it in everlasting Rewards: That that very Body, which was the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, and whose Members were the Members of Christ, and
Instruments of Righteousness, and did God Service, and labored and suffered
for Christ here, should be raised and rewarded hereafter: And how reasonable to
conclude, that God having planted in the Soul a natural Inclination to its own
Body, will surely one Day satisfy the Soul's Appetite by reuniting it to the
same Body.

Think how thy Body shall rise the same for Substance, but not the same for
Qualities and Endowments: that it shall be raised 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44, 49, 50.
in Incorruption, in Glory, in Power; raised a spiritual Body, and put on
Immortality: That thou shall bear the Image of the Heavenly: That this Flesh
and Blood shall be changed and altered with a perfective Alteration, that it
may be capable of inheritng the Kingdom of God: That Christ shall Phil. 3.21.
change thy vile Body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious Body;
and that thou shall Mat. 13.43.
shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of thy Father.

These Thoughts will warm and affect thy Heart, and move and incline thee to
study and endeavor to get thy Soul and Body fitted and qualified for a
Participation of a blessed and glorious Resurrection.

To get thy Soul now transformed, and made like unto Christ's gracious Soul,
that thy Body hereafter may be transformed, and made like unto his glorious
Body: to get, I say, a sanctified Soul here, that thou may not sail of a
glorified Body hereafter; for the Body follows the Condition of the Soul: Not
to spend thy Time, Care, Cost, Pains, in decking and adorning, in trimming and
Qui se pingunt in hoc seculo aliter quam creavit Deus, metuant ne cum venerit
resurrectionis dies, artifex creaturam suam non recognoseat. Cypr.
beautifying thy Body, but to dress and adorn thy Soul with true Grace and
Holiness here, that so at the Day of Resurrection thy Body may be made very
glorious and beautiful indeed, and then may be changed for the better, never to
suffer any Change more.

Yea, thy Meditation of the Resurrection of thy Body, will make thee labor to
get thy Body sanctified, that it may be glorified: 'Twill make thee pray, that
thy 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Body may be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
cause thee, as thou would have thy Body raised to Glory, to keep under thy
Body here, and not to suffer its Members to rise in Rebellion against God:
'Twill help thee to use thy bodily Members holily here, that they may fare well
and happily hereafter: Considering how unfit it is, that God should raise the
Instruments of Iniquity to a State of glorious Immortality; How unmeet, that
Christ should take that Body, which in this Life vigorously opposed him, and
busily and violently acted against him, and fashion this wicked hellish Body
like unto his heavenly and glorious Body; How incongruous, that they Romans 3.13.
that live after the Flesh, and Call. 6 8.
sow to their Flesh, should in their Flesh see God; that they who use their
Eyes chiefly to let in sinful Objects, should at the latter Day Job 19 26, 27.
see God for themselves, and that their Eyes should behold him with Comfort and
Joy. Thy Meditation concerning the Resurrection, will direct thee to say upon
any Temptation, Shall I offer to abuse and dishonor this Flesh, to abuse and
dishonor God with this Flesh, which I look that God should so highly honor,
and greatly glorify at the last Day? Shall I sin against God with this Body of
mine, which I hope shall shine at the Resurrection as the Sun in the Firmament,
and as the Stars for ever and ever, and be changed and fashioned like the
glorious Body of Jesus Christ?

This will engage thee to strive with the Apostle, Phil 3.11.
if by any means thou may attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead, a
Resurrection to a glorious Immortality:

To study to be just, that thou may be Partaker of the Acts 24 15.
Resurrection of the Just: To labor to have part in the Rev. 20.6.
first, that thou may partake of the second Resurrection: Jo. 5.25, 28, 29.
To hear now the Voice of the Son of God, speaking by his Word, and Works, and
Spirit; and hearing, to live a divine and spiritual Life; that when thou art
dead and rotten in thy Grave, thou may at last hear his Voice, and come
forth to the Resurrection of Life, and lift up thy Head with Joy in the latter
Day: To labor to be a true Member of Christ, and to live to Christ, that so
thou may 1 Th. fl. 4.14.
sleep in Jesus, and by the Power of God be brought from the dead with him: To
feast and refresh the Bodies of the Poor, that thou may be Luke 14.14.
recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just: To endeavor to act spiritually
and lively, as thou hopest to partake of the Resurrection unto Life: To be
careful to have always a Acts 24.15, 16.
Conscience void of Offense, in Hope and Expectation of an happy Resurrection;
and in Intuition of the Promise of it, with the and 26.7.
12 Tribes, to serve God instantly Day and Night: To refuse at any time to Heb
11.35.
accept Deliverance, upon base and unworthy Terms, and sinful Conditions, that
thou may obtain a better Resurrection: To be willing to put thy Body to any
Pains, Labor, Suffering, for the sake of God and Christ, who will not suffer
so much as thy Body to be a Loser: To 1 Cor. 6.20.
glorify God in thy Body, since God has promised to glorify this Body: To
resolve, that Christ shall be Phil. 1.20.
magnified in thy Body, whether it be by Lise or by Death; since Christ will
raise even thy dead Body, and give this very Body of thine an 1 Cor. 15.58.
abundant Recompense of Reward at last: In a Word; to have thy Conversation
Phil. 3.20, 21.
in Heaven, from whence thou look for thy Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
change thy vile Body.

3. And lastly, Meditate much and often of that perfect State of heavenly
Glory, that is to be enjoyed upon the Reunion of Soul and Body. Think, when thy
Soul shall recover its own Body, what a glad and joyful Meeting there will of
those old Companions and intimate Friends, which have been parted and separated
so long: and how the Glory of thy Body will be an Addition to the Joy and
Happiness of thy Soul: and that from the Day of Resurrection, not only a Part
but thy whole Person, consisting both of Soul and Body, will be settled in a
perfectly happy Condition.

(1.) Apply thy Mind to think in general, of enjoying an 1 Pet. 1.4.
Inheritance incorruptible, and undesiled, and that fades not away, reserved
in Heaven for you; of taking Possession of an heavenly Kingdom, and receiving a
Crown of Life: That if thou be a real good Christian, Col. 3.4.
when Christ who is thy Life shall appear, thou also shall appear with him in
Glory: That neither 1 Cor 2.9.
Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart if Man, the
Things which God has prepared for them that love him. Think of an excellent
State of heavenly Happiness, which cannot indeed be fully understood, till it
is enjoyed; but yet at present is sufficiently revealed to provoke our Desires
after it, and to encourage our Endeavors to gain and obtain it.

The Meditation of heavenly Happiness and Glory in the general, will cause thee
to beware of such 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Rev. 21.27.
Sins, as will meritoriously exclude thee from the Kingdom of Heaven, and
formally unfit thee for the Enjoyment of it; and will make thee careful to get
the Qualifications proper to a Person to whom it belongs, and to perform the
necessary indispensable Conditions upon which the promised Benefit depends: To
labor to be Col. 1.12.
made meet to be a Partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in Light; by Grace
to become capable and susceptible of Glory: to Joh. 3.3.
be born again, that thou may see the Kingdom of God: to be a Romans 9.23.
Vessel of Mercy, sitted and prepared unto Glory: To bow thy Knees to God, that
he would work this Meetness and Fitness, this spiritual Aptitnde and Idoneity
in thee; that he would prepare thee for the Inheritance of the Saints, and
Inheritance Acts 20 32.
among them which are sanctified; by making thee Partaker of effectual
Vocation, real Regeneration, gracious Adoption, and thorough Sanctification;
that by Holiness he would qualify and dispose thee for Happiness.

And this Meditation will incline thee to put thy self in God's Way, to be made
fit: And when he begins to make thee fit, to do the best thou can, under God,
in his Strength and by his Grace, to sit thy self; to inquire after the Means
of eternal Life, and to charge thy self with the Use of these Means, in order
to the attaining of this great End: To cleanse thy self from all Filthiness,
that thou may be meet for an undefiled Inheritance: Rev. 3.4.
To keep thy Garments undefiled, that thou may be worthy to walk with Christ
in white: To glorify God both in thy Body and Spirit, that thou may receive
and inherit the Promise of the Glorification both of thy Soul and Body: To
endeavor to have Romans 6.22.
thy Fruit unto Holiness, that thy End may be everlasting Life: Rev. 22.14.
To do God's Commandments, that thou may be blessed, and have Right to the
Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City: Romans 2.7.
By patient continuance in well doing, to seek for Glory, and Honor, and
Immortality, that God may render eternal Life to thee: Believing, and
considering, that he that made thee without thee, won'd save thee without thee;
(a known Saying of St. Austin) that God will never bestow glorious Immortality
upon any that are loath to look after it; that he will never give eternal Life
to any that are unwilling to receive it; that he will not make thee happy against
thy Will; nor force Heaven upon thee whether thou will or no: That eternal Life
is a Thing well worth thy looking after; and therefore it is that God will have
it sought for; and sought for by well doing, in a way of Obedience and good
Works; And that not only by Fits and Starts, but by Perseverance or Continuance
in well-doing, and by patient Continuance in well-doing: That a Man may as well
think to be able to Qui fide solitarta putat se posse ambulare in Christo, is
uno pede ambulare conatur, quod est impo^^b^le Dav. in Col. 2.6. p. 174
walk with one Leg, as ever expect to go to Heaven by a Faith that is separated
from good Works.

But do not only think of Glory in the General; But consider seriously more
particularly, how upon the Reunion of Soul and Body, thou shall be made
completely happy

In the Vision of God;

In beholding the glorisied humane Nature of Christ;

In the Perfection of thy Knowledge, and the full Satisfaction of all thy
rational Desires;

In the blessed Place thou shall dwell in;

In the blessed Company thou shall enjoy;

And in the Uninterruption, Perpetuity and Eternity of this blessed State.

1. How thou shall at last be made happy Mar. 5 8. 1 John 3.2.
in the Sight of God: That thy Understanding shall acquiesce in the highest
Being: That then thou shall see him as he is, a Fountain of all that is
desirable to thy Nature; see him Nos non negamus quin Deum videant animae
separatae: sed quta visionis intus non est und ratio, sed variae parts, prout
Deus sise clarius vel obsc rius revelas, libenter concedimus nondum co
pervenisse animas fidelium, ut eum sacie ad faciem intuers dici possint, These.
Salmur. de vit. Aetern. these 11.
1 Cor. 12.12.
Face to Face, know him even as also thou art known; that in Heaven thou shall
have as clear a Sight of God, and as free Communion with him, as the State of a
Creature can admit. That though thou shall not then immediately see the very
Essence of God (as the over-acute Schoolmen affirm) God being in this respect
invisible to the Angels themselves; who though they be unspotted with any Sin,
yet the sole Imbecility of their Nature and Creature-state does hinder such a
Sight of God: yet (as the learned Camero expresses himself concerning it) thou
shall see God, by Videtur Deus experiundo quis sit, and qualem se erga nos
praestet. Camero Praelect. de Verbo Dei, c. 7. p. 455.
experiencing who he is, and what he shows and manifests himself to be to thee:
by reaping the blessed Fruit and Benefit of the Divine Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, so far as the Measure of a Creature can bear, in the Sanctity of thy
Soul, and glorious Immortality of thy Body. And (as the ingenious, judicious
Vide These. Salmur. de vita aeterna, a These. 13. ad finem These. 27.
Amyraldus does very intelligibly explain this Matter) thou shall see God
hereafter in his glorious Works and admirable Operations; such as will be the
most bright Splendour and beautiful Habitation of Paradise, the Glorification of
thy own and others Bodies, the Consociation of the Church with Angels, and
especially the glorious Presence of Christ, in whose Manhood will appear as
much of the Creator as is possibly visible in the Nature of Man: To which add
whatever else there may be, in which the Majesty of the Deity shall then
manifest it self: Which rare Effects of the Divinity will certainly lead thee
to a clear and full Knowledge of God's most excellent Properties, and divine
Virtues; his Wisdom and Knowledge, Power and Greatness, Grace and Mercy, Truth
and Faithfulness; the Knowledge and Contemplation of which, will Fire and
inflame thee with Love to him, and ravish thee with joy and Delight in him.

Think, how hereafter thou shall see God, and see him as thy God, and Chief
Good: see god, not with a transient Sight; but see him so as to possess and
enjoy him, to close with him, and be united to him, and complacentially to rest
in him as thy utmost and perfect End: See God, not by a mere speculative
Contemplation of him, but so, as by seeing him In the Tife of Glory our Souls
become living polished Gsasses, wherein the Divine Nature, wherein Christ, God
and Man, may be seen as he is: and he is Truth it self, Life it self, and
Goodness it self; and we are transformed into the Similitude of all these his
Actibutes. Dr. Jackson third Vol. p. 504, 505.
to become 1 John 3.2.
like unto him, to be changed and transformed into the true and lively Image of
him; to be made Partaker, in thy Measure and Proportion, of that Wisdom and
Holiness, Love and Goodness, which thou shall apprehend and behold in him: That
thou shall not only please and delight thy self by looking on some Glory that
shall appear before thee, (to use some Words of a See D. Patrick's Parable of
the Pilgr. p. 89, 90.
learned Doctor) but shall be made all glorious within, and become thy self a
God-like Creature: That thou shall not behold the Divinity only without thy
self, and be made happy by some external Enjoyment of God only; but thou shall
see God within thee, and feel his Power thoroughly working thee to the same
Mind, Will and Desire with himself; That thou shall see God hereafter, and be
like him; and reflecting upon thy self, shall see that thou art like him, and
be pleased and satisfied, joyful and delighted in thy Similitude and
Resemblance of him.

This Meditation will move thee, to labor to be fit for the perfect Vision and
Fruition of God, in the future State of heavenly Glory: To remember to turn
away thy Eyes from beholding Vanity, as thou look to behold the Divine
Glory: To make it thy Business Heb. 12.14.
to follow Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord; enjoy the
glorious Sight, and behold the blessed Face of God: To labor to see God here,
that thou may be the fitter to see him hereafter: To see him in his Works;
to search after, behold and admire that infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
which are visible and legible in his wonderful Works of Creation and
Providence: But more especially, to study to see and know God, as he has
revealed himself in his Word: to see his Holiness in his Precepts, his Justice
in his Threatenings, his Grace and Goodness in his Promises. Once more; To see
and converse with God in his Ordinances; to see him, as he presents himself to
thy view, and exhibits himself to be seen in the Sanctuary; to enjoy Communion
and Fellowship with him in the public solemn Ordinances of Prayer, hearing,
receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: And to be always purging thy
Sight, clearing thy Eyes, and cleansing thy Soul, endeavoring to become Mat.
5.8.
Purity speaks two Things, 1. Freedom from mixture with any Thing that is more
vile; so Metal is pure, that is not embas'd with a worse Metal; and Wine is
pure, that is not mixed with Water. 2. Purity speaks cleerness and transparency:
So Spring-waters, Fountains, Diamonds are pure. So Purity of Heart consists, 1.
in Abstraction and Septration from every Thing base and filthy, and in
gathering up the Soul into Communion with that which is pure: and, 2. in that
Glory, Luster and Beauty, which arises from such Purity.
pure in Heart, not desiled by looking after fleshly or worldly Lusts, nor
polluted with other foul Mixtures; to be free from Hypocrisy and Uncleanness,
from Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit; in this Sense, to be pure in Heart,
that thou may see God; have a spiritual Sight, and inward Sense and See Dr.
Jackson 3. V. book 11. c. 21.
Taste, a savory assectionate Knowledge of him, and be capable and receptive of
Impressions from him; as the crystal Spring easily admits the Sunbeams, and
imbibes its Rays; and the clean Glass plainly receives the Species and Images
of any Bodies: To get a cleansed purified Soul, that thou may be able to see
and enjoy God here, and so be fit for the Beatifical Vision hereafter: To
behold in the (...). 3.18.
Glass of the Gospel the Glory of the Lord, and to be changed into the same
Image here, as thou hopest hereafter to see God, so as to be Ps. 17.15.
satisfied with his Likeness.

2. Think how happy thou shall hereafter be in Heaven, by beholding the
glorified humane Nature of Christ: That when he shall appear, thou 1 John 3 2.
shall see him as he is; see the Person of Christ [as he is] in Opposition to
what he was, while he was here on Earth, in the Form of a Servant: That if thou
be a Servant of the Lamb, thou shall see his Rev. 22.3, 4.
Face in the New Jerusalem: That thou shall be Joh. 17.24.
with him where he is, and shall immediately behold his Glory which his Father
has given him.

Sit down, and consider, when thou shall arrive at the Court of Heaven, how
transcendent, and ravishing, and pleasingly amazing the heavenly Glory of
Christ will be to thee! That if the 1 Kings 10 8.
Queen of Sheba pronounced Solomon's Servants happy, because they stood
continually before him, and heard his Wisdom, and beheld but a temporal,
fading, and earthly Glory; how unspeakable then thy Happiness will be,
constantly to behold the Presence, and heavenly Mediatorial Glory of Jesus
Christ! That if here it be so sweet and pleasant a Thing Eccl. 11.7.
for the Eyes to behold the Sun; how pleasant and delightful then it will be,
to view and behold the Sun of Righteousness; to look upon the glorified humane
Nature of Christ, which will appear more beautiful, and shine more bright than
the Sun in the Firmament! If it were so refreshing and joyful a Sight to the
Faithful in those Days, to see and enjoy Christ, though in his State of
Humiliation; If the Mat. 2.1.
Wise Men came from far to see Christ, though lying in a Manger; And Luke 19.4.
Zaccheus climbed up into a Tree, to see him in the Days of his Flesh; And one
of the Romam in flove, Paulum in ore, Christum in corpore.
three Things which St. Austin wished he might have seen, was, Christ in the
Flesh; Think, how Christ in his Glory and Advancement, will be a more taking
satisfying Object, than in his Humility and Debasement: How strangely it will
affect and delight thee, to see him so highly exalted, and vastly enriched, who
humbled and emptied himself for thy sake, and became very mean and poor, that
thou through his Poverty might be made rich: To see that Body, that here was
laid in a Manger, nailed to a Cross, and buried in a Sepulcher, now made a most
glorious Body, and one of the rarest Sights, and greatest Wonders in Heaven: To
see Christ in Glory, and Christ in Glory, thine; thy glorified Head and Lord,
and the Exemplary Cause of thy Glorification: To see him Job 19.27.
for thy self, (as Job 19.27.
Job speaks) for thy own unspeakable Good and Comfort: To see him, and be
enamored of him, and be like unto him; to converse and enjoy Communion with
him, and to rejoice in and with him: To behold his Glory; and not only
curiously to gaze upon him, but to be glorified with him; in some proportion,
and according to thy capacity, to be made Partaker of the same Glory, and to be
admitted Rev. 3.21.
to sit with him in his Throne: Think, what a sablime and notable part of thy
Happiness this will be in Heaven. If having 1 Pet. 1.8.
not seen Christ, thou love him; and believing in him, rejoycest with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory: O then consider, how thou shall love and
rejoice in him, when thou shall actually see him, and immediately enjoy him in
the heavenly Kingdom.

This Meditation will prevail with thee to labor to become meet and fit for
the happy Sight and felicitating Enjoyment of the glorified humane Nature of
Christ: 'Twill make thee study to attain to real Holiness of Heart and Life,
Heb. 12.14.
without which no Man shall see the Lord Jesus Christ in Glory: 'Twill cause
thee to endeavor to be a Partaker of the Divine Nature of Christ, that thou
may be admitted to be a Spectator and Enjoyer of the glorified humane Nature
of Christ: to be in this World, as he was in this World; that at last thou
may be in the other World, as he is in that World: to purify thy self even
as he is pure, if thou have any Hope in thee to see him as he is, at his
Appearance.

And this Meditation will move and incline thee to labor, and love to see
Christ here, that thou may be fitted to have the Honor and Privilege to see
him hereafter: To delight to see him now in his Promises, to see and enjoy him
in his Gospel- Ordinances, to behold him in his Graces shining in his Members,
and to see his Image formed in thy own Heart and Life: Considering, that only
Christ-like Creatures are in a capacity of being happy with Christ in Glory:
That (as D Rust in his Sermon. at the Fun. of Bp. Tailor, p. 8. f.
one says well) God and Christ, without thee, cannot possibly make thee happy:
That it is not the Person of God and Christ, but their Life and Nature, wherein
consists thy formal Happiness.

And that thou may be fit to see him as he is, 'twill direct thee at present
to see him as he was; to look upon him as humbling himself to the Death of the
Cross, for thy Sins; till thy Heart be kindly broken for, and thy Heart and
Life be truly broken off from all thy Sins; and to eye and imitate that
excellent Pattern and rare Example, which here he gave thee in every Action of
his holy Life.

3. Freely and largely meditate, how happy thou shall be made hereafter in the
great Advancement and Perfection of thy Knowledge, and in the filling up of thy
utmost Capacities, and the Satisfaction of all thy Desires. That though now
thou 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12.
see through a Glass, darkly; and know but in part; yet when that which is
perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away; as the Light of
Candles and Stars is done away by the rising of the Sun: That though now See
Bolton of the four last Things, p, 143, 144.
many Difficulties in Nature, and Mysteries in Scripture, and Secrets and
Wonders of Divine Providence pose and nonplus thee, dazzle thy Eyes, and are
too high and sublime for thee; yet that in Heaven thou shall have the Causes of
natural things manifested to thee; the deep and profound Mysteries of Religion,
and of thy Redemption and Salvation revealed to thee; the Intricacies and
Riddles of God's Providence unfolded to thee; the Wisdom, and Justice, and
Goodness of God, in his darkest Dispensations, and most inscrutable and
unsearchable Actions, cleared up to thee: That there thou shall know the
Orders, Offices, Excellencies of the Angels; and the Nature, Operations, and
Original of thy own Soul; which is given thee rather to use, than to know, in
this present World: That in the State of Glory, thy Understanding shall be
extraordinarily and supernaturally illuminated and irradiated, and thy Knowledge
be wonderfully increased and advanced, and thy Mind exceedingly pleased and
delighted both by the Repetition, and new Variety of Contemplation: That in the
heavenly Glory, the Divine Manifeslations and Communications shall be ample and
liberal enough to fill all the Capacities, and richly to answer all the Desires
of thy most exalted and perfected Faculties: That there thou shall never feel
any Want or Indigence, but be so satisfied as not to be * satiated, cloyed or
glutted: That See D Patrick's parab. of the Pilgr. p. 97, 98.

And D. Rust's Sermon. at the Funeral of Bp. Tailor, p. 7. fol.

Tametsi nibil desit ad plenam perfect amque loetutiam and meredjbilem
veluptatem qua sruemur in dies, *nulla tamen nos unqu^^n rerum ^starum satietas
capiet, quin quotidie nova quaedaem tum contemplandi and cognoscendi, tum loet
tiam ex contem^^^^one percipiendi materia ex rebus illis manabit ac esslor^scet.

These. Salmur, de vita aeterna, these. 27.


in Heaven, thou shall always reckon that thou have sufficient already to make
thee thoroughly and completely happy; and yet still be receiving new Additions,
and fresh Accruements, and an Accumulation of Satisfaction: That every
Participation of Truth and Goodness will stretch and distend the Capacities of
thy Soul, and fit thee for further and further Receptions: That the Capacities
of thy Faculties shall be continually widened and enlarged, and continually
filled and satisfied, until thou arrivest unto such Degrees as thou can
assign no Measure unto.

This Meditation will cause thee to carry thy self so here, that thou may be
fit to attain a Perfection of Knowledge hereafter.

To be careful to know those Things now, which are necessary to the present,
and preparatory to the future State; and Omnibus pietatis Christianae studiosis
velut sertum ^^^^dam suum commendare solebat dictum ^^ud Hieron^mi ad ^^^linum,
Diseamus in (...) quorum scientia nobi^ (...) in coelo: Quod etiam Auditorio
Theologico, in (...) literas docebat, inscri^sit. Narrat. hist. de vita Das.
Parei, conscript. a Phil. Par. Dav. fill.
the Knowledge of which will abide and continue, and be heightened and perfected
in the other World.

To beg of God, that he would open thy Eyes here, enlighten thy Understanding,
translate thee out of the Kingdom of Darkness, and turn thee from Darkness to
light: Believing, and considering, that gross and sottish Ignorance here, is an
ill preparation for Perfectio of Knowledge hereafter; That if now thou wilfully
continuest ignorant of the very first Principles of the Oracles of God, thou
art unfit to go on to perfection, and to be admitted another day to the
Understanding of the Secrets and hidden Mysteries of God: That if now thou
make thy self like a Beast, in Ignorance; thou will be unmeet to be made like
an Angel of God, in the glorious Perfection of heavenly Knowledge: If now thou
darknest thy own Understanding, and blindest thy own Mind, thou will be unfit
for the perfect Iag^n of the heavenly Glory: If now thou shuttest thy Eyes
against the Light, and art afraid to come to the Light, lest thy Deeds should
be reproved; thou will be utterly unmeet to be Partaker of the Inheritance of
the saints in Light; thou will only be meet for the Kingdom of Darkness, fit to
be cast out into utter Darkness, and to inherit the Blackness of Darkness for
ever: 'Twill make thee labor to get some competent Knowledge here, which will
be a good Preparation for perfect coplete Knowledge hereafter: Remembering, that
to him that has shall be given; which is true of Knowledge, as well as Grace.

And this Meditation will likewise stir thee up, to practice and live up to the
Knowledge of those Things, which God has been pleased most clearly to discover,
and plainly to reveal in his Word to thee, as any way necessary to thy own and
others Edisication and Salvation: Thou being assured and well persuaded, that
practice and doing is the ready way to further Knowing; as Ps. 111.10 Joh. 7.17.
to increase thy Knowledge here, so, to augment thy Knowledge hereafter: 'Twill
cause thee to charge thy self to walk as a Child of the Light, and of the Day;
to follow the Light of God's Word and Spirit, that thou may be meet to be
made Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

The forementioned Meditation will moreover make thee wise unto Sobriety,
repress the itching Curiosity of thy Nature, keep thee from spending thy Time
in boldly prying into God's Homo sum, non intelligo secreta Dei, investigare
non audeo, and ideo etiam attentare sormido: q^^^ and hoc ipsum genus quasi
sacrilegae temer^tatis est, siplus sone qupias quam si^^^is. Salv. de gub. Del,
l. 3.
Secrets, and from immoderatly thirsting and reaching after the Knowledge of
Things too high for thee: Remembering and considering, that in this Life thou
can not attain to clear and full and perfect Knowledge, which is a Reward
reserved for another Life; And that thou may enjoy it in due Time, 'twill
make thee willing to wait and stay God's Time; to be humbly, and modestly, and
contentedly ignorant of all those Things wherein God has been pleased to be
silent, and has though most fit, in this lower imperfect State, for Man to be
ignorant. The Consideration that thy Knowledge shall be perfected hereafter,
will bring thee at present to be quietly ignorant of those Things, which God
sees meet and most convenient for a Time to hide and conceal from thee; and
will help thee to wait very patiently for the Season of the fuller
Manifestation of himself to thee; this being the Way to have thy Knowledge
increased and perfected another Day.

Further; This Meditation will also mind thee, to fit thy self for the sure
receiving the full Satisfaction of all thy Desires in Heaven hereafter. 'Twill
cause thee now to curb and restrain thy sensual Appetite, to moderate thy
Desires, to submit thy Will to the Will of God, and to do his Pleasure here,
that so thou may have thy widest Capacities and largest Desires every way
satisfied and fulfilled hereafter.

4. Meditate how happy thou shall be hereafter, by dwelling in a most glorious,
beauteous, blessed Place; in thy heavenly Father's House, in thy Joh. 14.2.
Savior's Father's House, in which there are many Mansions,; a stately Palace,
a spacious House indeed, fit to receive and entertain an innumerable Company of
glorious Inhabitants: That thou shall be placed and settled in the Seat of the
Blessed, an House not made with Hands, a Building of God, Paradise, Heaven, the
third Heaven, which is seated not only above the Region of the Air, but above
the Moon and highest Stars; from whence thou shall with Advantage take a
pleasant Prospect of the admirable Beauty, and comely Order of the Universe,
and of the Usefulness of all its Parts: That thou shall inhabit a Place which
is so incomparably glorious, that it is called in Scripture the Throne of God:
That thou shall dwell hereafter in the better and heavenly Country of the
Saints: That thou shall actually and personally enter into the promised Land,
and not only have a Pisgah-sight of it afar off: That thou shall be translated
into the heavenly Canaan, transported into the holy Land, conducted and
received into the holy City, in which there is no Night, and which has no need
of the Sun or Moon to shine in it, the Glory of God inlightning it, and the
Lamb being the Light thereof. Think, how the beautiful, glorious, precious
Things (of which there is mention in the 21th and 22th of the Revelation) in
the large Description of the new Jerusalem; if meant of the Glory of the
highest Heaven, are but Umbrages and Shadows of the good Things to come, which
are contained and treasured up in the heavenly Kingdom. Though Heaven be indeed
more a State than a Place, yet think, how the Majesty and Amenity of the Place
of Glory, will add to thy Joy and increase thy Felicity.

And this Meditation will provoke thee to labor to become apt and fit to live
in so holy and blessed a Place as Heaven: To be always traveling toward this
heavenly Country, though thy Way lie through a Wilderness: To make the mention
of Heaven, and the Way thereto, to be thy frequent Discourse, thy most serious
and most refreshing Conference: To be careful to have thy constant Conversation
in Heaven: To give all Diligence to be prepared and disposed by an heavenly
State for an heavenly Place: To let the Kingdom of God enter into thy Soul,
that thou may be meet to enter into the Kingdom of God: To become the Temple
of God here, an Habitation of God through the Spirit, that thou may be
worthy to be received hereafter into an heavenly Habitation: To cleanse thy
self, because no unelean Thing can ever enter into that holy City: To labor to
get such a virtuous Disposition and generous Spirit, such holy Habits, heavenly
Customs and divine Manners, as may fit and qualify thee to be admitted Citizen
of the new Jerusalem: And to beg of thy Father which is in Heaven, that as he
has prepared an Heaven for holy Souls, so he would more and more prepare thy
too too unprepared Soul for Heaven,

5. Spend thy Thoughts in the Consideration of thy future Enjoyment of the most
blessed Company, in the most blessed Place. Consider seriously, that as thou
shall have Communion with the blessed Trinity in the heavenly Glory, fully
enjoy God, and have Fellowship with Jesus Christ thy Head; So thou shall
associate and be conversant with Angels, and have sweet Familiarity with those
blessed Spirits; and shall there enjoy the Communion of Saints; shall there
meet with the holy Patriarchs, be received into the goodly Fellowship of the
Prophets, be taken into the glorious Company of the Apostles, and be joined to
the noble Army of Martyrs; and with all the Faithful of all Ages recount the
Mercies, and chaunt the Praises of thy bountiful Creator, and gracious Redeemer.

Think with thy self, how that good Company is a great part of the Pleasure and
Comfort of a good Man's Life, and a kind of Heaven here upon Earth: But that
hereafter thou shall have the best Company that Earth and Heaven can afford;
That there thou shall converse with and delight in the most eminent Children,
and faithful Servants of God, and famous Worthies of the Church of Christ:
Esseror studio patres vestros, quos colui and dilexi, videndi. Neque eos vero
solum convenire aveo, quos ipse cognovi: sed illos etiam, de quibus audivi, and
legi, and ipfe conscripsi. Cic. in Cat. Maj. seu de sen.
That there thou shall see, and know those, whom thou never saw before; sit
down Mat. 8.11.
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven: and shall renew a
blessed Acquaintance with thy old dear Christian Godly Friends and virtuous
Relations: Not know them by former Stature, Feature, Favor, (for there will be
a vast Difference between a mortal and glorified Body) but know them by
Revelation, or by the Vide these. Salmur. de vit. aetern. these. 35, 36.
public Testimony that Christ shall give concerning them, or by Passages
occurring in some Opportunities of Discourse with them: Nor know them in a
worldly or fleshly Manner, but know and enjoy them in a most pure and
spiritual, divine and heavenly Manner.

And think what a comfort it will be, to enjoy Society with those in Heaven,
with whom thou did use to go frequently to the House of God in Company! What
an Happiness it will be to meet in Heaven with those, with whom thou wast wont
to discourse of Heaven! to rejoice and join in Praises with those in Heaven,
whom thou have often wept, and mourned, and prayed with here on Earth! What a
rejoicing it will be, to see and enjoy those dear Saints in the Heavenly Glory,
whom thou wast a Means of bringing thither, or who were the Means of bringing
thee thither! What a pleasing refreshing Converse it will be in the heavenly
Jerusalem, to tell one another there the most remarkable Stories of the Divine
Love, and to receive a faithful particular Relation of the rare Passages of the
Divine Providence, of which the good and virtuous have had Experience in all
Ages of the World! How kindly and sweetly thou shall converse with others, when
all Corruptions on all sides shall be removed, your Judgments and Affections
united, and your Dispositions exactly suited! How contented and satisfied you
shall there be, where you shall live absolutely free from all manner of Injury,
Envy, Strangeness, Suspicion, Uncharitableness: Where all the Inhabitants shall
always live (as See D. Patrick's Par. of the Pilgr. p. 92, 93, 94.
one describes that State) in a rapturous Love of God, and a most passionate
Love of one another: Where every one will be loving, and every one will be
lovely: Where every one will love others as much as they deserve, or desire;
and look for no other Retribution but a Reciprocation of Love: and where all
shall rejoice, not only in their own Salvation, but in the Glory and
Blessedness of others, as if it were all their own! Consider that hereafter
thou shall be so pleased with the Place thou shall be in, and satisfied with
the Company thou shall be with, that thou shall say in the State of
Glorification, Mat. 17 4.
as Peter did in the Transfiguration, Lord, it is good for me to be here: That
as thy essential Happiness shall consist in the Fruition of God, the Chiefest
Good; so, that thy concomitant, circumstantial, accidental Joies will consist
in the beauteous Place, and the holy Company thou shall enjoy: But yet Dr.
Jackson, 3 vol. p. 508.
that either the Place, or Society of Saints and Angels, can add or confer any
Thing to thy Happiness, proceeds from God's special Presence in both.

This Meditation will invite and provoke thee, to make it thy diligent constant
Care here upon Earth to fit and prepare thy self for the future Enjoyment of
the most holy and blessed Company in the heavenly Glory: To get a Spirit
suitable both to the Company and Employment of Heaven: To mortify thy unruly
Lusts, and to moderate those violent boisterous Passions, which would cause a
kind of Hell in Heaven, and make thee not only restless and uneasy in thy self,
but apt and prone to trouble others and to disturb the Peace of that blessed
Place: To labor to become truly holy, and so to be meet for the heavenly
Society: Remembering and considering, that scandalous, unholy, disorderly
Persons, are by the Divine Ordination to Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.5, 11. Rom 16.17.
be excluded from the Communion of Saints even here below, to be shut out from
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, to be denied the Benefit and Comfort of
brotherly Society, and Chistian familiar Converse: And that if by Scandal, and
Practice of open Wickedness, thou should render thy self unfit for present
Fellowship and Communion with the Saints, thou would surely prove much more
unmeet for their perfectly pure and unspotted Society in Heaven hereafter.

And this will cause thee to keep Company, and to hold Communion with the
Saints here, that thou may be fit to enjoy blessed Communion with them
hereafter: To shun and avoid the Company of the Wicked, as a kind of Hell here
upon Earth; to count their unavoidable Neighborhood a daily Trouble and an
heavy Burden to thee: And if any truly Godly live in the Place where thou
dwell, to find them out, and to prize and improve them to the utmost: To
sort and suit thy self with those now, whom thou would desire to be ranked
with and gathered to another Day: To seck to live with those here, whom thou
would earnestly wish to live withal hereafter: To make account, that now to
live among the Good, to converse with regenerate sanctified Persons, and real
spiritual experimental Christians; and to enjoy God in his People, and Christ
in his Members; that this is a great Happiness, and a little Image of Heaven:
To use such reasoning as this with thy self; Should I hate or decline the
Communion of Saints here, what should I do in Heaven at last, where next to the
Fruition and Enjoyment of God in Glory, the best Entertainment will be the
Company and Society of blessed and glorified Saints to all Eternity? This would
keep thee from sitting upon Thorns, when thou art in Company with gracious
Persons, with serious savory Christians, and wishing thou were well rid of thy
Trouble; and would cause thy Heart to spring and leap within thee, to see the
Face, and hear the Discourse, and enjoy the Converse and profitable Company of
the truly Godly: It would direct thee to choose and use such Company all thy
Life long, that when thou die, (as Dr. Preston said of himself upon his
Deathbed) thou may only change thy Place, and not thy Company. This would
help thee to labor that God may now dwell in thee, that hereafter thou may
dwell with him: That Christ may now dwell in thy Heart by Faith, that thou at
last may dwell with Christ in Glory: To have at present Fellowship with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and with those who have the Image of God
and Christ stamped upon them, the Beauty of Holiness and the Glory of Heaven
shining in them; to have thy Soul sympathize, and thy Heart harmonize with
them, and thy Affections closely embrace them, and freely run out to them; to
love and rejoice to meet and confer with them here, that thou may be fit to
meet their Persons, and to enjoy their holy Company and happy Society in the
heavenly Glory hereafter.

6. And lastly; Love and delight to enlarge thy Thoughts in the frequent
Meditation of the Vninterruption, Perpetuity and Eternity of this blessed
State: To sit down and consider, that thou have the Promise of eternal Life,
eternal Salvation, eternal Glory, a continuing City, an everlasting Habitation,
a House eternal in the Heavens, an Inheritance incorruptible, an everlasting
Kingdom, a Crown of Glory that fades not away: That, if thou art a righteous
Person, thou shall be ever with the Lord, and as a Son abide in thy heavenly
Father's House for ever, and reign in the Kingdom of thy Father for ever and
ever; that thou shall be a Pillar in the Temple of thy God, and go no more out:
That if once thou entrest in, thou can never pass out of that State of Bliss:
that the Eternity of thy Felicity, will be the Compleatment of thy Happiness:
That there will be no fear of ever losing or relinquishing thy pleasant
Possession: That to admit any such Thought, would be a lessening and
diminishing, a souring and imbittering the Joys and Delights of that blessed
State, and a kind of Hell even in Heaven it self: That therefore in Heaven thou
shall surely live an immortal Life of endless Love, and continual Joy, and
perpetual Praise.

This Meditation will sweetly constrain thee, to labor earnestly to become
meet to enjoy a Perpetuity and Eternity of perfect and consummate heavenly
Felicity.

'Twill make thee mindful to lay the Foundation of Life eternal in thy self
here in this World; to pass from Death to Life even in this Life; to get the
Seed of eternal Life here; Grace, the Seed of Glory: to get eternal Life
initial, that thou may be sit for eternal Life perfectional: To obtain the
good Beginnings of Life everlasting, as an earnest in this Life of that which
is to follow, and a good Preparation for Life everlasting to be conferred in
the World to come: To begin by Grace to live here, that thou may be fit to
live eternally in Glory hereafter.

And this Meditation will engage thee to give God here thy whole remaining
Time, that thou may be fit to enjoy his blessed Eternity: To be careful that
there be no voluntary Intercision or Interruption of thy Obedience; To
endeavor to serve God in Holiness and Righteousness before him, Luke 1.75.
all the Days of thy Life; without any wilful departing, backsliding,
withdrawing, declining, or moral discontinuance of thy holy and religious
walking with him, by gross Neglect of what thou ought to do, or by doing the
contrary to thy Duty. This will incline thee to deal with God, as thou would
that he should deal with thee; and move thee to say thus to thy self; Would I
have God give me Admission into Heaven, and afford me only a Taste of
Happiness, and then presently put an end to those transporting ravishing Joys,
and ere long annihilate me, or at least turn me quite out of Paradise, and for
ever deprive me of that joyful, blissful State and Place, and thrust me into
far a meaner and lower Condition; Would I be well contented with this? If not;
why then let me not only enter into God's Service, but continue therein to my
Life's End. If I expect a perfect perpetual Happiness from God, is it sit and
reasonable, that I should give God a broken, imperfect, flitting, inconstant
Obedience? Would I have God's Goodness last for ever? then let not my Goodness
be as a Hos 6.4.
Morning-cloud, and go away as the early Dew: Let not me be off and on with
God: Let not me serve him by Fits and Starts, but let my Heart stand always
bent for God, and let me perform a constant Course of Obedience to him: Let me
not only enter into the Race, and run for a Spurt; and then sit down, or start
aside, and fly out of the Way; but let me here hold out to the End, or I shall
be unfit for an endless Felicity in another and better World.

The Consideration of all that has been spoken, both in general and particular,
of the glorious Happiness of Heaven, will be of further Use and Advantage to
thee, as to the Redemption of thy Time, in several respects: for,

(1.) 'Twill hearten and encourage thee to do and suffer any thing for God.
(2.) 'Twill help and enable thee to answer and oppose the fair and furious
Temptations of Satan. (3.) To live in an holy Contempt of this present World;
and in the serious, real, visible Exercise of constant heavenly-mindedness.
(4.) And lastly; To live in delightful forethoughts and fore-tastes of the
Glory to come.
(1.) The foregoing Meditations of a perfect, heavenly, glorious Reward, will
quicken and strengthen, hearten and encourage thee to do and suffer any thing
for God.

[1.] The serious frequent Consideration of a perfect State of heavenly Glory,
will ammate and encourage thee to lay out thy self to the utmost for God, and
to act vigorously in the performance of thy Daty, in this State of Probation,
in which thou art placed in this lower World.

All the forementioned Particulars of this Reward, will be so many Cords to
bind thee to thy Duty; and as so many Magnctical Hocks, to draw thee to
Obedience. Thou will up and be doing, upon this Consideration, that there is
enough to be gotten by well doing; Thou wi^t Col. 3.23, 24.
heartily serve the Lord Christ, that Christ that died for thee, of whom thou
know thou shall receive the Reward of the Inheritance; who has promised a
Reward to the Gift of a Mat. 10.42.
Cup of cold Water only, and therefore will undoubtedly give a great Reward to
a constant course of sincere Obedience. Thou will besorward to do any thing
Col. 1.5.
for the Hope that is laid up for thee in Heaven; considering, that all thy
good Duties and faithful Performances shall be 1 Pet. 1.7.
found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

The deep Thoughts of the heavenly Glory, will render the Duties of Religion
easy to thee. The Meditation of an everlasting heavenly Rest, will facilitate
the Yoke, and lighten the Burden of Christ to thee. The Greatness of thy Reward
will lessen and take off the Difficulty of thy Labor. Thou will surely think
no Task, no Duty, no Diligence, no Care, no Cost, no Pains too much to get to
Heaven, which at last will fully make amends for all. Thou will strive to do
thy best in all thou do, because, as Apelles said of his great Care in
drawing a very curious Picture, Pingo Aeternitati, I limn for Eternity; so,
whatever thou do, thou do for Glory, Honor, Immortality, a blessed
Eternity.

If by the Eternity of thy Felicity, were meant only an Aevum of very long
Duration; yet it would seem a weighty Motive to any considering rational Man,
to engage him to Godliness and Christianity, and to oblige him to Industry and
Activity: But when the Gospel-revelation does give thee Assurance of the
Perpotuity, and endless Duration of this Felicity; the due Consideration of so
great and infinite a Reward, will have a more forcible powerful Influence upon
thee. It greatly raised, and much affected David's Heart, to be able to say to
God, 2 Samuel 7.19.
thou have spoken of thy Servant's House for a great while to come; How then is
it likely to spirit and encourage thee, to consider that God has spoken of an
heavenly Happiness to be bestowed upon thee, that shall last as long as
Eternity it self, that shall last as long as God himself?

[2.] The serious Thoughts of a perfect heavenly State of eternal Bliss, will
quicken and encourage thee not only to do, but to Nihil crus sentit in nervo,
quando anmus est in coel. Tertul.
suffer any thing for God and Christ and the Gospel: to choose Heb. 11.25, 26.
with Moses rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy
the Pleasures of Sin for a Season; esteeming the Reproach of Christ (or, for
Christ) far greater Riches than any Worldly Treasures out of a respect unto the
Recompense of the Reward: And, with Christ, for and 12.2.
the Joy that is set before thee, to endure the Cross, and despise the Shame: 1
Pet. 4.13.
To rejoice to be a Partaker of Christ's Sufferings, that when his Glory shall
be revealed, thou may be glad also with exceeding Joy: To be ready to Heb.
10.34, 35, 36.
take joyfully the spoiling of thy Goods, knowing in thy self that thou have in
Heaven a better and an enduring Substance. But of this I shall speak more under
the next Head. That is the first; The serious Consideration and earnest
Expectation of a vast and ample Reward in Heaven, will encourage and enable
thee not only to do but to suffer for Christ Jesus.

(2.) The Consideration of a future perfect heavenly Happiness, will help and
enable thee to resist and repel both the fair and furious Temptations of Satan.
By Meditation put on for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation, and that will defend
thee against the Assault, and will ward off the Blows of the Devil. It will,

[1.] Enable thee to answer and oppose the subtle and powerful Temptations of
Satan, when he fairly promises any pleasing Good to thee. The consideration of
what God offers thee, will make thee reject and disdain whatever Satan for the
present proffers thee; because he can make no proffer valuable and
considerable, equal and answerable to what God has made in the Gospel to thee.
This Sun will presently put out the Light of all his twinkling Stars. As Saul
said to his Servants, to keep them from falling away to David, 1 Samuel 22.7.
Will the Son of Jesse give every one of you Fields, and Vineyards, and make
you all Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds? So thou will say to
thy considering self, are the Devil and the World able to afford me those
Honors and Dignities, Riches and Treasures, Delights and Pleasures, and to
entertain me with such a Paradise as God has prepared for me, and promised to
me? Are the Devil, and the World, and all the Pleasures of Sin, which are
slight, and short, and last but for a Season, ever able to make me amends, if I
make a refusal of God's Kindness? Are they ever able to countervail, and make
up the Loss of God, and Christ, and the heavenly Kingdom to me? What Is all the
outward Splendour and Glory of this World, to the incomparable unconceivable
Glory of Heaven? What are these Meats and Drinks here below, to the celestial
Food, and the full Satisfaction of all my spiritual Desires? What signify all
the filthy impure Pleasures here, to the Enjoyment of the Society of immaculate
Angels, and the glorious Presence of the immaculate Lamb hereafter? How are all
the Pleasures of Sin, put in the Balance against the Joys of Heaven, but as a
Feather against a Mountain? How poor and beggarly are all the Riches on Earth,
to the vast and sure Treasures laid up for me in Heaven? How mean a Cottage,
what a very Dunghill is the most sumptuous Building, and stately Habitation
here, to the beautiful, spacious, glorious, heavenly Palace? What vile Weeds,
and sorry Rags, are the costliest Garments and richest Apparel here, to the
white Ornaments, and glorious Robes of Saints triumphant in Heaven? How
contemptible and despicable is all Honor with Men, in comparison or Honor
with God and Angels? any secular Preferment, and worldly Power, in respect of
the heavenly Crown and Kingdom? What Invitation or Inducement is this carnal
Company to me, that I should so covet and fondly embrace their Society, to the
Loss and Forfeiture of all blessed Fellowship with God and Christ, with Saints
and Angels to all Eternity? Shall I ever become such a mere Bedlam and humane
Beast, as to slight and undervalue a perfect State of heavenly Glory and to
place my Happiness in Sensuality and Flesh-pleasing? Further,

[2.] The Meditation of the high and heavenly Felicity and Glory, will serve to
counterpoise the heaviest Temptation, when Satan or his Initruments shall
terribly tempt thee, and sharply assault thee, by threatening any great and
grievous Evil to thee. If Satan threaten thee with Persecution, with the Loss
of thy Estate, or of temporal Life it self; this will instruct thee to tell him
what Christ himself has told thee, that Mat. 5.10, 11, 12
Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is
the Kingdom of Heaven: That blessed art thou when Men shall revile thee, and
persecute thee, and shall say all manner of evil against thee falsely for
Christ's sake; that then thou must rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is
thy Reward in Heaven: That and 19.29.
every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for Christ's Name's sake, shall receive
an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting Life: That and 16.25.
whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his Life
for Christ's sake, shall find it. It will enable thee to tell the Devil, what
the great Apostle of Christ has told thee; That 2 Timothy 2.12.
if thou suffer, thou shall also reign with Christ, and be glorified with
him: but if thou deniest him, he also will deny thee: That thou Romans 8.17, 18.
reckonest, that the Sufferings of this present Time are not worthy to be
compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in thee: That thy 2 Cor. 4.17.
light Affliction, which is but for a Moment, not only works, but (...).
works out for thee a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. This
will cause thee to be Phil. 1.28.
in nothing terrified by thy Adversaries (the Agents of Satan, and Instruments
of the Devil:) which is to them an evident Token of Perdition, but to thee of
Salvation, and that of God. The Consideration of a sure, full, everlasting,
heavenly Reward, will keep thee from sticking at any Suffering. Satan can never
terrisy and dishearten thee with the Fear of Death, or temporal Torments; but
thou will be able patiently to endure, and cheerfully to go through any
Suffering, if thou do but weigh the Recompense of Reward, and well consider,
that eternal Salvation will richly compensate the suffering Christian. That is
the second Advantage of the forementioned Meditations; The Consideration of a
perfect State of heavenly Glory, will help and enable thee to resist and repel
the taking, or terrible, the flattering, or affrighting Temptations of Satan.

(3.) The due Consideration of a perfect State of heavenly Glory, will enable
thee to live in an holy Contempt of this present World, and in the serious,
real, visible Exercise of constant heavenly-mindedness.

[1.] The often renewed Thoughts of a future perfect heavenly Happiness, will
effectually provoke thee to live in a manifest, rational, holy Contempt of all
external and earthly Things; and in quiet Contentment with what Share and
Allowance God allots and affords thee of outward Comforts and Accommodations
here in this World.

'Twill cause thee to slight and undervalue the Things of the World, which God
in the Gospel has so disgraced and disparaged; To despise and contemn them in
thy Judgment, Affections, Speeches, Actions, in comparison of the nobler,
richer Things to be enjoyed in the other World. The raised Thoughts of a
celestial Happiness, will teach thee to take all sublunary Glory for a Shadow,
or a Dream; and move thee to complain of the World's Dotage in the pathetical
Words of that divine Poet, Herb. Poems, Dotage.
But Oh the Folly of distracted Men,
Who Griefs in earnest, Joies in jest pursue;
Preferring, like brute Beasts, a loathsome Den
Before a Court, even that above so clear,
Where are no Sorrows, but Delights more true
Than Miseries are here!


These Thoughts will preserve thee from being so foolish as to mind Baubles,
and to follow after Butter-flies: from being excessively fond and greedy of a
tickling, transient Pleasure; from catching earnestly at a Vapor, a Puff of
Honor; from stooping low to a base and filthy Clod of Earth; from striving
over-eagerly for any of this World's Goods, which thou must certainly soon part
with, and which if thou could hold never so fast, and keep never so long,
thou could find no solid, real, rational Happiness in: From envying those
that have Ps. 7.14.
their Portion in this Life: And will cause thee to dread the Thoughts Luke
16.25.
of receiving thy good Things, and 6.24.
thy Consolation here: To tremble to think of going shortly out of this World,
and leaving all thou have behind thee, and of having nothing at all that is
truly good to reap and receive in another World. The Meditation of heavenly
Provisions and Enjoyments, will wean and loosen thy Heart from, deaden and
disaffect it to the drossy or kexy Things of this base and dull Earth, which
are wholly unworthy of the choice Affections of thy heaven-born Soul. It will
direct thee to use this World, as if thou did not use it; to use earthly
Things, but not to mind them, nor with thy whole Heart to desire them, nor to
place thy Happiness in them, nor to dull thy Appetite to heavenly Things by
them.

To consider seriously, that God has provided such Riches and Treasures in
another World for thee, this is a likely Means to free thee from affecting
inordinately Worldly Greatness, and to moderate thy Desires and Endeavors
after earthly Things; to enable thee to live without them, to live above them,
to have thy Conversation here without Covetousness, and to be content with such
Things as thou have in thy Passage and Way to Heaven, since Heaven will make up
all at last: Reckoning with thy self, that the Discontent of thy Life would be
a kind of rude Blasphemy against Heaven; a pronouncing and proclaiming of all
the promised Glory of Heaven, what Solomon does of all earthly Glory, that this
also is Vanity: A telling all the World, that thou verily think, either
there is no Heaven at all, or that Heaven is not enough to satisfy thee. The
fixed Thoughts of a promised heavenly Reward, will serve to consirm and
stablish thy Heart against worldly excessive Fears, and Cares, and immoderate
Labors for outward and earthly Things; and will prompt thee to argue thus with
thy self; Why should I fear the Loss of any Thing here in this World, when it
is my Father's good Pleasure to give me a Kingdom? and why should I doubt of
earthly Necessaries, when God has allotted and apportioned an heavenly Kingdom
to me? If he has promised me an heavenly Kingdom, he will not withhold such
temporal Supplies as are necessary for me in my present Pilgrimage: And what
need I cark and care, labor and sweat, toil and trouble my self for mere
Vnnecessaries, and vain and hurtful Superfluities?

[2.] The Meditation of a perfect heavenly Happiness, will help thee to live in
the serious real visible Exercise of constant heavenly-mindedness; to seek, and
care for, to (...). Col. 3.1, 2.
savor, and set thy Affections on Things above; to have thy Soul, like the
Flame of a Candle, always aspiring upward; to live by Faith; to affect the
Kingdom of Heaven (which the primitive Christians had so much in their Hearts
and Tongues, that the Heathen Just. Mart. Apol. 2. ad Antonium.
suspected they affected Caesar's Empire) To desire a better, that is, an
heavenly Country, and to look for a City which has Foundations, whose Builder
and Maker is God; To have thy Conversation in Heaven; to lead and frame thy
Life according to heavenly Rules and Patterns, To order and to judge of every
thing with respect had to these heavenly Things; To be so taken with their
Beauty and Excellency, Sweetness and Pleasantness, as to thirst after them with
an unsatiable Desire, and to refer every thing to the obtainment of them.

(4.) And lastly. If God has wrought such due and requisite Qualifications in
thee, as may fit and prepare thee for an heavenly State; thy Meditation then of
a perfect State of heavenly Happiness, will provoke thee to live in daily
thankful, delightful Fore-thoughts, and sweet refreshing comfortable Foretastes
of a perfect State of heavenly Glory, and blessed celestial Immortality. It
will invite, and constrain thee to think and speak well of God and Religion; to
laud and magnify the Divine Munisicence, to admire and extol the Bounty of God,
who sweetly and kindly allures thee to Piety by a most ample and inestimable
Reward; and ingages to give thee such great Wages for so little Work, eternal
Life for the Labor and Service of a few Years; an exceeding eternal weight of
Glory for such small Pains spent in a short Race; who, though thou may
sometimes start aside, or stumble in the Way, yet will not deny thee thy
Reward, nor lessen thy Crown; but, if thou do thy best, will reward thy
Sincerity largely and liberally, and will abundantly recompense the very
meanest faithful Performance, the giving but a Cup of cold Water in the Name of
a Disciple. It will excite thee to give thanks to God, who has begotten thee
again to a lively Hope, and made thee very rich in Hope. It will enable thee to
live comfortably, and walk cheerfully, as an Heir of the Promises, an Heir of
the Grace of Life, of eternal Life or Glory, which will be bestowed by the free
Grace and Favor of God: To rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory; as
one whose Name is written in Heaven, and that have a Mansion prepared by Christ
in Heaven for thee: To rejoice and be exceeding glad, to consider that great is
thy Reward in Heaven: To rejoice in the first Fruits of the Spirit, in the
earnest of the Spirit, which is the earnest of thy Inheritance, given by God as
a Pledge, or first part of Payment of that Inheritance which he has destined to
thee: To sit down, and express and vent thy Thoughts in the feeling
affectionate words of the forecited sweet Singer, Herb. Poem, The Glance.
If thy first glance so powerful be,
A Mirth but opened, and sealed up again;
What wonders shall we feel, when we shall see
Thy full-eyed Love!
When thou shall look us out of pain,
And one Aspect of thine spend in Delight
More than a thousand Suns disburse in Light
In Heaven above!


If thou shall use to think much of Heaven, thou will rejoice in that Sight
which thou gettest of God and Christ here, as a real Pledge of a clearer Vision,
and nearer Fruition of God and Christ hereafter: Thou will rejoice in that
Communion which thou hold with the Saints in the Church here, as an earnest
and assurance of thy Fellowship with them in the heavenly Glory hereafter: Thou will delight in that measure of spiritual Knowledge, and those Beginnings of
eternal Life thou attainest here, as Tokens and Pledges of a perfection of
Knowledge, a perfection of Life eternal to be received and enjoyed hereafter:
Thy thankful, cheerful Life will answer the Reward, the Riches, the Crown, the
Kingdom, which God has plainly promised thee, and given a sure Earnest, and
certain Pledge of to thee.

The last of the four last Things proposed as the subject Matter of Meditation
in order to the right Redemption of Time.
Let Read Mr. Bolton of Hell, in his 4 last things: And Mr. Richard Adams's
sermon. of Hell, in the M. E. at St. G.
Hell and its Torments be the Subject of thy solemn and frequent Meditation,
which will be of great Use and Advantage to thee, for preventing the
mis-spending, and promoting the right redeeming of thy Time.

Hope of Heaven, and Fear of Hell, are the great Engines apt to turn about our
Wills, and the forcible Spring of all our Actions; and nothing so strongly
affects as Fear: And we have need enough in this present State to get every
Affection wrought upon, and to use all possible Motives with our selves for the
furthering and promoting the Salvation of our Souls. And therefore surely she
was overhasty, and acted rashly, that ran about the City with a Brand of Fire
in one Hand, and a Bottle of Water in the other, and said, her business was to
set Heaven on fire with the one, and to quench Hell-slames with the other, that
there might be neither of them left, only pure Love to move and incite her
Piety. The devout St. Bernard puts us upon a wiser and better Course;
Descendamus in insernum viventes ne defcendamus mori^ntes.
Let us go into Hell by Meditation, while we live, says he, that we may not go
into Hell when we die.

Seriously consider, that if thou should prove a final impenitent Sinner;
when thy Soul shall quit the Tabernacle of thy Body, it shall pass immediately
into a State of Misery, and dwell in the Region of Devils, and of evil
discontented Spirits; and that thou shall be raised at the last Day to the Ioh.
5.29.
Resurrection of Damnation, to Dan. 12.2.
Shame and everlasting Contempt; be raised, as a Malefactor is fetched out of
Prison, to appear in Judgment first, and then to be had to the Place of
Execution: be raised, though thou would Malunt extingui penitus, quam ad
supplicia reparari. Minucius Fell. p. 84.
rather choose to be annihilated, than to be restored and raised again to
Punishment.

That then thou shall be ranked among the Goats on the Mat. 25.41.
left Hand, and sentenced to Mat. 25.41.
depart: That then thou shall be excluded, and banished from the Face and
Favor, the comfortable 2 Thessalonians 1.9.
Presence, and blessed Enjoyment of God and Christ in Glory. That thou shall
suffer the Loss of all thy outward and earthly Enjoyments; have impetuous
Desires after terrene and sensual Things still remaining, and yet want the
Objects which should suit and satisfy, please and gratify those Desires: But
that thy greatest Punishment shall consist in the Loss of God and Christ, and
of all real substantial Good, by the Loss of God and Christ, the chiefest Good.

Consider further; That thou shall be forced to depart from Christ into
Hellfire; not a purging, but plaguing; not a purifying, but tormenting Fire:
That it will be no small Pain, that will arise from an acute Feeling and lively
Sense of the unutterable Losses, and unrecoverable Damages thou shall then
sustain by reason of thy Sin; from a quick and terrible Apprehension that thou
art bereaved of God, forsaken of Christ, and utterly deprived of all the
glorious Good that was so fairly offered to thee; and from the sad
Consideration, that they whom thou did despise and vilify, and trample on
here on Earth, and account the very Offscouring of the World, are at last
possessed and made Partakers of that blissful State which thou find thy self
deprived of: As it heightened and aggravated Dives's Misery, to behold Lazarus
in Abraham's Bosom.

But well consider, That this will not be all; but that there shall be a real
Presence of all Evil, as well as a privation of all Good: That as all the
Members of thy Body, and Powers of thy Soul, have been Weapons of
Unrighteousness, so thou shall be punished in all the Parts of thy Body, and
Faculties of thy Soul; which then shall be made more capable of Torment, and
shall suffer-Pain without any Diversion or Intermission, Mitigation or
Relaxation at all, finding Rev. 14.11.
no Rest day nor night: That then thou shall be filled with Horror of
Conscience, troubled and vexed to think and consider, that all the Torments
thou indurest are sent in Vengeance, and inflicted by Divine Justice by way of
Punishment for thy wilful Faults, and voluntary Crimes, and according to the
measure of them.

And think again; That as thou shall suffer variety of Punishment, Punishment
of Loss, and Punishment of Sense; so thou shall undergo extremity of Torment:
That thou shall be forced to depart into Fire, (...), Mat. 25.41.
the Fire, emphatically; which whether it shall be material, or metaphorical,
speaks the sharpness and severity of thy Torment. That thou shall be cast into
Fire prepared; suffer a contrived Punishment, that falls under the solemnity of
a Preparation: Prepared by God, the wise and just Lord and Judge: For the Devil
and his Angels: A great and inevitable Punishment; such as the Devils must
suffer, and such as thou must suffer with the Devils: That if thou servest the
Devil here, thou must dwell with him in Hellfire.

And if it be so great an Affliction to the People of God, who have a true
Sense and a right Judgment of Things, to be necessitated to live among Ps.
120.5.
the Wicked here in this World; Think then what a grievous Misery it will be to
thee, when thy Eyes are opened in Hell, to see thy self under a necessity of
dwelling continually with the Devils, and cursed Fiends of Hell.

Think how it would Shepheard's S C. p 95.
scare thee almost out of thy wits, to have the Devil frequently appear to thee
here; and what Horror then shall fill thy Soul, when thou shall be banished
from the Face of God, and Presence of Christ, and from Angels Society, and be
joined in Fellowship with the Devil and his Angels; be shut up in the darkest
Den with that roaring Lion, and be chained with the Devil in fiery Fetters.

Nor will it at all relieve thee, to have Companions in all thy Pain and
Distress in Hell; But the more there be that shall suffer with thee there, the
less ease and comfort shall thou enjoy: for (as Dr. Jackson, 3 vol. p. 495.
one of profound Judgment well observes) there will be no Concord or Consort
there, nothing but perpetual Discord, which is always so much the greater, by
how much the Parties discording are more in number: It being a Thing too well
known, that to live in continual Discord, though but with some few, is a kind
of Hell here upon Earth.

Think yet further; That thy Punishment in Hell will be perpetual, thy Torments
be endless, as well as easeless; thy Mat. 25.41, 46. and 3.12.
Fire everlasting, and unquenchable: That thou shall be Rev. 20.10.
tormented in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, day and night, for ever and ever:
That if it were possible for one Eternity to be spent, for one ever to expire
and come to an End, there should be another ever for thee to be tormented in:
That in Hell Mark 9.44, 46, 48.
thy Worm shall never die: That thou shall be punished with 2 Thessalonians 1.9.
everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord: That thou shall be
destroyed in a moral, not in a natural Sense: That thy Essence and Being shall
be everlastingly preserved; but thou shall be everlastingly deprived of God,
and Glory, and of all that makes to thy well-being; and everlastingly afflicted
and punished with all that tends to thy ill-being: That as Nero refused to put
Philostr. in vi^a Apoll. Tyanaei.
Apollonius to Death, who was very desirous to die, because he would not so far
gratify him; And as Tiberius Caesar, when a certain Offender petitioned him to
hasten his Punishment, retur'd this Answer, Suetonius l. 3. c. 6.
Nondum tecum redii in gratiam; Stay, Sir, you and I are not Friends yet: So,
if thou provest a damned Person, that God will not be moved by all thy entreaty to
grant a quick and speedy Dispatch to thee, nor after See Mr. Bolton's 4 last
Things p. 107, 108, 109, 110.

If thou had an Head as big as Archimedes, and could tell how many Atoms
of Dust we^e in the Globe of the Earth; yet think that such a vast number is
but as one little Atome in compare with those endless Sorrows and those endless
Joys. -- Let this be thy Impress, or Motto, let this be writ upon the min^ that
a learned man writes upon all his Books, Aetern^tatem cogita, Think of
Eternity. (Johan. Meursius) D. Patrick's Div. Arithm p. 40, 41.


thousands and millions of Years spent in Torments, yield to let thee die at
last: And that the Eternity of thy Torments, will be the Hell of Hell, and the
very Sting of the second Death; That the Eternity both of Loss and Sense will
even break the very Heart of thee.

If good Men here do grieve and mourn, when God withdraws and absents himself
but for a Moment from them; Think then how lamentably and intolerably it will
perplex and punish thee, to be made sensible hereafter, that God will hide his
Face from thee for ever. That if here thou art unable to bear a tedious Fit of
the Toothache, Headache, Cholick, Gout, or Stone; what then thou will do to
endure those akings of Heart, and wounds of Spirit, and convulsions of
Conscience, and complicated torments of Soul and Body, which will be the
Portion of damned Persons to eternal Ages. And if it be so sad a Misery for any
to be burnt to Death here; Think then how incomparably greater a Misery it will
be, to be always burning and frying in Hell, and yet never to be burnt to
Death there. Nay, if here to lie long on a Bed of Down, or on a Bed of Roses,
and not once to rise in several Years together, would prove a grievous sore
Trouble and heavy Affliction; what an overwhelming Thought is this then of
lying in Flames to all Eternity?

Consider here, that so great is the Folly of Man's Mind, and the Hardness of
his Heart, and the Power of present sensual Allurements, that See Baxter's
Reas. of the Christ. Rel. p. 171.
nothing less than the Threatening of an endless Misery was an apt and sit
Instrument of God's ruling and governing the World: That Men would not have
been sufficiently awed, and effectually restrained and deterred from Sin, and
kept in order and obedience, if God had not intimated and foretold that the
obstinate Sinner shall certainly suffer perpetual Punishment in another World.
That it is too evident, that the Denunciation even of eternal Pain, and
infinite Torment, does Id. ib. p. 164, 170.
not move and sway the greatest part of Men; and therefore that the Threatening
of mere Annihilation or of some lighter and shorter Punishment would surely
have less prevailed and wrought upon the World. And now, when everlasting
Punishment is plainly threatened, that the just and holy Lawgiver does not
intend to affright thee with a Lie, or with an uncertainty: That his Threatening
is not like the prediction of an Almanac; It may be so, it may be not; But
that he means really to execute and inflict the Penalty of eternal Punishment
upon thee, in case of thy final Impenitency and Disobedience.

Consider moreover; That thy Punishment will be How the infinity of Punishment
is answerable to the infinity of the Fault; see Barontus de peccato M^rtalt and
Vent (...), 6. part. 2.
justly and deservedly everlasting, if now thou sinnest with a Deus punit nos
in aeterno suo, quta nes peccanites in aeferno nostro.
Mind, and Will, and Disposition to sin to Eternity, and would sin on for
ever here, and persevere in eternal Contumacy, without end or term, if God
should not break off the course of thy Sins, by putting a Period to thy Days.

That thy eternal Torment will be reasonable and equitable, if now when Life
and Death, an Eternity of Happiness and an Eternity of Misery are set before
thee in this Time of thy Trial and Probation, thou art grossly wanting to thy
self, Vide Episcop. Resp. ad 64. quaest. qu. 62. p. 68.
slightest and despisest eternal Happiness, and so put it away from thee
for ever, and drawest wilfully eternal Misery upon thy self. If here thou
closest with what is present, and let go what is future; (as that vile and
wretched Cardinal did, who preferred his present part in Paris before his future
part in Paradise;) had rather have any thing in possession, than never so
much in reversion; and so greedily catchest at the present Pleasures of Sin for
a season, and refusest the Favor of God, and the Joys and Blessendness of the
World to come; thou have nothing to complain of for thy Loss of Heaven, but thy
own See Dr. Jackson vol. 3. p. 496.
free Choice.

And as for Pain of Sense, though thou do not expressly choose it in its
self, yet if thou chusest it implicitly in the causes of it; If now thou
chusest that Sin to which such Torment is by the Law of God See Baxier's Reas.
of the Christ. Rel. p. 165, 169, 170.
annexed, and deliberately and resolvedly to the very last eagerly pursuest
those sinful Pleasures and Profits, which God has plainly told thee will be
surely followed with no less than everlasting Torments; And take Paradise was
created for man; the everlasting Fire was prepared for the Devil, and his
Angels; But ungodly men with the Words and Works called it to them, Wisd. 1.16.
committed a kind of ^iot upon Hell, invaded Lucifer's peculiar, and strive more
vehemently for their portion in that Lake of Brimstone, endure more temporal
hardship in their pass'age thither, than any Martyr in his siery Chariot of
Ascent toward Heaven: An the that take, such pains for it, is worthy to take
his portion with it, to have that pay which he has merited so dearly. Dr.
Hammond, pract. Cat. see there p 412, 413 in 12.
as much or more pains in the ways of Sin to go to Hell, than would have
served to get to Heaven; thou will have none to blame at last of Cruelty toward
thee but thy self; no reason to cry out of the Divine Severity, when thou have
but the consequents of thy wilful choice: For God puts things to thy own
Choice, and entreats thee to be careful to choose aright, and will at last only
suffer thee to inherit thy own foolish option, and evil Choice, which here thou
made to thy eternal Ruin.

Consider once more; That all Hell is not in another Life: That if thou be a
wicked Person, thou have an Argument within thee to convince thee that there is
an Hell, when thy Conscience pains and gripes thee, and is too hot for thee:
That the present secret Checks, and severe Rebukes of thy own Conscience, are
an Emblem and Representation, and a kind of Anticipation of Hell Torments:
That now thou live even in the Suburbs of Hell: That thou feel the The
Heathen feigned Prometheus his Liver to be continually gnawn upon by a Vultur
or Cormorant without wasting the Substance of it, or deading its capacity of
Pain.
Vultur preying betimes upon thee; the Worm crawling early in thy Bosom, and
beginning to gnaw thee even in this Life: That thou have an Aetna, or Vesuvius,
at least some Sparks of the hellish Fire already kindled in thy own Breast;
some prelibations and fore-tastes of those Vials of Wratth that are prepared
and reserved for thee; some Drops let fall upon thee of that Ocean of Wrath
that is likely at last to overwhelm thee: That thou carriest the Sulphur of
Hell about thee, and thy Hell is already, even here upon Earth, begun within
thee: That though thou be not actually in the very Place of Hell, yet thou
know that eternal Woes are due to thee; and find that this is a present
Torment to thee, in the midst of thy greatest outward worldly Enjoyments; as a
Person is scorched with a burning Fever, though he lie upon a Bed of Ivory, in
a Chamber richly furnished and hung with the finest Tapestry, or adorned with
rare and curious Pictures, and rendered as delightful and pleasant as can be.

Call here to mind, how some that have been only singed by this Fire, and have
had no more than the Smell thereof passing upon them; have been most rueful
amazing Spectacles to all Beholders, through that Horror and Terror of
Conscience, which was but an Image and Resemblance of Hell Torments: And if the
beginnings of these Sorrows be so dreadful here in this World, Consider how
unsufferable then the full measure thereof will certainly be in the World to
come.

Think earnestly and often of these Things, and see how strangely they will
operate with thee. Fox Acts and Mon. 2 vol. p. 922, 923.
Mr. Bilney the Martyr did diverse times in his Imprisonment put his Finger to
the Flame of the Candle, to feel and try the Heat of the Fire before his
Execution: Do thou by Meditation flash Hellfire in thy own Face, and burn the
Brimstone of Hell at thy own Nostrils: Use thy self to serious Thoughts of
Hell: Sit down and consider, whether thou art able to bear those Torments, to
dwell with that consuming Fire, to abide with those everlasting Burnings.
Pursue these Thoughts, and often renew and repeat these Considerations; and
this is likely to startle and awaken thee, to rouse and raise thee out of thy
carnal Security. Labor by Meditation to presentiate, and to reallize the
intolerable Torments of Hell to thy self; and work the Thoughts of the Things
forementioned upon thy Heart, until thou art suitably affected with them, and
fully resolved to answer the Ends of the Threatening of them.

Thy Meditation of Hell Torments will be apt to beget Mr. Perkins would
pronounce the Word Damn with such an Emphasis as left a doleful Echo in his
Auditors Ears a good while after. Mr. Fuller in his Life, Holy State, p. 82.
stirring and lively Affections in thee: It will be useful to withold or
withdraw thee from Sin, which has such a dreadful Issue; To keep, or take thee
off from living in such a course, wherein every Act is a step to Perdition: To
restrain thee from great Sins especially. Thou will not choose to live without
God in this World, for fear thou should be forced to live without God in the
other World. Thou will not dare to continue in wilful Ignorance, or
Disobedience, considering that Christ will come 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.
in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey
not the Gospel of Christ. Thou will not give way to Unbelief, considering it is
the damning Sin; Nor live and die in wilful Impenitency, lest thou perish
eternally. Thou will not surely be boldly guilty of such open Profaneness and
gross Impiety, as to bid God damn thee, damn thee Body and Soul; and the Devil
take thee: Thou will never use such cursed Forms of Speech thy self; and wilt
tremble to hear such horrid, and worse than hellish Words proceed from the
Mouths of mad and desperate Sinners. Nor will thou offer to cherish and nourish
hidden Hypocrisy; since Hell is prepared of purpose for Hypocrites, and the
Punishment of Hypocrites is made the Standard of the Infernal Sufferings of
other Sinners; whose Mat. 24.51.
portion shall be appointed with Hypocrites. Thou will not indulge thy self in
Sensuality and Voluptuousness, which has a terrible Isa. 5.11, 12, 14.
Woe denounced against it: Thou will not destroy thy Soul for the Pampering of
thy Body, lose fullness of Joy for the pleasing of a single Sense, rivers of
Pleasures for a superfluous Cup of drink, Pleasures at God's Right Hand for
evermore for the Pleasures of Sin which are but for a season, for a minute, for
a moment. Thou will not take thy short Pleasure, to pay so dear as to suffer
eternal Pain for it. Thou will not allow thy self in Intemperance; Nor venture
to walk after the flesh in the Lust of Uncleanness, remembering that the Lord
knows how to 2 Pet. 2 9, 10.
reserve such Persons chiefly unto the Day of Judgment to be punished: And well
knowing, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
that neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
Thou will not burn in the fire of Lust, lest at last thou be scorched in the
slames of Hell: Thou will set the Fire of Hell in opposition to the Fire of
Lust, that the one may abate and put out the other. As it is storied of a
virtuous Christian Woman, that being tempted and earnestly solicited to yield
to commit Folly with a certain Wanton, who made profession of great Love to
her, and how ready he was to do any thing for her sake. To convince him, and to
deliver her self out of the Temptation, she strait requested this one thing of
him, that he would hold the Tip of his Finger in the Flame of the Candle for
one Quarter of an Hour: He shrunk, and wondered at the Proposition: But if you
be loath, said she, at my desire to endure such Pain for a Quarter of an Hour;
how can you expect that I for your pleasure should expose my self to suffer for
Ever in Soul and Body the Wrath of God, and the eternal Flames of Hellfire.
Thou will resolve deliberately, and endeavor carefully to refrain bad Company.
Whenever idle and evil Companions tempt thee, and say, Come, to thee; thou will
be ready to think presently how Christ will say at Last Day, Depart from me.
Thou will take heed of doing the Devil's Work, for fear of suffering the
Devil's Punishment. Thou will have no Intimacy and Familiarity with the Devil
now; thou will not give him heart-room, nor house-room, lest thou be
compelled to bear him company in Hellfire for ever hereafter. Thou will by no
means be of the Devil's Party, nor side and associate with the Ungodly, and so
deserve to be kept and continued in that Society which was formerly chosen by
thee, and acceptable to thee. Thou will also zealously flee Idolatry, and hate
and abominate that Religion wherein the practice of gross Idolatry is made
necessary; the Worshipping of Images, of Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, the
Worshipping and Invocating of Saints and Angels; Considering, 1 Cor. 6.9.
that Idolaters are of the Number of those that shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God, but are appointed to have their Rev. 21.8.
part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. Nor will thou fall
inconsideratly into damnable Heresy, nor hold so grossly corrupt Opinions as
may bring upon thee 2 Pet. 2.1.
swift Destruction; nor be deluded to believe the Lies of Antichrist, to thy
utter 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 12.
perishing, and eternal undoing. Thou will abhor wilful Lying, to save thy
Credit, or get Gain; and hate to set thy Servum nolle mentiri nova religio est.
Plaut.
Servants to tell Lies, to vend thy Wares, and put off thy Commodities. Thou will be loath by a gainful Lie to cheat thy Brother of Twelve-pence, and to lose
thy Soul by the bargain: remembering that Lying is a damnable Sin, and that Rev.
21.8.
all Liars shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone: which is the Second Death.

Thou will be fearful of speaking any thing that looks like Detraction; still
minding thy self, that Romans 1.29, 30, 32.
Whisperers and Back-biters are joined in the Catalogue with Haters of God, who
are worthy of Death: And that he that Ps. 15.1, 3.
Back-biteth with his Tongue, and takes up a Reproach against his Neighbor,
is not likely to dwell in God's holy City: That if thou should prove such a
Devil incarnate, thou will be fit to keep company perpetually with the Devil
and his Angels: That if thy Tongue should here be so set on Fire of Hell, it
would presage that without Repentance and Reformation it will surely be set on
Fire in Hell.

Thou will watch against the rising of rash Anger, which is a Sin that has Hell
at the heels of it; and be careful to prevent its breaking out in Expression or
Action; revolving in thy Mind that of thy Savior; Mat. 5.22.
Whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, to his Brother, shall be in danger of
Hellfire. Thou will dread the Thoughts of Vnfruitfulness under Means, having
fixed and imprinted this in thy Mind, that Mat. 3.10.
every Tree which brings not forth good Fruit is hewn down, and cast into the
Fire: and 11.23.
And that Capernaum, which was exalted unto Heaven by her enjoyment of special
Means, was threatened for want of answerable Improvement to be brought down to
Hell. Thou will not harden thy Heart in Unmercifulness; pondering in thine
Heart how Dives in Hell wanted the refreshment of a Desiderabat guttam, quia
non dedit micam. Aug.
Drop of Water, for refusing to give poor Lazarus the small comfort of a Crumb
of Bread, when he himself fared so sumptuously, and feasted deliciously every
Day. Thou will not be unmerciful in not giving; Nor in not forgiving; never
forgetting how the wicked uncompassionate Servant in the Parable was delivered
by his Lord to the Tormentors. Thou will strive and labor against sinful Mr.
Latimer having in a Sermon at Court in Henry the Eighth's days much displeased
the King, he was commanded the next Lord's Day to preach again, and make his
Recantation: He coming prefaced to his Sermon with a kind of Dialogism in this
manner; Hugh Latimer, Do know to whom thou art this day to speak? to the
high and mighty Monarch, that can take away thy Life if thou offend; therefore
take heed how thou speak a Word that may displease his Majesty: But (as
recalling himself) Hugh, Hugh (says he) do know from whom thou come, and
upon whose message thou art sent? even the great and mighty God, that is able
to cast both Body and Soul into Hellfire for ever; and therefore take heed to
thy self, that thou deliver thy message faithfully; and so came to his Sermon;
and what he had delivered the Day before, confirmed and urged with more
vehemence than ever. -- The King that day called for him, -- and taking him off
from his Knees, embraced him in his Arms, saying, he blessed God, that he had a
Man in his Kingdom, that durst deal so plainly and faithfully with him. Mr.
Newcomen's Sermon, on Heb. 4.13. p. 37.
Fearfulness, and not be drawn to do any Evil, or omit any Good against clear
and full Light of Conscience, for Fear of any outward Trouble or Danger;
recollecting in thy Thoughts, that the Rev 21.8.
Fearful shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and
Brimstone. Thou will be ready Mat. 10.28. Luke 12.5.
to set the Fear of God, and the Fear of Hell against all carnal Fear of Men,
or of any temporal Evil whatsoever: As the Primitive Martyrs did; who when they
were solicited by Heathen Emperors to sacrifice to their Idols, with these
Arguments, That then they should save their Houses and Lands, and Liberties and
Lives, but should otherwise lose all; They put off all with this Answer, Da
veniam, Imperator, tu carcerem minaris, ille gehennam.
Pardon us, O Emperor, you threaten a Prison to us, but God threatens Hell to
us. So Biblis (as Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius relates the Story) a Woman who having fainted before, and renounced
her Profession of Christianity, out of fear of suffering Persecution, and being
brought to the Place where the Christians Bodies were burnt to Ashes, that
others might be drawn from their Profession by means of her expected public
blasphemous Denial and Recantation; was, at the very Hour of Suffering,
thoroughly awakened as out of a dead Sleep, by the sight of those Flames which
were the Instruments of the Martyrs Torments, to consider the intolerable
eternal Torture of Hellfire, which she must unavoidably suffer, if she should
dishonor Christ and his Religion, and asperse the innocent and unblameable
Professors of it: And thus expelling the lesser Fear by the greater, and
happily returning unto her self, she disappointed her Persecutors Expectation;
and by being faithful unto Death obtained the Crown of a Martyr of Jesus, and
animated others to endure the Cross with Christian Fortitude, and the Patience
of the Saints. Fix thy Cogitations on the Infernal Flames, and this will make
thee resolve and determine to choose rather to do, or suffer any thing here,
than to suffer the sad and bitter Pains of Hell hereafter: Concluding, that the
Pains and Difficulties of Duty, are no way comparable to the troublesome uneasy
Condition, and piercing raging Pains of Hell: yea, that the Suffering of
Martyrdom here, is a light Affliction to the dreadful Suffering of Hellfire
hereafter.

The serious frequent Meditation of the exquisite Punishments, and dolorous
Torments of Hell, will moreover powerfully persuade thee to be far from De
horribili eorum exitio admoniti fideles, praesentem illis sortem non invideant.
Calv.
envying the greatest Prosperity of wicked Men; who shall one day change their
present Felicity for extreme Want, and utmost Misery; lose the Presence of God
and Christ, and the full Fruition of endless Pleasures in Heaven, and suffer an
Eternity of distracting Pains, and racking heart-renting Torments in Hell, for
a few bitter-sweet transient Pleasures here on Earth. Yea, this will help thee
to bear any outward Affliction patiently, and quietly to accept of any temporal
Punishment of thy Iniquity; considering, thou deservest Hell it self, and that
all thy present Straits and Sufferings are nothing to the Wants and Losses, the
Pains and Miseries of damned Persons. That eminent Pattern of Christian
Patience, the holy His Life among Mr. Clark's Lives of ten em. Div. p. 178.
Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, did humbly adore God's Goodness in the midst of his
sorest sharpest Sufferings, and violent, excruciating, racking and grinding
Pains, which were caused and continued by a complication of acute Diseases, the
Stone, Ulcer, Gangrene; and expressed himself with mavelous Meekness in such
Words as these; Lord, thou give me no occasion to have any hard Thoughts of
thee. O who would not even in Burnings have honorable Thoughts of God? Blessed
be God, there is nothing of Hell in all this.

Again; This will thoroughly awaken and quicken thee to take heed of beginning
the Hell here, which will be completed and consummated hereafter: of being now
of an hellish frame and temper of Mind: of departing from, and living without
God and Christ; which is not only Man's Sin, but Misery; which is a very Hell
upon Earth, and will be a great part of the future Hell: of contracting and
strengthening vicious habits here, and of exposing thy self to the Misery that
naturally arises from Sin; to the Rebukes and Upbraidings of a guilty
Conscience: Considering with thy self, that an hellish Temper and Disposition,
if thou live and die in that Condition, will surely continue and be
confirmed in the other World; and that an hellish State will prepare thee for,
and bring thee to the place of Hell. This will also engage thee to bless God
for Christ, for giving his only begotten Son to 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
deliver thee from the Wrath to come, by suffering Tribulation and Anguish for
thee; and and 5 9.
not appointing thee to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ. And to
be truly thankful to Jesus Christ, who condescended to be forsaken of God, that
thou might not be totally deserted, and eternally forsaken of him; and
endured the Fire of God's Wrath, that thou might be perfectly freed for ever
from Hellfire. This will provoke thee by Faith, and Repentance, and bringing
forth Fruits Mat. 3.7, 8.
meet for Repentance, Mat. 3.7, 8.
to flee from the Wrath to come, and to seek to escape the Damnation of Hell.
And this will cause thee to hate and abandon the cursed Arts and wicked Ways
of and 23.15.
making others the Children of Hell; to dread the Thoughts of ever becoming the
unhappy Instruments of hurrying any others to Hell: And will incline thee, in
Pity and Charity to the Souls of Sinners, to do thy best, by all means
possible, to keep all about thee from running and falling into that Luke 16.28.
place of Torment: to be zealous and industrious to Si fieri possit, ab^spsis
inferis extrahendi nobis sunt homints. Calv. in Act. 8.22.
James 5.20.
save Souls from Death, to save Jude 23.
them with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire; (as the Genesis 19.16.
Angels of old plackt lingning Lot out of Sodom:) Not to suffer thy Neighbor
ever to go to Hell quietly; but rather to territy thy sinful Brother, than to
permit him to miscarry for ever.

Obj. But is not this a slavish Tomper, to be moved to my Duty out of Fear of
Hell? Should not the Love of God be the Principle that acts us? and 1 John 4.18.
perfect Love is said to cast out Fear.

I answer; When all the Motives and Incentives that possibly can be made use
of, will scarcely effectually put us upon Duty; surely we have Bonum tamen est,
ut si necdum amor a malo te revocat, saltem timor gehennalis coerceat. Thomas a
Kempis, l. 1. c 24. n. 7.
little reason to let go or lay aside any one of them; but to use whatever may
work upon us, Love, or Hope, or Fear. And as for a Christians Love to God, it
does not here exclude all Fear, because it is not perfect in this Life. It will
indeed in the future Life cast out all Fear of Damnation: And it may be so
perfect in this Life, as to banish and expel all distrustful tormenting Fear;
which consists in terrifying disquieting Apprehensions that God will deal
with a Man as a Slave; take Advantages of him, condemn and destroy him whenever
he does amiss: But the true sincere Love of God is fairly consistent with a
filial, cautelous, preserving, preventing Fear. Mr. Baxter in his Directions
for Peace and Comfort, Doult 6.
A judicious Divine well observes, that it is a great Mistake to think that
filial Fear is only the Fear of temporal Chastisement, and that all Fear of
Hell is slavish: Even filial Fear is a Fear of Hell; which yet is joined with
such a Persuasion of God's Love to us, that we conclude he will not cast us off
upon every provocation; and is accompanied with some Love in us to God, and
with Care and Watchfulness, lest we should by Apostasy and final Impenitency
miscarry eternally.

The ninth Direction.
If you would redeem the Time, you must endeavor to spiritualize your common
and ordinary worldly Employments: and must take care that your natural, as well
as civil, Actions partake of Religion.

1. You must endeavor to spiritualize your ordinary civil or domestical
Employments, by doing them all in O^edience of Faith, and making them the
Instruments, whereby to show forth your Honesty, Equity, Righteousness,
Justice, and whatever Virtues may be exercised therein. You must make
conscience to follow your Calling out of an awful respect to the Command of
God; to do what you do even in civil Business in the Name of Christ, as the
Work of Christ, so as you may say at that time, Now I am about the Work of God,
and of Jesus Christ: I thank God, my Conscience bears me witness I am acting in
Obedience to Christ, expecting a Blessing from Christ upon what I do: and I
look to receive a Reward from Christ. The Apostle commands Servants, Col. 3.23,
24.
whatsoever they do for Men, to do it heartily, as to the Lord; to serve the
Lord Christ in the Service they do to their earthly Masters.

Thus to work for God and Christ, is for that time to honor God and Christ as
much, nay more, by the meanest servile worldly Act, than if you should spend
all that time in Prayer, Meditation, or any other spiritual Employment, to
which you had no sufficient Call at such a time. The devout Herbert, in one of
his sacred The Elixir.
Poems, desiring God to teach him, what he did in any thing, to do it as for
him; expresses himself thus sweetly and spiritually: All may of thee partake:
Nothing can be so mean,
Which with this Tincture (for thy sake)
Will not grow bright and clean.
A Servant with this Clause
Makes Drudgery divine.
Who sweeps a Room, as for thy Laws,
Makes that and the Action fine.
This is the famous Stone
That turns all to Gold:
For that which God does touch and own
Cannot for less be told.


2. We must take care, that our natural, as well as civil or oeconomical,
Actions partake of Religion; be inscribed with Zech. 14.20, 21.
Holiness unto the Lord; and, by the purity of our end and intention therein,
become as acceptable Vt quiequid aggrediantur homines sit sacrisicium Calv. in
loc.
Sacrifices unto God: That on all occasions we In cilo and potu, -- homines
sacri erunt Deo and sanctitatem colent. Id. ib.
eat and drink, not merely to indulge and gratify our Appetite, Se^ing there
must be in us a sensitive Appetite, whilst we are in this animal State, i^ is
to be endeavored, a far as may be, that we, gratify the Appetite, nor a^ it is
a sensitive Appetite, but under this notion, as the thing that it desires makes
for our real good, and tends to the enjoyment of the supreme Good: to eat and
drink, not because we are hungry or thirsty, because the Appetite desires it;
but with reference to the main end, with respect to the highest Good, that the
Body may be enabled, strengthened and quickened to wait upon the Soul cheerfully
in the Actions of a holy Life. Mr. S. Shaw in his Voice of one Crying in a
Wilderness, p. 149, 150.
as it is a sensitive Appetite; not only, or chiefly to It is lawful in all
hences to comply with a weak and a nice Stomach: but not with a nice and
curious Palate. Bp. Taylor's Rule and Exerc. of holy Live. c. 2. 2. meas. 3.
please our Taste: That we do not cover a Business of Pleasure under a pretense
of preserving Health, or the fair color of supplying Nature; (as Ad hoc
incertum hilarescit infalix anima, -- ut obtentu salutis, obumbret negocium
voluptatis. Aug. Conf. l. 10. c. 31.. 2.
St. Austin confesses he found himself too apt to do) And more especially, that
we never offer to pamper our Bodies that we may be the stronger to serve our
Lusts: That we do not eat and drink our selves either into Lust, or out of
Duty: But that we take our Meat as our Medicine: (as Hoc me docuisti, ut
quemadmodum medicamenta, sic alimenta sumpturus accedam. Id. ib.. 1.
St. Austin acknowledges God had taught him to do) use Meat-and Drink as
remedies to cure natural Infirmities, not to cause moral Distempers; as means
to Eccl. 10.17.
sustain and refresh our Bodies, that our Bodies may be fit to serve our Souls;
and our selves may be enabled with vigor and alacrity to serve and honor God
in the proper Duties of our particular Places.

We should eat our Bread before God (as the Expression is Exodus 18.12.) that
is, not only as in the sight of God; but (as the 1 Cor. 10.31.
Apostle speaks) whether we eat or drink, we should do all to the Glory of God.

Remember to direct these natural Actions to spiritual Ends, and to make them
an occasion of some Exercise of Religion. Be never wanting to beg a Blessing of
God before you eat: And when you sit at Table (as Cun manducas, nequaquam totus
manduces. sed corpore tuo suam refectionem postulante, men's suam non negligat;
memoria suavitatis Domini vel Scripturarum poscat Meditationes. Bernard.
St. Bernard advises) be not wholly employed in eating and drinking; but your
body requiring, and receiving its due repast, let not your Mind neglect its
proper refection. Refresh your Soul, when you feed your Body: and use such holy
Meditations, as may keep and preserve you from Jam. 5.5. Romans 13.14.
nourishing your Hearts, from ministering fuel to your Lusts, and making
provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Fox Act. and Mon. 2 vol.
p. 1457.
Mr. Fox reports of the holy Bradford, that in the midst of Dinner he used
often to muse with himself, having his Hat over his Eyes, from whence came
commonly plenty of Tears dropping on his Trencher.

Whenever you recruit and repair your Nature, strive then to provoke and stir
up in thy self and others Mat. 5 6.
hungrings and thirstings after Righteousness: Remember, meditate, and
discourse of the Sweetness of Christ, of the refreshing strengthening Ordinances
of Christ, of being Ps. 36.8.
abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of God's House, and of drinking of the
River of his Pleasures: of feeding and living by Faith on the Promises of the
Gospel, and receiving the Romans 15.4.
Comforts of the Scriptures: With Job, Job 23.12.
esteem the Words of God's Mouth more than thy necessary Food, or appointed
Portion: With David, acknowledge the Laws and Judgments of God to be Ps. 19.10.
sweeter than Honey, and the Honeycomb; than the sweetest and purest Honey.
Think, and speak of the Joh 6.48, 50, 51, 55.
living Bread which came down from Heaven, of the Bread of Life, the Rev. 21.6.
and 22.17.
Water of Life, of spiritual Isa. 55.1.
Wine and Milk: 1 Pet. 2.2.
Desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby: Have a longing
Mind to that spiritual Food which is Meat indeed, and Drink indeed. Taste and
relish the Rev. 2 17.
hidden Manna. Delight thy self in the serious Fore-thoughts of Mat 8.11.
sitting down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven: of
Luke 22.30.
eating and drinking at Christ's Table in his Kingdom. Raise and lift up thy
Mind to the Celestial Table: strengthen and sharpen thy Appetite to the most
delicious heavenly Banquets: Let the Consideration and Hope of the spiritual
Joys, and purer higher Pleasures of the other World, cause thee to despise
these gross and brutish Pleasures; to say in the Words, and with the Affection
and Spirit of Mr. Herbert, Home.
What is this weary World, this Meat and Drink,
That chains us by the Teeth so fast?
Church Porch, p. 5.
Look on Meat, think it Dirt, then eat a Bit.
And say withal, Earth to Earth I commit.


Entertain thy self with better fare, and richer cheer. Thank God you have Joh.
4.32.
Meat to eat which the World knows not of. Let others and 6.27.
labor for the Meat which perishes; but do thou resolve rather to labor for
that Meat which endures to everlasting Life. Account and reckon it thy Meat
and Drink, with thy blessed and 4.34.
Savior, to do the Will of thy heavenly Father: And with and 4.31, 32.
him have a greater care of making provision for others Souls, than of
supplying thy own bodily Necessities.

When at usual seasons thou nourishest thy Body, be sure thou do not then
forget to 1 Timothy 4.6.
nourish up thy self and others in and 6.3.
wholesome Words, in the Words of Faith, and of good Doctrine, which is
according to Godliness: Even while thou arc feeding thy Body, as thou have
occasion and opportunity, let thy Prove. 10.21.
Lips feed many. I remember Cicero introduces Cato giving this good account of
himself, that he loved to feast with his Friends and Neighbors, not so much
for the Neque enim ipsorum convivtorum delectationem corporis voluptatibus
magis, quan catu amicorum, and sermonibus metiebar. Been enim majores nostri,
etc. Ego vero proster sermonis delectationem tempestivis conviviis delector,
etc. Cicero de senect.
corporal Pleasure of eating and drinking, as for the delight and refreshment
of the good Discourses that were used among them at such Meetings.

And Tertullian informs us, that much of Religion was mingled with the Meals,
the very common Meals of the Primitive Christians: That they did not offer to
Non prius discumbitur, quam oration ad Deum praegustetur: -- It a suturaatur, ut
qui meminerint etiam per noctem ado: andum Deum sibiesse, etc. Aeque oration
convivium duimit. -- non tam coenam coenaverint, quam disciplinam. Tert. Apol.
c. 39
take their Meat before they had tasted the spiritual sweetnesses of Prayer and
Devotion: That they fed as those who well remembered, that they were to go upon
their Knees to God, before they went to Bed: and therefore narrowly watched
over themselves, that no degrees of Intemperance at Supper might dull and
indispose them to the Duty of Prayer, and unfit them for the Worship and
Service of God that night: That they talked and conferred as those that knew God
heard: And after Supper, as any was able either out of the holy Scriptures, or
out of his own Invention, he was called forth into the midst of the Company to
sing a Psalm or Hymn to God; which was a manifest Proof what temperate measures
he had at that Meeting kept in drinking; having laden neither his Stomach, nor
his Understanding. Prayer in like manner dismissed the Company: who then
departed with settled dispositions, and sirm resolutions to lead most modest,
chaste, virtuous, godly Lives: as those who at that very season had not so much
made a Meal as kept a Discipline: had at that time been at a Lecture, rather
than at a Supper; and then had more replenished their Souls, than satisfied
their Bodies. And both In ipsa mensa magis lect onem vel disputationem, quan
epu ationem potation^ nque d ligebat, etc. Poslidonius de vita August.
Possidonius and Mensam habebat magis srugiseris sermonibus, quam exqu sitis e
luliis opiparam. -- Eoque fire velsacram lectionem adhibebat mensae, vel de re
quaptam frugisera commentabatur, ut non minus ammt convivarum resi erentur,
quan cerpora. Lrasm. epist. ad archiep. Toletan. ante Op. August.
Erasmus certify us concerning St. Austin, that he had a Table richly furnished
rather with fruitful Discourses than exquisite Dainties: That he took great
care that their Table-talk should be serious and pious, or some way profitable,
at least charitable and innocent: To which end he ordered that a certain
Distich or two Verses should be written on it, or hung at it, as a necessary
Law, forbidding those that fed at his Table to gnaw the good Names of others,
or to fasten their Teeth in them by backbiting of them, by detracting from or
speaking evil of absent Persons: A Disease (as Erasmus there well observes)
almost peculiar to those who otherwise make a profession of Piety, when nothing
is more alien from true Piety: for this Pest usually steals upon Men under a
show of Probity, and guise of Goodness; while it would appear to be an hatred
of Vices, and a Zeal of Virtue. Which great Evil was so abhorred by this holy
Man, that sometimes he would not yield to the Authority of the very Bishops;
but when some of his most familiar Fellow-Bishops were forgetful of that
Writing, and spoke what was not agreeable to the Direction of it; he would very
sharply reprehend them, and be so moved as to tell them, Let them either blot
out those written Verses, or he would rise from the Table in the midst of his
Refection, and go to his Chamber, if they would not forbear such Tales and
Stories. He would not suffer his Table to be polluted with such Talk; but
either required some Scripture to be read while he sat at Table, or held some
useful Disputation, or discoursed concerning some fruitful Matter at Meals,
that the Minds of his Guests might be no less refreshed than their Bodies. How
instructive and edifying were the Table-colloquies of the excellent Luther, and
the holy Mr. Greenham? And In the Life of Bp. Usher, p. 57, 58.
Dr. Bernard acquaints us, that the Discourses which daily fell from Bp. Usher
at his Table in the clearing of Difficulties in the Scripture, and other
Subjects (especially when learned Men came to visit him) were of great
advantage to such as were capable of them: To others he would apply and
accommodate himself with wonderful Humility and Condescension to their meaner
Capacities, to inform and satisfy their Minds, and to work upon their
Affections in practical Matters; and in his Discourses would sometimes rather
incline toward such, than to others more learned. It put me often in mind
(says that worthy Doctor) of that Speech of the Queen of Sheba to Solomon;
Happy are these thy Servants that continually stand about thee and hear thy
Wisdom.

We should all ordinarily stir up our selves to use savoury Expressions, and
show holy Affections, when we are eating: We should still taste and commend the
Goodness of God in the variety of his Creatures we partake of, and give God
solemn hearty A young man lying upon his Sickbed, was always calling for
meat, but as soon as he saw it was brought to him, at the sight of it he shook
and trembled dreadfully in every part of his Body; and so continued till his
Food was carried away; and thus being not able to eat, he pined away, and
before his Death acknowledged God's Justice, in that, in his Health he had
received his meat ordinarily without giving thanks. Mr. Swinnock's Christ.
man's Call. p. 409.
thanks after every Meal for his satherly Care of us, and seasonable bountiful
Provision for us and ours; and charge our selves to spend the Strength we
receive from his Creatures in doing him faithful and cheerful Service.

And as we should be spiritual and heavenly in eating and drinking, so we
should use Recreations and Sleep to holy ends; that by doing for the present
little or nothing, we may become more apt to do some good thing, to be usefully
occupied, and worthily employed.

The tenth Direction.
If we would wisely redeem the Time, we must make a good Choice of our Friends
and Acquaintance, and a good Improvement of our Company and Society.

1. A good Choice of our Friends and Acquaintance. The sense Man has of his own
Weakness and Indigency, makes him naturally much The Philosopher sitly calls
him (...).
addicted and strongly inclined to Company and Society, which he apprehends so
necessary for the Genesis 2.18. Eccl. 4.9, 10, 11, 12.
Help, Relief and Comfort of his Life: But of all Society, that is the most
inward and intimate, which has its Rise from Choice and Election: In the making
of which Choice, great Caution and Consideration, Care and Prudence is to be
exercised; for Men are either made, or marred, as to the forming of their
Manners; and furthered, or hindered, as to the Improvement of their Time, and
their Preparations for Eternity, according to the Company they sall in with:
And therefore we need Direction in no Action of our Life more than in the
Choice of our Company, especially of our Friends, our closest and most familiar
Companions. They are excellent Counsels that are given by Bp. Taylot of the
Measures and Ossices of Friendship, p. 14.
Pythagoras, and Bp. Taylot of the Measures and Ossices of Friendship, p. 14.
Theognis, to guide and conduct our Choice: (...)
Pvvhag. Aur. Carm 5.
Where Virtue dwells there Friendships make.
(...).
(...).
Theogn. sent. 113.
But evil Neighbourhoods forsake.


Virtutum amicitia adjutrix a natura data est, non vitiorum comes: ut quoniam
solitaria non posset virtus ad ea, quae summa sunt, perventre, conjuncta, and
sociata cum altera perviniret. Lael. apud Cic. de Amic.
Tully tells us, that Friendship is given and intended by Nature to be an
Assistant, Helper and Advancer of Virtues, and not a Companion, Prompter and
Promoter of Vices: It therefore greatly concerns and becomes you, so to pick
and choose your Friends and Acquaintance, as may best serve some excellent End
of Virtue.

And yet we sind, when Persons are to choose their most bosom Friends, the
Companions of their Youth and Age, that they and their Relations, who are their
Guides and Governors, do too commonly regard bodily Beauty and worldly
Portion, more than Piety and Religion, and all the Riches and Ornaments of
Grace, and Helps for Salvation, and Advantages of living and growing in the
Knowledge, and Faith, and Fear of God.

Laelius in Cicero relates of Scipio, that he was wont to complain, that Men
were exceeding diligent in all other Provisions, would take what care conld be
expected in making choice of Goats and Sheep, and such like things; but were
extremely In amicis eligendis negligentes esse, nec^h there quasi signa
quaedam, and notas, quibus eos, qui ad amicitiam essent idonei; judicarent.
Cic. de Amic.
negligent in choosing of their Friends, nor in this case made any use of
requisite Signs and Notes, by which they might discern and judge what Persons
were fit and well qualified to be received and taken into Friendship. And he
there directs, that Men would prudently put some stop to the Stream of their
Affection; and as we make Trial of other things, so that we would make some
Aliqua part periclitatis moribus amicorum. Ib.
Experiment of the Manners of the Persons we design for our Companions, and
accordingly embrace or decline Familiarity with them.

O be nice and choice of your Company and Society, delicate and curious in that
Matter and Business. Consider beforehand (as Hominum utique del ctus hab^ndus
est; an digni sint, quibus partem vitae nostrae impend mus, an ad ibos temporis
nostri jactura perveniat. De tranq An c. 6.
Seneca advises) whether they be worthy or no to have any part of your Life
bestowed upon them, whether any share of your Time may fitly and warrantably be
allowed them: for idle carnal Friends are the Thieves that steal away our Time
from us; and it is a costly Entertainment of them, to waste our Time upon them.
Vain and profane Friends and Acquaintance do rob us of the opportunity of doing
and receiving good: They seek nothing but idle and empty Talk, they will not
maintain serious and savoury Discourse: O! what Loss have many of us sustained
by such ill Customers as these? Call to thy remembrance (says Seneca) Quam
mults vitam tuam diripuerint, te non sentiente quid p^rderes De brev. vit. c. 3.
How many have cheated thee of thy Time, thou in the mean time not
understanding what thou have lost. E^^ quos validiss^me diligunt, partem suorum
annorum dant, nec inte^^gunt: Dant autem ita, ut sine illorum incremento sibi
detrabant: Sed hoc ipsum an detrahant, nesciunt: ideo tolirabilis est i^is
jactura detrimenti latentis. Id ib. c. 8.
Men give away part of their Years (says he) to them they mightily love, nor
do they perceive or know in the least what they do: And they give it so, that
others receive no profit by that which they deprive themselves of: But they are
ignorant that they themselves lose any thing by it, and therefore the Detriment
that is so latent is toberable to them.

If we be wise, let us look well who they be that we spend and lay out our Time
upon. Let Us not Ps 26.4. and 1.1. Prove. 4.14, 15, 16.
sit, customarily sit with vain Persons: nor be the common Prove. 13.20.
Companions of Fools: but rather say, in our Hearts at least, with holy David,
Ps. 6.8. Mat. 7.23.
Depart from me, all ye Workers of Iniquity: Ps. 119. 115
Depart from me ye evil Doers: for I will keep the Commandmentsi of my God.

Avoid Communion with the Lepers of the World. O never offer with
Nebuchadnezzar to keep Company with Beasts: Do not so degrade, and debase your
selves: Do not lose your Time, and lose your selves in such unprositable,
contemptible Society. Take here the Counsel of St. Jerome, Disce ex hac part
sanctam superbiam, scito te illis esse me^terem. Ilieron.
In this respect learn an holy Pride, scorn such mean and low, vile and base
Company, and know your selves to be better than they: Be of more raised Spirits
than to be Companions with them. By keeping ill Company, thou will lose thy
Time, and lose or lessen thy spiritual Beauty: thou will, like him that walks
in the Sun, be quickly tanned insensibly.

Have no frequent chosen Converse, no inward close Friendship with those that
are none of God's real Friends, that have no spiritual Acquaintance with God,
but are manifestly profane, openly ungodly, and alienated from the Life of God;
that are Enemies to God, and his Religion; his Son, and Spirit; his Word, and
Worship; Laws, and Ways; and whose Irm 4.4.
Friendship is Enmity with God; whose Friendship is Friendship with Hell, and
who are themselves but a kind of familiar Devils: Never choose to join in
Company with these; to haunt the Places they use, which commonly give no small
occasion of Sin; and to resort and repair to such Houses in agreed Meetings to
sinful Ends and Businesses.

Choose not those for thy Friends, who never yet began to be true Friends to
themselves. He that is not a Friend to himself, will never be a Friend to thee.
It Is only he that is a Friend to himself (says Qus sibi Anicus est, scito hunc
amicum omnil us esse. Sen. ep. 6^ in fine.
Seneca wisely and discretely) that is likely to prove a truly profitable
Friend to others.

Choose not such for thy Friends, that are not likely to be Friends to thy Soul.
How can he be reckoned and reputed a Friend to thee, who is not a Friend, but
rather an Enemy to the better Part of thee? Take this for a Rule, That if a
Person be not a good Man, though he love thee, he is not a Friend to thee. A
Master of Morality will tell thee, That Qui amicus est, amat: qui amat, non
utique amicus est. Itaque amicitia semper prodest: amor etiam aliquando nocet.
Sen ep. 35.
he that is a Friend, does love: but he that loves, is not for that reason
presently a Friend: for Friendship does always profit a Person; but Love does
hurt sometimes: Now hurt to the Soul, is the greatest Hurt that can be done to
any. And therefore acquaint not with those that will study to bring Vice into
your Acquaintance, and whose Acquaintance will breed your Estrangement from
God: Keep free from that Company that will make you part Company with God, and
Christ, and a good Conscience: Cleave not unto those that will be Clogs and
Pullbacks, Deadners and Quench-coals to you; that will cool and damp your Heart
and Spirit, in the Practice of Piety and Exercise of Religion, and make you Ps.
39 1, 2.
hold your peace even from Good: That will only love, and respect, and care for
you, upon condition that you love not Christ, nor regard Holiness, nor care in
the least for your immortal Soul, and eternal Happiness: That will by all means
labor to bring you to esteem lightly of the Lord's Day; and to give them your
Time and Company, in an idle, truitless, profane, ill-exemplary private
Retirement, when you should be conscientiously and awfully present at the
Public Assembly.

Be sure you beware of such Company, as will only give a treat and
entertainment to your Sense and Palate, load your Body with Meats and Drinks,
pass the Time in Sport and Play with you; sill your Ears with unprofitable,
atheistical, profane, loose and lewd Discourse; vitiate your Mind, pervert your
Judgment, debauch your Fancy, corrupt your Manners, help you to forget God and
your selves, teach you to become Herbert's Church porch, p 2.
Beasts in Courtesy, and by their foolish mad Mirth, and cruel Kindness to you
abroad, make work enough for your earnest, serious Sorrow and Sadness, your
dear and costly Repentance at home: But will make you neither wiser, nor
better, add nothing to your Virtue, contribute nothing to your Graces, and to
the Feeding and Nourishing of your Souls: Who will, it may be, feast and pamper
your Body, but starve and pine, yea poison your Soul; and by a pretended
Civility and Courtesy to you, labor to be the Bane and Undoing of you: Who
will either vex, or Serpunt vitia, and in proximum quemque transiliunt, and
contactu nocent. Itaque ut in pestilentia curandum est, ne corruptis jam
corporibus and morbo slagratibus assideamus, quia pericula trabemus, asslatuque
ipso laborabimus, Ita in amicorum legendis ingeniis dabimus operam, ut quam
minime inquinatos assumamus. Initium morbi est, aegris sana miscere. Sen de
Tranq An. c. 7.

Vt solent vitia in corpore alibi connata in aliud membrum perniciem suam
esslare, sic improborum vitia in eos derivantur qui cum illis vitae habent
consuetudinem. Tert. advers. Valent.


taint all that are near them: Who being themselves infected with the Plague of
Sin, have a strange and strong desire to infect others: The only mode of whose
Kindness is an artificial Insinuation of variety of Temptations, and an earnest
importunate Solicitation to Evil: Who will endeavor to turn you off from a
diligent holy Life; and, if it be possible, will laugh or mock you out of
Heaven: Who having no Seed, or Spark of Virtue in themselves, must needs hate,
besiege and undermine it in others, as being a constant standing Reproach to
themselves.

Nisi in bonis amicitia esse non potest. -- Nec sine virtute amiciti tesse u^o
pacto potest. -- ^um conciliatrix amicitiae virtutis epinio fuerit, difficile
est amicitiam manner si a virtute deseceris. Lael. apud Cic. de Amic
Abandon those Companions, that are good Companions only in sinning; who will
lead you to Atheism and Profaneness, provoke you to Lust and Wantonness, Anger
and Rage, or draw you into Drunkenness; urge and impose their Slight those who
say amidst their sickly Healths,
Thou liv'st by Rule. What does not so but Man?
House, are built by Rule, and Commonwealths.
Entice the trusty Sun, if that you can,
From his Ecllptick Line; becken the Sky.
Who lives by Rule then, Keeps good Company.
Herb. Church Porch, p. 5.
sickly Healths upon you, and will not let you live by Rule; but will
unweariedly tice and press you to Sin, and be sick with them; sweetly persuade
you into Inconvenience, fairly and finely allure you into fashionable Folly,
and inevitable Misery; court and complement you into eternal Ruin; civilly bear
you Company, and lovingly befriend you into Hell; and so really show less
Kinduess, and worse Nature to you, than Luke 16.27, 28.
Dives among the Devils in Hell expressed toward his Brethren here on Earth,
who contrived and labored to keep and preserve them from that Place of
Torment. Make not them the Joy and Entertainment of thy Life, who, by thy
leave, will be thy eternal Destruction and Death.

Have no Intimacy, hold no Familiarity with wicked Persons: you may go see and
visit them as their Physicians, but not as their Companions: you may sometimes
call upon them, to cure and heal them, to prescribe somewhat to them, to leave
some good Directions with them: but you must not be so often with them, nor
stay so long with them, till you get their Disease, and take Infection from
them.

But now on the other side; If we would spend our Time profitably and
comfortably, and have it turn to any considerable good Account; let us study to
contract Friendship and Union with virtuous Persons: esteeming them the most
valuable Friends, and (to use Tully's Expression) Optimam and pulcherrimam
vitae supellectilem. Cic. de Amic.
the best and fairest furniture of Life. Let Us reckon Nihilest am ibilius
virtate, nihil quod magis alliciat homines ad diligendum: -- Si tanta vis
probitatis est, ut eam vel in eis, quos nunquam vidimus, vel quod majus est, in
host etiam diligamus: quid mirum si animi hominum moveautur, cum eorum,
quibuscum usu conjuacti esse possint, virtutem, and bonitatem perspicere
videantur. Id. ib.
Virtue and Grace to be the weightiest reason of Amability; the Worthiness and
Excellency of Persons Dispositions and Manners to be the most solid stable
Ground, the greatest Allective and strongest Attractive of Love and Dearness.
Let Us choose with holy David to be Ps. 119.63.
Bonos boni diligunt, assciscuntque sibi quasi propinquitate conjunctos atque
naturd. -- Constat bonts inter bonos quasine, cessariam benerolentiam esse. Id.
ib.
Companions of all them that fear God, and of them that keep his Precepts: To
be their Companions out of true Affection, not out of Faction: because they are
Godly, not because they are Persons of such and such an Opinion and Party: To
be Companions of them, and of all them: Let not any difference in outward
Quality, nor in Opinion among the Godly, in things remote from the Substance of
Religion, be a cause of sinful Partiality. David a great King scorned not the
Company of any such, nor was ashamed to be seen in their Company. As his was,
so let Ps. 16.3.
all our Delight be in the Saints, and the Excellent that are in the Earth.
Let Us join with him, and say, and 119 79.
Let those that fear thee, turn unto me, and those that have known thy
Testimonies. Let Us choose to Prove. 13.20.
walk with wise Men, that we may be wise: to be frequently in Company with
those, and 11.30.
whose Fruit (that is, actively, the Fruit which they bring forth, the Profit
which they yield and afford to others, in their Communication and Conversation,
by Information and Example) is a Tree of Life; and who are wise to win Souls.

Be conversant with those (says Cum his versare, qui te meliorem facturi sunt
^^ illos admit, quos tu potes facere melitres. Sen. ep. 7.
Seneca excellently) who are any way likely to make thee better: and receive
those into thy Friendship and Acquaintance, whom thou may probably some way
or other make better. I say in like manner; let us sort and suit, associate and
familiarize our selves with those among whom we may do most spiritual Good, or
from whom we may reap and receive most spiritual Good, or from whom we may reap
and receive most spiritual Benefit.

Study and strive to choose such an one for thy Friend, to whom thou may give
such reverential Respect in thy Carriage and Behavior, as may restrain thee
from many uncomely sinful Actions, which you might take more Liberty to commit
in other Company.

Take him for thy special Friend and peculiar Companion, who will be a constant
Physician, careful Tutor, and spiritual Benefactor to thy Soul; who will be a
familiar, tutelar, guardian Angel to thee: who will be (as Dr. All. b^^, Sermon.
p. 57.

The second Soul and Conscience. Dr. Ham. of srat. Admoa. and Correp p. 8.


one well expresses it) an Dr. All. b^^, Sermon. p. 57.

The second Soul and Conscience. Dr. Ham. of srat. Admoa. and Correp p. 8.


assistant Conscience to thee: who will not fail to perform that Office, which
the benumbed or sleepy Conscience within thee shall at any time neglect. Who
will be as faithful a Monitor to thee, as thy own Conscience should be: Who
daily does so improve in Virtue, and Profit in Piety, that whenever he comes
into thy Company, he will give thee the great Pleasure, not only of seeing whom
you would, but of seeing such an one as you would: Who will be careful to Herb.
Church Porch, p. 6.
salute himself, before he visits thee; and will surely bring himself a great
Gift to thee: (as Conspectus, and praesentia, and conversatio al quid habet
vivae voluptatis: utique si non tantum quem velis, sed qualem velis videas.
Affer itaque te mihi ingens munus. -- Prepera ad me, sed ad te pr^us. Sen. ep.
35.
Seneca counsels his Friend Lucilius to order, compose, and carry himself
toward him.)

Choose such Persons for thy intimate Friends, who will be Friends and Helps in
the best things to thee; Friends in the concernments of the Life to come; that
will prize and value, and on all occasions readily show some real Kindness to
thy Soul; that will observe thy Motions, and help to guide and direct thy
Actions; that will have a constant watchful Eye upon thy Life and Manners, and
not willingly suffer thee to misearry to Eternity, for want of careful looking
after. Acquaint and accompany with those, in the enjoyment of whom you may
enjoy somewhat of God himself; and whose sweet and gracious Converse will be a
little Image of Heaven to you: Take those for your Consorts and Associates
here, with whom you may desire and hope to keep joyful Company for ever
hereafter. If we make any Reckoning of our Time, let us first make a good
Choice of our Friends.

2. And then a good Improvement of our Company and Society with them. Be
prudent and pious in the Use, as well as in the Choice of your Friends. Let not
your Friendship be a mere nominal, formal, empty, juiceless thing.

Let your ordinary Visits to your Friends be out of Conscience, as well as out
of Courtesy: out of a real Design to do some Office of Love, especially to
their Souls; and to bring some spiritual Advantage to them.

See p. 216. to the end of 219.
Time is commonly lost by mere complemental Visits, wherein no civil Business is
dispatched, no Service done to the Bodies, Estates, or Souls of others.

Let Christian Friends take heed especially that they come not together of
purpose to waste their Time in unseasonable, immeasurable Play and Sport; that
they be not found notoriously guilty of spending commonly and customarily as
many Hours in Play together, as if Gaming were, not their Recreation and
Diversion, but their Trade and Profession, their Calling and Occupation. Can
this be reckoned a well redeeming the Time in evil Days? Would not some of
that Time be spent more fruitfully and comfortably in the Communication of your
Experiences, and the Observations you have made relating either to God's Word
or Works? or in reading together some select and seasonable Scripture, or else
some part of practical Divinity, or good Morality, or useful History; and in
discoursing and conferring thereupon, as you have Ability, and find Occasion?

Let not Cards and Dice swallow up and devour the most of the Hours you spend
together: Nor ever suffer any Friends and Companions to rob you of your Time,
by Nulla est excusatio peccati, si amici causa peccav^^^ -- Strectum
statuerimus vel concedere amicis quicquid veltur, vel impetrare ab amicis
quicquid velimus, perse^^a quideus ^pientia sumus, si nibil habeat res vitu. --
Haec prima lex in amicitia sanciatur, ut neque rogemus res turper, nec factamus
rogati, etc. -- ut ab amicis honesta petamus, amitorum can a honesta faciamus.
Lael. apud Cic. de Amic.
yielding to them, and complying with them, when they unreasonably exact of you
to hold out with them in their Sports. If you perceive that any particular Game
or Play does steal away your Heart and Time; it is high time then rather to lay
it quite aside, than to suffer such Detriment by Continuation of the Use of it.
When Bp. Usher, in his tender Years, was taught by some of his Friends to play
at Cards, and found himself so delighted therewith, that it not only took place
of the Love of his Book, but began to be a Rival with the spiritual Part in
him, upon apprehension thereof (as In the Life of Bp. Usher, p. 24.
Dr. Bernard informs us) he gave it over, and never played after.

When Christian Acquaintance meet together, let them be as useful and
profitable, as helpful and beneficial, as holy and heavenly in their Discourses
as may be: You may do more good by an honest Hint, and a serious savoury Speech
in Company, than it may be a Minister may do by many Sermons.

Labor to spiritualize and ennoble your Friendship, by making it a State of
Love and Purity, an Opportunity and Advantage of amending and reforming, of
benefiting and bettering one another.

Dr. Ham. of frat. Admon. or Corrept. p. 29.
Let such as live either with or by one another, by solemn Compact and Agreement
strictly and strongly oblige one another to take some special spiritual Care of
one another's Souls; This would be real spiritual good Neighborhood; an high
Advancement, a rich and gainful Improvement of Friendship.

You that are Intimates and Familiars, look upon your selves as one another's
Gen 4.9.
Keepers: Take a spiritual Charge one of another: Phil. 2.20.
Naturally care for one another's spiritual State: Heb. 13.17.
Watch over one another's Souls, as they that must give account: an Account of
one another, as well as of your selves: that you may do it with Joy, and not
with Grief: Be 2 Cor. 11.2.
jealous over one another with a Godly Jealousy; and show your selves such fast
Friends to one another's Souls, as to do your best to prevent one another's
sinning, and to promote the Work of Grace and Holiness in one another's Hearts.
Take Occasion to warm not so much one another's Houses, as one another's
Hearts. Visit one another in the Evening, meet together, and confer one with
another at leisure hours, and on days of Recreation: Mal. 3.16.
Speak often one to another, concerning the things that belong to the Peace of
one another's Souls, and concern the Conditiion of the Church of Christ. Build
up Jude 20. (...) may be put for (...).
one another on your most holy Faith. 1 Thessalonians. 5.11
Comfort your selves together, and edify one another.

Heb. 3.13.
Exhort one another daily, while it is called, To day; Let your Exhortation be
mutual and reciprocal, frequent and continual, seasonable and speedy; lest any
of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. Take the first Opportunity
of dealing with thy Friend, as the case and need of his Soul requires, lest
Death remove him unexpectedly out of the reach of thy Charity to all Eternity.
Consider with thy self, that should thy Companion live longer, yet he may
continue in the omission of some Duty, because you only purpose to put him upon
it. Or, he may go on in the commission of some Sin, grow more and more in Love
with it, and fall more under the Power of it, because you have only some
thought and intention to turn him from it.

Support, preserve and keep one another from falling; and, in the Spirit of
Meekness, raise and recover, Gal. 6.1.
restore and Jam 5.19.
convert one another, when overtaken and fallen, in any degree and measure,
either into Sin, or Error. Le^. 19 17.
Hate not your Friend or Brother in your Heart: in any wise rebuke your
Neighbor, and never suffer Sin upon him, when you find him offending against
God, or Man. And Mat. 18.15.
if a Friend or Brother shall plainly trespass against thee, go and tell him
his Fault between thee and him alone: not seeming to reproach him, by chiding
and reprehending him in public; nor offering to back-bite him, by talking
privately to others against him.

Col. 3.16. Romans 15 14.
Teach and admonish one another: and let it appear that you practice your own
Precepts, and take your selves the Counsel you give to others: Follow
Tertullian's excellent Advice; Oportet constantiam commenend proprtie
conversationis autheritate dertgere, ne icta faciis aesictent thus crubescant.
Tert. de patientia, initio.
strengthen your friendly Admonition and Exhortation with the Authority of your
own Conversation, that your want of Deeds may not make you blush at your own
Words: and let me add, that your Friend and Companion may not neglect and
reject your Sayings, because he knows too well your Doings: As oftentimes you
thrust away the good Light of a Candle, for the ill savor which the stinking
Tallow yields. Let none have reason to retort, and say, Luke 4.23.
Physician, heal thy self: Romans 2 21.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? What Mr. Herbert
speaks of Ministers may be sitly accommodated to the Exhortations and
Admonitions of Christian Friends; The Windows.
Doctrine, and Life, Colors, and Light, in one
When they combine and mingle, bring
A strong Regard and Aw: but Speech alone
Does vanish like a flaring thing,
And in the Ear, not Conscience, ring.


Heb 10 24.
Consider one another to provoke unto Love, and to good Works; or, to Dr. Ham
of frat. Admon. or Correp. p. 7. (...).
sharpen or provoke [in one another] Charity and good or laudable Works. You
are apt to forget, and prone to neglect your selves: you have need enough of
one another spiritual Care and Help: it is necessary that others should watch
and observe, incite and assist you; be at some trouble, and take some pains
with you: your own and others Consideration and Provocation of you, is little
enough to stir and move you: Ponder and Dr. Hum. Par. in loc.
weigh all Advantages that you can have one upon another, to excite and
extimulate, to engage and quicken one another to the Exercise of Charity, and
all Actions of Piety, whenever you find any thing of fainting, or growing
cold in one another.

Search and enquire into one another spiritual Estates: mind and study the
Cases and Conditions of one another Souls; the Causes and Cures of one another
spiritual Distempers. Be very solicitous for one another present and future
Good: carefully consult the spiritual Prosperity, and eternal Welfare of one
another.

Consider one another to provoke one another, not to Sin and Wickedness, to
Vanity and Folly, to uncertain Opinions, to Faction and Division, to Siding and
Party-taking; not to that which is highly provoking, but exceeding
well-plealing to God; not to Wrath, but to Love; not to Evil, but to Good
Works. Consider and provoke one another, not as the Devil considers and
provokes Men by his Temptations; but as God considers and provokes Men, who
watches over us continually, prevents us daily with his Grace, strengthens us
against Temptations, affords us his Counsel, instills many good Motions into our
Minds, and often incites and stirs us up to the Duties incumbent on us: And as
Christ considered and provoked Sinners, when he was here on Earth, to Faith and
Repentance, good Works and Obedience; who went about doing Good; doing good to
Men's Souls, as well as Bodies: who freely conversed with them, frequently
instructed them, affectionately exhorted them, powerfully pressed them, plainly
reproved them, was grieved for the Hardness of their Hearts, lamented and wept
over their Impenitency and Insidelity.

Consider thy Companion at such a season, when it is most likely that he may
consider what you say to him: Provoke him to Good, when in all probability it
may do most good.

Remember to consider and provoke one another in a serious manner. Never offer
to utter a few cold, dull, dead Words, between Jest and Earnest; but earnestly
persuade, and pathetically expostulate one with another; and let one another
plainly see that every Application does arise and proceed from Love and
Compassion, and that it is the Desire of your Souls to save one another's
Souls. Let your Words be as Eccl. 12.1.
Goads (as the Wise Man speaks) to prick one another forward in the way of
Religion. Instead of detaining one another unnecessarily from the Public
Assembly, stir up one another with an holy Zeal, and say one to another in the
Words of the Prophet, Zech. 8.21.
Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts: I
will go also. Be not Quench-coals, but as live Coals, begetting Heat in those
that are next you. Let Christian Acquaintance use their utmost Endeavors to
bring one another more acquainted with God, and with their own spiritual States
and Conditions. Let Christian Neighbors study and endeavor to make one
another nigh to God. Let Christian Yoke-fellows exhort and encourage one
another to take Christ's Yoke upon them, and to bear his Burden. Let Christian
Servants stir up one another to work out their Salvation, to do the Business,
and to finish the Work which their heavenly Master has given them to do.

Consider, exhort, provoke one another, and look what becomes of all the
Labor, Care and Pains that you take with any Friend or Acquaintance; and if it
obtain not at present its much desired Fruit and Effect, yet be not
disheartened, nor Angor iste, qui pro amico saepe capiendus est, non tantum
valet, ut tollat e vita amicitiam, non plus, quam ut virtutes, quia nonnullas
curas, and molestias afferunt, repudientur. Lael. apud Cic. de Amic.
desert your Duty, and give over this necessary Office and excellent Part of
Friendship, though you find it difficult and uneasy; though you seem to any
carnal Friend as one that mocks, (as Genesis 19.14.
Lot did to his Sons-in-law). 2 Timothy 2.25. and 4 2.
In Meekness instruct those that oppose themselves: 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering: which will be a becoming
Imitation of God, who (you may remember) endured you with much long-suffering;
who did not leave you to your selves, when you first rejected his heavenly
Admonition; who called you often before you would hear, and often provoked you
before you would stir: who suffers sinful Men so long, till at last he suffers
for his Suffering: who is so patient, till at last he loses by his Patience:
whose extreme Patience (as Tertullian excellently observes) seems to Vt sua
sibi patientia detrahat: plures enim Dominum idcirco non credunt, quia seculo
iratum tamdiu nesciunt. Teit. de patientia.
detract and derogate from his Power: for many believe (says he) that there is
no Governor of the World, because they do not see him angry with the World.
Patiently continue thy Consideration and Care of thy Friends, for though they
do not consider what you say at present, they may consider it hereafter.
Consider them, because this will be a comfortable Consideration, that though
you do no good upon them, yet you did your honest, faithful, and best
Endeavors to do them good, and are therefore clear from their Blood.

Think how greatly you will gain in your own Experience by considering your
Acquaintance, and dealing in a spiritual way with them; and how much you will
heighten and strengthen your own good Affections, by exhorting, provoking, and
exciting your Friends. by rubbing and chasing your Companions, you will not
only get warmth into them, but will with the same labor make your selves a
great deal hotter than you were before. The more you persuade and stir up them
to the Love and Fear of God, the more your own Heart will be warmed and inhamed
with the Love, and filled and possessed with the Fear of God: The more you
quicken and stir up them to good Works, you your selves will become much more
ready to every good Work.

And as this will increase and improve your own spiritual Gifts and Graces, so
it will enlarge your Joys and Comforts; and be matter of Satisraction and
Pleasure to you, to see some of their Souls spiritually prosper, whom you have
taken a special care of. What a comfort will it be at last to consider, that
you have done much good by considering your Associates; that by your
consideration of them you have brought them to consider God and themselves;
that, under God, you have been the happy Instruments of awakening, convincing,
strengthening, and quickening your Acquaintance; of Mat. 18.15.
gaining your Brethren; of gaining them to God, and gaining and endearing them
more and more to your selves; and of saving some precious Souls from Death,
which are more worth than the whole World? How will they be your 1 Thessalonians. 2.19,
20.
Glory and Joy, and Crown of Rejoicing, who shall confess and acknowledge that
you were the blessed means of working upon them, and prevailing with them;
that, under God, they ow their spiritual Light and Life, their Growth and
Thriving in Grace, their Progress and Procedure in Faith and Holiness, their
Stedfastness and Advancement in Religion and Godliness to your cure and pains
with them, your compassionate Consideration of them, and watchful
Circumspection over them? yea, will not this increase the Joies of Heaven, and
heighten the Pleasures of Paradise to you, to meet with those Acquaintance
there, whom you were a means of helping thither, by prompting and encouraging
them to do those Works which are the way to the heavenly Kingdom.

Consider moreover, that your considering your Friends and Neighbors will be
considered and accepted by God, though they should never consider any thing at
all: that your Labor of Love shall not be in vain to your selves, though it
should be ineffectual to others: But if by dealing with them, you do some real
considerable good upon them; that then very great will be your Reward in
Heaven: that if you Dan. 12.3
turn many to Righteousness, you shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever:
That if, from a Principle of the Fear of the Lord, you Mal. 3.16, 17.
speak often one to another, to animate one another to Faith and Obedience, to
Courage and Constancy; the Lord will hearken, and hear it, and a Book of
Remembrance shall be written before him concerning it: and you shall be his in
that Day when he makes up his Jewels, [his peculiar Lot, Inheritance, choice
Portion, chief Treasure,] and he will spare you as a Man spares his own Son
that serves him. If you consider one another for good, God will consider you
for good: If you provoke one another to Love, this will provoke God to love you
for it: If you provoke your Acquaintance to good Works, this will provoke God
to reward you as well as them, for all the good Works that are done by them, by
means of your Exhortations and Quantoscunque aliquis exemplo sanctae vitae
aedificaverit, cum tantis and pro tantis mercedem beatae vitae retributionis
aceipiet. Aug. tom. 10. p. 209. Paris.
Examples. But if you provoke not them to do good Works, you shall one Day be
found guilty of all the evil Works done by them, which you might have hindered
by any means, and any way prevented the Commission of.

Neglect not the serious Exhortation, loving Consideration, and zealous
Provocation one of another; for surely when you come to die, your own Hearts
will not condemn you for laboring too hard in the grand concernments of the
Souls of your Friends, who are as Deuteronomy. 13.6.
your own Souls: But you will be ready to challenge your selves for want of
Care and Diligence in that Performance, and to grieve and mourn that you have
been so useless in your Friendship and Society; that you have no better
improved Christian Fellowship and Communion; no more awakened, quickened,
comforted, and spiritually served one another.

Grudg not to bestow a little Labor in watching over thy Friend and Neighbor;
this Work and Task will be quickly over.

And take not amiss another taking care of thee. Count the Christian Religion
lovely and amiable, upon this Consideration, that it makes such excellent and
admirable Provision for the Welfare and Safety of Souls, for the spiritual
Security and eternal Felicity of the Professors of it. Prize and value the rich
Mercy, and abundant Kindness of God to thee, that he should appoint every
Friend about thee to be a spiritual Help to thee; and make it part of his
Office and Business to take care of thy Soul. And when you find any Friend
faithful in the Exercise of his Duty, and Discharge of his Conscience toward
thee, bless God that he is so; And be truly thankful to him also, for so high
an expression of his charitable Affection: Let his sincere and hearty Love to
thee make him appear 1 Samuel 29.9.
good in thy sight as an Angel of God, and cause his Romans 10 15.
Feet, as well as Face, to be truly Quid tam alsurdum, quam delectari multis
inanibus rebus, ui honor, ut gloria, ut aedificio, ut vestitu, culiu jue
cerporis: animo autem virtute praedito, eo qut vel amare, vel (ut enini
remuneratione benevolentiae, nthil vicissitudine studiorum, essicier umque
jucundiu. Lael. apud Cic. de amic.
beautiful to thee. Never be provoked with an ill Provocation against the
Person of a Friend, who sharpens and provokes you with a good Provocation. Be
not angry with any that provoke you to Love; nor render evil for good to such
as labor to provoke you to good Works. If thy Friend and Companion rebuke
thee, know how to accept a great Kindness; take his Love and Good Will well,
and show that thou have good Flesh to heal. Say with holy David, Ps. 41.5.
Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a Kindness; and let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent Oil which shall not break my Head. And reckon this to be
one of the saddest Strokes that God inflicts, for God to say, Hos. 4.4.
Let no Man strive, nor reprove another. Be so wise, and good natured, as to
Plurimim in amicitia amicorum been suadentium valeat autoritas, eaque
adhibeatur ad monendum non moao aperre sed etiam acriter si res postulabit: and
autoritati adhibitae pareatur. Id. ib.
suffer a Word of Exhortation and Admonition from a truly loving Christian
Friend. When thou aut in Company with thy Friends, do 1 Kings 20.23.
as Benhadad's Servant did in the Presence of Ahab; diligently observe whether
any good thing will come from any, and hastily catch it. Show thy self much
pleased and delighted with any good Discourse that is started, and labor to
keep it up and maintain it.

But know, that if now thou refusest to hearken to the Counsels, and follow the
Advices, and submit Ephesians. 5.21.
thy self to the Reproofs and Reprehensions of prudent, pious, Christian
Friends; and art ready to strive against all their earnest passionate Strivings
with thee; then they that contended and labored in vain with thee here, shall
surely 1 Cor. 6.2.
judge thee at Last Day, and bring in Evidence and Testimony against thee, that
they would have healed thee, and thou would not be healed; that they, by all
means, would have helped thee to Heaven, and thou would hasten and hurry to
Hell. Jer. 51.9.


The eleventh Direction.
If we would earnestly redeem the Time, we must remember and consider, perform
and answer our solemn Sacramental Vows, Occasional Promises, and Sickbed
Resolutions.

1. Our solemn Sacramental Vows.

(1.) Our Promise and Of the Vow of Baptism, see Dr. Hammond's Pract. Cat. l.
6. the latter part of sect, 2, and 3. And his notions contracted in the Whole
Duty of Man, partit. 2. par. 33, etc.
Vow made in Baptism. Which Promise made by Persons baptized when adult, or of
full Age, is called (as some understand and interpret that Place) the
stipulation or 1 Pet. 3.21.
answer of a good Conscience toward God.

At the time of our Infant Baptism, we were dedicated to the Service of God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and solemnly entered into a sacred Covenant. Then
we indented and engaged to renounce the Devil, the Ephesians. 6.12. and 2.2.
Ruler, Joh. 12 31.
Prince, and 2 Cor. 4.4.
God of this World; And all his Works: All that the Devil labors by any means
to set us about and employ us in: But especially and principally all those
Sins, which carry particularly the stamp and character, the image and
resemblance of Satan upon them, and have Joh. 8.44.
from the beginning been practiced by him; such as Pride, Lying, Slandering,
Malice, Envy, Killing and Destroying, Tempting and Soliciting others to Sin: We
covenanted expressly to abandon and abomine all Diabolical Works; And to forsake
and disclaim the Pomps and Vanities, or Pompous Vanities; the profane
Spectacles, the Luxury, the ostentatious vainglorious Bravery of this wicked
World: To abhor and avoid the evil Company, and to resist the applauded vile
vicious Customs, and popular Temptations of the World: To take care not to
accompany the Ungodly in their Sins: To deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; and
all the sinful Desires, Affections, Appetites of the Flesh^ to abstain from
fleshly Lusts, and from all the Works of the Flesh: to make no provision for
the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof: To endeavor to moderate and
subordinate all our Desires to the Will of God: And by God's Grace, and under
the influence of Divine Assistance, according to our Abilities, obediently to
keep God's holy Will and Commandments; and not only to take a few Steps, but to
walk in the same; and that not only for a spurt, or a few days, but all the
days of our Lives.

And since we came to years of Discretion, and were of age sufficient to use
our Reason, and act understandingly; we have personally owned, openly and
deliberately confirmed our Baptismal Vow, taken the obligation in our own
names; by actual consent yielded and resigned, devoted and delivered up our
selves to become the teachable tractable Disciples, the ready and voluntary
Servants of the blessed Trinity: Now to make this grand Promise good, were to
redeem the Time indeed. Let Us never offer, or dare to live, as if we had been
initiated in the impure Mysteries of the Heathen; as if we had been baptized in
the name of Bacchus, or Venus; baptized in the very Devil's name, devoted to
his Drudgery, and deeply engaged against God, and Christ, and the Holy Spirit;
against the Gospel and Godliness; against the Members of Christ, and the People
of God: But look and see we live as those, who did so early and so solemnly
dedicate our selves, Souls, Bodies, and Interests to God; and vow to give our
Time and Opportunities to his Service. We are in Justice obliged to keep this
Promise, to pay this Vow; which if we fail to do, we are miserably perjured and
forsworn.

(2.) And then for the other Sacrament, that of the Lord's Supper; In our
preparations for the receiving of it, we have, it may be, searched and tried,
proved and examined our selves; inquired into our hearts and ways; taken
special notice of many passages of our misled Lives, and misspent Time;
seriously considered our many partial Covenant-breaches; renewed and repeated
our Baptismal-contract with God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; determined to
mortify those hateful Sins which crucisied our Savior; settled our purposes of
returning to our Duty with greater care and diligence than ever; strengthened
and reinforced our Covenant of reforming our Lives, and redeeming our Time; and
resolved upon a stricter Observance of God's Laws, for the rest of our days:
And at every time of our participation of the holy Communion, we openly
offered, and publicly presented ourselves, our Souls and Bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto God: O let us remember, and stand to
our Word; and take care, in God's Fear, through Christ strengthening us, to
perform the Covenant we have so often ratified, and frequently reiterated.

2. And then again; When God has roused and startled us by some awakening
Ordinance, or Providence: When some Mark 3.17.
Son of Thunder has plainly preached as if Death were at our backs (which was
the Character King James once gave of a lively Minister that preached before
himself) Or when some affectionate zealous Ambassador of Christ, coming to us
in the Spirit of St. Paul, has so convincingly reasoned of the Judgment to
come, and brought his Discourse so close and home to our very Consciences, as
to cause us to tremble again, with Felix; we then came to sudden Resolutions,
and speedy Purposes of Emendation of our Ways.

Or, when at any time God has cast us upon Beds of Sickness, brought us to the
very brink of Death, the very Mouth of the Grave: when Friends and Physicians
have been doubtful of our Lives; when all our own Hopes of Life sickned and
died; when our Souls have almost sat upon our Lips; O then what Si aliqua nos
aegritudo corripiat, si signa aegritudinis vicinam mortem denuncient, inducias
vivendi quaerimus, ut peccata nostra desleamus, and eas cum magno aestu
desiderit setimus, quas acceptas modo pro nihilo habemus. Gregor. Homil. 12. in
Euang.
fair and large Promises, and specious goodly Resolutions have we made, if God
should ever restore us, lend longer Life to us, and try and trust us once
again, to become new Men, to turn over a new Leaf, to lead a new Life, to
improve our Time to all possible Advantage, to do God more Service in a Day,
than we did him in a Month before?

Have we not been sometimes so sick, that we verily concluded we were really
seized by the Arrest of Death, and seemed to hear God saying to us in
particular, Luke 16.2.
Give an account of thy Stewardship; for thou may be no longer Steward: and
thought of nothing but the tolling of the Bell, and expected (some of us) that
the several parts of us within a few days, or hours, should be shared and
divided between the Grave and Hell? Then we experienced in our selves
Philosophantes metus, and aegrae fortunae sana consilia: (to use the elegant
expressions of the most ingenious Sen. ep. 94. in fine.

Nam quasi ista inter se contraria sint, bona fortuna, and men's bona: ita
melius in malis sapimus, secunda rectum auferunt. Ibid.


Moralist) Then our Fears read Lectures of Philosophy, [Lectures of Divinity]
to us; and the sad and sorrowful circumstances of a sick, and declining, and
dangerous condition, did minister salutary Counsels and healthful Advices to
us. Let Us recollect and remember, what were our serious secret Thoughts, the
inward workings of our Hearts, the lively stirrings of our Consciences; yea our
open Confessions, free Professions, and large Promises and Protestations at
such a time as that.

Men are too commonly of a Temper much like that of Naevolus in Martial, of
whom we find there this Securo nihil est te, Naevole, pejus: eodem
Sollicito nihil est, Naevole, te melius, etc.
-- Esto, Naevole, sollicitus.
Martial. l 4. Epigr. 83.
Character, that when he was secure and prosperous, none was more arrogant and
insolent; but when he was solicitous, and pressed with care, none was more
modest and humble, and of better condition and carriage than he.

We generally appear sensible and serious, ready to reform, and forward to
enter into Vows and Engagements, in Affliction and Adversity, in grievous
Calamities and deep Distresses; and to do this especially, when confined to our
Chambers by malignant Distempers, violent or painful Diseases; and forced by
Sickness to take, and to keep our Beds.

Plinius Secundus writing to his Friend Maximus, acquaints him with this
observation of his; The late languishing Condition of a Friend of mine taught
me thus much, says he, that we are usually Optimos esse nos dum insirmi sumus.
best when we are sick and weak: for what infirm sick Person is amorous or
lascivious, ambitious of Honor, or covetous of Riches? How little soever such
a Person possesses, he reckons he has enough, because he supposes he must
shortly relinquish what ever he has. Then a Man remembers that there is a God,
says he, and that he himself is but a Man: Then he envies, admires, despises
no body: then he does not hearken to, nor feed upon uncharitable Discourses:
nor is he malicious, or injurious to any: but only designs, if he should
continue longer in the World, to lead an innocent and a happy Life. And he ends
that notable Epistle with this very wise and wholesome Counsel; What
Philosophers endeavor to deliver in many Words and Volumes; Vt tales esse sani
perseveremus, quales nos futuros profitemur infirmi. Plin. l 7. Ep. 26.
that I may thus briefly hint, by way of Instruction, to thee, and to myself,
says he; Ps. 85.8.
That we continue to be such when we are well, as we promise we will be when we
are sick. When Sigismund the Emperor enquired of the Bishop of Colen what he
should do to be happy eternally; he only advised him to take care to live, as
he promised to do the last time he had the Gout or Stone.

O let us but pay our Sickbed Vows, and we shall redeem the Time indeed. Let Us
be the Ille promissum suum implevit, qui and cum videas illum, and cum audias,
idem est. Sen. ep. 75.
same when our Actions are seen, as when our Words are heard. Let Us never
offer, when we recover our Health and Strength, to resume our old-acquaintance
Sins, or to Ps. 85.8.
turn again to Folly.

Did we but answer our sacred Vows, and solemn Promises, we should no longer be
expensive and wasteful of our precious Hours: We should not be Inter caetera
mala, hoc quoque habet stultitia proprium, semper incipit vivere. Epicuri
dictum a Seneca laudatum, ep. 13

Considera quam foeda sit hominum levitas, quotidie nova vitae fundamenta
ponentium, novas spes etiam in exitu inchoantium. Id. ib.

Male vivunt qui semper vivere incipiunt: quia semper illis imperfecta vita
est. Non potest autem stare paratue ad mortem, qui modo incipit vivere. Id
agendum est, ut satis vixerimus: nemo hoc putat, qui ordetur cum maxim vitam.
Id. ep. 23.


always beginning to live, but should live indeed and in good earnest: We
should in time make so sure of a blessed Eternity, that we should never more
have cause to fear either Sickness, Death, the Grave, or Hell.

The twelfth and last Direction.
If we would effectually redeem the Time, we must not give way to any Delay,
but strengthen and settle our Resolution against any farther Procrastination.

Luke 19.44.
Know the Time of thy Visitation: Verse 42.
Know in this thy Day the things which belong unto thy Peace. Is. 55.6. Ps.
32.2.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Job 22 21.
Acquaint now thy self with God. Mat. 5.25.
Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the Way with him. and
3.7.
Flee from the Wrath to come: Not go, nor run, but flee. Heb. 6.18.
Flee for Refuge to lay hold upon the Hope set before you: as of old, the
unwitting and unwilling Manslayer was wont to hasten to take hold upon the
Horns of the Altar, and to Exodus 21.13. Number. 35.6. Deuteronomy. 4.41.
flee for safety to a Sanctuary, or City of Refuge, when hotly pursued by the
enraged Avenger of Blood. Be able to say with holy David, Ps. 119.60.
I made -- Properat vivere nemo sntis.
Martial. l. 2. epigr. 90.
haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

Where the Prophet expresses it both affirmatively and negatively, and so the
more Emphatically, after the manner of the Hebrews, to show his promptitude and
readiness, speediness and quickness; in Calv. in loc.
comparison of those dull and lazy Procrastinators, who come not at all, or
come but softly and slowly to God. And Quanquam verba sunt praeteriti temporis,
continuum tamen actum notant. Ibid.
though the Words speak of the time past, yet (as Calvin observes) they note a
continual act: I made haste and delayed not; and I still make haste, and now do
not delay to keep thy Commandments. Remember, how Abraham rose up early in the
Morning, and without objecting or disputing, or letting slip the first
opportunity, was ready to offer, and forward to sacrifice his only Son, at
God's command. ( Genesis 22.3.) And how Christ's Disciples, at his first Call,
immediately left their Nets, the Ship and their Father, and followed him.
(Matthew. 4.20, 22.) And take Example by the wise Merchant in the Parable, who
dispatched his necessary business immediately, without cunctation or delay: The
account there given of him is expressed all in the present Tense; He (...),
Mat. 13.44.
goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth the Field in which the Treasure
was hid. (...), Gal. 6.10.
While you have opportunity, do good to your selves, and do good to all. Let me
say to you concerning Time and Opportunity, as Boaz said to his Kinsman
concerning the Land, Ruth 4.4,
If you will redeem it, redeem it: Stand no longer dallying and trifling in a
matter that requires haste and speed. For here consider,

1. The sooner, the better. It Is better,

(1.) In respect of God. (2.) Of our selves.
(1.) The sooner we redeem the Time, the better it is in respect of God: for
God is abundantly more honored, and better served by it.

He is more honored by it. Our making haste to redeem the Time, prevents the
doing of much Dishonor, which by great and gross misspence of our Time would
many ways be cast upon God; by our affronting his Authority, continuing in
open Rebellion against him, breaking his holy and righteous Laws, abusing his
Creatures, and misemploying his Gifts from day to day. And more than so, It
actually and positively does much honor to him, as it is a ready, present,
obedient Answer to God's Call, who cries, Heb. 3.7, 13.
To day; while it is called, to day: And a real demonstration, and high
expression of our ardent Love and hearty Affection to him, and his Laws, and
Ways: and an open and constant Justification of their Equity, Bonity, Suavity
and Amability, in the eye of the World. And it is no small Honor done to God,
that by making haste, and not delaying, we devote the best of our Time to him,
and put him not off with the very dregs and refuse.

And further yet; as God is more honored, so he is much better served by it.
The more haste we make to redeem the Time, we shall be the better disposed,
more adapted and sitted for the Service of God; become more meet Vessels for
our Master's Use: and not only acquire greater Abilities, but meet with larger,
more frequent and various Opportunities of doing God faithful and acceptable
Service. The sooner we enter in, the longer we shall labor in our Lord's
Vineyard, and do the more work for our Heavenly Master.

(2.) The sooner we redeem the Time, the better it is in respect of our selves.
It Is more honor able, more pleasurable, more profitable to do it sooner than
later.

1. It is more honor able to hasten, and not to delay: for this is a Sign that
our Acts and Deeds are free and voluntary, not forced and constrained: That
what we do in Religion, we do of good will and choice. On a Sick or Deathbed,
a Man is scared into a sudden and unchosen Piety, and frighted into sits of
involuntary Devotion. He that never sets himself to redeem his Time, till a
mighty Fear forcibly drives and impells him to it; till he finds he approaches
and draws near to the Gates of Death and Hell, and is ready to give up his
unready and unallowable Accounts to the great and righteous Judge; This Man acts
dishonourably, for he does nothing out of disaffection to his Sins; nothing at
all for the Love of God, and for the sake of Virtue. But it is an Honor and a
Credit to a Christian, to redeem the Time by his own Election, and to act for
God out of a free and ingenuous Principle of Love.

2. The more haste we make to redeem the Time, it is so much the more
pleasurable to us: For, if we take up Christ's Burden betimes, we shall account
it a light Burden: Use will alleviate it to us. If we enter early into God's
Service, we shall more easily reckon his Service perfect Freedom. The sooner we
turn our Feet unto God's Testimonies, we shall run the way of them with more
Freedom. The sooner we address and apply our selves to the keeping of God's
Commandments, we shall bring our selves with so much less pains to keep them,
and shall taste more Sweetness in our Observance of them: We shall not meet
with such Difficulties when we set upon the Work, nor have so great and vast
Prejudlces against God's Laws and Ways to remove; such strong Biasses to
sinful Courses to knock off, such grown and radicated sinful Habits to root
out: We shall enter into the Way of God's Commandments, and fall upon the
Practice of Piety with less reluctance and contranitency: and the longer we
have walked in the holy Path, the better we shall like it: the longer we have
kept the Divine Precepts, the more we shall experience the Goodness, and find
and feel the Comfort of them: and so still be more and more pleased and
satisfied with them, and delighted in them.

3. The more haste we make to redeem the Time, it will prove the more
profitable and benesicial to us: We shall get the more Grace, the more Peace
here; and a greater reward of Glory hereafter.

The more we shall get of God's Grace. Grace is increased by degrees: and this
is the Method of the Divine Wisdom, for God ordinarily to give out his Grace as
a help and encour agement to usefulness and Diligence; a Reward and
Remuneration of it. God does not use to communicate his Grace to drousy,
sleepy, idle, lazy-Loiterers; but to impart it to waking and stirring, active
and busy Persons: Habenti dabitur. Mat. 25.29.
Unto every one that has, and industriously uses what he has, in a faithful
improvement of his Time, and trading with his Talents; to him shall be given,
and he shall have abundance. The more work we do, the more strength and Grace
we shall receive: and therefore let us early be up, and quickly be doing.

Again; The sooner we do redeem our Time, the more peace we shall have, as well
as the more Grace. An early painful, a constant laborious Christian must needs
be ordinarily a comfortable Christian. Se. Dr. Sll bs's Preface to the Soul's
Conflict.
Some degree of comfort attends and follows every good Action, as Heat
accompanies Fire, and as Beams and Influences issue from the Sun: and many
degrees of comfort will certainly usually accompany many good Actions. The more
we hasten to redeem our Time as we ought, we shall the sooner attain to a high
degree of Probability, and a comfortable Assurance of our Justification and
Right to Salvation. But as long as we wilfully waste our Time, and mis-spend
our Hours; so long we shall be troubled with disquieting Doubts, and perplexing
Fears. ^s. 57.21.
There is no Peace, says my God, to the Wicked; says the Prophet: But Ps
119.165.
great Peace have they which love thy Law; says David: which love it so well,
as to make very great haste to keep it.

Once more; As the sooner we redeem our Time and Opportunities, the more Grace
and Peace we shall get here; so we shall receive a greater Reward of Glory
hereafter. God will remunerate us according to our Works: The more we have done
for him, the more we shall receive from him. The more acts of Obedience we have
persormed, we shall be recompensed with the higher Degree of heavenly Glory.
The sooner you do it, so much the better. That Is the first.

Consider,

(2.) We must make haste, and not delay to redeem the Time, because they that
make most haste to redeem it, do find they have work enough to fill up all
their Time, and take up all their Days and Hours. The Well-doing the business
of Religion will fully employ us all our life long. It Is a strange thing, for
any to think that the work of a Day, of an Hour, of an Instant, which Wisdom's
Children, the most understanding People of God, think a whole Life little
enough for. Do you dream of believing in an Instant, of repenting in an
Instant? Repentance has many Acts and Exercises belonging to it. To remove and
expel long contracted habits of Sin, to arrive to a confirmed settled state of
Goodness, to give an Example of Christian Graces in all Relations and
Conditions of Life; certainly these are things that require a large and very
considerable tract of Time, and cannot be crowded into a narrow Room.

If we do but consider, that they that have entered the most early into the
Service of God, and have done many Years work for God, do acknowledge
themselves, even after the pains and industry of thirty or forty Years Piety to
be but very imperfect Christians: If the most devout, religious Persons, after
their using so much Diligence, do find at last so much Indevotion and
Unholiness in themselves; many bad relics of Selfishness, Worldliness, Pride,
and Passion; many initial excesses in Meats and Drinks; much Coldness and
Deadness in holy Duties, much Slackness and Remisness in the ways of
Godliness; some strong Temptations, which sometimes shake them, and are ready
to foil and overbear them; some Weaknesses and Untowardnesses, which they can
never free themselves wholly from: If we well and seriously consider this, we
shall be forced to confess, that the Redemption of Time, and Business of
Religion, is not to be delaied and put off to be a late, much less the last
Work to be done by a Christian.

(3.) We must make haste, and not delay to redeem the Time; for

Delays are Unworthy and disingenuous. Delays are Hazardous and dangerous.
Delays are Foolish and unreasonable.
1. Unworthy 1. In respect of God. 1. Unworthy 2. In respect of our selves.
1. Unworthy in respect of God. Every Delay of the Redemption of our Time for
God's Service, it argues our want of Respect, our lack of Aflection and Love to
God: It shows we prefer our Sins before him. See p. 25.
What an unworthy thing is it, that we should put God off, who should be served
in the first place by us, if we had Christianity, or Reason? That we should
ever expect to receive the Reward of Eternal Life, and unconceivable Happiness
from him, and yet grudg to devote the few Days of this temporal Life to him?
That we should refuse to give our good Days to God, and strongly presume that
God at last will be contented, well-pleased and satisfied with the weak, and
faint, and sickly Service of those evil Days, which we our selves Eccl. 12.1.
shall say we have no pleasure in? What a disingenuous thing is it, not to go
to God till we cannot tell whither to go? Just as Men go into an Hospital, when
they apprehend they are quite useless, and find themselves utterly disabled to
do any Work, and wholly unfit for Labor and Service?

What baseness is it to deal worse with God, than fair conditioned and
ingenuous Men deal one with another? Prove. 3.28.
Say not unto thy Neighbor, says Solomon; Say not unto God, say I; Go, and
come again, and to morrow I will give; when thou have it by thee. Thou have thy
Endeavors, and thy Heart and Affections more by thee now, than thou art likely
to have hereafter: and therefore do not causlesly and trislingly put God off.
The Lev. 19.13.
Wages of an hired Servant, were not to abide with an Israelitish Master all
Night until the Morning. Nor may we defer the Payment of the Debt which we all
ow to our great Landlord, when it is at present justly demanded, and he cannot
in honor remit, or forbear it. Shall we unworthily and wickedly oppose our
Wills to the Wisdom and Will of God, who best understands what is the fittest
Time, and has Right to appoint, and Authority to determine the Time of our
Work, as well as the Work it self. When God so plainly says, To day; Is it
meet for us to say, To morrow? Shall we continue to delay, when we promise so
often to break off our Delays? Shall we make God wait, who so pathetically
calls, and cries, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
O that there were such an Heart in them! Jer. 13.27.
When shall it once be? It Is unworthy to deal worse with God than we would deal
with Men.

But how highly unworthy is it to deal worse with God, than we have dealt with
Sin, and with the Devil himself? To come on in the Service of God as slowly as
a Snail, when we used to Jer. 8.6.
turn to our sinful courses as engerly and violently as the Horse rusheth into
the Battle? To deny God continually what he requires, and reasonably expects;
when we have so frequently satisfied and fulfilled the Desires of the Flesh,
and not once said Nay to the Devil's Temptations? To linger, and delay to keep
God's Commandments, who have made the greatest haste and speed, and never in
the least delayed to do the Lusts and Works of the Devil?

Once more; What shameful Unworthiness is it, to deal worse with God, than God
himself deals with us? When we stand in need of God, God makes no unnecessary
Delay. Christ is represented as Cant 2.8.
coming leaping upon the Mountains, and skipping upon the Hills. Bp. Reyn. in
loc.
When the Time of Deliverance is come, Christ makes haste, and rejoiceth to
save: and no Mountains nor Hills, either of Sin or Misery can stop him: And
shall we secretly justify, maintain and plead for our Delays, by objecting the
many Mountains of Difficulties that stand in the ways of Christ's Commands?
When at any time we want any thing, it does not content and satisfy us that God
at last will give us the Mercy, but we are impatient till he does it: We are
ready to cry with David, Ps. 40.13, 17.
O Lord, make haste to help me: make no tarrying, O my God. We would be loath to
be served so by God, as we do usually serve God. When God himself has no
delight to put us off, what unworthiness is it for any of us to find in our
Hearts to put God off.

God makes indeed many great and very long Delays, with relation to the
Execution of his Judgments: But here it is highly disingenuous for us to delay,
because God delays. Is it not an indication of an ill Nature, a plain
discovery of a bad Temper, for any to defer their Repentance, because God
defers their Punishment? and by prolonging and lengthning out our Disobedience,
to make God suffer from us, because we do not suffer from him? What wretched
baseness is it to take liberty and encouragement to continue still in an evil
way, and run on presumptously in a course of Sin, because God is merciful,
patient and long-suffering, and Eccl. 8.11.
Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily? whenas the Goodness
and Patience of God should lead and oblige us to speedy Repentance; And nothing
in the World can possibly appear more unbecoming, and a more ungrateful return
to the Kindness of Heaven, than to be bold to be evil, because God is good.
What can be more contrary to all Ingenuity, than to say in your Hearts, and
signify in your Lives, (though you will not for shame speak out such a thing)
that you earnestly desire to have some further Time afforded you to live in
Sin, and offend God, yet a while longer, by abusing his Mercies and disobeying
his Commands; and when all is done, to receive at last a general Pardon, upon a
short and slight Repentance and Confession; and without the Trouble of a holy
Life, or taking any pains in working out your Salvation, to be freely and fully
made Partakers of the Riches and Treasures of Mercy and Glory?

Shall we show our selves so monstrously disingenuous, as to delay to repent
and obey; when in the case of his Judgments, God is so gracious as to delay:
But in the case of his Mercies he is so kind as not to delay to give what he
sees we are fit to receive?

2. Delays are unworthy in respect of our selves. For,

(1.) The very Act of deferring plainly discovers a false, rotten, corrupt,
unsound and unsincere Heart. Some are so weak as to think, there is somewhat of
Goodness in them, because they resolve to redeem the Time, by becoming penitent
and obedient hereafttr: But I think it is a Sign of great Baseness. A Man that
purposes to keep God's Commandments hereafter, and delays to keep and observe
them at present; the plain truth of it is, he has no real honest good Mind to
keep them at all. He is just like a cheating Debtor, that puts off the Payment
from day to day, with good Words and fair Promises; not because he really
designs to discharge the Debt at the Time appointed; but because he never
intends to pay it, if he can possibly shift and avoid it. That which makes you
now desirous to defer the Redemption of your Time, will make you loath to redeem
it hereafter, as well as now.

(2.) To delay the Redemption of our Time, is very unworthy in respect of our
selves, because it infers the misimprovement and misemployment of our rational
Faculties, and the great Abuse of our bodily Members during our Delays. When
every one of us have Souls capable of doing God and our Generation good
Service, what an unworthy thing is it either not to employ, or to misemploy the
noble Powers of our reasonable Souls, which are always fit for higher
Services, and better Uses, than the dilatory Sinner puts them to. Does it not
too plainly speak a mean and low and base Spirit, to choose to continue a Slave
to Sin, a Drudg and Bondsman to the Devil; when thou might be busied and set
a-work in God's Service, and very honorably and gainfully employed by the
great and mighty Monarch of the World? To yield your Members as Instruments of
Unrighteousness unto Sin, instead of yielding your selves to God, and your
Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God?

2. To delay the Redemption of our Time, is hazardous and dangerous, as well as
unworthy and disingenuous. For,

(1.) The Time of our Life is very uncertain. Seriously consider, that if thou
do not take the present Time, Time with thee may quickly be no more. Subito
tollitur, qui diu toleratur. Gregor. Hom. 12. in Euang.
He that is long forborne, is often snatched away of a sudden. Job 21.13.
Thou may go down to the Grave in a Moment. Thou may be dead, and buried;
thy Body be rotten in the Grave, and thy Soul grievously tormented in Hell,
long before the Time comes which thou did fix and set for thy Repentance, and
the amendment of thy Life. Maxima vitae jactura, dilatio est. Illa primum
quemque extrahit diem, illa eripit praesentia, dum ulteriora promittit. Maximum
vivendi impedimentum est, expectatio quae pendat excrastino. Quo spectas, quo
te extendis? omnia quae ventura sunt, in incerto jacent: protinus vive. Sen. de
brev. vit. cap. 9.
Delay, says Seneca, is the greatest Loss of humane Life: It deprives us of
that which is present, while it Promises that which is future. The greatest
hindrance of living well, says he, is, Hope of living to morrow. But it is a
noted Saying of St. Gregory, Qui poenitenti veniam spopondit, peccanti diem
crastinuninon promisit. Greg. Hom. 12. in Euang.
He that has promised Pardon to him that repents, he has not promised to
morrow to repent in. And if God has not promised it to us, we have no reason to
promise it to our selves: for, it is a Rule in Civil Law, Nemo potest promittere
alienum
No Person can promise that which is another. He spoke prudently and piously,
who when he was invited to come to morrow to a Feast, returned this Answer, I
have not had a morrow for these many Years. It was good Counsel which a wise
Rabbi gave his Scholar, that he should be sure to repent one Day besore he
died. But if you delay to be penitent and pious, holy and religious, the
present Day; you may never have the Benefit and Advantage of another.

Young Men too commonly lavish out the present, in hope of redeeming the future
Time: But they build their Hope upon the greatest Uncertainty in the World.
Quis est tam stultus (quamvis sit adolescens) cui sit exploratum, se ad
vesperum esse victurum? Quinetiam aetas illae mulio plures,quam nostra, mortis
casus habet. Facilius in morbos incidunt adolescentes, graviue aegrotant,
tristius curantur. Itaque pauci veniunt adsenectutem. Cicero in Cat. Maj. sen
de Senect.
Young Men (as Tully brings in Cato discoursing) in some respects, are in
greater danger of Death than Old Men: They fall into Diseases more easily,
sicken more violently, and are cured more hardly: and therefore there are but
very few that reach to an Old Age. The Jews tell of Ben Syra yet a Child, (as
Dr. Stoughton's Heavenly Conversation, p. 81, 82.
Dr. Stoughton relates the Story) that he begged of his Master to instruct him
in the Law of God, who deferred it, and put him off; saying, he was too young
yet to be entered into Divine Mysteries: then he replied, But Master, said he, I
have been in the Churchyard, and perceive by the Graves which I have lain down
by, and measured, and find shorter than my self, that many have died younger
than I am, and what shall I do then? and if I should die before I have learned
the Law of God, what would become of me then Master? The consideration of our
short Life, says that worthy Doctor, should cause us to Ad haec quaerenda
natus, aestima, quam non multum acceperit temporis, etiamsi illud totum sibi
vendicet, cui licet nihil facilitate eript, nihil negligendo patiatur excidere,
licet horus avarissime servet, and usque in ultimae aetatis his manae terminos
procedat, nec quicquam illi ex eo quod natura constituit, fortuna concutiat:
tamen homo ad immortalium cognitionem nimis mortalis est. Sen. de Otio sap. c.
32.
make haste to learn to know, and serve God, and to think we cannot begin to
study that Lesson too soon, that can never be learned too well. And withal to
use all Speed and Diligence, lest, as Children have usually torn their Books,
so, we have ended our Lives, before we have learned our Lessons.

Joh. 9 4.
Work while it is Day: the Night comes, when no Man can work. and 12.35.
Yet a little while is the Light [of this Life] with you: walk while ye have
the Light, lest Darkness come upon you. Do not carry your selves like idle
Boys, who play away their Candle, and then are forced to go to bed in the dark.

Thy Life is uncertain; and therefore, with Apelles that curious Painter, let
no Day go without some Stroke, or Line drawn to the Life: Let no Day pass
without dispatching some lawful Business, without performing some good Work,
and doing some laudable virtuous Action. Do every Day the Work of that Day:
Make Religion thy business every day of thy Life.

(2.) Delays and Prorogations are very dangerous, because many other things
are exceeding uncertain as well as our Lives. Thou do not know, but that by
some Disease thou may quite lose the use of thy Reason, and the natural
right Exercise of thy Rational Faculties, and so become in a manner dead, even
while thou live. Or if still thou retainest the free use of thy Reason, yet
thou may be deprived of the means of Grace, and helps to Salvation: Isa.
30.20.
Thy Teachers may be removed into a Corner. Thou may be pinched with a Amos
8 11, 12.
Famine of hearing the Word of the Lord; and be ready to Prove. 29.18.
perish for want of Vision. Or through Sickness, or some sad Providence, thou
may be hindered and detained from making use of those common Means, which
others comfortably and profitably enjoy. Or, if thou have Liberty to attend on
the outward means of Grace, thou may 2 Cor. 6.1.
receive the Grace of God in vain, not Luke 19 42.
know and understand in this thy Day the things that belong unto thy Peace.
Thou may have a Prove. 17.16.
Price in thy hand to get Wisdom, and be such a Fool as to have no heart to it.
Thy Mind may become more unprepared, and thy Will more indisposed to receive
the Truth, and embrace the Goodness of the Word. Thou may be ready to Acts
7.51.
resist the working of the Spirit in the great Ordinances of the Gospel; and
may render its ordinary Motions ineffectual, and the common Grace of God
unsuccessful. Thy continued Delays are likely to render thee more unteachable
and untractable, more incurable and unchangeable; more full of false Opinions
of God and his Ways, and strong Prejudices and Heart-risings against Religious
Practices; more settled in sinful Ways and Courses. Thy chosen Delays will
insensibly draw on sinful Habits, and evil Customs, which will prove and become
a second Nature, and be hardly left, and difficultly laid down. These poisonous
Roots will not be easily plucked up. These Jer. 13.23.
Naturalists say, that Spots are so deep in the Leopard, that if you take off
the Skin, they will appear in the very Flesh.
Leopard's Spots will not be quickly fetched out. Thou will be as unable to do
it thy self, as an Ethiopian is to change his Skin: and it is a 2 Timothy 2.25.
peradventure whether God will cure a customary, habitual procrastinating
Sinner. Upon thy wilful long Delays God may deny thee the seasonable Aids, and
sovereign Auxiliaries of his Grace; suspend the Influences, withdraw the
Assistances, cease the Motions, and discontinue the Strivings of his Spirit;
and so all outward Means enjoyed may prove ineffectual for your Good. God may
withhold his special Grace, in Judgment for your Non-improvement of common
Grace. Yea, thy obstinate Delays may provoke God to Luke 19.42.
hide the things of thy Peace from thy Eyes, to deliver thee over into Satan's
Power, to leave thee to thy self, to Ps. 81.12.
give thee up to thy own Heart's Lusts, to judicial Blindness of Mind, to
dreadful carnal Security, and horrible Illud est cor durum quod non trepidat ad
nomen cordis duri. Bern.
Hardness of Heart; to a Romans 1.28.
reprobate Mind, and a 1 Timothy 4 2.
seared cauterized Conscience. By way of Punishment of thy Delays, God may
suffer thee to sin on, till thou comst to be Ephesians. 4.19.
past feeling; and not help thee to recover any spiritual Sense in a dying
Hour: but at last Romans 1.28.
give the Spirit of Slumber, or let thee fall into the lamentable Condition of
downright Desperation. Of each of which, a learned Gr. Exempl. part. 3.. 15. p.
559.
Writer gives us a very notable and remarkable Example: Of the former, out of
Biblioth. Frat. Pol. Tom. 3.
Petrus Damianus, of one Gunizo, a factious and ambitious Person, to whom the
Tempter gave notice of his approaching Death; but when any Man preached
Repentance to him, out of a strange Incuriousness, or the Spirit of
Reprobation, he seemed like a dead and unconcerned Person: in all other
Discourses he was awake and apt to answer. And of the latter, out of Venerable
L. 5. c. 15. Hist. Gent. Anglor.
Bid, of a drunken Monk, who upon his Deathbed seemed to see Hell opened, and
a Place assigned him near to Caiaphas, and those who crucified our dearest
Lord. The Religious Persons that stood about his Bed, called on him to repent
of his Sins, to implore the Mercies of God, and to trust in Christ; but he
answered, This is no time to change my Life, the Sentence is past upon me, and
it is too late.

There may be no room and place for Consideration and Repentance upon thy
Deathbed, either through senslessness and stupidity, caused by the special
Disease of thy Body, or the sad and direful Divine Judgment: or through too
quick a feeling, too deep a sense of pungent corporal Pain, or exquisite
Torture of Mind and Conscience: the Tempter busily setting in with thy own
guilty awakened Conscience, to aggravate thy Sins to thy Terror and Amazement,
and to load thee heavily till thou faintest, sinkest and fallest, crushed and
broken under the Burden.

But suppose thou should stand at that Day in much more moderate tolerable
Circumstances, yet thou may be distracted and diverted with the Thoughts of
making or altering thy Will, settling thy Estate, disposing and ordering the
Affairs of thy Family, stating and clearing the Interests of thy Relatives. And
when thou art about to bid thy final and last Farewell to every thing in this
World that is near and dear to thee, and art under a strange and strong
apprehension of hastily approaching Death and Judgment, 'twill prove a very
hard task to gain and maintain a well-composed and undisturbed Mind in the
management of thy great Soulconcerns.

But admit thou should enjoy much Freedom of Thoughts, and have the greatest
Advantage imaginable of a quiet sedate Frame and Temper, in the Procedure of
that most busy Day and Hour, yet is there a very formidable Danger of thy dying
and departing without rational Satisfaction about the Goodness and Safety of
thy State and Condition, or any comfortable Evidence of the Divine Acceptance
of thy Deathbed Performance.

3. To delay the Redemption of thy Time, is highly unreasonable, and very Non
est, creed mihi, sapientis dicere, Vivam.
Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive hodie.
Martial. l. 1. epigr. 16. Cras vives: hodie jam vivere, Postume, serum est.
Ille sapit, quisquis, Postume, vixit heri.
Id. l. 5. epigr. 58.
foolish: to put off the building of a spiritual Temple in thy Soul, as the
Jews excused their Neglect of re-edifying the material Temple, by saying, Hag.
1.2.
The Time is not come.

What Folly is it, to Perdis hodiernum: quod in manu fortunae positum est,
disponis: quod in tua, dimittis. Sen. de brev. vit. c. 9.
lose the present, which God has put in thy own hand, and to determine and
dispose of the future Time, which only and wholly rests in the Hand of God, and
is quite out of thine. To Put all to the venture of repenting and securing thy
State hereafter, when so many have ruined and undone themselves without Remedy
or Recovery, by lingering and loitering Delays?

What a plain and apparent Self-delusion is it, to except against, and wave the
present Time, because it is present; since when that Time which now is future
shall become present, you must then put that off for the same reason that now
you put this by?

What a silly Cheat do thou put upon thy self, while thou do pretend a
purpose to make but a very short Delay; a Desire to enjoy thy Sin but a little
longer, it may be but this once more; and a Resolution then to part and shake
hands with it for ever? when as the very next touch may deadly infect thee, the
very next taste poison thee; one other Closure with sensual Pleasure will in
all probability more deeply enamour thee; one farther embrace of Sin more
bewitch and fascinate, inebriate and intoxicate thee; one step more presently
carry thee into a Snare, that will entangle and hold thee fast for ever. Is it
likely that thou will leave thy Sin, when thou shall be more in love with it,
more enslaved to it? and that thou will be able to deny thy Lust, when thou
have greatly provoked and inflamed it, by farther gratifying and fulfilling it?
Do not thou take a direct course to besot and infatuate thy self, and to
bring thy self at last to delight in the Remembrance of those beloved Sins,
which thou shall not be able to act any longer? Thou Fool dare thou venture
to break the Commandments of God now, and pretend a purpose to keep them
hereafter; when every breach of God's holy Laws will lessen thy Aw and
Reverence of them, make thee more unfit and unable to keep them, more averse to
the Observation of them, more ready to contemn them, more prone and bold to
violate them for the future?

How lamentably do thou abuse thy self, by encouraging thy self to Sin at
present, upon hopes of repenting hereafter? that is, in plain terms, in hopes
of accusing and condemning thy self, of blushing and becoming ashamed and
cofounded; of being sorely troubled, greatly grieved, and sorry exceedingly at
thy very heart; of falling out with thy self at last, calling thy self Fool,
Madman, Beast; and punishing and taking Revenge upon thy self for what thou
have done.

What a vain Confidence and groundless Expectation is it, to think thou shall
easily get rid of thy Sins, when they will be much more riveted and radicated:
and presently recover the Favor of God, when thou have more highly provoked
and incensed him with thy aggravated Sins, and multiplied Provocations: and
quickly regain the Motions of God's Spirit, when thou have grieved and driven
him away by thy very tedious long Delays?

What a false and imaginary Hope is it, to look at last to obtain the Pardon of
all thy Sins, without having respect to God's Commandments in the course of thy
Life? when God does intend and promise Pardon in order to Holiness, and chiefly
design it as an Encouragement to cheerful faithful sincere Obedience. Ps 130.4.
There is Forgiveness with thee; that thou may be feared: says the Psalmist.

How unreasonable is it, to live in a continual Neglect of thy present
necessary indispensable Duty, and to expect that God at last should yield to
accept See the Gr. Exemp. p. 302.
the Will for the Deed, when the Deed is out of thy own Power merely through
thy own Default?

What Weakness is it, to delight to delay, when nothing is to be gotten by it?
when thou can not hope that God hereafter will alter his Law, change his
Covenant, accept and save thee upon cheaper Terms and easier Conditions than
now he is pleased to propose to thee. When God's Will is not likely to alter,
nor thy own Will more likely by Delay to be wrought to a Compliance with the
Divine Will, what is the meaning of all thy tarrying? Is it prudent to delay
thy Duty, when thou can not retard thy Punishment? when though thou lingerest
and delaiest, yet 2 Pet. 2.3.
thy Judgment now of a long time lingreth not, thy Damnation slumbreth not.

Yea, what an unaccountable carriage is it, by making Delays to cast thy self
into grand Inconveniences; to run thy self into such unhappy Circumstances,
that thou shall have hereafter a more painful difficult Work to do than ever,
less time to do it in, less strength within, and smaller aids and helps from
without, from Heaven above, to do it with; and shall meet with more hindrances
and obstructions in the doing of it from the Devil, the World, and thy own
Corruptions?

What an absurdity is it to multiply Delays, and Victuros agimus semper, nec
vivimus unquam.
Cras hoc siet. Idem eras fiet Quid? quasi magnum
Nempo diem donas? sed cum lux altera venit,
Jam cras hesternum consumsimus: ecce aliud cras
Egerit hos annos, and semper paulum erit ultra.
Pers. sat. 5. v. 66.
never to make any end of them? to find no leisure in all thy Life to live
well? to lengthen out, and let thy morrow grow till it reach the years of Dic
mihi cras istud, Postume, quando venit?
Jam cras istud habet Priami vel Nestoris annos.
Martial. l. 5. epigr. 58 Vide and l. 2. epigr. 64.
Priamus or Nestor; and, if it were possible, the full Age of Methuselah? St.
Austin confesses and condemns his former lingering dilatory Temper. Non erat
omnino quod responderem veritate convictus, nisi tanium verba lenta and
somnclenta, Modo, ecce modo, sine paululum. sed modo and modo non habebant
modum. Aug. Confess. l. 8. c 5.
I was clearly convinced by the Truth, says he, and had nothing to answer but
only lazy and sleepy Words, another time, shortly, a while hence, let me alone
but a little longer: But my Delays were endless and infinite, and would keep
and observe no measures or limits. I prayed in this manner to thee, says he;
Da mihi castitatem and continentiam, sed noli modo; timebam
Lord give me the gift of Chastity and Continence: But I said in my heart, pray
do not give it yet to me, for I was afraid lest thou should hear me too
quickly, and heal me too soon, etc. And at last he reasoned himself out of this
unreasonable Humor, in this manner; How long, how long shall I put it off till
to morrow, and next day? Why not now? Why should not this very Hour put an end
to my lewd and loose Life?

What unhappy Folly is it tp delay the Time of thy Youth, and so to lose the Sea p. 22.
Flower of thy Age?

What a Reproach and Disparagement to thy Judgment and Understanding, that when
thou art come to years of Maturity, arrived to thy Middle Age, thou should
show thy self so inconsiderate and indiscreet as still to delay, and not to use
thy Reason and Judgment aright?

What a farther and higher degree of Folly is it, to defer the Redemption of
thy Time till Our seeking all Summer, withered and dry, and beginning to shoot
out a little, about Michaelmass spring: of which kind of shooting fruit can
never come. Bp. Andrew's Sermon, page 174.
Old Age? The Stoic will tell thee, Sera parsimonia in fundo est. Non enim
tantum minimum in tino, sed pessimum remanet. Sen. ep. 1.

Non pisdet te reliquias vitae tibi reser vare, and id solum tempus bonae menti
destinare, quod in nullaem rem conferri possit? Quam serum est tunc vtvere
incipare, cun desinendum est? quae tam stulta mortalitatis oblsvio, in
qumquagesimum and sexagesimum annum differ sana consilia: and inde velle
vitam inchoare, qu^ panci perduxerunt? id de brev. vit. c. 4.

Quidam vivere tunc incipiunt, cunt desinendum est. Quidam ante vivere
desecerunt, quan inciperent. Idem, epist. 23. in fine.


It Is late to spare when thou come to the Bottom: for it is not only the
least, but the very worst, that is left to the last. Art not thou ashamed,
says he, to reserve nothing but the Relics, the Dross, the Dregs and Refuse
for thy self; and to set that Time for the bettering of thy Mind and amendment
of thy Manners, which can be bestowed on nothing else? Is it not extremely
late, says he, then to begin to live, when thou should make an end of Life?
What is so foolish a Forgetfulness of Mortality, as to defer wholesome Counsels
to the fiftieth or sixtieth Year of thy Age, and to think to enter upon a
virtuous Life at such a time, as very few have lengthned out their days to? I
may here apply those Words of Epicurus, commended and adopted by Seneca, Quid
est turpius quam senex vivere incipiens? Sen. ep. 12. in fine.
What is more uncomely than an Old Man beginning to live? Though the Truth is,
in the case of Godly Living, Better late than never. But is it any act or part
of Wisdom, to resolve to begin to redeem the Time at such an Age, when thou will blush, in consideration of thy Years, to discover to any thy wonderful,
shameful, gross Ignorance of the things of God, in order to thy receiving
Information and Instruction, and furnishing thy Mind with necessary Knowledge;
and, through Weakness of Understanding and Memory, be more incapable of
learning the great things of the Christian Religion, and Gospel-Institution,
than thou wast in thy Younger Time: And wilt be backward to attempt so
ungrateful a Work as openly to censure the Actions and Carriages of thy past
Life, and to condemn and discontent thy old Companions, by forsaking their
Fellowship, and taking up a course of Life so wholly different from, and
directly contrary to theirs: And when thou will find it so God in Wisdom will
have the Conversions of such as have gone on in a course of Sinning (especially
after Light revealed) to be rare and difficult. Births in those that are
ancienter, are with greater danger than in the younger sort. Cavendum est
vulnus quod dolor curatur. Dr. Sibbs's Soul's Constable. p 327.
tough an undertaking, so troublesome and uneasy a task, to conquer and master,
to expel and extirpate inveterate vicious Habits, which have been growing all
thy Life, and to get virtuous Dispositions and gracious Habits introduced and
planted in thy Heart? Is this to conclude and act rationally, to think to turn
thy self at large to the full Exercise of all thy Christian Duty, when thou art
reduced to a little Nook and Corner of thy Life? What lamentable wretched Folly
is it, to defer all to an Ante sonectutem curandum est ut homo been vivat, in
se^^etute autem ut been moriatur. Sen.
Old Age?

But is not this the most mavelous Folly and Madness of all, to adjourn the
necessary Work and weighty Business of Redemption of Time to a dying Day and
Hour? or to put off all to a Deathbed; and so to make that the Time of
beginning, which should be only the Time of renewing Repentance; and to cast
thy self into such straits, in which thou shall have no time to receive, and
make use of that variety of God's Grace, his preventing, restraining,
assisting, furthering, quickening, strengthening, confirming, persevering Grace,
which it is his usual sapiential Method to dispense and afford for the gradual
bringing returning Sinners, in the way of Obedience and Holy Living to a
participation of the great Rewards of a blessed Eternity. Yea to conclude and
shut up thy self within such narrow Cancels, Bounds and Limits, wherein thou
shall be utterly unable to discharge and perform a great part of that Duty,
which the Gospel expressly requires as the ordinary Qualification, and common
clearly revealed Condition in order to Salvation; unable to Rev. 22.14.
do the Commandments of God, and 14.12.
to keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus; to do, to keep them
all; when thou shall want the Objects and Opportunities of performing the
several Duties, and exercising the several Graces, which a course of Obedience
plainly includes: unable to answer the end of Christ's Death, by 1 Pet. 2.24.
living to Righteousness: to exercise Chastity, Temperance, Mortification, as
acts of Election, when thy Body is weak, and low, and languishing; no Lust
stirring, no Temptation to such a Sin assaulting: unable to Tit 2.12.
live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present World; to Heb. 12.1.
run a Race; Romans 2.7.
patiently to continue in Well-doing, Gal. 6.9.
without faintirg: For these are things, which cannot be dispatched on a
sudden, performed in a trice, or shrunk up into a narrow scantling, so small a
pittance of Time. How can thy Light sufficiently shine before Men, that they
may see thy good Works; when thy Dr. Tillotson's sermon. 2. vol. p. 80.
Candle is just sinking into the Socket?

What a wild Fancy, and idle Imagination is it, to When we are come to the
very last cast, our Strength is gone, our Spirit clean spent, our Senses
appalled, and the Powers of our Soul as numb as our Senses: when a General
Prostration of all our Powers, and the shadow of Death upon our Eyes: Then
something we would say or do, which should stand for our seeking: But (I doubt)
it will not serve. This is the Time we allow God, to seeking him in. Is this
it? would we then seek him, when we are not in case to seek any thing else?
Would we turn to him then, when we are not able to turn our selves in our Bed?
Or, rise early to seek him, when we are not able to rise at all? Or enquire
after him, when our Breath fails us, and we are not able to speak three
Words together? No Hour, but the Hour of Death? No Time, but when he takes
Time from us, and us from it? Bp. Andrew's sermon. p. 180.
flatter thy self into the persuasion, that some sudden flashings of a
passionate Repentance, some short gleams of Piety, and little scatterings of
Devotion; a few good Thoughts, or Godly Words; some weak ineffectual Purposes,
imperfect Promises, fallacious Resolutions; or, at most, the Performance of
some single Actions, will, upon a Deathbed, be acceptable to God, without
habitual Sanctity, and an industrious persevering Piety. That a few Prayers and
Tears, Sighs and Groans, an extorted Sorrow, and enforced Sadness; a compulsory
Confession of thy Sins, and a Gift of Charity left to the Poor, out of that
Estate, which now is Defer not Charities till Death: for certainly, if a Man
weigh it rightly, he that does so, is rather liberal of an other Man's, than of
his own. Sir Fr. Bacon's Essaies, of Riches, p. 2ii.

Let thy Alms go before, and keep Heaven's Gate

Open for thee 3 or both may come too late.


rather another Man's than thy own, since thou thy self art able to keep it no
longer; That such little slight things as these will serve as a sufficient
Composition to be offered to God, and prove available to cross and cancel all
the Debts, and wipe off the many and great Guilts of a fifty or threescore
Years Impiety and Iniquity: And that the Pardon of all thy Sins will be
comfortably sealed, and thy Soul be certainly consigned to the Joys of
Paradise, and Glory of Heaven, by receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
immediately before thy Departure. That if thou can but form and frame thy
shortest Breath to call upon God with these five Words, Lord have Mercy upon
me, but a little before thy last Gasp; they will really Duke.
prove as powerful and available for the happy Translation of thy Soul to
Heaven, as the mumbling over those five Words of Consecration, Hoc est enim
Corpus meum, for this is my Body, is by the Papists imagined to be effectual
for the Transubstantiation of their Host.

Is this consistent with the use of Reason and Consideration, to venture all
upon a Deathbed Repentance? to take a wilful Course to bring thy self into
such a Condition, in which thou shall be utterly unable, with all the help that
can be afforded thee, to find out one Promise, or to meet with one Example in
the whole Bible, that will full reach, or plainly and properly speak to thy
particular case, and afford thee sufficient support, relief and Comfort, in
that dark and dismal Day and Hour?

Obj. No Promise? may some object, and say; Why what do you make of those
Words? At what time soever a Sinner does repent him of his Sins, from the
bottom of his Heart, I will put all his Wickedness out of my Remembrance, says
the Lord.

Answ. For answer, give me leave to tell you what others make of these Words,
and those very great Divines too: There are no such Words in the whole Bible,
(says the very Learned Sermon. of the Invalid. of a Death. bed Rep. part. 2.
Bp. Tailor) nor any nearer to the sense of them than those Words of the
Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 18.21. But if the Wicked will turn from all his Sins
that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Or those, chap. 33.14, 15.
in which you shall find Repentance more fully described; When I say unto the
Wicked, Thou shall surely die: If he turn from his Sin, and do that which is
lawful and right: if the Wicked restore the Pledge, give again that he had
robbed, walk in the Statutes of Life without committing Iniquity; he shall
surely live, he shall not die. Here only is the condition of Pardon; to leave
all your Sins, to keep all God's Statutes, to walk in them, to abide, to
proceed, and make progress in them; and this, without the interruption by a
deadly Sin, [ without committing Iniquity] to make restitution, -- Satisfaction
for all Injury to our Neighbor's Fame, all wrongs done to his Soul: -- When
this is done according to thy utmost Power, then thou have repented truly, then
thou have a title to the Promise; Thou shall surely live, thou shall not die,
for thy old Sins thou have formerly committed. This Place of Ezekiel is it
which is so often mistaken for that common Saying, At what time soever, etc.
Repentance as stated by the Prophet cannot be done [ at what time soever] not
upon a Man's Deathbed. -- Let that Saying therefore no more deceive you, or be
made a color to countenance a persevering Sinner, or a Deathbed Penitent.

And it is observable what a free reflection the judicious Chillingworth, in a
P. 337.
Sermon preached before King Charles the First, was bold to make upon that
Passage, which then stood in the entrance to our Common Prayer Book: I would to
God, says he, the Composers of our Liturgy, out of a care of avoiding
mistakes, and to take away Occasion of cavilling our Liturgy, and out of Fear
of encouraging Carnal Men to security in sinning, had been so provident, as to
set down in Terms, the first Sentence taken out of the 18th of Ezekiel, and not
have put in the place of it an ambiguous, and (though not in it self, yet
accidentally, by reason of the mistake to which it is subject) I fear very
often a pernicious Paraphrase; for, whereas thus they make it, At what time
soever -- says the Lord; the plain truth, if you will hear it, is, the Lord
does not say so, these are not the very Words of God, but the Paraphrase of
Men: The Words of God are Ezekiel. 18.21.
-- where, I hope, you easily observe that there is no such Word as, At what
time soever a Sinner does repent, etc. and that there is a wide difference
between this (as the Word repent usually sounds in the Ears of the People) and
turning from all Sins, and keeping all God's Statutes: That indeed, having no
more in it but Sorrow and good Purposes, may be done easily and certainly at
the last Gasp; and it is very strange that any Christian, who dies in his right
Senses, and knows the difference between Heaven and Hell should fail of the
performing it: but this Work of turning, keeping, and doing, is -- ordinarily a
Work of Time, a long and laborious Work (but yet Heaven is very well worth it)
and if you mean to go through with it, you had need go about it presently. And
I find the Reverend and Learned Mr. Robert Bolton expressing himself to the
same purpose; Mr. Bolton's Instruct, for a right coms. Affl. Conse. page 254,
255.
I marvel, says he, that any should be so blindfolded, and baffled by the
Devil, as to embolden himself to drive off until the last, by that Place before
Confession: At what time soever, etc. Especially, if he look upon the Text from
whence it is taken; which, methinks, being rightly understood, and the
Conditions well considered, is most punctual, and precise, to fright any from
that desperate Folly: The Words run thus, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22, etc. Hence it
appears, that if any Man expect upon good ground, any portion in this precious
Promise of Mercy and Grace, he must leave all his Sins, and keep all God's
Statutes. -- Now what space is left to come to Comfort, by keeping all God's
Statutes; when thou art presently to pass to that highest and dreadful
Tribunal, to give an exact and strict Account for the continual Breach of all
God's Laws all thy Life long?

But I must desire the Objector to remember, that when some Alterations were
made by Authority in our Liturgy, the Paraphrase was removed, and the proper
Words of Scripture put in the room of it: and now the self-deceiving
Procrastinator will not well know what to do for want of a What time soever,
etc. which is nowhere now to be found or met with in all his Bible, or
Common Prayer Book.

Obj. But a Friend to Delays may further object, and say; Though, I confess, I
was out in alleging the Promise, yet certainly there is an Example that
affords sufficient ground of Comfort to a late and Deathbed Penitent. You
cannot deny, says he, but that the Thief was converted upon the Cross, in the
last Hour of his Life; and, notwithstanding his extreme late Repentance, was
accepted and received by Christ to Mercy.

Answ. It is especially from this Example abused, that ignorant Dawbers, and
untaught Teachers take occasion to prepare and make up that Bp. Andrews sermon.
1. of. Repent. and Fast. p. 181.
Opiate Divinity, which they minister to the Souls of superficial Deathbed
Penitents, and so send them away into the Paradise of Fools. And this is the
great Rock of Presumption, which many build, or rather split upon: They resolve
to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin during the Season of their Health and Strength;
and intend and hope to repent of their Sins, and turn to God, to accept of
Christ and make sure of Heaven upon the Cross of their last Sickness, and with
the beatified Thief to slip immediately into Paradise.

But I shall labor to convince you, that the Instance of the Thief upon the
Cross will Vid. Chillingworth's sermon. 6th on Luke 16.9. p. 397.
not suit your Condition, nor serve your turn. For here consider with me these
few things:

1. That, it may be, he was not so vile and vicious a Person, as he is commonly
taken to have been: for (...) and Latro do not always note a Thief or Robber,
but signify a Soldier; and out of Zeal to the Jews he might have somewhat
transgressed the Roman Laws: It may be otherwise he was not altogether so bad a
Man: But thou know the heinous circumstances of thy own misled and
ill-governed Life. But,

2. Suppose him to have been a notorious Ill Liver: yet it is to be considered,
that the Conversion and Salvation of the Thief is an extraordinary Instance:
For,

(1.) The Thief was converted at a very remarkable Time, when the Son of God
and Savior of the World shed his precious Blood, and suffered a painful
shameful Death, to satisfy the Divine Law and Justice, and to redeem and
recover lost and miserable Mankind: And certainly if ever God would work a
Miracle, he would do it then. Do thou hope to exercise Repentance unto Life
at the Hour of Death, and to sue out a Pardon with thy last Breath, when thou
have not heartily and devoutly called upon God in all thy Life, because God had
Mercy on the Thief upon the Cross? Tell me, can thou expect that Christ
should come another Time into the World, and suffer again, and die once more
for Mankind? if so, then thou may conceive great Hopes indeed that God will
do the like again, and it may fare as well with thee as it did with the Thief.
Christ then triumphing on the Cross, (says the Worthy Threat. of Repent. p.
161.
Mr. Daniel Dyke) did as Princes do in the Triumph of Entering into their
Kingdoms; they pardon gross Offenses before committed, such as they pardon not
afterward. And Instruct. for a right comf. Affl. Consc. p. 251.
Mr. Robert Bolton uses an Illustration somewhat like it; A King sometimes
pardons a Malefactor at the Place of Execution, says he; will thou therefore
run desperately into some horrible Villainy, deserving Death, hoping to be that
One amongst many Thousands?

If God do good to any Sinner, that has securely lived in his Sins all his
Days, and bring him home to himself at last; he goes out of the way of his
ordinary Grace and Providence; and the Conversion of a Sinner upon his
Deathbed, it is a high expression of extraordinary Grace and Mercy, and an Act
of God's absolute Power and Sovereignty: And surely it is safest and most
comfortable to expect from God not merely what he can do, but what he has
promised in his Word, and given us plain notice that he will do; and what in
the ordinary course of his Providence he declares himself ready to do. I make
no Question, but God is Agentia naturali mode, debilius agunt quam ut possant
unt actu habitum informare, idoque opus est subinde r^petit is actibu, -- At
res long aluer se habet in divinis, cun nemsram is qui producit actum Deus
est, Deus, inquam, agent -- tanta vi and efficacia, ut statim primo illo actis
-- in utraqus animae part seu potentia habitus fides and charatates ingeneret,
atque infundat quasi. Cameronis oper. p. 912. But I think, that ordinarily
Habitus infusi infunduntur ad modum acquisito^^^.
able in the shortest Time to work such clear and strong Convictions, and to
make such powerful deep Impressions upon the Mind and Heart of a dying Sinner,
as should have the virtue and power of a general Habit, or be equivalent to
many particular Habits; and in case of longer continuance of Life, should be
effectual to a lasting persevering Obedience. And I readily acknowledge, that
the Nature of God is infinitely merciful: and that it was the gracious Nature
of God, which moved and inclined him to make the Evangelical Promise; and, I
think, he has not so restrained and bound up himself by the New Covenant, but
that, if he please, he may use Divine tum libertati, tum gratiae ac nilsericer
liae detr. thy aut decedere non parun videtur, si dicatur, Deum non posse, aut
nulo u quam tempote velle extra ordinem, id^st, praeter aut suprae quan
promisit, paenitentium and resipiseentium, licet se o admodum, and i^ capulo
quasi vitae suae, misereri. Non entm astringitur suis legtbus proprits Deus,
sed jus suunt supremum semper intig um siet servat agendi pro arbitrio suo.
Annon licit mibi facere de meo quod volo? Mat. 20.15. Ad jus autem Divinum hoc,
pertinet aestimatio paenitentiae and resipiscentiae quae in sine vitae fit, pro
paenitentta and resipiscentia quae spe ventae digna est. Epise. Resp. ad 64
Quaest. quaest. 15.
Prerogative Royal, and act beyond his own Covenant-obligation, and ordinary,
certain and express Promise, to the saving of a Sinner upon the change of his
Mind and Heart, and his having See Dr. Sibbs's Soul's Conflict, p. 327.
an eternal desire of pleasing God, begotten in him by special Grace; who had
no time to perform the constant Obedience of a holy Life: But, is it easy for
thee to expect, that an infinitely wise, holy and just God should at last act
in a very extraordinary way, to save thee who would destroy thy self, and
have long neglected the ordinary Means of thy Soul's Salvation; and would by
no means know and do the things that belonged unto thy Peace? How very justly
may God at last Prove. 1.26.
Risus Dei long gravior est ira Dei. Quod Deus loquitur cum risu, tu legas
cuns luctu. Aug.
laugh at thy Calamity, and mock when thy Fear comes?

(2.) The Learned Author of the P. 281, 282.
Great Exemplar thinks it probable that the good Thief was much advantaged by
the intervening Accident of dying at the same time with Christ; there being a
natural Compassion produced in us toward the Partners of our Miseries. For
Christ was not void of humane Passions, though he had in them no Imperfection
or Irregularity; and therefore might be invited by the Society of Misery, the
rather to admit him to participate his Jaies: and St. Paul proves him to be a
merciful High Priest, because he was touched with a feeling of our Infirmities;
the first expression of which was to this Blessed Thief.

If the Thief had not met with such an extraordinary Opportunity of Suffering
with Christ, and entering with Christ into Paradise; though he had been
converted, he might have tarried till he had suffered many Years Afflictions
and Persecutions for the sake of Christ and his holy Gospel, and performed a
long and tedious Work of crucifying the Old Man, crucifying the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts; of Mortification, Self-denial, and sincere Obedience. The
good Thief, by special Favor, was let into Paradise at a privy Door, as I may
say; but you and I must look to go thither, and enter the ordinary Way.
Consider,

(3.) That the Conversion and Salvation of the Thief is not only an
extraordinary, but a singular Instance. The Example of the Thief, it is but
one; and besides this one there is not one more to be produced out of all that
Sacred Book, which contains the History of several thousand Years: and for this
one that sped how many millions of late and Deathbed Penitents have eternally
miscarried, sadly repented of their late Repentance, and inherited the
uncomfortable Portion of Fools? And if thou shall venture to drive off all to
the very last, have not thou very great cause to fear that thou shall become an
unhappy Castaway, as well as so many have been before thee? Thou do not
think it prudent or safe to follow It is as if a Man should spur his Ass till
he spoke, because Balaam's Ass did once speak. Mr. Greenham.

Though some have found a Purse in their way, let us not trust to like hap, but
carry money with us. Bp. Andrew's sermon. page 180.


or rely upon single or very unusual Precedents in other things. If a thousand
Persons should have perished by the taking of any poisoned Meat, and one only
have been miraculously preserved; would thou dare to taste of that or the
like Food, and hope to do well, because one once escaped, when a thousand died?
Will thou expect to be accommodated, and upon any great Occasion provided for
by Miracle, because God once Ps. 78.13.
divided the Sea, and caused his Israel to pass through, and made the Waters to
stand as an heap; Verse. 24, 25, 27, 28.
rained down Manna upon them to eat, and gave them of the Corn of Heaven, so
that man did eat Angels Food; rained Flesh also upon them as Dust, and
feathered Fowls like as the Sand of the Sea; let it fall in the midst of their
Camp, round about their Habitations; Verse. 15, 16.
clave also the Rocks in the Wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the
great Depths; and fed Elijah the Prophet by the Ministry of 1 Kin. 17.4, 6.
Ravens, whom he commanded to bring him Bread and Flesh both in the Morning and
in the Evening? Because the Thief was happily converted at the last Hour, do
thou conclude so thou may be in like manner? But why should not thou be
startled and affrighted by the Ideo conjungitur exemple latrenis conversi
exemplum latronis alteriue, qui in peccatis, quibus assueverat, manet, and in
aeternam damnationem inesdit, ne quis adsecuritatem hac drctrina abutatur.
Gerhard. Harm. in loc.
sad Example of the other Thief, who still lay in his accustomed Sins, died and
perished in his Iniquities; and though his Savior was so near him, fell
irrecoverably into eternal Damnation? The one Example may serve to keep thee
from abusing the other to Security.

(4.) Do not offer any longer to draw the good Thief into Example, and to
embolden thy self thereby wittingly and willingly to defer thy Repentance till
the last Hour, and to hope for Mercy at the very last; for, let me tell thee,
There is a great deal of difference between the case and circumstances of the
blessed Thief, and thy self: for, suppose the Thief had heard somewhat of
Christ by general fame before, some commendation of his Doctrine and Miracles,
and an intimation of Christ's Profession that a Kingdom belonged to him, though
not of this World; yet thou can not prove, that ever he had in all his Life a
clear direct Call before this Day and Hour, in which he was Christ's Companion
upon the Cross, and heard his gracious Speeches, and his compassionate Prayer
poured out to his Father for his Crucifiers; and beheld and considered his
excellent Virtues and admirable Graces, in the time of his deepest Sorrows and
forest sufferings. This was the first time that the Thief had any Converse with
Christ, and the first Day of Grace that probably was ever vouchsafed to him.
Speak now, is this thy case? Art thou able to use this Plea, that hitherto thou
wast never plainly invited to Repentance, nor expressly called to come to
Christ? Have not thou lived long under the Means of Grace, and frequented the
Ministry of the Gospel? Have not thou heard, yea of often heard the joyful
sound of the Word, and felt the sweet motions of the Spirit? May not Christ
complain of thee, and such as thee, Mat. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered you even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under
her Wings, and ye would not?

The Thief had no distinct Knowledge of Christ before: His case was as if a See
Bp. Taylor's sermon. of the Invalid. of a Deathbed Rep. part. 2. p. 78.
Turk or Heathen should turn Christian, and receive the Sacrament of Baptism,
and therewithal the Remission of the Sins of his State of Ignorance, upon his
Deathbed. But thou wast very early baptized into the Name of Christ, and have
solemnly entered into Covenant with Christ, and frequently ratified and
confirmed that Covenant, and all along openly and outwardly professed thy self
the Disciple of Jesus, and Servant of Christ: And therefore, if still thou
live in Sin, and deferrest thy Repentance, and put off thy Obedience;
thou failest in the performance of thy solemn Promise, and grand Obligation;
and art false and treacherous to the Lord Christ; and art to account for Breach
of Contract, and plain Rebellion against thy Heavenly Lord and King. And how
can thou hope, when thou have refused and denied to present the Service of
thy Life to him, that God will be satisfied with the weeping and Hos 7.14.
howling of a careless Sinner, unwillingly departing, and forced to go to a
speedy reckoning in another World.

Consider,

(5.) That the Vid. Chryfost. (...)
good Thief redeemed and improved his Time at last in so notable and wonderful
a way and manner, as no Man ever did, or can beside. Surely thou can never
hope to do that Honor to God and Christ upon a Deathbed, which the Thief did
in a short time upon the Cross. The Thief brought more Glory to God and Christ
at the time of his Departure out of this World, than another Man's whole Life
can do. See Bp. Taylor's Great Exemp. p. 581.
What Age of the World can give Example of so strong a Faith, or produce a
Pattern of greater Piety? for he believed him to be the Savior, whom the Jews
accused as a grand Malefactor, and Pilate condemned, who was crucified by the
Gentiles, and vilified by the Jews, and openly reviled by the other Thief: He
expected Life and Salvation from an afflicted, suffering, dying Person, hanging
in a public shameful manner, full of Pain, upon a Cross, under the Sadnesses,
Sorrows and Pangs of Death; who was esteemed smitten and seemed to Man's Sense
for saken of God, whom he had always professed to be his Father: In the very
Extremity of Christ's Passion, the good Thief believed him to be the holy Son
of God, the Lord of Life, able to save in Death: He beheld the Beauty and Glory
of Christ, through the dark Ignominy of the Cross: He saw him naked, wounded, a
Partner of the same Torment upon the Tree, enduring the servile Punishment of
the Cross: and yet was heartily persuaded Christ was a King. Dic, o latro, ubi
thronus ex sapphyro? ubi Cherubim and exercitus caeli? ubi corona, sceptrum and
purpura, ut eum dicas Regem? videsne coronam aliam, quam spine im; sceptrum
aliud, quam clavos; aliam purpuram, quan sangutnem; alium thronum, quam crucem;
alios ministros, quam carnifices; juid ergo Regium vides? Aug.
Speak, O Thief, says St. Austin, where is the Throne of Sapphire? where are
the Cherubims and heavenly Hosts? where is the Crown, the Scepter, and the
Purple, that thou should count Christ a King? Do thou see any other Crown
than that of Thorns, any other Scepter than the Nails in his Hands, any other
Purple than his Blood, any other Throne than the Cross, any other Officers and
Ministers than the Executioners? Videte quam oculata sit sides, quam lynceos
oculos habeat diligentius considerate. Cognoscit Dei Filium -- in ligno
pendentem, cognoscit morientem: siquidem latro cognoscit in patibulo, etc.
Bern. sermon. 2. in Epiph. Dorn.
See, says St. Ber^ard, how sharp-sighted Faith is; what quick and piercing
Eyes it has; how it apprehends and discerns Christ to be the Son of God, though
hanging, bleeding, dying upon the Cross: How evidently it discovers the great
King appearing in the mean form of a Servant, and taking a Journey through the
strait way of painful shameful Suffering into his heavenly Kingdom of Glory.

How far did the rare and noble Faith of this Thief excel the Faith even of all
the Disciples and Apostles of Christ, who now at last fearfully Titubaverunt
qus viderunt Christum mortuos suscitautem; credidit ille quem videbat secum in
ligno pendentem. Aug. sermon. 144 de Tempore.
stumbled at Christ's Cross, though sometime they had seen him raising the very
Dead? Gerhard. Harm in Luc. 23.40, 41, 42.
Peter believed, when he saw Christ Mat. 14.28.
walking upon the Sea; but the Thief believed, when he saw Christ's Feet fast
nailed to the Cross, and beheld him flowing all over in Blood from Head to
Foot. The Apostles believed, when they saw Christ and 17.2.
transfigur'd before them; and his Face shining as the Sun, and his Raiment
white as the Light: but the Thief believed, when he saw Christ, not
transfigured, but strangely disfigured, miserably mangled and deforemed; and
his Face, not shining, but sullied, and fadly besmeard with Spittle, Wounds and
Blood, Joh. 11.27, 39.
Martha believed, when she saw Christ powerfully raising a dead and even
stinking Lazarus, from the very Grave, who had been dead four Days; but the
Thief believed, when he saw Christ hanging in the Valley of the Shadow of
Death, almost expiring, and very near giving up the Ghost. Others believed,
when they saw Christ daily working divine Miracles, and honored by the People
with solemn Acclamations; but the Thief believed at such a Time, when Christ
wrought no Miracles to demonstrate his Divinity, and testify his Innocence; and
was rejected, despised, and had in open derision of Men. He cleaved to him,
when the very Apostles and Disciples themselves forsook and fled from him. He
believed in Christ, when he had the strongest Temptations to the coutrary; when
Christ was seemingly in as low a Condition as himself. Verily Christ found not
so great Faith, no not in Israel: no not in his Recolamus fidem latronis, quam
non invenit Christus post resurrectionem in Discipulis suis. August. sermon. 144.
de Tempote.
own Disciples even after his Resurrection. All the holy Actions of another
Man's Life, are not likely to amount to the Service done to God and Christ by
this one act of the Thief's Faith.

Besides; his pregnant Faith was eminently productive of many good Works, Vid.
Daven. Praelect. de Just. Act. p. 390.
both internal, and external: He feared God; acknowledged his own Sin and
Guilt, with Godly Sorrow, true Contrition, and hearty Repentance; condemned
himself, justified Jesus, and publicly testified that Christ was a Person
perfectly just and righteous, unblameable and innocent: This Man has done
nothing Luke 23.41.
(...), nibil absurdum, absonum vel indetens fecit. Non so^um banc crucem non
est promeritus, sed nec ullo etiam levissimo peccato est centaminatus. Gerhard.
Harm. in loc.
amiss, said he. He commiserated his causelessly calamitous Condition, when the
other vile Belluinu n est, non human (...), non compati morienti, Seneca.
brutish Thief was void of Humanity, and instead of pitying mocked and scoffed
at a dying Person. He maintained the Honor of his Savior against the Railery
and Blasphemy of his Fellow-sufferer, who derided the Office, especially the
Kingly Dignity of Christ. He called him Lord, his Lord; embracing him as the
true Messiah. He honored him, whom Judas betrayed: He boldly confessed and
defended him, whom Peter timorously denied, and fearfully forswore. He plainly
declared that he sought and looked for a future State, and better Life. He
freely acknowledged that this same suffering dying Person should have
immediately the Power of Paradise, and Authority to place him in the Seat of the
Blessed. As Dan. 6.10.
Daniel prayed toward Jerusalem and the Temple, when it was in its ruins and
rubbish; so the penitent Thief prayed to Christ, when he was in the lowest
State of his Humiliation: When Christ was almost entering into his Grave, he
begged and entreated that Christ would remember him when he came To ev ponitur
pro eis.
into his Kingdom. Which of the Eleven were heard to utter so gracious a Word
to their Savior, in his last Pangs, and dying Agonies? This penitent Thief
prayed in Faith, and looked for Mal. 4.2.
Healing from the Wings of this Sun of Righteousness, when this glorious Sun
rose from the West, as I may say. He was so humble, that he would not presume
to ask of Christ a participation of his Kingdom, or any great and high Honor
in it; but only requested that he might not be forgotten by him: the way of
remembering and considering him, he left wholly to him. He showed a very
exemplary Patience upon the Cross: he did not murmur against God, or the
Magistrate; (...)but owned the Dueness and Justice of his Punishment, and was
content to bear it, and desired not the removal or abatement of it: he meekly
and quietly accepted his corporal temporal Punishment, being only solicitous
for his Soul's Salvation. He charitably Luke 23.40 (...) significat reprele^do
and anterdico. Gerhard. Harm in loc.
reprehended his Fellow-Thief, and Luke 23.40 (...) significat reprele^do and
anterdico. Gerhard. Harm in loc.
forbad him to proceed in his Blasphemy, invited him to Repentance, and sought
to further the Salvation of his Neighbor. Thou can not expect ever to meet
with such an Occasion, to try and exercise thy Faith and Obedience: and
therefore thou have no imaginable reason to nourish up thy self in Security,
upon presumptuous Hopes of faring as he did, since thou can not do as he did.

(6.) And lastly; Suppose thou should at last redeem thy Time so well, as, by
God's help, with the good Thief, to act and exercise unfeigned Repentance upon
thy Deathbed; yet, I pray, show me, and help me a little to understand, how
thou art likely to get that Comfort, and gain that sweet Peace of Conscience,
which a more early Redemption of thy Time would in all probability bring thee
in, and bless thee with in thy last Hours. A thinking, understanding Heathen
will tell thee, Mortem venientem nemo hilaris excipit, nisi qui se ad illam diu
composucrat. Sen. ep. 30.
He only can cheerfully entertain, and gladly welcome Death when it comes, who
has a long time been fitting and preparing himself for it.

The Thief upon the Cross, had indeed full Assurance that his Soul was in a
good Condition at present; and sure Ground of strongest Confidence and most
comfortable Acquiescence, that he should be very quickly in a pure and holy, a
blissful and happy State in another World. But it is not to be expected that
thou should arrive to such Assurance in the same or the like way that he did:
for Christ then hung upon the Cross by him, and had compassion on him, and
revealed it to him, that his Repentance (which was God's extraordinary gracious
Gift) was Repentance unto Life, that his Person was accepted, and his Prayer
heard; and that a higher Favor should be shown him, and a greater Good be
bestowed upon him, than was expressly desired by him: That his Lord was ready to
take the Key of Paradise into his hand, and would very quickly open the Door
and let him in, and give him entrance into the Joy of his Lord. All which is
included in Christ's gracious Answer to the humble Petition of the penitent
Thief, which he strengthened and confirmed with an earnest Asseveration, Verily
I say unto thee, I will not only be mindful of thee, but thou shall be with me;
and that not only some time hereafter, but Nee sine grave causa expressum illud
ho^le; Censebant enim Judaes non quorumvis animas statim in selicem Paradisi
statum recipi, sed eas demum quae been purgat^ ex hac vita excederent. Grot. in
loc.
to day, immediately after thy Death and Departure; To day shall thou be with me
in Paradise; be joyfully received, and pleasurably entertained in that happy
Repository and Receptacle of Spirits, which God has prepared for holy Souls.

But when thou shall come to lie upon a Deathbed, and be conscious to thy self
that thou have led a very sinful and ungodly Life all thy days; and that this
is the first time that thou have in good earnest minded this great Work;
Suppose that the workings of thy Heart should be sincere, how can thou
evidence thy Uprightness to thy self; prove and make out to thy self, and
satisfy thy self, in any ordinary way, that thy Conversion is true and real,
sound and sincere? When thou shall plainly apprehend, that thou art changing
thy Place and Habitation, State and Condition, all of a sudden; thou can not
but conclude, that it highly concerns thee to humble thy self to God, to beg
his Pardon, and promise him fair; and to resolve, by all possible means to
shake off thy Sins, which are too grievous and dang erous Companions to carry
along with thee into the other World; to cast away thy Sins, at loost as a Man
in a Storm begins to cast away his Goods, because if he keeps his much valued
Goods, he must lose his dearest Life. But do not thou remember the famous
remarkable Story of 2 Mac. 9.
Antiochus, who when the Judgment of God followed him, and smote him with an
incurable and invisible Plague, with a Pain of the Bowels that was remediless,
and sore Torments of the inner Parts, so that the filthiness of his Smell was
noisome to all his Army, and no Man could endure to carry him for his
intolerable Stink, and he himself could not abide his own Smell; Then he began
to leave off his great Pride, -- This wicked Person vowed also unto the Lord
that he would set the holy City at Liberty, make all the Jews equals to the
Citizens of Athens, garnish the holy Temple with goodly Gifts, become a Jew
himself, and go through all the World that was inhabited, and declare the Power
of God. But the Lord would now no more have Mercy upon him; having suffered
grievously, he died most miserably. And have not thou I never knew, nor heard
of any, unwrought upon under conscionable means, who after Recovery performed
the Vows...not counted as error and Promises of a new Life, which he made in
his Sickness, and times of Extremity. For if he will not be moved with the
Ministry, God will never give that honor unto the Cross, to do the deed. Mr.
Bolton's Instructions for a right Comf. afflicted Conscience, p. 255.
known some, and heard of others, who being condemned by Law, or cast upon Beds
of Sickness, have outwardly manifested as great and probable signs of true
Repentance, upon seeming near approaches of Death and Judgment, as thou can
now be well supposed to do: and yet when God by a kind and merciful Providence
has restored them, all that looked so lively and lovely has quite vanished and
come to nothing; these fairly promising, hopeful Penitents have afterward
fallen to their old Biass, proved as vile and vicious, as bad and worse than
ever they were before. And, it may be, thou thy self have been in the like
case, and done as much heretofore as now; and have reason to remember thy
false, deceitful, treacherous dealing with God in former Instances, on the like
Occasions; how many of thy own Purposes and Promises have failed and been quite
lost; and have cause enough to suspect and question the Truth and Goodness of
all the present fairest shows, and goodliest Appearances of thy Repentance.

And here this great Difficulty will at last unavoidably lie before thee,
whether thou do not seek, return and enquire after God, only because he now
begins to Ps. 78.34.
slay thee in good earnest. Here will be the doubt and dispute, How thou will
be able to determine, that the Confession of thy Sins, and Condemnation of thy
self, thy Resolutions and Promises of better Obedience, in case of longer Life,
are not all the mere effect of slavish Fear, and only the product of trouble of
Mind and terror of Conscience; rather than the genuin proper issue of a
vehement hatred of Sin, for the Turpitude and Unreasonableness of it; of a
strong Affection to God and his Laws, and a hearty Love to Holiness; when thou
have no time to make sufficient Proof and due Trial of the Truth and Sincerity
of thy Faith and Repentance. And what comfortable joyful security can thou
have, that God will certainly and infallibly save thee, by an act of
extraordinary Grace and Favor, in the want of the Actions of a virtuous and
holy Life, which he requires in the Gospel as ordinarily necessary to
Salvation? It is here but a may be, a peradventure: Mat. 20.15.
It is lawful indeed for God to do what he will with his own: but the
possibility of an extraordinary Grace is not likely then to bring thee that
clear and full Light of sweet Peace, and solid spiritual Comfort, which an
early diligent Improvement of the Grace of God ordinarily vouch-safed in the
course of thy Life, and time of thy Health and Strength, would in all
probability have produced.

If therefore thou would wisely provide for thy Peace, take no encouragement
to delay the Redemption of thy Time, from the Instance and Example of the Thief
upon the Cross, who was sincerely converted to Christ, and fully ascertained of
Salvation by the infallible Oracle of the Mouth of his Savior, in the very
close of his Life, the final and ultimate Hour before his Departure.

Obj. But some or other may be ready and apt to say; Alas! I have deferred so
long already, that though I entertain some serious Thoughts of redeeming the
Time, and use my honest Endeavors; yet I fear, do what I can, it is now too
late for me to obtain Eternal Salvation.

Answ. I answer; Have thou made very long Delays, spent and wasted a very
considerable part of thy Life, the most of thy precious Time in the Service of
Sin and Satan? Why truly thou have reason to be so much the more humbled, the
more sorry for it, the more ashamed of it; the more penitent at present, and
the more obedient for the future; great cause to purpose and intend to give
unto God the whole remainder of thy Time: And though thou have but a small
Time, but a few Years more to live here in this World, yet let this be the
Frame and Temper, the settled Disposition, and invincible Resolution of thy
Soul, that if God should prolong thy Life beyond thy expectation, that if thou
had never so much Time to spend upon this Earth, thou would, by the help of
God, compose and set thy self to the study of knowing, and an endeavor of
doing the Divine Will; to a Renunciation of thy past Life and Actions, and a
Conformation of thy Affections and Manners to the Rule and Prescript of the
Gospel of Christ: that thou would employ thy whole Time, expend and lay out
all thy Strength in the Service, and to the Glory of God only.

And here consider for thy Comfort, that there are to be found several sorts
and degrees of late Penitents: and there is so much the more Hope for thee,
that thou art not of the lowest rank and form of all. Indeed, if thou were a
deathbed Penitent, though I will not say thy case would be absolutely
hopeless, utterly helpless, and altogether desperate; yet because it is so
seldom and rare a thing, that so late Repentance proves sound and serious; thy
Condition would be exceeding Poenitentia quae ab infirmo petitur, insirma est.
Paenitentia quae a moriente tantum petitur, timeo ne and ipsa moriatur. Aug. de
Temp. sermon. 57.
dubious, and very dangerous, and thy spiritual Comfort extremely uncertain, if
not ordinarily impossible: and supposing thou were to begin thy Repentance upon
a Deathbed, I should....(2 occurences found) not much wonder if thou should
almost begin thy Hell there.

But (as Vis te de dubio liberare, vis quod incertum est evadere? age
poenitentiam dum sanus et. Si enim agis viram poenitentiam dum sanus es, and
invenerit te novissimus dies; fecurus es. Ergo curre ut reconcilieris; si sic
agis, securus es. Quare securus es? quia egisti poenitentiam eo tempore, quo
and peccare potuisti. Si antem vis agere poenitentiam ipsam tune, quando
peccare non potes, peccati te dimiserunt, non tu illa. Aug. Tom. 10. de vere
poenitentibus, Hom. 41, ex 50. Amb. exhortat, ad Poenitentiam.
St. Austin discourses wisely and judiciously) if now thou for sakest thy Sins
and turnest to God, while thou do enjoy some measure of Health and Strength;
and chusest to serve God, when yet thou could serve Sin and Satan, if thou
could; here is some room and place for strong Comfort, such as may quiet the
troubled Mind, and satisfy the afflicted Conscience of a Sinner, Though thou
beast but a late Penitent, yet if thou could be an older Sinner, and wilt
not; if thou art willing to break off from Sin, when thou have yet some Time to
sin, and Strength to sin, and Occasions of Sin offered thee, and Temptations to
Sin lying before thee, and pressing upon thee; When thou art invited, and it
may be provoked to it, and thy Faculties are not yet so weakened and disabled,
but that thou might several ways with Pleasure sin if thou would; if now
thou refusest, and wilt not, it is a sign thy Repentance, though late
Repentance, yet, is true Repentance for all that. Thou, who could go over thy
old Sins again, if thou do heartily cast them off, when thou could commit
them afresh; If thou deliberately leavest thy Sins, before thy Sins leave thee;
If thou steadfastly resolvest and earnestly endeavourest to work the Work of God
now, when there is some Opportunity remaining and Power left, which, if thou
would, thou could employ in the Devil's Work; if indeed this be thy case,
if truly it be thus with thee, then be of good comfort, for I dare assure thee,
that God in Christ will graciously accept thee, and gloriously reward thee.

Remember and consider, that they that were hired about the Mat. 20.9, 12.
eleventh Hour, received every Man a Penny, and were made equal unto those
which had born the Burden and Heat of the day. This indeed gives no
Encouragement to any that study to delay from day to day; because these Persons
in the Parable were never called before the eleventh Hour; they stood no longer
idle, but went into the Vineyard, as soon as they were called, without any the
least delay. Nor does it afford sufficient comfort to a As concerning the man
which was called the last Hour of the day to labor in the Vineyard. I pray you
take notice, that this man was a Labourer, and though he took pains but for a
short time, yet Labor he did: whereas, he that shall defer his Repentance, and
Amendment of Life, till his last Hour, if he indeed prove sorry for his Sins,
yet labor he cannot; the best that he can do, is to make Offers and
Resolutions to work the good Work of God, if it shall please him to snare him
Life; But that those Resolutions of his shall be accepted with God, instead of
real very Labor indeed, I find no Commission to assure you. Chillingworths
sermon. 6. on Luke 16 9. p. 397.
Death bed Penitent, because these Persons, that went in late, labored
soundly, and wrought full hard for the space of an Hour, before they received
their Pay; which Deathbed Penitents have no time to do. But yet this Passage
gives good ground of great Comfort to all such Persons, as timely think upon
their Ways, turn their Feet unto God's Testimonies, and enter into the Race of
Godliness, when they could stand idle a while longer, or still continue and run
on further in foolish Ways, and sinful Courses.

To conclude all; I exhort and beseech you, and let me effectually persuade and
prevail with you, by all that with any reason has been offered to your
consideration, to Quare vis procrastinare propositum tuum? Surge, and in
instant ^^ncipe, and die: Nunc tempus est faciendi, nunc tempus est pugnandi,
nunc tempus est emend indi. A Kem^is, l 1. c. 22. n. 5.
break off all your Delays, Excuses, Discouragements; and to give all speedy,
careful, cheerful Diligence to redeem the Time, to work out your Salvation, and
to make your Calling and Election sure, by bringing forth the seasonable,
proper, plentiful Fruits of an undelayed Repentance. Take the excellent Counsel
of the wise Son of Sirach; Ecclus 18.19, 10, 21, 22.
Use Physic, or ever thou be sick. Before Judgment examine thy self, and in
the day of Visitation thou shall find Mercy. Humble thy self before thou be
sick, and in the time of Sins show Repentance. Let nothing hinder thee to pay
thy Vow in due time, and defer not until Death to be justified. Follow likewise
the Advice, and practice according to the profitable Direction of the Learned
Gerhard; Timely and faithfully Vtamur mediis conversionis and salutis, vivamus
in vero timore Dei, insistamus precibu^, resistamus peccatorum principus, ne
cogitatio prava delectationem, delectatio consensum, consensus opus gignat,
opus consuetudinem, consuetudo necessitatem, necessitas pertinaciam, pertinacia
desperationem, desperatio damnationem pariat. Gerhard, Harm. c. 201. p. 2000.
use the means of Conversion and Salvation, live in the true Fear of God, pray
without ceasing, resist the Beginnings of any Sins, lest an evil Thought raise
Delight, Delight draw on Consent, Consent produce an evil Work, evil Works
beget an evil Habit, an evil Habit induce a kind of Necessity of sinning, and
such Necessity breed Pertinacy, Pertinacy cause Despair, and Desperation end in
Damnation.

FINIS.

